THE Catholic Representer. OR THE PAPIST Misrepresented AND REPRESENTED

Second Part.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
For his Household and Chapel. 1687.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Veneration shown to Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, etc.
Whether the Papists Pray to Images? in Relation to a Passage of a Book,
Entitled, A Catechism truly Representing the Doctrines and Practices of the
Church of Rome: and its Vindication.

CHAP. II. Whether Papists Pray directly to the Cross, as is positively
Asserted by a Protestant? with an Essay of a Heathen-Catechism, after the Copy
of the Truly-representing Protestant-Catechism, in which this Calumny is
published.

CHAP. III. Whether the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be contrary to the
Writings of the Primitive Fathers, or agreeable to them? The Papist believes
his Senses in this Mystery as much as the Protetant; being Notes upon a late
Pamphlet, Entitled, The Papists Doctrine of Transubstantiation, not agreeable
to the Primitive Fathers.

CHAP. IV. The Form of the Catholic Church Established by Christ. No hopes of
Salvation out of it. The Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Church in this
Point, Good at this day. The Protestants as uncharitably Damn the Papists, as
These are said to do the Protestants. In reference to the Preface of Wholesome
Advices from the B. V. etc.

CHAP. V. The Papist, as to the Articles of his Belief, follows the Method
prescribed by Christ, practiced by the Apostles and the Primimitive Church. The
Method is of Divine Institution, and more according to Reason than what Others
follow. The Word Worship is Equivocal, and acknowledged so by St. Austin.

CHAP. VI. The Papist does not Believe, but upon most Convincing Reasons.
Mysteries of Faith above Reason, not contrary to it. The Papist is not deprived
of the Word of God, nor kept from the Knowledge of the Gospel. He does not Pray
to the Cross, more than Protetestants Pray to their Bibles, or the Sacrament.
Three Protestant Queries Answered.

CHAP. VII. The Vulgar among the Papists not deprived of the Word of God. They
are better Instructed in the true Sense of it, than those of other Persuasions
who Teach themselves. The Unlearned and Unstable wrest it to their own
Destruction.

CHAP. VIII. The Vulgar not permitted to read the Bible among the Papists, for
fear they should discover the Errors of their Religion, an Absurd Calumny. The
Restraint is, That there may not be as many different Words of God, as there
are Heads amongst them; and may have something better Ground than their own
Imagination to direct their Faith. A Word to a Lay-Friend.

CHAP. IX. The Scriptures not always the Same to the same Person. No
Possibility of meeting in One Faith, whilst Private Reason sets up for
Interpreter of the Word of God. The Sham-Story of the Frogs and Crabs. The
Truth of the Anniversary Solemnity.

CHAP. X. Private Interpretation of Scriptures, the Occasion of Divisions. Some
Protestant Divines call in the Assistance of Authority and Guides; but all ends
in the Private Spirit. The Question started; Where was the Protestant Religion
as it is now Reformed, before Luther? The Answers of some Protestant Divines.

CHAP. XI. An Enquiry into the Religion of the Primitive Times, and
particularly That of Constantine the First Christian Emperor; For the
Satisfaction of those, who desire to know, whether the Protestant Religion was
generally Professed amongst the Christians of those Purer Times.

CHAP. XII. Protestant Historians show us Popery in the Primitive Church under
Constantine, but no Protestancy. The Christians of that Age never Protested
against the Popish Doctrines professedly Taught and Practiced in those Times;
Therefore they were no Protestants. An Enquiry into the Religion of the Ages
succeeding Constantine.

CHAP. XIII. The Professors of Popish Doctrines in the Primitive Times, no
Protestants, but Papists. Popish Tenets not only the Opinions of Private
Doctors, but the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. The Four First General
Councils no Protestants.

CHAP. XIV. No Protestant Harangue in the First Four General Councils to fill
the Fathers Heads with Fears and Jealousies. No Canons made by the said Fathers
to prevent the Growth of Popery, at that Time professedly Taught and Practiced,
is an Argument that the Fathers of those Councils were no Protestants.

CHAP. XV. The Appeal of Protestants to the Primitive Fathers, shown Injurious
to Protestancy, from the Concess^ons of Protestant Writers. Luther, the Apostle
of the Reformati^^, disclaims the Doctrine of the Fathers, as not being for his
purpose of Reforming.

CHAP. XVI. A New Way of making all the Popish Sayings of the Primitive Fathers
to be Good Protestancy. The Art of Interpreting does Feats; it makes way for
Atheism and Infidelity.

THE PAPIST Misrepresented AND Represented.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Of the Veneration shown to Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, etc.
Whether the Papists pray to Images? in Relation to a Passage of a Book,
Entitled, A Catechism truly Representing the Doctrines and Practices of the
Church of Rome: and its Vindication.

THe Papist Misrepresented worships the Images of Christ and his Saints, he
kisses them, uncovers his Head falls down before them, offers Incense, and
Prays to them; and uses all such Postures of Worship, as he would do to the
Person or Persons, thereby represented, if they were present: And whosoever
thinks otherwise amongst them, is accursed. Catech. truly repres. the Doctr. of
the Chapter of Rome p. 42.

THe Papist Represented is taught* That the Images of Christ, of the Virgin
Mary, and other Saints ought to be kept, and especially in Churches, and due
Honor and Veneration given them; not for that any Divinity or Virtue is
believed to be in them, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or any
confidence to be placed in them, as was anciently done by the Heathens, who put
their trust in Idols; but because the Honor which is exhibited to the Images,
is referred to the Prototype, or Thing represented by them: So that by the
Images which he kisses, and before which he kneels, or puts off his hat, he
adores Christ, and reverences his Saints, whom the said Images represent. This
is what He is taught, and are the Words of the Council of Trent. (Sess. 25.)
And tho some endeavor to cast an Infamy upon this Doctrine and Practice, by
letting loose the School-debates amongst the multitude, and raising Mists and
Confusion from the disagree^ng Opinions of Divines; Yet in honest Practice he is
conscious to himself of doing no more than what he sees done every Day by such,
who commendably follow the regular Motions of Humane Nature, the Dictates of
unbiased Reason.

First, therefore, as Men judge it nothing but Decent and Reasonable, to set
forth and adorn their Houses, with the Pictures of such Persons as belong to
their Family, of their old Friends, Benefactors, Governors, such as they
esteem, and whose Memory they desire to preserve and honor: So he cannot but
think it as agreeable to Reason, that the House of God be set forth, with the
Memories of such Eminent Persons, who by a singular Favor of Heaven, have been
made chosen Vessels for the Propagation of the Religion there professed, or
have sealed the Truth of the Doctrine there delivered, with the Effusion of
their dearest Blood. This God himself did in a manner direct and approve, when
filling Bezaleel and Aholi^b (Exodus 35. 31.) with the Spirit of God, in Wisdom,
in Understanding, and in Knowledge, He Inspired them to make Two Cherubims of
Gold (Exodus 37. 7.) on the side of the Mercy Seat; openly declaring by this
Fact, the best Ornaments of his Seat and House here on Earth, to be the Images,
Pictures, and Representations of those Divine Spirits, who are continually
finging Praises to him before his Throne in Heaven. This he was pleased to
suggest to the Jews, tho so prone to Idolatry; and why should Christians be so
Squeamish, as not to follow, when the Finger of God himself is giving
Direction, not in any Ceremony particularly relating to that People; but in the
Ornament of that Place, which by his own Order was consecrated to his Presence
and Service? But it is not all Christians, even of Those Separated from the
Communion of his Church, that wholly disallow of this Practice; there are
several degrees amongst them as to this particular.

The Lutheran Protestants have their Altars and Church Walls set out with the
Images and Pictures of the Apostles, of the Virgin Mary, of Christ upon the
Cross, etc. Other Protestants who think the best temper of Religion to be in
the Compounding Luther and Calvin together, dare not go so far; and therefore
instead of Christ and his Apostles, expose only two Saints of the old Law,
Moses and Aaron in their holy Places, admitting generally too the Judaical
Ornament of the Ark, some Cberubims over their Church doors and Windows; but
nothing of a Cbristian Representation, besides a Modern Sainted Queen. This is
in such Churches, where the Clamours of the Crowd overrule; where nothing more
of Cbrist must appear, for fear of offending tender Consciences with the looks
and smell of Popery: whilst yet in other Places, as in some Cathedrals and
Universities, where the People don't awe the Clergy, where the Charge of Popery
is neglected, and the Walls and Windows not left as naked, as senceless Fears
would have them, Cbrist and his Apostles stand with as much Veneration as Moses
and Aaron elsewhere; and a Primitive Martyr is as becoming an Ornament, as Queen
Elizabeth. And this seems so reasonable to some true Sons of this Church, that
they think nothing more suitable to their Retirement, where they design to
converse with Heaven than a Crucifix: the this Practice some think fit to wave,
for fear of raising Jealousies in their Family, and becoming the talk of the
Neighborhood.

And this which he sees thus approved by many, and practiced by some
Protestants, he owns and declares for the allowed and established Practice of
his Church. So that to be a Papist in this particular, is nothing more, than to
think the Pictures of Christ, of his Apostles and Saints to be as ornamental in
a Cbristian House, as others of Relations, Benefactors, or Emperors, etc. And
not to join hands with him, who broke in pieces the Image of Christ upon the
Cross, while he left those of the Two Thieves, stand untoucht. It Is to look
upon the Cross or Crucifix as proper in a Church, to show that that Place and
Congregation belongs to Christ; as the Lion and the Unicorn or Kings Arms, to
Intimate that they own the King, as Supreme Governor. It Is to esteem the
Apostles and Martyrs as fit to have place there, for preaching the Gospel there
delivered, and ratifying it with their Blood; as Moses and Aaron for publishing
the Commandments; or as Queen Elizabeth for establishing the Religion by her
Statutes.

As he is a Papist therefore he cannot have a good Opinion of those* who love
all sorts of Pictures, whether of Relations, Landskips, Monsters, Dogs or
Devils; but can brook nothing of Christ or his Mother: who with Satisfaction
enough can Admit of Mahomet, Luther, Calvin, a suffering Russel, or Sidney, The
Savior of the Nation, any Profane or Immodest Picture whatsoever; but
presently turn Stomach at the sight of the Worlds Redeemer upon the Cross, at
any Passage of Christ's Passion, or sacred Mystery of our Religion represented
in Colors. No better Christians can he esteem those who cannot endure to be
without their Signet, to show their Family: who cannot see their Shops or
Sign-Posts without the Arms of the Company they are Free of: who must have
their Scutcheon over their Hall doors, to publish the Corporation they belong
to: and yet can allow of nothing to show they are Christians: who can see
Crosses on their Houses and Walls both private and public, on their Signs,
Barges, their Ships, and Colors, as often as you will, to speak them belonging
to Citizens: but a Cross to declare themselves Christians, they repute as
intolerable. These he cannot much esteem for their Christianity as to this
Point, since he sees they are ashamed of nothing, but what is to show them to
be Christians.

Secondly, as to what concerns the Respect and Veneration He shows to Sacred
Images of Christ, his Mother, or Apostles, etc. he does nothing but what Nature
and Reason oblige him too: and to explicate what this is, he needs no more than
declare, that as a Loyal Wife, who has a tender Love and sincere Respect for
her Husband, cannot choose, from the pressing Impulse of innocent Nature, but
have a Love and Respect for his Picture, and expresses that Love by kissing it,
and hanging it at her Breast: in the same manner, He having a hearty Love and
true Honor in his Soul for his Blessed Redeemer, Apostles and Martyrs of
Christ, cannot hinder the irresistible force of Nature, from having a Respect
and Honor for their Pictures, and this same Respect he expresses by kissing
them, placing them in his Oratory the Church, etc.

Again, as Christians Honor and Respect the Bible above all other Books; and
tho it be made of nothing but Paper, Ink, Leather, Pastboard, like all other
Volumes; yet because the Stroks of that Ink are so ordered and joined in that
Paper, that they Signify and Represent to him the Doctrine and Passion of
Christ, etc. for this Reason they cannot choose but Love and Respect and Honor
this Book; and if in reading and perusing it, any more devout than the rest,
express these Sentiments of their Souls by kissing it, never taking it into
their Hands, but with an awful Reverence, with their Heads uncovered, and on
their bended knees: they do nothing but to the Honor, and Glory of God, and
what may, without Superstition, or Suspicion of giving Idolatrous Worship to
the Paper or Ink of that Book, be paid to that Sacred Volume, and what has been
the Practice of many holy Christians and Saints. Upon the same Account, and for
the same Reason, tho the Pictures of Christ etc. are nothing but Ink and Paper,
like others; yet because the Stroks of that Ink are so ordered and drawn there,
that they Signify and Represent to him Christ's Nativity, his Scourging at the
Pillar, or Passion on the Cross etc. they are to him like a Chapter of the
Bible it self, informing him of the same Sacred Mystery, teaching him the same
Divine Truth, and upon this Consideration, are to him a part of Gods holy Word,
without any difference from that Chapter of the Bible, which treats of that
Mystery, besides in the different Fashion of the Stroks and manner of laying on
the Ink. And if in the Contemplation and Consideration of these Divine Truths
and Sacred Mysteries thus Represented to him, he stands with his Head
uncovered, or on his knees, he does it only to express the Love and Honor,
which at that time inflame his heart toward God, and the Veneration which he
has for Christ in those endearing Passages: And in these Actions and Postures
he does no more make a God of, or give Idolatrous Worship to the Paper, Ink, or
Colors of those Pictures, or the Material Images; than he makes a God of the
Bible, when in taking an Oath, he stands with his Head uncovered and kisses it,
or reads it on his knees; or gives Idolatrous Worship to a Preacher, when he
hears him deliver Gods Word with his Headbare.

Let Divines therefore wrangle to the Worlds end, and dispute, whether this
Honor, this Reverence and Respect shown to the Bible, to a Preachers Sermon,
to Pictures or Images, be the same, or distinct from what is given to the
Things Represented; whether it terminates on them absolutely after an Inferior
manner, or only relatively, and so forth. This they may go on with for the
exercise of their Wits and Tongues; and others may scatter these Notions
amongst the Crowd for the Confusion of Mankind, and the Disturbance of weak
Brains: but for his part, he is little concerned with these Debates. He Is
certain he believes in, Worships and Adores only One God, who Created and
Redeemed him, and by whose Mercy and Grace he expects Salvation: and he
confesses, that all Pictures, Images, etc. relating to Him or his Saints, are
nothing more than Paper, Colors, Wood, Stone. etc. mere Creatures not to be
confided in. Yet as long as he sees, that Christians full of Devotion and Zeal
can kneel down before a piece of Bread, for its being a Figure or a
Representative Commemoration of Christ, his Goodness and Passion; and yet to
the Honor, and Glory of God. As long as he sees Men full of Scorn and Rage can
show their Malice to a great Prelate, by exposing his Effigies to the
contemptuous Shouts of the Rabble, carrying it in a mock-Procession, and
committing it to the flames; and this without having it decided, whether it be
the same Dishonor shown to the Image and to the Person: and whether it be the
same Respect and Reverence given to the Sacramental Figure and to Christ, or a
different: As long as he sees this, he cannot doubt to Honor and Reverence
Christ before an Image relating to him; notwithstanding the Speculative
Scruple, whether it be the same, or a distinct Veneration given to God and to
the Image.

It Is a sufficient satisfaction to him, that all the Love, Respect, Honor or
Veneration he has for the Bible, for a Sermon, for a Picture or Image of
Christ, etc. is wholly for the Sake, the Love and Honor he bears to Christ;
and howsoever he expresses it, whether by kissing these Commemorative Signs, by
Bowing, by Kneeling, by Incensing, etc. yet as long as these are only so many
different ways, or speaking Testimonies of the affection of his Soul toward
God (as God is his Witness who sees his heart) he can have no scruple in
performing them: no more than others, who being sensible of a diflerent motion
in their Souls toward Queen Mary, and her Sister Queen Elizabeth, express the
Love, the Respect and Honor they have for the latter, by placing her Picture
in their Churches, by keeping her Day in a certain Veneration, by ringing of
Bells, burning Candles, lighting Bonfires, all which are nothing but so much
Street-incense offered up to her Honor and Memory. For what reason can he
have, to think that to be idolatrous, when done to the Honor of God, which he
sees thus without scruple, or fear of Idolatry performed to a Queen, no
otherwise Canonized, but by the Sainting breath of the Rabble?

This then is what he does as to Sacred Images, and tho his Adversaries, by
calling this worshipping, adoring, falling down to Images, can presently raise
a Notion of Idolatry in their unthinking Auditory: yet it is upon such
Principles, that their Dissenting Brethren pursuing the same Reasonings a
little farther, draw them under the same Infamy, throwing the Coat over their
Heads, which they had cut out for others Shoulders.

But now as for Praying to Images, it is what the utterly detests, as a thing
contrary to all Reason and Religion. The Council of Trent expressly declares to
all of his Communion, that no Virtue or Divinity is to be believed to be in
Images, nothing is to be asked of them, nor confidence to be placed in them.
What praying then can there be to Images, if nothing be to be asked of them?
For his part, he could as well pray to the Monument, to the Statues of the
Kings in the Exchange, or to the Giants in Guild-ball, as to the Image of the
Greatest Saint in Heaven; and thinks 'twould be as much to the purpose: and vet
if the True-representing Catechism is to be heard, the Papists do not only
kiss the Images of Christ and his Saints, but they likewise Pray to them. God
deliver him from such true. Representing.

The Answer to The Papists Misrepresented etc. (p. 17) is so just to the
Papists, as to grant, that They do not absolutely Pray to Images; this, in his
opinion, being a charge too absurd, to be urged against the most brutish of
Heathens. And afterward (p. 22.) when he comes to speak of Praying to Images,
he tells you of a Sense in which it may be taken (that is, If the world be so
pleased to take it so) and it is that Praying to Images shall signify, not an
oblation of Prayers to Christ's Image, so as to expect to be heard by the
Image: but so as to expect to be rather heard by Christ himself, for praying to
him by his Image. So that praying to Images, comes to be the same, as praying
to Christ by his Image, and afterward, within a line or two is nothing but
praying where Images are, or before Images. Thus he does not positively charge
the Papists with praying to Images; but only endeavors to prove it in some
sense; and then honestly and fairly explicates what he means by those words;
and at last does not impute it as a Doctrine, but only as a consequence, that
he thinks may be deduced from some Practice of theirs, as may be seen, (p. 22.)
now mentioned.

But now comes the Faithful-representing Catechism, and without mincing it at
all, he assures all such as will be catechis'd, that the Papists Pray to
Images, and this positively, absolutely, without explaining any sense, in which
those words are to be taken: not a Word for the preventing any Mistake in his
Readers: if they will think the Papists so sottish, as to Pray to Stocks and
Stones, and expect relief from those Wooden Mediators, they may do it for all
his true representing: Such Christian Calumny he will help to transfuse into the
Heads of the Ignorant: but not a Syllable to obviate the working of such Poison.

It Is true, he tells his Reader, that the Honor given by Papists to Images, is
referred to the Persons Represented by them: but no mention of what is meant by
Praying to Images: that he leaves to the discretion of every one, that can
afford to lay out sixpence upon a Catechism against Popery. And now at last in
his Vindication of this passage, he tells ye, he did not intend to insinuate by
those Words, as if the Papists did Pray to Images absolutely, so as to expect
to be heard by the Images, but so as to expect to be heard by Christ, for
praying to him by his Image, in the sense 'twas taken above, in the Answer to
the Papists Misrepresented, etc. And here he confidently affirms, that from the
two Answers in his Catechism, viz. to Quest. 44. and 45. laid together, or
either of them entire, it manifestly appears what he intended by that charge.
But I must ask him; To whom does this manifestly appear? Is he assured, that
all the zealous Controvertists of Spittle-fields and Wapping will dive into
this subtilty, and understand his meaning, tho there be not one word in either
of the two Answers to explicate it? Does he think those Favorers of Popery,
will lay things together, to take off from the blackness of the Charge, which
is absolute and positive in the Indictment? He that leaves the Papists, their
Credit and their Doctrine, to the favor and mercy of such a Jury, must
certainly be very willing to hear Oats's Tune of eighty one played over again.
No, when Doctors and Divines charge bluntly and downright, it is not to be
expected from the Crowd to make a favorable Interpretation. But at last the
Catechist in his Postscript will prove, that the Papists do in some manner Pray
to Images: His Argument is thus; Prayer is to the Object to which the
Veneration is to be given; but the Veneration, is to be given to the Image, as
representing; and so is the Prayer. A piece of Sophistry, by which he may prove
(for the next Edition of his Catechism) that the Papists Pray to the Bible, as
well as to Images; they having a Veneration for both the one and the other. And
if he can but once make out, that People Pray to every thing, to which they
give a Veneration; will not this serve to prove, that every one, who going into
Westminster Abbey takes off his Hat, does, by paying that Veneration, in some
manner ^ray to the Walls? Will it not be the same thing to Petition the Chair
of State, as to make a Reverence to it: and to ^ray to every Dish of Meat that
goes to the Kings Table, Pap. not Misrep. by Prot. p. 5. Answ. to Pap. Prot. p.
17.
as to bow to it? But suppose he could in any sense have proved Praying to
Images against the Papists by some better Argument than this, which is not fit
to lie under a University-threshold: yet would this be true Representing to
insert this Consequence of his into the Character of a Papist? It has been
decided long ago by his own Party, that he that puts the Interpretations and
Consequences of Men's Doctrines and Practices into their Character, is a Proper
Misrepresenter: Does not the Catechist then justly fall under this Infamy, who
in giving an account of the Papists Doctrine and Practices, instead of such a
Doctrine or Practice, inserts a Consequence of his own into their Character?
And yet this Catechism in the Title, is the truly representing Catechism.

Again, he says he has composed this Catechism out of the Papists Pref.
own Writings, out of their own approved Authors and Councils; and by this his
Reader is to understand, that every Doctrine and Practice he there imputes to
the Papists, is what their own Authors and Councils expressly own and profess:
Now to make good this pretext, and justify himself, he is obliged to point out
to some of the Papists approved Authors and Councils, which do acknowledge and
declare this Point of Praying to Images to be the received Doctrine and
Practice of their Church, if not absolutely, at least in that sense in which he
has explicated himself in his Vindication. For if he does not do this, he has
most unchristianly wronged the Papists, in imputing to them a Doctrine and
Practice pretendedly according to their most received Authors, but no where
found in such Authors or Councils, being only a misinterpretation of his own,
passed upon the World for a Popish Doctrine: and this will most unluckily draw
him into the number of Misrepresenters.

Lastly, in his Answer 10 Q. 44, having declared to his Reader, that the
Papists kiss the Images of Christ, fall down before them; offer Catec. p. 49.
Incense and Pray to them, etc. he concludes thus: And whosoever does think
otherwise, is acc^rsed: For this citing the Council of Trent, Sess. 25. and
Catech. Romans By which he insinuates into his Reader, that not only kissing
Images of Christ, etc. but likewise Praying to them is prescribed by the
Council of Trent, and the Catechism ad Parochos, and that whosoever shall think
otherwise, viz. that Images ought not to be kissed, nor prayed to, is cast out
of the Communion of that Church, and declared Accursed. This is what every
Reader must understand from that passage. And indeed, who can apprehend it
otherwise, especially finding it thus positively asserted in a Book, which in
the very first leaf is recommended as a Catechism Faithfully drawn out of the
allowed Writings of the Church of Rome: And when the Author in the Preface
gives this assurance, that the Quotations are true, he having again and again
examined them? And yet whosoever shall be so curious, as to examine the said
Council of Trent, and Roman Catechism, will not find in the places cited, nor
even throughout the Books, so much as one syllable concerning Praying to
Images: much less any Curse pronounced against those who shall think otherwise.
The Council indeed Anathematizes such, who teach contrary to what has been
shown, in the beginning of this Paper, to be the sense of the Fath^rs there
assembled, touching the Veneration due to the Images of Christ: but no mention
there of Praying to Images in any sense whatsoever.

And is it not strange now, that when such things as these are charged upon the
Papists, and published to the world for their Doctrine, it is taken ill of
them, when they disclaim all such Tenets? it is called Postscr.
a Clamor and a Noise when they justify themselves in Protesting against such
false Imputations: And if they say, they are foully Misrepresented, this draws
out a Vindication in a Postscript, to sink the dirt in deeper. For his part,
it is no satisfaction to him, to be engaged in Disputes or Quarrels: But yet he
confesses, he can no more forbear crying out, when he sees Dirt unworthily
thrown at his Religion, than if it were cast in the Face of his Dearest
Relations, his Father or Mother: and therefore he must needs say, that if he
finds any one dressing up a Papist to the Multitude as a Monster, and showing
his Horns and cloven Foot to the Crowds, he cannot stand by in silence, but
will cry out, A Cheat, A Cheat; with endeavors to find out, who the cloven
Foot belongs to.

But however, he could heartily wish, there were no occasion for this: that
there were more Charity in the World, and when Men speak of their Neighbors
Faith and Religion, that they would be truly serious; and not think it a less
Crime to cast an Aspersion in this particular, than in other Concerns of their
Good Name and Reputation; he that wrongfully defames him for a Thief, only
injures his Person, and at most his Family: But he that casts an Infamy upon
his Religion, wrongs Millions; and abuses the Multitude into a false
Persuasion, that upon this score, it is now more a Christians Duty to hate, than
to love one another. The Divisions and Animosities amongst Christians at this
day are but a sad Spectacle; And God knows how far the Passionate
Exaggerations, and Rash Charges upon others Faith and Religion have been an
Encouragement to these Evils. He heartily wishes there were some Moderation in
this Particular: It being no Commendation to* Christianity, that her Members
like the Canibals of America, have no other way of Thriving, than by Devouring
each other; nor a good Argument of the Truth of any Persuasion, because they
can make the greater Devil of their Neighbor.

But the Catechist in his Postscript will convince his Reader, that the Papists
Pray to Images: For why (says he) do they direct their Prayers to them? As they
do to the Cross, which they Salute after this manner: Hail, O Cross, our only
Hope, etc. But this shall be the Subject of our Next.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. II. Whether Papists pray directly to the Cross, as is positively
asserted by a Protestant? with an Essay of a Heathen-Catechism, after the Copy
of the Truly-representing Protestant-Catechism, in which this Calumny is
published.

THe Papist Misrepresented- does not only ascribe peculiar Virtues to the
Cross, praying that God would make the wood of the Cross to be the stability of
Faith, an increase of Good Works, the Redemption of Souls, as the Pontifical
has it (in Bened. nov. Cru.) But they Pray directly to it, saluting the Cross
after this manner: Hail, O Cross, our only Hope, in this time of the Passion.
Increase Grace in the Godly, and blot out the Sins of the Guilty: in which very
words they directly pray to it, in the Hymn of the Passion, which is in the
Public Office of their Church. Catech. true. repres. Q. 46. and Posts^r.

THe Papist Represented confesses and believes God to be the Fountain of all
Goodness, to be the Center of all Virtue, Power and Wisdom; and that there is
no Good whatsoever, whether Spiritual or Temporal, can arrive to him, but what
is to come immediately from God the Father, through the Merits and Passion of
Jesus Christ his only Son, Our Redeemer Blessed for ever more, in the Virtue of
the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Whatsoever Good therefore he desires, whether the
Stability of Faith, Increase of good Works, or the Redemption of his Soul, etc.
he can hope to obtain from no other, than from God, the Author of all Good
Gifts, and Father of Mercies. This Truth he owns and professes, and believes
himself bound rather to lose his Life, then any ways contradict or deny it: it
being the very Doctrine delivered by St. James in his Epistle, c. 1. v. 17.
that Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights.

And having thus acknowledged, that in God is infinitely treasured up all that
can be called Good, he likewise confesses, that Man can be no otherwise
partaker of any of these Blessings, but according to the Pleasure and Ordinance
of this infinite Being, who essentially comprehends them all: so that no
Creature whatsoever, whether in Earth or in Heaven, tho the greatest Angel or
Saint, has power of themselves to bestow any of these Gifts upon Man; they
being wholly in the disposure of Him who is their Author, and not to be
communicated to any, but as He shall order and appoint.

The Principal Means, by which these Heavenly Blessings are derived to the
World, is the Passion of Christ. And the Way ordained for Christians to apply
to themselves the Blessings thus purchased by our Redeemer, is the Doing the
Will of Heaven, and Prayer. By these he has access to that Heavenly Treasure,
and is made partaker of that rich store, without which he can be nothing but
eternally miserable. Whenever therefore he desires Increase of Grace,
Forgiveness of Sins, or any other Divine Benefit from the Hand of God, he
endeavors to compose his Life and Actions according to the Prescript of the
Commandments and Will of Heaven, and raises his Heart and Soul by Prayer, to
petition assistance, and a supply of his necessities from the Divine Throne.
And because he is taught from Scripture, that God hears the Prayer of the
Righteous, he therefore desires sometimes the Just on Earth, Prove. 15. 29.
sometimes those in Heaven, to unite in Prayer, to be joynt-petitioners with
him to the Seat of the Divine Majesty, that so he may find more acceptance in
the sight of God, and obtain his desires through the Merits and Passion of Him
who died for all.

But to think that he prays to the Cross, or from any material Crucifix expects
relief either for Body or Soul, is only to render him more sottish than the
worst of Heathens, and in one extravagancy to make him outdo all the Frenzies
of Bedlam. He confesses it evident to the least glimpse of Reason, that a piece
of Wood or Stone fashioned into a Cross, is no more capable of hearing his
prayers, or praying for him, or granting his Requests, than when it lay
regardless upon the ground without either shape or figure: And that if his
Religion did either teach or practice such s^upid Idolatry, as praying to a
piece of Wood, etc. he could no more be any longer of her Communion, than he
could sacrifice to Molech, or with the Zidonians and Ammonites pray to
Ashtoroth, or Milcom.

He does not deny, but in one of the Hymns used in his Church, are found these
words: Hail, O Cross, our only Hope! In this time of the Passion, increase
Righteousness in the Just, and blot out the Sins of the Guilty. And these same
words, as likewise the whole Hymn are found in St. Ambrose's Works, tho
composed, by that Learned Bishop Vincentius Fortunatus, who lived in the fifth
Age, to be sung on Passion Sunday, upon which day it is still used by his
Church, as part of that days Solemnity. And if for these words of this Prelate
(whose Name is so often celebrated by Pious and Learned Men) and his whole
Church, must be blackned with the Infamy of Idolatry, and praying directly to
the Cross, then stand clear Paul, have a care Chrysostom, beware, O Creed; and
you Common Prayer Book look to your felf: for if there be but any that will
weigh you in this Scale; if you have but a Grave Catechist, that according to
this Rule, will Faithfully represent you; you will be infallibly set out for
nothing better, then Professors of Folly and Nonsense, Bundles of Absurdities
and Profaneness, sitter for the diversion of Drolling Atheists, than the
Direction of any Christian Congregation. It Is but exposing some sentences and
expressions found in them, in the rigid and literal sense of the words, to the
Multitude, and they will presently lose all their Authority of being Divine, and
become as Ridiculous as Popery, which by these true-representing Arts has been
made so infamous by its Adversaries.

As now, if after the Method of this Faithful Catechism, the Question should be
thus asked concerning St. Paul: Quest. What regard had St. Paul for the
material Cross? A. He reverenced it above all things in Heaven and Earth:
expressly owning it, for the only Subject of his Glory: God forbid (says he,
Gal. 6. 14.) that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jefus Christ.
Again, He looked upon the Wood of the Cross, as that which had purchased Man's
Reconciliation to God: as he directly confesses Ephesians. 2. 16. where he says,
Man was Reconciled unto God in one body by the Cross. Would not the urging
these expressions of St. Paul, in the rigid sense of the Words, as they
signify the material Wood of the Cross, make him change his Color in the Eyes
of the Multitude, and render him more like an Infidel, than an Apostle of Jesus
Christ; for thus placing his Glory and Man's Reconciliation in a piece of Wood?

And if these same measures are applied to St. Chrysostom and other Fathers,
who flourished in the time of the Church's Purity, will not they all appear
disfigured with the horror of Superstition and Idolatry, and carry the most
infamous Marks of Popery in the very face of them? St. Chrisostom says
expressly, that the Cross has broken the Gates of Hell, has opened the Passage
into Heaven, has made Paradise again accessible, and confounded the power of
Satan: and a little before, that every thing that contributes to our Salvation,
receives its perfection from the Cross. St. Ephrem in almost the same words
thus celebrates the Cross. It has triumphed, says he, over death, it is the Hope
of true Believers, the Light of the World, the Key of Paradise, the Overthrow
of Heresies, the Help of Religious Men, the Establishment of Faith, a great and
secure Protection, and the perpetual Glory of good Christians for ever. Now let
but these words of these Eminent and Primitive Christians be thrown amongst the
Crowds, with an innuendo, as if spoken merely of the material Cross, and that
they attributed so many excellencies to a piece of Wood; what scandals would
immediately follow? How many contempts and scornful reproaches would these Great
Fathers receive from the presuming Multitude? And how many compassionate Moans
would the more Pitying Sex sigh out upon the darkness of that Age? This would
certainly have followed, had it been the Fate of these Primitive Christians to
have fallen into True-representing Protestant hands; or were there any faithful
Catechism to have made Questions and Answers upon their Faith and Practice.

But certainly it is not only the part of a Faithful Catechism, that pretends to
give a true account of men's Belief and Practice, to lay down some words some
expressions, taken out of their Hymns, their Epistles, their Books, and then
leave them to the discretion of every undiscerning or prejudiced Reader, to
interpret as they please: and more especially, it ought not to have pointed out
to a false and mistaken sense, which, however literal, is yet contrary to the
meaning of those, whose Doctrine it pretends to deliver. No, this is not doing
faithfully, it is not true-representing. If it would have made good its Title in
the Frontispiece, it should, besides relating the bare words, have given a
faithful account of the sense, in which Catholics understand those words. And
therefore, as to do right to St. Paul, St. Chrysostom, St. Ephrem, etc. besides
giving a bare Narrative of their expressions, it ought to be explicated to the
people, that in all those high Encomiums, of infinite and divine Perfections and
Effects attributed to the Cross; they do not understand the mere Material Cross
or piece of Wood; but the Belief in the Mystery of the Cross, the Passion of
the Son of God, or Christ Crucified: which are all signified and represented by
the Cross. So to represent truly the Practice of Catholics, it is not
sufficient to set down the bare words of the Hymn* but likewise their meaning
ought to have been proposed; that with St. Paul, St. Chrysostom, St. Ephrem,
etc. they do not understand barely the Material Cross, but Christ crucified;
and that in that Holy time of the Passion; in which that Hymn is sung, their
whole Devotion and Prayers are directed to Him, who being born for us Men, and
our Salvation, made peace through Coloss. 1. 10.
the Blood of his Cross. So that the meaning of Catholics in saying that Hymn,
is; Hail, O Christ, our only Hope! In this time of the Passion, increase
Righteousness in the Just, etc.

This had been true-representing indeed; but to pretend to faithful
representing, and then to set down only Words, without their due Sense and
Meaning, is to represent by halves; it has more of deceiving in it, then
representing; having little of truth in it, besides in Brags and Pretenses.

This certainly is so insincere a Method, that if allowed, there needs no more
to blast the Credit and Reputation even os Truth it self: and it is very
observable, that there is scarce an Argument taken up by Protestants or any
Means used by them, for the defeating of Popery, or making it Ridiculous to the
Multitude, but the same, if followed on, will infallibly ruin all Religion, and
turn Christianity out of the World; Protestancy it self is not proof against
its own weapons; but that which brought it into the World, will be certainly
its overthrow with as many, as have but sense enough to put it to the Trial.

There may be occasion hereafter of evidencing this in many Particulars; at
present 'twill be sufficient to let the impartial Reader see, how far this one
Argument taken up by the Faithful Catechist, to prove the Papists so stupid, as
to pray directly to a piece of Wood, will contribute to the ruin of the
Christian Faith, and even of Protestancy it self, if an Atheist or Heathen
should take it out of his hands, and use it to the best advantage of his Cause.
The Argument is this; That it must be supposed sufficiently proved against
Catholics, that they pray directly to the Material Cross, because there are
some words in a Hymn of their Church, which if taken in their literal and rigid
sense, import a direct praying to it. Now let but some honest Heathen turn a
True-representing Catechism-maker, and following exactly this Copy set before
him, see whether in faithfully describing the Doctrines and Practices of
Protestants according to this Rule, he cannot do as much for them, that is, set
them out as Absurd and Ridiculous, as they have done for the Church of Rome.
And to follow the method exactly, he must go by Questions and Answers. We must
suppose therefore, that the Title of his Book is thus; A Catechism truly
representing the Doctrines and Practices of Protestants, faithfully drawn out
of their own Bible and approved Liturgy: And that thus He begins:

Q. What God do the Protestants worship and serve?

A. They worship a God, which they believe to have Hands; as they expressly own
in their Creed; where they daily make this profession. He ascended into Heaven,
and sits at the Right hand of the Father. And in Ps. 138. 7. they thus address
themselves to their God: Thou shall stre^ch fourth thine Hand against the wrath
of mine enemies; and thy Right Hand shall save me.

2. They believe him to have Ears: as Psalm. 17. 6. where they cry out to him: O
God, incline thine Ear, unto me, and hear my speech: And ib. verse. 1. O Lord,
attend unto my Cry give ear unto my Prayer.

3. They believe him to have Eyes, Nostrils and Mouth; as Psalm. 17. 2. where
praying to God, they say: Let thine Eyes behold the things that are equal. And
Psalm. 18. 8. they thus describe him: There went up a Smoke out of his Nostri's,
and Nostri's out of his Mouth.

Q. Where do they believe the Seat of their God to be?

A. In Heaven, which they believe to be a place upon some Hill, as they
pro^ess, Psalm. 3. 4. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out
of his holy Hill. And Psalm. 24. 3. Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord?
And again, Psalm. 43. 3. Let them bring me unto thy Holy Hill.

Q. What Creatures shall be saved; or dwell with God for ever upon this Hill?

A. All Creatures shall be saved both Man and Beasts, as they expressly believe,
Ps. 36. 7. Thou, Lord, shall save both Man and Beast, as the Psalms have it in
the Common Prayer. And Revel. c. 4. 6. Round about the throne (of God) were
four Beasts. And chap. 5. 6. In the midst of the throne, and of the four
Beasts; and in the midst of the Elders, stood a Lamb. And verse. 8, the four
Beasts, and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb.

Q. Whom do Protestants address themselves to, in the Solemn and Public
Service of their Church?

A. They address themselves directly to the Saints, as Psalm. 30. 4. Sing unto
the Lord (O ye Saints of his) and give thanks.

2. To the Angels, Psalm. 148. 2. Praise ye him all his Angels.

3. To the Sun and Moon, Beasts, Mountains, etc. Psalm. 148. 3. Praise ye him
Sun and Moon, verse. 9. Mountains and all Hills. verse. 10. Beasts and all Cattle.

Q In what manner do Protestants perform their Public Devotion and Service to
God?

A. In Lying, Cursing and scandalously defaming one another.

Q. How in lying?

A. By having such things in their public Service to be said by all, which
scarce any one of them can say with truth: as Psalm. 119. 62. At midnight I will
rise to give thanks unto thee. Psalm 6. 6. I am weary with my groaning, all the
night make I my bed to swim, I water my Couch with my tears. Psalm. 18. 21. I
have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
Psalm. 34. 1. I will bless the Lord at all times; his Praise shall continually
be in my mouth. Psalm. 35. 13. But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing
was sackcloth: I humblid* my self with fasting. Psalm. 109. 24. My knees are
weak with fasting. Psalm. 101. 3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.
Verse. 4. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person.
Verse. 5. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off. Verse. 7.
He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight. Psalm. 113. 4. The mountains skipped like rams, and
the little hills like lambs. These and many more such like Asseverations,
Promises and Protestations they make in their Devotions; and yet how few of
them (if any) without defying their own Consciences and Truth?

Q. How by Cursing?

A. In direful Imprecations, and fearful wishes imploring the worst of evils
against their Neighbor: as Psalm. 109. 6. where they thus pray to God: Set thou
a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand; when he shall be
judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer become sin. Let his days be
few; and let another take his office. Let his children he fatherless, and his
wife a widow. Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: Let them seek
their bread also out of their desolate places. Let the Extortioner catch all
that he has, and let the Strangers spoil his labor. Let there be none to
extend mercy unto him, neither let there be any to favor his fatherless
children etc. can there be more terrible Wishes, more direful Imprecations than
these?

Q. How by defaming one another?

A. By charging one another with the most infamous of Crimes in the heat of
their Devotions: as in the recital of Ps. 50. where the Clerk thus begins,
verse. 18. accusing the Minister; When thou saw a thief, then thou
consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers. Then the Minister
accuses the Clerk; Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames
deceit. Then the Clerk falls upon the Minister again: Thou sit and speak
against thy Brother, and slanderest thine own Mothers Son.

Misrcp. Hold, hold, Representer whether will you run? you are even turning
Christianity into a piece of Buffoonry, and making a Drol of all Religion.


Represent. You are altogether in the right on it. And this is what I told you
in the beginning; that there is no making use of a Protestant Argument, which
serves that Party, for the ridiculing of Popery, but the same if followed on,
will as certainly undermine the Truth of the whole Gospel, and cut the Sinews
of all Religion. This Heathen-Catechist has not gone one tittle beyond the Copy
set him in the True-representing Catechism, and you see how fearfully it begins
to work. The citation of three or four words out of a Hymn, was Argument enough
to lay the Papists flat for so many stupid Sots: and has any thing been here
asserted against the Protestants, but what has been supported by as plain and
express words, as those of the Popish hymn? If in the one case therefore this
way of proving does not hold, how comes it to be so conclusive in the other?


Misrepresent, The Words, it is true, of the Scripture cited in this
Mock-Catechism, are as plain and express as can be: but they are here made use
of in a sense never intended by those Divine Penmen, the Authors of Sacred
Writ, who tho they have the very words cited, yet never meant them, as here
they are brought, in their literal and rigid sense; but some of them
Figuratively, some of them in Conformity to our Apprehensions, some of them in
the Person of another, etc. and begin thus understood, they make no reflection
upon Protestancy or Christanity, but are truly edifying.


Repres. This is honestly said: and if you could but do so in any others case
besides your own; there would be more peace in this Nation, and above half the
Devils, that disturb its quiet, would be laid. Had the True-representing
Catechism, but thus impartially interpreted the words of the Hymn above
mentioned, and given the true sense of it, he had never been set upon the File
of Misrepresenters. But to charge bluntly an absurdity upon the Papists, and to
pretend to prove it against them from their own plain words, without
discovering their meaning; is to do the same as our Heathen-Catechist has
performed to the life, defaming Christianity from the express words of
Scripture, and both alike by Misrepresenting.

Would you, and such whose thriving depends much upon your Art, see to give
every thing its true weight and sense, and show the right side outward of every
thing you expose to the admiring Crowds; this sincere and honest dealing would
much more recommend you to well meaning people, than the more fashionable way
of blackning and ridiculing your Neighbors. But an ill habit is not easily
laid by. It Is matter of some Admiration to me to consider, how uneven your
Proceedings are in this kind; how readily you can discover a speech to be
figurative, when that sense best serves your own turn: And how in other
occasions, nothing of Figure can be found, when the literal sense will serve to
cast an infamy upon the Papists. The Fathers in their Works do very frequently
address themselves to the Martyrs and Saints in Heaven, desiring their
Ass^stance and Prayers, that See Nubes Testium, which shows this at large, S.
Ambr. l. de Vid.
they would join with them in their Requests: Nay, they expressly say, that the
Saints ought to be prayed to: Now because this does not favor your Cause, in
Obsecrandi sunt Angeli: Martyrs obsecrandi.
the literal sense, it is strange how industrious you are to suck out the
substance, and to blow it all up into a Figure; and those express Prayers are
no Prayers; but rather Raptures, Innocent Wishes, Rhetorical Flights and
Apostrop^es. On the other side, tho the Papists are never any where directed to
pray to the Cross, have no Prayers to the Cross; yet because in one of their
Hymns are found two words literally implying a Prayer to it: Oh! this must be
taken literally; here no Figure can be discovered, no Rapture, no Innocent
Wish, Rhetorical Flight or Apostophe, although the whole Hymn be nothing but a
Poetical composure, which without any injury to Christian Truth, takes the
liberty of such Innocent Flights. Thus are you sometimes for Figures, and
sometimes for no Figures, managing every thing as will best contribute to the
advancing your own Cause, the running down Popery, and making it odious with
the People. This seems to be your chief aim in all your Performances; and the
only Measure of your Comments and Interpretations. I wish you would be more
serious in a Concern of this moment, and not expose thus the Reputation of the
greatest part of the Christian World, to the mercy of every little Conceit, and
petty imaginary Proof. Such Arguments as these, might serve well enough for a
Christmas-Nights Entertainment; but to insert them for a Catechism-Proof, when
the Subject is Religion and the Guidance of Souls, is very unseasonable and
improper; especially when true Representing and doing it faithfully is
pretended in the Frontispiece.


Misrepresent. Do'nt run your self out of Breath upon this Point: you have
another yet to speak to, viz. Why the Papists go in long Pilgrimages to certain
Images, if they do not Pray to them, or hope to be better heard for Praying
there?


Represent. That Is another of the Catechism Proofs, but for a Diversion there is
another Piece calls for a Word or two.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. III. Whether the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be contrary to the
Writings of the Primitive Fathers, or agreeable to them? The Papist believes
his Senses in this Mystery as much as the Protestant: being Notes upon a late
Pamphlet, intit'led, The Papists Doctrine of Transubstantiation, not agreeable
to the Primitive Fathers.

The Papist Misrepresented, by the wonderful Advantages of Implicit Faith and
Prejudice, is preserved in Ignorance, and led into the most Monstrous of
Errors. By these helps the late Inventions of Men are shamm'd upon him, for the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church; and what was never known to the Ancient
Fathers, takes place in his Creed, as Their most constant and professed
Doctrine. This is evident in many Particulars, but most clearly as to the Point
of Transubstantiation, which the Primitive Fathers were so far from holding,
that They believed the direct contrary. Indeed we have from the Writings of the
Fathers so many plain Places against this Doctrine, that we cannot conceive how
it came into the World: so that notwithstanding the Papists pretense to
Antiquity in this Point, we shall find they are mere Gibeonits, who have made
use of their moldy bread and clouted shoes to deceive the People of the Lord;
and that they confidently lay claim to the Fathers for the defense of this
Point, which upon examination is found quite contrary to their Belief. Sum. of
the Pamphl.

THe Papist Represented admits nothing to take place in his Creed, but upon
such strong and convincing Motives, that none can accuse him of Ignorance or
Error, but those who have their Judgments swallowed up by Prejudice, and whose
Passion has overrun their Reason. The Inventions of Men are with him but of
little value, they may be the Subject of his Opinion, but no concern of his
Faith; This bids them defiance, and embraces nothing but what is securely
founded on the Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers. Upon these
solid and lasting Supports stand every Article of his Faith: And that of
Transubstantiation has nothing less than these to rely on. This has an
undoubted claim to Antiquity, and is so far from being contrary to the
sentiments of the Primitive Fathers, that nothing contrary to it, can be
discovered in them by the most critical Observers. Many and express are the
Testimonies found in their Works upon this Subject; and because a confident
Undertaker has in a late Phamplet endeavored to stamp this Doctrine with
Novelty, and to show, that the Primitive Fathers believed the direct contrary,
we'll set down the Testimonies he produces for the advancing this Position,
and, for clearing the matter, place on the other side of the Balance other
Sayings out of the same Fathers; and then leave it to the impartial Judge to
determine, whether side outweighs: that is, whether the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, be direct contrary to the Belief of the Fathers, as is
pretended, or else agreeable to it.

Testimonies of the Fathers cited in the Pamphlet against Transubstantiation.
Testimonies of the Fathers in behalf of Transubstantiation. Dionys. c. 3. Eccl.
Hier. By those reverend Signs and Symbols Christ is signified, and the Faithful
made partakers of him. DIonisius in the same chapter prays thus to Christ in
the Sacrament: O most Divine and Holy Sacrifice, open those mystical and
signifying Vails wherewith thou art covered: show thy self clearly unto us, and
replenish our spiritual eyes with thy singular and revealed brightness. Justin
Mart. Apol. 2. Our blood and flesh are nourished by the conversion of that
food, which we receive in the Eucharist. Justin Martyr. This place of this
Father is thus at length: For we do not receive this as common Bread, or common
Drink; But as by the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Redeemer being made Man, had
both Flesh and Blood for our Salvation: So also we are taught that this food,
by which our blood and flesh are by a change nourished, being consecrated by
the prayer of the Word, is the Flesh and Blood of Christ Jesus himself
incarnate. Tertul. adv. Mar. l. 4. c. 4. Christ taking the Bread, and
distributing it to his Disciples, made it his Body, saying, This is my Body,
that is to say, a Figure of my Body. Tertullian. Christ taking the Bread, and
distributing it to his Disciples made it his Body, saying, This is my Body,
that is to say, a figure of my Body. Which means, that he made that to be his
Body, which had been a Figure of his Body, in the Old Law, to wit, the Bread:
as is evident from the context; and is proved at large by Perron, who shows the
design of Tertullian in that discourse against Marcion to be, that Christ came
to fulfill all the Types and Figures of the Old Law: and so that he made the
Bread to be his Body, which in the Old Law had been only a Figure of it. The
same Tertullian l. de Resurr. Car. c. 8. says thus; Our flesh feeds on the Body
and Blood of Christ, that the Soul may be filled with God. Id. l. de Anima,
That if we question our senses, we may doubt, whether our Blessed Savior was
not deceived in what he heard, and saw, and touched; He might (says he) be
deceived in the voice from Heaven, in the smell of the Ointment with which he
was anointed against his Burial, and in the taste of the Wine* which he
consecrated in remembrance of his Blood. Chrysostom Homil. 83. in Mattheum. Let
us give Credit to God every where, and not contradict him, although what he says
seems contrary to our Apprehension and our Eyes. Let his saying master our
Understanding and our Eyes. And thus let us behave our selves in the Mysteries,
not only looking upon what is before us, but holding fast his Words. For his
Words cannot deceive, but our sense may be easily mistaken; his Words cannot be
untrue; but our sense is very often deceived. Since therefore he has said, This
is my Body, let us be convinced and believe, and behold it with the Eyes of our
understanding. Cyril. Hier. Cat. c. 4. Do not therefore look on it as mere
Bread only, or bare Wine; for as God himself has said, it is the Body and Blood
of Christ. Notwithstanding therefore the information of sense, let Faith
confirm thee, and do not judge of the thing by the Taste; but rather take it for
most certain by Faith, without the least doubting, that his Body and Blood are
given thee. Origin contra Mar. Calls the Bread and the Chalice, the Images of
the Body and Blood of Christ. Origin. Hom. 5. in div. lo. Evang. When you
receive the holy Food and that incorruptible Banquet, when you enjoy the Bread
of Life and Cup, you eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Lord, then our
Lord enters under your Roof: do you therefore humble your self, and imitating
the Centurion, say: Lord, I am not worthy thou should enter under my Roof.
For where he enters unworthily, there he enters to the judgment of the
Receiver. Id. in Mat. That which is consecrated by Gods Word and Prayer, as to
the matter of it, goes into the belly, and is voided into the draught. Ambros.
de sacr. l. 4. c. 4, The Bread and Wine are what they were, and yet are changed
into another thing. St. Ambrose de Mist. init. c. 9. How many examples do we
produce to prove, that this is not what Nature framed, but what the Benediction
has consecrated; and that the power of Benediction is greater than the power of
Nature, because by Benediction Nature it self is changed? Moses held a Rod in
his hand, he cast it from him, and it became a Serpent -- The Rivers afforded
no drink; at the prayers of the Prophet, they ran no longer Blood, but the
Nature of waters returned. -- Now if Blessings given by Men were of so great
efficacy, as to change the Nature of things; what shall we say of the divine
Consecration, where the very Words of Christ our Savior are operative? For
this Sacrament which thou receivest, is made by the Words of Christ. And if the
words of Elias were so powerful, as to draw fire from Heaven, shall not the
words of Christ be powerful enough, to change the nature of things? Thou have
read of the Creation of the World, that God spoke, and the things were made; he
commanded, and they received a Being. If therefore Christ by his Word, was able
to make something of nothing; shall he not be thought able, to change one thing
into another? For it is no less a work, to give a Nature or Being to things,
than to change them from one Nature to another. -- 'Twas above the order of
Nature for a Virgin to conceive; and this Body which we make in the Sacrament,
is that which was born of the Virgin. Why do you require here the order of
Nature in the Body of Christ, when as above all Nature, Christ was born of a
Virgin? Theod. Dial. Christ honored the Symbols and the Signs, with the Title
of his Body and Blood; not changing the Nature, but to Nature adding grace; for
neither do the Mystical Signs recede from their nature; for they abide in their
proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched. Theodoret
immediately after the words, cited in the adverse Column, goes on in these
words: The Mystical Signs are understood to be that which they are made, and
they are believed and adored, as being those very things which they are
believed. And in his Comment. in ep. ad Cor. he says, That Christ gave his
precious Body and Blood, not only to the eleven Apostles, but also to the
Traitor Judas. And That they contemn and affront Christ, who take his most
sacred Body into their unclean hands, and receive it within their polluted
mouth. Of this Theodoret the Protestant Centuriators (Cent. 5. c. 10.) say;
That he spoke dangerously of the Sacrament; because he affirms, that the
Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, after the invocation of the Priest,
are changed* and made other things than they were before. Eusebius. Christ gave
his disciples the Symbols of divine Economy, commanding the Image and Type of
his Body to be made. Eusebius, l. 1. Them. Evang. c. 10. Being now preferred to a
more excellent Sacrifice and Office, than that was of the Old Law, we think it
unreasonable any more to fall back to those first and weak Elements, which
contain certain Signs and Figures, but not the truth it self. Id. As cited by
St. Jo. Damas. Many sinners being Priests, do offer Sacrifice; neither does God
deny his assistance, but by the holy Ghost consecrates the proposed Gifts. And
the Bread indeed is made the Precious Body of our Lord, and the Cup his
precious Blood. Greg. Naz* Orat. 2 in Pas. Now we shall be partakers of the
Paschal Supper but still in a Figure, tho more clear then in the old Law, for
the legal Passover, (I will not be afraid to speak it) was a more obscure
Figure of a Figure. St. Greg. Naz. Lest any one should think he speaks in the
place cited of a mere Figure without the substance, in the same Oration thus
exhorts his Auditors, Eat, says he, without confusion and without doubting, the
Body, and drink the Blood of thy Savior; If thou desire to have life: and
refuse not to give credit to the words which are spoken concerning his Flesh:
neither be scandalized at his Passion. Be constant, firm and stable, not
wavering in any thing for the sayings of thy Adversaries. And in Orat. 11. he
says thus of his sister Corgonia; She prostrates her self with Faith before the
Altar, and with a great cry calls upon him, who is worshipped on it. S. Austin.
Indeed this is a miserable Bondage of the Soul, to take the Signs instead of
the things Signified. And in the Person of Christ, speaking to his disciples,
says thus You are not to eat this Body which you see, or to drink that Blood
which my Crucifiers shall pour forth, I have commended to you the Sacrament,
which being Spiritually understood, shall quicken you. St. Austin in his
explication of the 98 Psalm, where expounding these words, Adore his
footstool; he says thus: I enquire what this his footstool is, and the
Scripture makes me answer, The earth is my footstool. Here now wavering I turn
my self to Christ, because it is he I seek here, and I am forthwith satisfied,
how the Earth may be adored without sacrilege, and his footstool without the
guilt of Idolatry. For he took Earth of Earth, Flesh being of Earth, and he
took Flesh of the Flesh of Mary. And because he conversed here with us in that
Flesh, and gave us that very Flesh to eat for the Salvation of our Souls; and
there is nobody eats that Flesh without adoring it first; it is evident, how
that foostool of our Lord may be adored; and that we are so far from sinning in
adoring it, that we sin, if we do not adore it. Id. Christ brought them to a
banquet, in which he commended to his Discip^es the Figure of his Body and
Blood, for he did not doubt to say, This is my Body, when he gave the Sign of
his Body. And L. 12. con. Faust. c. 10. he says: For the Blood of Christ upon
Earth has a loud Voice, when all people receiving it, answer, Amen. This is the
plain Voice of the Blood, which the very Blood it self speaks out of the mouths
of the Faithful, who are rede^m'd by the same Blood. And c. 2c. He calls the
Eucharist, The Sacrament of Hope, by which the Church is at this time united,
as long as That is drunk which flowed from the side of Christ. Id. How shall l
lay hold on him who is absent? How shall I reach my hands unto the Heavens, and
touch him who sits there? Send thy Faith thither and thou have him sure. Id. in
Com. Psalm. 33. where he speaks thus of Christ. And he was carried in his own
hands. And can this, my Brethren, be possible in man! Was ever any man carried
in his own hands? He may be carried by the hands of others; but in his own, no
man was ever yet carried. How this can be literally understood of David we
cannot discover. But in Christ we find it verified. For Christ was carried in
his own hands, when giving his own very Body, He said, This is my Body. For
that Body he carried in his own hands. Such is the Humility of our Lord Jesus
Christ. S. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. c. 10. What is that which the Bread signifies?
The body of Christ. S. Chrysostom. Hom. de Euchar. where speaking of the Blessed
Sacrament, he says thus, Do you see Bread? Do you see wine? Does this go into
the Draught like other Food? God forbid, don't think so. For as Wax when joined
with the Fire is likned unto it, so that nothing of the Substance of it is
left, nothing remains; So here conceive the Mysteries to be consumed with the
Substance of the Body. And Hom. 83 in Matt. Christ did not think it enough to
become Man, be scourged and murdered; but he incorporates himself with us, and
not by Faith only, but in reality makes us his Body -- -- Many Mothers there
are, who seed their Insants at a Strangers Breast; but Christ not so; he
nourishes us with his own Blood -- -- The things we propose are not ^one by
humane Power. He that wrought those things at the ^ast Supper, is the Author of
what is done here: We hold but the place of Ministers; but he that sanctifies
and changes them is Christ himself. Id. ad Caes. Monach. After Consecration the
Bread is worthy of the Name of the Body of Christ, although the Nature of the
Bread remains still in it. And Hom. 24. in Ep. 1. ad Cor. That which is in the
Chalice, is the same that flowed from his Side, and we are Partakers of it. He
poured out this very Blood, that we might not remain in Error; and he not only
poured it out, but he has likewise given the very same to us. Wheresore, says
he to us, If you desire Blood, do not color the Altars of Idols with the Blood
of Beasts; but upon my Altar offer up my Blood. And Lib. 3. de S^c^^d. O
Miracle! He that sits above with his Father, at the very same instant of Time
is here in the Hands of all, he gives himself to those that are w^lling to
receive him. And Hom. 46. in Joan. The Devils when they behold the Blood of
Christ within us, are put to Flight, and the Angels come in. This Blood
purified the Holy of Holies: and if the Figure of it had so great Virtue in the
Temple of the Jews, and when sprinkled on the Doors of the Egyptians, it has
much greater now being the Truth. Macar. 27. Hom. 27* In the Church Bread and
Wine are offered; the Type of his Flesh and Blood, and they who are Partakers
of the visible Bread, do Spiritually eat the Flesh of the Lord. S. Cyril Alexan
Ep. ad Colos. Cited by S. Thomas. That we should not feel horror to see Flesh
and Blood on the Sacred Altars* God condescending to our Frailty, flows into
the things offered the Power of Life: converting them into the verity of his
own Flesh; to the end the Body of life be found in us, as a certain quickening
seed. S. Greg Nyss. c. 37. I do now rightly believe, that the Bread sanctified
by the Word of God, is changed into the Body of God by the Word. Pope Gelasius
l. de 2. Not. The Sacraments which we receive of the Body and Blood of Christ
are a divine Thing, by means whereof we are made Partakers of the divine
Nature, and yet the Substance of Bread and Wine does not cease to be. Here the
Author has made a new Pope: for this was another Gelasius, as is proved at
large by Bellarmin: and if the words immediately following the text cited in
the same Author* be added, the difficulty is removed; which are these: They
(the substance of Bread and Wine) do pass into a Divine Substance, the Holy
Ghost effecting it; yet remaining in the propriety of their Nature.

Here Is a short account of what the Primitive Fathers say as to the Point under
debate, which may be seen more at large in such volumes as designedly treat of
this Subject. And what think you now, Misrepresenter? Take both sides into your
hands, and weigh them; and see, to which part the Fathers incline. Consider the
matter a little, and tell me whether the Fathers are such strict Protestants in
this affair, as is pretended? Do you think, They could have taken the Test? Do
their express belief of the real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, their
plain assertion of the supernatural change of the Bread and Wine into the Body
and Blood of Christ, agree with that Parliamentary Divinity? Come,
Misrepresenter, it argues a great Stock of Confidence in you, thus to pretend
positively that the Fathers believed direct contrary to our Doctrine; whereas
it is evident to any Eye, that is not blinded like yours, They deliver
themselves most largely and fully in its behalf; and that amongst all the Ends
of Text you have picked out of them, there is not so much as one directly
contrary to what we hold.

Misrepresent. You press too many Questions at once; You bid me Consider, and
would have me Answer too. But the best on it is, I need no consideration here,
for without it I know what I am to return: and it is, that tho you heap up fifty
times more express Testimonies than these, yet the Fathers still believed
direct contrary to your Doctrine. They speak of the Sacrament, and call it a
Figure, a Symbol, a Sign, an Image, a Remembrance, and this is a contradiction
to your Belief, and as long as these Words are to be found in them, the People
I have to deal with, will take it so.


Represent. This is thine own true self, Misrepresenter: to prove a thing by
halves, and call that consuting of Popery, is your Masterpiece. Why, these
expressions of the Fathers, terming the Sacrament, a Figure, a Symbol, a Sign,
an Image, a Remembrance, are so far from being contrary to our Belief, that
they are as agreeable to it, as to the Articles of the very Protestant Church
it self. For the Catholic Church teaches that the Body and Blood of Christ are
in the Blessed Sacrament really and substantially, and so indeed not only as in
a Sign, Symbol or Figure. But it does not deny the Sacrament to be a Figure:
for the Eucharist is a Figure, or Representation of the Death of Christ. It
does not deny it to be a Sign; for the outward and visible species of Bread are
a Sign of the Heavenly Bread that is within. It does not deny it to be a
Remembrance or Commemoration; for whosoever receives it, shows forth, according
to St. Paul, the Passion and Death of our Redeemer. It does not deny it to
operate by a Virtue,-for it has Virtue and Power there to work in the Soul.
What our Church denis and condemns, is, that the Body and Blood of Christ is
there only as in a Sign, or in a Figure, or a Virtue, and not according to the
Verity and Substance of it. You prove therefore nothing against us, in
producing Testimonies of the Fathers owning the Sacrament to be a Figure, a
Sign, etc. For this is not to show Them contrary to us, but positively agreeing
with our Belief: especially if taken together, with what you see cited out of
them in our favor. If you will make good your Pretenses, and not abuse your
Followers with half-demonstrations; you should see first to understand the
Doctrine of your Adversaries before you undertake to confute it. Show that the
Fathers maintain the Sacrament to be only a Sign, only a Figure, etc. and you
may do something; but till then don't pretend They believed contrary to us.


Misrepresent. This is a put off with a piece of New Popery. But let that go.
Some of the Fathers positively say, that the Nature or Substance of Bread
remains after Consecration: I hope this too does not agree with your Doctrine.


Represent. What I have declared to you has nothing new in it. It Is asserted
positively by Bellarmine: and that every Sacrament is a Sign, has been the
constant Doctrine of our Divines, who make that an essential part of the
Definition of a Sacrament. As for what some of the Fathers mention of the
Nature or Substance of Bread remaining: any one that is versed in their
Writings is not ignorant, that by those terms they often mean no more than the
Natural qualities or visible appearances of things; as you your selves can tell
us upon occasion, when it serves your turn to have it so: and in this sense it
does not at all disagree with our Belief. But suppose the worst; those
expressions of the Fathers, are only occasional or accidental; but where they
treat professedly of this* Subject, they speak plainly in our behalf, and (to
follow the Rule of one of the Lights of your Church, as you style him in* this
Pamphlet) I would fain know whether a man's judgment must be taken from
occasional Dr. St.
and incidental passages, or from designed and set discourses; which is as much
as to ask, whether the lively representation of a man by Picture, may best be
taken, when in haste of other business he passes by us, giving only a glance of
his Countenance; or when he purposely and designedly sits in order to that end,
that his Countenance may be truly represented? There Is no Book treats so fully
and demonstratively of any Subject in one place, but occasionally speaking of
the same elsewhere, from some obscure or dubious expression, furnishes matter
for an Objection against the Doctrine before designedly established. This is
true even of the Bible it self, which teaching Christ to be True Man, does yet
by the occasional expression of St. Paul, saying that he appeared in Habit as a
Man, and in the Likeness of a Man; give occasion to some to object, that he was
no Real and Substantial Man, which strikes at the very Fundamental Truth
delivered in that Sacred Volume: and if this be true, even of the Word of God
it self; what wonder, to find it in the Works of the Fathers much more ample
and voluminous?


Misrepresent. This is another shift, with a help of a Logical distinction:
however let this pass too. But as long as you don't believe your senses, but
deny the certainty of those Powers, which God has given us to lead us to the
Belief of all the Mysteries of Christian Religion, I am sure you contradict the
Fathers, and are in a fair way of undermining the very foundation of
Christianity.


Represent. This is the Cock-Argument of the other Light of your Church, and it
so far resembles the Light, that like it, it makes a glaring show, but go to
grasp it, and you find nothing in your Hand. Why, Misrepresenter, even in this
Mystery I believe more of my Senses, than you do; my Eyes tell me there is the
color of Bread, and I assent to them; my Tongue, that it has the taste of
Bread, I agree to it: my smelling, that it has the smell of Bread, I yield to
it: my Fingers that it feels like Bread; I accept of the Information: my Ears
tell me from the Words spoken by Christ himself, That it is the Body of Christ;
I believe these too. Is not here Misrepresenter, one Sense more than you
believe? And yet you would fain persuade the World, I do not believe my Senses.
The Sense by which Faith comes, is that of Hearing. S. Paul possitively
affirming, that Faith comes by Hearing* and how do I overthrow the certainty of
Christian Religion, by harkening to that Sense, by which all Faith is to be
conveyed into my Soul?


Misrepresent. You don't believe your Eyes which assure you of the Substance of
the Bread being there, even after Consecration.


Represent. If your Eyes see the Substance of things, they are most
extraordinary ones, and better than mine. For my part, mine never saw farther
than the Color or Figure, etc. of things, which are only accidents, and the
entire Object of that Sense. It Is Reason or Judgment acquaints me with the
Substance* and this Judgment, it is true, I frame generally from the Information
of my Senses, excepting when they are indisposed, or some Divine Revelation
intervenes: For in this case I choose rather to judge from This, than from my
Senses; as Abraham did, who being told by his Senses, That those three that
appeared to him (Gen 18.) were Men, and by a Revelation from God, that they
were Angels, judged of them and their Nature according to the Revelation, and
not according to his Senses.


Misrepresent. You are all upon Quirks and Philosophy to day, and I am tired
with your Distiactions, and so farewell, till the Holy Days are over.


Represent. Fare you well; but do you hear, don't forget to send your People to
the Chapels to Morrow Morning, to see the Nursing and Rocking the Child in the
Cradle. This is one of your April-Errands for Christmas Morning; and you don't
think much of making the Papists ridiculous, though it be at the expense of
making your own people Fools.


Published with Allowance.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. IIII. The Form of the Catholic Church established by Christ. No hopes of
Salvation out of it. The Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Church in this
point, Good at this day. The Protestants as uncharitably damn the Papists, as
These are said to do the Protestants. In reference to the Preface of Wholesome
advises from the B. V. etc.

THe Papists Misrepresented is Member of a Church, which excludes all others
from the hopes of Salvation, besides those who are within the Pale of her own
Communion. And no doubt his Church is True, if uncharitableness, be but a Mark
of the True one: if it be but safest to be on the uncharitable side, he is
beyond all question in the right. But certainly this is to leave the Rule of
Christ and his Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, who taught none of this
damning Doctrine, but ever recommended Charity, as the necessary foundation of
a Christian life.

THe Papist Represented is taught, that Christ our Savior, before his
Ascension into Heaven established a Church consisting of all True Believers,
amongst which he gave some Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists;
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in
the Unity of Faith. (Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.) These Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastons and Teachers, he constituted over the Faithful, to over-see, rule and
direct them, to whom he gave them in charge by the mouth of St. Paul (Act. 20.
28.) Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which
the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has pnrchas'd with his own blood: with a strict Command to the Flock or
Congregation of the Faithful, to be obedient to these Pastors thus put over
them by the Ordinance of God: (Heb. 13. 17.) Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves; for They watch for your Souls, as they that must
give account. And verse. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have
spoken unto you the word of God, whose Faith follow. This command of submitting
to Pastors, was given to the Flock, as he is taught by St. Paul, for the
preventing Divisions and Schisms: that so, notwithstanding their differing
private Inclinations, Capacities, Sense and Judgment, by this Obedience and
Submission to those that were put over them, for their rule and direction, they
might be perfectly joined together in the same mind and same judgment (1 Cor.
1. 10.) That they might be preserved in the Unity of Peace, and be no more
Children, rossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
(Ephesians. 4. 14.)

And that the People or Flock might have no scruple or solicitude upon them,
for fear of being led into Error by these Apostles and Pastors, but might
securely and without anxiety of Spirit rest under their Guidance and Direction,
Christ did most solemnly promise the said Overseers, the Apostles and Pastors,
the assistance of his Holy Spirit: I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world (Mat. 28. 2c.) The Comforter, the Holy Ghost shall teach you all
things (Jo. 14. 26.) By which effectual Promise they were constituted Guides,
were taught all Truth, and all those secured from Error, who committed
themselves to their Instruction.

The Catholic Church being thus constituted, and ordian'd by Christ himself,
and provided with Apostles and Pastors divinely assisted for the instructing
the Flock in the Mysteries of the Christian Faith: with an obligation on all
that heard them, to believe upon pain of damnation: He that believes not,
shall be damned (Mat. 16. 16.) it is certain that all such as did separate
themselves from the Communion of the Apostles, either by contradicting or
disbelieving their Doctrine, or being refractory to their Government, did in
this most heinously offend the Divine Majesty, and exclude themselves from the
hopes of Salvation; the former, by rejecting the true Faith, without which it is
impossible to please Him, Heb. 11. 6. the latter by disobedience, resisting the
Ordinance of God; They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans
13. 1. 2.

This was the Face and Constitution of the Church of Christ in the time of the
Apostles; Salvation being promised to those that believed: He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved: and Damnation threatened to disbelievers; He
that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. So that 'twas no Uncharitable,
but a most Evangelical Assertion in the Evangelist, to say; The Lord added to
the Church daily such as should be saved. (Act. 2. 47.) And the declaring, that
there was no Salvation out of their Church, was nothing but a necessary
Doctrine.

The Church being thus by Christ himself founded, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 15. consisting of Pastors and Teachers to instruct, and of the
Flock under an indispensable obligation of receiving and Submitting to their
Instruction; it was so to continue to the end of the World: Christ's Spirit,
being to abide with her for ever. (Jo. 14. 16.) The Promise of his assistance
being not limited to the Persons of the Apostles, but annexed to their
Function. As therefore St. Paul, when he left Ephesus (Act. 20. 28.) appointed
others to oversee and rule the Flock, with their Commission from the holy
Ghost: So he and the other Apostles, when they departed this Life, had others
to succeed them, for the Direction and Government of the Faithful. And as those
who cut themselves off from the Communion of the Apostles, incurred the guilt
of Damnation, by unavoidably, in so doing, erring in Faith, or Disobedience; so
likewise all those, who separated from the Communion of their Successors: it
being at all times most certainly true, that there was no true Faith, nor true
Charity in any, that separated themselves from the Doctrine and Government of
the Church of Christ, over which the Apostles were Overseers and Rulers for
their time, and their Successors to be so after them to the end of the World.
This, as to the Apostles, is evident from the severe censure of Deceivers,
pronounced against all those who endeavored to make Divisions in their time
(Ephesians. 4. 14.) where they are said to work, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. And 2 Timothy 2. 18. Such as
dissented from the Apostles, are condemned for erring concerning the Truth, and
overthrowing the Faith. And Tit. 3. 11. They are said to be subverted and in
sin, and to be condemned of themselves. And as to their Successors, the
Practice of the Primitive Church in the time of her confessed Purity, is a most
convincing Argument; there being none that in the first three or four
Centuries, ever separated from them, either in point of Doctrine, or making
Schisms, tho under the most colorable pretext of Reforming Errors, or
rejecting Innovation, but were declared Innovators, as men to be avoided, as
cut off from the Mystical Body of Christ, by the Pastors and Overseers then in
being. The Rule of St. John (1 John 4. 6.) being always the standard-Measure of
the Church; He that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears not
us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.

Here then it is evident that the Catholic Church in the time of the Apostles,
as also of their Successors, was the Depository of the true Faith; and that to
dissent from her in Faith, was to fall into Error, to divide from God; He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, (Luke 10. 16.) If
he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen, and a
Publican, (Matthew. 18. 17.) and consequently no Promises of Christ, nor
Salvation to be expected by such, who were not of her Communion.

This same One holy Catholic Church, he believes to have continued in all Ages,
it being at all times true, what has been always said by the Faithful in the
Creed, I believe the holy Ca-Cholic Church; and that it is to remain to the end
of the World assisted by the Spirit of God, and preserved from teaching errors,
according to the Promise of Christ. (Matthew. 28. 20. Joh. 14. 16.) So that as
then, so now at this time there is a Church succeeding that of the Apostles,
which teaches all Truth, and from which none can separate, without erring in
Faith, or incurring the guilt of Schism, Sins altogether inconsistent with
Salvation. And because after most serious Considerations, and the weighing of
all Reasons, he believes this Church to be that, in whose Communion he is; he
does not question, but what is truly affirmed of the Church of the Apostles and
succeeding Ages, and those that fell from it; is most true of the same Church
now in being, of which he is a Member, and of all those who separate from it,
upon what pretext soever. And however this may be painted out for
Vncharitablenss, yet it is certainly the very Doctrine delivered by the
Apostles, and the Practice of the Primitive Church. And when the worst has been
made of it, yet still he does not come short of Dr. Tillotsons Charity, for
notwithstanding all this, yet so much Charity he has (and he desires always to
have it) as to hope that a great many of other separate Persuasions, who live
piously, and have been almost inevitably Sermon. at Whitehall, pr. 3d.
detained in their Persuasion, by the prejudice of Education, and an Invincible
Ignorance, will upon a sincere general Repentance find mercy with God.

Misrepresent. Enough of this dry reasoning: What do you say to a Piece not
long since published, Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin to her
Indiscreet Worshippers, which being composed by one of your own Persuasion, has
laid you more open, than all your Adversaries could do. Come let me tell you,
the blow that comes from a Friend is the severest: and this true Representer,
has quite blasted all your Representing Characters and Expositions.


Represent. Then, I see, you intend I should s^t up for Reader of Anatomy upon
all the Pamphlets that come into the World. I am highly obliged to you for the
kindness; but I think the Scavanger has much tbe better Office; who has nothing
but Dirt and Sinks to deal with, much less offensive, than to be always raking
in filthy Calumnies, fulsome Incongruities, and noisome Impertinencies. No,
Misrepresenter, I would not undertake it, tho I were certain to enlarge my
Interest, and become as Popular, as you have done, by your so taking knack of
Misrepresenting. However, to pleasure a Friend as you are, I Will touch at some
particulars, which seem to fall within my Province of Representing.


Misrepresent. Why, I hope, there is no Misrepresenting there; you don't sure do
that ill office to one another; I thought none but Protestants had been
Misrepresenters.


Represent. Yes, yes, it is Protestant Misrepresenting, I mean to be at. As long
as it has a Protestant Preface to it, never question, Misrepresenter, but I
shall find your finger in it. And what think you of the sourth and fi^th leaves
of the Preface, where he sets out the Papist, as Weak, as Confident, as
Ridiculous, as Foolish as he can well make them: are not these Colors of your
laying on?


Misrepresent. He does not assert this barely, without giving a Reason for it.
He says, your pronouncing Damnation against all those that are separated from
your Church, is an argument of the weakness of your Cause; and that your
declaring all others to be out of the way of Salvation, is only because you are
at a loss for other Reasons to convince Men's Understanding, and therefore by
these Threats and Thunders you work upon their Passions: which to considering
Men proves nothing more, than your own Confidence and Ridiculousness, and makes
them doubt, whether in this you have Pref.
more of the Fool or the Artist. And what Misrepresenting, I pray you, in this?
Represent* Never more Unreasonable Misrepresenting, then when Calumnies are set
out with the Colors of Reason. You, Friend, see but with one eye; and, I fear,
have that Curse upon you, to think even contradictions reasonble, so they be
but in favor of the Cause you have espoused. He gives a Reason, you say, for
what he says: But is it reason or fair dealing in him, to load the Papists with
the most Ignominious Names, and Ridicule them to the Multitude, for making such
Declarations in reference to such as are out of their Communion, which is
nothing more than what is done by his own Church, nay what he himself does most
solemnly make, before he concludes his Preface, almost in the same breath, with
which he so positively declaimed against the Papist? Consider this a little, if
Considering be not out of thy power. The Papists declare, that such as separate
from the Faith and Communion of their Church, sounded by Christ, and continued
down from the Apostles, under a visible Succession of Pastors and Teachers, do
by that depart from the Truth, from the Doctrine and Commands of Christ, and
consequently are out of the way of Salvation. This by the Preface-maker, is
presently set out for Thundering of Hell and Damnation, it is their Confidence,
it is the Weakness of their Cause, puts them upon it, and for so doing, they are
void of Charity. And yet see, how condemning this in the Papists, he does the
very same thing himself; hear his solemn Profession, which he makes in the
presence of God, the last page of his Preface but one: I do here solemnly
profess, says he, in the presence of God, that I cannot but conclude, the
Worship, the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, to be so extremely
dangerous, that nothing but invincible Ignorance, of which God only can be
judge, can give us any reasonable hope of their Salvation, who live and die in
that Communion. Is not here the very same sentence pronounced by Protestants
aagainst the Papist, which the Papists declare against the Protestants? And yet
He that Unchurches the Papists for so doing, thinks himself as safe in the very
doing of what he condemns, that he could venture the Salvation of a thousand
Souls, if he had them, upon the ground on which he stands. Pray now tell me,
how that comes to be so safe, so reasonable and secure in Him and his Church,
which in the Papist he condemns for so Uncharitable and Ridiculous? Or how
happens it, that having dressed up the Papists in a Fools-coat, and afterward
slipping it over his own shoulders, he thinks himself to look so Wise and Grave
upon it? Come, Misrepresenter, here is more of your hand in this Preface, then I
expect you will own; if you had net, by your malignant influence, indisposed the
Author's eyesight; Red and Yellow, had been the same Colors to him upon a
Protestant-back* as upon a Papist.


Misrepresent. Come you wrong the Author by your Misconstructions; he does not
say the Papists are damned, but that their condition is extremely dangerous;
and this does not leave them without hope of Salvation.


Represent* It Is true, he will allow the Ignorant and Fools of his Communion so
much Charity, as to think the Papists way he saved. But for the judicious and
learned Protestants, who go by Reason, who consider and weigh things, no such
Charity in them: there is no Reasonable hope, says he, of their Salvation, who
live and die in that Communion of the Papists. So that, if any are so
Charitable amongst the Protestants, it is for want of being advised, for want of
being better instructed in their Religion, it is for want of being like those
that Guide 'em, for want of Reason: for there is no Reasonable hope, says he, of
their Salvation: no reasonable hope at all, unless it be for such of them whose
invincible Ignorance will excuse them. And is not this the very same, which is
most frankly allowed the Prot^stants by the Papists, who after they have been
proclaimed so often to the gaping Crowds, for most Uncharitable Damners,
Thunderers of Hell and Damnation against the poor Protestants, do not advance
their damnation one ace farther against them, then the Protestants themselves
most solemnly in the presence of God, and after good consideration, do against
the Papists: There being no Papist, but what will grant such Protestants hopes
of Salvation, who living piously, and repenting sincerely of all offenses,
through invincible Ignorance remain in that Communion, which is the utmost it
seems of what they will allow the Papists.

Do you see, Misrepresenter, by this, how injuriously busy you have been in
slandering the Papists? How many thousand Mouths and Pens have you influenced,
to render the Papists black and odious for their uncharitablenss, for their
excluding all others from Salvation besides themselves: when upon examination
of the matter, the Doctrine of Papists and Protestants in this affair is the
same in reference to each other; and the Protestants are as Unchristian Damners
of the Papists, as they are made to be of the Protestants.


Misrepresent. Come you abuse the Protestants: they are too tenderhearted:
have more Charity, then to say, you are damned: I never heard so foul a word
fall from any of them. And if you have found any thing like it in this Preface,
you are to consider, the Author of it professes himself a Layman, and you are
not to take measure of their Religion from him; he may be overseen, through
Zeal or Passion, he is dabling out of his element, and may he mistaken.


Represent. It Is true, he says he is a Layman; but he speaks so like a
Clergyman, so almost in the very words and phrase of a Doctor of his Church,
mentioned at large in my last Reply; that I cannot but take it for
Church-sence, dropping through a Lay-pen. They both agree, that the only hope
of Salvation for the Papists, is invincible Ignorance. They both meet, first in
declaring against the Papists for their Incharitableness, and then unluckily
jump in asserting the very Principle they condemn. Then, if you take the other
Doctor along with you, quoted in the same Reply, who declares, That all those,
who are Members Idol of the Church of Rome, Ed. 1, p. 3.
of the Church of Rome, must by the terms of Communion with that Church, be
guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of which are sins inconsistent
with Salvation: You Will find it most evident, that this Preface speaks the sense
of the Protestant Church, and that the throwing it upon a Layman, is but a vain
Apology. However, to give the Protestants their due, this I Will say for them,
that amongst the kind, They are the most Gentile and Courtly Damners, that can
possibly be met with: For, as you observe, they are seldom or never heard to
say, The Papists must be damned: no, this Grim-divinity would alarm the dull
Congregation, and make 'em jealous of their Leaders, that they condemn the
Papi^ts for uncharitable and are as bad themselves: They declare their
sentiments therefore in softer language, and instead of saying, The Papists
must be damned, they only say, there is no reasonable hope of their Salvation:
We hope, that such of them, as by invincible Ignorance are detained in that
Communion, upon a general repentance will find mercy with God. They are
Idolaters or Hypocrites, Superstitious, Blood-suckers, etc. and must be
necessarily guilty of such sins, as are inconsistent with Salvation; but they
are Members still of the true Church, the corrupt; and God's merciful. In this
kind of modest Cant, and with the show of Charity, do they cast out the Papists
amongst the Reprobate. But all this, if it were put in plain English, is just
the same as to say, They are damned; and it is only not to betray them selves to
the people, they do not speak out. Tell me, Misrepresenter, when a Man has done
his best to prove me an Idolater, a Hypocrit, a Corrupter of the Laws of God,
that I incur the most horrid of crimes without remorse or Conscience, according
to the Principles of my Religion: Does not he smooth me up with a very
unseasonable Complement, to tell me, after all this dreadful Indictment, that
he has Charity enough* to hope I shall be saved. He first in good earnest makes
a Devil of me, and with the same breath seems willing to complement me into a
Saint. But however, I don't think the Papists are much beholden to these, for
their so civil hopes; for those that pretend to have Charity enough to hope
thus of the Papists, after they have made 'em Idolaters and Hypocrites; I don't
question, may have the like charitable Hopes for the Socinian, the Turk, the
Jew, and the Atheists. And if more Doctors then One, don't in this lay a fair
ground, for the taking in the Devils too within the extent of their Charity, I
am mistaken.

But these their pretended hopes I can look on no better then bare Complements:
it is plain, their allowance of Salvation to Papists is upon no other score,
than the supposal of invincible Ignorance, and this makes their damning
Doctrine to be of as Iarge an extent, nay, to be the very same they decry in
the Papists. And it is a Mystery to me, how they impose upon the People, making
that look black and odious in the Papists, which They practice themselves
without the least breach of Christian Charity.


Misrepresent. 'This is a Paradox then to you, it seems: come it is a time of
Christian liberty, and I Will be free with you: They know the People they have to
deal with; the word Pope is an Enchantment, and Papist an Infatuation to them.
Let them hear these but named, and they are so wholly possessed, their
discerning Faculties so stupefied, that they will pass you over fifty
contradictions without once stumbling. No fear of their enquiring, How can this
be? And, pray now, where is your difficulty of persuading these people any
thing. Consider upon this, and then call me* Mis-representer again, if you
think I deserve it.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. V. The Papist, as to the Articles of his Belief, follows the Method
prescribed by Christ, practiced by the Apostles and the Primitive Church. The
Method is of Divine Institution, and more according to Reason than what Others
follow. The Word Worship is Equivocal, and acknowledged so by St. Austin.

THe Papist as Misrepresented has no good Reasons to defend his way of Worship
and Religion, and therefore the most Soverain means he has to work upon weak
minds, is plentifully to thunder out against them threatenings of Hell and
Damnation; and Poor Man! What should he do? He finds himself at a loss to
convince their Understanding; and therefore he must not be wanting to work upon
their Passions. But since the strength of his Cause lies in nothing, but
pouring out Curses, and pronouncing others to be in a Damnable condition, it
proves nothing but his own Confidence. His Zeal may be great, but being not
grounded on good Reasons, it only makes him the more Ridiculous, and is
incapable of shaking any ones constancy, because it arises without knowledge
and judgment. The Sum of the ninth page of the Preface.

THe Papist as Represented has so good Reasons for every Point of his Faith and
Religion, that whosoever casts them by as Weak and Ridiculous, must upon the
same grounds turn Christianity out of doors, and own it to be built on no
better foundation, than the Ignorant Zeal and Confidence of its Asserters. The
Motive of St. Augustine for his embracing the Scriptures for the Word of God,
was the Authority of the Catholic Church; he expressly declaring (cont. Ep.
Fundam.) That he would not believe the Gospel, except the Authority of the
Catholic Church moved him to it. From this same Authority it is he receives
every Article of his Faith; and since in his very Creed, he is taught to
believe the Holy Catholic Church, he thinks he has Reason enough to do it. And
whosoever taxes him of Weakness or Confidence for so doing, does nothing less
than call him a Fool for believing his Creed; and this is only one Remove from
telling him, that if he will be Wise, and have good Reasons for what he does, he
must be no Christian. Others may be so Wise, as to believe only Eleven Articles
of their Creed: for his part he thinks it no reflection upon his Wisdom to
believe Twelve: he was taught so many, when he was a Child, and he does not
find he has outgrown any one of the number.

This Catholic Church, which by the Creed every Christian is bound to believe,
is, as was explicated in our last, the Congregation of all true Believers under
the Government and Direction of Pastors and Teachers in an uninterrupted
Succession descending from the Apostles, who by Gods appointment, are set over
the Flock, to feed and rule it; and whom the Flock is obliged to hear and obey,
and whose Faith they are bound to follow in each respective Age. It Is thus
delivered to him by St. Paul (Heb. 13. 7, 17.) Remember them which have the
Rule over you, whose Faith follow. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves. And this way of the Faithful receiving their Instruction in
the Christian Belief, from the Catholic Church speaking to them by the Pastors
and Teachers of the said Church (which is the Method he observes, as to every
Article of his Faith) has been always looked on so sound and reasonable, that
in the time of the very Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, there was never
any used but this: 'twas by this means the World first became Christian, and by
the very same Orthodox Christianity has been always preserved in its vigor and
purity, notwithstanding all the oppositions of Subtle, Malicious, or
Self-interested Adversaries.

He that has but read the Scriptures cannot but have observed, that the Method
prescribed by Cbrist himself, for the planting and propagating the Mysteries of
his Holy Faith in the World, was by ordaining and commissionating Apostles and
Disciples, to inform all Mankind of his Doctrine and Religion; and the only
Reasonable Means for any at that time, to arrive to the certain Knowledge of
the True Faith, was to hear and submit to the Doctrine delivered by Those that
were thus sent to Preach and Teach it.

This is the way by which the Christian Religion was first planted in the
World: and by this it has been ever since maintained. The same Pastors and
Overseers, that were to teach the Gospel, having another part of their Charge,
viz. To stand up in case of any Difficulties or Divisions arising in Point of
Faith, and by their Decision to put an end to the Controversy; So to preserve
Unity amongst the Faithful, and defeat all the attempts of Turbulent and
Presuming Spirits. This Method of Pastors and Teachers directing and feeding,
and the Obligation of the Flock to Submit and Obey, as necessary for continuing
One Faith amongst Believers, he has learnt to be Reasonable and of Divine
Institution from the Practice of the Apostles. For he finds, Acts 15. that a
Controversy being started at Antioch, concerning the necessity of
Circumcision; 'twas not left to every Particular Believer to think and decide
the matter, as they judge fit, according to the best of their Knowledge and
Parts: neither did Paul and Barnabas, with other Overseers of the Church of
Antioch, undertake to define any thing in this Particular. No; what was the
Common Concern of all Christians, was not to be determined by the Rulers and
Pastors of any Particular Church: but as belonging to All, 'twas to be remitted
to the Consideration and Decision of Those, who had All under their Charge,
that is, the Pastors of the Universal or Catholic Church. And thus did Paul and
Barnabas; for going up to Jerusalem, the Cause was committed to the Hearing and
Sentence of All the Apostles and Elders assembled at Jurusalem. And as 'twas
determined by Them thus in Body, 'twas received by the Faithful with
consolation; not only at Antioch; but in all other Places, wheresoever the
Gospel of Christ was preached by the Apostles, who as they went through the
Cities delivered them the Decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the
Apostles and Elders, who were at Jerusalem, Act. 16. 4.

This was the Practice of the Apostles, as it stands recorded in Holy Writ,
providentially there described, that their Successors, the Rulers and Pastors
of the Church in future Ages, from this Authentic President, might be provided
of a Means whereby to maintain a Unity in Faith amongst all True Believers,
however spread throughout the different and divided Nations of the Universe,
and know how to give a check to all growing Schisms and Heresies. As therefore
the Apostles put a stop to this Debate concerning the Circumcision, by
determining in Council, in what manner the Faithful were to be taught, were to
believe and do in this Particular; and by this Determination preserved the
Unity of Spirit in the Bond of Peace amongst the Faithful, and prevented the
many Divisions, which otherwise might have torn the Flock asunder, had they
been every one lest to their own thoughts, to judge of it as they pleased. In
like manner did the Pastors of the Church succeeding them in their Charge, in
the like Circumstances: for when there appeared any entering in among the Flock,
(as was foretold by St. Paul, Act. 20. 29.) and like grievous Wolves not
sparing it, but speaking Perverse things to draw away Disciples after them: The
Overseers, who were to feed the Church of God, and commanded by the same
Apostle, to Watch and take heed to all the Flock (ib. v. 28.) assembled in
Council, and by their Determination declared to all under their Charge the
Faith delivered, and directed them which way to believe, as to the Point in
debate.

This was the Practice of the Primitive Church, when as yet acknowledged Pure
and Uncorrupted. Thus did the Pastors then in the First General Council at
Nice, decide the Controversy raised by Arius: thus they did in the Second at
Constantinople; in the Third at Ephesus; in the Foutth at Chalcedon. The
Faithful always receiving with great Veneration the Determination of their
Pastors thus Assembled; and looking upon this Submission to their Doctrine, as
the most Reasonable Means, whereby to secure themselves from falling into
Error. And this same Method, thus happily begun by the Apostles, and continued
on by the Practice of the Primitive Church, it is which he observes in every
Article of his Faith; there being no one Point, amongst all those controverted
amongst Christians, which he assents to, but as derermin'd by the Pastors of
the Catholic Church assembled, who have the care of the Flock; and whom, by the
command of Christ and his Apostles, he is bound to submit to and obey.

Misrepresent. This is the very thing I charge you with: for, pray now, what do
you make of all this? Is not this pinning your Faith upon other men's sleeves?
Is not this shutting your own Eyes, and running blindfold after other men's
Phancies?


Represent. Speak sincerely, Misrepresenter, and don't dissemble. Don't I do in
this the very thing prescribed by Christ himself; commanded and practiced by
the Apostles and faithful then living, and followed by the Church of the purest
Ages? And if this be running blindfold with you, and pinning of my Faith upon
other men's sleeves; what do you, in the mean time, make of the Bible, which
gives these Directions? Are not you a great Dissembler in pretending a
veneration to that Divine Law, while you contemn and ridicule the Doctrine it
delivers!


Misrepresent. God has given you Reason to examine and weigh things, and to
guide your self: and this wilful slavery is not well pleasing to Him, by which
you let other men's Imaginations tyrannize it over your own Reason and Judgment.


Represent. In observing the Rule I have laid down to you as to my Belief, I
make use of the best of my Reason, and follow it to the utmost of my
endeavors. For since God has been pleased to appoint and ordain Pastors and
Overseers, to feed and take care of the Flock; my Reason tells me, it is more
prudent and safe for me, to Obey and submit my self to them (Heb. 13. 17.) and
to follow their Faith (v. 7.) upon the warrant of God's Command; than forsaking
them, to follow my own Private judgment, without any other authority than of my
own Confidence and Presumption. Tell me, Misrepresenter, does not thy Reason
tell thee, it is more reasonable to think, that three, four or six hundred Able
and Learned Pastors met together out of the several Parts of Christendom, in a
concern properly belonging to their Place and Charge, can Reason consider,
weigh and judge of it better than One of the Flock? If so, why do you slander
me, for shutting my Eyes, and hoodwinking my Reason; whenas I, in submitting to
the Consideration and Judgment of so many, do govern my self more according to
Reason than you, who contemning so great a Number, chose rather to follow one,
who being your own self, are likely to incur the censure commonly given to
those, who will be both Masters and Scholars to themselves? Those therefore
that defame the Papists, for having no good Reasons for their Religion and
Worship, there is some reason to think, begin to talk of Reason, before they are
thoroughly acquainted with it, or know well what it is.


Misrepresent. Come stop here a little, if you can. Have you seen the Answer to
your First Sheet. He accuses you of transcribing in substance what was writ
upon the same Subject in the First Part.


Represent. He Is Angry: so no great fear of him. His first attempt, is to
undervalue his Adversary: but this wont do with Understanding Men. For tho it
were, as he says, They know what is True must of necessity be always the same,
and cannot be repeated too often. And as for Repetitions, tho it were in the
Afternoon of what was said the very same Day in the Morning, you know, as the
World goes, is no great Reflection. And for the First Part it is now near two
years since 'twas published.


Misrepresent. You discredit and reject the Divines and Schoolmen.


Represent. No, I only blame those, who endeavor to spoil their Neighbor
through Philosophy, and vain deceit. (Coloss. 2. 8.) disturbing the Faithful
with Speculative Notions, allowable enough within School-walls; but easily made
use of by ill men amongst Crowds to the confusion of all Religion. I Will let
them wrangle about Worship Absolute and Relative, as they do about seeing: but
tell me, must I shut my eyes, or say, I don't see; because they cannot agree,
how and in what manner I see?


Misrepresent. You trim up Similitudes and Resemblances: but don't at all state
the case, or show what we are to trust to.


Represent. I know of little more there is in the whole case, besides the
Equivocation about the Word Worship. You find this Expression of Worshipping
Images, in some of our Books; and in the Catechism ad Parochos, it is said, they
are set up, ut colantur, to be worshipped. And here you presently catch at this,
and run away with it in Triumph, boasting to your unthinking Auditory, that you
have proved the Papists Idolaters out of their own Books and Councils, because
they profess a Worship due to Images. But do you hear; don't be too hasty in
passing Sentence, and drawing Consequences; it is easy out-running all the
bounds of Charity, if you are too much upon the spur in this affair. You and
yours, Misrepresenter, ought to consider, that this one and the same Word
Worship signifies very different Conceptions, and almost as many sorts of
Respect, Honor and Veneration, as there are different degrees of Excellency in
the World. There Is an Honor due to Parents, and this is properly called in
Latin Colere Parents, to worship or honor our Parents. There Is an Honor due
to Magistrates, which may be termed a Worship, as by their Title they are
styled Worshipful. There Is an Honor due to Kings, which in Scripture is
expressed by Adoring or Worshipping; as in 1 Chronicles. 29. 20. where it is said; All
the Congregation -- bowed down their heads, and Worshipped the Lord and the
King. There Is an Honor due to the Martyrs or Saints departed, which is
likewise called a Worship; and therefore St. Augustine says expressly (Contr.
Faust. l. 20. c. 2.) We Worship the Martyrs, with that Worship of Love and
Society, with which even in this life Holy Men of God are Worshipped -- But we
Worship them (the Martyrs) so much the more devoutly, because more securely.
There Is again a certain Reverence and suitable Respect due to some Things,
which have an eminent Relation to God and his Service (as the Answerer) here
confesses, p. 5.) such are the Bible, the Images of Christ, etc. and this
certain Reverence and Respect is termed likewise Worship, so it is properly
said, Colere Imaginem Christi, Colere Sancta Evangelia. There Is an Honor, in
sine, due to God, which is called still by some Word, Worship: in Greek Latria,
as St. Augustine, ib. has it, which is a certain service properly due to the
Divinity, with which we neither Worship the Martyrs, nor teach them to be
worshipped, but God alone.

Do you see, Misrepresenter, how many different Conceptions of the Mind, and
Affections or Motions of the Heart, are expressed by this one and the same
Word, Worship? And all these the Papists give to these several Objects, due
proportion being always observed, according to their different Degree of
Excellency. So that tho they are all called by the same Name of Worship, yet it
signifies a different Affection of the Soul as due to each respective Object.
Upon this hinge turns this Controversy, and if you would be so sincere, as to
explicate this Truth, and not presently make every thing Idolatry, where you
see a Worship paid, much of this Unchristian Wrangling, which has disturbed the
World these hundred and fifty years, might be prevented for the future.

Mr. Thorndike was so honest, as to give this notice to his Readers. (Epil. p.
3. p. 353.) Where he says, that the words, Adoration, Worship, Respect,
Reverence, or howsoever you translate the word Cultus, are or may be, in
despite of our hearts, equivocal: and the cause of this equivocation is the
want of Words, properly to signify Conceptions, which came not from common
use. St. Augustine declared this Truth long ago (l. 10. de Civit. Dei, c. 1.)
where he shows all these Words, Servitus, Cultus, Religio, Pietas. Service,
Worship, Religion, Piety to be Equivocal, and may be applied both to God and
Creatures. And thus Catholics many times use them, without the least
entrenching upon the Divine Prerogative, or scandal to their Neighbor, which
had never been heightened to that degree as is at this day; had not some, as the
Pharisees did to our B. Savior, stood by, and taken as much pains to wrest
every thing into a Wrong Sense, as Charity obliges to interpret in a Right one.

And as Worship is understood in all this latitude, it is hard to make it out,
that Men are to pray to every thing they Worship: or that Prayer is necessarily
depending on it. But then again, if the Catechism by his Praying to, means no
more, than Praying at or before Images, I have nothing to say to it. I only
complained of it, because by his Expression, as it stands there, he seems
willing to have his Reader understand it, that the Papists so pray to Images,
as if they expected to be heard by them, or that They should obtain or grant
their Request, which is a most foul Misrepresentation. But as for Praying
before them, it is what we own and Practice. And since to, at and before come to
be all one with him; let the Words of Abjuration quoted by Spelman, be thus
Understood; as Dr. Stillingfleet makes Bowing to the Name of Jesus and at it,
(Idol. of Chapter R. p. 111. Ed. 1.) to be the same, and then it plainly declares
our Doctrine, and we shall not fall out much upon this matter.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. VI. The Papist does not believe, but upon most Convincing Reasons:
Mysteries of Faith above Reason, not contrary to it. The Papist is not deprived
of the Word of God, nor kept from the Knowledge of the Gospel. He does not Pray
to the Cross, more than Protestants pray to their Bibles, or the Sacrament.
Three Protestant Queries Answered.

THe Papist Misrepresented knows no reason for the Religion he professes. He Is
overruled by Authority, and is forced to submit his Belief to such Points, as
are contrary to his Reason. He Is deprived of the Word of God, and kept in a
miserable Ignorance of his Duty both to God and his Neighbor.

THe Papist Represented very commendably enquires into the Reasonableness of
his Belief: He searches into the Motives of his Faith, and here applys all the
Reason he is able, to Examine, Consider, Weigh and Judge of things aright; not
taking one step forward in order to give the least assent by Faith, till his
Judgment is thoroughly convinced, that in Reason he is bound to do it; and that
he should be self-condemned by his own Knowledge or Conscience, if he did not
submit, upon such Evidence and full conviction. This is what he is taught to
do, as to the Motives or Reasons of his Believing all those Points, which are
purely Mysteries of Faith. But although he has good Reason, for giving his
assent by Faith, to all the Articles of Christian Religion: Yet because the
greatest part of them are above his Reason, and therefore properly called
Mysteries, he cannot pretend to measure them by his shortsighted Reason, no
more than take the demensions of the Heavens by his Span, which are out of his
reach. For how can Reason without a daring Presumption, undertake to fathom
such things, which however agreeable to the Infinite Understanding of God, bear
no proportion with any Created Faculties whilst encompassed with Flesh? In the
Mysteries therefore of his Faith, his Reason is overruled by Authority; so
that in these, he goes much farther than his Reason will carry him. His Reason
indeed, directs him to the Authority; but then having discovered this, his
Faith follows with Certainty and Security, where Reason can give her no Light.

Misrepresent. Upon this account it is, I declare to my Followers, that the
Papists believe without Reason; that whosoever will be a Papist, must cast a
Blind over all his Rational Faculties, and by a slavish Obedience submit his
Faith without control.


Represent. And for this very reason you are a Misrepresenter, and slander the
Papists. For the Papists use their Reason, as much as any Protestant in the
World can do. I have told you already, they apply their Reason to search with
the strictest scrutiny, into all the Motives, which are apt to make a thing
Credible, and never Submit their Faith, but where their Reason, upon the
strongest and most convincing Arguments, obliges them to it, and that so
forcibly, that 'twould be a contradiction to their Reason not to submit. Can
any Protestant do more than this?


Misrepresent. Yes; We search into the very Mysteries of the Christian Faith,
and believe no farther, than is agreeable to our Reason, at least so as not to
be against it. A Protestant, by his Religion, is so reasonable a Creature, that
no Authority in the World can oblige him to believe contrary to his Reason:
he will believe things above his Reason; but not contrary to it.


Represent. Thus you deceive your selves and all that follow you. Why, all this
is nothing but what the Papists are taught to do. You pretend to Reformation;
condemning the Papists, for going Blindfold; and yet what you do, is downright
Popery. There Is no Papist in the World is taught to believe contrary to Reason;
they believe such Mysteries, as are above Reason; but nothing contrary to it.
Let me examine you a little in this Point, and we shall soon find, what
agreement there is betwixt us. You believe the Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation?


Misrepresent. Yes.


Represent. But can any Protestant Reasoning discover, or even apprehend, how
there can be three distinct Persons in One Divine Nature undivided? or how God
could be made Man, be Born, Suffer, and Die? But not to go so high: Can you
conceive it as agreeable to your Reason; How all this World could be made out
of Nothing? Can you conceive, What Eternity is; to be without beginning or
ending? For the Bodies of all the Sons of Adam to rise from the Dead, after
having passed through so many successive Corruptions? How the Bodies of the
Just shall become Spiritual, and put on Incorruption: And those of the Wicked
be tormented for ever as long as God shall be God? Can you conceive, apprehend,
or by your Reason tell, How these things can be? Can your Reason by being
Protestant, open unto you these Mysteries? And I hope, you believe them with a
firm and undoubting Faith.


Misrepresent. Yes, I believe them all: and, to speak plainly, I think they are
far above the reach of all Humane Reason. Man may endeavor to explicate them
by Similitudes, or some proportion in Nature; but these still fall much short
of the real Truth of those Mysteries: and he that thinks he comprehends them,
does only deceive himself, and like those who try to look the Sun full in the
Face, see nothing, by presuming to see too much. However, notwithstanding this
great disproportion the Mysteries of Christian Religion bear with humane
Reason, yet I believe them all with a firm and certain Faith, to be true upon
the Authority of God revealing them, who is Truth it self.


Represent. Spoke like a Christian; and if all Protestants would join with you,
in this Sentiment, there would not be so many Reasoning Atheists in the World
as there are. But give me leave, Misrepresenter; Is it not a very spiteful and
un-neighbourly Trick, that whilst you thus in private, profess and own so
sovereign a Truth as this, and that you believe such Mysteries, according to
your Religion, which your Reason can neither see nor understand: Yet when you
come to appear in Public, and are to win the favor of the People by
declaiming against Popery; you then dress out this in the Papists, as the
greatest piece of nonsense in the World; it is then nothing but going
blindfold, laying aside Reason, a slavish Submission, and a thousand worse
things besides? Come, let me tell you, this your putting on at pleasure
different Faces, is no credit to your cause: And it makes some begin to think,
That many of your Popular Harangues, have more of Policy in them, than
Religion; that they drive more at keeping up a Party, than saving of Souls.
Otherwise, why should you in public set that forth as Ridiculous in the
Papists, which in your more sober conversation between Friends, you profess
your selves, and own as Reasonable and Christian?


Misrepresent. This is nothing better than railery. Why, I don't blame the
Papists upon this account; I only pity and condemn them, because, Poor Souls!
they are forced to take up all Religion upon trust; they are not allowed the
use of the Bible; and so cannot examine by their own Reason the Doctrine of
Christ, and Mysteries of his Faith; but without all Seeing or Reasoning, must
take all that is given them for Good; and so are merely led Captives, depending
wholly upon the Will of their Ignorant Guides; and if they will but say as they
say, they are Good Catholics, though they understand not a Word. This is it I
call going Blindfold, hood-winking of Reason, and slavish Obedience.


Represent. You are come now to your Popular Topic; and yet you cannot turn
your self in it, without Misrepresenting, deceiving and stretching your Stories
beyond the bounds of Truth. You please your people, by putting the Bible into
their hands, encouraging them to search the Scriptures, to find out the Truth,
that so the Word of Christ may dwell richly in them in all Wisdom. Then you
tell them of the great Blessing they enjoy, in as much as their lot is not
fallen in those unhappy Places, where the people can by no means procure the
Reading of the Bible, cannot come to the Knowledge of the Word of God, or of
their Duty, but must walk in Darkness, and see no Light.


Misrepresent. Well; and is not this true?


Represent. It Is like the Truths you generally tell, when you rail against the
Papists. It has a little of Truth in it, and the Greater Part False. It has a
Truth for the Foundation; but then you raise so many False Constructions, Wrong
Inferences, and Misapplications upon it, that the Truth is violently bore down,
and almost sunk into nothing.


Misrepresent. Come let me take my Turn: You Catechis'd me in one Point; now
let me examine you in another. Do you Believe the Bible to be the Word of God?


Represent. Yes; I believe it to be the Word of God; that it contains the
Doctrine of Christ, and as such I am commanded to Respect, Honor and Reverence
it: and so I do sincerely; desiring rather to lose my life, than contemn or
injure that Sacred Volume.


Misrepresent. Do you think it convenient for the People, to Know and
Understand the Doctrine it delivers?


Represent. I think it not only convenient, but also necessary for them to Know
and Understand it; and that Salvation is not attainable by those, who do not do
as is there commanded, or do not believe as is there taught.


Misrepresent. Why then do you deprive the Vulgar and Ordinary People of this
Holy Food of their Souls, which you judge Necessary for their Salvation? Why do
you take the Light out of their Hands, and force them to walk in darkness*?

Represent. The Ordinary People and Vulgar of our Communion have more of this
Holy Food, are better served with this Light of Truth, than those of any other
Persuasion whatsoever: and it is nothing but an Aspersion of yours, to say They
are deprived of this Bread of Life, and are left without Means of knowing their
Duty to God and their Neighbor. Do you but consider a little, Misrepresenter;
Are those People deprived of the Word of God, who are taught it by their
Pastors, by God's Appointment, ordained to teach them? Or does he take the
better course to be instructed in his Christian Duty, who leaving his Pastors,
goes about to teach himself? Men don't generally think that Flock to be
deprived of its food, which is carefully fed by the Shepherd; neither is that
Sick Man left without Means for his Cure, who receives Prescriptions from the
Physician, without having the liberty of the Apothecarie's Shop, to take what
best suits with his Taste or his Fancy; where though all be Good, if rightly
applied, yet it is easy mistaking the use of the Drugs, and taking Killing ones
instead of Curing. Why then should you defame the Papists, as not having God's
Word dwelling in their hearts; whenas, though they do not receive it generally by
Reading it themselves; yet they are instructed in that Sacred Truth, and fed
with it by the hands of their Pastors and Teachers, who by Commission from the
Holy Ghost, are put over the Flock to take heed to it and Feed it? (Act. 20.
28.) Was Mary Magdalen deprived of the Word of God, who placed at her Savior's
Feet, heard it from his own most Sacred Mouth, though she had it not in Writing?
Were those People deprived of the Word of God, to whom the Apostles were sent
to Preach, for those several years before any of the Gospel was in Writing?
'Twas Preaching, Teaching and Instructing by Word of Mouth, was the Means
appointed by Christ, for the planting his Gospel; and the Apostles, that were
thus commanded to Preach, had never any Command to Write; their Writing was
only Accidental, occasioned by reason of their Absence from those, whom
accidentally they desired to advise and direct. If since then the Papists are
taught and instructed in the Word of God, the very same way, that Christ
himself, the Unerring Rule, taught all those that followed him: Since they are
instructed in it, the same Way the Apostles themselves observed and commanded;
by Submitting to, and Obeying. Those that are Over them and are to give an
account of their Souls. (Heb. 13. 17.) Why do you say, they are deprived of the
Word of God, or robbed of the Gospel? When you say the Vulgar Sort of the
Papists have not the Written Letter of the Gospel promiscuously put into their
hands, you say True; and if you would say no more, we should have no complaints
against you. But when besides this, you instill into your Followers, that the
Papists are left in Darkness, that the Word of God is hid from them, These
Applications, and Inferences are the Work of thy Hands, Misrepresenter; and put
into plain English, prove no more, than that every one, that has a Light
carried before him by an abler Man than himself, does certainly walk in the
Dark, because he has not the Light in his own Hands.


Misrepresent. Come, I am not for disputing: If you have any more upon this
Subject, keep it till next time. Your Second Sheet has been blown up in a
Reply. He there briskly shows, that Your Representing, is Palliating and
Glossing: That you grow weary of your Religion as formerly practiced and
defended, and that in all likelihood, you are hastening a pace to a Reformation.


Represent. It Is your old Trick, when the Reasons begin to come close and
pinch, to take refuge in starting another Game. But, let us hear; Is not the
Answerer you speak of, a Protestant, a Member of the Pretended Reformation? Why
then should he reprove Us, if it be true what he says, for being weary of our
Religion as formerly Practiced, and hastening to a Reformation? Is it not
commendable to Reform? If he thinks that unreasonable, which was formerly
Practiced, and is of opinion, that we are Weary of it and Reform; what Reason
has he to complain, or reproach us for it? It Is a very hard Case, that we
should be scoffed at and publicly condemned as Abetters of what was formerly
practiced; and reproved again, for being supposed to Reform it. If it was ill
to maintain it, can it be ill too to amend it? The Papists then, it seems,
whether they are supposed to go on as before, or to reform, are certain to be
run down; as if Figulus Figulo, did extend even to our Case, and no Reformer
could speak well of another Reformer. But do y' hear, Misrepresenter, here is a
Mystery in this, which I am confident you are something concerned in; you must
not take it ill, if I discover it. This new Pretext of the Papists being weary
of their Religion, as practiced heretofore, and hastening to a Reformation, is
nothing but a pretty contrived Shelter, for the Adversaries of the Papists to
retire under, to save their Reputation. They have been declaiming against the
Papists these hundred and fifty years, and endeavored to set out their
Religion so deformed in every Point with Idolatry, Superstition, and Impiety,
that to their Credulous Followers, they have made it more eligible to be a Jew
than a Papist; and with their Prophet Luther, have convinced infinite Numbers,
that such Christian Princes as own the Pope, are four times worse than the
Mahometans; and that it is more probable, the Grand Vizier fights the Lords
Battles, and deserves the Good Wishes of Christendom, rather than They. In this
Charitable Belief have Many bred up their Flock. And now since of late, through
a favorable Ray of Mercy, the Papists have had some liberty of showing
themselves, and in their Sermons, in their Catechisms, in their Expositions of
their Faith, both in Word and Writings, there appears nothing of the Monster so
long foretold; there is some danger, this should beget in the People a Jealousy
and Suspicion of their Teachers, and be a caution to them, of not easily
trusting those, who have for so many years deceived them. What then is to be
done? Why, it must be given out, that the Papists are charged; that they are
weary of their Religion as practiced heretofore; that their Way of delivering
it, is now less Offensive than in former ages. And under this Cover the Credit
of all such who have painted the Papists out otherwise than They now appear, is
to be saved, and they cleared from the most foul Imputation of Misrepresenting.


Misrepresent. You Will run on now upon this Topic, and say not one word to the
Body of the Answer. He proves, You Pray directly to the Cross, from Your
Consecrating and Blessing the Cross: From your kneeling down to it, worshipping
and adoring it.


Represent. Nothing of this reaches the Point* unless he had first proved that
every thing that is Blessed and Consecrated, and to which a Worship or
Adoration is any way paid, is directly prayed to. And this will be a difficult
Task: For as We Bless and Consecrate Crosses; so likewise we Bless and
Conjecrate Churches, Altars, Holy Water, Chalices and other Vessels dedicated
to Holy uses. And I don't think he will impute it to us, that we Pray directly to
Churches, Altars, Holy Water or Chalices. There Is a Blessi^g or Consecration
for Protestant Churches; there is a Blessing and Consecration again for their
Sacramental Bread and Wine: and yet a Protestant would but smile at the
Undertaker, who should prove from hence; that They Pray to their Churches and
their Sacrament, because they are Blessed and Consecrated. But we Worship and
Adore the Cross, and then, why, says he, is it more absurd to pray to the
Cro^s, than it is thus to adore it? And to this Question let Bishop Jewel, a
Father of his own Church give him an Answer. We only adore Christ (says he in
his Reply against Hard, p. 379.) as very God, but we Worship also and Reverence
the Sacrament, we Worship the Word of God, we Worship all other things in such
Religious wise to Christ belonging. And now let my Answerer guess, whether
every thing that is Worshipped or Adored, may be directly prayed to. Does he
think Bishop Jewel prayed directly to the Sacrament? does he think He prayed to
the Bible, and yet he owns, he Worshipped them Both? And in this WE Worship, he
expresses himself so like a Witness of the Doctrine of his Church, that if our
Modern Divines have not prevaricated from their Fathers, and brought in New
Protestantism, being wea^y of the Old, all the Sons of that Church, are obliged
to Worship them, as much as that Prelate; and this they may easily find a way
to do, without any necessity of praying to them directly. It Is not every thing
that is any ways Worshipped, is presently made an Ob^ect capable of being
Prayed to. I showed in my Last, many things to be in some manner Objects of
Worship, which to Pray to would be an Absurdity. For as Bishop Jewel Worshipped
the Sacrament and Bible, so we Worship the Bible too; and as we Worship the
Cross, so likewise the Holy Sepulcher, the Him of our Savior's Garment, his
Crown of Thorns, the very Ground on which his Sacred Feet stood, and the Linen
in which his Body was laid; not as God, nor as Things capable of being prayed
to; but as Bishop Jewel expresses it, as Things in Religious wise to Christ
belonging, or as the Answerer has it, as Things, which have an eminent Relation
to God and his Service. And Jewel gives the Reason (ib. p. 409.) The Sacraments
be adored, says he, but the whole honor rests not in them, but is passed
over from them to the things signified. As the Reverence shown to a Bible, or
Church, or Chair of State rests not in them, but passes over to God and the
King. And as the Contempt shown to a Duke's Picture or Pope's, rests not
there, but passes over to the Persons Represented. This Nature, Honest Reason,
and Practice easily understand, however Learned Wranglers, whose business is to
overthrow, not to build up, may endeavor to confound it. But we must Answer
his Queries.

Quer. Whether the Crosses used in the Religious Service of the Church of Rome
be mere Pieces of Wood? Answ. Nothing more capable of being Prayed to, than
mere Pieces of Wood.

Quer. Whether they may not, and are not to adore the Cross, though they may
not adore a mere Piece of Wood? Answ. Just as much as Bishop Jewel thought
himself obliged to adore the Sacrament, though he would not adore a mere piece
of Bread.

Quer. How the Cross which they Pray to Christ to Bless, is made the Stability
of Faith, and Increase of Good Works? Answ. Just as the Bread and Wine may be
to Protestants, by being a Figure of Christ's Passion, and a Remembrance of his
Sufferings.

Quer. How the Cross upon which Christ hung, may be Christ who hung upon the
Cross? Answ. How the Cross may be Christ I cannot tell. But how the Word Cross
may signify Christ, every Schoolboy knows; as David in his Psalms often
distinguishes the Earth from the People upon the Earth: And yet often uses the
Word Earth to signify the People upon the Earth. This is but a poor Cavil, and
very unbecoming Christians or Scholars to disturb the Nation withal.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. VII. The Vulgar among the Papists not deprived of the Word of God. They
are better instructed in the true Sense of it, than those of other Persuasions
who teach themselves. The Unlearned and Unstable wrest it to their own
Destruction.

A Papist Misrepresented takes up all his Belief upon trust; he is led through
all the Mysteries of his Religion by the hand, without seeing which way, or
whether he goes. All from beginning to end is blindness and ignorance: the
Scripture which should be his light, is taken from him; and, what knowledge can
he have when the Word of God, which was ordained by the divine Wisdom, for the
instruction and comfort of poor Sinners, is snatched out of his hand, and kept
from him?

A Papist Rerepresented believes as the Church of God teaches, and this not
blindly; but knowingly and understandingly, as far as the littleness of humane
Reason, and his own Capacity will give him leave. In order to this, his Church
has provided him of variety of learned Books, explicating to him the Sense of
the Scriptures, as likewise the Articles of his Creed, every Mystery of his
Religion, the ten Commandments, the Sacraments, and the whole Duty of a
Christian; and this in such numbers, both in Latin and English, and all other
Languages, that whosoever reproaches him with blindness, in the midst of so many
Lights, may with as good Reason prove him to be in the dark, when Noonday
shines upon him. Besides these Books, the Church has given direction to all
Parish Priests, to explicate on Sundays and Holy Days, the Gospel and some
Mystery of Faith, to such as are under their Charge, and to instruct them, how
to live virtuously, and die holily. And now, if notwithstanding these helps and
assistance, some in his Church believe without Understanding, and live without
the knowledge of their Duty; it is not the Church is to be blamed, which has
provided them of sufficient Means, but they themselves to be condemned of
negligence and sloth, who thus carelessly starve in the midst of plenty, and die
with the Remedy before them. Neither does he understand, that the charge of
being led in blindness and ignorance, can be justly laid to any, even to the
Vulgar of his Communion, because they have not the Scriptures permitted them to
read and interpret at pleasure; since it is evident to any, that has taken a
considerate view of the Christian World, in those Countries, where the
Scripture is thus permitted, there is as much Vice, as much Blindness, as much
Ignorance, of the Christian Faith, and Profession, as in any place whatsoever:
So that tho they have a Light about them, they are either not taught how to use
it; or else approaching it with too much Confidence and Presumption, come too
near it and put out their eyes.

Besides, what danger of Ignorance and Blindness can there be to the Vulgar of
his Communion, from the not reading the Scripture; Since such means are used
for the instructing them in the Mysteries therein contained, that they are not
at all deprived of it; nay since it is delivered to them, with much greater
advantage, and more for the improvement of their knowledge in the Mysteries of
Faith, and Duty of a Christian, than those have it amongst whom it is
promiscuosly thrown, to read and judge it themselves? For let any one, upon a
due consideration, tell me; Which is the Scripture, what is properly the Word
of God? Is it the Words of the Bible, or the true Sense and Meaning, of those
Words? It Is certain the letter avails nothing; it is the Spirit that enlivens,
it is the Sense that instructs to Salvation. Our concern then at present, is
not, which have more of the Words of the Scripture in their Memory, more Texts,
at their tongue's command, more of the Books in their hands; but it is, where
more care is taken, for imprinting the true Sense of these Words in the
Understanding of the People, and where is used the most prudential method, for
the leading them into the truth of all the Mysteries contained in that sacred
Volume? And in this Point the Papist will yield to none: for it is an
unquestionable truth, that when a Book contains high Mysteries of Religion,
Mysteries superior to all Sense and Reason, and those not delivered in
expressions suited to every capacity, but obnoxious to various interpretations,
such as may be wrested by the unlearned and unstable to their own Destruction:
2 Pet. 3. 16.
in this case it is an unquestionable truth, I say, that that People is in all
probability, likely to have more of the true Sense of this Book, and to be
better informed of the truth of the Mysteries it contains, who are instructed
in it by the Learned of that Communion, and taught it by their Pastors,
Prelates, and those whom God has placed over them to govern and feed the
Flock; than any other People, who have the Book put into their own hands, to
read it and search it, and satisfy themselves. For why? Are not the Pastors
more capable of teaching the People, than the People are to teach themselves;
Or is it commendable in Scripture only and Religion, for every one to be his
own Master, which in any other matter, whosoever does it, shall be esteemed a
Fool? We know Moses (Deuteronomy. 31. 9.) gave the Book of the Law to the Levites to
keep and read it every seven years to the People: and in King Jehoshaphats
reign (2 Chronicles. 17. 9.) the Priests and Levits did read it and teach the
People; so did Jeremy (Jer. 36.) by Gods command; so Isaiah, so Ezekiel; so the
Levits (Nehemiah 8. 8.) Read in the Book, in the Law of God distinctly, and
gave the Sense and caused them the People to understand the Reading. And did
not our Blessed Savior (Luc. 4. 17.) take the Book of the Prophet and read it,
and expound it to the People? And was not this the Office of the Apostles and
Deacons to interpret the Scriptures, and instruct their Followers, what they
were to believe and do? For this intention was Ananias sent to Saul, Peter to
Cornelius, and Philip to the Eunuch, who professedly owned, he could not
understand the Prophet in so necessary a Point, as that of the Messiah, without
an Interpreter: How can I understand, said he, except some man should guide me?
(Act. 8. 31.)

Since therefore the Papists in delivering the Scripture come nearest to this
Method, commanded by God in the Old Law, prescribed and practiced by Christ and
his Apostles in the New; what People can be better instructed in the true sense
of it, and understand more of the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, than they?
With what Reason can it be urged against the Vulgar of his Communion, that the
Scriptures are hid from them, that they are bred up in blindness and ignorance?
Do not the Pastors expound the Scriptures to them, do not they instruct them in
every Point of their Religion, and teach them the whole Duty of a Christian? Is
it not this they do in their Pulpits, in their Catechisms, in the
Confessionaries, in so many hundred spiritual Books, plainly laying before them
their whole obligation, both as to Faith and Good manners? And is this to
conceal from them the Scripture? Is the Word of God hid from them, because they
have their Pastors to instruct them in it? Or are they any ways injured,
because they have learneder men than themselves to teach them? Is the Multitude
a better Judge of Scripture, and more able to discover the truth of it, than
those, whom God has placed over them? Has God so deserted the Pastors and
Prelates of his Church; and is the Flock of late become so Wise? The Faith of
Christ was first planted by Christ's Preaching it to the Multitude; by the same
way 'twas propagated by the Apostles, and so it is to be delivered down to the
end of the World; Faith comes by hearing. By this means many Barbarous Nations,
says St. Irenaeus l. 3. adv. har. c. 3. believe in Christ, have the Doctrine
of Salvation written in their Hearts by the Holy Ghost without the help of
Books, and religiously observe the Traditions, believing in one God, etc. Now
it is certain the Truth of this Christian Faith, with all its Mysteries, is
unquestionably preserved in Christ's Catholic Church, and the People are to
receive it; and not to find out their Faith and Religion every one for
themselves. If they are afraid of being deceived, when they rely on their
Pastors for it; they run ten times the hazard, when they trust to themselves.

The Papist therefore is taught, that since Christ has a Church upon earth, in
which is conserved the truth of the Gospel; it is safer and more prudential for
the People to be instructed in this Truth, from the Pastors of this Church, and
by this means come to the Knowledge of the Word of God, that is, of its true
sense and meaning; than by committing the Book it self into the hands of the
Multitude, and leting every one understand it for themselves: He knows it is a
very popular thing, and acceptable to the prying Multitude, to have a Book at
command, which directs the Way to Salvation: but since it is not the Book is to
save him, but the Truth and Doctrine which it teaches, he believes it is better
learning this from those who are Wiser, and are commissionated from Heaven to
teach, than to venture at it himself without any Authority. The unhappy
Divisions among Christians sufficiently inform him, that to such Readers as St.
Peter calls unreary and ignorant, however wise they may think themselves,
A^ianism may be as obvious in this Book as Christ's Divinity, and that when such
an one undertakes the interpreting of it, it is an hazard, whether at the end he
comes out, Quaker, Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Independent, Mugletonian, Socinian
or Atheist: It Is a Venture whether the Trinity shall have place in his Creed or
no; whether he will allow of Baptism or any Sacrament; and whether Cruelty,
cutting of Throats, Oppression, Tyranny, Dethroning of Kings and Murder of
Princes, shall not with him become a necessary Duty, and a true serving of the
Lord. For all these, and more damnable Doctrines has he seen preached up and
practiced by those, who have had the Bible in their Banners, who have been
esteemed Searchers of the Word of God, and presumptuously made their Comments
upon this Sacred Text. And is it not this abuse, that has occasioned so many
Schisms, and almost broken the Mystical Body of Christ into pieces? That
whereas all his Followers should be of one mind, now no body knows, what
Religion his Neighbor is of: but every Wall now parts Religions, more than
Seas did heretofore: And the whole is come to be no more than a Persuasion, a
Judgment, an Opinion.

And now since these, and infinite other mischiefs arise, from the free
permitting the Bible among the Multitude; he thinks it commendable in his
Church, out of a true. Solicitude for the Salvation of Souls; to prevent these
evils, by teaching them the true Sense of this Sacred Volume, and instructing
them in their whole Duty, as to all they are to believe and practice, without
leaving the Book to be scanned by them as they please; and so not permitting
them to turn the Food of their Souls into Poison, or abuse that to theit
Destruction, which was ordained by Christ for their gaining of Heaven. They are
not therefore deprived of the Holy Scripture, but have the whole benefit of it,
and all the comfort; being instructed in the whole word of God; only with this
Advantage, that it is not left in their power, to do themselves any mischief, by
abusing it. And this is so ordered, only in consideration of the Vulgar, who
are commonly very ignorant, unsteady, bold, presuming, or as St. Paul styles
them, Vnlearn'd and Unstable, and easy to be deceived; whilst judicious men of
his Communion, any one that is Learned, Prudent and Sober, may be easily
permitted to have the perusal of this Book, to read it as much, and as often as
he pleases; because such are not in danger of prejudicing themselves by false
interpretations, or preferring their own Sense, before that which they receive
from their Pastors and the Church.

It Is not the Book therefore that is properly forbidden, but only false and
presumptuous interpretations of it, and such only who are in all probability
likely to do this, are not permitted to read it. And upon the whole, there is
nothing more in this great noise, of the Papist being deprived of the Word of
God, than that such as for the most part are not capable amongst them, of
reading it as they ought, have not leave to read it; and those that are
capable, may have in most Countries leave to read it as they please. Those that
can read it to edification, may have it at desire, and those that are likely to
read it to the perverting of Gods Holy Word, and the destruction of their own
Souls, It Is thought fit, they should let it alone.

Published with Allowance.

London, Prnted by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. VIII. The Vulgar not permitted to read the Bible among the Papists, for
fear they should discover the Errors of their Religion, an Absurd Calumny. The
Restraint is, That there may not be as many different Words of God, as there
are (...) amongst them; and may have something better ground that their own
Imagination to direct their Faith; a word to a Lay-friend.

Misrepresent. YOu gave me no room to put in one word in your last; but for all
your long-winded Reasons there, why the Vulgar of your Communion do not
generally read the Scriptures; I can apprehend no other, but only that your
Priesis and Jesuits being conscious of the unreasonableness of Popery, and how
contrary it is to the Truth of God's Word, dare not allow the People the
reading and perusirg it, left finding their Religion not to stand the trial of
the Scriptures, they should discover the delusion, and run over to the
Reformation.


Represent. I expect no better from you; it is your trade to make the worst of
every thing the Papists do; but the best on it is, your Misconstructions lie so
open, that there needs no more, than a mere glimpse of Reason to discover all
your Art. For if any of your Auditors should but once consider, that though the
Vulgar and unlearned of the Papists have not in some Countries the Bible
promiscuously allowed amongst them, yet that in those same Countries, and all
others, there is no College, University, Community, or place of learning, but
where the Scriptures are publicly read and expounded; if they should consider
this, I say, Is it possible for them to believe, that that Restraint is upon
the Vulgar, for fear they should see into the Foliies of their Religion? If
their Religion were so contrary to Scripture, as you pretend, is it not more
likely the learned should make this discovery in their reading the Bible, than
the Vulgar, if they had the like liberty? Cannot Scholars as easily see the
Truth of Scripture, and what is erroneous and at defiance with it, as the
Unlearned? Or are the Errors and Foliies of Popery such, that of necessity a
man must be a Block-head to understand them? Since when became Mechanics and
Apron-strings so priviledg'd; that to be bred up to the Anvil, the Needle or
the Ell should qualify better for the understanding the Scriptures, than
application, Study, and the education of a University? Or is it probable that
every man, amongst the Papists, no sooner becomes Scholar, but he turns
Atheist? That upon their search in the Bible, they plainly see all the errors
of their Religion, and yet are so bewitched as to go on boldly and jocondly to
the Devil without speaking a word, or moving a step to save their own Souls or
their Relations? Come, Misrepresenter, this looks so like a sham of yours, that
I cannot but admire your confidence. I wonder how you dare venture your credit
in exposing such weak and illgrounded Arguments. You have men of sense and
reason to deal with; and it is much they do not make exceptions. But I suppose
you rely upon the hearty Prejudice they have against Popery, in which case you
know they will take upon trust, they will pin their Faith upon any man's Sleeve, and
let impossibilities pass for evident Truths, without examination.


Misrepresent. You may prove, and preach, as long as you please; but I am sure
thousands and thousands that I meet with, will never believe otherwise than I
tell you. You do all things by design, and you have no other reason,
notwithstanding all your loud pretenses, for keeping the Eible out of the hands
of your common people, but only the jealousy your Pastors have, that by that
Light they will see into the deformitys of Popery, and prove Deserters.


Represent. The men of this Creed are only such, whose Eyes you have put out,
to lead them by the Nose after you, where you please. What ground can there be
for this pretension, at least here in England, where the Bible in English, or
Rhemes-Testament is to be found in most Catholic Families? If the Prohibition
of not reading the Bible be, as you pretend, in other Countries, for fear of
the Vulgar discovering the Errors of their Religion: How comes it, they don^t
make this discovery here? Do you find so many Deserters in this Nation upon
this score? Many have quitted that Communion upon other motives best known to
themselves; but never any one I could meet with, left them yet by reading and
following the Word of God. Again, if the reading the Scriptures is such a
defeat to Popery, as you give out: Is it likely those, who have been bred up to
the reading the Bible, and have made it their Study and Companion, should ever
embrace that Communion? And yet, whosoever shall examine, will find the greater
part of that Church here in this Nation, to have had their education, and grown
up with the Bible in hand, and That too, not translated for the advantage of
Popish Principles.


Misrepresent. Let Us have then your Reason, why the Holy Scriptures are not
generally allowed to the Vulgar of your Church without exception.


Represent. It Is, that there may not be as many different Bibles amongst them,
as there are Heads: and that they may have something better than an Imagination
to build their Salvation on.


Misrepresent. This is all Paradox. Why, have the Protestants here in England,
as many different Bibles as Heads? They all read the Bible, and yet it is but
one and the same in all their hands.


Represent. As to what is in their Hands, you are in the right: But see what is
in their Heads: A little consideration will convince you, that what you call a
Paradox, is nothing less than a Plain Truth: And that in reality there are as
many Words of God amongst them, as Heads. I gave you a hint in our last
discourse; That though the Book of the Scriptures does certainly contain the Word
of God; yet to every Christian that reads it, it is the sense and meaning, and
not the Letter is more properly the Word of God, for their instruction and
direction. Now do you but reflect, in how many different senses, the Letter of
the Bible is understood, and so many different Bibles will you find multiplied
by your followers: And tell me, upon examination, whether this be much fewer
than Heads.


Misrepresent. This is still mysterious.


Represent. Every thing is so to you, which is not for your purpose. Tell me,
How do your people benefit by the Scriptures; is it by laying the Bible upon
their Heads, and so understanding it: Or is it by the Sense and meaning in
which they understand it? If it be by the sense and meaning; then just that is
the Bible to every one, as the sense is, in which they conceive it. And if you
cannot apprehend this without longer explications; follow my directions, and you
shall find it as evident as demonstration. Provide your self well of Pen, Ink
and Paper, and having done this, invite the first of your Congregation you
meet, and if he be at leisure, desire him to give you an account of the sense,
in which he understands the Scripture. Write you it down all at length as he
delivers it: And having finished with him, go to another and do the like: Then
to a third; so to a fourth and fifth, etc. Still laying by every one's volume
by it self: And when you have gone as far as you think enough for your
satisfaction, compare your Writings together, see how they agree; and remember
that as different as you find them in the Doctrine of Christ, in the Mysteries
of Faith, in the commands of the Apostles, etc. So many different Words of God
have you. And as different as they are in your Papers, just so are they in the
Heads of those who directed your Pen: Your Papers being nothing but a
Transcript or Copy of such conceptions, as are laid up in their Heads for the
express Doctrine of Christ, and unquestionable Word of God.


Misrepresent. This is a pretty Chimoera, I confess: It Is much cheaper taking
your explication, than making the experiment.


Represent. Well, but what do you say to it? If you will not take the trouble,
imagine it within your self; and suppose it done by the Pens of ten thousand
Angels. Don't you think there would be a pretty variety of Bibles? There would
be This Man's Bible, and That man's Bible; Such an one's Bible, and Such an
one's Bible; infinite numbers of Bibles.


Misrepresent. You make a droll of these sacred matters. Why these would not be
Bibles, nor different Words of God; but so many different Conceptions of the
same Word of God.


Represent. It Is you make the Droll, and I expose it to your shame. You think
then these Transcripts would not be Bibles, nor so many words of God; and you
are in the right; for they would be only so many Imaginations of theirs that
frame them. But why do you delude the poor people in this manner; putting the
Bible into their hands, and persuading them, they are guided by the Scriptures
and the Word of God; whenas when you come to see what it is they steer by; you
dare not own it for the Word of God; but their own imaginations? it being not
the Book as it is in their Hands they are directed by, but as it is in their
Heads. And to convince you again by a farther experiment, how far it is, as it
lies there, from being the Word of God; take but those supposed Copies, we
spoke of just now, and carry them to any Licenser of your own to examine, in
order to be Printed and Published for the Word of God and Rule of Faith, and
see whether you can find any will set them forward with an Imprimatar. And if
it be absurd, even to suppose you could: What an Unchristian Imposture is it to
let so many poor Souls go on, with a secure confidence of following the Word of
God, and building their Salvation on it, when what they really follow and build
on, is so far from being what they imagine, that, if exposed to public, 'twould
pass for no better than some Religious Imaginations or Pious Dreams. It Is then
for the avoiding these Inconveniences, the Vulgar amongst us are not generally
allowed the Bible. Our Church takes care to put the same Word of God into their
Heads and Hearts, by instructing them all in its Doctrine, as it has been
delivered down and practiced in the Catholic Church in all Ages since the
Apostles. Your Church puts the same Bible into the Hands of your Vulgar, but
for their Heads and Hearts, it leaves them to take their venture, and here lies
the difference between us.


Misrepresent. Stop a little: Have you received your Answer from your
Lay-Friend? He pinches closely.


Represent. I fear he is too much your Friend, to be much Mine, or his own. I
cannot but suspect him, since he pretends so great zeal for Truth, and brings
so much Gall and Passion along with him, to conduct him to it. His open
Profession (p. 10) where he says, I must tell my Mind freely, for I have vowed
to follow Truth and Charity, wherever they lead me. And then his Resolate
consession in the very next Page, where he thus declares; Thus much I Will
confess, That I desire to live no longer than I can, if not speak, yet love and
admire the Church of England 's sense; is a plain argument to me, he is one of
your acquaintance, and that it is not to be expected, he should know or deliver
truly the Doctrine of our Church, who is so unhappy as not to know his own
Mind: But in one breath desires to be informed, and Vows to follow, wheresoever
Truth ^or Charity shall lead him: and in the very next, without condition or
reserve, desires rather to die, than to move one step from where he stands. No,
this coming with Vowed Docility in one hand, and sturdy Presumption in the
other, is no good Argument of Sincerity and Honesty, the qualities he so
eagerly pretends to, and ungroundedly questions in me.


Misrepresent. Well, but he has proved beyond the possibility of Reply, that
the Papists are on the Uncharitable side, and Protestants on the Charitable,
out of your own Authors; and your Charitable Doctrine to be new Popery.


Represent. You have his Word for it. (p. 8.) But any besides a Layman, will
call it only a Say-so, instead of a Proof. His Protestant Charity, which he
even boasts of, is the granting Salvation to Papists, upon no other score, than
Invincible Ignorance; and for this he thinks them, p. 6. Charitable to a high
degree. And yet this is the very same Charity, Papists have for Protestants;
the allowing of Salvation possible for such, as through invincible Ignorance
remain separate from the Church, being a common opinion of the Modern and
Ancient Schoolmen. And all those who pronounce so severely against Protestants;
it is against Protestants remaining such, as he words it, (p. 8.) that is
Obstinately and Pertinaciously continuing in Error and Schism; in which
circumstances Papists too are allowed no claim to Salvation by Protestants. Now
where is the Contradictions, and the two sorts of Popery he brags of? (p. 8.)
Come, Misrepresenter, I look upon your Friends put to a hard shift, when they
begin to talk of New Popery. They have been making the Papists odious these
hundred Years, for their Incharitableness to Protestants, and now the Disguise
begins to wear off, and the Papists appear as Charitable as Protestants,
nothing can serve to amuse the people* and hinder their seeing the delusion,
but the noise of New Popery. This may do with some, but methinks, a Sinc^^e
Layman, who desires to be led into all Truth (p. 5.) might be glad to find Men
better than he thought them, and not seek for one disguise to palliate another.
If his mind be tinctured with the Blood that runs in his Veins (p. 11.) yet
assure him a Friend of his, wishes heartily 'twou'd flow something Cooler, and
cause in him a more Even Pulse, than to require (as he does, p. 12) nothing
less than an Infallible Certainty to better his Opinion of the Papists, whilst
yet a Fallible Persuasion will content him, for all the rest of his Religion.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. IX. The Scriptures not always the Same to the same Person. No
Possibility of meeting in One Faith, whilst Private Reason sets up for
Interpreter of the Word of God. The Shamstory of the Frogs and Crabs. The Truth
of the Anniversary Solemnity.

Misrepresent. YOur last attempt of Proving the Scriptures to be as various in
the Heads of Protestants, as there are Heads amongst them, was very Bold; and I
am persuaded now you are Cooler, you will disown the Assertion.


Represent. What I said, was to lay before you the Reason, why amongst the
Catholics the Reading of the Bible is not promiscuously allowed the Vulgar. And
to that end I showed you, that the Ordinary People in all Nations, being for
the most part, Unlearned and Unstable, wheresoever the Canvassing the Scripture
is freely permitted them without exception, they generally understand it
several ways, and consequently what is the Scripture to Them, is Multiplied and
made as Numerous, as their different Conceptions and Imaginations of it. And
now I Will go farther with you: for it is not only thus in several People: but
even the same Person many times has the Faculty of Multiplyi^g the Word of God.
For how many are to be found amongst the Vulgar, who according to their
different Humors, as their Interest changes, according to the different
Impressions they receive from Confidents, especially such as have gained their
good Opinion, espouse different Doctrines and Persuasions, and run through as
many Sects as there are Divisions in the Nation? And yet in all their Windings,
they still follow, as they imagine, the Scriptures; always guiding themselves,
by what, they think, the Word of God evidently speaks to them. Don't you see,
how to these same Persons, the Word of God is not always the same? It alters
according to Seasons and Times, and 'twas one Word of God directed them the
last year; another this; and it may be another before the next. So that though it
be always the same, Unchangeable in their Hands, as to the Letter yet it often
changes in their Heads as the Meaning.


Misrepresent. This is a fine Whim to undermine the Authority of the
Scriptures* But say what you will, the Word of God is Plain, Easy and Clear;
and God has given to every one Reason enough to Understand it; the Reading it
is comfortable, the Following it a Duty. And it is an injury of the highest
nature to deprive any, tho the meanest Soul, of so considerable a Blessing.


Represent. If it be so Plain and Easy, as you say; how comes it, there is so
little agreement in the Understanding it? How are there so many Different and
Contrary Divisions, Sects and Perswdsions in this One Nation? How comes it,
that even in the Essentials of Christianity, concerning the Trinity,
Incarnation, the Divinity of Christ, the Sacrament, Baptism, the Holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, the Resurrection of
the Flesh, etc. there has been, and at present is so great diversity amongst
those, that read the Scripture? The business is, you are for setting up every
man's Private Reason to be Judge of Scripture: If you have seen the Answer to
the Protestant Plea for a Socinian, you will find there (p. 26.) he points it out
for the Mark of a Right Socinian, to make Reason the Rule of the Scriptures;
Such a one (says he) makes Reason the Rule of that Rule. And are not you far
worse in this, than the Rankest Socinian in the World, whilst with him, you do
not make Common Reason the Measure of that Rule, but every man's Private Reason;
which when put to the Test, proves in Thousands and Thousands to be nothing
better than Passion, Prejudice, Interest, Imagination, Guessing or Fancy?
Don't you find by experience, there is no such Trivial Proposal made, but
presently the Company's divided; there is Head against Head, Reason against
Reason; and this, though the concern be but of Hay or Straw, or the most obvious
in the World? Don't you see again, that almost every Man's Reason is different,
as their Capacity, Parts, Education, Temper, Inclination, Impressions are
different; and that as every Man has a Head of his own, so he has generally a
Reason, or way of Reasoning of his own; nay, are not Men so Inconstant even
with themselves too, that what is Reason to them at one time, is Unreasonable
at another? How then can you set up a Thing so Slippery, so Weak, Various,
Wavering, Changeable, Inconstant, as you see Private Reason is, to be relied on
by every man, as his Guide in Scripture, and Judge of the word of God?
Christian Faitb^, as you know from St. Paul, (Ephesians. 4. 5.) is but One; and all
Christians are directed by the same Apostle (1 Cor. 1. 10.) to meet in this one
Faith, to be of one Spirit and one Mind, to say all the same thing, to avoid
Divisions. Now how can you imagine it possible, for all Christans to concur in
the same Belief, whilst the Scriptures being but One which they read, their
Private Judgments give differing and contrary Interpretations of it, and carry
them several ways? If Faith be to follow every Man's Private Reason, is it not
impossible for the Faith to be One, whilst their Reason is so different? If the
word of God, as it is One in it self, were also One and the Same in every Man's
Private Judgment, 'twould certainly produce in all the Same Belief without
distinction or Division. But as long as the Scriptures are no otherwise in
people's Heads and Hearts, than by the Interpretation they make of it; their
Faith must necessarily be as Various as their Interpretations; which being
conform to their Private Reasons, there can be little grounds for Unity of
Faith, whilst in their Reason there is so little agreement. It Is said of the
Manna, that the Taste of it was not the same to all the Israelites; but that it
relished according to that kind of meat, which was most grateful to every ones
Palate. Now if the Israelites in Canaan had received a Command of bringing
forth that sort of Meat, whose Taste should be like that of the Manna, they eat
in the Desert; is it possible they should all agree in their Dish; since tho
the Manna was the same they all fed on, yet the Relish was as different as
their Tempers and Palates? This is our Case: All Christians that read the Holy
Scriptures, look upon themselves commanded, to produce in their Hearts a Faith
conform to that, they are taught in the Scriptures, which they read. And, what
is special here, in this Faith they are all, without exception, commanded to
agree, to be of one Mind, one Spirit: Now how is it possible their Faith should
be the same in all, since the Scriptures do not make the same impressions on
all, but as variously as are the Interpretations they frame of it, these being
as different as their Private Judgment, their Reasons and Imaginations?


Misrepresent. You set up Reason then against Scripture, and by your own
Private Reasoning overthrow both. You are a very Reasonable Creature, it seems:
but no body will think so besides your self. The very Frogs and Crabs are a
sufficient confutation of all your Pretenses, either to Sense or Reason.


Represent. Whether's the Man run now? Where about are you?


Misrepresent. Not one step beyond Somerset House and St. James 's. I have only
a mind to make you blush with the sense of your own stupidity, whilst you are
so loudly laying claim to Reason. Is not your imposing upon the People with
Crabs and Frogs, for the Souls coming out of Purgatory on the Anniversaries of
the Dead, a convincing Argument, that your Phancies are too big with
Absurdities and Nonsense, to have much Reason amongst you?


Represent, I am still in the dark, and see not where you are.


Misrepresent. You are taught to deny, what you are ashamed to own: but the
matter of Fact is beyond all question. I know a Gentleman, that would not lie
for the matter, who saw the Crabs at St James 's in Black Crape Cases the last
year, upon the edges of the Hearse-cloth, and immediately came and told it to
an Acquaintance of his in the Pall Mall. Another Gentleman, a Friend of mine,
upon the same day being invited by Curiosity into Somerset House to see the
Ceremony; after several other diversions, at last espied great numbers of
little Movables upon the Mourning Black Cloth that covered the Pavement,
diverting him with an uncertain mixed Motion, something betwixt Tumbling and
Crawling. He could not here choose but ask what they were, and a good well
meaning Catholic that stood next, told him, the Fathers were praying for the
Dead: and those were the Souls released out of Purgatory, by their good
Prayers. This put an edge to his Curiosity and Invention, and he never left
them till coming near the Altar, he laid hands on One that was there a
stragler, and cunningly slipped it into his Pocket.


Represent. There Is no coming for any Spectator within three or four yards of
the Altar: the Rails keep all at a distance.


Misrepresent. Oh! I know nothing of that matter: he was a Crafty Blade, and I
am sure he did It; and by degrees making his way out, he went strait to a
Tavern, where some Friends were waiting his coming. He made them a Relation of
the whole matter; and immediately with great earnestness, they were all for
having the Soul making its appearance, and seeing the inside of it. Whereupon
One more courageous than the rest, ventured upon it, and having Vnripp'd the
Case, presently something nimbly skipp'd out, to their great surprise. They
began to fear now the Soul was fled: but a joyful Frog falling on the Table,
glad at the release from its Purgatory-bag, put an end to the Comedy, filing
them with laughter and sport, but most of all with Contempt of the Papists, who
by such silly Inventions deceive the World, and cheat the Poor harmless people.


Represent. And this is Gospel now, I Will warrant you, amongst your Flock Well,
if there were nothing else in Popery to assure one of the Truth of that
Religion so Nick-nam'd; yet to consider, with how many Wicked Lies, Malicious
Inventions, Oatish and Bedloish Fables it is attacked, assaulted, and
undermined, is enough to convince any one, that the Devil is its greatest
Enemy, who by such Engines of Hell is so industrious for its overthrow. Were it
so near allied to Satan* as you confidently delude your Followers, these Lies
would be then indeed necessary to uphold, but not to defeat it. It Is strange to
all Good Christians, how that at all times you can so keep alive a Continued
Popish Plot in the Brains of some Protestants, that for every Fiction and Lie
of yours, you have your Affidavit-men ready; you have always some in a Tavern,
a Coffee-house at a Dinner or Supper* with Friends, that attest the Truth of
your Malicious Reports; and stand for Eyewitnesses of what had never any other
Being, but what You gave it in Your Committee of Lies. These Crabs, these
Frogs, these Christmas-Cradles, the Rockings, and Nursings and warming of
Clouts, and some other Reports, that have been warmly carried about this last
Month by Men of all Coats, came all out of the same Mi^t. And were it not that
the People, you deal with, were so wonderfully short-memory'd when a Lie is
discovered, and again so wretchedly Credulous when a Fresh one is Broached,
these Fictions would be your utter Confusion. But I Will tell you the Truth of
all this matter.

There Is a Mourning Hearse indeed placed in the Chapels in Memory of the
Deceased Party; and Prayers are offered up for his Soul: after the Practice of
the Primitive Church in the time of her Purity above Thirteen hundred years
ago: and as 'twas then performed to Constantine the First Christian Emperor,
whose Body, after his Decease, as it is related by Eusebius (l. 4. de Vit.
Constable. c. 71.) being exposed upon a stately Throne -- great numbers of People,
together with the Priests offered up Prayers to God, not without Sighs and
Tears for the Soul of the Emperor; thus performing a most acceptable Office to
their Prince of Pious Memory. And this Pious Office was not only performed to
the Faithful Departed, at the time of their Departure; but every year at the
return of that Day: and thus says Tertullian (l. 10. de Monog. c. 10.) speaking
of a Christian Widow, She prays for his (her Husbands) Soul -- and makes
Oblations on the Anniversary days of his Departure. This is what We now do,
and all that is performed in our Chapels: but for the Erogs and Crabs, they
are no where but in your Brains.


Misrepresent. I Will send some to see within a day or two.


Represent. You have enough ready to go upon such an Errand. If they bring you
any Crabs or Frogs thence, pray let me have a sight of them.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. X. Private Interpretation of Scriptures, the Occasion of Divisions. Some
Protestant Divines call in the assistance of Authority and Guides; but all ends
in the Private Spirit. The Question started; Where was the Protestant Religion
as it is now Reformed, before Luther? The Answers of some Protestant Divines.

Represent. YOu broke off my last Discourse, with your Dream of Frogs and
Crabs. But I Will take it up now: and therefore I must tell you, I cannot but
admire your Procedings in leaving the Holy Bible to the Vulgar, to be scanned
and Interpreted by them at pleasure. It Is evident they being of Different
Capacities and Inclinations, they can never so agree in their Interpretations,
as to meet in One Faith, to be of One Mind, and One Spirit, as is commanded by
St. Paul. (1 Cor. 1. 10.) This is too clearly Demonstrated in the Distractions
of this our Nation: where so many setting up for Interpreters of Scripture,
there are Religious Sects, Divisions, Persuasions, Faiths and Creeds multiplied
without number, to the scandal of the Christian Name, every-one pretending to
the Truth, while yet these being so numerous the true Faith is but One: One God
and one Faith (Ephesians. 4. 5.) And the Reason of these divisions is obvious. For
though the Bible is but one in all their Hands; yet this Sacred Book does not
instruct and direct them, but by certain means to be used on their part. And
these Means being (according to D. Reynolds and Whitaker) The reading it, their
conference of Places, their weighing of the circumstances of the Text, their
skill in the Tongues, their Diligence and Prayer: How is it possible they
should all agree in their Expositions of H. Writ, since these Actions on their
behalf are but Humane Endeavors, Subject to Error, Oversight, Infirmity, and
as different as their several Parts and Capacities? Can all compare Texts
alike? Can they all weigh Circumstances alike? Are they all skilled in
Languages alike? How then shall they be instructed and directed alike, when
their Instruction and Direction, as to the Christian Faith, depends upon these
Means? And while they thus rely on their own endeavors, their own searching
and interpreting the Scriptures, as the Means whereby to arrive to the True
Faith; is it not a miserable thing to consider, that these Divided Christians,
having rejected the Interpretation of the Catholic Church, do now every one
rely on so unsafe Means for their Faith and Salvation, that no man dares trust
to but themselves, that is, every Private Person on his own Private Search and
Interpretation of H. Writ: Which whilst every one depends on for himself, yet
no body dares trust to besides, nor think it sufficient whereon to build their
Salvation. And the result of this, is to bring all to the Private Spirit.


Misrepresent. I have let you run on so long declaiming against the
Interpretations of the Private Spirit, to see what you would be at: And now you
have spent so much breath, you have at last said nothing, but in the air. Why,
We are not for the Private Spirit. If you read Mr. Sa. Crispe 's Sermon at the
Primary Visitation of the Bishop of Norwich 1686. You Will see the Guidance of the
Private Spirit proved nothing better than Enthusiasm: (p. 6.) That it has made
so much havoc in the World in the worst designs, in the murder of Princes, the
overturning of Kingdoms and Churches, that there is nothing so vile, or
Monstrous, Earthly, sensual or devilish, but if this pretense be admitted, may
pass for Inspiration: And that consequently, it is not to be relied on, as
proper to conduct any to salvation. He declares plainly the necessity of a
Guide in this affair. And that all those, who desire not to miss their way,
must not only apply themselves with due modesty to the searching the
Scriptures; but must likewise carefully use the Ministerial Aids of the
Christian Church: And the reason, why so many are given over to Strong
Delusions, and to believe a Lie, He says (p. 7.) is, because out of Pride or
Wantonness, they forsake the Guides of Gods appointment. The like application
to Church Guides, or Ministerial Helps is required by the Author of the
Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith (p. 38.) as likewise by the
late Discourse Concerning a Judge of Controversies. So that, you see, These
Protestant Divines are not for encouraging the Enthusiasms of every man's
Private Interpretation of Scripture: No, they are for a just deference to
Authority, and the use of Guides.


Represent. I confess some of them, to keep up the Face of a Church, do
Speculatively contend for Authority and Guides; but then in Fact they again
defeat all these their Pretensions, whilst they own no Authority to be so Great
or Safe with them, but it is to be subjected to the control of every Private
Examiner; and so to be followed, or not followed, as every man in his own
Private Capacity shall think fit: So that the Vltimate Appeal with them, is not
to Authority, but to the Private Spirit. They maintain the Authority of the
Church, as being to decide Controversies of Faith (Art. 20.) and this is not to
ordain or enforce any thing to be believed, that is against the Scripture. But
whether that which it decides, be against or according to Scripture; this every
man is to decide again by his own private Reason. They maintain the Authority
of General Councils. But because these may err; (Art. 21.) their Decrees have
neither Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken
out of Holy Scripture. But whether de facto they be taken out of Scripture or
no; this every Private Man must judge for himself. And this Dr. Burnet asserts
positively in his Exam. of Meth. p. 82. The Principle of Protestants, with
relation to the majority, even in a General Council, is, That when any
Doctrines are established or condemned upon the Authorities of the Scriptures,
those who differ from them, and do think that the Council misunderstood the
Scriptures, are bound to suspect themselves a little, and to review the matter
with greater application -- Yet if they are required to profess that they
believe opinions which they think false, if they were never so inconsiderable,
no man ought to go against his Conscience. -- And if any Synod of Protestants
has decreed any thing contrary to this, in so far they have departed from the
Protestant Principles. But the whole matter is more fully expressed by the
Author of the Discourse before mentioned Concerning a Judge of Controversy: Who
(p. 11. at the bottom,) clears it thus: If you ask, whose Judgment ought to
take place, the Judgment of the Church, or of every private Christian? I answer
(says he, and mark it) The Judgment of the Church of necessity must take place
as to external Government, to determine what shall be professed and practiced
in her Communion; and no private Christian has any thing to do in these
matters. But when the Question is, What is Right or Wrong, True or False, in
what we may obey, and in what not? Here every Private Christian, who will not
believe without understanding, nor follow his Guides blindfold, must judge for
himself, and it is as much as his Soul is worth to judge right. Don't you see
here, there is no Authority so Great and Safe amongst them, but what is to be
subject to the Censure of every Private Christian? And though there be the Name
of such a thing as a Church, yet let that Command, prescribe and ordain what it
will, to be received as the Truth and Faith of Christ, it is not That is to be
obeyed or believed: but being esteemed as a piece of Formality not to be relied
on; every Man when he thinks fit, must set himself up above Church and
Authority, and even judge for himself. Is not here every Controversy left to
the decision of the Private Spirit? And under the Notion of a Church, a gate
opened to all the Fanaticisms and Quakerisms in the World? By the Creed all
Christians are bound to Believe the Holy Catholic Church: And St. Paul (Heb.
13. v. 7.) commands all to Obey and Submit to those that are over them, and
this not only as to External Government; but likewise as to Truth and Belief;
and therefore* says he; v. 7. Whose Faith follow. But here you see, though your
Divines maintain the Authority of a Church; yet there is no Obligation on any
Members of submitting to it, as to any Point of Faith: They must acknowledge it
indeed as to the Governing or Politic part: But as to the Christian or
Believing part; here every Christian, as to what he is to obey, and what not,
is to judge for himself. And pray now, what does all this end in, but the
Private Spirit? Can it desire any fairer Plea than this? Certainly this their
Church, were it the Catholic Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth; 'twould
not thus be commendably left to be overruled by every Private Man's Reason:
There would not be this liberty for every one to run astray from it, by
preferring their own Judgment, before the Decision and Judgment of the Church.
'Twas said heretofore, and we know by whom, Let him that does not hear the
Church, he as a Heathen and a Publican. But now it seems* That Man alone is as
Blind as a Heathen or Publican, who does not rather hear himself, than the
Church. I wonder, how long this has been so?


Misrepresent. I Will warrant you now, you have got in your Head the Question,
Where was the Protestant Church before Luther? But don't reproach this Church;
and persuade the World, she is as yet but in her Infancy. If you have seen a
Book entit'led The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, You Will see it there
proved, That the Protestant Religion was Anciently and Generally professed in the
Christian World before the Reformation. p. 1.


Represent. You have brought in this Question now by Head and Shoulders: But
since it is sta^ted; satisfy me so far, as to let me know, where this Church
was before the Pretended Reformation: In what Country or Nation was it Visible?
Whether in the Eastern or Western World? We have a fair Historical account of
it, from Luther's time to our days: But I would willingly know, where it was in
all those Fifteen Hundred years from Christ's Ascension, to the coming of the
Prophet Luther, as he is styled by Slydan?


Misrepresent. Why, this Author of the Antiquity of the Protestant Religion,
asserts it positively and proves, That the Protestant Religion was Anciently
and Generally professed in the Christian World before the Reformation. And sure
you that pretend to History and Religion cannot be ignorant, Where that
Religion was, which was Anciently and Generally professed amongst Christians
throughout the World.


Represent. Certainly then, This Man must have had some extraordinary
Revelation, or made some New Discovery. For the former Protestants, who lived
nearer Luth^r's time, knew nothing of this Religion being Generally professed.
^oannes Regius (lib. Apol* p. 176,) Bishop Jewel (Apol. p. 4. c. 4. d. 2.) and
Mr. Parkins (E^po^. Cre* p. 400.) confe^s, that before the days of Luther and
Zuingli^, the Church viz. Protestant, was Invisible, unknown, unheard of: that
for the space of many hundred years an Universal Apostasy overspread the Whole
face of the Earth* and this Church was not then visible to the World. So that
by what I see, Authors don't agree in this matter. And then besides this, in a
late Famillar Discourse betwixt a Minister and his Parishioner. The Question
being proposed (p. 14) Where was your Religion, as it is now reformed, when
Luther began his Reformation? As to this particular the Minister answers; It
may be 'twas in the Greek, in the Abassine and Egyptian Churches, amongst the
Armenian Christians -- It may be 'twas in a Corner, under a Cloud, covered with
Rubbish. What if we say, 'twas no where?


Misrepresent. Well, and what then?


Represent. Nothing, but that I see, it is very hard to be found; some find it
Generally professed, others Invisibly professed; others travel a great way to
find it, and return back with a May be: and it may be 'twas under the Rubbish.
And what if one should here enforce the Argument in The Plain Man's Reply? He Is
upon Enquiry Who is the Infallible Judge asserted by Catholics; and because he
don't find Authors agree upon the Point, Where he shall find him. (p. 18. 25.)
he there concludes them all to be but Triflers, and that there is no such Judge
in the World. Would not this conclude as forcibly, that there was no Protestant
Church in the World before Luther? Since being now upon the Search, to what
Church or Communion one was to have applied himself in K. Henry the Seventh's
time, to have been instructed in the True Faith and Doctrine of Christ, they
generally agree there was such a Church in the World, but some send us to
Armenia for it, some to Greece, some to the Hussites, some to an Invisible
Corner, some to a Cloud, some to look under the Rubbish. What can a Man call
this, but in the Plain Man's phrase, Trifling? And yet Plain as he is, he
stands fair for this same Title of Honor, he has so bountifully bestowed upon
others: For as others, so He tells us (p. 10.) that True Religion shall never
be so far driven out of the World, but that it shall always have somewhere or
other, some that believe and profess it in all things necessary to Salvation. I
enquire, Where these were twenty years before the Pretended Reformation? He
assures me. They were certainly in the World some where or other. Great
satisfaction to an Enquirer! Is not this just as if I were traveling to a
certain Town (as as it is in the Plain Man's Reply p. 19.) and do ask the next
Man I meet, which is the right way? He tells me it is a very Cross-Road to find,
and I may easily miss it. But says he, though I cannot direct you my self, yet
there is a Man lives in that Village, who knows every step so exactly, that if
you take him for your Guide, you cannot possibly be mistaken. Pray, say I, at
what House does this Honest Man live? How may I come to the speech of him? Nay!
says he, I know nothing of all that, but you must find him as you can. Now
suppose every Man in the Village gives me the same wise Answer, What an
admirable Direction would this prove? Is this any thing but Trifling? This is
just our Case. I am enquiring to find out the True, Protestant Church before
Luther. All assure me, 'twas certainly in the World; but when I come to ask,
Where? the Plain Man's Reply is, Some where or other.


Misrepr. Though they don't agree where 'twas just before Luther. Yet all agree,
'twas generally professed by the Primitive Christians.


Represent. Then I see we must despair of finding it, the thousand Years before
Luther. And what was the Primitive Church we will enquire in our next.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. M DC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XI. An Enquiry into the Religion of the Primitive Times; and
particularly That of Constantine the First Christian Emperor: For the
satisfaction of those, who desire to know, whether the Protestant Religion was
generally Professed amongst the Christians of those Purer times.

Represent. WE are now to enquire into the Belief and Practice of the Primitive
Church, and see whether that was Protestant, or Catholic. But we must first
know, how many Years or Ages you will allow us to look into; that is, how long you
say, the True, Pretestant Religion, as now established, was professed and
practiced Anciently and Generally among Christians after the Apostles days,
before corruption crept in upon it. Setle this Point, and then we'll proceed.


Misrepresent. If you are in good earnest, He give you some account of this.
The Author of the Discourse Concerning a Judge of Controversy lately
published, says p. 15. For Authority, We appeal to the best Authority of the
Christian Church, the Three First Ages after the Apostles. So that I presume by
him, the Protestant Religion was Anciently and Generally professed and
practiced to the year of Christ 400. Calvin, Reynolds and Fulk own the Church
of Rome to have continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles, that is, Protestant,
in the time of Cyprian, Jerome, Austin, the last of whom lived till the year,
430. Again, in the Discourse entitled Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants
it is said, p. 56. The Tradition of the Church remained Clear and Strong till
after the First Four General Councils, the last of which being that of
Chalcedon, (established in England by Act of Parliament, An. 1 Eliz.) was held
in the Year 450. So that I may allow you to search into the Primitive Church,
for the first four hundred and fifty years: for so long, I question not, the
Protestant Religion was Generally professed and practiced: and that Religion as
then practiced, is the same as now established by Law here in England: and it is
a shame You and Yours should so declaim against it.


Represent. Pardon me here; for I profess my self to have so great a veneration
for the Primitive Church, that I resolve to believe as that believed: and if it
appears, that That Church was the Protestant Church, I Will even be Protestant to
morrow. But let us go on upon our Enquiry. You say, you have reason to believe
the Protestant Religion was Generally professed in the Primitive Times, for the
First Four hundred and fifty years. For your satisfaction and mine, we'll take
a view of the Christian Religion as then professed. And that we may proceed
with more security and certainty, we'll not descend at present so low as you
allow; but look at it, as 'twas practiced in the time of Constantine the Great,
who died about the year 337. I make choice of this time; because This was the
First (...), that gave liberty for the Public Profession of Christianity, and
established it by Law. 'Twas under him all those Pious, Learned and Holy Men
first appeared, w^o till then had been confined by cruel Pers^c^^ors to Caves,
Rocks, and Wildernesses. 'Twas under him the First General Council of Ni^e was
held, which we all venerate, and whose Creed we all recite and assent to as
Apostolical.


Misrepresent. I approve the circumstances: For if ever Christianity was Pure
and Vncorrupt, it must certainly be then, when it* first showed it self to the
world, and raised up its Head from under Perfecution. And now you put me in
mind of it, Dr. Swadlin in his Answer to the 36 Questions reckons This Emperor
Constantine the Great, for one of the Fathers or Professors of the Prote^tant
Relition in old times. Answ. 11. So that I have no exceptions against Him. But
who shall give us the account of the Religion then Professed?


Represent. Even the Fathers or Professors that then lived: but chiefly
Eusebius Caesariensis, an Historian of that Age, and who is listed by Dr.
Swadlin in the same place, for another Professor of the Protestant Religion.
Besides we'll see what account some Modern Protestant Historians give of the
Religion of those times.


Misrepresent. Very fairly proposed; See you hold on so to the end, and He hear
you with patience: for I am of the same mind with your Lay-friend, and He tell
it you freely; I have vowed to follow Truth and Charity, wherever they lead
me.


Represent. This is some encouragement, if your heart keep pace with your
words. But l^t's enter upon our view:

First* I find Constantine erected a magnificent Church, in memory of the
Apostles: He pre^ared himself a Sepulcher in it, to the end, that after death,
he might be esteemed wo^th of the prayers which should be performed there in
honor of the Apostles -- He consecrated a Church to the Apostles; believing
that their memory would be useful and advant^gio^s to his Soul. Eusebius, de vit.
Coast. l. 4. c. 60.

2. When he marched with his Army, he carried with him a portable Tabernacle,
with Priests and Deacons attending it, for the celebration of the Divine
Mystertes. So Zozomenus, hist. l. 1. c. 8. verse. fin.

3. He had Lights burning in the Church in the day time, so the Centurists Cent
4. 410. relate it out of Eusebius.

4. He Translated to Constantinople the Holy Relics of St. Andrew, Luke and
Timothy, at which the Devils roared: as it is worded by St. Jerome, who gives
the whole Narration of it, cont. Vigilant. Bullinger likewise mentions it, de
Orig. error.

5. He translated to Constantinople, for the preservation of that City, certain
Relics of the Cross, found near Jerusalem by his Mother Helen. Centurists
Cent. 4. Col. 1529. Being fully persuaded that That City would be perfectly
secure wherein such a (Relick) as this was preserved. As Socrates relates it,
Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 17.

6. Under him Pilgrimages were made to Jerusalem: the Empress Helen his Mother
went thither to Worship, as the Centurists have it, Cent. 4. col. 457. And
Eusebius relates how Alexander, who lived an hundred years before Constantine,
went in pilgrimage to Jerusalem, upon account both of praying there, and also
of seeing the places. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 11.

7. In his time 'twas decreed in a Council held at Arles, that Priests might
not marry. Centurists Cent. 4. Col. 704.

8. He had in great Veneration Sacred Virgins professing perpetual Chastity.
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 28. And Socrates says that Helen found at
Jerusalem Holy Virgins Consecrated to God, whom She so highly honored, that
She her self waited upon them, and brought them Meat to the Tables, at the
Entertainment to which She had invited them. Ec. Hist. l. 1. c. 17.

9. Under him were Monks throughout Syria, Palestine and Bithynia, and other
places of Asia in the Dominion of Constantin: So the Centurists Cent. 4. Col.
1294. They say likewise, he most greatly Reverenced Anthony the Monk, who lived
in the Deserts of Egypt. Cent. 4. Col. 470. Zozom. hist. l. 1. c. 13. Socrat.
Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 21.

10. He restrained himself from all Licenousness and Luxury by macerating
himself with fastings and bodily austerities. Eus. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 14.

11. He visited and embraced the Sepulcher of Peter and Paul, and laying aside
his Imperial State, he became a Petitioner to the Saints, that they would
become Intercessors to God for him. St. Chrysostom. in ep. 2. Cor. Hom. 26.

12. He Signed his Forehead with the Sign of the Cross. Eusebius. in vit. Constable.
l. 3. c. 2. He honored the same Sign. Eus. in laud. Constable. He had success of
Victory in virtue of it, and erected it publicly. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 2.
c. 7. and l. 1. c. 25.

13. He sat not down at the Council of Nice, till such time as the Bishops had
beckoned to him. Eusebius. ib. l. 3. c. 10.

14. He judged it unlawful for him to undertake the Judgment of Ecclesiastical
Causes; but committed them over to be decided by Bishops. Zozom. hist. l. 1. c.
16.

15. He procured the Synod at Arles, where the Petition of the Council to Pope
Sylvester was, that for the Uniform Observation of Easter day throughout the
world, He would send forth his Letters to all according to ancient Custom.
Osiand. in Epit. etc. cent. 4. p. 182.

16. He subjected all Christian Churches to the Pope, insomuch that Mr. Napper
in his Treatise upon the Revelations dedicated to King James I. says, After the
Year of God Three Hundred, the Emperor Constantine subdued all Christian
Churches to Pope Sylvester: from which time till these our days, the Pope and
his Clergy has possessed the outward and Visible Church. And ib. P. 43. The
Popes Kingdom (says he) has had power over all Christians from the time of Pope
Sylvester and ^he Emperor Constantine, for these Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty
Years. And ib. p. 145. From the time of Constantine until these our days, even
One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Years, the Pope and his Clergy has possessed
the outward visible Church of Christians. Again ib. p. 68. Between the year of
Christ Three Hundred, and Three Hundred and Sixteen, the Antichristian and
Papistical R^^gn began, reigning universally and without any debatable
contradiction, One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Years: God's True Church most
certainly abiding so long Latent and Invisible. Nay he goes yet further, ib. p.
391. During even the Second and Third Ages (says he, after Christ) the true
Temple of God and Light of the Gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist
himself.

17. He attributed Primacy to the Bishop of Rome, as Frigevillaeus Gauuius
owns, Pal. Chr. ad Regin. Angliae. Constantine preferred (says he) the Bishop
of Rome and of Constantinople before the rest; giving the Primacy to the Bishop
of Rome before all. And upon this score he is charged by the same Author, p.
34. fatal^y to have given Power to the Beast.

18. He reproved Acesius the Novatian for denying the Power of remitting sin to
be given to Priests. Centurists Cent. 4. Col, 653. and Socrates l. 1. c. 10.

19. Of his Priests assembled to the Dedication of the Church, some of them did
Preach and interpret the Holy Scriptures: But such as were unable to arrive at
these things, appeased the Deity with unbloody Sacrifices, and Mystic
Immolations, humb^y offering up their Prayers to God for the common peace, for
the Church of God. So Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 45.

20. After his death, Prayers were offered for his Soul; So the Centuriators
Cent. 4. Col. 454. where they relate, that after his death, the People poured
forth Prayers for the Emperors Soul not without Tears. So likewise Eusebius,
who adds that his Body was vouchsafed a Place with the Monument of the
Apostles, that it might be vouchsafed the Divine Rites, and Mystie Service, or
Sacrifice* de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 71.

And what think you now, Misrepresenter; tell me your Opinion: was the
Protestant Religion Anciently and Generally professed and practiced in these
Primitive Times, when Constantine governed both the Western and Eastern World?
Does the Church in his time practicing as you have now seen acknowledged by
unquestionable Authorities, look like a Protestant Church? If you know what
it is to be a Protestant, tell me your mind; Was Constantine and his Church
Protestants, or no?

Misrepresent. You have hunted out for all the Superst^tions, Errors and
Oversights of that Age; and now ask Whether the Professors were Protestants?
And I answer you; They were Protestants, as to the Doctrine of the Gospel and
Creed which they professed, though not as to their Oversights and Errors.


Represent. That is to say in plain English, They were Protestants, as the
Papists now are Protestants. Any honest man, by your appeal to, and Pretext of
Reformation, according to the Primitive Times, would have expected to have
found a Protestant Religion professed and practiced in those times, as it is now
here in this Nation by Law established. And yet when we have taken a Prospect
of those Primi^ive Ages, we find the Christians then living. Professors of no
other Protestancy, than such as is seen practiced at this day, in their
Majesty's Chapels at White Hall, Somerset house and St. James's: and that, I
think, is a Protestancy, which is called Popery.


Misrepresent. Why, in our Reformation, we are no more obliged to take in the
Errors of Constantine 's time, than those Corruptions we found in the time of
Henry 8. No, we Reform according to the Purity of the Gospel, and have no other
Rule than that of the Word of God, Instructing and Directing us. And as for all
Superstitions, they are alike rejected by us, though some have Antiquity to plead
in their behalf.


Represent. Then, I see, however you pretend, your Reformation has reduced
Christianity to that state, as 'twas professed in the Primitive Times: Yet when
we come to look into those times, thinking to find a Flourishing, Uncontrol'd
Protestancy Generally and Publicly Professed; we are still as far to seek
for it as before: and all that appears, is the Doctrine of the Creed and Gospel
professed, but together with what you call the Errors and Superstitions of
Popery; so that to be a Protestant according to the Primitive Times, is nothing
else but to be a Papist. Certainly this must be a very surprising
disappointment to some, to find Constantine the Great, and Eusebius his
Historian, to be such kind of Popish Protestants as these, who yet are set down
by your Dr. Swadlin as the Ancient Protestants, according to whose Faith and
Practice the present Reformation was regulated, and against whose Positions
(says he Ans. 11.) if we hold any thing, name it, we answer it: prove it, we
yield. So that, let me tell you, By what I can see as yet, when a man has taken
the pains to look back to those Primitive Ages, he can be no more satisfied,
where the Protestant Religion, as it is now Reformed, was in the time of
Constantine, than when Luther began the Reformation; but after all his search
he must rest contented either with the Plain Man's Reply of its being Home where
or other: or else with the same It may be as was given to the Parishioner: It
may be 'twas in the Greek* in the Abassin and Egyptian Churches, amongst the
Armenian Christians: It may be 'twas in a Corner, under a Cloud, covered with
Rubbish. What if we say 'twas no where? Famil. Discourse betwixt a Minister and
Parishioner. p. 14.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THis is to give notice, That this last Week were sound here in London several
Good Protestant Lies, concerning Flying Crabs seen in the Chapel at
Somersethouse: and of the Parish Church of St. James's in the Fields, being
undermined by the Papists, and in danger of being demolished by Fireballs. If
the Right Owners will appear, they shall be restored to them without Cost or
Charges; and if any will produce them* they shall be well rewarded for their
Pains.

Published with Allowance.

Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. MDC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XII. Protestant Historians show us Popery in the Primitive Church under
Constantine; but no Protestancy. The Christians of that Age never Protested
against the Popish Doctrines professedly Taught and Practiced in those times;
Therefore they were no Protestants. An Enquiry into the Religion of the Ages
succeeding Constantine.

Represent. IF you remember, at our last meeting, Misrepresenter, we were
looking back into the Primitive Times, to see, if we could find there the
Protestant Religion, as it is now reformed, Generally Professed and Practiced
amongst the Christians of that Purer Age. But we lost our labor; and all the
Hopes You came big with, ended in nothing but a disappointment.


Misrepresent. 'Twould be a Miracle indeed to find it, as long as you have the
carrying and management of the Light, by which we are to make the Discovery.


Represent. A short memory makes you Unreasonable. Have you forgot so soon, the
very Means and Method, by which we entered upon our Search, were of your own
Choice, at least by approbation and consent? Our business was to make enquiry
after the Protestant Religion. We agreed to examine the Religion Practiced in
Constantine's time, who, as your Dr. Swadlin says, was a Protestant, and in
whose time, according to your Divines, the Protestant Religion was generally
professed. We took an account of the Religion of that Age, from Eusebius a
Protestant Professor too (if you credit Dr. Swadlin) and some other Modern
Protestants. The Translation of Eusebias we made use of, was done by a
Protestant, approved and published by Protestants, and Printed at Cambridge,
Anno 1683. a Protestant University: what possibly could be fairer done, and
more to your advantage? And yet after all; instead of meeting in those times
with the Protestant Religion, as now Reformed, we were got in the middle of
Good Catholics, Professing and Practicing their Religion, received from the
Apostles, pure as yet and uncorrupted, as your Fulk and Calvin confess; and
such, as you, under the specious Pretext of Reformation, have since made Odious
and Criminal, and done your best to hiss it out of the world.


Misrepresent. The Reformers have preserved the Religion of those times
Inviolable; and have only labored to purge Christianity of the Errors, then or
since that time brought in to deform it.


Represent. This is the proper Mark of the Beast. Never a Reformer yet, even
from Arius to this Day, but what has set up his Standard against Pretended
Errors and Innovations. And this is the stamp they set upon every thing that
does not suit with their Humor* Fancy or Interest. The Reformers of the
Reformation go by the same Rule; and such as Reform again upon those, that
Reform the Reformation, still pursue this Method, till at last they have
Reformed away, one after the other, all that belongs to Christianity. Some
reformed away the greatest part of the holy Ceremonies and Religious Decency
observed in Churches; comes another sort and reform away what These left: after
them comes a Third, and Reform away even the Churches themselves. Some made a
Reform of the Priestly Vestments, retaining the Name of Copes and Miters, with
the Use only of a Surplice; the next reform the Surplice: and the Third reform
the Priests and Ministers themselves all out of doors. Some began to reform the
Sacraments, and all were Superstitious but Two: others came, and thought these
Two as Superstitious as the other Five; and at last they have reformed amongst
them Religion so far, till the only Christianity that is left without Error,
Corruption or Innovation, is that, which (tho Protestancy still) is without
ever a Christian in it.


Misrepresent. Certainly you have forgot what you were about: and instead of
looking for the Protestant Religion, you have taken a leap from Constantine,
down into all the Enthusiasms of our Age.


Represent. No, no, We shall soon be back again. I have only given you a hint,
what it is you call purging Christianity of Errors and Innovations, and what
edifying work it makes. And by this we shall find, there was no Protestant
Religion Generally Practiced and Professed amongst Christians, in those days of
Constantine, of which we have* lately taken a Survey.


Misrepresent. How so?


Represent. Because, if the Protestant Religion had been at that time generally
professed; the Protestants then would have as zealously Protested against what
you call the Errors and Innovations in Constantine's time, as they did twelve
hundred years after, in the Reign of King Henry 8.


Misrepresent. Make that out.


Represent. You know it is the very Essence of Protestants, to Protest against
those Doctrines and Practices, which they condemn as the Errors and
Superstitions of Popery. But such Doctrines and Practices there were in
Constantine's time, as Eusebius and other Historians declare, and you your
selves own. Therefore, if the Protestant Religion had been at that time
genenerally professed, they would have Generally Protested against those
Doctrines and Practices. But there was no General Protestation against those
Doctrines and Practices by the Christians in Constantine's time: Therefore the
Christians in Constantine's time were not Generally Protestants.


Misrepresent. Methinks this gingles something like a Syllogism.


Represent. It Is to that Tune; and I think, convincing enough to any serious
Considerer, that is acquainted with the Spirit of Protestantism. Come, I dare
appeal to your judgment, though so perversely biased: for the Case is clear.
Don't you observe, the Protestants that have been in the world ever since
Luther's Pretended Reformation, have not only Ridiculed and Condemned what they
call Romish Errors, in the time of Henry 8. but likewise condemn the same
practiced (as they own) heretofore in the time of Constantine? And here I ask
of you. Don't you think, if Luther and his Fellow-Reformers had happened in
Constantine's time, they would as certainly have Reformed the Christian
Religion of Constantine, as they did afterward of Hen. 8. Their loud
Protesting against and condemning the Pretended Errors of both the One and the
Others Religion, is a sufficient intimation, what they would have done, had the
Sins of Christendom so early provoked the Divine Vergeance, and brought them
before into the World. Since therefore it is evident, it cannot be made appear.
That the Christians in Constantine's time, did Protest against any such
pretended Errors, as the Protestants have done ever since Luther; it is evident
there were no such Christians in those times, as Protestants. And however Dr.
Swadlin confidently derives the Succession of the Protestant Religion, not from
the Waldenses, Wicklifists and Hussits; but from Constantine, Eusebius, etc.
You have now seen the One Practicing, the Other relating such Doctrines, (as
are by Protestants now marked out for Superstitious) without the lest guilt of
Conscience, or making any the least Protestation against them; and what kind of
Protestants these must have been, who were thus deep in Popery, I leave you to
consider. Only one thing still I Will propose to you: We have made hitherto some
enquiry into the Christianity of those Former Times, and looked back upon those
Christians. Now suppose it had been your Fate, to have been in those times,
just Protestant as you are at this day: Had you gone into their Churches and
seen there the lighted Candles, the appeasing the Deity with Unbloody
Sacrifices, and Mystic Consecrations. Had you seen the Awful Translation of
Holy Relics; Constantine prostrate at the Sepulcher of the Apostles, and
imploring their Intercession; had you seen him signing his Forehead with the
Cross; and with great veneration repositing part of the Holy Cross for the
security of the City. Had you seen him Fasting, and chastising his Body;
honoring Monks, and Virgins by Vow consecrated to God: Attributing Primacy to
the Bishop of Rome, and Subjecting all Christian Churches to him. Had you seen
the Body of the Deceased Emperor in the Church upon a stately Throne, with the
Priests and numerous Crowds, in Tears and Sighs praying for his Soul: Had you
seen, I say, in those days, the Christians serving God, and publicly
exercising their Religion in this manner, would you have thought them
Protestants? Would this have agreed with the Notion of Protestantism, you have
now in your Head? Or, tell me seriously, should you not have run out of their
Churches, and heartily Protested against them as Rank Papists? And yet these
are the Christians your Divines appeal to, as the Ancient Professors of the
Protestant Religion. It Is according to these times, they say, they have
Reformed Christianity: And that the Religion as now established by Law in this
Nation, is the same, as was then Anciently and Generally professed and
practiced in those Primitive Times.


Misrepresent. You stand close tied up to Constantine s' time, and there make
your boasts. You know we appeal to the First Five or Six Hundred Years; and
it is not reason, you should confine the search to so narrow Bounds, as the
Reign of one Emperor.


Represent. We Will go forward therefore, and see what was the Religion of all
these Ages; and because we cannot learn this better, than from the Belief and
Doctrine of the Eminent and Learned Fathers of of those Times; we will see what
Information their Works will give us, as they are acknowledged by the
Centurists, and other Protestant Historians, and Writers. The Century-Writers,
you must know, give an Historical account of those Ages; and in their Fourth
Century dedicated to Q. Elizabeth, and affirmed by Protestants to be an
Excellent Work, worthy of immortal Memory, they charge the Fathers of those
Ancient and Purer times, with the holding the Doctrines as follow, viz. with
Justification by Works, Merit, Confession of Sins to a Priest, Unwritten
Tradition, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, with Altars so called of Sacrifice
offered upon them, and Consecrated with the Sign of the Cross and Chrism: with
the Doctrine of Real Presence, Transubstantiation, Reservation of the
Sacrament, worshipping it, and offering it in Sacrifice, as propitiatory for
the Living and the Dead: with the Mixture of Water and Wine in the (...)
Consecration. With the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, Abrenunciation, Exorcism,
anointing with Oil, and other Ceremonies used in Baptism: With holding, Infants
dying without Baptism not to be Saved: The Bishop Confirming the Baptized with
Chrism, and keeping the Chrism in a Box; with Consecration of Chrism by a
Bishop only; with solemn Translation of Saints Relics, their Worship, placing
them under the Altar, Pilgrimages to them; and Diseased Persons thereupon
cured. With Images in the Church, and Lights in the Day time. With Anchorites,
Ermites, Abbots and Monks, their Vowed Chstity, Voluntary Poverty, vowed
Chastity of Virgins, Monasterys of Virgins, their Veil and Habit, the Fast from
Flesh in Lent; Funeral Rites, Anniversary Days; Prayer for the Soul of the
Deceased Party, from Apostolic Tradition: With a set Form of Prayer, Litanys,
numbering Prayers upon little Stones. With Worshipping the Cross, Signing the
Forehead with it. With attributing to it Virtue of Consecrating the Sacrament,
of driving away Devils, Witchcraft, etc. In like manner with Deacons,
Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorcists, etc. with farther mention of the Prtests
Unction, Ecclesiastical Vestments, the Albe, the Stole, Dalmatica and Cope,
etc. With teaching that Priests might not marry after being ordained. With
Magnificent Churches Consecrated, with Celebration of Mass, appointed to be
said in no places, but such as were hallowed by a Bishop: With affirming the
Church to be built upon Peter. With teaching Peter's Primacy, and deriving the
same from Peter to his Successor the Bishop of Rome, whose Episcopal See, the
Ancient Fathers do therefore term Peter's See, Peter's Chair, honoring the same
with a peculiar Festival Day; and decreeing even Public Prayer to be made for
the Pope in Mass time; and finally with several examples of confessed Primacy
in the Bishop of Rome.


Misrepresent. Bless me, Man! Why we are over Head and Ears in Popery. I have
not Patience to hear any more of this kind of Trumpery; I see, if I let you
have the searching for the Protessant Religion in the Primitive Times, we shall
never find it.


Represent. I see but little hopes of it indeed hitherto: And yet what can a
Man do more for your advantage, than I have here done? I enquire of I
rotestants; Where one must look to find their Religion in former Times? They
tell me; Their Religion is the same that was professed by the Primitive
Christians, in the First, Four, Five, or Six Hundred Years after Christ. I
examine those Years; and not to be biased by Passion or Prejudice, I make use
of Protestant Spectacles to look back upon those Past Ages: And yet you see,
what kind of Protestant Religion we meet with: Were it not for your saying,
They were Protestants, one might swear without scruple, the Christians of those
times were downright Papists. I have delivered to you hitherto nothing of the
Profession and Practice of those Ages, but what your own Protestant Historians
deliver to me. And how can I think the Christians were then Protestants, when
Your own Historians and Controvertists, mark out to me the most Eminent and
Leading Men of those Times for Papists? Come, let me tell you, This is enough
to make any Man stumble. And tho you pretend to go by S^nse and Reason in your
Religion: Yet, methinks, to hear the Protestants of the Last Age, condemning
the Times now under question, for Papistical, and you with your Modern Divines
appealing to them for Protestant, is not very agreeable either to Sense or
Reason, and, to be free with you, I must even renounce them both, if you intend
I should follow you.


Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. M DC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XIII. The Professors of Popish Doctrines in the Primitive Times, no
Protestants, but Papists. Popish Tenets not only the Opinions of Private
Doctors, but the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. The Four First General
Councils no Protestants.

Representer. WELL met to day, Misrepresenter; I hope, now you have slept upon
our last Discourse, you will not press me much with turning Protestant; since
having now Examined the Religion of the Primitive Times, we cannot discover,
but that what you call Popery, was as Generally professed by the Christians of
those Purer Ages, as under Hen. 8. when your New Apostles set up for
Reformation.


Misrepresent. You would fain persuade me to it. I know this is the Trap you
lay to catch Converts. But you will be mistaken in me; I am too well acquainted
with all your Wiles.


Repres. No, No, as for your particular I even despair. It Is Good, Well-meaning
People, such as have made it the First of their Morning Prayers to God, to
Direct them to the Truth, such as have dealt justly and honestly with their
Neighbors, have spoke ill of none, have raised no Lying Reports, nor have been
maliciously Industrious in spreading them; such as these I willingly Discourse,
and have hopes to prevail with. But for you, that talk loud of Reason, and have
none: You that fleer, and flurt, and blaspheme every thing you do not
understand; You that suck in Hatred against your Neighbor with your Milk, and
afterward nourish it by Obstinacy and Passion; and continue to malign him, you
know not why. You that condemn your Neighbor upon a bare Presumption; and pass
Sentence against him upon Fables and Hear-says, and persuade all your
Acquaintance to do the like; for you, I say, nothing less than a Miracle can
change your Heart; and unless some favorable Ray of Mercy shine upon you to
cure this Blindness, as you have lived, so, I fear, you will die in Darkness.


Misrepres. What, dooming me already!


Repres. Your want of Charity is a Presage of your Doom. It Is but beating the
Air to Discourse with you. However, Once again. Don't you often charge me with
believing the Errors and Superstitions of Popery; and importune me no longer to
admire those Fopperies; but, as I tender my Salvation, to renounce them all
heartily, and become a Good Protestant?


Misrepres. Yes, I do: And it is the Doctrine I Preach up every where, for the
good of Souls, And I give the Reason: Because the Protestant Religion is the
Pure Religion as 'twas Professed heretofore by the Christians in the Primitive
Times.


Repres. It Is that Religion I desire to be a Member of: But how can I believe,
that That was the Protestant Religion? If I am to pin my Faith upon your
Sleeve, tell me so. But if I am to be convinced of it by Reason, how is it
possible I should be of your Mind, and think so; since having now taken a fair
Prospect of the Religion of those Ages, from the Best and most Impartial
Historians, we find Popery to have been then Professed with as little Control
or Contradiction, as *it is at this Day in Italy or Spain? I am sure, if you
should be told of any Neighbor of yours, in this City, that in his Devotions
desires the Prayers of the Saints in Heaven, Prays for the Souls of the
Faithful Departed, keeps Anniversary Days, Signs his Forehead with the Sign of
the Cross; uses Exercisms, Oil, Breathing and other Ceremonies in Baptizing his
Children, etc. you would presently cry out, A Papist, A Papist. And if you
Censure such an one for a Papist now, how can you persuade me, the Primitive
Christians were Protestants, whom we have found Professing such Doctrines and
Practices? If it be Popery now to do so; how was it Protestantism then? Either
you must make them Protestants that Teach those things at this Day amongst us;
or else they were none, who Taught and Practiced them heretofore. Come, I Will ask
you one Question; Had you lived in those Days of the Primitive Church, would
you have Communicated, or joined with those Priests and Numerous People, who
after the Decease of Constantine, were Praying round the Hearse, for the Soul
of the Emperor, as it is related by Eusebius de Vit. Constable. lib. 4 cap. 71? If
you would not, I conclude Those Priests and People were none of Your Church,
that is, no Protestants. And yet while you would have stood out then, as
Recusant, I am confident such as at this Day Pray for the Soul of Charles 2.
would then have Prayed for Constantine's, had they been then Living. And These
are such as you call Papists. By which my Reason informs me, That if ^le be a
Christian, as Christians were in the Primitive Church, I must be no Protestant,
but a Papist: since the Protestants of our Days, would no more have joined with
the Christians of those Times, than they do now with the Papists.


Misrepres. You triumph now, as if you had got^a Victory: and yet you have
hi^herto done just nothing. All your Proofs end in nothing but some Particular
Instances: and so I confess you have shown some Private Doctors, some
Particular Men to have been acknowledged as infected with Popery in those
Primitive Times, by our Centuriators and other Protestant Divines. But what is
all this to the Primitive Church? Some Private Doctors and Opiniators might
then be Papists, it is true: but the Church was nevertheless Protestant. Examine
the Four First General Councils, which were at that Time the Church
Representative, and you will see nothing Decreed by them, but what We hold as
Protestants.


Repres. You are for having me take all upon trust. And though you cry out
against Pinning Faith upon Sleeves; yet I see, if I don't pin my Faith upon
your Sleeve, I shall never be Protestant. You Preach to me, I must be guided by
Reason; and it is not enough to Say, the Primitive Church was Protestant: but
you must Prove it too, if you will convince my Reason. For my part, by the
Progress we have hitherto made, I think I have Reason to think, that not only
some Private Men, but that the Whole Church was then Popish, as you call it.
For let us but reflect a little; Who were These Men, who by your Modern
Protestants are accused of Popish Doctrines in those Times of Constantine, and
the Two Following Ages; and we shall find they were the most Eminent, the mosh
Learned, the most Exemplar, and Best Men of their Times: they were S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, Nyssen, S. Basil, S. Hilary, S. Cyril, S. Paulinus, S. Epiphanius,
etc. These were the Men, who living in those Primitive Ages of the Church, are
condemned and rejected by Modern Protestants, for holding and maintaining
Popish Doctrines, These are they who are charged with Popery, by the
Centuriators, by Osiander, Chemnitius, Melancthon, Bullinger, Beza, Whitaker,
Humfrey, Covel, Whitgift, Abbot, Morton, Fulk, Trig, Cartwright, Field, Hooker,
etc. Now I need not ask here, being upon Enquiry into the Faith of the
Primitive Church, whether Those Ancient Fathers cannot in all likelihood better
inform me, what was the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of their Times, than
other Modern Teachers, who had not a Being in the World, till Twelve or
Thirteen Hundred Years after? But I may consider with my self, whether it be
not most agreeable to Reason to think, since such Eminent and Virtuous Men and
Prelates, as just now recited, are accused of Popery, that not only some
Private Persons in those Primitive Times, but that the Whole Church was then
Popish? I am assured by all Antiquity, that these Persons, that stand thus
Indicted, Governed the Primitive Church; were Bishops, Pastors, and the most
Exemplary of their Age; the People or Flock were Instructed and Taught by them;
So that such Doctrines as they then Published in their Writings, and Preached
to the People, without Censure or Reproof, I cannot look on as a Private or
Closet-Concern; but as the Public and Received Doctrine of their Times: and
that in the Sermons and Works of the Pastors is seen the Belief of the Flock.
And this will oblige me to conclude, that Such Doctrines and Practices of which
these Ancient Fathers and Doctors stand charged by Moderns, was not the
Doctrine of Private Men, but of the Whole Church of their Times: It being not
at all probable to think, while the Pastors are thus generally condemned for
Papists, that the People should be Protestants, I demand of you, Whether the
Writings and Books of Protestant Prelates, Doctors and Divines Published under
Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth, be not an Argument, that besides showing their
Private Sentiments, will prove likewise the Doctrine and Belief of Their
Church? and that whosoever quarrels with them for their Protestant Negatives,
and Dissenting from the Church of Rome, does not in the same Breath condemn
their Whole Church, of which they were Rulers and Overseers? If so, have not I
equal Grounds to believe, that the Concurring Sentiments of the Primitive
Fathers, was the Sense of the Primitive Church; and that the accusing them of
Popish Doctrines and Principles is a Condemnation of their Whole Church, over
which God had placed them Prelates, Pastors and Teachers? So that by all my
Reason can discover yet, if I am to be of the Religion of the Primitive Times,
I am to be no Protestant; but continue as I am, a Papist: and if I were not so,
this your Appealing to the Primitive Church, and our Search into it, would even
oblige me to renounce Your Communion, who* only make a Noise of the Primitive
Church, and are nothing like it: but are as much for Reforming that, as you did
the Church of Henry 8.


Misrepres. Leave these Private Doctors and Fathers, and look but into the
First Four General Councils, and you will soon discover, that the Church of those
Primitive Christians was nothing else but Protestant.


Repres. I find too much of the Pope in those Councils, to think they were
Protestants. The Pope Presides in Three of them by his Legates or Deputy. They
show great Respect to his Letters, and follow his Direction. They hear him
called their Head without Contradiction: and call him so Themselves. They own
him to have the Care of the Vineyard, v^z. the Whole Church, committed by
Christ to his Charge. Now how can I imagine the Bishops there assembled to be
Protestants, since You and I, that know what kind of things Protestants are,
are very well assar'd, that had those Prelates been Protetants, instead of
these Honorable Titles* and Respects* they had even set upon Him with those
Course Protestant Complements of Antichrist, Whore of Babylon, Usurper, etc.
with a peremptory Demand of What had he to meddle there with his Legates and
(...) of Direction in the (...)* Church, whose Diocese, like other Bishops, was
no other, but what was over-lookt by the Seven Hills? You know if the
Centurists, Osiander, Mr. Cartwright, Bibliander, Dr. Whitaker, Mr. Bale, or
Mr. Beard had been there, they had in such Honorable Phrases Entitled him to
Tyranny and Usurpation, as they have since, with other of their Brethren, done
in their Writings. But since, instead of these Reformed Complements, I find the
Pope Treated by those Four First General Councils, with all Submission, Respect
and Veneration; how can my Reason be convinced that those Bishops and Divines
there assembled were Protestants? Do you but imagine with your self, that Pope
Sylvester, Damasus, Celestine, and Leo, instead of Directing their Legates and
Letters to those First General Councils, had sent them to a Synod of Dort, of
Charenton, to such Committees for Religion, or Convocations as have been at any
time held in these Northern Climates, since the time of Lather's Pretended
Reformation; what Reception do you think they would have had? Can you imagine
they would have given to the Legates the most Honorable Seats, as was done in
those Councils? Would they be heard to style the Pope the Successor of Peter,
and Their Head, with that awful Silence, as was done there? Would the Pope's
Orders and Directions be received with that Submission, as was done by those
Venerable Synods?


Misrepres. Troth, I am apt to believe they would not.


Repres. Then I am apt to believe, and have Reason for it, that the Prelates and
Divines of those Four First General Councils, were nothing like These, that
have been of late assembled in our National Synods and Convocations; that is,
No Protestants. For if your Protestant Religion were really the same Religion,
as was then Professed in the time of those First Councils, the Behavior of
those Ancient Prelates had certainly been no other, than such as might
rationally be expected from our Modern Protestant Synods and Convocations, had
the same Legates and Letters been Directed from the Pope to them: and yet how
Vast a difference there is betwixt what Those did heretofore and These would do
now, were they in the like Circumstances, You your self cannot but acknowledge:
and whilst you own that Those Primitive Bishops of the Ancient and yet Pure
Church did behave themselves so unlike Protestants, how can I, who am to govern
my self by Reason, conclude them to have been Protestants? Come, you exact too
hard a Task of me; if you expect I shall believe, that the Primitive Christians
were Protestants, you must even do more than Say so; you must show, that those
Ancient Doctors did behave themselves in their Pulpits like our Modern Doctors;
That They did then in their Sermons rail against the Pope, and endeavor to
prove Him Antichrist: That Obeying and Believing the Catholic Church was going
Blindfold, and Pinning Faith upon Sleeves: That Praying to Saints was Idolatry,
and Praying for the Souls departed, an Idle Superstition, and a Tricking them
to Heaven. I have shown you the same Popish Doctrines Professed heretofore, as
you now find at this day: show me but such Damning Sermons Preached against
them heretofore, and you will do something.


Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. M DC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XIV. No Protestant Harangue in the First Four General Councils to fill
the Fathers Heads with Fears and Jealousies: No Canons made by the said Fathers
to prevent the Growth of Popery at that Time professedly Taught and Practiced,
is an Argument that the Fathers of those Councils were no Protestants.

Representer. I Hope you are by this time satisfied, Misrepresenter, that the
Professors of such Doctrines and Principles, as you call Popish, were every
where to be found in the Time of the Primitive Church, when you say the
Protestant Religion was Generally Professed amongst Christians.


Misrepresent. I very freely acknowledge, That in the Time of the Primitive
Church, and of the First Four General Councils, there were very many Eminent
Men, through Infirmity or Blindness Embracing and Professing Popish Doctrines.
This I will not be so obstinate as to deny; because I find most of the Ancient
Fathers of the Church branded with the Mark of Popish Errors, by Our own
Century-Writers, and other Protestant Divines. Hierome, Ambrose, Austin,
Athanasius, Gregory, Chrysostom, and the rest of them, do not escape this
Censure; They all had their Failings in this Point, They c^ndescended too much
to the Infirmity of their Times, and in many of their Doctrines knew not what
they said or Taught. But still the Church was Protestant; and the Four First
General Councils, as I told you before, were all Protestants. You may claim
some Particular Doctors of those Times, if you will, and welcome; but for the
Church and Councils, these were certainly Ours; and their Religion was the same
True, Protestant Religion, as is here by Law Established.


Repres. Well, I don't know how far Interest or Passion, or Education, may work
in this Point: But I cannot bring my Reason and What you say, to meet, for my
Life: and yet I have been trying, and turning and stretching it every way,
since our last Meeting, and 'twon't do at last. For look you now; You say Those
First General Councils were Protestants. This presently raises a Notion in my
Head, That all those Bishops and Divines there assembled, were like our
Protestants here in England; and I presently resemble them to our Convocations
or Parliaments. Here I begin to Imagine, what so many Divines of Ours would
have done in those Times, had they been then in Body. I consider, that the
Times were then very Dangerous; Popery, as you confess, began to spread, many
Eminent Men were infected with its Errors: Then think I, Certainly, if the
Fathers in those Councils had been Protestants, there could not have been
wanting some Zealous Doctor, who would have animated the Fathers to the utter
Ex^irpation of those Errors, and with a Fervorous Protestant Harangue, have
prepared them for the Enacting of Laws or Canons, to prevent the Growth of
Popery, and sor the Preservation of the Protestant, the most Moderate and best
Religion in the World. I cannot (...), but there would have appeared some Warm
Doctor, a Dr. J. S. who from the Text Revel. 11. 5. I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent;
would have thus poured forth the Spirit of Reformation upon them: We have no
Appreh^nsions, that either Mahometanism or Pag^nism will come into these
Kingdoms: it is another kind of Removal of our Candlestick, that we have reason
to fear; it is another Religion nigher at hand, that is most likely to Displace
our Candlestick. You all know what Religion I mean; it is Popery that most
threatens us. It is that Restless, Busy Religion, that has made so much
Disturbance in Christendom; that has always been, and is still so Active by all
Means, Just or Unjust, by Fraud or Force, to insinuate it self into all Places.
It is this we ought to have most Apprehensions of. May God so inspire you, that
by your Means as effectual Provision as Possible may be made, both for the
keeping out that Foreign Religion, which so little serves the Ends of
Christianity, and so much disserves the Inter^st both of King and People; and
for the more firm Establishment of the Protestant Religion. Or in case of this
Doctor's failing, would there not have been invited another, as Dr. J. T. who
would have put the Fathers in mind, That it is believed by many, and not
without cause, that the Pope and his Faction are the Antichrist. -- That Popery
is as bad, or worse than Infidelity -- That the Old Heathen Philosophers were
better Teachers of Religion than the Papists. -- That Tully, Plutarch, and
Seneca, were much Honester, and more Christian Casuists, than any that I know
of* in the Church of Rome. That therefore They would make a Lasting Provision
for the Security of our Peace and Religion against all the Secret Contrivances
and open Attempts of These Sons of Violence. Can you think, Misrepresenter,
that Popery having thus overspread the Earth, the Light of the Gospel being
obscured (as Mr. Napper says, upon Revel. p. 191.) by the Roman Antichrist
himself, in the Time of these First Four Councils, there could be so many
Protestants assembled, Bishops, Divines, and others, as you say there were in
those councils, and yet not one word of Encouragement for the rooting out of
Popery, and filling their Heads with Fears and Jealousies? Come, for my part, I
cannot tell how to imagine this possible. And therefore unless, as you have
shown me what you call the Corruptions of Popery in those Times, so you can
likewise show me, there were some Means taken for the preventing the Growth of
them by those Fathers, I shall never bring my Reason to believe, that those
Fathers were Protestants.


Misrepres. Means! I don't question but there were Means used for the Redress
of those Evils: but we are not upon that Point yet. You are only speaking of a
Sermon Introductory to those Councils.


Repres. Well, and can you show me from any of the Ancient Historians, that
there were any such Inspiriting Sermons at those Times? If you cannot produce
any, I shall be apt to believe, that either the Preachers then were no
Protestants, or else that the Fathers were none. For you and I that know what
Protestancy and Popery is, must needs conclude so.


Misrepres. You may even drop this Point; for I don't pin my Faith upon such
Sermons. I know indeed, as the World goes now, there are some who cannot hold
their Eyes open at a Sermon, but when the Thunder of Papist and Popery,
breaking from the Pulpit, awakens them. But it is likely, 'twas not so in old
Times. The Christians heretofore, I believe, had a greater Portion of the
Spirit of Peace and Charity, they were contented with following their Text, and
knew to spend their Glass, without the help of these Popular Excursions. It may
be this Modish Divinity is New, taken up only since the making a Faction and
Party has crept into the Pulpit with the Gospel. But what then? The Protestant
Religion was Anciently Professed; and I question not, the Fathers of those
First Councils were Protestants, though I can produce no Instance of such
Parliamentary Sermons, as you speak of.


Repres. Thou art Good-natured sometimes, Misrepresenter, and so Ingenuous, as
to shame the Devil and speak Truth: In Return, I Will let fall this Point, and
will enquire no farther after Protestant Sermons in those Primitive Times, for
the Direction of the First Councils. We'll pass over therefore to the Councils
themselves, and Examine what kind of Christians the Fathers there assembled
were.


Misrepres. Yes, this will be to the Purpose: upon this Point turns the whole
weight of the Controversy, if it don't appear they were Protestants; I must
needs own, I have deluded many; and that I really am, what you call me, a
Misrepresenter.


Repres. Don't you remember, I showed you at our last Meeting, that the Pope
and Those Fathers were too well agreed to be Protestants?


Misrepres. Yes, yes; I have heard this already. The Popes were Good Prelates
in those Days; they had not then the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead: and
so that Concludes nothing.


Repres. If They had not then the Mark of the Beast, 'twas because there were
then no such things as Protestants to set it on. The Popes had at that Time all
Christian Churches Subject to them, as Mr. Napper confesses, upon the
Revelations: Nay, he says that the Pope's Usurpation and Lording it over all
Christian Churches, began before the Year of Christ 316, which was before the
Time even of the First General Council of Nice held An. 325. Now since for this
very Usurpation (as they call it) the Modern Protestants, Luther's Offspring,
have set Horns upon the Pope, and made him Antichrist, if he was not so reputed
or esteemed by the First General Councils, there being then the same Reason, I
must needs conclude, 'twas because they were then no Protestants. You your self
cannot deny, but if Those Protestants, who now say, that the Antichristian and
Papistical Reign began in those Days; had They then lived, and been
Protestants, would have said the same then, as they do now. And since, instead
of such Opprobrious and Infamous Titles, the Fathers then showed him the
highest Respect and Veneration, my Reason assures me, Those Fathers were no
Protestants.


Misrepres. This is nothing but a Dry Repetition, and I am weary of it. Advance
a Step* or I Will even be gone, and leave you Gaping without a Witness.


Repres. Let Us proceed then to the Canons and Decrees of those First Councils.
And here I demand of you: Do you find any Canons or Decrees made by the Fathers
of those Councils, in opposition to the Doctrines and Tenets, which you now
condemn as Popish Errors, but were then Taught and Practiced?


Misrepres. What Errors do you mean?


Repres. If you remember, Calvin, Beza, Dr. Field, Whitaker, the Centurists,
and other Protestant Writers, Censure the greatest part of the Primitive
Fathers, who lived either before or in the Time of the First Four General
Councils, for Teaching and Believing many Points, which are of late rejected
sor Superstitions of Popery, and Inventions of Men: Such as, attributing
Primacy to the Sea of Rome, Tradition, Invocation of Saints, Honoring the
Relics of Martyrs, Prayer for the Dead, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Transubstantiation, etc. These and many other such Doctrines, Modern
Protestants own to have been Taught by the Fathers of the Primitive Church, in
the Time of the First Councils. And now I ask of you, Whether the Prelates
there assembled* did by Canons or Decrees make any Provision against these
Doctrines?


Misrepres. I confess, I don't find any Canons they made upon this matter.

Respres. How can I believe then, that the Reverend Bishops and Divines of
those Councils were Protestants? You are not ignorant, how ill these Doctrines
suit with the Protestant Temper. You know, They look upon the Intercession of
Saints, as injurious to the Mediation of Christ, and Idolatrous: The Pope's
Primacy, is with them an Antichristian Usurpation: Honoring Relics is
Superstitious: Praying for the Dead, an Idle Devotion: The Belief of
Transubstantiation, Unreasonable: The Mass, an Evacuating of the Sacrifice of
the Cross. Now can you persuade me, that the Fathers of those First Councils
could be Protestants, and yet let these Doctrines and Practices, so Detestable
as they must be in their Opinion, pass without any Condemnation and Uncensur'd?
No certainly, The Fathers of those Times were more Zealous than so. They were
Watchful against all Novel Opinions, such as were contrary to the Received
Doctrine of the Church; and there were no sooner any started, though in Parts
remote from them, but they presently took the Alarm, and by Writing, Preaching,
Disputing, Synods National and Ecumenical, did make a most Vigorous Opposition
and withstand them: And such as continued Obstimate in their Errors, with
Endeavors of drawing Numbers after them, and Disturbing the Peace of the
Church, seldom or never escaped without the Mark of Heresy or Schism. When I
consider this State of the Primitive Church* happily Flourishing under the
Conduct and Care of so many Eminent Prelates and Pastors, no less Zealous in
Defending their Charge from the Assaults of Innovators, and Vpstart Opinions,
than in Preserving Them in the Received Doctrines from the Apostles; I cannot
imagine, how to Condemn them assembled in Full Council, of such Gross
Stupidity, or Inexcusable Connivance, as they must of necessity be guilty of,
in passing over so Considerable an Evil, which had then overspread the greatest
part of the Church. And yet if I am to take Them for Protestants, they of
necessity fall under these Censures, in not Reproving or Condemning those
Popish Doctrines, which (as we are assured from Modern Protestants) in the
Times of those Councils had prevailed upon such great Numbers of the Christian
World. And Therefore since, as you confess, They made no Provision by Decrees
or Canone, against those Doctrines, I am thoroughly persuaded, They were no
Protestants.


Misrepres. Then, I Will warrant you, you take them all for Good Papists.


Repres. I must take 'em for Papists or Nothing, For I am confident, none but
Papists could see so much Popery Taught and Practiced, as We have seen from
Eusebius and Others, under Constantine and in the Time of the First Four
Councils, and yet pass it by in Silence without Censure or Reproof. Your Friend
therefore, who tells the World, that the Protestant Religion was Anciently and
Generally Professed, would do well to Explicate to the Curious, what kind of
Protestancy that was heretofore, which did agree so well with So much Popery.
If he does not clear this Point well, many others, I believe, besides my self,
will begin to suspect, that the Fathers and Prelates assembled in those First
Councils of the Primitive Church, were rather Papists than Protestants.


Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. M DC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XV. The Appeal of Protestants to the Primitive Fathers, shown Injurious
to Protestancy, from the Concessions of Protestant Writers. Luther, the Apostle
of the Reformation, disclaims the Doctrine of the Fathers, as not being for his
purpose of Reforming.

Misrepresenter. I HAVE a Scruple this Morning, that I have given you too much
room, to look for the Protestant Religion in the Primitive Times: If I had
Confined your Search within a Narrower compass of years, you had discovered
more Protestancy and less Popery.


Repris. I have not taken in more Years than you agreed to, nor more than are
generally allowed by Protestants. You know it is the Bulwark of the Pretended
Reformers, to make their Appeal to the Belief and Practice of the Primitive
Church. They acknowledge their Separation from the Church of Rome, as it was in
the Time of their Reformation: and they justify themselves for so doing;
because the Church of Rome (as they pretend) had fallen from the Purity of
Doctrine professed by the Primitive Church, into Gross Errors, Superstition and
Idolatry. And therefore since the Church of Rome would not Reform it self,
'twas necessary They should Separate from it, so to Reform the Abuses and
Corruptions that had crept in upon Christianity, and bring it back to that
State of Purity, in which it had been practiced by their Forefathers of the
Primitive Church.


Misrepres. Yes; this is the True Reason of the Protestants Separating
themselves from the Church of Rome: and therefore I don't doubt, but the
Religion as here Established amongst us by Law, is the same as was heretofore
Generally professed by the Primitive Church. But the Question is, How many
Years the Primitive Church continued Pure and Incorrupt, that is, Protestant,
as we are at this Day? For I see, you have looked back into some Ages Past,
which I took for Protestant, and there has appeared then so much Popery
publicly Exercised and Professed, that I have some reason to suspect, that the
Christians of those Times, were rather Papists than Protestants: and that you
have been something insincere in this Point, and not made your Enquiry so far
back as you ought.


Repres. It Is your Interest rather to suspect Me, than the Weakness of Your own
Cause. But tell me; How many Years did you allow me, wherein to search for the
Protestant Religion in the Past Ages of the Primitive Church?


Misrepres. I gave you the Compass of the first Five hundred Years after
Christ. And in this I a am sure, there was no Mistake of mine. For Our Dr.
Morton says (Prot. Ap. p. 354.) that It has been the Constant Prosession of
Protestants, to stand to the Judgment of Antiquity, for the continuance of the
First Four hundred Years and more, in all things. And (ib. 573.) be says that
Protestants are so far from suffering the limitation of the First 440 Years,
that they give the Romanists the Scope of the First Five or Six hundred Years.
Bishop Jewel too, our Champion and Apologist, makes his Challenge in his Sermon
at Paul's Cross, to all his Learned Adversaries the Papists, to bring against
the Protestant Doctrine any one sufficient Sentence out of any One Catholic
Doctor or Father, for the Space of Six hundred Years after Christ, and he is
content to yield. Whitaker renews the same Challenge (Resp. ad rat. Camp. p.
90.) provoking the Papists to the first Six hundred Years; and if they can
produce any one Father or Council against the Protestant Articles, he grants
the Victory: It is the Offer of us all, (says he) the same do we all promise,
and we will perform it. So that as far as I see, I have not exceeded the
Protestant Bounds.


Repres. Neither have I, in our Enquiry, passed these Limits: Our Search has
been restrained within the Compass of the First Six hundred Years: and the
whole System of Popery, I have laid before you, has been the Belief and
Practice of the Christians of those Times. And this will oblige you to
consider, what Grounds you have to trust to, for the Support of the Pretended
Reformation; whilst you see some eminent Protestants Appealing to the Primitive
Church of the First Six hundred Years; and Challenging the Papists to produce
any One Doctor in favor of Popery within that Compass: and yet other
Protestants at the same time are charging the most Learned and Eminent Fathers
of those Ages, as Abbettors of Popery, and reprove them for being infected with
Popish Doctrines.


Misrepres. This you have been often Saying, but I must see it Proved.


Repres. Do you keep then in your Mind the Challenge of Bishop Jewel above
mentioned: wherein he provokes the Papists, to show One Father holding against
the Protestant Doctrine, in the First Six hundred years; and bidding them
Defiance upon this Trial; the like of Whitaker and others: and I Will let you see
the Concessions of some other Protestants, upon the same Subject. But have
Patience then.

1. For the allowing Vows of Perpetual Chastity, and affirming them to be
Obligatory: S. Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Epiphanius and S. Austin are
reproved by Chemnitius. Exam. p. 3. p. 41, 42. And the General Council of
Chalcedon is confessed to have forbidden Marriage to Monks and Nuns, by Just.
Molit. de Eccl. Milit. p. 80.

2. As touching the Sacrament; Chrysostom is thought to confirm
Transubstantiation. Centur. 5. col. 517. Eusebius Emissenus did speak
unprofitably of Transubstantiation. Cent. 4. col. 985. In Cyprian are many
Sayings which seem to affirm Transubstantiation. Ursin. Commen. p. 211.

3. As concerning Sacrifice; it is affirmed by Learned Protestants, that the
Ancient Fathers, viz. Athanasius, Ambrose, Austin, etc. erred herein: So Calvin
and Dr. Field, who say of them, that they made a Sacrifice of the Lords Supper.
The Centurists likewise affirm of Cyprian, that his Judgment in this Point is
Superstitious. Cent. 3. col. 83. That the Writings of Irenaeus and Ignatius are
herein incommodious and dangerous. Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 55. And that presently
after the Apostles Times, the Supper of our Lord was turned into a Sacrifice.
sebas. Franc. in Ep. de Abrog.

4. Concerning Prayer for the Dead, It was general in the Church lorg before
the Days of Austin, as appears in Cyprian and Tertullian. So Mr. G. Gifford in
his Demonst. p. 38. Mr. Fulk likewise acknowledges, that Tertullian, Cyprian,
Austin, Jerome, and a great many more, do witness, that Sacrifice for the Dead
is the Tradition of the Apostles. Consut. of Purg. p. 362. That Prayer and Alms
were made for the Dead almost from the very beginning of the Church. Bucer in
Enar. 4. Evang. in Mat. c. 12.

5. Concerning Merit of Works Dr. Humfrey says; It may not be denied, but that
Ireuaeus, Clement and others who are called Apostolical Men, have in their
Writings the Opinions of Free Will, and Merit of Works. Jesuitism par. 2. p.
530. Origin and Chrysostom are affirmed by the Centuriators, to have handled
impurely the Doctrine of Justification, and that they attribute Merit to Works.
Cent. 3. col. 265. and Cent. 5. col. 1178. And not only Cyprian, but almost all
the Holy Fathers of that Time, were in that Error; as thinking so to pay the
Pain due to Sin, and to satisfy Gods Justice. Whitak. in Resp. ad Rat. Camp.
Rat. 5.

6. Concerning Invocation of Saints. The Lord Archbishop of Cant. Discoursing
of Doctrines taught in any Age since the Apostles Times, affirms without any
Exception of Age or Father, That almost all the Bishops and Writers of the
Gr^ek Church and Latin also, for the most part, were spotted with Doctrines of
Free Will, Merit, Invocation of Saints, etc. Whitgift Def. ag. Rep. of Cartw.
p. 473. Mr. Fulk likewise says; I confess that Ambrose, Austin, and Jerome held
Invocation of Saints to be lawful. Rejoyn. to Brist. p. 5. S Cyprian is charged
by the Cent. to maintain, That Martyrs and Saints departed, pray for the
Living. Cent. 3. col. 84. Origin likewise, with Prayer for himself to Holy Job
and Invocation of Angels. Cent. 3, col. 83. and col. 75. The same Centurists
affirm moreover, That there are manifest Steps of Invocation of Saints in the
Doctors of that Ancient Age. Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.

7. Concerning Confession and Absolution. The Centurists confess; That even in
those Times of Cyprian and Tertullian was used Private Confession: and that the
same was then commanded and thought necessary. Cent. 3 c. 6. col. 127. That
also Penance or Satisfaction was enjoined according to the Offense. Ib. And
likewise, that the Priest, when the Confession was made, and Penance enjoined,
did afterward Absolve the Penitent with the Ceremony of Imp^sing his Hand.
Cent. ib.

8. Concerning the Primacy of Peter above the other Apostles, the Ancient
Fathers of the Church, viz. Jerome, Hilary, Nazianzen, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Origin, are reprehended by the Protestant Centurists, viz. for affirming the
Church to be built upon Peter. Cent. 4. col. 1215, 555, 558, etc. The same
Centurists reprove S. Cyprian, for teaching (say they) without any foundation
of Scripture, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all other for
the M^ther and Root of the Catholic Church. Cent. 3. col. 84. In like manner
Irenaeus, who (as Hamelmannus says) might yet remember the Apostles own lively
Preaching, is condemned by the Centurists for his affirming, That all the
Churches ought to accord to the Roman Church, in regard of a more powerful
Principality: for which words they charge him with a corrupt Saying concerning
the Primacy of the Roman Church. Cent. 2. Alph. Tab. word Irenaeus. And this
Authority of the B. of Rome, D. Philip Nicolai refers for its beginning to
the Infirmity of the Apostles and of the first succeeding Bishops of Rome, in
Comment. de Reg. Christ. p. 221. With whom concurs Mr. Middleton, in his
Papist. Mast. p. 193. No marvail therefore (says he) though perusing Councils,
Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles forward, we find the Print of the Popes
Feet.

For these and all other Points of Catholic Doctrine, the current Testimonies
of the Ancient Fathers, are so certain and evident, that many Learned
Protestants, upon this Consideration, refuse to stand the Test of their
Authorities; thinking it far more advantageous to their Cause, to give them a
general Disclaim. Hence Mr. Whitaker affirms the Popish Religion to be patcht
up out of the Fathers Errors. Cont. Dur l. 6. p. 423. And Dr. Humfrey most
severely reprehends Mr. Jewel, for his so bold Appeal to the Primitive Fathers;
affirming, that herein Mr. Jewel gave the Papists too large a scope, was
injurious to himself, and after a manner spoiled himself and the Church.


Misrepres. So then I see you intend to claim the Fathers, not only of
Constantine 's Time, and the Following Ages, as Abettors of Popery; but
likewise Those, who in the First Centuries immediately succeeded the Apostles.
And what Room then do you leave for Protestancy?


Repres. It Is not only I that claim Them, but even the Protestants themselves,
you see, of the precedent Age, such who were not ashamed to speak the Truth,
make a surrender of them, laying aside all Pretensions either to Them or their
Doctrine. And when they have disowned all the Fathers one by one, from Clement,
Ignatius, Irenaeus, who lived in the Apostles Days, and succeeded them in their
Function, to S. Jerome, Austin, Leo, Gregory, the last of which survived the
Fifth Century: when they have declared that Antichrist began his Reign, and
obscured the Light of the Gospel, even from the Time of the Apostles: I wonder
what Room, as you say, there is left for Protestancy. It savours something of a
Mystery, methinks, called Nonsense; to say the Protestant Religion is the same
Pure Religion as was Anciently and Generally Professed amongst the Fathers and
Christians of the Primitive Church; and then to condemn the same Fathers and
Christians of the Primitive Church, for being infected with Popery, and giving
way to Antichrist. Wherefore to avoid these Inconveniences, if you will take my
Advice, Misrepresenter, I believe you had better pretend no longer Right to the
Primitive Fathers; but as you have condemned the Eight hundred Years next
before the Reformation, of Damnable Errors and Popish Superstitions, to take
one step further back, and even take in the other Six hundred Years too, and so
condemn them all in the lump, from Christ's Time to Luther, for being Papists
and Popishly affected. Never Mince the matter; They were all Men, you know, and
subject to Error, and when you are once in, it is as easily condemning your
Forefathers for Fourteen Ages as for Eight. Your First Reforming-Apostles were
something of this mind; and thought it no more difficulty to Censure and
Condemn the Primitive Fathers, than Those they found in the time of K. Henry 8.
but were for Reforming all with the same Hand. Hearken a little to your
courageous Luther: In the Writings (says he) of Jerome there is not a word of
True Faith in Christ, and Sound Religion; Tertullian is very Superstitious; I
have held Origin long since Accursed; of Chrysostom I make no account; Basil
is of no worth, he is wholly a Monk, I value him not of a Hair; Cyprian is a
Weak Divine. The Apology of Philip Melancthon far excels all the Dostors of the
Church, and exceeds even Austin himself. Coll. Men's. c. de Patr. Eccles. And in
another place; The Fathers, says he, of so many Ages have been plainly Blind,
and most Ignorant in the Scriptures; They erred all their Lifetime, and unless
they were mended before their Deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining
to God's Church. To. 2. l. de Serve. Arbit. Peter Martyr is of the same mind,
and therefore says plainly, That as long as we stand to Councils and Fathers,
we shall always remain infected with the same Errors, viz. of Popery. And
certainly, Misrepresenter, these Your First Setters up for Reformation were in
the Right on it: for nothing can possibly so strengthen Protestancy, and
justify the Separation as this Levelling Divinity. For your Going by halves,
and pretending to be of the Religion of the First Ages of the Church, fills
People with Doubts and Scruples, whilst looking back upon the Professors of
those Times, instead of Protestancy they find so much Popery amongst them.


Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. M DC LXXX VI.

THE CATHOLIC REPRESENTER.
CHAP. XVI. A New Way of making all the Popish Sayings of the Primitive Fathers
to be Good Protestancy. The Art of Interpreting does Feats; it makes way for
Atheism and Infidelity.

Represent. HOW stands your Head to day, Misrepresenter; have you Considered
the Proposal I made you at our last Meeting? Are you for disclaiming all Title
to the Primitive Church, and Huffing those Ancient Fathers; as Luther, Peter
Martyr, and others did, who designing a Through-Reformation, were alike for
calling those Great Doctors to an account of the First Ages, as they did those
they found in the Time of King Henry 8? Or are you for Reforming upon These
First Reformers, and taking in those Primitive Fathers of the Church for
Protestants, which They cast off and Condemned for Papists?


Misrepres. I have Considered this Matter very seriously, and taken the Advice
of Friends upon the Point. And therefore, to be short with you, I value no more
the Saying of Luther; than he did Those Ancient Fathers, whom he condemned as
Weak Divines, Superstitious, and Valued not of a Hair. He was so near the Times
of Darkness, that he could not well look back, and make Judgment of any thing
behind him.


Repres. Nay, I commend you in this; it is only just to serve him in his kind.
'Twas Tertullian's Saying. Cur^^nm idem licet Marcionitis, quod Marcioni? If
Marcion has rebelled against the Church, why should his Followers think much to
rebel against him? And since Luther cast off all Authority, and valued not the
Writings and Doctrine of the most Eminent Fathers of the Primitive Church; why
should any one think much of undervaluing him, by his own Example? If Luther
could so easily throw by S. Cyprian for a Weak Divine, and S. Basil for being
wholly a Monk; is not this Precedent enough for any Follower of Luther, to cast
him off, for an Apostate Friar and an Ambitious Divine? Well, but if you Reform
upon Luther in this Point, and don't think fit with him to lay aside all the
Writings of the Ancient Fathers, as Erroneous and Superstitious; what do you do
with all those troublesome Passages in their Works, wherein They are such
Positive Asserters of Popish Doctrines, that it is impossible for any Man to
take the Authors for any thing but Papists; which does not well suit with your
Claim to them as Protestants?


Misrepres. Pish, I value no more these Difficulties, than Luther did the
Fathers, that is, not of a Hair. If the First Reformers bad their Eyes but half
open, what is that to us, who have the Noon-light of the Gospel shining upon us?
Alas, the Protestant Church in the Time of Luther, etc. was but in her Nonage;
and what wonder is it, if We, standing upon their Shoulders, see farther than
They?


Repres. Then we are like to have Old Protestancy, I see, and New Protestancy;
a Protestancy of Luther, and a Protestancy of those that stand upon Luther's
Shoulders: And who knows but some other Doctors in the next Age may set their
Feet upon your Shoulders, and see as far beyond you, as you think you do beyond
Luther? As far as I see, The Reforming Humovr is not so much out of Fashion,
but all this is possible; And though the Word of late be STAND FAST; yet this
cannot be very effectual, when Those that give it, never knew what. 'twas to
Stand Fast themselves: They that have no other Being, but what they gained by a
Violent Breaking loose and Separation, Argue but weakly, when they cry to their
Followers to HOLD FAST. When Doctrine and Example go together, it moves
powerfully; but when the Example is a Confutation of the Doctrine, it sinks not
beyond the Ear; and is no more to the purpose, than for a Rebel to Preach up
Loyalty and Obedience to his Followers.


Misrep. Whither are you gone? Why the Protestancy of the First Reformers and
Our Protestancy is much at one; only Luther and his Contemporaries were for
Reforming the Primitive Fathers, taking them for as rank Papists as those that
we found in the Time of King Henry 8. And we take them for Good Sound
Protestants, and regulate our Belief and Doctrine according to what was then
generally Taught by them and Practiced.


Repres. So that Those Fathers it seems, whom Luther condemned as
Superstitious, Monkish, and Accursed, you follow as True-Protestants. It Is well
Luther is gone before you; if he were to come again, he would as certainly
throw you into the same List of Superstitious, Monkish, and Accursed, as he did
those Fathers, whom you follow as Protestants, but were rejected by him for
Papists.


Misrep. No such matter. For though we believe as the Fathers believed, yet we
don't dissent in any material Point from Luther; we accept of and own his
Reformation, and fear no Anathema from him, though he were to have a Second
Coming. All the business, is Luther, Peter Martyr, etc. did not understand the
Fathers; They mistook their Meaning, and thought them in their Writings to
teach Popery, and therefore declared them Accursed; But Our Divines, the
Divines of these Days of clearer Light, whose Discerning Faculties are more
Pure and more Refined than those that went before them, have now Examined the
Works of the Fathers with a stricter Eye, and find all that in the Fathers to
be Stanch-Protestancy, which Luther and his Followers mistook for Popery.


Repres. How so Man! What strange Discovery is this!


Misrep. Nothing strange at all; It Is only by the Natural Art of
Interpretation. It Is but the Application of three or four Significant Words to
the Popish Expressions of the Fathers, and forthwith they appear all in as true
a Protestant Dress, as if the Fathers of the XXXIX Articles had been the
Authors.


Repres. What* this is some Controversial Legerdermain I Will warrant you; You Will
favor me with a sight of it, who knows what Effect it may have upon me? If it
does not make a Convert of me, at least I shall undoubtedly admire the Art and
Industry of the Operators.


Misrep. You are upon your Rallery. However produce you any of what you take
for the most Popish Sayings of the Fathers, even those very Sayings, for which
They were condemned by Luther for Papists, and you shall soon see, I Will make
good what I tell you. I don't, like Empty Quacks, promise more than I Will perform.


Repres. Let Us see then. As to Invocation of Saints; We quote St. Gregory
Nyssen, who thus directs himself to S. Theodore Martyr, (Orat. de S. Theod.)
Intercede and Pray for our Country, to the Lord of the Universe: Thou have left
this World, yet thou know our Desires, our Wants, and the Necessities of
Human Life. Ask for Peace. We quote likewise S. Gregory Nazianzen, who thus
Addresses himself to S. Cyprian, (Orat. 18. in S. Cyprian) Do you full of
Compassion look upon us from Heaven, direct our Words and Life, and help me who
have the Charge of this holy Flock. The like we read in St. Chrysostom, St.
Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Austin, etc. And for this very Reason are these
Fathers reproved by former Protestants, as infected with Popish Errors, and
spotted with Superstitious Doctrines. Now, how do you make this a Protestant
Doctrine?


Misrep. Why, look you now: with one Word I turn all this Popery into
Protestantism. These Sayings of the Fathers are not Prayers to the Saints, but
only so many Rhetorical Flights or Innocent Wishes: and what is become of all
the Popery now? But proceed; have you any more?


Repres. This is as good as the Powder of Pimperlimpimp; a German Artist could
not make a more Expedite and Undiscernible Conversion. But pray let us have some
more of this. We quote for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, some Passages
of the First General Councils, in which he is styled Head; and of some Ancient
Fathers, who acknowledge his Jurisdiction, and obey his Orders, though being
Prelates not of the Western, but of the Eastern and African Church.


Misrep. These are nothing but Complements.


Repres. Good again. We quote likewise upon the same Subject, St. Irenaeus who
(lib. 3. c. 3. adv. Haer.) says that All Churches ought to accord to the Roman
Church, in regard of her more Powerful Principality. And Others who call it the
Head-Church; adding, that to its Bishop is given a Preeminence of Priesthood.
For which Sayings These Fathers are rejected by the Centurists.


Misrep. Pish! The Centurists understood them not. These are only Expressions
of Civil Respect, and no acknowledgments of Authority, Primacy, or
Jurisdiction. They are nothing but Respectful Compellations, and Words of
Courtesy.


Repres. We quote again upon this Subject, The many Applications that were wont
to be made by the Eastern and African Bishops to the Bishop of Rome, wherein
they acquainted him with the State of their Church Affairs, Gave an Account of
their Faith, Informed him of Heresies arising, Required his Assistance, etc.


Misrep. All this was only for the maintaining a Mutual and Brotherly
Correspondence. It means no more.


Repres. We quote again in behalf of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation,
the Sayings of the Primitive Fathers, affirming, That as Christ changed Water
into Wine at Cana of Galilee; so at his Last Supper he changed Wine into his
Blood. That the Flesh of Christ, which we eat for our Salvation, ought to be
Adored, and that we Sin in not Adoring it. That the Words of Christ cannot
deceive us or be untrue, but our Sense is very often deceived; Since therefore
He has said, This is my Body, let us be Convinced and Believe, That He that
Sanctifies and Changes the Gifts, is Christ himself; it is not done by Human
Power, the Priests hold but the Place of Ministers. That they believed the
Bread Sanctified by the Word of God, to be Changed into the Body of God by the
Word.


Misrep. The Fathers in all these Expressions speak only as Orators,
Figuratively or Morally, but not as Divines; and so all this advances nothing
for Popery.


Repres. Well, hold: I Will say this for you, This is the most artificial Knack of
making the Ancient Fathers no Papists that could possibly be invented. Luther,
and the rest of that Age, were certainly Dull Souls, so severely to Censure the
Fathers for being infected with Popis^ Errors; whenas if they had understood
the Efficacy of these Three or Four Words, RHETORICALLY, COMPLEMENTALLY,
CIVIL-RESPECTFULLY, FIGURATIVELY, and MORALLY, and known the Right Use of them,
they might have made the Primitive Fathers to have delivered as Good Protestant
Doctrine, as any Modern Divine has done since the Reformation.


Misrep. You are in the right; but such Discoveries as These, are not the
Product of one Age. This could not be expected from the First Reformers, who
had their Hands full, and many Irons in the Fire: 'Twas enough for them to
condemn all such Expressions and Writings, whether of Primitive Fathers or
Others, that did any ways seem to disagree with the Reformed Principles. But
our Modern Controvertists, who have had more Leisure and Contrivance, and
looked more ^arrowly into the Text, have now made all that Sound Protestancy
which by the First Reformers was taken for Rank Popery; and all this by
Interpreting and Declaring what is spoken by the Ancient Councils and Fathers
by way of Complement, of Civil Respect, of Oratory, of Figure, or Moral
Discourse.


Repres. Really this is admirable. But pray now tell me, May not this Method of
Interpreting sometime or other be likely to do Mischief; and as you by this
Art, of Popery have made Protestancy, may not some other by the same way, of
Christianity, make Judaism, Infidelity or Atheism, and at last make every thing
of any thing?


Misrep. How so?


Repres. As now, if when We, as Christians, proving Christ to be the Son of
God, allege Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are One, any Pretending Interpreter
should come and say, This is only a RHETORICAL FLIGHT. When we quote Luke 1.
11. Thou art my beloved Son, he should say, This is a COMPLEMENT. When we prove
Obedience to Superiors by Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you,
and Submit your selves, he should say. This is only for a MUTUAL CORRESPONDENCF
or CIVIL RESPECT. If to all the Duties of a Christian commanded in Holy Writ of
Living Soberly, not Bearing False Witness, Being Subject for Conscience sake,
Loving our Neighbor, Not making Divisions, Honoring Parents, Not Stealing,
etc. he should thrust in those little Interpreting Words* and make all this to
be spoken Figuratively, or by way of Complement; would not this be a very fair
way of turning Christianity out of doors, and making the next Generation
Infidels by the same Rule as you have made the Ancient Fathers to be
Protestants? Let any thing be delivered never so expressly either in Scripture
or Fathers, it is but the Interpreting it by way of Figure, Complement, or
Morally, and it changes the whole Sense, and makes any thing of any thing.
There would be no great difficulty by this Art, of making the Bible speak the
Language of the Alcoran. And if this be your Way of making Protestants of the
Primitive Fathers, it is but applying your Rule home, and you may make the
Trent-Fathers as much Protestants as They.


Misrep. Well, I am bound to stand to it, that the Ancient Fathers were
Protestants still. But suppose They were not, I could not tell how to turn
Papist. A Papist is such an Unreasonable and Absurd kind of Christian, that a
Man had as good be of no Religion at all, a^ be a Papist.


Repres. It may be so indeed, as you understand a Papist. If a Papist were
really what you seem to render him to the People, I should as heartily detest
him and his Religion, as you and yours do, and should not wonder to see you
more concerned at your Neighbor's turning Papist, than when he becomes Jew or
Atheist.


Misrep. Let Us hear then what Your Papist is, and I Will tell you what Mine is:
But let us have none of these Interruptions and quick Turns. When I have said my
Say, do you take yours. I Will give you no disturbance: I have some Eight or Ten
Points to touch at; and if you will let me have my Humor, let us return to our Old
way of Papist Misrepresented and Represented.


Repres. Well, as you please; but pray consider, whether Silence will not be
more agreeble to these Times of Peace: Do you go Your Way, and I Will go Mine, if
you think fit.


Published with Allowance.

Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty, for his
Household and Chapel. MDCLXXXVI.


