Gospel-Baptism OR, PLAIN PROOF, That the Mode of Dipping, Plunging or
Immersion, now commonly used by the People called Anabaptists; is according to
the Primitive Institution: In a LETTER TO Mr. Samuel Young.

Occasioned by his Sharp Reflections in Contempt of that Way, and the Defenders
thereof in a small Book, ENTITLED, A Second and Last New-Years-Gift, etc. With
some Notes concerning the True SUBJECT.

By a Lover of Truth.

Magna est Veritas and prevalebit. LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood, and Sold by
William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street. and John Marshal, at the
Bible in Grace-church street. 1700.

Plain Mathematical Demonstration, that (according to the present Mode of
Baptizing, commonly used by the People called Anabaptist) the Person Baptized
is plunged, or dipped, by the hands of the Administrator; even from the Crown of
the Head to the very Soles of the Feet.


To demonstrate that a persons going ^wn into the Water, hinders not his total
^mersion or Plunging by the Administrator; Supppose a K to be a Staff standin^
upright, with the foot K on the bottom o^ the River I K; let h c represent the
Su^ face or upper part of the Water, let a person be supposed to take hold of
the To^ of the Staff, and impel or immerge the Staff toward the Earth, till
the head (...) covered in the Water. Tell me then, you can, the least particle
of such staff that has not received an Immersion (...) plunge by the hand of
such person; notwithstanding its being in the Water before.

You may imagine infinite parallels between the surface of the Water and the
Earth, the least motion of the top of the Staff toward the Earth, makes an
Imme^^sion of every particle beneath its form^^ parallel of Altitude.

The same may be said, of a person to (...) Baptized; the going down into the
Water is no part of the immersion: That pa^^ is effectually, and really done by
the Administrator, and in no part Imaginary; whi^^ I think, now a Child may
understand a^^ therefore I need not doubt a Philosopher^^

This may suffice to Answer the n^^ Objection, that the Baptists act contrary
to their own principles; by going down (...) to the Water themselves.

To the READER.
I Humbly beseech a Favorable Eye, a Smooth Brow, a Pleasant and Complacent
Aspect, the Abdication of Morose Animosity, Pre^^dice, Rancour, Enmity, and the
Exercise of ^umanity, Patience, Self-Denial, Coolness and ^edateness of Mind;
at least for so long or little ^^ while, 'till he supposed Criminal has
proposed and pleaded his Cause, made his Defense and Appeal; and then, being
fully heard; to ^^ss Censure, give Judgment, and pass Sen^^nce impartially
according to Merit or De^^erit, either unto Condemnation, or Vindication and
Acquittal; like a Righteous and ^nbyassed, and not a
Sufflated-Aetnean-Evo^^itant-Sententious-Judge.

It is too Natural, and has been too Usual, ^^r Adversaies to throw Dirt at,
and bespatter ^^e another; though thereby they foul their own ^^ingers: And
commonly they are Lynx-eyed (...) the discovering others Blemishes, though as
^^ind as a Bat in the Observation of their own ^^ot^.

It is Undeniable, That there is no Church or ^^cie^y of People of what
Denomination soever, but there may be found, or has been, som^^ whose
Ignorance or Scandalous Life has been, o^^ may be a Reproach unto them; and
such who ar^ faulty may justly pass under a severe Censure but it is very
unjust to condemn the Principle of any Society, for the ill Practice or
Ignoran^^ of a Few.

What Intolerable Reflections have been made upon the Innocent, and upon a true
Principle for, or because of the Extravaganci^^ (whether all were true or no,
which may b^^ questioned considering these times) of Knipperdolin and John of
Leyden, as if a^ that professed Believers Baptism were such Calvin calls them
Furiosi, or Madmen, and most Writers contemn them, as if their Principles were
prodiglously Erroneous. Dr. Featly on the Title Page of his Book, has the
Picture of the Heads (with a little more) of several with Faces of such
Features as renders them contemptible, and as if God had not given them (...)
good shapes as other Men; with design thereby to make himself admired, as a
Famous Oppose and Mall to that People. Many unfa^^ Ways have many at this Day
used, to beg^^ an ill Opinion of this People, that what the^ say for themselves
may not be regarded. On main Argument against them is, That the^ Ministers
generally are no Scholars but illitera^^ Tradesmen, and guilty of great
Impropriety (...) Speech. It is true, that it is the unhappiness of ^ome to be
so, though probably we may find as Learned men among us as among others, and also
as ^nlearned persons amongst others as amongst us; ^esides, it is evident on
the other hand, that the ^^eatest Scholars do not always make the greatest or
best Preachers. And considering the advantages of School Learning that some men
have, they make as great flaws as those which ^^ey contemn, though not in the
same thing. Where there is Grace and a Gift for preaching in some mechanic,
the goodness of God is the more to be admired: and a man of Learning, ^earing
such speak well, may be drawn into ad^iration at a disappointment. The graces
and Gifts of God are still unlimited. The Spirit ^oweth where it lists. To be
short, to understand the Tougues is but a humane (though it (...) a useful and
ornamental) Accomplishment. And in those who have it not, it is no defect in
nature, but an unhappy want of Education; which may be where there is plentiful
Grace, therefore people should have a Care, how they cast ^^ntempt upon a
gifted Tradesman.

First, In this little Tract. I have (I hope) ^oved, that John and the ^^st of
the Disciples have not declared that they Plunged not.

Secondly, That Plunging is not contrary, ^^t according to the Doctrine of
Baptism, and therefore the only Lawful Baptism.

Thirdly, That as it is a Duty and Command, we rightly practice it.

And if so; Then to some it will appear, that those who have Screwed their
Brains, to squeeze out the Quintessence of the derivate verb Baptizo, to make
it a diminutive inceptive; and s^ not exceeding, nay hardly amounting to so
much as Rantizo; have thereby so exalted their own Wits, that to them the Old
Lexicographers and the Learned in past Ages seem to have imposed upon ignorant
posterity; nay, the Greeks have not understood their own tongue. And a^ this to
bring the real extensive, significative ordinance of Baptism, to no more then a
little sprinkling or pouring a little Water from the Palm of a Man's hand, which
they falsely call washing.

Tertullian, Id verum quodcunque primumid adulterum quod posterius:

I shall add no more, but beg of God t^ open the blind E^ys, that they may
behold (...) Splendour of Truth, and be in Love with it.

Mr. Sam. Young's Letter.
SIR,
BEfore your Papers go to the Press, I pray you to see my next; where you shall
find ^^ings done Ex professo and not Obiter.

That John and Peter declare they plunged not. that Plunging is contrary to the
Doctrine of Baptism. That if Plunging were a Duty and Command of Christ, you
practice it not.

The Papers have been read by many Learned ^ivines, who approve what I have
done. I understand you are no Minister, and therefore, I think ^^sit to meddle
with me in this thing; though the Hand ^^f Joab may be in all this. (I wish your
great ^^en would appear.) Whether you are a Learned ^^an I know not, or a good
Grecian, many common ^^atia School masters in this City are not; as I too ^^ell
know, who have occasionally taught them.

If you run the beaten Road, Follow not my Ar^uments closely and concisely; I
intend not to read ^^n Leaves of your Book if this be not so: One sheet ^^ere
enough for an Answer, or two at the most. Do ^^ou think, I will take Notice of
Thread bare Col^^ctions out of Danvers, Russel; or such Men, whom ^^olly and
Dishonesty have contended, which should ^^nder them most Infamous. A wise Man
and ^^holar of Yours, desires we may meet first. I will ^^elore Mr. Collins,
Mr. Stennet, Mr. Steed, Mr. Piggott, Mr. Adams, or other Scholars. I pray let
me see ^ours before my next Book goes to the Press. ^hen if I am convinced by
you I shall not proceed, (...) not I may make Addition to your Convictions.

I am well satisfied in my Cause, say who will (...) the contrary; name your
Time and Place, where ^ou may meet your Friend and Servant,

Sam. Young.

The Answer.
SIR,
I Being naturally Pusillanimous, and being suddenly smitten with the Ponderous
Thunderbolt of your Pen, and mine Eyes dazzled and set a Twinkling, by the
Circumvolitant Coruscation its usual Concomitant; my Spirits which before had
some Elevation, immediately were deprest to a Nullity of Altitude, and being
ignorant of Longitude for some time, I could scarce tell where I was; but after
a while, being reanimated and raised, looked out; and with a Circumspicient
Eye, by the help of the Optics, descried Land; and then with a Huzza, like a
wild Sailor, made Speed with Top and Top-Gallant to get to Shore, and set foot
on it.

Sir, Now to the Business: I assure you that I am not Ambitious of hasting my
Papers to the Press; I am not so Over-opinionative of my Accomplishments, as to
Expose my self by Exposing them, to Universal View and Censure (...) without
the Approbation and Encouragement o^ Men of Profound Learning and Solid
Judgment.

I have Expatiated farther than at first I intended, and indeed, if what is
writ be Valuable I shall be unwilling, that they should fall under the sole
Hands of one Adversary; that shall stiflle them in a Gold-finders Treasury,
with the Greatest Contempt: Or, barbarously condemn them to a French Martyrdom,
of cutting out their Tongue to spoil their Speaking, and then committing them
to the Unmerciful, Consuming Flame^ As to your three Things, take middle and
bot^ Ends together, I have luckily (if pertinently) spoke to. If my Papers had
past the Approbation of many Learned Divines, perhaps, I might ^old up my Head
a little higher; but you know, ^e Anabaptists are generally contemptible
Mecha^icks; and our Spirits are kept under the Hatches and cannot peep up: But
it is a Kindness to keep ^s humble.

Indeed I am no Minister, and therefore must confess with the most Debased
Soul, that I am unfit to meddle with you in this thing; and do believe, you
^hink so, because you tell me so. I need not advise you to glory over me, but I
think you cannot think too meanly of me: However, in this matter, I have not
been so Effeminate, as to have Words put into my Mouth by any Man living
hitherto; though I should think it no Shame to take Advice, and learn to ^o a
thing effectually: And I could wish I had ^he Woman of Tokoah's Tongue, Wisdom
and Courage; to manage Truth for the Conviction of boasting Gainsayers. As for
Learning, I must play at Bo^eep for that; look not for it in me, if you do, ^ou
will loose your Labor. I profess not my self Master either of the Latin or
Greek; but am willing ^o learn, though not with the Common City-Masters ^o be
scorned for it.

You have said so much to dash me out of Countenance, and brought me to such a
Confession, that (...) know not with what Face I shall appear before such
Majesty. The Papers must speak all, for I am unfit ^or a Logomachical Duel,
though I should have Seconds. As for my Collection of Forces to attack ^ou, I
give you this Encouragement, you will not and a Brigade of
Gigantick-frightful-astonishing exten^^ve-bearded-Switzers: I have no such
Foreigners as Danvers and Russel, for they never came under my Eye, and
therefore are Remote from my Conduct: but they are your own familiars, that
never designed to hurt you; if they do give you a By-blow by Chance, in
Wielding of their Weapon, you must Excuse them. It is ill skirmishing in a
Cround. If my Arguments are Old; I believe they will come in with such smooth
faces, being new trimmed, that you will hardly know them; and I assue you, I
never met with them in this dress before. I hope, we shall answer each others
desires (if yours are a^ mine) to be friends, though we cannot jump in
Opinion.) As for the mutual sight of each others papers and a meeting I oppose
it not; but crave time to give you notice of my resolves further, therefore
burden you with no more at present, but suscribe

Your Friend AND very Humble Servant, Tho. Minge.
March, the 8th. 1699/1700.
Gospel-Baptism: OR, Plain Proof, etc.
Reverend Sir,
PArdon (I beseech you) my Boldness, in that I presume to divert your Mind from
that which you esteem more weighty; than the ^eading of Lines concerning a
Matter, wherewith you are already thoroughly acquainted, You are a Gentleman of
that Learning and Free Conversation, that I be^^eve (to you) there is no new
Thing under the Sun; and therefore I may justly suspect ^ou will charge me
among the rest, with ^ain Repetitions and Impertinencies. Shall (...) hold a
Candle to the Sun? what more ri^iculous! The Light of the Candle must be
Eclipsed, if not Extinguished. However I ^ay hope, that a Pleasant and Serious
Gentleman will take what I write pleasantly, and think that so I write; and
though wea^ly, yet, as the Matter really requires, serously: For though the Manager
and managi^ of a thing may be justly ridiculed, and (...) may play one with
another; yet the Tru^^ or Thing it self must not be played with, a^^ therefore
not played away; but hearti^^ with the best of our Judgments maintain^^ and
defended. Thus far you may Wond^^ what is the Matter.

In short, Having read in your last Ne^-Years-Gift, (for which I now again tha^
you) and also personally heard you, Vi^voce, contemning the Mode of Dipping
used by the People vulgarly called A^baptists: I now offer a little Water,
whi^^ I hope may extinguish the Flame, a^^ abate the Heat of overgrown Zeal;
whi^^ seemed to appear against the Example^ our dear Lord and Master, and
Practi^^ of his Disciples. As to those with yourself, who maintain and defend
Infant Baptism, I blame them not; I believe th^^ are sincere, and that they
think they a^^ in the right, and act not against th^^ Light; persuading
themselves from Circumcision, and their Childrens being (...) the Covenant by
virtue of their Paren^^ Faith: However, as to the Mode, I could almost be as
censorious as another, in judging a Man of Learning to speak against ^^is
Knowledge, and so his Conscience also; when he denies Dipping to be understood
by the Word Baptism. I shall ^ot undertake to run through the whole
^ontroversie, I knowing I may unwillingly and weakly abuse a good Cause, which
^as not wanted Men of Learning and Piety (...) defend it.

As to the Word (...), with its De^^vatives, your self knows better than I; ^ho
profess my self no Master of the ^reek Tongue, I know you are well acquainted
with Scapula, and he tells me, that APGO, signifies Mergo, Immergo. ^^em tingo
(quod fit immergendo) item ^avo, etc. (...), Mergo, seu Immergo, ^^bmergo,
Obruo aqua, Abluo, Lavo, (...), Mersio, Lotio, Ablutio, ipse im^ergendi item
lavandi seu abluendi actus. And so he goes on with his Derivatives, (...)
denoting the use of a great (and ^ot a small sprinkling) Quantity of Water.
George Pasor in his Lexicon has ^he same, with which other Authors a^ree; as
is very well known also to you. ^endrick Hexham renders the Word Baptism,
Doopinge, which in English we know (...) Dipping, which the Translators of our
Bible might as truly have done if they ha^^ pleased; but we, and most, whose
Languages border upon the Latin, follow th^^ Greek; which I think is something
of abuse, occasioning doubt when perhaps there would be none. In three other
Dutch Dictionaries (which I have also Baptism is rendered, Even doopsel and do^^
which again turned into Latin, is Baptisma, etc. Immersio, etc. (...), Ick
doop^^ doopen; baptizare, mergere and immerge^^ etc. (...), Even dooper,
baptized. Gedoop^ The day of one's Baptism, Den dagh v^^ yemants doopinge; den
doop-dagh. No^ to the Text it self, in Dutch Bibles (...) several Translations,
Matthew. 3.5, 6. D^ is tot hem uytgegaen Jerusalem end ghehe^^ Judea, end 't
gheheele lant rontom den Jo^^ daen. End wierden van hem ghedoopt in (...)
Jordaen beliidende hare sonden. Verse (...) Hy dan siende vele van de Phariseen
en^^ Sadduceen tot siinen doop komen sprack, and^ v. 11. Ick doope u well met
water tot beke^^ ringhe: maer dic na my komp is sterck^^ dan ick, etc. die sal
u met den heylig^^ geest end met vyer doopen. Here (...) pleased to Observe,
that the Dut^^ are not ashamed to say according to the Original (if the Word
[with] (...) there). I dip you with Water, which you were pleased to say was
Nonsense. ^^beg of you to excogitate (and declare) (...) way how to be dipped in
it, without it. ^^er. 13. Do quam Jesus van Galilea na (...) Jordaen tot
Joannem om van hem ghe^^opt te worden. Jesus came, etc. to be ^^pt. Doch
Joannes, etc. My is noodich ^^n u ghedoopt te worden, I have need to be ^^t of
thee: v. 16. End Jesus ghedoopt ^^inde, is ter stondt opgeklommen uyt het
Wa^^^, etc. And Jesus when he was dipped went (...) straightway out of the Water.
The three ^^veral Bibles of several Translations, which I have by me, though
they ex^^ess truly other things in differing words, ^et they all agree in Words
signifying (...) Baptizing Dipping.

Now a little of the Text in Greek, ^at. 3.11. (...). (...) (says Pasor) ex
Hebraismo hic redundat. ^go quidem baptizo vos aqua, I baptize you (...) with]
Water; as you affirm in opposition (...) Dipping. Suppose (...) be superfluous,
^here is nothing of the Cause lost by it: ^^or there can be no Dipping in it
without (...), and therefore they must dip with it. ^ut forasmuch as (...) is
in the Text, why should it be turned out? Some Translators continue it it. I
have three Translation that have it, One in Flemish, another Spanish, and a
third in Italian: The former in Dutch has it thus, Matthew. 3. Ick doope u in it
water tot penitentie, man by die na mij comen sal, is stercker dan ick^ w^ens
schoenen ick niet waerdich en ben (...) draghon die sal u doopen; in den
heylig^^ gheest end vier. This Version printe^ 1548.

In the Other in Spanish it is thus Mar. 3. v. 11. Yo ciertamente os baptizo
(...) agua, para conversion: mas el que viene tra^ m^, mas poderoso es que yo.
cuyos capat^ yo no soy digno de llevar. El os baptizan en Espiritu sancto y
fuego. Testament printe^ 1596. Here you have [In] retained, a^ in the Greek;
and so, I baptize or dip i^ Water.

In Italian thus, Jo certamente vi batt^ zo in acqua alla penitentia, ma quello
(...) viene doppo me, e piu possente die me, d^ quaele io non sono degno di
portare i Calzament^ esso vi battezera in Spirito santo et fu^c^ If dipping
with Water be Nonsense, the^ pray accept of dipping in. The Sen^^ you have in
the 2 Kings 5.14. (...), etc. Then went Naaman down and dipped himself seven
times in Jordan. Here we may observe that he went down into the Water, and yet
is said to baptize or dip himself [in] ^n Jordan, Immersit se, as Pasor has it.

Therefore his going down was no hin^erance to his total Immersion or Dipping,
(which you have been pleased to intimate) but did facilitate it. It is too
trifling to talk of an Engine. The usual way of Plunging, is certainly as near
the Original Pattern and Institution, as can enter into the Heart of Man; and
that Submersion that is usually made, if considered, will be found to be an
Immersion even of the very Feet, by the Administrator. Beyond what is possible,
God expects not from Man. Baptism as is respects Doctrine, whether it be of
Water, or of the Spirit, or Affliction, signifies more than a Sprinkling or
Pouring; and the two latter are an Allusion to the former, Joh. 20.22. Are you
able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be Baptized with the
Baptism that I am baptized with? That Baptism of our Savior was the Baptism of
Afflictions (more than a Sprinkling) He was a Man of Sorrow and acquainted with
Grief. The Metaphor (says Pasor) is familiar to the Scriptures, in which
Afflictions are compared to Whirlpools of Water; with which, those wh^ are
annoyed with the Miseries and Cala^mities of this Life, are as it were plunge^
down, nevertheless, so plunged down tha^ they may rise again. The Baptism of
the Spirit is a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit^ and not a sprinkling or small
pouring, Act^ 2.4. And they were all filled with the Ho^^ Ghost. These Baptisms
are neither Inspersions, Conspersions nor Aspersions.

The Example of our Savior's being baptized by John in the River of Jordan,
wherein it is plain that they went down into the Water; and express that he came
up out of the Water, after he had been there baptized o^ dipped rather; for so it
certainly was, the natural signification of the word Baptism being so; and the
Ordinance it self to Believers signifies the ablution, washing away or
remission of Sins, Death, Burial, Resurrection; the Death and Burial of Sin,
and Resurrection o^ Renovation to Life, through the Death an^ Resurrection of
Christ, Acts 8. v. 38. An^ they went down both into the water, both Philip and
the Eunuch, and (Philip) baptized him. End by doopte hem. Dutch. and he dipped
him. The reason why they were dipped in Rivers was given, Because there was much
Water; A little would serve to sprinkle o^ wash the face. A good man may, and
does sometimes, speak rashly and inconsiderately, that, of which he may have
cause to humble himself and repent. What Man ^n a sedate mind, will affirm that
our Savior ever said one word, or did one Act that was needless, or might have
been said ^r done better? Or that John and the other Disciples of our Lord, in
imitation of him, (...) the ministration of that Ordinance of Baptism, put
themselves and the people who ^elieved and obeyed them, to unnecessary Trouble
and Labor? which certainly they ^^d, if it ought or might rightly be done
otherwise, with more expedition and ease. and common prudence of a man would
direct (if that were to guide, and not the (...) fallible example) to the
shortest Course. ^or it is a saying amongst men, or Philosophers. Frustra fit
per plura, quod aeque been ^ri potest per pauciora. But our Savior did (...)
things well, who durst say otherwise? (...) is to be lamented, that so many in
the several Ages since Christ and his Apostles, ^ave attempted to correct, or
rather deface and deform their unerring Pattern. They ^ave made a great deal of
Work by attempt^^g to shorten it; who should make a mock ^f Going down into the
Water to be baptized? when we have no other Example (...) all the New
Testament. If a little water sprinkled or poured on the face be enough^ as they
say it is; no marvel that they alte^ the Primitive Custom of going down into
the Water, and count it not only needless but ridiculous and contemptible:
Certain^^ they know not what they say or do; an^ therefore (though their Sin be
horrid^ they ought to be prayed for. What yo^ quote out of John merely about
washing without relation to the other Circumstances of the Ordinance of
Baptism; nothing weakens the Baptists Cause in following the Primitive Example:
But may (if you way of Arguing be fair) be sufficient Pro^ and Reason for your
self and Party, (wh^ durst alter Institutions) to change sprinkling or washing
of the Face, to washing (...) the Feet for sufficient Baptism; since it (...)
also undoubtedly true, what our Savior said, John 13.8. If I wash thee not,
the have no part in me; yet he washed only the Feet, and says, He that is
washed need (...) wash the whole, but the Feet only; If the Feet only, then not
the Face: But this (...) trifling. What has been said is sufficient to prove
Baptism by dipping (without a^ Engine) after going down into the Water. But I
have more to say, out of your own Authors, who are for Pedobaptism; for in deed
I have not one Author in my House that manages the Controversy for, (but
several against) the (so called) Anabaptists. Therefore I entreat your patience
and excuse, if I burden you with some impertinent repetitions or frivolous
Inferences. But ^y the way, while it is in my Mind, I ^ould ask a Question or
two; whether is (...) not a Mavelous Thing, that any should ^ave it entered
into his Heart to think, that ^ur Savior went down into the River and John
with him, to have a little Water taken ^p in the Hand, to sprinkle or pour on
the ^ead or Face only? Certainly that Act of ^rinking, or pouring on the Face
or Head only with a little Water, might have been ^one with greater facility.
And whereas in contempt, the Question has been asked, whether they went in
naked or with their ^loaths on. I think it is sufficient that we ^ave an
Account, that they undoubtedly went down into the River for an holy End; (...)
baptize and be baptized: And who in their right Wits, durst question the
Mode^^y or Decency of the Act, performed either ^y our Savior, his Apostles or
Disciples.

Now to go on, Let us consider the Agreement or Disagreement, between the Mode
^f Sprinkling used by the Pedobaptists; and ^he Things represented or signified
by true Baptism.

Berchetus (with whose Book (I doubt not) you are well acquainted) in one of
his Catechisms has these Words. 48. Per Baptismum quasi ingredim^^ in Dei
Ecclesiam. Testificatur enim nobi^ Deum nos, qui alioqui peregrini sumus, cum
domesticis collocare velle. Baptismus duo nobis repraesentat, tum remissionem
peccatorum^ videlicet, tum spiritualem regenerationem.

. 49. Quam vero proportionem cum h^^ habet aqua, ut signum horum esse possit
(...) Respons. Quia peccatorum remissio similis es quodammodo lavacro, quo ea
quae sunt in nostris animis inquinamenta eluuntur, quemadmodum corporis sordes
aqua abstergimus. A regenerationem nostram quomodo aqua innuit? (...). Which in
Latin he renders thus. Quoniam initium quidem ipsius est, ut nostr^ natura
mortificetur: Finis vero, ut novae creaturae simus, infusa in nestrum caput
aqua^ signum mortis est. Sed somul etiam nostrum ad vitam reditum subindicat,
in eo quod nom submersi in aqua perpetuo simus, sed tantum puncto temporis,
quasi in aliquod sepulchrum subimus, ut statim ex eo emergamus. In English
thus, By Baptism we do (as it were) enter into the Church of God. For it is
testified to us, that God is willing to place us who otherwise are Strangers,
with those of his own House. Baptism represents two Things to us, that is to
say, both Remission of Sins and Spiritual Regeneration.

49. But what Proportion, Analogy, or Agreement, has Water with these things;
that it may be a sign of these things?

Answer. Because Remission of Sins, after (...) sort, is like a Laver; wherein
the filthinesses which are in our souls are washed out, even as we put away the
uncleanness of the body with Water.

Question. But how does Water signify our Regeneration?

Answer. Because indeed, the beginning thereof is, that our nature may be
mortified; but the end, that we may be new Creatures; the water poured on our
head, ^s the sign of Death. But together therewith does also somewhat
demonstrate, that forasmuch as we are not continually suppressed (or continued
immersed) in the water, ^ut only for a moment of time; we go down, as it were,
into some Grave, that we may presently arise out of it.

Now am I necessarily induced to treat of the subject proper to be baptized,
together, with the Mode or Manner how; in doing which, some other things
perhaps may fall under cousideration.

First, What a Church is. The Catholic Church consists only of the
Predestinate, and comprehends the universal number of all those which shall
be saved; not only those now living on earth, but all that have been since the
beginning of the world, John 10.16. A particular Church is a member of the
Universal and Catholic Church, and it is a Visible Company and Congregation of
men, among whom the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments rightly
administered, etc. Vid. Willet's Synopsis Papismi. Page 51, 52, 53.

That Baptism gives entrance into the Visible Church. So Vrsinus. Page 412.
Baptism is instituted to be a Token and Symbol of our receiving, and entrance
into the Church. For these are opposed and contradictory, To be, and, Not to be
in the Church: To enter, and Not to enter into the Church. For God will have
all the Citizens of his Church thus enfranchised, and those who are not
baptized; when they may, he will not have Reckoned in the number of his Church.
Hither appertain all those places, in which those who were become Christians,
(by believing, for there is no other way) as the Ethiopian Eunuch, Cornelius,
the Jailer of Philippi, Lydia the seller of purple, Paul etc. are said to have
been presently baptized: Wherefore the Supper also is given only to them who
are baptized, for they only are received into the Church, of this end bear
Witness those words of Christ: Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. where the Word (...), which Christ uses, properly signifies, make
Disciples; thus it is expounded by John: Joh. 4.1. The Pharisees heard that
Jesus made, and baptized more Disciples than John. Again, That it should be a
mark whereby the Church may be discerned from all other Nations and Sects. This
end follows on the former, For they who by a Public Sacrament are received
into the Church, are by the self same discerned, and as by a Badge
distinguished from the remnant, the filth of the World. Go and teach all
Nations, baptizing them; as if he should say, Gather me a Church by the Word,
and whom ye shall make my Disciples, believing with their whole heart, all
them, and them alone Baptize, and separate unto me. Again, Baptism should be a
signification or an advertisement unto us of the Cross, and of the preservation
of the Church therein, and of the deliverance of the Church from it. For it
signifies that they who are baptized, are plunged, as it were, in affliction,
but with assurance of escaping thence. Hence afflictions are termed by the name
of Baptism, are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism, that I shall be
Baptized with? Deliverance from the Cross the very Ceremony it self of Baptism
does show. For we are Dipped indeed, but we are not drowned or choked in the
Water. Moreover in respect of this end, Baptism is compared to the Flood etc.
and to the red Sea. etc. What the Learned Vrsinus brought in as the first and
chief end of Baptism, I designing brevity, and not thinking to transcribe so
much, have omitted, and therefore inverting the order, think now to mention it
as that which is material, viz. that the end of Baptism is to be a Confirmation
of our Faith, that is, a solemn testification when Christ testifies that he
washes us with his blood and Spirit, that is, that he bestows on us
remission of Sins, Justification and Regeneration. Or the Chief end is, To be
the Sealing of God and obsignation of the promise of grace, that is, of our
Justification and Regeneration, and a testimony of God's Will, that he gives
the baptized these gifts at this present, and will give them ever hereafter.
Again, John's Baptism and ours the same for substance. John preached the
Baptism of repentance for remission of Sins, saying unto the people that they
should believe in him that should come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus;
ours that they should believe in Christ Jesus already come. Page 414. you have
this. The right and lawful use then of Baptism is, when the Converted are
Baptized with observation of that Rite, and End which Christ appointed. They
who are Baptized, cannot receive that which is promised but by Faith. page 409.
The Word Baptism, signifies a Dipping in Water, or Sprinkling with Water
(says he). But the Reason ^his saying this latter, is not because it is ^e
proper signification of the Word, but ^^cause Custom has brought it in use,
(...) Sprinkling instead of Dipping. Those of the East Church (says he) were
dipped their whole Body in the Water. Those of the North in Colder Countries,
^re only sprinkled with Water, etc. Thus (...) Vrsinus.

Perkins his Golden Chain, Page 132. The Ancient custom of Baptizing, was to
dip, and, as it were, to dive all the body of the Baptized in the Water; a^ may
appear in Paul, Romans 6. (Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death. Therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory
of the Father, eve^ so we also should walk in Newness of Lafe. And the Counsels
of Laodicea and Neoca^ sarea, but now, especially in cold Countries, the Church
uses only to sprinkle the baptized by reason of Childrens weakness: for very
few of ripe years are no^ a days baptized: we need not much man vail at this
Alteration, seeing Charity an^ necessity may dispense with Ceremonies and
mitigate in Equity the sharpness (...) them. Thus far Perkins. Whether the^ may
be a dispensation for an Alteration (...) that part of the Institution, is a
Question. But if it be proved, that Believers on^ and not Infants, are the
proper Subjects (...) Baptism; the Reason for Alteration will (...) out of
Doors. Now I will present you (...) Account of the Opinion and positive
Assertion, of that undoubtedly Learned a^^ Pious Divine John Calvin, out of his
Instations; a Book worthy high Esteem, a^^ by your self thought so Excellent;
the you say, he said true; who said, the since our Savior's time none but the
^^^postles have equalled it. Folio 470. ^age 2.

. 19. His Words are these (having ^^eated about Baptism.) Caterum merga^^ne
totus qui tingitur, id que ter an semel, an ^^fusa tantum aqua aspergatur,
minimum re^^t: sed id pro regionum diversitate Ecclesiis li^^rum esse debet.
Quanquam et ipsum bapti^^ndi verbum mergere significat, and mergendi ^^um
veteri Ecclesiae observatum fuisse constat.

English thus, But whether he that is bapti^^d may be dipped all over, (or wholly
plunged) ^^d that thrice or once, or whether Water being poured on, he be
sprinkled only, it matters ^^ry little; but that ought to be (left) free to
(...) Churches, according to the diversity of Re^^ns or Countries.

Although also, the Word it self of Bap^^ing signifies to Dip, and it is
manifest, ^^at the Rite of Dipping has been ob^^ved by the Ancient Church. The
for^^er Period is, Sua fert Opinio, his Opinion, or Think so; and is the Matter
in ^^spute: The latter his positive Assertion (...) the Primitive Mode of
Baptism, according to our Savior's Institution, Mat. 28. (...). Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, ^^tizing them, etc. which ought to take ^^ace
with the Exclusion of all other Modes. And his true Assertion of the Primitive
Practice and Example, (and I should say Command) leaves no room for his Opinion
of Indifferency in the Matter.

Especially (we may judge so) since we find him upon solid Grounds, employing
his worthy (and in many things unerring) Pen in the use of that so much
decry'd, contemned and ridiculed (by your self recounted, and so accounted in
your Second New-years-Gift, Page 22.) way of arguing used by the Anabaptists.
See Calvin's Inst. cap. 17. fol. 509. of the Lord Supper.. 50. Tertio, cur de
pane simpliciter dixit ut ederent, de calice ut omnes biberent? Acsi Satanae
calliditati ex destinat^ occurrere voluisset. -- Imo qua id fiducia hod^
usurpant, ut plebeculae symbolum Christi Corpor^ distribuant, si nullum habent
Domini vel Man datum vel Exemplum. -- Why did our Lord s^ plainly that they
should eat of the Bread, and th^^ they should all drink of the Cup? As if it
ha^ been his Pleasure and Design to meet with and oppose the Subtilty of Satan.
-- Yea, with what confidence at this day do they usurp th^^ thing, that they
should distribute to the poor people the Sign of Christ's Body, if they have
neither the Lord's Precept nor Example. Thus far Calvin^ And this occasioned by
their cutting the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper shorter, or taking away what
they thought was superfluous in the Institution; administering the Sacrament in
one kind only, to wit, the Bread, and withholding the Cup from the People,
^rguing that the Bread was the Body of Christ, and therefore, that the Blood
must ^eeds be there by way of Concomitan^y: So that receiving one, they
received ^oth. Calven tells them, There Is no Pre^ept nor Example for this: The
Argument was good, and of like weight is it, against those who add to, or
diminish from ^e other institution of Baptism; either, as (...) Matter, Manner,
or Subject. In your opinion, a little Water to sprinkle, may ^rve to represent
all the things signified by Baptism, to wit, the word it self, Dip^ng; which is
clearly another thing, Washing, Death, Burial, Resurrection, ^tting on of
Christ, overwhelmed with ^flictions, a being filled with the Spirit, etc. ^ll
which are plentiful expressions and significations.

That I may speak after Calvin: Our Savior did (as it were) of set purpose,
ob^^ate the subtilty of Satan in the error of ^rinkling instead of Baptism; in
being ^^mself an example of going down into the River, where was plenty of
Water, therein he was Baptized or Dipped; whereby was fully represented all
things without diminution. But perhaps you may say. Quo^ sum haec? To what end
is all this? Have w^^ not had enough of this already? Perhap^ you have. But
since I have gone thus fa^ and farther then I thought for at first. (...) for a
Hundred, in for a Thousand, I a^^ minded to run the hazard of the best pa^^ of
my Stock; therefore beg your patience and entreat you to get your bags ready,
f^^ in a little time, (Deo volente) I will pay you all. Now it will be
convenient to walk ba^^ and over-hall part of the Thread already spun, to see
whether I can mend it. L^^ me say something among the rest of the Quality of
the Subject to be baptized.

I must to the Catechism; for I find ((...) least) that he must be a
Catecheumen, S^^ Berchetus before. By Baptism we do (...) it were, enter into
the Church. T^^ Church of Christ is built up of live^ Stones, upon the Living
Stone and Ro^^ Christ, 1 Peter 2.4, 5. The Life o^^ Christian is Faith, the
just shall live by (...) Faith. Hab. 2.4. John 17.3. This (...) Life Eternal,
that they might know thee (...) only true God, and Jesus Christ whom the have
sent. This knowledge of God a^ and Christ is by faith only; what is not (...)
Faith is sin. All Acts of Religious w^^ship ought to be in Faith, which is the
^rue knowledge of God in Christ. Baptism ^s a part of Religious Worship,
therefore (...) ought to be performed with Faith by ^he Subject: There is
Confession with the Mouth, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with by Mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in ^^^e heart, that God has raised him from the
^ead, thou shall be saved. Faith which is ^er joined with repentance and
confession, qualifies for Baptism, and Baptism ^^r a Regular admission to
Communion at ^he Lords Table; in a True Regular Vi^ble Church: It is true also,
that Believers and Elect Children do first belong to ^he Invisible Catholic
Church before, ^ea, and if they should never be joined (...) a Visible Church;
But that is not our ^usiness to discourse of; our business is ^ith a Visible
Church, which admits of ^one, but such as make an Audible and ^isible
Profession of Faith, which in Chari^y, may be judged Real. For man knows ^t
the heart. The next in the Catechism (...), For it is Testified to us, that God
is willing (...) place us, who otherwise are Strangers, with ^^ose of his own
house.

Testified to us: Can this be meant to a ^abe or babes, that have Eyes and see
not, ^ars but hear not, neither do they understand: No, it cannot be, therefore
the proper Subject must be a Believer, Young^ or Older, who otherwise are
Strange^ that is, being without Faith; for the are we Strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel. That God is willing to place (...) with those of his
own House, which is, (...) Church. We are to know God's will, th^^ before our
Admission or Orderly Reception into his Visible Church; for of the Invisi^^ in
respect of Election, we were Member before: In short, all the Representations^
Baptism that can be reckoned up, are no (...) presentations to a Babe; that
has no Understanding of Things done or said.

Neither indeed is any thing in a Catechi^^ significant, but to such who have a
com^^tent Understanding; and so some ground (...) Hope, that as they understand
Things, G^^ will work Faith to believe them. The^^fore since no Man can find
out a reason (...) cause in the Creature, why a Creature (...) of Understanding
and Reason, should h^^ an Act of Religious Worship performed (...) to him;
which is proper for himself to ^^lieve, desire, and act; and that also wher^^
is performed by another for him, that Ac^^ confessedly by the Person so acting,
that (...) of no profit or advantage at all to such C^^ture, without his future
concurrence in (...) approbation and belief of the things done and required:
What can enforce the per^^rming of that Act, but the sole Authority (...) four
only Lawgiver, the Lord Jesus Christ, which whether it be his Law, that
Infants should be Baptized, I shall by and by con^^der: Only, by the way,
(passing by ^any things, that might be said from the ^atechism besides.) I
shall make a Collection from the Greek Word (whereby Baptism is signified) of
the import thereof, as ^^e Author gives it. viz. -- (...), etc. Eo ^^od non
submersi in aqua perpetuo simus, sed ^ntum puncto temporis, quasi in aliquod
sepul^rum subimus, ut statim ex eo emergamus. (...), and more often (...)
submer^^s, quasi (...), qui est in profundo, profun^^s. A (...), fundum, ima
pars, imus ^^rges, a quo (...) and (...), in profundum jacio, demergo. (...),
subimus, etc. (...) and (...). ^^nitus ingredior, me abdo, etc. hic vero
sig^ficat demergo, vel submergo, itemque submer^^r and Latin, in profundum
defigo, a (...), deorsum, and (...) figo; unde dicitur, ^^l (...) and (...),
quum occidit, aut se ab^^t, vel descendit (...), sub terram, etc. ^ontra (...)
vel (...) emerso, sursum pro^^o, vel erumpo, e profundo usque ad superficiem
aquae erumpo. Item orior, (...), ab (...) sursum. What more different from
sprinkling than all this, which is brought to signify Baptism, and in that
Death, going down into the Grave, and Resurrection or Coming out again? Here
are a plentiful number of Words, and more might have been mentioned from the
same Author, signifying dipping, plunging, casting, yea sixing (momento
temporis, tamen, in baptismo) to the Bottom, into the Deep, the lowest part: A
going down, under, hiding. Again, a rising up, a coming forth, a breaking out,
a breaking out from the Deep, to the upper part of the Water. Call this
sprinking if you can. If not sprinkling, then dipping; if dipping, then a plain
Representation of Death, Burial and Resurrection, as aforesaid; according to
the Design, Property, Practice and Example of the primitive Institution.

I might bring in more Authors, who give a plain and plentiful Testimony
against their own practice; but these may suffice, there being, in your own
Opinion, more than enough.

Now a Word or two about the Covenant with Abraham, and the Sign of it
Circumcision, Genesis 12. Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, get thee out of thy
Country and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a Land that I
will show thee. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy Name great; and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them
that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee, and in thee shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed: Chap. 13. v. 14, etc. And the Lord said unto
Abraham, -- All the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy
seed for ever. And I will make thy seed as the Dust of the Earth, so that if a
Man can number the Dust of the Earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the Land in the length of it, and in the breadth of it, for
I will give it unto thee: Chap. 15.4, 5, 6. A Son promised, and the
multpilication of his Seed: And he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to
him for Righteousness. Chap. 17.2. I will make my covenant between me and thee,
and I will multiply thee exceedingly. v. 10. This is my Covenant, which ye
shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee; every Man child among
you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your Foreskin,
and it shall be a Token of the Covenant between me and you. And he that is
eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every Man-child in your
Generations, he that is born in the House, ^^ bought with Money, of any
Stranger which i^ not of thy seed -- must needs be circumcised, and my Covenant
shall be in your Flesh^ etc.

Here was Abraham's Call from his own Country, etc. and a promise of another
Earthly Country, and the multiplication of his Seed that were to possess that
Country (there was no other expressed that Earthly and Corporal, though thereby
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, understood the Promise of the spiritual
See^ and heavenly Canaan also; and Abraham believed, etc. Romans 4.11.
Circumcision was called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, in respect of
Abraham, wh^ actually believed the Promise; which was as a Writing or Evidence
to which the Seal was put, and the Promise, being that he should become a great
Nation, and ^ separate and chosen People distinct from aother Nations. God was
pleased to command, that Circumcision should be a Sea^ of his Covenant with
Abraham, in the flesh of all that made up the Body of that Nation. Every Male
child born in the House or bought with Money. We read not that Faith was a
Praerequisite to the Admission of any, to the Sign or Seal of Circumcision. The
Master buys, the Servant is circumcised. Circumcision was restrained to Abraham
and his Seed, and the Retainers to their Families; as they were to be a
distinct and separate Nation and National Church, differing in that indelible
Character and External Worship from all others. It has pleased God that they
above all People of the World, should have a distinct Character; that they
should be known above all People of the World, however scattered. I deny not,
but Circumcision had its spiritual Signification to all the Faithful in that
Nation; but what was commanded them, was binding to no People of the World
besides, though they were Believers. Job and Cornelius were not circumcised.

We need not go the Old Testament for a Gospel Institution.

In the Institution of Baptism, by our great Lawgiver Christ Jesus; The
Command was, Go teach all Nations baptizing. No such Command preceded
Circucision, Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.

Belief is set before Baptism, because they which were then to be baptized,
were Adulti, Men of sufficient Years; in whom Faith and Confession of their
sins was first required; as Mat. 3.6. They were baptized, confessing their
Sins. Secondly, That Salvation depends o^ Faith, not of Baptism; it may
appear John 5.24. He that believes is passed from death to life; he that
believes shall be saved^ and it follows in this place, h^ that will not
believe shall be damned He says not, he that will not be baptized. Baptism is
joined notwithstanding to Belief, that no Man should neglect o^ despise the
Ordinance of God. Willet Symptis Papismi. page 463.

Acts 10.47. The Holy Ghost went before, and then Baptism followed; the thing
signified appeared first, and then the Sign or Seal was added: Can any forbid
water (says St. Peter) that these should m^ be baptized, which have received
the Holy Ghost, as well as we.

Willet quotes Augustine, Per fidem renascimur in baptismate, By Faith we are
bon^ again in baptism: It is then the proper Act o^ Faith, to regenerate us,
not of Baptism^ the Use and End whereof, is to strengthen and increase our
Faith: If so, Faith must be before Baptism, or how can it be a^ Instrument to
increase it.

Willet page 492. That Infants neither have Faith in themselves, nor yet are
profited or furthered to their Salvation by the Faith of others; it is thus
proved.

1. St. Paul says, Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God,
Romans 10.17. But Infants can neither hear, nor understand the Word of God: Ergo,
no Faith is wrought in them.

2. There is no habitual or potential Faith, that pleases God, but the
Justifying Faith is always actual, working by love; Gal. 5.6. Ergo, Children
have either no Faith, or it must needs be an actual or working Faith.

3. Infants are not justified, nor relieved or helped forward toward their
Salvation, by the Faith of their Parents or Godfathers, when they are
baptized: For the Scripture says, The just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17.
that is, by his own Faith, not the Faith of another; -- before God they are no
more helped, by the Confession of another Mouth, than by the Belief of
another Heart: Wherefore it is not either the Faith of the Parents, or the
Confession of the Witnesses; that supplieth the lack of both in Infants.

Vrsinus page 414. Teach all, etc. baptizing them, that is, all who by your
doctrine come unto me, and are made my Disciples. The Order here is to be noted
and observed, He wills first, that they be taught, and after, that they be
baptized. For he speaks of Men of Years, which should be converted unto the
Faith and Gospel of Christ. Wherefore he will not have the Sacraments to be
dumb, but signifies, that the Word ought to go before, and then the Sacraments
to follow. Very true thus far. This is Gospel. But I will give something more
of his own Opinion, and what is also in common with other Pedobaptists, which
is this And among them are numbered, the Infants also of such as come unto
Christ; or are Christ's Disciples. For their Infants also are Disciples, as
being born in the School of Christ. For to be born in the Church, serves to
the Infants instead of their Profession. There Is his ipse dixit for that, and
not one Word o^ God for it. But I doubt not, but that he has a Friend to stand
by him in it. See him further. The Use of the Sacrament without Faith does not
save, therefore with Faith it does save. The want of the Sacrament does not
condemn: Yet so, as that want of the Sacrament be without contempt. For not the
want but the contempt of the Sacraments condemn, as which cannot possibly be
where Faith is.

This last Paragraph is sufficiently witnessed to, by Calvin and other Authors.
See Calvin concerning Infants in Covenant; Showing that their Salvation is
undoubted and independent of Baptism, or any other Helps or Accessions; if it
should happen that they pass out of this Life, (antequam aqua mergi datum
fuerit) before they are baptized or dipped. Instit. folio 471.

Now to come close to the Business, it is certain, that the Spiritual Part of
the Promise made to Abraham, was to his Spiritual Seed. He spoke not of Seeds
as of many, but of one, that is, Christ; and if you are Christ's, then are you
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. What is plainer, to exclude a
Carnal Seed from all pretenses to spiritual Privileges. The promises are to
you and to your seed, and to as many as the Lord shall call; that is, such as
shall have an Essectual Call; for it must be such as obey the Call. Otherwise
the unbelieving Jews; to whom this was preached must really be Heirs, and
certainly possess the Kingdom of Heaven; For such as are in the Everlasting
Covenant, shall certainly never perish, but inherit Everlasting Life; for whom
God loves, he loves to the End. We are all by Nature Children of Wrath, we are
Children of God no other way, then by Faith in Christ Jesus. But whether go I?
Is this true Doctrine? Is there not a mistake? Pray what becomes of Infants,
who have not Faith, neither capable of it? Must these be lost? God forbid, who
durst say it? nay, who durst think it? But we are speaking of Church Members.
Pray what Church? Is it a Visible Church or the Invisible Church of all God's
Elect, that Infants are born Members of? If by their Birth into the World, they
have an Entrance into, and an Existence in this invisible Church; then are they
certainly in the Everlasting Covenant, which shall never be broken, and all the
Powers of Darkness shall never prevail against them to exclude them; and if
they dye in Infancy they are certainly safe. If they live to be adult, they
shall certainly be made partakers of the Graces of the Covenant, God will write
his Law in their Hearts, they shall have Faith. God will be to them a God, and
they shall be to him a People, and they will conform to his revealed Will.

If they are born in (and so are Members of) a Visible Church. I think I need
not question, but that you mean a Church of Christ; and if so, then the
Question is not to be, Vbi? Where? for it must be where the Child is born: But
the Question must be How an Enquirer may know, that to be a Church of Christ,
where the Child is born?

This is somewhat wild. If it be said the Parent is a Churchmember, and so,
being in the Church, the Child coming into the World at the same time, falls
into the Churches Lap; and is also a Churchmember, and under the Churches
care, even before Baptism; and consequently must be baptized. So much for the
Infants.

Now for the Adult: How can it be said that they are Members of a Church,
(visible I mean, according to the former desinition) till they have made a
profession of Faith, and have had a formal Admission, and that by Baptism? If
you say they are Members of the Invisible Church, and so have a Right to
Baptism: No Person that I know of, denies it. But who knows which do, and which
do not belong to the Invisible Church? It is the Searcher of Hearts, God alone
that knows who are his. Man can make Judgment of no more than Profession and
Practice, which fall under the Observation of the Senses. Can they be said to
be of, and not of a visible Church at the same time?

In your New-Years-Gift, page 22. your words are these, Brethren, be sober, --
Are not all that are added to the Church to be baptized? Are no Infants added
to the Church? are they lost? were they not once added to the Church? Page 24.
of ditto, Again you say, For my part, I have been long of the Opinion, Baptism
is not properly an initiating Ordinance, whether of Infants or Adult; they are
no^ baptized, and so made Church Members; but they are Church Members, and so
baptized. Coronation does not make a King, but declare him so, etc. Acts 2.38.
And Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, etc. v. 39. For the promise is unto
you and to your Children and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call. v. 41. Then they that gladly received his Word were
baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
Souls: And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship,
and breaking of Bread and in Prayers. (no Infants could be of this number.

And fear came upon every Soul, (Infants know nothing; therefore can fear
nothing) -- And all that believed were together, etc. 46, 47. And they
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. Praising God
and having favor with all people, and the Lord added to the Church daily such
as should be saved.

None of the Characters of these People, which were added to the Church agree
with Infants: And was it not next to a Miracle, if none of these three
Thousand, had an Infant or young Child; and would it not be a greater wonder if
they so had, that they did not make have to baptize such Child, lest it should
go out of the World, before it was made a Christian by Baptism: And if it had
been so baptized, is it not as great a Wonder that we have no Record of any
such thing; especially if it were of that weight for Infants to be baptized, as
some People esteem and affirm. Certainly it is more probable, that some of
these three Thousand had Infants, than that there were Infants baptized in the
two or three Families; whereof it is said, They believed with all their House,
and that they rejoiced with all their House. For Infants cannot properly be
said to do either. But why should we expect a Record of that, for which, there
was no Prescript or Command by the great Lawgiver; which if it had been his
Will, certainly he would have been as plain and positive, as the Lord was in
the Command to Abraham, in the Covenant of Circumcision: But the Gospel is more
spiritual, is a New Covenant, the Right of Gospel Ordinances comes in by Faith;
and the Pedobaptists themselves, as I have shown, acknowledge the
Insignificancy of Infants baptism; unless they confirm it by their own Faith,
when they are grown up.

You your self are pleased to use probable Arguments, you see here I have
imitated you: You see those who were added to the Church, they were such as
were baptized: Are no Infants added to the Church (visible)? No none without a
Profession, and Profession they are not capable of, because they have not Faith
as I have showed out of your own Writers. Are they lost? No, never the more nor
sooner for want of Baptism; as I have made it appear out of your own Writers,
Calvin, Vrsinus, etc.

First, It is Contempt and not the wan^ of the Sacrament does condemn. Vrsinus,
etc.

Now Children cannot contemn, for they know nothing of the Matter.

Secondly, The Parents who are Godly, and are for Believers Baptism, they
contemn not Baptism by retaining their Infants from it; but so retain them,
because their Consciences tell them that it would be a profaning of the Sacred
Ordinance; by preferring an improper and unqualified Subject to it: And if they
should so do, it would be their Sin.

If the Parents sin therein (I mean, by retaining the Children from Baptism)
the Child will not suffer for their Parents sin.

Well, say you, Were not Infants once added to the Church? I answer, Yes. To
the Jewish Church-National according to your sense, (if I mistake not) as soon
as they were born; but had not the Seal of the Church Covenant till eight Days
after.

But what is that to the Gospel Church state? The Church state now, is not
National but Congregational; as many as God shall call into the Household of
Faith; as has been sufficiently demonstrated already. It is not buying with
Money will give a Right to Baptism. Excluding Infants from Baptism, excludes
them not from Salvation, as has been said before.

I must have one probable Argument more, about the three thousand. Is it
likely, that among these, there was not one Woman, when commonly they are the
more plentiful Sex: If there was one, certainly she must be a Communicant; for
they brake Bread from House to House. We read of Women's believing, and being
baptized, and Believers were commanded to observe all things that were
delivered unto them. Now if you can prove that any Infants believed, then you
may find out another probable Argument on your part. But let that pass, we have
enough without far fetched Things.

You say Infants are Church Members, and so baptized. Coronation does not make
a King, but declare him so.

But Kings have become so by God's choice immediately, whereof the Prophets
have given Testimony; others mediately by Men, others so by Conquest: So others
Hereditary, and are so by some standing Law; and all these precede Coronation,
and by all these ways God sets up Kings. S^ when God by his Law qualifies a
Person, and makes him a spiritual King, by giving him Faith, and writing his
Law in his Heart, making him his child, then is baptism as a Crown to declare
him such in the Church of God.

A Word to your Comparison of the Table (it looks a Kitchen one, for such
Tables are wont to be washed) Page 24.

Suppose you had a Table equally dirty every where, and your Maid should pour
Water on, and that but a little, at one end; or if it were a round Table, and
so, had no end, only a little on one part, and there washed and no further;
would you then say that Table was washed? Even such is your Parties Practice.
If she had washed all over she had done the Business, and in doing that, there
must have been not only Inspersion or Aspersion, but Frication and Abstersion:
Thus you see for one Trifle, I but in another.

Pray condemn me not for my presuming Ingratitude, in that I so saucily take
part of your New-Year-Gift, and throw it ^n your Face: For it is to a good End,
only to act the part of an Occulist, to make you rub your Eyes, that you may
the better ^e the Vanity of your own admired Arguments; in opposition to the
solid Judgment ^f the primitive Christians, the very Nature and Native Property
of Languages, the Aseveration of the most Pious and Learned, who would not lie
for God, nor talk deceitfully (in a cause that they thought) for him; and had
so much Candor and Integrity, that they would acknowledge the Truth ^f the
Thing, though it made most against them; in the management of a Cause with
their strenuous and utmost Skill, Dexterity and Wit: Nay, you have opposed two
Councils, mentioned by Perkins, a Pious and Reverend Divine. To stick by your
Arguments against Dipping, is as absurd and ridiculous, as to say there is no
such place as China, or the East or West Indies. When things are Evident in
themselves, and wherein all Parties are agreed; as concerning Women's Communion
at the Lord's Table, they having the same Essential part that gives a right; to
wit, Faith and Admission by Baptism into the visible Church^ There need no
Dependence upon the Rule of Grammar. And for a Man that he must bear Rule in
his own House, it is Evident in its own Nature. Can there be as Ordinance, and
no Coherence of the Quality of the Subject that is to Obey? The very Word
[Ordinance] denotes in the Institution, a Subject capable of Obedience; and to
all right Obedience there must be Faith, unless it were otherwise declared in
the Institution. The Stones i^ the Spiritual Building ought to be Living Stones.

You were pleased to say, That Dipping [with] Water was Nonsense.

I say, That to say a Man that is distracted is out of his Wits, is also
Nonsense; for the proper Meaning is, that his Wits are out of him. But the
Phrase has obtained so much Reputation by Custom, and runs so smooth; that I
should be accounted little other than delirious, if I should attempt to alter
the Vulgar, and Smooth, and bring in the Rugged and Harsh sounded Expression,
The Wits are out of the Man. And indeed, there is need of no Alteration, since
every one understands the Meaning to be good Sense. Well, I have proved the
manner of Baptism to be by dipping in Water: I beseech you let it pass smooth,
by the Name or Phrase, Baptizing with Water; since several ways there are, and
have been showed Reasons for it.

There is one Argument comes into my Mind, that is much used by your Party; The
Foederal Holiness of Children: 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband,
else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.

If this Holiness were a Fruit of special Grace, and of the Everlasting
Covenant; or a Sanctification in the Womb, such as John's was, it would
certainly end in Glorification, and the Way leading to that end, would be a
Holy Life. But common Experience has found, that the Life and Death of the
Childrne of the Believer have many times appeared as bad, as the Life and Death
of the Children of the most profane: And therefore, the Holiness cannot (as
they come of their Parents) be the Holiness of the Everlasting Covenant.

I tell you, or rather all Men know, what it is not by the Issue and Event. I
leave it to others to define what it is.

The Papists affirm, That the Baptism if Children and Infants, is grounded upon
Tradition, and not upon Scripture.

The Protestants answer, It were very hard, if we had no more certain Ground
for the Baptizing of Infants, than Tradition; which is but a feeble Weapon to
fight against Heretics withal. Willet's Synop. page 491.

Then they produce Scriptures, Genesis 17. 1 Cor. 7.14, etc. as is usual, and need
no Repetition.

Dr. Stilling fleet, late Bishop acknowledges (in his Scripture proof i^
Opposition to the Papists) a necessity of a Profession of Faith, in order to
Baptism; and so, brings in a necessity of Sponsors, and affirms that what they
cannot do personally by themselves, they do by their Sponsors.

In a Book, Entitled, Duplies of the Ministers and Professors of Aberdene, to
the Second Answers of some Reverend Brethren concerning the late Covenant; Page
97. you have it thus, Lastly, Of the Stipulation of Godfathers in Baptism,
instanced by us in our Fifth Demand, ye have spoken nothing particularly either
in your First or Second Answers. We have no Precept or Example of it in Holy
Scripture: Yea, some of our Learned Divines affirm, that it was instituted by
Pope Higynus; and ye will not deny, that it has been much abused in Popery.

How comes it to pass then, that this Ceremony is allowed, and used by some of
you; We say, some; for we are informed that some of your Mind do not use it at
all. See Dr. Morton, in his Defense of the Three Ceremonies, page 24. See Pet.
Martyr on the 6th. Chapter of ^he Epistle to the Romans, and Gerard in Loc.
Theolog. Tom. 4.

Here by the way Observe, that the Doctors and Ministers of Aberdene (as I
no^ed Calvin did before) did esteem the not having Precept or Example in Holy
Scripture (for Practice of a Thing) an Argument of sufficient weight to
persuade them against it, and to reject it.

You may be pleased to observe, the several Shifts that the Pedobaptists have
been put to, to support the Ungospel-like Practice of Sprinkling, or Baptizing
(as it is called) Infants.

First, As to the Subject: The Gospel-Church-member is expressly declared to be
a Believer, not a Word in the Scriptures of any other but such baptized.

That Infant Baptism may be proved, they have recourse to the Practice of
Circumcision, enjoined to Abraham and his Seed, though we read not of any
Doctrine of Faith preached to any, that were admitted to it. They that were
bought with Money, by an Express Command from God, were to be circumcised.
Infants (say they) were circumcised then, and why not Children baptized now;
since it is evident God has as much care of Infants now, as he had then: And
yet generally confessed, that their Baptism signifies nothing in respect of
their Estate before God, helps them nothing, without their personal Faith when
they are grown up. The Question then may be, why they may not as well defer
Baptism, till they are capable of Faith and Profession; for there will be no
time lost, all that time wherein they were not bettered by what they could do
as Infants, or Parents and Godfathers did or could ^o for them. Circumcision
did not belong ^o the Priest's Office, the Parent usually circumcised. Baptism
belongs to the Gospel-Minister, he that teaches is to baptize.

Some say, the Parents Faith gives a Right to Baptism: Pray who can say, (...)
though they may in Charity be thought ^o have had) that they had Faith,
supposing the Parents to be dead, before the Child is preferred to Baptism.

Others say (or at least it is constructively so) if they are born in a
Christian Kingdom or Commonwealth, they are then ^orn in the Church; and as
such are Church Members, and therefore have right (...) Baptism. This is
absolutely National, and confounds the World with the Church, and differs
little from a Wilderness. For (...) is not the being born in England, though
(...) be a Land of Light, that makes a Christian. Others affirm, there must be
a Pro^^ssion of Faith, and therefore there must be ^^onsors.

Others say, there is no need of them, ^^t prove it an Unscriptural and
Anti^^ristian Practice; being introduced by a ^^^pe as you may plainly see. So
that necessa^^ Crutch being taken away, by which only it is supported, by that
Party who own a Profession of Faith; Baptism of Infants falls to the Ground.
More might be said to show what an amaze they are in, by leaving the plain
Gospel-way.

Errantium a via multae sunt differentiae.
Of those that wander out of the way there are many differences.
Qui a recto tramite divertit, quo plus incedit eo plus errat.
He that turns out of the right way, the farther he goes the more he erreth.
The Word of God is plain in all things necessary to Salvation; It is a Light
to the Feet, and a Lanthorn to the Path.

The two Institutions are so plain, th^^ nothing can be plainer; if they had
no^^ been so, can we think otherwise, but tha^ some words to this purpose would
have been left.

You that believe, Baptize your Infants.

This had been enough to have settled th^^ Subject to perpetuity: But there was
n^^ need of it, God knew how things would be, and he is wise, and brings Good
o^^ of Men's Folly and Sin. The Word of God^^ pure, enlightening the Eyes.

What the Scripture teaches not, we may willing and safely be ignorant of; and
say with Calvin to that purpose: Nos, ne in eandem (errantium) incidanus
foveam, aures, oculos, corda, mentes, ^inguas penitus defigamus in sacra Dei
Do^^trina. Fst enim ea Spiritus sancti optimi Magistri Schola, in qua sic
proficitur, ut ni^^il sit aliunde asoiscendum: ignorandum ve^^o libenter
qui^^^^id in ea non docetur.

We, lest we should fall into the same pit with those who wander out of the
way; let us fix ^^uy Ears, Eyes, Hearts, Minds, Tongues, ^holly in the Sacred
Doctrine of God. For that ^^s the School of the Holy Spirit the best Master,
^^n which Men so profit, that nothing is to be got ^^r learned elsewhere, and
whatsoever is not ^aught there, we may willingly be ignorant (...).



The Gospel is a plain Pathway to Heaven, the wayfaring Man though Fool, shall
not err therein.

He that believes and is baptized shall be ^aved.

Go teach all Nations baptizing, etc.

John was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there, etc.

The plain Man believes, and thinks ^one but Believers ought to be baptized;
and also that it must be done according to Prescript and Example; and that
therefore Infants, not having Faith, are not to b^^ baptized or sprinkled,
especially having no Precept or Example so to do.

How now, (says the Pedobaptist) What have this Tittle-tattle-Prittle-pratt^
Nonsensical-Plebeian-Taut ological-More
Hebetico-Rustico-Mechanico-Fullonico-An^torio-Trituranti-Sutorio-Cerdonico-Plumb^ bean-brained People to do? Must the^ not? Ought they not to be diffident (...) their own Judgments, and refer Matters of Divinity to those, whose Province it is? A Company of Block-head^ they cannot speak Sense. Fools no Lat^ know, and they know no Latin. May they not rather trust us, who are Gra^^matico-Dialectico-Rhetorico-Historico-Eth^co-Physico-Metaphisico Theologi? We, we speak truly, according to the Propriety of Languages, Dispute well, Act th^^ Orator elegantly, Give an Account o^ the Transactions of Things past in th^^ World, Humane and Divine: Understan^^^ the Precepts of Morality, know the Nature of Things, and mount above, t^^ the abstract Notions of things supernatural; and for Divinity, with that w^^^ have the greatest Familiarity: And therefore, being best acquainted with it, know best how to define and determine things of it, or aboutit: And may with Authority tell you. That you ( Fullers, Thrashers; a Draper is too fine a name) and other base Artizens, such as for the most part, Anabaptests are. (Theseare the very words of Vusinus) need not trouble your Noddles about Rivers and much Water, your concern for that is as superfluous as the Water, it is not a farthing matter; tush, it matters nothing: A little Water is of the same Nature with a great Quantity, 'twas needless, and is needless to go into Rivers, or into Water. A Basin full will serve for half a Score. We know how to shorten Work, and improve time. We stand upon our Ancestors shoulders, and see farther than they.

Then you talk of Faith, as necessary. A Fig for Faith and peofession, yea
Repentance to; they are superfluous and redundant things. It was enough if the
Parent believed, it is on matter for the Child, if the Child were Sprinkled it
was a good Christian.

And it is somewhat strange, since the way was so easy, that when the 3000 were
converted, the Apostle did not charge them to take heed, that all their Infant^
that they had, or any should have there after, should forthwith be Sprinkled;
for^ as much as their Parents Faith gave them Right to Baptism: That also, it
might never be heard that any Persons Adult ha^^ been Baptized, whose Parents
were Baptized long before.

But if no Persons but Adult were Baptized, we can hear of no other.

As for Holiness, the Children have i^ though in respect of Salvation they are
never the better for it.

As for Infants Baptism, we tell you (though the Gospel be silent in it, and
La^ People cannot find it there), we can fet^^ it from far, rather than the
Children sha^^ go without it, though we cannot make o^^ what they are the
better for it. Wha^ we cannot find of the Institution in New we have found in
the Old Law. And (...) Philosophically we prove, that round about is the
nearest way home. Thus with Rombusian Elocution and Language-fustian have done.

Sir, Though I as much slight and con^temn the principle of Pedobaptism, (...)
your Self does that of the Anabaptists^ (vulgarly so called, though wrongfully
yet I must tell you, that I have as great respect and veneration for the
Persons and Piety of the Men of that persuasion, ^s I have for those of my own;
and doubt ^s little of their Integrity. The coming unto the World, and so into
the Church, and finding it the general opinion and ^ractice of the Learned and
others; in^^much that it was both a matter of ^ame and danger, to oppose what
they ^und, and to maintain a Doctrine that ^eemed new; both pious and impious
bent ^^eir wits to aggregate Reasons, why they ^ould keep what they had got;
and the ^rther off the Reasons were fetched the ^reater the Applause. So the
matter be^^g prejudged, determined, and by Au^^ority maintained; they rest
contented ^^ith what they got, especially, because ^^one of the Rulers are of
another mind. (...) you have given your self the trouble to ^^ad what I have
writ, I crave once again ^^ur pardon for the occasion I have given, ^^d assure
you I should be joyful to plea^^re you in what I may, in Quality of

SIR your very Humble Servant T. Minge.

Postscript.
IN your New-Years-Gift, Page 23d. and 24th. You express your self thus,

As for the Way of Plunging, it does not look with me, like an Ordinance of
Christ. If it were such, they and we are all Transgressors. We baptize the Face
only, they the Head and Shoulders. I aver little more: For no more say what you
will, can be called Baptism, but what is the Baptizer's Work, etc. You say all
must be baptized; for all must be mortified, every part, as all was defiled by
Sin. You would be angry, if I should whisper you in the Ears, and ask, Must
nothing be mortified but that above the Waste? For no more do you plunge, the
Baptized do all the rest. For shame never say any more, etc. All Attempts to
Answer it vanish in the Empty Air. You must get some Engine, or such thing to
do the Work by; and change your own Practice. Who would change ours, if there
be any Consistency between your Doctrine and acting in this Case.

Answ. I say as you say, thus far; That no more can be called Baptism, but what
is the Baptizer's Work; and that therefore going down into the Water is no part
of the Immersion, but a way to stand fair for it. I need not repea^ what you
have said, or that which you say that we say; but I may dare tru^^ to affirm,
that from what I have said upon solid Fundamental Grounds, out of Scripture the
Primitive Institution, the Example of our Blessed Lord, and Practi^^ of the
Disciples, with other Reasons for Plunging; it must or ought to be concluded,
that Baptism by Dipping or Plunging is the true and only lawful Baptism with
Water (and no Nonsense). And further that I have sufficiently proved, that th^^
present Mode used commonly by Baptist^ is regular and true, and fully agrees
with the things thereby represented; there being, even by the Hands of the
Administrator, a total Dipping, Plunging or Immersion of the Person; yea, every
Particle from Head to Foot; as may evidently appear to all that without
prejudic^^^ will exercise their Reason, and conside^ of the Mathematical
Demonstration. Insomuch that there is no room for fur^^er Denial or Opposition,
without the ^^enial of the proper use of their Senses. ^^^r shame never say any
more: All At^^mpts (...) answer it vanish in the Empty ^^^^r. You see or may
do, that there is (...) need of an Engine; and that there is Consistency
between our Doctrine and ^^actice, or acting in the case. And if ^^u see it to
be so, then you have bound ^^ur self by Promise to change your Pra^^ce, which
were it done would be good ^^ews to hear.

You were pleased to say, I would be ^^gry with you, if you should whisper
(...) in the Ear, etc. I tell you that ^^^u mist it, I was not, but on the
^^trary pleased at your Freedom. But ^^^w since matters lie so fair, I beg of
(...) not to be angry but pleasant, if I ^^uld whisper you in the Ear again,
for (...) equal Balance by way of repartee; (...) is but Talionis Lex, and
every body ^^^es not know what you and I say when we ^^isper) and ask, whether
that last Costly, ^^erfine, Diaphanous, Delicate, Silk-soft, dear-^^eloved and
admired New-Shift, esteemed (...) duration like Asbestinum or the Incom^^table
Flax, Mundified and not consumed (...) Fire; is not, at the very first wearing
not only egregiously merdify'd and Lutose, b^ thoroughly outworn, tattered, torn
and use^ less, to be cast a way and contemned, an^ that the Owner (if that were
all he had without a Miracle must be and contin^^ shiftless. Answer I expect
none.

FINIS.

