A DISCOURSE OF THE Use of Images: In Relation to the Church of England AND THE
Church of Rome. In Vindication of NUBES TESTIUM. Against a Pamphlet Entitled,
The Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning Images, directed against
some Leaves of that Collection.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

A Discourse of the Use of Images: In relation to the Church of England and the
Church of Rome. In Vindication of NUBES TESTIUM.
THE Factious and Unchristian Temper of our Age has so unhappily spread it self
through all Ranks of Men, that even those, whose business ought to be the
Advancement of Piety, have not escaped it is malignant Influence. And this they
evidence too clearly to the world, whilst They show themselves so industrious
in multiplying the number of many needless Contentions in the Church, instead
of endeavoring to lessen and abate them. This is the Misfortune of him, who
undertakes to assert the Antiquity of the Protestant Religion concerning
Images, in Answer to a Dozen Leaves of Nubes Testium: Who because he is a
Professed and Virulent Enemy to Catholics, seems resolved to contradict and
Ridicule, in a strain of Drollery more becoming the Stage than his Coat, every
thing they Believe and Teach, though it be the very Doctrine of his own Church.
And like a Blind Combatant strikes at all before him, without distinction of
Friend and Enemy, with a Have at all. At this Game plays this Undertaker; whose
only care being to write an Answer in FULL, Answers, and Condemns even those
Practices, as are allowed and approved by his own Church; and in this new
Method of Controversy spends the greatest part of his Twelve-penny Pamphlet:
So that though he pretends to be a Son of the Church of England, yet whosoever
considers, how often he strikes that Church in the Face, must needs question
the Legitimation, and necessarily conclude, that it is Uncertain What Church he
is of, whilst the only thing Certain is, That he is No Papist. This whole
matter, as to his needless multiplying of Controversies, and opposing the
Doctrine and Practice of the Church of England, as well as that of the Church of
Rome, I Will show briefly in declaring, what the Church of Rome and England teach
concerning,

1. The Historical Use of Sacred Images. 2. The Commemorative Use of Images. 3.
The Respect and Honor due to Images.
In all which if it be made appear that the Two Churches agree, there will need
but little more, to prove This Answerer a Trisler, whilst he so laboriously
sets himself against both; and at the end of all, says nothing to the purpose.

1. As to the Historical Use of Images, it is the Professed Doctrine and Practice
of the Church of Rome, to have the Pictures and Images of Holy Things and
Passages both in Houses and Churches, for the instruction of the Ignorant in
the knowledge of the History of both the Old and New Testament; that so they
may be acquainted with those Sacred Persons of Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and be informed of the Wonderful Works wrought by God in Man's
Creation and Redemption. This appears in the Council of Trent Sess. 25 and in
the Catechism ad Parochos part. 3. de Invoc. Sanc. par. 40. Both which agree,
that Holy Pictures and Images are made, to inform the People of the History of
Holy Writ, and that for this end they are set up in Churches and other Places.

This same Historical Use of Holy Images is conform likewise to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of England, as is evident in Mr. Montagu's Appeal to
Caesar, who declaring the Church of England's Own, Proper, True and Ancient
Tenets, (Ep. Ded. to the King) such as be without any doubt or question,
Legitimate and Genuine, such as she will both acknowledge and maintain for her
own, in this Book Authorized and Published by Express order of King James and
Charles l. and approved as containing nothing in it, but what was agreeable to
the Doctrine and Discipline established in the Church of England (Ib.) says
expressly, c. 20. that Images were improved unto an Historical Use in St.
Gregory 's time, and then adds; Had the Church of Rome gone no farther in
Practice or Precept, than that which St. Gregory recommends, our Church (says
he) I suppose (for so our Doctrine is) would not blame them, nor have departed
from them about that Point. And again chap. 23. Does the English Church condemn
the Historical or Civil use of Images? It does not (says he) in Practice; all
the World knows that; nor yet in Precept or Doctrine, that I know. And at the
end of the same Chapter, he says, Images may be had and made -- ut Ornatui
sint, ut Memoriae, ut Historiae; For Ornament, for Commemoration, and for
History; and that they may be made for such Ends, No Law of God forbids,
says our Gamaliel, pa. 203. ad Apol. Bell. From whose words, in a Book so
Authentic, and approved by Two Kings, Heads of the Church, it is beyond
question, that the Historical Use of Images is agreeable to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of England. And this does most Evidently appear to any,
that will but put his head into any Church of this Communion, where presently
Moses, and Aaron show themselves to the Beholder, and let him know the concern
they had in Those Commandments, which they there guard betwixt them. This may
be seen with great advantage in the Church at the Savoy, where besides these
Two Saints of the Jewish Law, the Four Evangelists have their place in full
proportion between the side Windows, with St. Peter, and St. Stephen, and the
Twelve Apostles in twelve Niches on the Front of the Gallery. But above all,
the New Church in St. James's in the Fields commends this Practice in a Rare
Piece of Workmanship, where the hand of the Artist has set forth to the Life
upon the Font, the History of Original Sin, and it is Cure in the Water of
Baptism. Adam and Eve stand beneath, Confessing the guilt of that Sin, for
which Infants are brought thither to be cleans'd. Round the Basin is seen
Christ under the hand of the Baptist in Jordan, authorizing the Institution of
that Salutary Laver: And over it is an Angel, as it were descending to move the
Waters, and to signify that the efficacy of that Sacrament is from above. Then
if you turn toward the Altar, in one Figure is represented the Institution of
the Blessed Sacrament at the Last Supper: The very same which is over the Altar
at his Majesty's Chapel at Whitehal, and for the very same intent, viz. A
Pelican feeding her Young ones with her Blood; to signify what Christ gives
to the Faithful, his Children, in the Sacrament, that he feeds them with his
Blood. Much more may be seen in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches of this kind,
not only in relation to the Old, but New Testament, even the Crucifixion of our
Savior, but especially in the New Common-Prayer-Books, interleav'd with
Pictures.

2ly. As to the Commemorative Use of Images, it is received and approved in the
Church of Rome, as it is explicated in the Council of Trent above cited, where
it is said; That the Use of Holy Images is Beneficial to the People, because by
them they are put in mind of the Benefits and Blessings received from Christ;
and by seeing the Wonderful Miracles wrought by the Power of God, and the
Exemplary Lives of the Saints, they are excited to give God Thanks for such
Favors, to love him, and compose their Lives according to the Exemple of such
Holy Men. The same is declared in the Catechism ad Parochos, ut sup. where the
Parish Priest is directed to inform the People; That Holy Images are placed in
Churches, to put them in mind of the Divine Mysteries and Blessings, that so
they may be more Zealous and Attentive in the Love and Service of so Good a
God. And that by beholding the Representations of the Saints, they may be
admonished, to conform their Lives to such Examples. Thus teaches the Church of
Rome.

The Church of England likewise agrees with her in the same Doctrine and
Practice; allowing of Images, as helps to Piety, and for the affecting the
minds of the Beholders with Pious Cogitations, and encouraging them to a
Virtuous and Exemplary Life. This is most apparent in the Injunctions given by
King Edward VI. to his Clergy and Ministers, wherein they are ordered to
Instruct the People in their Circuits, that Images serve for Remembrance,
whereby Men may be admonished of the holy Lives and Conversation of them that
the said Images Represent. Which is the very Doctrine now mentioned in the
Council of Trent and Catechism ad Parochos. This Mr. Montagu explicates more at
large, in his Book called A New Gag, etc. where treating of Images, he says to
the Papists: Images have these uses assigned by your Schools -- The Instruction
of the Ignorant, the Refreshing of History, and Exciting Devotion: You and WE
also give unto them these. And a little after, The Pictures of Christ, the
Blessed Virgin, and Saints may be made, and had in Houses, set up in Churches.
-- The Protestants do it, and use them for Helps of Piety. In his Appeal to
Caesar likewise he thus delivers the Sense of the Church of England in this
affair, c. 21. Our strictest Writers, says he, do not condemn or censure St.
Gregory for putting upon them (Images) that Historical use of suggesting unto,
moving or affecting the mind even in Pious and Religious Affections: For
Instance, in Remembering more feelingly, and so being empassion'd more
effectually, with the Death, Bloodshed and Bitter Passion of our Savior, when
we see that Story fully and lively Represented unto us in Colors, or Work by a
Skilful hand. And I know not the Man that is made of human Mold, but when he
reads on this (Painted) Book, his Tragical Endurances for Man, will reflect
upon himself, and his own Soul and Conscience, with a Lively apprehension of
Man's Sin, God's Love, Christ's endeared Charity, in undergoing these unknown
Sufferings for our sake. Thus this Eminent Author most feelingly explicates the
Pious use of Holy Images, as proper for the suggesting Good Thoughts, and
inflaming the Soul with most Christian Affections, in order to the Love and
Service of God.

In this the Reader may behold, how little Difference, or rather how great an
Agreement there is between the Legitimate and Genuin Doctrine of the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, as to these two first Points mentioned, viz.
The Historical and Commemorative Use of Sacred Images. Now when a Member of the
Church of Rome has endeavored to show, that this Doctrine as to the Historical
and Commemorative Use of Holy Images is agreeable to the Ancient Church, as is
done in Nubes Testium; who could ever expect, that any Member of the Church of
England, much less a Divine, should appear, bidding Defiance to such Doctrine,
with endeavors to show the Practice of it to be Heathenish, Heretical, and but
a Popish Invention? Could a Man think, that any Church of England Divine would
take so much pains to abuse and Ridicule his own Church? Certainly he must be
either very Ignorant of what his own Church teaches; or very blindly Malicious
against the Church of Rome, that to expose her, should not care what Mischief
he did his own Mother Church. But thus it happens sometimes, when Men are
guided by Passion instead of Truth and Reason; it is impossible to avoid these
Absurdities, when such Bitter Spirits take Pen in hand, who look no further in
Answering, than to Contradict their Adversary, right or wrong. And how far this
Answerer has done this, 'twill be not amiss in this Place to consider.

1st. Then he pretends to show, pa. 20. That the first making of Pictures among
Christians proceeded partly from the Example of some HERETICS. This Bolt he
shoots against the Papists: But will not any Reader presently reflect, that if
Pictures in Churches, be not a Christian Institution, but the Corruption of
Heretics; that the Church of England, for all the Pictures they set up in their
Churches, follow not Christ and his Apostles, as they pretend, but the
Invention of Heretics? And what Credit is this to his Church?

2ly. He asserts ib. that the making Pictures among Christians had it is Origin
principally from the Fond Inclinations of those, who being Converted from
Heathenism to Christianity, retained still an old relish and love of those
Superstitious* Practices, to which they had been accustomed so long. Is not
this to let the Person of Quality, to whom he writes, know; that the Church of
England, in using and allowing Sacred Pictures of Christ, his Apostles, etc.
(as is shown above) in Houses and Churches, follows not only an Heretical
Abuse, but likewise the Superstitious Practices of Heathens?

3ly. He says, that there was no such thing, pa. 15. as the Use of Images in
the Primitive Ages. Which is to inform his Reader, that the Church of England,
as to this Point of Images, is fallen from the Christianity of the Primitive
Times; and that she stands in need of a Reformation.

4ly. He shows pa. 22. that the having Pictures in Churches, is contrary to an
Express Canon of the Council of Eliberis, held An. 305. by the Fathers of the
Primitive Church. In which he condemns his own Church for contradicting the
Positive Decrees of so Ancient a Council.

5ly. From the Example of an Ancient Bishop renting a Veil or Hanging, whereon
was the Image of Christ, he declares, pa. 25. in the words of the Bishop, such
Pictures to be contrary to the Authority of the Scriptures. Which is plainly to
tell the World, that the Use of Hangings, such as have Christ, or his Saints
Represented on them, as may be seen in many Houses, in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, are all contrary to the Word of God.

These are some of the Severe Reflections he makes upon his own Church, while
he is blindly knocking down Popery. Who could desire a better conditioned
Antagonist than this, who is so Good-natured, as never to strike at his
Adversary, but he gives himself a Blow over the Face at the same time? Has not
he fairly defended his own Church, while he thus exposes her under the Guilt of
being Heathenish, Heretical, going contrary to the Primitive Church, to
Councils and Scriptures, which is the Blackest of that Dirt, he has done his
best to cast upon the Church of Rome? Hitherto the Reader has seen the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome and of England, as far as concerns the Two First Points,
viz. the Historical and Commemorative Use of Holy Images; and how this Worthy
Answerer, with some wrested and misapplied Passages of Antiquity, strikes most
rashly at Both Churches; not caring, so he can but overthrow the Church of
Rome, what other Church, though his own, falls with her. Now we will consider the
Third Point, which is of the Honor and Respect due to these Images of Christ,
etc. And as to this,

The Church of Rome teaches, that the Images of Christ, etc. ought to be kept,
especially in Churches, and DUE Honor and Veneration given them: Not for that
any Divinity or Virtue is believed to be in them, for which they are to be
Worshipped; or that any thing is to be Asked of them, or any Confidence to be
placed in them, as was done by the Heathens; but because the Honor shown to
them is referred to the Prototypes, or Things Represented by them: So that by
the Images we Kiss, and before which we Kneel, we Adore Christ and Reverence
his Saints, whom the said Images Represent. So the Council of Trent delivers
this Doctrine, Sess. 25. The like is shown in the Catechism ad Parochos, ubi
sup. And the whole meaning of it is nothing more, than what was given at large
by Leontius Bishop of Cyprus, who flourished An. 620. that is, above a Thousand
and threescore years ago; who thus makes his Apology for the Christians against
the Jews, who charged them with the breach of the second Commandment, in giving
honor to Images. The Pictures and Images, says he, of the Saints are not adored
amongst us, like Gods. For if I Worshipped the Wood of an Image, as God, I might
as well do the like to any other Wood: If I honored the Wood as God, I would
never throw it into the fire, when the Image is once disfigured. -- As
therefore he that has received a Commission from his Prince, and kisses the
Seal, dos not respect the Wax, the Paper or the Lead, but gives the Honor to
the King; so we Christians, when we show Respect to the Figure of the Cross, do
not honor the Nature of the Wood, but the Sign, the Pledge, the Remembrance of
Christ; through this beholding him, who was Crucified on it, we respect and
Adore him. And as Children, full of a dear Affection to their Father, who is
Absent from them, do kiss with Tears, and with all Tenderness embrace his
Stick, his Chair, his Coat, which they see at home; and yet do not adore these
things, but express their Desire and Honor they have for their Father: Just so
do all we Faithful honor the Cross, as Christ's Staff; the most Holy Sepulcher,
as his Chair and Couch, the Manger and Bethleem as his House, etc. Not that we
honor the Place, the House, the Country, the City or the Stones, but Him that
was Conversant amongst them, who appeared in our Flesh, and delivered us from
Error, Christ our Lord; and for Christ we honor those Things, which belong to
him, describing his Passion in our Churches, in our Houses, in the Streets, in
Images, upon our Linen, in our Chambers, upon our Cloths, and upon every Place,
to the end that having these continually before our Eyes, we may be put in
mind, and not like thee (O Jew) forget our Lord and God. As you therefore
expressing a veneration for the Book of the Law, do not Honor the Paper or Ink
of which it is composed, but the Word of God contained in it: So I, showing
Reverence to the Image of Christ, do not Adore (no, God forbid) the Wood or the
Colors; but having an Inanimate Representation of Christ, by this seem to be
possessed of, and to Worship Christ himself. As Jacob having received the
party-color'd and Bloody Coat of his Son Joseph, kissed it, full of Tears, and
put it to his Eyes; not doing this for any Love or Honor he had for the Coat;
but by this seeming to kiss Joseph, and hold him in his Arms: So all
Christians, holding or kissing any Image of Christ, of his Apostles or Martyrs,
do the like to Christ himself, or his Martyrs, in the affection of their Souls.
By all which it is evident, that all the Honor and Veneration paid by Catholics
to any Picture or Image of Christ or his Martyrs, is only to express the Love
and Honor they have for Christ and his Martyrs; and that in thus doing, they no
more commit Idolatry, or make Gods of those Pictures, than that Woman is
disloyal to her Husband, who in affection to him, respects and kisses his
Picture; than that Subject is a Traitor to his Prince, who Honors his
Portraiture; or than all those, who pay a Reverence to the Chair of State, for
the Relation it has to the King, make a King of the Chair, in so doing. This
then is the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome.

The Church of England seems to concur with the Church of Rome in all this
Point. This may be gathered partly out of the Ecclesiastical Canons agreed to
An. 1603. in the First year of King James I. where Can. 30. it is said, That the
Holy Ghost did so Honor by the mouths of the Apostles, the very NAME of the
Cross, that it did not only comprehend even Christ Crucified under that Name,
but likewise the efficacy of Christ's Death and Passion, etc. In which words
this Church acknowledges, the Giving Honor to the NAME of the Cross to have
been the Practice of the Apostles, as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost. And
that the Name of the Cross, was not only to put them in mind of the Person,
whom they were to Worship (as a Modern Doctor says of the Name of Jesus,) but
that the Holy Ghost did by the Apostles, Honor the very NAME it self. Spiritus
S. per Apostolorum ora, ipsum Crucis Nomen usque adeo honoravit. And in
honoring that Name, did honor Christ Crucified; Christum ipsum Crucifixum sub
eodem comprehenderet. Which is the very Practice and Sense of Catholics, both
as to the Name of the Cross, of Jesus, and of Pictures; Names or Words being
Pictures to the Ear, as Pictures are Words to the Eye.

But it comes nearer our Case, what is added in the same Canone 2o. Honor ac
Dignitas Crucis Nomini acquisita, etiam and SIGNO Crucis, vel ipsa Apostolorum
aetate (neque enim contrarium ostendi potest) existimationem peperit
Honorificam. The Honor and Esteem shown to the NAME of the CROSS, did produce
even in the Age of the Apostles, an honorable Esteem likewise for the SIGN of
the Cross; neither can any thing contrary to this be proved. What can be
plainer, than that according to this Canon, it is the Sense of the Church of
England, that the Primitive Christians were taught by the Apostles, not only to
Honor the Name of the Cross, but likewise the SIGN of the Cross? And certainly,
if according to this Church, the Apostles taught their Followers, to honor in
their Hearts and Souls the Sign of the Cross, it can neither be contrary to the
Apostles, nor this Church, to do so now, and to express this Honor outwardly,
which they are thus taught to conceive inwardly, and entertain in their hearts.
It Is an Absurdity sure too great, to fall upon the Church of England, thus
absolutely to approve the Affection of Honor and Esteem toward the Sign of the
Cross in Christians Hearts, as both a Christian Duty and an Apostolical
Doctrine; and then afterward, to condemn the same Honor and Affection of the
Soul, as Idolatry and Superstition, when it is expressed Outwardly, either in
Words or Gesture: For how is it possible, that what is Apostolical in the
Heart, should, by being expressed outwardly, become Idolatrous?

This Doctrine is delivered more expressly by Mr. Montague, who in his Book
called a New Gag, thus declares the Express Tenet of Catholics and of his own
Church, p. 318. You say the Pictures of Christ, the Blessed Virgin and Saints,
must not have Latria; So We. You give them Dulia; I quarrel not the Term, though
I could. There is a Respect due unto, and Honor given Relatively to them. If
this you call Dulia, We give it too. Let Practice and Doctrine go together, We
agree. Nay he shows farther, it is impossible to keep or set up the Pictures of
Christ or his Saints, without having a REVERENCE and HONOR for them, in due
kind. Hear him in his own words, in his Appeal to Caesar, c. 21.

But it has distasted some (says he) that RESPECT and HONOR should be given
unto them (Images of Christ.) Strange it should displease any, that can approve
of any, be it but a Civil use of them. I cannot tell; unless Men would
ins^^ntly have them pulled down in all places, demolished, stamped to powder,
whosesoever, whatsoever, wheresoever. The setting of them up, suffering them to
stand, using them for Ornaments, for helps of Memory, of Affection, of
Rememoration, cannot be abstracted, to my Understanding, from Reverence and
Honor Simply, in due kind. Can a Man have the True Representation of his
Prince, Parents, Patrons, etc. without Awe, Respect, Regard, Love, Reverence,
moved by Aspect, and wrought in him? I profess my Imperfection, or what they
will call it, it is so with me. Unco impacto in Latrinas, in Gemonias, in malam
Crucem, the Pictures, Statues, Paintings, Representations, of Christ, the
Virgin, Apostles, Martyrs, Holy Men and Women; unless the very having and
preserving of them, do in some sort imply RESPECT, REGARD and HONOR done unto
them, without offense justly given, without Scandal, or Inclination to Impiety.
Then he urges the Truth of this Doctrine with the words of Junius. Junius, says
he, was no Papist; not in your opinion, I hope. He in his Animadversions upon
Bellarmin de Imaginibus, says, Hoc nemo NOSTRVM dicit, non esse COLENDAS, nec
ullo modo. Suo modo COLI probamus, velut Imagines; at non religioso cultu, qui
aut superstitiosus est, aut impius; nec cum aliorum scandalo, sive Cultus
separatus sive conjunctus cum eorum Cultu intelligatur, quorum sunt Imagines.
None of us say, that Images are no ways to be worshipped. We prove that they are
to be worshipped in a way peculiar to them, as Images, but not with a Religious
Worship, which is either Superstitious or Impious: Neither to the scandal of
others, whether the Worship be understood the same, or different from that
which is given to the things Represented by them.

Thus this Learned Man delivers and defends the Doctrine of his Church in
relation to the Images of Christ and his Saints, against the Arguments of some
Informers, which he thinks to be no other than Puritans, and at best, some
FVRIOVS ONES of his own Church, or SINGVLAR ILLUMINATES, as he terms them, ib.
c. 20. And now what great difference here in this Point between the Two
Churches? The Council of Trent says, that Images of CHRIST, etc. ought to be
set up in Churches, and DVE HONOR and VENERATION given them. The Church of
England (by Mr. Montague) says, that the Images of Christ, the Blessed Virgin
Mary and Saints, may be set up in Churches; RESPECT and HONOR may be given them
in Due kind; The using them for helps of Memory, of Affection, of Rememoration
cannot be abstracted from REVERENCE and HONOR simply, in DVE kind. The
Catechism ad Parochos says, These Images are set up in Churches, ut Colantur,
that they may be Honored or Worshipped; that is, in due kind. The Protestants
say (by Junius) None of us deny, but they may be Honored or Worshipped in their
kind: Nay more, We prove, They are to be Worshipped in some manner, that is, as
Images. Both Churches then agree, that Sacred Images may be set up in Churches;
that a Respect, Honor and Reverence is due to them, in their kind; and both
concur in terming this Honor or Reverence, Cultus or Worship, i. e. in it is
kind, Suo modo. Junius expressing it due, velut Imagines, as they are Images,
The Council of Trent, because they Represent Christ, etc. which is upon the
very same reason and ground.

Besides this, it is agreed by both Churches, that this Reverence shown to these
things, is founded purely upon the Relation they have to God, and is terminated
finally upon him. This as to the Church of Rome, appears from what is already
quoted out of the Council of Trent: And as to the Church of England, from the
words of Montagu above mentioned. And from Bishop Jewel, who (in Rep. ag.
Hard.) says; We Worship the Sacrament, the Word of God, we Worship all other
things in such Religious wise to Christ belonging. And then afterward giving
the Reason: The Sacraments be Adored (says* he) but the whole Honor rests not
in them, but is passed over from them to the things Signified. Which is the
very Relative Honor mentioned so often by Catholic Divines. And this Divinity
is found likewise in some Modorn Churchmen, as Dr. Stillingfleet, who (in his
Def. ag. T. G. pa. 600.) says, that Although no Irrational or Inanimate Being be
capable of that real Excellency, to deserve any Honor from us for it is own
sake; yet such things may have a Relation to matters of so High a Nature, as to
deserve a different Usage and Regard from other things: And this afterward he
terms a Reverence, and, if I may so call it, a Religious Respect to Sacred
Places and Things. In which words, though there is some Mincing it; yet it
delivers in some manner the whole Doctrine of Catholics.

The two Churches thus agreeing in the lawfulness of placing Images in
Churches, and that an Honor, or Reverence, or even Worship in it is kind, is
necessarily due to them, as they serve for helps to Piety; of Affection or
Rememoration, and have Relation to God. The Answerer of these leaves of Nubes
Testium, lets fly at all this, like one of Montagu's FVRIOVS ONES, or SINGVLAR
ILLVMINATES. He runs it down, under the Name of IMAGE WORSHIP; and is sure,
with this very Word alone, so far to prevail upon the Ignorant and Vulgar at
least (with whom, by his loose arguing, he seems chiefly concerned) as to gain
their Votes, in crying down the Papists for Idolaters; and then his Business is
done. Upon this strain he runs to the end of his Pamphlet, proving that
Image Worship is contrary to Fathers, to Antiquity, to Councils; Image Worship,
Image Worship, is all the Cant: But never tells, what this Image Worship is;
and never reflects, that his own Church is for an Image Worship too.

Thus unhappily in the midst of Dust and Noise he manages the Controversy with
the Papists, without ever Stating the Question, or declaring what the Papists
hold, unbecoming a Scholar; and multiplying many Needless Contentions,
unbecoming a Christian.

If he had examined the Doctrine of his own Church, and understood what
Catholics teach, he would have soon discovered the vanity of this Engagement;
and found, that after so much bustle upon this matter, there is but little more
in it, besides Fighting about Names and Words; and that however tolerable this
may be in a School for a Logic Dispute, it is unworthy of a Divine, who pretends
to be a Preacher of the Gospel of Peace.

It Is already here made out to any unprejudiced Considerer, that, according to
the Doctrine of Protestants, especially those of the Church of England, it is
impossible to separate even the Historical Use of Holy Images, from a Respect
and Reverence which necessarily follows them: Much less can they serve as Helps
to Piety, for the exciting Devotion, and bringing to mind the Persons
Represented, but they force from the beholders an Interior Love and Honor; so
that, as it is impossible, for a Good Subject to have by him the Picture of his
Prince and of a Traitor, without being differently affected in his Soul toward
them, even in the very same manner, as he is to the Persons they Represent. So
neither can a Faithful and Good Christian, behold the Pictures or other
Representations of Christ, of Judas, of Mahomet, but his Soul will be
differently moved toward them with Love, Respect, Honor, Veneration, on the
one side; with Indignation and Contempt on the other, as he finds himself
affected to the Persons Represented by them. Thus far is acknowledged by
Protestants, and may be gathered from what is above cited out of Montagu and
Junius. Catholics say the same, and so cannot be censured or condemned for
this. What then is their Crime? The Charge urged against them is, that they
show this same Honor and Veneration outwardly to these Holy Images of Christ,
the Apostles, etc. They kiss them, pull off their Hats, they Bow, they Kneel,
Burn Tapers, Incense, and Pray before them: This is the Crime, this the
Image Worship and Idolatry of the Catholics.

And here, in their behalf, and to bring this Voluminous Controversy into a
Narrower Compass, I must ask of the Answerer; If it be lawful for Protestants
and Catholics to have an INTERIOR Respect, Honor and Reverence for Holy Images,
as appears evidently confessed above; how comes it to be so Unlawful and
Abominable for Catholics to signify and express outwardly this same Respect,
Honor and Reverence, which is so Commendable for all Christians, both Catholics
and Protestants, to have Inwardly in their Souls? Certainly, That Honor and
Reverence, which in the Heart is Christian, cannot but be Christian in the
Expression: And it is very absurd, to think a Duty can become Idolatry by
professing it. If a Christian has a greater Reverence in his Soul, for the Book
of the Holy Scriptures, than for any other Book whatsoever, may not he lawfully
express this Reverence by Kissing it? If the Woman in the Gospel, respects and
Honors in her Heart the Hem of our Saviors Garment; is the Kissing that Hem,
any more Idolatry, than was that Affection and Reverence she had in her Soul
toward it? If a Christian has a Respect and Reverence even for the House of
God, or Church, above other Houses, that are not Dedicated to his Service; may
not he show this Respect, by Uncovering his Head? If a Christian Honors the
Communion Table above other Profane Tables; may not this Honor be exteriourly
professed, by setting Candles on it, and Plate, and adorning it with Hangings,
and then Bowing to it, without a Crime?

If a Christian Reverences and Honors in his Heart the NAME of Jesus, or of the
Cross, as the Church of England says the Apostles did; can it be Idolatry
outwardly to profess this same Honor, by Bowing or Bending the Knee? And if he
Respects the Sacrament, may not he show this exteriorly, by receiving it
Kneeling? And if these Exterior Professions and Acknowledgments of the Interior
Respect, Honor and Reverence that is due to these things, may be thus
commendably shown, by Kissing, Uncovering the Head, by Tapers, Ornaments,
Bowing and Kneeling, without any Abomination in the sight of God, or just
Scandal to our Neighbor; why may not the like Interior Respect and Honor,
acknowledged due to Holy Representations of Christ or his Saints, be professed
outwardly by the same Visible Expressions of Respect and Reverence: Especially
since what is done to all these things, is upon no other account, than the
Relation they have to God, and as appertaining to him and his Service?

Neither let the Answerer think to take Sanctuary, in calling this Veneration
shown to Pictures and Images of Christ, a Worship, as an Image Worship: For
however this may work upon the Mobile and Unthinking Crowds, and fill their
heads with a Notion of Idolatry; yet every Man of Sense and unbiased Judgment
knows, that this word Worship is equivocal, and that it is not every thing is
presently made an Idol of, which is any ways said to be Worshipped: As is shown
at large in The Pap. Misrep. 2. Part. c. 5, 6. For it is not only the Honor,
which Catholics show to Holy Images, is called a Worship; but likewise that is
a Worship, which Protestants give; as is owned by Junius above; so that in this
Sense Protestants may be said and proved to be Image-Worshipers too. The
Reverence likewise showed by Protestants to the Sacrament, is called by Jewel
(Rep. to Hard.) a Worship: The Honor given to the Bible he styles a Worship. In
the same way of speaking, the Respect to the Communion Table may be termed a
Worship; Bowing in Reverence to the Name of Jesus may be styled a Worship. And
in this Sense, 'twill not only be laid to the Church of England's charge, that
she teaches and approves Image Worship; but likewise Bread Worship,
Book-Worship, Table-Worship, and Name-Worship: And 'twill not be very
difficult, by the equivocation of this word, and the help of a little
Pulpit-Sophistry, to paint out This Church as Black with Idolatry and
Superstition, to the People, as she has done the Church of Rome.

And it does not at all reflect upon the Church of Rome, or her Doctrine, that
some of her Divines call this Respect, Honor, Veneration or Worship paid to
Holy Images a Religious Respect, or Honor, etc. For this is only a Dispute
about a Word; and let it be called by what Name they please, whether Honorary,
Religious, or Divine, this alters not the Nature of the thing; for it is but the
same thing, by whatsoever Name it be expressed. If some will have every Respect
or Veneration, shown to Holy Things, as to the Bible, the Sacrament, the Name
of Jesus, for the Relation they have to God, to be called a Religious Worship,
let 'em call it so in God's Name. And if others will have no Veneration or
Worship to be Religious, but that which is directly and immediately given to
God; let 'em have their way. These are fine Notions, and pretty Entertainments
for School-debates; but are no concern of our Religion or Conscience. For as
long as it is owned, that there is a Respect and Reverence due to such Holy
things, as in some particular manner have relalation to God and his Service,
and we only express this Respect outwardly, which interiorly we feel in our
Souls; let this be called an Honor, a Worship, an Adoring; let it be said to be
Honorary, Religious or Divine; let it be deemed Absolute or Relative, it is
equally alike to us; since we are satisfied, the wrangling of the Learned about
Names and Words, has no influence upon the Acts of our Souls; and cannot make
that to be Idolatrous, which in it self is not so.

Here then may the Reader see, how stands this Controversy between Catholics
and the Church of England Protestants. Both Churches acknowledge, that there is
an Honor, and Reverence that may be lawfully given to the Holy Images and
Pictures of Christ. Both Churches express this Honor outwardly: Protestants, by
using them in their Churches and Prayer-books, which (as Montagu says) cannot
be abstracted from giving them Honor and Reverence. While Catholics go farther,
and say, that it is lawful to express this Honor and Reverence due to them, as
they have relation to God, by Kissing them, pulling off the Hat, Bowing,
Setting of Tapers, etc. before them, in the same manner, and with no more just
occasion of Scandal, and no more breach of any Commandment, than the Church of
England does express the Veneration She shows to the Bible in Kissing it; to
the Church, by pulling off the Hat; to the Name of Jesus, by Bowing; to the
Communion Table, by setting Candles on it. Which being so many Actions intended
to signify the Interior Sentiment and Affection of the Soul; there can
certainly be no more of Idolatry in them, or Superstition, than there is in the
Intention, or in the Act of the Soul; the one being the same outwardly, what
the other is inwardly. And, however some Divines and Leading Men of the Church
of England, who are in love with wrangling, and through the Influence of an
Unchristian Temper, seem to be afraid of a better Understanding coming amongst
Christians, take pains to blow up this Controversy with some School and Empty
Notions; yet it is not to be thought, there is any great difference between the
Two Churches, were they to Speak their Sense in a Cool and Moderate Temper,
where they might be free from the Suggestions of such Hot and Fiery Spirits,
who seem to be rather Men of State and Policy, than of Religion. For, can it be
imagined, that the Church of England, who confesses, that the Holy Ghost
himself, the Apostles, and Primitive Christians instructed by the Apostles,
Honored the NAME of the Cross, and had an Honorable Esteem for the SIGN of the
Cross, can be in good earnest against those, who express outwardly this Honor,
which in it self is thus acknowledged of Divine Institution, and to have been
the Doctrine of the Apostles? If the Apostles too, as she owns above, did honor
the NAME of the Cross by their Mouths and Words; can she condemn those, who do
the like with their Hands, their Heads or Knees? If it be the Doctrine of the
Holy Ghost, to have this Honor for the Name and Sign of the Cross in our
Hearts; and the Apostles, by the instinct of that Holy Spirit, did express this
by their Words; may not We do so too? And if We may do this in Words, may not
we do it in any other way of Expressing our Sense, which Nature has given us,
and are answerable to Words? Words are nothing more than for their
Signification; and if we signify our thoughts by any other way, as by Signs,
by any Motion, or Gesture of our Body; these Actions being to express the same
affection of our Soul, which we other ways do by Words, they are as Innocent as
our Words; and it is impossible the Actions should be Idolatrous, whilst the
Words are Orthodox: Since being taught by the Apostles, to have an Honor in our
Hearts for the SIGN of the Cross, it is the same thing before God and Men,
whether we signify this outwardly by our Tongues, or by our Lips, or by our
Hands, or by our Heads, or by our Knees; these being only so many different
kinds of Speaking, to signify one and the same sense of our hearts. And whilst
they are so, there can be nothing justly charged upon any one of these ways of
Expressing, but will as certainly fall upon all the rest; for they being all
upon the same intention and design, of showing outwardly the Honor we are
taught by the Apostles to have in our hearts, and this Honor thus severally
expressed, being but one and the same, founded upon the Relation the Sign of
the Cross has to Christ; if it be a Religious Worship, when it is signified by
the Knee, it is Religious too when signified by the Tongue, and alike Religious
whilst it is in the Heart; if it be Idolatrous to express it by the Knee in
bending, it is Idolatrous too, to express it with the Tongue in Words; and most
of all Idolatrous, as it is in the Heart.

Upon this Point turns the Greatest part of this Controversy, which of it self
is very inconsiderable. But our Answerer takes little care to see how the
Question stands; He Is for exposing the Church of Rome, and as long as he has
the knack of doing this by Ridiculing, and Drolling, what should he trouble
himself with such impertinencies, as are stating the Question, and speaking to
the Point? He Is satisfied the word Image Worship will do the work, without much
need of longer Proofs; and therefore waving all such kind of Controversial
Drudgery, he falls to the Historical part, in which, from the different account
of Historians, the disagreement in Time and Place and other Circumstances, he
easily fills all with Confusion and Uncertainty. A tedious work he makes about
the second Council of Nice, and sets it out in such abusive Language, with so
much contempt and scorn, that he seems, at his writing this Character, to have
come fresh from a Billings-gate Lecture. Hear how he attacks that Venerable
Synod: They were a Pack of Greeks (says he pa. 38.) that were neither the
wisest, nor the honestest Men in the World. Then having undervalued the Proofs
of that Council as Senseless and Ridiculous, he adds, pa. 39. Now you may
judge, whether these were not rare Greek Wits. Yet we might forgive their want
of Brains, if they had been Men of Integrity; but they were dishonest too. In
this manner does he complement this great Synod with the Honorable Titles of
Fools and Knaves. Certainly he must be a wise Man in his own conceit, who makes
so bold with three hundred and fifty Fathers, besides the Popes Legates, and
the Vicars of the Oriental Patriarchs. But I leave him in this Buffoonry,
wishing him only much joy of his Admirable Talent in this kind. The Chief thing
he urges against this Council, is their establishing, as he pretends,
Superstitious Errors, the Worship or Adoration of Images, such as our Author
judges to be nothing else than Idolatry; in this, doing altogether like
himself, who quarrels with every thing; but how unlike the more Learned and
Moderate Divines of his own Church, who vindicate this Council from all such
imputations! Mr. Thorndike freely confessing, that he must maintain as
unquestionable, that the Council of Nice injoyns no Idolatry, Epil. 3. pa. 363.
And Dr. Field affirming, that the Nicence Fathers mean nothing else by
Adoration of Images, but embracing, kissing, and reverently using of them, and
like to the Honor we do the Books of Holy Scripture. (Of the Church l. 3. c.
36.) Thus do these Eminent Men deliver their Sense of this Council and it is
Doctrine, which our Author has thought fit to render so Ridiculous to the World.
He catches at Words, and without Examining or Understanding them, makes
Idolatry and Superstition of the most Orthodox and Christian Doctrine: And this
I look upon the occasion of his letting fly so furiously at this Venerable
Synod, and of all his Rallery against it. But I proceed to consider his other
Arguments.

The principal thing he insists on, and which runs through his whole Pamphlet,
is, that we cannot make it appear, even as a thing probable, that Images were
so much as set up in Churches in the Primitive Times; and upon this Practice,
now so common in the Church of Rome, he presses her with the Guilt of
Innovation. An Excellent Argument, well becoming a Leader of the People! But
this is the Motive of Reforming. And do not some other Reformers, upon the same
grounds, prove the use of Organs, in the Divine Service, to be an Innovation;
since it cannot be made appear, even as probable, that there were any such
things known to the Primitive Christians of the first three or four hundred
years? And do not others, still treading over the same steps, make the use of
Cathedrals and Churches, of Deanries and Prebendaries, an Innovation in
Christianity; since in the Primitive times there were no such things heard ^f?
After this rate some Men are pleased to argue; and at this pace the Reformation
may go on improving every day, till there is nothing of Christianity left, if
such Principles and Reasons of some Church of England Reformers are but
followed, as Just and Convincing. But these can have no authority, but with
some Weak and Passionate Men. Others, who weigh things duly, know that the
Circumstances of the Primitive Christians, their being under Severe
Persecution, their living and conversing in the middle of Pagans and Jews, etc.
did make many things inconvenient and unseasonable at that time, especially
such as related to the Solemnity and Order of the Church, which otherwise were
Good and Apostolical. This Mr. Montagu, a Wise and Learned Man, thoroughly
considered; and particularly in relation to Images, which, he says, in the
first Ages were but few or none in public, not because they were then
Unlawful, or contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles; but because they were
inconvenient in those times of Persecution and Paganism. I Will here set down his
own words to satisfy the Answerer, and to let him see the difference between
the Spirit of Peace and Moderation, and that of Bitterness and Wrangling. Thus
then that Worthy Divine argues in his Appeal to Caesar, c. 23.

As the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Times had very few or no Churches at
all, at least of Note, Dignity or of Receipt, because they lived in Times of
fierce Persecution, and were seldom, or Few of them Stationary, but compelled
subinde mutare seeds; so had they very few, I grant, or no Pictures at all in
public use amongst them, not so much as for Ornament sake. And the reason was,
because they lived continually amongst Pagans, and were themselves, for the
most part, such as had abandoned and come over from Paganism unto Christ; that
were bred in, brought up in, inured to, and fast settled unto Idolatry in
Image Worship. Therefore they spoke against them with some tartness and
inveighing sort, lest happily by conversing with, or neighboring upon Pagans, or
through former use of being misled by those Pagans, the Novel and tender Shoots
of Christianity might receive hurt, and learn to worship Idols, as those Pagans
did. In which words this Author plainly declares, that though there was not the
public use of Images in the first Ages; yet the admittance of them afterward
into Churches was no Innovation, as our Answerer pretends; but the practicing
of a thing, which in all the precedent Ages had been just and lawful, but not
expedient, for the reasons here assigned by him. Which thing the same Author
has thus clearly delivered in the foregoing Chapter, where speaking of the use
of Images: Before St. Gregory, says he, I know no such confessed employment for
them. He was the first that gave such public approbation unto them
DECLARATORILY, though it was TRVE DOCTRINE IN IT SELF, before he ever professed it
such. Can any thing be more clearly expressed? Is it not evidently here
acknowledg^d by a Church of England Divine, that the Use of Images, as approved
and allowed by Pope Gregory, who was for giving Reverence and Respect unto
them, as this Author confesses in the same Chapter, was a True Doctrine in it
self; though it was never professedly declared before this time? And yet our
Answerer, unacquainted it seems with the Doctrine of his own Church, and with
the Circumstances of the Primitive Church, comes here with the full Cry of
Innovation, giving the World and me a needless trouble of stating this
Controversy, which has been so long ago decided, as to this Point, by a Divine
of his own Church. But alas, some Men, who have for a long time from their
Castle of Privilege, with a Noisy, but Empty Controversy, peevishly declaimed
against all sorts of Adversaries; and there boastingly triumphed, where they
know no body dared contradict or question them, vainly think they may do the
like in Print, and that they may as easily impose upon all Readers, as upon
their Hearers. And I desire our Answerer to consider, how far he is here
concerned, who thus dares to venture abroad, with these Raw and Vnconnected
Notions.

But the Answerer is resolved however, to convince his Reader of the
Unlawfulness of Images; and in order to this tells him, as before, that the
Ancient Heretics were Friends to Images. I wont ask here; Why then does the
Church of England use them in her Places of Worship? But, I Will tell him in his
own Words, that this is a Silly Artifice; and that every thing is not to be
condemned, which was used by such a sort of People. He knows, I hope, that the
Ancient Heretics used the Bible too, as likewise Preaching and Churches, and
yet sure all these are not to be rejected upon this score. I have here showed
him already out of his own Authors, who first declaratorily established the use
of Holy Images, giving Reverence and Respect unto them; and that this was a
True Doctrine in it self, before he ever professed it: And what matter then, if
some Heretics admitted of the same, who are wont to abuse even the best of
things, as the Answerer says, the Gnostics did, pa. 57. who rankt Christ's
Image with those of Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle. As to what he says before,
page 53. that Pope Gregory I. and II. contradict each other in this Point, he
would do well to explicate this fuller in his next; for Pope Gregory II. is no
more for Adoration of Images, than Gregory I. as appears in that Letter of his
to Leo Isaurus cited in Nubes Testium, pa. 183. Where writing to the Emperor:
You charge us, says he, with the Adoration of Stones, and Walls, and Pictures.
But it is not so as you affirm, O Emperor! What we do is only to refresh our
Memory, to raise our minds to Heaven, -- and not, as you urge, to Worship them
as Gods; no, God forbid, we place no hope in them. How then does he contradict
Gregory I. while he is no more for Worshipping Images than he was? But he that
has Forehead enough to charge me with a Notion of Invocating of Images, as he
does, pa. 66. when I have no such Word or Hint, must not be called to an
account for every thing he says.

I have little more to consider in this Letter of the Answerer, besides his
great Kindness and Affection to the Heathens, who, with his Good Friend Dr.
Stillingfleet, is so favorable to them, as in a manner to excuse them from
Idolatry, so the better to fix this Crime upon the Papists: Though the Doctrine of
the Papists, in this Point, is so like what the Church of England teaches, that
(as is shown above) there is little difference betwixt them, besides about
School Terms and Words. The World knows the good understanding there was
between Sultan Solomon and Martin Luther, and how friendly the Followers of
this New Prophet were taught to be to the Turks; but why our English Reformers
upon Martin Luther should be at this day so kind to the Heathens, must be left
to every one to guess. The Answerer assures the Person of Quality, pa. 11. to
whom he writes, that to charge the Heathens with Worshipping Stocks and Stones
as Gods, is to Misrepresent them. And yet how many times has this very thing
been instilled into the Peoples Heads, as True of the Papists, which now, as we
are informed, is a Misrepresentation, when affirmed of the Pagans? Are not the
Pagans here deeply indebted to these Church of England Men, in their owning
them to be Misrepresented, whilst the same Abomination is so liberally charged
upon the Papists, and yet no Misrepresentation there, if you will believe 'em?
This is to make the Papists worse than Heathens; and without either Respect to
Duty or Good manners, to advance even now that Plot-Divinity, which was
Preached by a Doctor before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. Who setting
out Popery in such colors, as might be most effectual to excite that Assembly
to the Drawing of Blood, after several Dreadful Characters, at last pa. 30.
thus concludes; Nay, says he, it is a Religion, that will engage you in a more
Unnatural Idolatry, than ever the Pagans were guilty of. Is not this a rare
Character of one Christian from another? Nay from Church of England Christians
too, such who pretend to so much Charity and Moderation above their Neighbors;
and yet to cast forth so much Gall and Venom, that could be expected from none,
but another Julian, or a Lucian? But I take no advantage here, I consider this
was delivered in a time of an Epidemical Madness; and what wonder, if the
Pulpits did not escape the Contagion? But why at this time of the day should
this Lecture be read to the People? Is not the Plot out of some People's heads
yet? Is the Infection so lasting? But what shall we say; the Enclosure of some
Men's Religion, is only to be against Popery. They raise a monstrous Notion in
their own Brains; and while they expose this to the People, they make the
Innocent suffer for their Delusion. They Will join hands with the Turk or the
Pagan, so they can but make a Devil of the Papist. And in this some of their
Furioso's are so blindly rash, that they care not how Antichristian they make
their own Church, so they can but set out the Papists for Idolaters. For here I
desire any serious Man to consider, if the Papists were thus really Idolaters,
as bad or worse than the Heathens, as these Men suggest, what Advantage would
this be to the Church of England? What kind of Church must the Church of
England be, who has no Ordination, Succession, or Authority of Preaching, but
what she has received from these Idolaters? What kind of Church must she be,
whilst she owns her self and These Idolaters to be Parts of the same Church?
What kind of Church must she be, whilst she acknowledges, that all her Members
for a Thousand Years before Henry 8. were in Communion with these Idolaters;
and in all External Rites and Worship, were comprehended in the Papacy? Must
not she have been a very Dissembling and Adulterous Church; whilst believing
internally the True and Pure Faith of Christ, she did for so many years
externally practice all the supposed Superstitions and Idolatries of the Church
of Rome, which she judged to be most Wicked and Damnable? Is not this an
admirable Character of a Pretended Church of Christ, to have played the
Hypocrit for so many Ages, committing Adultery with the Supposed Whore of
Babylon, and partaking in all her pretended Abominations? What greater Blow
could an Enemy give to the Church of England, than some of her Divines do thus
with their own hands, who, like Spiritual Janissaries, destroy their own Mother
Church of which they are Members? For is it not evident, that whilst they
endeavor to make the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry, they prove their own
Church for so many years to have been Idolatrous, to have been a Dissembling
Church, a Church denying Christ and his Religion, a Church for Temporal
Respects committing many Idolatries and Superstitions, and consequently, no
Church at all?

And what more Forcible Argument need any Dissenters to justify their
Separation from the Church of England? For since the greatest part of those
things upon which the Dissent is founded, are such as have been instituted and
commanded by the Church of Rome, why should they receive them from the Church
of England, whilst these same Church-Guides, who press the Observance, take so
much pains to prove those from whom they received them, to be Idolaters, and a
sort of Christians worse than Heathens? What reason has any Man to join in such
a Form of Worship and Divine Service, when he is assured, that Those from whom
the greatest Part is borrowed, are Idolaters? Why should any be tied to such
Ceremonies, if those that instituted them were Idolaters? It Is but Rational for
every Man to think, that if the Papists are so Stupid, so Sottish, so
Ridiculous, such Idolaters, so worse than Heathens, as every little
Church-Divine is pleased to render them, that the Church of England, who
retains so much of their Service and Ceremonies, must of necessity be so far
like them in Sottishness, Ridiculosity, Idolatry and Heathenism; and the only
way to become a Pure Christian, must be to shake off, even that which She has
retained. This is a very Obvious reasoning; and I don't question, has so
powerfully wrought upon the minds of Infinite Numbers, and widen'd the
Separation to that degree, that the very Crime of the Church of England in her
Bitter and Unjust Invectives against the Papists, has by a just hand of God
proved her Punishment; whilst her endeavors to alienate the Peoples minds from
Popery, has embitter'd them even against her self, and been so fatal to her,
that by the same means she has made People no Papists, she has made them
Dissenters from her own Communion, and raised to her self almost as many
Enemies, as she inteded against the Church of Rome. Our Answerer, has lent a
helping hand in this Point; I do not mean here by his Peevish, Scandalous
Pulpit Invectives; but in this his pretended Answer to this Part of Nubes
Testium; whilst he has scarce any one Argument, but what is levelled as much
against his own Church (if that be really his, which he pretends) as against
the Papists: Though in reality, to any Intelligent Reader, there is but very
little against either: The whole being made up of Vulgar Sophisms, Wordy
Disputes, and Arguing at Rovers: But the Author is to be excused; the Whole is
nothing more than a Letter: And every body knows, that a Letter, however proper
it may be to the Person, to whom it is directed, is many times very Absurd, when
it is divulged and made Common; we will excuse therefore the Writer, but really he
is to blame that Published it.

FINIS.

