THE Horrid, Direful, Prodigious, AND DIABOLICAL PRACTICE OF THE JESUITS
DISCOVERED.

Fully laying open The Means, Manner, and Circumstances, whereby they inveagle
and seduce inhumanely, some Unwary Protestants, to the utter Ruin and
Damnation of their Souls.

Seasonably offered for the good of the Three NATIONS.

By a Lover of the Church of England, E. G.

LICENSED,

Feb. 20. 1679.


LONDON, Printed for A. C. 1679.

THE Horrid, Direful, Prodigious, AND DIABOLICAL PRACTICE OF THE JESUITS
Discovered, etc.
THis Narrative was wrote several Months ago; but then, such was the Papistical
Interest, that it was thought it would be looked upon as a Ridicule, and an
aspersion designed; and though many were well knowing then, and those
consequently of a growing and spreading evil, yet it could not be thought
convenient to have this true Narrative blasted. But now thanks to Providence,
England has no Puppies, in the least Blind, all can see; therefore this truth
may receive an acceptance fit for its Integrity.

The Jesuits have played their pranks in all unfortunate places to which they
could get admittance; but this Novelty for ought I know, is one of the most
pernicious Engines, most perverting Machine, and destructive Instrument that
ever could be used to damnation of Mortals Souls.

I was a little more shy in putting this to the World, though I had it from the
hand of one whose veracity was as dear to him as his Life, and now will find
equal credit with the ingenious as it can merit.

A Person of Quality being in some stress beyond Sea, found the Inquisition so
severe, that he was forced to consult a Jesuit, to whose neat and clear
conveyance into England, he stands obliged for his Life.

Some years had past before he met this same person again, and observe, how
things may happen: Beyond Sea this person was in as great Authority as most of
his Order, and as much Reverence paid to his Dignity; but so now he is met in
the Streets of London, in the Habit of a Costermonger, crying Pippins; by
reason of the crowd that then happened, he had an opportunity fully to view this
old Acquaintance; hesitations and struglings feiz'd and surpised him, but a
recollection following, obliged him to pretend to buy some of the Fruit, and
because it was not convenient in the Street, he desired the Crier to walk into
a House that was hard by: being of his Acquaintance, and having got him into a
Room, he embraced him very cordially, as one would do the person that had
preserved his Life, calling him by his name; to which he returned, he was no
such man, and knew not him, that caressed him; but the Gentleman replied, he
should be the ungratefullest Man in the World, if he did not know one, and
serve him that had given him his Life, not without some danger to his own; he
added, no disguise could change a Face that made such impression in his Heart;
so urged him with such sudden and home Memorandums, that after several
Evasions, the Jesuit considering what obligations the person lay under to him,
lest worse should follow, freely declared he was the person supposed, which he
should not have confessed to any that would not have prized his Life as his
own. The Gentleman replied, if he was not generous he must be grateful, and
bade him be as secure as he could wish. He was doubly engaged. First, as a
Gentleman to whom a secret was committed; Secondly, as a person to whom he owed
his present being, as an instrument of providence: but, says he, Father, in
the name of Goodness, what makes you in this posture? He was then a little
tardy and shy in his Answers; and being interrupted by the busy Drawer, he
deferred further inquiry until he had presented the Jesuit with three or four
Cups of thanks, which proved a Key to open his mysterious mind; for he told him
in short, he might know by his Profession and Order, that he was Educated to be
a Labourer in Christ's Cause; to omit no opportunity to Proselyte the World; to
boggle at no difficulty, to run all hazards, try all means universally to
establish his Kingdom; you must note our institution, first, was to be Christ's
Militia, for the Church of Rome found it ought to have a Lifeguard Militant,
that it might be Triumphant; we are not only bred to School Divinity, the
Titular Arts and Philosophy, but to all sorts of Mechanic Professions
Theorically; but the Gentleman replied, That was no Answer to his Question;
what made him assume such a strange Habit? He answered what I last said is more
to the purpose than you yet apprehend; but to be plain with you, under this
Coverture I have. liberty to discourse the Plebeians, and the Gregarians, and
to model them into such Principles as is suitable to my Ends; for such must be
the Instruments to reduce England to its Pristine Religion and Happiness: we
have interest enough in the great ones, men of Brains will adhere to them when
occasion serves, but for the stiff-necked herd multitude, or rabble Enemies to
sense and reason, they must be wrought upon by such operations as suit their
passions, which gives Life to the glympse of that knowledge they measure things
by; literature and reason they abominate as Atheistick. The Gentleman then
said, which way can you work upon them? You are so much my Friend, said the
Jesuit, that I will tell you, because I am sure I can depend upon you; my Trade
here is to infatuate, and Fanaticallize the Souls of the aforesaid Droans,
whose humming and number may crowd us into our design; for with a Powder which
dissolves undiscernably in any liquor, drunk by any Man, Woman, or Child, I can
erase out of their mind the memory of any thing heretofore most familiarly
known to them, and nothing will appear but the naked passions which their
temperature necessitated them to, according to which I infuse Notions which
commonly cleave to them during Life; nay, it may be it becomes so inherent,
that it is transmitted to Posterity. Do you convert them all Papists? says the
Gentleman; No, no, that will not do my business, we never concern our selves
with any but Leading Men, whom others are glad to follow as proud Apes. You
cannot tell how this Powder divests them of all their former thoughts, and
leaves nothing un-eradicated but the simple passions. Those I find addicted to
Love, I turn them to Ranters, and possess them with Amorous Affections; where I
find Admiration prevalent, I clap in Notions strangely mystical, make them
Praeadamites, and the like: where I find disgust and distaste reign, those I
make Independents; where Antipathy, aversion, or reluctance domineer, those I
turn to Anabaptists; where I find boldness and audacity, there I fix the
Pelagian Opinion; where I find anger and revenge, there I place perpetual
animosity and Execration, who go under the name of Muggletonians; where I find
mirth and comical airyness, I make them everlasting Scepticks; where I find
confidence I teach presumption, of which sort are the Presbyterians; where I
find hope, there I establish the Fifth Monarchy; where. I find fears, misgiving
and jealousy, there I plant Quakerism; where I find ardent zeal, those I
possess with such a fervency and eagerness of spirit, as turns them Witnesses.
But, says the Gentleman, do you make no Papists at all? I answered you that
before, says the Jesuit; but if the Catholicon exposes a person pityful,
compassionate, and rich, there I sow the Seeds of Merit, and reap a plentiful
Crop to the use of our Church; either in their Life time, or after by their
Wills. But methinks, said the Gentleman, if you can do this, it may be more for
your advantage to make them all Papists. To tell you the truth, the English
turned Protestants under a damned Ascendant, and their temperaments are so
obstinate, refractory, headstrong, willful, and naturally so given to
treachery, that the Commonalty are scarce fit to be trusted; but my business is
not so much to Convert, as to Pervert; for we have tried long enough in order
to the first, and only had our labor for our pains: Now if we can but distract
them, our aim is attained; for a House divided cannot stand. We have put in
their Noddles the term of dissenting Brethren. Says the Gentleman, are these
all the sorts you named before? Some Schismatics and Heretics there are
besides, says the Jesuit; and also where we find despair, scorn, shame, envy,
grief, hatred, those we possess with an Opinion, that there is no God at all.
After a Bottle or two had past, the Jesuit told the Gentleman, he seemed to
distrust what he had revealed; but since he saw that he had a Man out, if he
gave him leave to call him in, he would present him with a Pippin, into which
he put two Grains of yellowish Powder, which he promised should do him no harm;
the Fellow eat the Pippin greedily, but within less than an hour, he appeared
something Frantic, and said he found a numness and stupidity seizing all his
senses; his Eyes began to dim, his Hearing to fail him, a Qualm to seize his
Stomach, which made the Gentleman look a little concerned on the Jesuit; who
smiled, and said, Upon my Life you need fear no harm, I can tell you by its
operation what is the result of it; you shall find him in a passionate fit of
Love. Friend, says he to the Servant, take this Glass of Wine, and you shall
be well presently; but ordered the Gentleman to call the Drawer, and bid him
put him upon the Bed, and cover him; in the mean while, the Gentleman asked
him, whether he had invented that Powder? he answered, no; one that was of the
Society, an Adeptist, and great Pyrotechnite invented it in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and here in England founded the Puritanical Order, which is since by
degrees swarmed into Presbytery, Classical, Parochial, Provincial, Synodical;
in those days Confidence was the general passion that the English were subject
to; that begot Presumption, which begot Predestination, which begot all manner
of Villainy; hence issued spiritual Justification, the Devil and all. Hold, said
the Gentleman, we call them here English Jesuits. Call them what you will,
says the other, had they Learning to their inclinations, we might fear them
more than we do. It Is true, they imitate us, and when parts concur, they are
the fittest Incendiaries, and Ministers of much activity; witness the late
times, when they called us Murderers, and Thieves, while they were the
Assassinators and Robbers. Villainy is so truly bred in the Bone, that it will
never be removed but by Death. So mark the end of it, the Gentleman being weary
of his discourse, told him, he would go and see how his Man did. The Jesuit
told him, he should find him in a very loving humor, and so it fell out; the
poor Fellow could not speak, but was kissing the Pillow, his own Hands,
embracing and hugging the Coverlet, clipping himself; with all the gestures of
a deep Amoretto. The Master was concerned for his Servant, but the Jesuit said,
he would be cured by the next Morning; now if he had any Vice, he might by
inculcating of the opposite Virtue, fix him as he comes to himself; for
whatever impression he received in that. Juncture, that would only remain with
him which he then had stamped upon him. The Gentleman replied, he saw enough,
not to suffer his Servant to be any further tampered with; he caused one to sit
up all Night with him, who was next Morning pretty well recovered, and said, he
was easy all the while, and thought he could be well satisfied to continue so
always; he believed he was for some time bereft of his Senses, nay, of the very
power of thinking; but when he came to have any apprehension, nothing could be
more easy, innocent and pleased than he was; neither too hot, nor too cold,
hungry nor thirsty; a fine tranquillity seized his Soul, with such an
equanimity, that he forgot all past injuries, and he had no thought of pains to
come; he was in peace, amity, and concord with all the World; and that nothing
troubled him now, but that he could not get out of his head, by and by, anon,
anon, Sir, here, here, what do you want Gentlemen? Do you call here? This
relation confirmed the Gentleman that the Jesuit was a Conjurer, and became
much concerned that he had not inquired his Lodging; for though his gratitude
obliged him not to injure him, and that he held Friendship sacred, yet the good
of his Country he preferred before all, which made him enquire after his
Pippin-Monger; for though he considered particular obligations were great, yet
he must not favor a Traitor against the general; and weighing these Events,
suspected the danger of the consequence.

I thought not the Nation some Years ago, so sit to be presented with this, as
now, when there is no sober person but must be convinced, the Adage in Latin
was not made without cause; Si cum Jesuitis, non cum Jesu itis. I have a
natural aversion against these super-intendents; our Savior returned Good for
Evil, all sorts of Jesuits return Evil for Good; therefore more than the name,
they have no relation to Jesus. It Is true comparatively they may be admitted as
Daemonists; which pass as well for Good as Evil Spirits; this distinguishes,
all sorts of Jesuits are good only in pretense, but Diabolical in Design.

It Is humbly submitted, what abominable, horrid, odious, and detestable
actions, they have offered upon England; and what the three Nations have
suffered by the procurement of these Jesuits? What Treacherous Massacres,
Direful Assassinations, by Remonstrances, Covenants, and infamously prodigious
Execrations, have been accumulated upon the King and Kingdom? God preserve the
Kings Sacred Person, the old Royalists, and plant Loyalty in every individual
Heart; and that all Jesuits, their Spawn, Products; and Effects, be quite
extirpated; then will Christ's Church truly flourish, and Neighbourly Love be at
every Door, House, Board and Bed.

FINIS.

