Good Advice to the PULPITS, Delivered in a few CAUTIONS For the keeping up the
Reputation of those CHAIRS, And Preserving the Nation in Peace.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars, 1687.

To the Reader.
WE have been a distracted Nation these many Years, and some are of opinion,
that amongst other Causes, the Pulpits have in no small measure contributed to
the improving its Misfortunes. I here meddle not with the Truth of this
Supposition; whilst in this Time of Liberty, every one may be of what Judgment
they please; But being heartily sensible, that his Majesty does at this Time
earnestly desire the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, I think it ought to be
the Concern of every good Subject, to endeavor, as much as in them lies, to
remove all Obstacles that may any ways possibly hinder the effecting so good a
Work. And because amongst the many Engines, that move the People, the Pulpits
have the strongest Influence; it is of some Concern, that all Abuses should be
secluded from those Chairs, by the Moderation of a Christian, a Loyal, and a
Wise Spirit. What I speak here is of all Pulpits, whether of Conformists or
Dissenters, of what sort soever, whether Protestant or Papist; and not at all
concerning my self with their several Interpretations of the Gospel, and
differing Sentiments in Mysteries of Faith, I only desire, that however they
disagree in these, they be yet perfectly united in the Spirit of Loyalty and
Love, and in desiring the Peace of the Nation: And to this end I know of no
better Rule to be observed, than that of the Congregational Persuasion, in
their Address to his Majesty from Great Yarmouth: We faithfully Gazette June 13.
promise your Majesty, that we will neither Preach nor Teach, nor suffer any
thing to be so Preached or Taught amongst us, which may any ways tend to
alienate the Hearts of your People from your Majesty's Person and Government;
but shall endeavor to contribute the uttermost Assistance thereunto we are
capable of, in our several Stations. This is a Promise and a Rule of Peace, and
I wish 'twere writ over every Pulpit of the Kingdom, that it might there stand
as a Test for Preachers; that nothing might be Dispensed from those Places, but
what did agree with these Measures. I would not have any Preacher boast of his
Loyalty, till his Sermons have passed this Trial: for if it be the part of an
Open Enemy and a Treacherous Mind, to alienate the Peoples Hearts from their
Sovereign; I cannot tell how he that does this in the Pulpit, should be Loyal,
when he that should do it in the Field would be a Traitor. To the end therefore
that these Abuses may have no access to Pulpits, but that these may contribute
to the Peace of the Nation, to the removing all Animosities, and establishing a
general Satisfaction in the Hearts of all his Majesty's Subjects, to the
uniting them in one Knot of Loyalty and Love; I think it may not be amiss to
lay down a few Cautions, which may give some Directions in order to the
arriving at this End. 'Twould be a bold Presumption, I am sensible, to
undertake to Teach the Teachers; but if it be so contrived, as to let the
Teachers Teach themselves, it may not be so obnoxious to Censure, especially
when the Design is so General a Good.

Good Advice to the PULPITS.
First Caution.
FOR the preserving a Firm Peace, and good Understanding amongst his Majesty's
Subjects, and shutting a Gate against all the Endeavors of Malice and Envy;
it is very convenient for every Division of Believers in this Nation to take
care, that if any Wicked Villains, or Prostitute Wretches, should appear
against any one Party, blackning it with Infamous Crimes, charging it with the
foulest of Wickedness, and then back all with Protestations and Oaths, and pawn
their Souls for the Truth of what they assert; it is very convenient, I say,
that Men of all other Persuasions, in this Case, should take care, that these
Accusations do not presently get up into the Pulpit; and that their Teachers be
Cautious, not to catch at every thing they hear thus protested at the Bar by an
Informer with a Bible at his Lips, nor dispense it to their Congregation, as if
they had discovered it in the Gospel, which they hold in their Hands. This
difference betwixt the Bar and the Pulpit ought to be carefully observed,
because the Pulpit is only for the Delivery of the Word of God; and all that is
at the Bar is not so, but many times Lies, Perjuries, Malicious Inventions,
Putid Calumnies are there advanced: And, besides, that these do ill become the
House of God; what a violation must there be of Charity, when the Oath of a
Miscreant is made the Religion of the People; and they are taught to hate those
for Conscience sake, whom by the Law of God they are commanded to love?

This Caution all Preachers ought to carry along with them, that so they be not
Instrumental in disturbing the Peace of this Nation, which it is their Duty,
both as they are Christians and Subjects, to preserve. And this I say, though the
Parties accused happen to be such whose Principles they dislike, and to whose
Interest they are highly disaffected* The Matter is of Concern, and therefore
'twill not be improper to elucidate it by Example; and because the Aversion
against those called Papists is most general, I Will let them be the Instance.
Suppose therefore that they were accused by Men of Infamous Lives, of the worst
of Crimes, of Designing against the Life of their Sovereign, against the
Religion Established, against the Liberty and Property of their
Fellow Subjects, and these Accusations should be pressed against them with the
most Sacred Protestations and Repeated Oaths of the Accusers: yet would it not
be convenient for the Teachers of any other Persuasion, to proclaim these Men
Guilty from the Pulpit, and incense their Congregation against the supposed
Criminals, however advantageous their Downfall might be to the Interest of
their Party. And therefore 'twould be very Rash and Unchristian in this Case,
if any Minister should get up into his Pulpit, and from thence declaim against
that People at a Country Assizes, and declare them Guilty of all the Crimes of
which they stand accused. Suppose after this manner.

Of late they have given us the Compendium Sermon July 17. 1681. at the Assize
at Hunting. page 5. by B. Smith.
and Abstract of all their Villainies, in that Horrid and Execrable Plot, which
is yet on foot, and which in despite of all Discoveries and Opposition that can
be made, they have the Face and Insolence still to push forward and manage with
the utmost of a restless and implacable Vigor and Malice. A Design so horrid
and ghastly in its Aspect, so contrary to all true Sentiments of Piety,
Humanity and Allegiance, that I do not wonder, that they use all their Arts,
either to stifle its Discovery, or to divert the Odium of it from themselves
upon others.

Or thus, Of all those former Practices, Sermon on Mat. 8. 25. April 11. 1679.
on the Fast Day.
there is no one can parallel that execrable, hellish Plot, which was now set
on foot against us, and is still going on; and if God have not mercy upon us,
doubts not of success, to sink the Protestant Religion, which we profess, so
far as never to rise again.

Or thus. Our Enemies slept not, they were Sermon. before the Commons December. 22.
1680. at S. Margar. West. p. 11. Dr. Burn.
contriving how to make us return back into Egypt, or submit, not our Necks
only, but our Souls and Consciences, to that Tyrannical Yoke of the Roman
Slavery; and thought the Design so well laid, that it was upon the point of
being Executed. Then did it appear, that God was still watching over us for
Good; and he that saw all these secret Contrivances, so closely carried, and
cemented with so many sacred Ties, disappointed all their Councils, and brought
all their Designs to light, when we were least aware of it; being, though
sensible of a great Danger hanging over us, yet little apprehensive that it was
so near us, and was to break out in such a manner.

Or thus. Their loud Cry is not for Diana, B. E. before the Lords in Westminster. Ab.
Nov. 5. 1678. p. 24.
but for the Silver Shrines; not for the State of the Church, but for the State
and Pomp of the Churchmen, to make the Pope and his Clergy absolute Lords of
all Powers, and Pleasures, and Profits of the World; as in the Discovery of the
late horrid Plot for the Subversion of our Religion and Government, we find
they designed for themselves the most beneficial Places both in Church and
State.

Or thus. Providence has discovered another Plot and Confpiracy, contrived by
those, who act according to their Principles. A dangerous Plot, deeply laid,
secretly carried on, and that stumbles at nothing that lies in their way; not
at the Life of the King himself, though a Prince of so much Clemency and Mercy,
that he is inferior to none that sways a Scepter, or sits upon a Throne.

And therefore I doubt not, but that you (My Lords) and the rest of the Great
Council Ibid. p. 39, 40, 41.
of the Nation, who have now the weighty Concerns both of Church and State
before you, will consider, that ad Triarios deventum est, the Concerns of your
Religion, your Sovereign, your Laws, your Lives are before you. Therefore, if
you have any love of your Religion (as I know you have great love for it. -- If
you have any love of that True, Reformed, Approved Religion; any Abhorrency of
the Grossest Superstitions, -- If any Regard for the Life and Safety of his
Majesty; If any Concernment for the Peace and Welfare of the Nation; If any
Care of Self-preservation, to escape horrid Massacres, and the utmost Rage of
Persecution; -- It highly concerns you to take into your speedy and serious
Consideration, what Remedies are fit and suitable to be applied.

Or thus. O that God would give us all Hearts to consider this, -- That so we
may Sermon of Mr. Jane, April 11. 1679. before the Commons p. 27, 50.
no longer expose our selves and our Country, our Lives and Fortunes, and the
best Religion in the World, to the Advantages of Blood-thirsty and deceitful
Men, who have at this day conspired against us, to take away both our Place and
Nation. -- But it seems that we are not yet quite cast off, by that wonderful
Discovery which God has made amongst us of a Hellish Plot, for the
Assassinating of our King, and the Subversion of our Government and Religion.

Or thus. How visibly and near did God in his infinite Mercy, by way of
warning, B. H. Nov. 24. 1678. p. 40, 41.
hold it (the Rod) forth to us in his late discovering that Hellish Plot of our
Blood-thirsting Enemies, the Popish Priests, who had contrived to Murder, not
only our Bodies, but our Souls also, by taking from us the Light of the Gospel,
which is the Life of our Souls, and to cast us into the Dungeon of Popish
Darkness? -- Truly there needs no more than the Popish Priests, whom though you
banish the whole Land, you may be sure they will not sit idle Abroad, but Night
and Day labor to make assisting Parties in Italy, Spain, and France. We find
they have all contributed Money to carry on that Devilish Work; and doubtless
they will go on to contribute both Money and Men also, as occasion shall serve;
they will not easily sit down and suffer themselves to be baffled in this
Design, they thought themselves so sure of.

Or thus. The Instances are so many, and Dr. Sharp, April 11. 1679. to the
Commons p. 33.
so very well known, that I need not name them: but if they were all forgot,
the late, shall I say, or the Present Popish Plot, for the taking away the Life
of his Sacred Majesty, and Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the
Established Government of this Kingdom, now brought to light; This alone, though
all the other Instances were worn out of Memory, would sufficiently show us,
what we are to expect from these Roman Principles, as to the Security either of
our Prince, our Liberties, or our Religion.

Or thus. At this very time, since the discovery Dr. Tillots. Nov. 5. before
House Com. 1678. p. 31, 32, 35.
of so barbarous a Design, and the highest Provocation in the World, by the
treacherous Murder of one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, a very good
Man, and a most excellent Magistrate, who had been active in the discovery of
this Plot; I say, after all this, and notwithstanding the continued and
insupportable insolence of their Carriage and Behavior, even upon this
Occasion, no Violence, nay not so much as any Incivility, that I ever heard of,
has been offered to any of them. -- And now what remains, but to make our most
devout and thankful Acknowledgment to Almighty God -- for the wonderful
discovery of the late horrid and barbarous Conspiracy against our Prince, our
Peace, and our Religion.

Or thus. Even this has enraged our Adversaries Dr. Still. Nov. 13. 1678.
before the Commons, p. 42, 43, 44.
of the Roman Church, and made them the more restless to destroy it, (the
Reformation;) and to stick at no Means, which they thought might tend to its
Ruin. O Blessed Jesus! That ever thy Holy Name should be assumed by Traitors
and Murderers; or that the promoting thy true Religion, should be made the
Color for the most wicked Practices! -- Be astonished, O ye Heavens, and
tremble, O Earth, that have brought forth such a Generation of Vipers, who are
continually making way through the Bowels of their Mother, and, as we have
reason to believe, have designed to destroy the Father of their Country. If
these be the kind Embraces of one that pretends to be the Mother Church; if
this be the Paternal Affection of the Holy Father at Rome; if this indeed be
the Zeal for the Catholic Cause; if this be the way to reconcile us to their
Communion: have we not great reason to be fond of returning into the Bosom of
such a Church, which may strangle us as soon as it gets us within her Arms? --
But there are some whose Concernment it is, to make Men believe there was no
such dangerous Plot intended; I meddle not with that Evidence, which lies
before you; but there is one Notorious Circumstance obvious to all Persons, and
sufficient to convince any, which is the horrid Murder actually committed on
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in cold Blood, with great
contrivance and deliberation. Do Men imbrue their Hands in Blood for nothing?
Why no other Person? Why at such a Time? Why in such a Manner? There was a
Reason for all this; He had taken the Examinations; He knew too much to be
suffered to live; and they hoped by his Death to stifle the Evidence, and to
affrighten others from searching too far: and they managed that Matter so, as
though they had no other end in taking away his Life, but to prevent a farther
discovery. And they whom his Death does not convince, neither will they be
convinced, though he should rise again from the Dead.

Or thus. That we heard it bluster abroad for so many Years together in a
formidable A.B.C. No. 13. 1678. before the Lords in West. Abbey, p. 8, 9, 13,
26, 27.
Tempest, which has drenched and drowned so great a part of Christendom in
Blood, and yet the Storm has hitherto flown over us; That the Clouds have been
gathering at home too, and so long hung black over our Heads, and yet not
poured themselves forth in Showers of Vengeance; That Gebal, and Ammon, and
Amalek, and the rest; That Hell and Rome, and their Partisans, our Enemies on
all hands, both Foregn and Domestic, have been so long Confederate against us,
saying, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a People, that the
Name of the Reformed Church of England may be no more in Remembrance; that they
have so long looked Grim and Sour, and Roared and Rampt upon us. -- And now
when restless and unquiet Men (the true Spawn of him, whose Tail drew the third
part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth) would fain by their
Hellish Plots and Contrivances bring us down again from thence, even down to the
very Ground, and lay all our Honor in the Dust: When by their secret
Machinations they are at work on all hands to hurry us back into the old
Confusions; in hope, that out of that disordered Mass, they may at length rear
up a new World of their own; (but what a World? a World made up of a new Heaven
of Superstitions and Idolatries, a new Earth too of Anarchy first, and
pretended Liberty, but of Tyranny insufferable at next Remove) -- The Devils of
Sedition and Faction, of Treason and Rebellion, those Familiars of Rome, and
Rhemes and St. Omers, (the Jesuits I mean, that have so long possessed and
agitated a wretched part of this Nation) will never go out from hence, and
leave us at quiet, no not by Prayer and Fasting only. Nay, the best Laws we
have, the best you can make (if they be not steddily and severely Executed)
will prove too slight a Conjuration for those sturdy Evil Spirits of
Disobedience. There is another and a better Flagellum daemonum, than that of
Hieronymus Mengis and his Fellow Exorcists. Holy Water is a Trifle, and holy
Words will not do it. There is no such thing as Medicina per verba, Words and
Talk will never cure the Distempers of a Nation. Deaf Adders refuse all the
Voice of the Charmer, Charm he never so wisely. If in good earnest we would be
rid of this Legion, and say as our Lord to the deaf and dumb Spirit, Go out,
and enter no more; (what shall I say?) Solomon's Rod for the Back of Fools that
grow troublesome or dangerous, (as it may be prepared and managed) is a very
powerful and effectual Exorcism. Untamed Horses, and Skittish Mules, that will
have no Understanding, are not edifi'd by calm Reasonings and Instructions, and
meek Remonstrances, nor in any other Method so well as by David's Expedient; In
Fraeno and Camo, their Mouths must be kept in with Bit and Bridle, that it may
not be possible for them to fall upon you, and so you may be secure of them --
Viriliter agite.

If any, I say, upon these Grounds, should after these, or other such like
manners, declaim from the Pulpit against these People, and assert them Guilty
of all the Crimes, that by villainous Informers are charged against them at the
Bar, 'twould be highly prejudicial to the Peace of the Nation, much against
Charity and the Love we owe to our Neighbor, contrary to the Christian Spirit
of Meekness recommended in the Gospel, and consequently a very severe
Reflection upon those that shall proceed in this manner. These and infinite
other ill Consequences are the necessary Attendants of such Proceedings: For
what Peace can there possibly be expected, when it shall be in the power of Men
of Prostitute Consciences to distract the Nation, to fill it with Fears and
Jealousies, and so to influence the Pulpits, as to make them square the Gospel,
to the Support and Proof of their Calumnies? What Charity can there be in
those, who upon such Men's Suggestions, can be positive in pronouncing their
Neighbors Guilty of the blackest of Crimes? And what Meekness, whilst upon such
Motives, they are so easily filled with Gall and Bitterness, and change their
Gospel of Peace into such exasperating Invectives? And whilst these Christian
Endowments are wanting in Teachers, how low must their Credit and Reputation
sink with all sober Men, who know that where these Qualities are not, there can
be no more of a Preacher besides the Name and a Noise?

For my part, I think it is the Common Interest of all that call themselves
Christians, to be careful in avoiding these Inconveniences, which do ill suit
with that Name; and most especially it seems to be the Concern of all Pulpits,
of what sort soever, to see that the Spirit that moves there, should be only
that of the Gospel. For if once it be permitted, that in those Sacred Places
there be access for Interest, Affection, Prejudice or Passion, etc. and that
the Doctrins from thence enforced to the People, be not only according to the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost, but likewise what is suggested from the Information
and Narratives of such vile Men; 'twill bring all Preaching into a Disrepute,
and give too plausible an Occasion to Atheists of ridiculing all Religion.

Will it not be a Temptation likewise to Thinking Men, to have a less value for
those Chairs, when they find them subject to these Infirmities: when they see
them lie as open to Passion and Railing and such like Weaknesses, as other
Places, which for that Reason are esteemed Profane? Men are willing generally,
where they trust their Consciences, to find something above the ordinary Mass,
some more than ordinary Sanctity, a steady Conduct, a Conquest over the common
Frailties and Temptations of other Ranks, and such other like Qualities, which
may naturally work a Confidence in Men, and be as Arguments to convince them,
that the Spirit that there moves is above Nature, and capable of directing
others in order to Virtue and Truth. But where they find not Men thus
Qualified, when they experience those, who pretend to be Guides, to fall in
with the Mobile, to be exposed to their Levities, so as to take Fire at every
Flash; when they see them instill Jealousies, look Grim and Sour, Roar, Ramp,
and Insult over the Oppressed; 'twill only breed a Disesteem of them in the
Observers, and put them upon thinking, that however they may go to Church to
Hear for fashion sake; yet to rely upon such Men's Directions will not be very
safe, whilst they see them go to the Bar for their Doctrins, and fetch their
Proofs more out of the Law than the Gospel.

Besides, if any should hold forth in any of the Forms above, what a Scandal
would it be to their Profession? How odious would it appear to Considering Men,
to hear Preachers out of their Pulpits, inciting Judges against the Defendants
at the Bar; stirring up their Gall, and imbittering their Spirits, so to
prepare them to a Hearing of the Cause? And how much worse would it still be,
to hear them from those Chairs of Peace, pronouncing Sentence against the
supposed Criminals, and then calling for the Halter and Ax for Execution, and
the Effusion of Blood? To hear all this at a Sessions House might be something
tolerable; but to go to Church, and after the Text out of the Gospel, to hear
so much of Severity and of the Instruments of Death, makes it look more like a
Slaughterhouse, than the House of God; and lays Grounds enough to think, that
such Harangues as these are only for the filling the Judges and Lawgivers with
Fury and Vengeance; and that it is feared These would be too Meek and Merciful,
unless some Clergy-Cruelty were instilled into them out of the Pulpits. And
then how convincing an Argument will this be, that it is not only the State that
Persecutes, and is for Penal Laws, but the Church too; whilst the State being
Hearers, and for receiving Direction; these Churchmen are inciting them to the
speedy and severe Execution of the Laws; conjuring them by the Love they have
for the Approved and Reformed Religion, to take into their speedy and serious
Consideration, what Remedies are fit and suitable in such a Case: Assuring them,
that the Best Laws will not serve, if they be not speedily and severely
Executed? Will not this sound Penal Laws and Blood all over?

But above all, it is not fit Preachers should run out into these Cruel
Extravagances; because, if after the Preaching up such Accusations and Horrid
Crimes taken up against Men at the Bar, it should prove that the Informers were
Villains, and the Accused appear Innocent, what a Reflection would this prove
upon such Teachers, and upon their Religion; when it shall be manifest to the
World, that They have Preached up so many notorious Lies in their Pulpits, have
asserted the Truth of them, have spread so many unjust Calumnies against their
Neighbor, have Expounded Libels and Narratives instead of Gospel, and been as
positive in such Doctrins of Perjured Knights of the Post, as if they had been
delivered by the Evangelists? And if these Preachers happen to be Men of
Honesty and Conscience, will it not, do you think, be a disturbance to their
inward Peace, when they see the Men, they have so severely traduced from their
Pulpits, and blackn'd with the Foulest Crimes; to be Clear and Innocent; and
that those Villainies they so positively laid to their charge, prove only
Calumnies and Malicious Forgeries? What a damp must this be upon their Souls,
when they consider how Instrumental they have been in wronging the Innocent, in
attesting Lies and Perjuries, and promoting the Devil's Cause instead of God's?
How will those Characters they have given of their Neighbor in their Sermons,
look Ghastly and Tormenting, when they reflect upon them; when they consider
how they have proclaimed them Guilty of an Execrable and Horrid Plot; Of
Insolence and implacable Malice; Of want of Piety and Humanity; Of a Hellish
Plot; Of its being upon the Point of being Executed, for the Subversion of the
Religion and Government; Of designing to themselves the most Beneficial Places
both in Church and State; Of a Dangerous Plot, deeply laid against the Life of
the King, against the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, for horrid Massacres,
and the utmost rage of Persecution; Of being blood thirsty and deceitful Men,
engaged in a Hellish Plot, for Assassinating our King, and Subversion of our
Government and Religion; Of being Traitors and Murderers, a Generation of
Vipers; Of being the Spawn of the Devil, designing Hellish Plots and
Contrivances for the setting up of Anarchy and Tyranny; Of being Devils of
Sedition and Faction, of Treason and Rebellion, etc. How will these Characters,
I say, look, when they discover, they have thus injured and abused their
Innocent Neighbor, in such Choleric and Blood-drawing Expressions, in so vile
and unworthy a Manner?

And if they consider again, that they have not only done this to the People,
but likewise before the Judges and the Greatest Tribunal in the Nation; may not
they have some Scruples, and begin to question, whether they have not been
Instrumental, and concurred to the Death of such Persons, as wrongfully
suffered for these Forgeries? May not their Consciences, if there be any
Tenderness in them, begin to be troublesome, and suggest to them such afflicting
Thoughts as these? So many Men were put to Death, condemned for those Crimes,
which we pronounced them guilty of in the Pulpits: and who knows how far the
Magistrates and Judges were Influenced by our Sermons? and that they received
Directions from our Preaching, as well as from the Evidences, which they could
not but have some reason to suspect of Malice and Subornation? It may be likely
our Seconding the Witnesses, and Pleading their Cause, by urging the
Circumstances, the Time, the Place, the Person, and then asserting that They
whom this does not convince, neither will they be convinced, though one should
rise from the Dead; It may be likely that this might work more upon the
Auditory, than all the Affidavits at the Bar. And if the Judges did not
pronounce Sentence, nor Jury bring them in Guilty, merely upon the Authority of
our Attestations; yet it is very probable, that by our bitter Exaggerations and
severe Reflections; we did heighten their Aversion, and incline them to Believe
all that was urged against the Prisoners, and by this means, though not as
Instruments, yet by way of Disposers, did concur to the Condemnation of the
Accused, and the Effusion of Innocent Blood. May not the Consciences, I say, of
such as have rashly inveighed against Innocent Men, suggest to them such
afflicting Thoughts, and disquiet their Minds, for fear the many Wrongs,
Abuses, Affronts, Banishments, Pillories Imprisonments, Chains, Racks,
Starvings, Gibbets, and Blood of those that suffered upon the score of those
supposed Crimes, should in some part lie at their door, and be required at
their hands, who in their Sermons did so far contribute to the Reputation of
the Witnesses, to the incensing the People, the Juries and Judges? It Is very
possible such may be the Effects of their more sedate and serious Thoughts; and
that as they expect Mercy from God, it is their Obligation to make Restitution
of all the Wrongs they have done their Innocent Neighbor, and publicly declare
them Guiltless, whom to their Congregations they have so often proclaimed for
Criminals.

These and many other may be the Consequences and Mischiefs of such kind of
Preaching, and therefore it is evidently much better for the Peace of the
Nation, for the Good of our Neighbor, for the Credit of the Clergy, to forbear
all such kind of Reflections and Invectives in their Sermons: If they leave
State Affairs to the State or Civil Magistrate, and make the Enclosure of their
Province in the Gospel, 'twould be much more agreeable to the Order of things,
and for the Peace of Christendom, and this is my First Caution and Desire that
it be so.

Second Caution.
THAT, if Preachers do at any time think fit to lay open the Crimes of any
People to their Auditory, they be careful not to urge their Accusations
farther, than they are certain and know them to be True. And therefore for
Instance; If there be found an ungrounded and ill-told Tale, of the Papists
contriving the Death of Charles I. Of a Jesuit flourishing his Sword when the
fatal Stroke was given, etc. It Is not convenient nor Christian, that this
should be presently made a Pulpit Truth, nor infinuated into the People for a
Matter beyond question, to the defaming of so many Thousands. And therefore
methinks, it is not warrantable, that upon such Grounds as these, any one should
thus hold forth to the People, viz.

Before God and the World, I confess my self abundantly satisfied, that Popish
Jesuits Pelling before Judges at Westminster. Jan. 30. 1683. p. 39.
were in that Horrid Plot, (the King's Murder) to execute which some Protestant
Jesuits were the Instruments and Hands. -- That Roman Priest and Confessor is
known (says my Author) who, when he saw the fatal Stroke given to our Holy
King, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the Greatest Enemy that we have
in the World is gone. And when the News of that Horrible Execution came to
Roan, some Jesuited Persons there told a Protestant Gentleman (of good Credit)
That now they were revenged upon the King of England, for not Re-establishing
the Catholic Religion.

Or thus. It will be no improper thing, to show you how justly the Church of
Rome is Burn. before L. Mayor, Jan. 30. 1680/1 p. 11.
accused of this (the King's Murder) and how unjustly it is cast on those of
the Reformed Religion. -- What hand they had in this Execrable Crime, and how
far they disguised themselves into all the Forms and Divisions about Religion,
that were among us, I shall not positively assert, it has been done with very
much assurance, by Persons of great Worth and Credit; and there are many
Probabilities to induce us to believe it.

Or thus. From the same Place (Rome) our B. Smith at Hunt. Assis. July 17.
1681. p. 5.
late Dreadful Confusions were highly fomented: and that Sacred and Royal
Blood, which so much sullied the Honor of our Religion, and still cries so loud
for Vengeance, was not shed without their Concurrence and Assistance; the
Mischievous and Busy Jesuit being so Wicked, as to promote the Design, and so
Impudent, as to boast of it when it was done.

2. If there be a Story amongst the People, that such a sort of Men helped to
Fire the City; it is not Prudent for any, unless upon certain Grounds, to
deliver this from the Pulpit, and thence endeavor to convince the Congregation
of the Truth of it: As thus.

There might be evil Instruments in this H. Hesketh, before Lord Mayor at Bow,
Sep. 12. 1682.
Judgment (of the Fire of London) and it seems, we are satisfied, who they were
-- The Year 1666, had been long presaged to be a Fatal Year, and been often
assigned for the Downfall of Rome, by some, that had been too busy with
Apocalyptic Visions. There could never therefore be a fitter Time for them to
consute these bold Predictions, nor any Confutation, that in all probability
would more affect the World, and advantage their Cause, than to cause London to
fall, just then when it expected Rome should; and it has been said, how they
have gloried and triumphed in this thing. For that supposing them their
Craft-masters (and we have too many Reasons to think them to be so) it could
not be well thought, that such an Opportunity would be let slip, or some such
Counsel not pitched upon. -- Such things as these are now become their last
Refuge, it seems; and the Arguments in which (I am persuaded) they expect most
Success: they find how miserably fruitless all Rational Attempts against us
are, and how they still recoil against themselves; and they despair of ever
convincing us like Men, and therefore are resolved to beat out our Brains (if
they can) like Beasts.

3. If there be a Popular Rumor, that Jesuits in Disguise insinuate themselves
among Dissenters, and from their Pulpits Preach to them Schism and Sedition; it
does not look Rational that this Relation should be made a Sermon-Discourse,
preached up as a Truth, unless upon surer Grounds than a Report, or the
Assurance, that such a one knows the Person that saw the Man beyond Sea that
did it. And therefore how Vn-pulpit-like would such a Discourse as this look in
a Sermon?

It is their Business and Endeavor to keep J. Oaks, before Judges at Reading,
July 12. 1681. p. 19, 20.
us at odds, the better to carry on their own Designs; and therefore they have
their Emissaries up and down to Preach Schism and Sedition into Peoples Ears.
By such Arts as these they insinuate themselves among the poor deluded People
of our Separate Congregations, and joining with them in their Clamors against
the Church of England, crying it down for Superstitious and Popishly affected,
they pass there for Gifted Brethren, and real Popery is carried on by such
Disguises.

Preachers, I think, ought to be very Cautious, how they carry up such kind of
Stories as these into the Pulpits; because, though there may be Grounds enough to
make them a Table or Coffee-house Discourse; yet scarce enough to qualify them
for a Sermon, or to make them a fit Attendance for a Text out of the Gospel: I
am for having nothing have admittance into the Pulpit, besides what is
certainly and unquestionably True: That Place ought to be kept Sacred, and
nothing have access there, that is Profane, or in any likelihood may prove to
be a Lie.

It Is necessary this Caution be observed, that so all Preachers and Sermons be
maintained in their Just Authority and Respect. For nothing can more contribute
to the lessening their Reputation with the People, than to hear Vulgar Rumors,
Ill-grounded Stories, Peevish Jealousies, held forth, and as passionately
defended by them, as if they had been Inspired Truths. What Respect can I
possibly have for a Preacher, that makes no better choice of what he delivers?
Is it likely he should prevail upon my Understanding or Will, that suffers
himself to be imposed on? When I go to Church, I expect to hear the Word of
God, and such Solid Truths expounded to me, as may be a Comfort to my Soul, and
direct my Steps in the ways of Bliss. But if with a light Sprinkle of this, I
am put off with Fulsom Invectives, and a Relation of such Stories, as I am
confident, the Preacher knows no more the Truth of than my self; I cannot but
be Scandalized, and begin to fear, that such an one is better conversant in the
News of the Town, than in the Sacred Text or Fathers; and methinks, it has so
much the Relish and Air of a Coffee-house, that I cannot but look about me, to
see where we are. And now if People should once seriously reflect on this, and
consider with what empty Stories Preachers content themselves, for the patching
up their Sermons, it cannot choose but raise a great Prejudice in their Minds,
and discourage them from relying much upon their Teachers, whilst they see them
either so very Credulous, in thus taking up every Vulgar Rumor for a Truth; or
very Insincere, in delivering that to their Auditory, which they don't believe
themselves. Either of which is a very ill Quality to recommend a Minister to
his Congregation.

Upon which Score I cannot but heartily desire all Preachers, of what sort
soever, to take this into a serious Consideration, and to be very careful in
the Choice of the Matter and History, which they deliver to their People. I
conjure them by their Sacred Function, by the Gospel they expound, by the Truth
they pretend to; that they would think of nothing but Truth, that they would
preach up nothing but Truth, and consequently that they would deliver nothing
in their Sermons for a Truth, which may be a Lie for all as they know. This I
press the more earnestly, because I am sensible how much Preachers may lose
themselves for want of this Care. For besides the Offense against God, and the
Wrong they may do their Neighbor, it is certain they ruin their own Reputation.
It Is no small Reflection upon a Preacher, when it is with Truth said of him,
that instead of teaching the Gospel in Meekness, he has preached up Lies in a
Passion. Every Man ought to be true in his Way; and if he that puts off
Counterfeit Wares in his Shop for True ones, must of Necessity pass for a
Cheat; how circumspect is it necessary every Preacher should be, whilst to him
his Pulpit is his Shop; and the Injury, if done there, is the more
considerable, by how much the Affairs of the Soul and Eternity, are above all
the Concerns of this World?

And as these kind of Stories do not suit well with the Pulpit, so neither do
they agree with a Dedicatory Epistle, especially from a Faithful Pastor
addressing himself to his Parishioners: And therefore when Dr. Tenison, making
Apology for his True account of a Conference betw. A. P. and Dr. T.
Expressions of more Warmth and less Strength, in a Conference held about
Religion with a Jesuit, pretends that he has reason above most others, to give
severe Language to that sort of Men, because his Father being turned out of his
Living by a Committee, and another taking his Place and Revenue, without
restoring any thing, who after a few Years, Preaching up Purgatory, and other
Points, was turned out again by the same Committee, and soon after (as it were)
vanished away. When he makes this Apology, I say, for his peevish and severe
Language to a Jesuit, he does not seem to do the Office of a Good and Faithful
Pastor; for besides the giving that ill Example to his Flock, of entertaining a
Grudge in his Mind near about Thirty Years, and giving now ill Language to a
Stranger, for a supposed Injury done his Father in the last Age, and so letting
one Evil be the Excuse for another: besides his being moved with Indignation
against a Person, who (as he tells the Story) did not turn his Father out of
his Living, but did only take Possession of it, when his Father had been before
outed by the Committee. Besides, his conceiving an Hatred against a whole Body
of Men, for the sake of one supposed Member thereof, and being filled with
Suspicion and Jealousy against them all, upon his score; which is a piece of
Christianity and Justice fitly to be retaliated by the Jesuits, if they should
be Jealous of every Parson they met, for fear he should by Perjury Swear them
to the Gallows, because one of that Coat helped Five of their Brethren, not out
of their Livings, but out of their Lives, most infamously and barbarously, not
in the last Age but only Seven Years ago; besides the spiteful Insinuation into
his Parishioners, that the Father he Discoursed with, was a Hypocrit and a
Dissembler, something of the like nature with his own Father's old Friend, and
by this vile and undeserved Character, raising a Prejudice in the Minds of his
Readers, that being thus prepossessed, they might the easier give the Doctor
the Victory over his Antagonist, whom they had found knocked down in the very
first Leaf with a Calumny.

Besides all this, I say, is it not a very uncharitable Presumption in the
Doctor, thus by Insinuation to make a Jesuit of that Oubbard, who succeeded his
Father, and Preaching up Purgatory proved an Hypocrit and Dissembler? Does the
Doctor know he was a Jesuit, that he so confidently, not now in the Heat of
Dispute, but in the cooler management of his Pen, exposes all the Body of
Jusuits, as infamous, to his Parishioners, upon his score? Is he certain he was
a Jesuit, that now he serves up this Story to confirm his Flock, that the
Jesuits in Disguise, become Teachers to the Dissenters? If the Doctor knows it
to be a Truth, it is more than he has yet made appear; for all as I see in the
Story, as he has told it, it is as likely he was a Church of England Dissembler,
as a Jesuit. Don't every body know, there is many a Church of England Divine has
had Popery enough in them, to be marked for Jesuits,, and to be censured and
turned out for such, by the Men that made up the Committee in those Days? What
if Mr. Thorndike had Preached to such a Congregation his Doctrine of Praying for
the Dead, and requested of them (as he did in his Will) that they would Pray
for his Soul, when departed? Don't the Doctor think, that he had said enough of
Purgatory to have been cashiered by the Committee, and outed for a Papist? If
M. Montague had delivered there his Opinion of the use of Images, of the Cross,
of Traditions, of admitting the Pope for Arbitrator in Controversy, etc. would
not they as certainly have cast him by for a Papist, as they did Gubbard? So
that, I believe, if the Doctor will seriously consider upon the Point, he will
find, that many Church-of-England-men have had Popery enough in them to have
been turned out in those Times for Jesuits, and to have passed for so many
Gubbards. This I say as to his Popery; and as to his pretending a Kindness to
their Cause, it is more likely again he was a Church of England Divine than a
Jesuit; whilst it is well known, what the Church-Divines did at that Time for
Livings: of the Ten thousand Beneficed Men, there being many hundreds, that
complied with the Times, whether really or pretendedly, let the Doctor
determine. If he can show only Five Jesuits that did as much, 'twill be more
than ever was done yet; and if he should, 'twill be still, I believe, a
thousand to one, that his Friend Gubbard was a Church of England Divine, rather
than a Jesuit. And yet the Doctor will have him to be nothing but a Jesuit,
he is still angry at the Jesuits, for his sake; and he tells his Parishioners
the occasion of it, that this wrought upon him when he was young, and he cannot
yet wear it off; but I hope there are some amongst them that will have so much
compassion on him, as to be sorry, that in all this time the Doctor has not
worn out the Impressions of his Childhood: for my part, I am sorry to find such
a malicious Story set forth by a Pastor to his Parishioners, and that he has so
little Consideration and Charity, as to expose the Reputation of so great a
Body, under the black Colors of Dissimulation and Hypocrisy upon such a bare
Presumption. Would the Doctor like well to be thus served; and that He and his
Brethren should be thus trampled upon, upon such slight Imaginations? These
Methods, I know, serve well enough, to keep fast the People, and to make them
averse to the Jesuits. But I hope those whom the Doctor has endeavored to make
appear as Hypocrites, will show themselves Men of better Consciences, than to
follow him in so ill an Example. But let us now proceed to our Cautions.

Third Caution.
THAT if any Preacher be zealous to prevent his Flock from going over to any
other Communion, which he judges to be Erroneous; he would be careful, not to
use any Insincere or Unwarrantable Means, for the working this Effect: That he
would not be so Passionately earnest in the discouraging his People from such a
Change, as to forget both Honesty, Justice, Truth and Charity, while he is Warm
in his Dissuasives. And therefore if for the Settling his Congregation, and
ridding them of all Uneasiness, Scruples and Pangs of Conscience, he chooses
that Topic of Making the other Party Odious; he ought to be very Cautious in
his Charges, and not to lay blacker Colors on them, than in Truth and Justice
belongs to them. It Is a very difficult Task to make Characters of Adversaries,
for such especially, whose Interest it is they should be contemned and thought
Ridiculous. How easily do Passion, Aversion, Interest, Education here
insensibly steal in? And when these influence the Pencil, there never wants any
thing of Deformity or Monster, that is requisite to make the Bugbear out* It Is
advisable therefore here, that Preachers be watchful that none of These stand
at the Elbow while they are laying on the Colors: That they abstain from all
indirect and unjustifiable Methods, while they are exposing their Neighbor:
That they describe not the Doctrins of a Church from the Opinions of Private
Authors, from the Extravagances of some Professors, from the Loose Practices of
others: That they take not every thing by the Wrong Handle; give not out their
own wrested Interpretations, horrid Misconstructions, for the Faith of the
Church; and especially that they give not too much Rope to their Inferring
Faculty. This one thing of Drawing Consequences, is enough to ruin the soundest
Reputation in the World; and there is not any Church, Religion, Profession or
Persuasion, of all that call themselves Christians that is so securely fenced,
but may be soon made as deformed as Turcism by this single Artifice, All these
sinister Ways are therefore to be avoided, especially in Pulpits; for no
Character can be Just where these are made use of, I instance in the Case of
the Papists: If any one to discourage his Auditory from looking that way,
should call in any of these Auxiliaries to his Assistance and thus describe
Them or their Religion, viz.

Their different Orders of Religion amongst Sermon on Unity, Ephesians. 4. 3. at
Whitehall, March 10. 1675. page 107.
them, are neither better nor worse than so many Sects and several Casts of
Religion; only they have that advantage in managing their Divisions, which we
have not, to pack up their Fanatics in Convents and Cloisters, and so bring
them under some kind of Rule and Government.

Or thus. In the Roman Church it (the Sacrament) Th. Smith, August 17. 1679. at
Oxford, page 19.
must now be no longer a Representative, but a Real Propitiatory Sacrifice for
the Living and for the Dead; and Christ's Natural Body must be brought down
from Heaven upon a thousand Altars at once, and there Really broken and offered
up again to the Father, and his Blood actually spilt a thousand times every day.

Or thus. Popery is the worst Religion, or Mr. John's. at Guildhall Palm-Sund.
1679. Epist. 9. p. 9, 10.
Pretended Religion in the whole World, for she puts out the Understandings of
those of her own Communion, and tears out the Hearts of all others: whom she
cannot deceive, she will destroy. Upon which account she is the Common Enemy of
Mankind, and of us in particular, whom she has threatened with Extirpation. --
It would be endless to rip up the absurdity of Auricular Confession, where a
Man unlades himself of all his Sins, by whispering them into Priests Ears. --
Of Transubstantiation, where Men must renounce all their Five Senses at once.
-- The Doctrine of the Pope's Infallibility keeps a good decorum with the rest.
For though he has by his Authority spread those false and absurd Doctrins over a
great part of the World, and tho they seem to be unreasonable; yet they are
really true, because he that delivers them is out of a possibility of Erring;
he alone cannot Err, and all others, without some of his Assistance, cannot but
Err. But it is very hard to believe, that one single Man in the World is more
than a Man, and that all the rest are less than Men; That if he place himself
in his Chair, he cannot Err, if he would, and that others lie under as Fatal a
Necessity of Erring, if they be left to themselves, without his Guidance and
Direction,

Or thus. She professedly edifies the People Dr. Standish, Mar. 9. 1682/3;. at
Hertford Ass. p. 16.
in Ignorance, by Praying and Prophesying in an unknown Tongue; She makes no
other use or account of Confession, than what professed Drunkards do of
Vomiting.

Or thus. It is still more detestable in the J. Turner, at Lincoln's Inn, Sep.
29, 1683. p. 23.
Practice of the Church of Rome, that so long a Beadrol of Saints shall be
Invoked by a Rabble of Worshippers in a solemn Procession, as if neither they
nor God could be prevailed upon without abundance of Importunity or Clamor. --
It is much less lawful to pay our Devotions to any Saints departed, however
Pious and Exemplary they may have been; and much less to those that have been
Canonized for Money or for Treason, and owe their Saintship to their Friends on
the one hand, and, which is still more horrid and detestable, to their Crimes
and Villainies on the other; who are preferred to Heaven for disturbing the
Earth, and mounted into the blessed Regions of Light, and Peace, and Love, as a
Reward of Strife, Disobedience, Hatred and Contention, and every evil Work. --
Neither is it sufficient to say in this Case, that his (God's) Substance being
invisible, and not to be discerned by Mortal Eyes, or Human Senses, there is
therefore need of a sensible Memorandum, although the Worship be terminated in
Himself; for at this rate all the Idolatry of the Heathen World may be excused;
for no Man is so senseless to believe their Worship was terminated in a Stick or
Stone, at least we ought not to believe it, without very good Proof; and if it
could be proved, yet even this would be paralleled in the Church of Rome, where
they Pray (p. 26.) to the Crucifix of Wood or Stone, as well as to Christ
himself, and attribute as much Satisfaction and Expiation to it, as they do to
the Blood of their Crucified Redeemer, as appears undeniably from the Romish
Missals, which are extant at this day, and may at any time be produced against
them. -- God does not expect (p. ^0.) that we should make a particular
Confession of our Sins to Men, the consequence of which is only to make our
selves uneasy in the Company of those to whom we have Confessed, to run an
apparent hazard of being undone in many Cases, by Knaves for Interest; or by
Fools out of Levity, Inconstancy, and a blabbing Humor; and indeed I know
nothing it can be good for, but to let Men, that have nothing to do, to pry
into such Matters, into the Secrets of Families, and to put our selves
perfectly at the Mercy of a Priest, who will sometimes be treacherous as well
as other Men; besides, that instead of keeping up a wholesome Discipline, it is
the way to corrupt it, and tends to the debauching both Laity and ^l^rgy, in as
many ways as there are Sins to be committed, when the Confession and the
Penitent begin to discover and understand one another.

Or tbus. They have all along consecrated their devilish Practices by these
glorious W. Wray, No. 5. 1682. page 14, 15.
Names. The Churches Interest is the Center of their Religion, and their
Consciences turn upon the same Pin; That every thing is Pious, Conscientious
and Meritorious, that makes for the Cause; and there is no Sin with them like
Ill-luck and Miscarriage -- The supernumerary Articles of the Trent
Conventicle, have almost every one of them a Plot in them, either to destroy
others, or advance themselves. But their Politic Creed, which serves to keep up
the State and Grandeur of Holy Church, is most fatally pernicious, tending to
the Subversion of all Christian Monarchs in the World: The Articles whereof are
such as these. -- That the King is the Pope's or the Peoples Creature; for it
is indifferent to their great Machiavils the Jesuits, whose he is, so he do but
belong to either; Take him whole, or divide him, or how you please, so that
God, to whom alone he belongs and is accountable, may have the least share in
him. -- If the People contend to have him all to themselves, the Jesuit's a
fair Chapman, and will rather give up the Spiritual Interest of the Chair, than
dispute it. That if the People do but Depose him, (p. 17.) be it for Tyranny,
be it for Heresy, nay, be it for Popery, or Suspicion of Popery, do but Depose
him, and he is contented.

Or thus. Whatever Doctrine gives license J. James, at Guildhall December. 24.
1682. p. 29.
to Sin, must needs proceed from the Devil. -- Yet in the Church of Rome such
Doctrins as these are solemnly constituted as Essential Parts of the Christian
Religion, and imposed upon the Christian World with the same Authority as the
most Fundamental Articles of the Christan Faith.

Or thus. Would we but change our Scripture into Legends, our Service into a
Mass Book, Not. Bisby, Sermon. called The Modern Pharisees, 1683. page 11, 12.
our Prayers into Beads, our Sacraments into Shows, our Priests into Puppets;
would we Communicate in one Kind, Read Prayers in an unknown Tongue, Adore the
Pope little less than we do God, Preach Purgatory instead of Repentance, sell
Masses for a Groat, bestow Indulgences and Absolutions to the worst of Men. --
Though instead of Scripture we set up rotten Tradition; Though instead of Faith we
Preach up Faction; Though instead of Obedience we became guilty of Treason; Nay,
should we murder Princes, and prove false and deceitful to Mankind, yet Euge
bone serve, all would be well, and we in an instant thought worthy of a better
Kingdom by the Papists. -- If they (Jesuits) cannot peaceably compass the same,
they are to do it by Fire and Sword, Halter or Poison, never minding the
lawfulness of the Means, provided the Thing be but done. -- I confess, I should
admire their Zeal, and applaud their Order; but since one of them must go with
Dagger in his Hand, another with a Pistol, a third with a Bowl of Poison, (most
of them with one Mischief or other) to murder the King, and massacre the
People, to breed Confusions, and unhinge the Government, to destroy Religion,
and plant Idolatry; I cannot but utterly quarrel and blame their Zeal; and yet
no Pharisee ever Page 18.
compassed Sea and Land like them: No Difficulties scare them, no
Improbabilities amaze them, no Dangers repel them: Tu Regina jube; Let but the
Pope (He or She) command them, and away they go with as much alacrity and
readiness, as the Evil Spirit to persuade A^ab, that he may go up and fall at
Ramoth gilead.

Or thus. There is great boast made of Alms in the Romish Church, they sound
the Tho. Tenison, at S. Sepul. Apr. 6. 1681. p. 16.
Trumpet of them perpetually in our Ears. But what is the End to which a great
part of this Charity tends? -- The Scope they too often vainly aim it, is the
Blessing of a presumed Saint, who is ignorant of them; Security from the
External force of Evil Spirits, by the Charms and Spells of Monkish
Conjuration, a sort of Ecclesiastic Magic, which those very Spirits invent and
encourage -- Nay, sometimes the Scope is that very wicked one of Compounding
with Heaven by their liberal Alms, for their unforsaken Sins. And here in this
Nation (whilst the Island was enchanted with Popery) there were granted
Indulgences ever for what they call Deadly Sins, for many thousand Years to
come.

Or thus. A Jesuit being once asked, What W. Orme, at Guildhall March 27. 1681.
p. 33.
Ways and Means the Papists designed to take for the introducing their Religion
into England? Gave this Reply. -- We intended at first to do it either by
persuading and convincing the People with strength of Reason and Argument; but
because these have proved so often vain, therefore of late Years we have
pitched upon two new Methods and Resolutions. The one is to debauch and vitiate
the Nobility and Gentry, and to bring them off by degrees from all Sense, and
Care, and Kindness for Religion; which is easily to be done, by representing to
them a Sinful, Pleasurable Life, both Lawful and Safe. The other is to divide
the Commons into several Sects. -- Now how far the Papists have thriven in
these Designs, I shall leave to the Judgment and Determination of every sober
and unprejudiced Reader.

Or thus. For maintenance whereof (their Hickeringil at Colchester July 10.
1681. Postscript, p. 30.
Prelatical Pride and Rapacity) all their Pious Frauds and Cheats, all their
Lying Miracles, Indulgences, Purgatories, Limbusses, Crosses, Images, --
Fopperies, Plots, and Sham-plots are calculated, designed and contrived. I do
not think that every silly Papist knows these things; for they (poor Puppets)
dance, creep to the Cross, cringe, bow, drop Beads, Cross themselves, sprinkle
themselves with Holy Water, mumble their Aves, and show Tricks, as the Masters
of the Puppet-Play, with Wires (within the Curtain) actuate them, and make them
Frisk so ridiculously, Curvet, and show As David did before the Ark
such Gambols in Religion, especially at Processions (which I have seen in
Portugal) that the soberest Countenance cannot forbear a Smile, mixed with Pity.
But there is never a Jesuit amongst them, Pope nor Cardinal, but knows that I
here write God's Truth, and cannot forbear Laughing among themselves at these
Frauds; only they Sanctify these Cheats with a mollifying Epithet, calling
them Pious Frauds.

They hold (p. 33.) that the Pope is Alter Deus in terra, God upon Earth; And
others say, Christus in Coelo praesidet, Papa in terris residet; Christ is
Prince in Heaven, the Pope on Earth. Nay, their Hebrew Gloss upon Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
says, Si dixerint tibi quod Dextra sit Sinistra; talis Sententia tenenda est.
If they (the Pope and his Emissaries) tell thee, that thy Right Hand is thy
Left Hand, or thy Left Hand is thy Right Hand, yet you ought to believe them,
and be of that opinion. Another says, Sit ergo Domina nostra Roma Baculus in
aqua fractus, absit tamen ut crederem, quod viderim; Let our Mistress Rome be a
Stick that in the Water seems crooked, yet God forbid that I should believe my
own Eyes. -- No Man therefore (I say) can be a Papist, but he whose Eyes are
blinded by Education, or he who puts his own Eyes out by Atheism.

Or thus. This Council (of Trent) expresses Dr. Fowler before the Judges at
Gloucester, August 7. 1681. p. 14. 15, 16. Quod si aliquando Historias and
Narrationes Sacrae Scripturae, exprimi and figurari contigerit, doceatur
populus, non propterea Divinitatem figurari, quasi corporeis oculis conspici,
vel coloribus, aut figuris exprimi possit. Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
its allowance of Picturing the Divinity it self; and accordingly Pictures of
the Blessed Trinity, (Oh hateful Sight!) are ordinarily to be beheld in Popish
Churches. -- Nay they Pray unto them (Images) not only for Temporal or Ordinary
Blessings, but for Spiritual and Supernatural, such as the Pardon of their Sins.

What think you of their Doctrine of Transubstantiation? This is the most
prodigiously contradictious, Doctrine, that, I will not say, the Wit, but the
Madness of Men can possibly invent; it is a most wonderful complication of most
horrid Contradictions, and absolute Impossibilities. But this is not the worst
of it; it is also the Foundation of so Gross and Foul Idolatry, as is scarcely
to be named among the Gentiles, or to be found paralleled in Peruvia it self,
or the most Barbarous Parts of India. -- Here you see, that the Bread and Wine
are Worshipped by them, not as Representations of God, but as God himself.

What say you to their Doctrine of Purgatory? -- By this Doctrine the poor People
are brought into a most slavish State; by the means hereof their merciless
Tyrants the Priests hale them into worse than an Egyptian Bondage; who instead
of enjoining them the most Reasonable Duties, to which the Precepts of their
Savior oblige them, and which are most admirably adapted to the cleansing of
their Natures, etc. impose upon them a great number of ridiculous Services of
their own Invention. -- And as this Doctrine of theirs is groundless, so is it
as wicked; it being a most vile Affront to the Merits and Satisfaction of our
Blessed Savior: For in order to the establishing of this Doctrine they teach,
that the Passion of Christ takes away only the Gullt of Mortal Sins, (p. 19.)
not their Eternal Punishment; which is as Nonsensical, as False and Impious.

What say you to their well-known Doctrine of the Non-necessity of Repentance
before the imminent point of Death? -- What say you to the Doctrine of Opus
operatum? which makes the mere Work done in all Acts of Devotion, sufficient to
Divine Acceptance: particularly the bare Saying of Prayers, without either
minding what they say, or understanding it: and agreeably hereunto, the Romish
Church enjoins the saying of them in a Language unknown to the generality of
her Children.

Or thus. He (the Pope) takes out of their Hands the Holy Scriptures, the
greatest Gift Dr. Hooper before the King, No. 5. 1681. p. 16.
of the Holy Ghost; -- And instead of it puts a Legend; For the Word of Life
and Truth, undeniable fabulous Traditions; For Bread, a Stone; For Fish, a
Serpent. -- He takes from them the knowledge of the Prayers offered in their
Name, and lets them not understand their own Desires. So are the People to
appear before God dumb and senseless, like one of their Idols. All is to be
referred to the Priest, the Pardon of their Sins is to depend on his
Discretion. -- That Princes may not complain of Respect of Persons, they
Absolve in some Cases from the Obedience of God himself; and avowedly allow
what he as positively forbids: authorize Incestuous Conjunctions, and license
Perjury, O monstrum horrendum! Pass Pardons for all Sins committed against the
Divine Majesty. -- They give Divine Honor to Bread; which they call (p. 18.) a
God: and to an Image; which to the Eye they might better Transubstantiate: And
to cover their Idolatry, they commit Sacrilege, steal away one of the Ten
Commandments, and by their Index Expurgatorius blot the two Tables themselves.

Or thus. Though they (the Papists) have nothing Dr. Wallis at S. Mary's Oxon.
before the University, Oct. 9. 1681. p. 43.
of good Works at all; nay, though they be guilty of very great Immoralities,
yet, if they Confess to a Priest, and receive Absolution (which may be had at
an easy rate) they are then declared as Innocent as the Child that is new born
-- Nor is it necessary to this Absolution, that they should be Contrite, or
heartily Sorry; for Attrition; with Auricular Confession, shall pass instead of
Contrition: that is to effect, if they be but sorry for the Penance, though they
be not sorry for their Sin; or if all this should fail, it is but being at the
charge of an Indulgence or Pope's Pardon; that is, to purchase so many
Penyworth of other Men's Merits, -- which remain stored up in the Church's
Treasury, to be dispended at the Pope's Pleasure, to those who will give so
much Money for them. -- And this is what they require, by way of Commutation,
instead of Regeneration, Sanctification, Holiness and a Godly Life.

Or thus. We must not use any unlawful or indirect Means. -- This is the most
pernicious Dr. Calamy before the L. Mayor, May 29. 1682. p. 20.
and damnable Doctrine of Rome, though not always publicly owned, yet greedily
swallowed among them, and proved sufficiently from their unwearied Practices;
that in order to the propagation of their Faith or Church, any thing, every
thing becomes lawful; Killing and Massacring no Murder, Lying and Perjury no
Sin or Injury: that so good and great an End will Sanctify all Actions.

Or thus. For Auricular Confession, their great Intelligencer and
Lieger-Nuncio, the main B. E. before the Lords, No. 5. 1678.
Curb of the Laity, whereby the Clergy hold them in awe, in being admitted to
all the Secrets of States and Families, thereby to work their Purposes, their
Plots and Projects; and should that go down, then farewell Popery. -- These and
many other Doctrins of the like nature, are Matters of mere Interest and
Advantage; and if there were no Gain to be reaped from them, their chiefest
Champions would be ashamed of them. To these we may add many other Inventions
of that Church; as Ignorance, the Mother of their Devotion, which they are
bound to vow, and under the severest Penalties; so that it is a Mortal Sin so
much as to doubt of any part of their Religion. And this is their Children's
Play, to blindfold Men, that they may beat them.

Or thus. It Is a Religion, whose avowed Dr. Sharp before Commons, Apr. 11.
1679. p. 28, 29.
Principles, are to keep the People in Ignorance as much as they can; for with
them Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. -- It is a Religion, in which you are
so far from being permitted to try all things, and hold to that which is good,
according to the Apostle's Command, that you must wholly submit your Reason and
Understanding to the Dictates of an Infallible Judge, even so far (if one of
their greatest Authors say true) to be bound to believe Virtue to be Bad, and
Vice to be Good, if it shall please his Holiness to say so. -- It is a Religion
that will bring you back to the old Paganish Idolatry, or to that which is as
near it as can be. -- Nay, it is a Religion, that will engage you in a more
unnatural Idolatry, than ever the Pagans were guilty of, etc. -- All these
things put together, may perhaps rid you of a great many Uneasinesses and
Scruples, and Pangs of Conscience, with which you might (p. 32.) otherwise be
troubled, and which would not be so easily cured in the Way that you are now in.

Or thus. Would the Doctors go to School again? A School where they shall be
taught Dr. Butler at Windsor, December. 8. 1678. p. 32.
better Manners, than to rely upon the allsufficient Merits of their Savior;
than to be subject to any other Power than that of the Pope. And in order
thereunto, they must learn a new Lesson, to live a Single Life, (whether they
can do it honestly or no, it makes no matter) for fear lest having Wives and
Children, they should give the State Security of their Obedience to their
undoubted and lawful Sovereign.

If any Preachers (I say) in hopes to discourage their Flocks from looking
toward Popery, should make use of these or such like Dissuasives, 'twould be a
severe Reflection upon their Reputation, upon their Charity, upon their
Prudence, upon their Sincerity, with most Sober and Thinking Men. For who is
there, that would not discover these to be Invectives and Satyrs, instead of
Sermons and the delivery of the Word of God? How much Heat and Passion does
appear in them at first sight? How do they seem drenched in Choler and Gall?
And what satisfaction can it be to a Christian Congregation, to see their
Directors thus hurried away into all the Extravagances of an exasperated Mind,
and laboring to blow up their Flock to the same degree of Animosity, and make
them as Furious as themselves? It Is certain, Anger and Passion never look so
ill, as in a Pulpit: and it ought to be the chiefest care of a Preacher, to
shake of those Weaknesses before he gets up into that Chair. For if once Men
come to take the Bible in Hand, as others do the Sword, with a Mind embitter'd
and galled, it is no wonder if they strike blindly; no wonder if they do more
than is warrantable, and if for the working their Ends, they at last seem to
st^er by that Principle of Dolus an Virtus, quis in host requirit? No question
'twas the ill Effects of this kind of Holding forth, Luther discovered in his
Days, when he complained, The Post Evang. dom. 1. Adv.
World grows every day worse; Men are now more Revengeful, Covetous and
Licentious, than they were ever in the Papacy. And upon the same score, no
question, Erasmus made this Challenge; Bring forth, says he, but One, whom this
(Reformed) Gospel has Spong. adv. Hatten.
made Sober, Gentle, Meek, Modest, and I will show you many, that by it are
made Worse than they were before. And a little after: Truly it never happened
to me, to know any one Man, that was not the Worse for this kind of Gospelling.

And indeed, what better Fruit can be expected from such kind of Preaching as
this? When the Guides go out of the Way, ten thousand to one, but those that
are under their Conduct, will keep 'em Company in all their Extravagances. How
is it possible, that the Congregation should come out Meek and Sober, when
Those that are in the Pulpit have been for a whole Hour beating an Alarm to
them upon their Cushions, and sounding to Battle? How should they be otherwise
than Furious and Revengeful, when so much Venom has been infused into them from
those High Places? It Is natural for the Sheep to follow their Pastors; and I
know of no Benefit possibly to be reaped from such Furious Invectives; but only
such as the Lacedaemonians intended to their Children, when they showed 'em
Drunken Men, thinking there could be no more powerful Argument to discourage
them from being in love with that Vice, than to let 'em see the Deformity and
Beastliness of it in those who were overtaken by it. Such as this indeed may be
expected from these Pulpit-Satyrs; for to behold, how ill that Railing and
Haffing Humor looks in those Places, is Caution enough to any reasonable Man,
to make him take care of preventing the like Distempers in himself. And this
most especially, if he considers the Manner and Methods by which these work.

For such kind of Dissuasives as These, are not only bare Dissuasives, laying
down solid Grounds and Reasons, why their Flock should not join with such a
Communion; But they are made up of Profane Scurrility, Unmannerly Jeers,
Spiteful Exaggerations, Groundless Inferences, Unworthy Charges, Empty
Sophistry, and all those Petty Artifices, which Wit and Malice can possibly
invent, to make an Adversary odious. And what can be more odious than all this
in a Pulpit? To see a Man ascend into that Seat of the Gospel, with a
Gospel-Gown, a Gospel-Look; and the Gospel in his Hand, and when he has taken
his Text out of that Sacred Volume, with a short Preamble of Prayer,
immediately to fall to Character-making, to an exposing of his Neighbor, with
all the Arguments that Passion and Prejudice can suggest to him, is so
detestable an Entertainment in the Church, that I know of nothing like it, but
that of the Jews taking up Joh. 10. 31.
Stones in the Temple to sling at Christ. For all this Declaiming is really
nothing better than Flinging of Stones, it is to knock down their Neighbor, and
break his Head. And those who will but look back, and see how many Heads have
been broken by these kind of Stones slung out of the Pulpit, will easily be of
my mind. Such as this may however be tolerable in a Rabble, who are supposed to
know no better, and whose Complements are to Shout, Revile and Abuse: but to
hear this from Scholars, from Gown-men, from the Clergy, from the Pulpits, is a
most Absurd Profanation, and most unworthy especially of those who pretend to
a Reformation.

I cannot therefore but advise all sorts of Preachers, in case they fear their
Congregation may be seized with Doubts, and tempted to leave their Communion,
that they would seek other sorts of Arguments to Secure and Settle them. For
however these kind of Ungentile Satyrs, may perhaps rid them of a great many
Uneasinesses, and Scruples and Pangs of Conscience; yet I cannot think the
Method to be Apostolical. 'Twould certainly be more according to the Spirit of
the Gospel, to Preach nothing but Gospel Truths, to be Meek and Moderate, and
Peaceable; to spread no Calumnies, inculcate no Falsities, to exaggerate
nothing, to Misconstrue nothing, to make no False Inferences, and
Half-Descriptions; and as not to encourage or connive at Vice, so neither to
practice it in the way of Preaching against it. It Is very Ridiculous to see a
Man doing the very thing he condemns; to hear a Man pronouncing Sentence
against Equivocating and Lying, with an Equivocation or Lie in his Mouth: To
hear another condemning Cruelty, and at the same time inspiring his Auditory
with Blood and Revenge: To hear a Third reproving some Principles to be the
Doctrine of Devils, with such Arguments, as require the assistance of a Fiend at
the Elbow. These, I say, and such like, are very Ridiculous; and therefore I
look upon it more becoming all Pretenders to the Gospel, to avoid all such
indirect and unjust Means. If they have any thing to say against the Doctrins
or Practices of their Neighbors, let 'em do it as becomes Christians. Honesty
and Plain-dealing are commendable every where, and most of all in the Pulpit;
and amongst all sorts of Cheats, there are none worse than the Pulpit-Cheat.

If the Papists Religion be judged to be False and Erroneous, the way to show
it, would be to produce their Avowed and Received Doctrins, and prove them to
be contrary to Scripture, and to the Practice of the Primitive Church; this
done without Passion and Indirect Means, would not be unjust nor so offensive:
but why should False things, and such Doctrins as they Disavow, be laid to
their Charge? Why should it be positively asserted in the Pulpits,

1. That the different Orders amongst them, are so many Sects, and nothing but
Fanatics packed up in Convents. 2. That the Sacrament with them is a Real,
Propitiatory, but not a Representative Sacrifice. And that Christ's Body is
really broken, and his Blood actually spilt on their Altars. 3. That in
Transubstantiation they renounce all their Five Senses. 4. That the Pope in his
Chair cannot Err, if he would; and all others, without his Assistance, cannot
but Err. 5. That they Prophecy in an Unknown Tongue. 6. That they make no
other use of Confession, than what Professed Drunkards do of Vomiting. 7. That
their Saints are Canonized for Treasons, detestable Villainies, as a Reward of
Strife and every Evil Work. 8. That they Pray to a Crucifix, as well as to
Christ himself, and attribute as much Satisfaction to it, as to the Blood of
their Redeemer. 9. That Confession tends to the Debauching both Laity and
Clergy. 10. That every thing is Meritorious with them, that is for the Church's
Interest. 11. That they change Scripture into Legends, the Sacraments into
Shows, Preach Purgatory instead of Repentance, and Faction instead of Faith.
12. That to be False and Deceitful, is to become worthy of Heaven. 13. That
sometimes with Money they Compound with Heaven, for their unforsaken Sins. 14.
That if the Pope and his Emissaries say the Right Hand is the Left, the Papists
are bound to believe it. 15. That no Man can be a Papist, but he whose Eyes are
blinded by Education, or he who puts out his Eyes by Atheism. 16. That they
Pray unto Images for Pardon of their Sins. 17. That the Passion of Christ takes
away only the Guilt of Mortal Sins, not their Eternal Punishment. 18. That the
bare Saying of Prayers, without minding what they say, are acceptable to God.
19. That they appear before God in their Churches Dumb and Senseless, like an
Idol. 20. That they avowedly allow, what God positively forbids. 21. That to
Confess and be Absolved, is sufficient for the Forgiveness of Sins, though there
be no Sorrow for the Sins at all, but only for the Penance. 22. That an
Indulgence or Pope's Pardon purchased with Money, serves with them instead of
Sanctification and a Godly Life. 23. That Auricular Confession is the Means
whereby the Clergy work their Plots and Projects, it is a matter of mere
Interest, and were there no Gain in it, their Chief Champions would be ashamed
of it. 24. That they are bound to Vow Ignorance under the severest Penalties.
25. That their avowed Principles, are to keep the People in Ignorance. 26. That
they teach their People better Manners, than to rely upon the all-sufficient
Merits of Christ. 27. That their Clergy must live a Single Life, whether
Honestly or no, it makes no matter. 28. That the Reason why they must live
Singly, is for fear, lest having Wives and Children, they should give the State
Security of their Obedience to their Sovereign, etc.
Why should these things, I say, be so positively charged against them from the
Pulpits? It Is certain the Papists disown these Doctrins, and Preach against
them as much as those very Doctors who appear so zealous to condemn them. If
the Representer had but read such Sermons as these, he needed not have looked
farther, to have made good his Charge of Misrepresenting. The most that can be
said of these Points, is, that some of them are Mistakes of the Preachers;
others Exaggerations; others Inferences from some single Author, or some Abuse
in Practice others Absolute Falsities, and Wicked Calumnies. And which of all
these sorts of Arguments are fit for the Pulpit? It Is certain whatsoever is
delivered thence, ought to be weighed with the greatest Caution and Exactness
possible, because it is delivered with the Bible in Hand, which is little less
than Swearing with the Hand upon the Bible; it is accepted by the People as the
Word of God and Truth; it is supposed to be their Duty, and in the Service of
God. And now if instead of all this, Mistakes, weak Inferences, peevish
Exaggerations, Falsities and Calumnies are advanced, and as positively laid
down, as the very Scripture; Good God! what an Abuse both of the Place, the
Time, the Function and the Flock! What a Wrong to Neighbors, whilst they are
most unjustly traduced, made contemptible and scandalous! And what a
Disturbance to the Nation, whilst Animosities are created and fomented among
Subjects! And the Pulpit (I am ashamed to say it) become the Fountain of these
Mischiefs both to Soul and Body. Is not this to turn the Seat of the Gospel,
into a Chair of Pestilence? This is so Visible and Great an Abomination both
before God and Man, that I hope there is no need of Arguments to lay it open;
it is to be hoped, that none that takes up the Gospel, will so lay by his
Conscience at the same time, as to fall into these Unchristian Extravagances.
For, to say all in a word, I think, He that will accuse his Neighbor falsely in
the Pulpit, may with the same Conscience do the like at the Bar. The latter may
be more Infamous; but the Former is the Greater Crime.

Fourth Caution.
THAT, when Preachers pretend to refute the Tenets of any other Church, they
would forbear all Scurrility, Profaneness, Irreverent Expressions, and Comical
Declamations, which do not at all suit with the Subject of Religion, and are
nowhere so Absurd as in the Pulpit. And therefore if in the Confuting some
Doctrins or Practices of the Catholics, any Minister should deliver himself
after this manner:

Pilgrimages, going Barefoot, Hair Shirts Dr. South before the Court at
Christchurch Oxon. page 200,
and Whips, with other such Gospel Artillery, are their only Helps to Devotion.
-- It seems that with them a Man sometimes cannot be a Penitent, unless he also
turn Vagabond, and Foots it to Jerusalem. -- He that thinks to expiate a Sin by
going Barefoot, does the Penance of a Goose, and only makes one Folly the
atonement of another. Paul indeed was scourged and beaten by the Jews; but we
never read, that he beat or scourged himself: and if they think his keeping
under his Body imports so much, they must first prove, that the Body cannot be
kept under by a virtuous Mind, and that the Mind cannot be made virtuous, but
by a Scourge; and consequently, that Thongs and Whipcord are Means of Grace,
and things necessary to Salvation. The truth is, if Men's Religion lies no
deeper than their Skin, it is possible they may scourge themselves into very
great Improvements. -- But they will find that Bodily Exercise touches not the
Soul; -- and consequently that in this whole Course they are like Men out of
the Way; let them Slash on never so fast, they are not at all the nearer to
their Journeys end. And howsoever they deceive themselves and others, they may
as well expect to bring a Cart as a Soul to Heaven by such Means.

Or thus. What say you to the Popish Doctrine Dr. Fowler before the Judges at
Gloucester, August 7. 1681.
of the Sacrifice of the Mass? -- According to this Doctrine, our Blessed
Savior must still to the end of the World be laid hold on by Sinners, be
ground with their Teeth, and sent down into their impure Paunches, as often as
the Priest shall pronounce this Charm, Hoc est enim Corpus meum: and it seems
that he was a false Prophet, when he said upon the Cross, It is finished,
seeing there was such an infinite deal of Loathsome Drudgery still to be
undergone.

Or thus. For Purgatory, it is not material in it self, whether it be, or where
it be, no B. E. before the Lords, No. 5. 1678.
more than the World in the Moon: but so long as that false Fire serves to
maintain a true one, and his Holiness's Kitchen smoaks with the Rents he
receives for releasing Souls from thence, which never came there, it concerns
him and his to see to it, that it be not suffered to go out.

If any Minister, I say, in Confuting the Doctrins or Practices of the
Catholics, should deliver himself in this manner, 'twould be a thing very
unbecoming the Pulpit: because all things that concern Religion, ought to be
treated with a certain Modesty, Gravity and Decorum. Every Minister should bear
in mind, that as he is distinguished from other Ranks of Mankind, by the
Modesty and Decency of his Habit; so he should be careful, that the same Good
Qualities appear in the performance of every part of his Duty; and that every
Action should speak as plainly his Character, as the Habit he wears. Upon this
score it is, that as it would be very scandalous, to see Ministers Habited like
Men of other Stations, of the Street, of the Court, of the Stage; so is it as
Ridiculous, to hear them in their Pulpits, under show of expounding the Gospel,
fall into all the Scurrility of the Stage, the Profaneness of the Mobile, and
the Drolling of Petty Declamators. It Is certain, no Men love to be laughed out
of their Religion. And even those who have made choice of the Wrong, yet
through Mistake are so fastened to it, that whosoever turns their Worship or
Belief to Ridicule, shall most certainly raise their Animosity, and make them
Peevish, but never win them from their Error. For who can be pleased to see
that which is most Dear to them, abused, and treated in Pulpits with the
rudeness of the Streets? If any Churchmen have so much Charity, as to labor for
the recovery of such, whom they judge to be in Error, they ought to deal with
them with all the Moderation imaginable, open their Wounds with a Tender Hand:
for as Compassion softens and heals, so Roughness and Inhumanity serve only to
gall and increase the Sore.

When Men have done their best to secure their Salvation in the choice of
Religion, and having searched the Scriptures, examined Antiquity and Fathers,
and amongst other Points of their Faith take the Real Presence, for Instance,
for a Christian Truth; it is certain they must have a Respect for the Mystery,
and adore the Goodness of God, who is wonderful in all his Works. And when they
are thus affected, how must it move them, to hear this scoffed and mocked at
under the Irreligious and Profane Terms, of Legerdemain, Hocus pocus, A Trick,
A Cheat, A Drudgery for Christ, etc. Can any thing appear to them more unworthy
of a Christian Spirit, than this sort of barbarous Logic; than this inhuman and
enflaming Eloquence? To see things most Sacred thus daubed over with Pulpit
Dirt and Mire, far beyond all the Profanation of Belshazzar, who only drank
out of the Sacred Vessels of the Temple, but never so vilifi'd them, as to
expose them to the Contempt of the Mobile! But the Scriptures are to be
fulfilled; these assure us there shall come Mockers in the last time: and the
next Verse tells us who they are Th^se be they, who Separate Jude, Ver. 18, 19.
themselves, Sensual, having not the Spirit: For though Michael, as it is observed
by St. Jude, in Disputing even with the Devil, brought no Railing Accusation
against him; yet these sort of Men, shall both Rail and Blaspheme; their very
Mark being to Speak evil of those things which they know not. Hi autem,
quaecunque Ib. v. 9, 10.
quidem ignorant, blasphemant. As therefore Preachers desire to have no share
in this Character, I think it is convenient they should be careful to avoid all
kind of contemptuous and mocking Reflections upon the Religion of their
Neighbor; treating all Parties with a becoming Modesty; and as not to approve
of Errors, which soever they be, so neither to forget themselves while they
undertake to refute them. Let all Mockery and Drolling be left to the Stage,
and a decent Gravity be observed in the Pulpits.

Fifth Caution.
THAT, if any Preacher should in his Sermon peevishly lash out against the
Religion of his Prince, he would be careful not to Dedicate such a Sermon to
his Prince, whose Religion he has exposed as Infamous and Ridiculous. And
therefore if any Doctor should in the heat of his Zeal in this or the like
manner inveigh against the Church of Rome.

As to the Guilt of the Former, i. e. of the D. B. W. in a Sermon Preached Jan.
30. 1684/5. but Published afterward, and Dedicated to King James II. page 26.
Church of Rome, whom in the Parallel I here call Israel, will not their
Usurped Supremacy, so contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, Mat. 20. 25. and
afterward their pretended Infallibility, the only Prerogative of Heavens
Crown, taken in to justify that and every other Usurpation whatever, too too
nearly resemble the Apostasy of Israel? And what have these Calves of Dan and
Bethel (to follow the Allusion) ever since bleated out, but the
Excommunicating, Deposing and Extirpating of Princes, and Hell and Damnation to
all, who would not join with them in the Holy Cheat? The ill Consequences
whereof, have been felt nowhere more than in these Kingdoms, whereof we are;
witness the Slavery in which (p. 27.) Prince and People, for so many Ages
together were held by it; and when the Yoke was cast off, what Plots,
Conspiracies and Treasons were still hatching by those of that Communion? So
notorious, so hateful were their Practices, till at length all that befell the
Nation, was suspected to arise from thence; so general was the Odium of that
Name, that like a common Thief, every Felony, by whomsoever committed, is
charged upon them, etc.

If any Doctor, I say, should in this manner inveigh against the Church of
Rome, the Preacher ought to be careful, when he Prints his Sermon, not to
Dedicate it to his Sovereign, a Member of that Communion. For certainly, a
Sermon that accuses the Church and Religion of Catholics, of Tyranny,
Usurpation, Cheating, of being Hateful and Odious, does not seem very fit for
the Patronage of a Catholic King. I think there can be no greater Affront, than
for a Preacher thus to expose his Prince's Religion under all the hateful Forms
that can be, and then to desire his Prince's Protection for the Infamy he has
cast upon it. This is just as if he should say to him, May it please your
Majesty, I have Abused and Ridiculed your Religion behind your back to your
Subjects; and now I am come to do it over again before your Face, and I expect
you shall uphold me in it. What greater piece of Confidence and Presumption can
there be than this? It Is a thing not to be ventured on to a Subject, though but
of a middle Rank; for who is there so Phlegmatic amongst them all, that can
hear his Religion derided and rendered odious, and think himself obliged by the
Abuse? I am confident at least, there is no Preacher whatsoever, would take it
for a Complement, to have his People and Persuasion made Contemptible in Print,
and then to have a Present made to him of the Satyr. What a Rashness then must
it needs be, to do this to a Prince? Is it to be thought, he has not as much
Kindness for his Religion, as any Gown-man for his? Can he spend so many Hours
in Prayer, be so Exemplary Pious in his Devotions, and so Exact in all
Observances of his Church, and after all take it kindly to see his Church
vilifi'd and contemned? At least, can it enter into the Heart of any Rational
Man, that a Prince who has hazarded Three Kingdoms for his Religion, should be
welcomed to his Crown with the Present of a Sermon, in which his Religion is
thus exposed to the Scorn of all his Subjects? Certainly none can be so
absurdly stupid. I hope therefore there is no necessity of enforcing this
Caution with any farther Arguments, the improbability of the Attempt making
that needless.

Neither would it be a Piece of much better Manners, if a Prince of the
Catholic Communion being come to the Crown, and having called a Parliament to
Settle the Affairs of the Nation, a Doctor of another Communion should in these
Terms Hold-forth to the Members of the Lower House.

To conclude, I would desire you to observe, That it is a Church-of-England
Loyalty Dr. Sherlock to the Commons, May 29. 1685. page 31, 32.
I persuade you to; This our King Approves, Commends, Relies on, as a Tried and
Experienced Loyalty, which has Suffered with its Prince, but never yet Rebelled
against him; A Loyalty upon firm and steady Principles, and without Reserve.
And therefore to keep us true to our Prince, we must be true to our Church, and
to our Religion. It is no Act of Loyalty, to Accommodate or Complement away our
Religion, and its Legal Securities; for if we change our Religion, we must
change the Principles of our Loyalty too, and, I am sure, the King and the
Crown will gain nothing by that; for there is no Lasting and Immovable Loyalty
as that of the Church of England. -- I deny not, but some who are Papists, in
some Junctures of Affairs, may, and have been very Loyal; but, I am sure, the
Popish Religion is not; the Englishman may be Loyal, but not the Papist; And
yet there can be no security of those Men's Loyalty, whose Religion in any Case
teaches them to Rebel.

If any Doctor should Hold-forth, I say, in these Terms, 'twould not be a Piece
of the best Manners; Because there can be no greater Rudeness in the World,
than for a Minister thus abusively to Reflect upon his Prince, and to tell his
Subjects, that they have a Sovereign, whose Religion teaches to Rebel. What
greater Affront can there possibly be offered to a Crowned Head, than to be
thus vilely exposed to his own Subjects, and by a Subject too? It Is certain, to
a Generous and Noble-Hearted Prince, who knows how to value his Word, and makes
Conscience of his Duty, nothing can be no more Displeasing, than to hear of
False-heartedness, Treachery and Disloyalty; to hear of it, I say, even in
Subjects, must of necessity be Odious to him: and what must it be, when his own
Subjects are assured from the Pulpit, that even He himself professes a
Religion, which encourages Disloyalty, and in some Cases, even teaches to
Rebel? Can a Prince who has an Abhorrence to Treachery and Disloyalty, be
pleased to hear, that what he so much detests in others, is found in the
Religion, he nourishes with in his own Breast? Certainly, next to the Striking
at his Crown, as nothing can be more Disrespectful, so nothing can be more
Offensive than this. Besides, must not a Prince be very sensible of such kind
of Mockery in Preaching, whilst his Subjects are encouraged to be Loyal, but
with an Argument in the Close, which is enough to blow a Trumpet to Rebellion:
For what more powerful Argument to ill-designing Men, than to have this
Assurance of the Religion of the Prince?

And then again, when a Prince has called a Parliament in order to a Settlement
of the Affairs of the Nation, what a kind of good Subject must he be, who in
this manner sets himself to raise an Aversion in the Hearts of this Assembly
against their Prince, by exposing his Religion under so vile a Character, that
it is impossible, where the Charge is believed to True, to entertain very kind
Thougts for any that is a Professor of such Unnatural Principles? It Is well
known, that when a Prince and Parliament meet, it is the Sovereign's Desire,
there should be a mutual good Understanding between himself and that Council;
and that none can more affront the Prince, than to raise Jealousies in their
Heads, and disturb their Minds with Foul Idea's touching Himself and his
Religion: What need then of further Arguments to discourage such kind of
Preaching; since, however it may sound big of being Loyal and True to the King,
it does notwithstanding work the quite contrary Effect, and even answer the
Wishes of the most wicked Enemies of the Crown?

In this manner it injures Him as Sovereign; and were there nothing of this in
it; yet must it be very unwelcome to him, to hear such a Character of the
Subjects of his own Communion, that there can be no Security in their Loyalty;
since being but newly come to the Crown, he cannot but remember, that it is but
a little time since he was a Subject himself. And how near this comes to his
own Person, let every one consider. I meddle here nothing with the
Controversy; but I believe, that all Honest Men, that know how hearty a Lover
this our Sovereign is of Loyalty and Fidelity, and how Sincere in his Religion,
need no other Argument to conclude him a Calumniator, who has thus Aspersed his
Religion, and set it forth as Disloyal, and teaching to Rebel: Since if it
really were so whosoever professed a Love to it, and Loyalty together, must of
necessity be a Dissembler on the one Side or the other; there being no
possibility of being heartily Loyal, and yet be True to a Church, which teaches
to Rebel.

All that remains here worthy of Consideration, is, whether it be Wise or
Mannerly for Preachers, to make their Prince's Religion Odious and Contemptible
to his Subjects, tho they make no Dedications of it, or do not Preach it to a
Parliament House? The Reasons for the Doubt are these:

1. Because it does not look like the part of a good Subject, to undervalue his
Prince to his own People. And yet he that inveighs against his Religion, seems
to do so: For when such and such Points of his Faith are painted out and
condemned as Ridiculous, Nonsense, Profane, Impious, the Effects of Madness,
full of Contradictions, contrary to Sense and Reason, Charms, Hocus-pocus,
Cheats, gross Idolatry, worse and more Unnatural than that of Barbarians and
Pagans. Are not all these most severe Reflections upon his Sense, his Judgment
and Reason? Whilst He being supposed to approve and embrace all those Tenets,
that are stamped with these Ignominious and Unworthy Titles, is at the same time
supposed not to know the difference between Sense and Nonsense, Reason and
Contradictions, Judgment and Madness, Christianity and Idolatry; and especially
when after these Black Characters this Conclusion brings up, These things are
so Plain, that any Man of Sense, any Child may see it. Is not this within one
Step of ranking all of that Communion in the List of Madmen or Fools? It leaves
'em all, at least, at the Mercy of the Congregation, by their Inferring
Faculty, to make what they please of them.

2. Because such a way of Preaching Reflects upon the Government of their
Sovereign. The Reason is evident; because when They set forth the Religion of
their Prince, as teaching and encouraging Usurpation, Tyranny, Massacres, all
sorts of Cruelty and Treachery, of introducing Slavery, and making no
Conscience of any thing that is for the Interest of Mother Church: This
certainly fills the Subjects with Fears and Jealousies, makes them uneasy
under such a Government, and indisposes them for giving a hearty Service to
such a Prince, who, they are made to fear, intends nothing better for them,
than Violence and Slavery. Whosoever considers the Temper of this Nation, how
susceptible the People are of Fears, how jealous of their Liberty, how
credulous at the Noise of Plots and Designs; cannot but know, how far a Hint or
sly Insinuation will go with them; and that one Innuendo, that touches upon the
right String, will set them more in a Ferment, than open Danger will do any
other Nation in the World. It Is strange, how sensibly the Noise of a Cloud, or
a Storm, or a Snake in the Grass, works upon them, though in the Quiet of a
general Calm: To talk to them of Patience, Non-resistance, of being ready to
suffer all that God shall permit for their Sins, is to fill their Heads with
Fire and Fagots; and a Word of Slavery carries their Fancies into the middle of
Egypt. Now when a People is thus disposed, how can those Preachers be good
Subjects, who cannot get six Steps above their Congregation, but immediately
they discover Clouds hanging over the People's Heads, they fright them with
Storms and Tempests, and then pretending to allay their Fears with the Comfort
of Have but Patience, be ready to suffer, all this will blow over, they fright
them ten times worse than before, and slily improve their Comforts into a
Second Storm? Now what kind of Subjects must these be, and how wonderfully
Loyal, that by these Contrivances and subtle Insinuations, can fill his
Majesty's People with as much Disturbance, and render them as Uneasy under the
most benign Influence of a Gracious and Indulgent Prince, as if they had the
heavy Weight of Tyranny galling their Shoulders? I know the Pretense is
Religion, and to preferve them from Error: and it is no more than a Pretense;
for it is certain, Men may be taught to be Good Christians, without being made
Bad Subjects; and the disturbing the Government, is no necessary Preparation
for directing People the Way to Heaven. Patience and Resignation may be easily
taught without the help of Storms; the Scripture furnishes Matter and Examples
enough without going up into the Clouds. And I wish this Modern way of teaching
Patience, be not a new kind of Pulpit-Drum to alarm People into the Spirit of
Rebellion.

I would not be for raising Scandals against any Society of Men much less
against those who pretend to the Gospel. But when I see the Effects of such
kind of Preaching, how it raises Discontents and Jealousies, and becomes an
Aggrievance to the Prince, I cannot but wish, that such as follow this Method,
and intend the Mischief, were more Loyal; and such as intend it not, were more
Wise. Howsoever it be, I am sure the Method is unwarrantable, and not at all
becoming those, who would willingly be thought the Best Preachers in the World,
and the Best Subjects.

FINIS.

