Licensed January 9th 1668/9

Roger L'Estrange

THE Present State OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE, As to the Government, Laws,
Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of that
Commonwealth: With a Relation of the present War in CANDIA.

Written by J. Gailhard, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar,
1669.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir John Trevor, One of His MAJESTY'S Principal
Secretaries OF STATE.
Right Honorable,
YOur Excellent Name is not only in Luster here, where the wisdom of a most
intelligent and clearsighted Prince has chosen you to so great and near a
Trust, to the perfect Content and Satisfaction of all sober and disinteressed
Persons; But among Strangers, (those of the greatest Power and Intimacy with
their Princes) your Prudence and Conduct has rendered you so conspicuous, that
at Aix-la-Chapelle, and at Paris, they all gave you the happy Omen of being at
your Return into England, in no less a Station then that in which his Majesty's
Wisdom, and most Judicious Election, has placed you.

Your Goodness will therefore forgive me, at the least (and this nation will, I
am confident, be far from reproaching me) that I assume a Liberty of making to
you a Tender of the Productions of my Industry and Observation, in a Discourse
of such Affairs, Negotiations, and Managements, as hold so near a proportion
with the grandeur of your Spirit, and Eminency of your Charge.

The Republic of VENICE, as it is Ancient and Venerable, so it is Strong and
Vigorous; as her frequent wrestlings with Popes, Emperors, Kings of France and
Spain, and other Potent Neighbors (in all which Encounters she has come off
with Honor) and most of all, her honorable struglings with the Ottoman Power
can Testify. And that she is Grave and Wise, let that one instance of many
suffice, (viz.) her judicious untwisting that formidable League at Cambray.

That this Wise Republic has sometimes been seen in Troubles and Disorder, is
no more to be wondered at, then that Clocks or Watches should be sometimes
amiss; not for any defect of Art, but by reason of the moisture or other
intemperateness of weather: So here, the distemper of times, more then the
default of Governors, has sometimes produced disorders, though perhaps more
rarely then in most Nations in Christendom.

Her Princes are the Sons of Nobles, instructed early in the Discipline and
Concerns of their Country; And like true Heroes, have for almost a Thousand
years protected this Virgin from the Rude Attaques of those Hectors and
impetuous Assaillants, that have at several times been attempting to violate
her Honor.

It had been an unexcusable indecency for me to have made my present Address to
a person of any other sort, then to one whose temper of mind, and known
Abilities, were proportionably formed to those great Affairs, which are the
subject of the present Discourse: In whose person is united the Genius of so
many of those Excellent Men, who in their several Ages were the Oracles and
Generous Supporters of their Country.

With these Impressions I secure my self of Your Honors Candor and
Condescension, and in all Humility, presume to subscribe my self,

Right Honorable, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, J. Gailhard.

TO THE READER.
IT was a Saying of Solomon, There is no new thing under the Sun: We who live
some Thousands of years after him, have much more reason to say so, seeing we
have the experience of so many who came after him, and went before us. It is
certainly true, that the world follows now the same course as it did before,
and all the works of God and Nature are submitted to that Order which he settled
them in from their Creation; the day succeeds to the night, one season to
another, and the stars have the same motions and influences as they had long
ago: So it is in matter of Arts and Sciences, which for certain we derive from
some of those who went before us, from whom we received some hints, and direct
or indirect lights and directions about them: The very opinions about matters
of Divinity or Philosophy, which to some seem new, were of old: And in this
sense there is no new thing under the Sun. Yet every particular man has not
the knowledge of every one of these things; and though they had, yet some
additions may be made to them, there being degrees of Knowledge and Science;
and every Art may receive some additional degree of perfection; all do not know
all things alike, and some thing is ever left to be acquired by our Labors,
Studies and Industry: And as those who come last, stand upon the Shoulders of
others, so they can see further off; and to the experience of the former, they
may join their own Observations, and so carry things further then they were
before. Therefore rational and judicious men will slight nothing, but they will
hear and see before they approve or condemn; and yet when they are come to
that, they will be wary, according to that Lesson which the Rabbis say Moses
gave the Children of Israel at his coming down from the Mountain, before the
reading of the Law to them, Be quick to hear, slow to speak, slower to anger,
and slowest of all to judge. It is a charitable disposition in some to be
imitated by all, to pass by the defects of some things, for the sake of some
perfections in the same. And indeed it is but justice, that as the good which
is in a thing or person cannot justify the evil in the same; so that evil
should not make others condemn the good which is in it; but as I condemn a man
for his Vices, so I must commend him for his Virtues; for I would esteem what
deserves to be esteemed, wheresoever I find it.

And as I do so as to the persons of others, the same method I ought to observe
about their works. It is an universal truth, that every thing here has its
failings and defects. We find spots in the Moon, but withal there is a light
in it; as long as we receive no harm by the one, and the other is beneficial
to us, let us be content without. Furthermore, we know that it is not usual
(and I dare say possible) to find one who excells in every thing, but every one
applies himself to that which most of all suits his Genius and Inclination, and
consequently, is the more likely to succeed in it; wherefore we ought to
hearken to any one about things which are in his own way, and we must not judge
till we have seen; this being the Rule, judge not before the time.

I desire the Reader to observe it on this occasion: for, to carry on the
design I have undertaken, I must in some things tread the steps of others;
neither can it be expected in reason, that the State of so ancient and so
flourishing a Republic, should have been kept from the knowledge of other
Nations: she has acted so important a part upon the Stages of EUROPE and ASIA,
that the best Writers have had matter enough afforded them to satisfy the
curiosity of those that were nigh and far off about it; yet all have used
different ways, and those who have written after, were never the less
acceptable for it, because there is ever one thing or other to be added,
omitted or altered, for no man says all that can be said upon a Subject; and
if just when things are upon the Stage men do not agree about their true state,
what shall it be when they are related a long time after? So that People judge
of them not only according to their inclination, but also conjunctures and
emergencies do in time very much alter the face of things; though in some
Republics they are not so subject to alteration as in most Monarchies; for let
persons be what they please, the Laws still remain the same, and they are the
Sovereign; but in the Government of single Persons they alter according to the
inclination of the Prince, and the mind of his Ministers, as they are
overruled by the necessity of Affairs: which I speak of, not that I should
think it to be an inconveniency attending Monarchies, so far from it, that I
look upon it as one of the greatest advantages of this Government over
Republics; for a liberty is allowed to find remedies fit and proper for new
distempers felt or feared, when others are doting upon the idol of their old
ways, there wanting in Republics a person by whose Authority all the rest may
be over-swayed, and be brought to that which the present reason of State,
differing from the former, does require.

The present Wars of Candia, (which is the chief, and one place besides
excepted, the only stage of action in these parts of the world) and some kind
of superficial knowledge I have of the Affairs of Italy, made me choose the
State of Venice, as the most important that could be spoken of in the present
Conjuncture; the more, because I thought men would have the curiosity to know
the condition of that Commonwealth, which at present makes so much noise in
the World, by reason of her stout and vigorous opposition to so dreadful an
Enemy as the Turk is. And also I am obliged to answer a Challenge I received
from some persons of Note, to perform a conditional kind of promise I made in
my book of The present State of Italy, in the place where I treat of this
Republic, to give a Relation of it: Besides that, the subject is so worthy in
it self, that I could not treat of any Outlandish State better regulated then
this is, though of late, through the private ends of particular men, some
corruptions are crept into it, as at one time or other it has ever fallen out
with the best Commonwealths in the World: wherefore in this case I speak the
good and the bad, I neither flatter nor slander, but I commend and condemn, as
I see occasion for it, though I do not undertake to pass any judgment upon
things, only I lay them down in their own natural colors.

In pursuance of my Design, I could not omit some things spoken by others,
because they are obvious and necessary, which is unavoidable in things that
have the nature of a Commonplace: But I desire the Reader would take the pains
to compare, then he will easily observe the difference of methods, and how much
I endeavor to use a clear and a substantial Discourse. And because I know that
now men care not for long and dear Books, some having not much time, and others
no money to spare that way; therefore I have studied brevity, for fear of being
tedious, and have compiled a Book (if I may so name these few leaves) which
shall be cheap, and little enough to be easily carried in a man's pocket; and it
will be a great satisfaction to me if ever I do any thing which may prove
acceptable and useful to the Nation. And as Books as well as Clothes must be
modish and fashionable, as now in France their Memoires, and in England
Relations; and because a Luster is to be given to things, and (to please
Booksellers) a considerable name to Relations, In this I have conformed my
self to that method.

THE Present State OF VENICE.
TO write well of so worthy a Subject, would require the pen of a public
Minister, endued with a transcendent capacity, who for many years had resided
on the place, and managed many public important affairs, and in a Conjuncture
which had produced many Changes and Revolutions, and several events increased
and multiplied by reason of the violence of the minds of men of inveterate
enmity, inward passions, and of nigh and remote interests, and who being taught
by age, times and experience, which are the right guides, the safe and faithful
companions of the actions of men, had thereby had fair occasions of framing a
perfect and true Relation of the State of this Republic. But this being not
the usual practice of public persons, is more to be wished then hoped for; and
therefore liberty for that, is left to particular persons, who being not taken
up with public affairs, may spare some of their time about it. Out of the
consideration of this, I am now desirous to give the Public this token of my
zeal and affection, wherein I walk upon good, real and sure grounds: But
because I intend to avoid speaking of superfluous and unnecessary things, I
will mention those only which may be beneficial and necessary to be known,
which I reduce to six heads. The first will be about the whole State of which
that Republic is at present possessed either by Land or by Sea, and withal
something shall be said of the quality of their more considerable Inland
Cities, their Riches, Customs, and Carriage of their Subjects. In the Second,
I will treat of their yearly incomes and expenses. In the Third, Of their Land
and Sea Forces, whether they be ordinary or extraordinary, and wherein they
consist. The Fourth, shall be concerning their manner of Government, and the
administration of their Laws and Justice. In the Fifth, I intend to speak of
the nature and manners of the Venetians. And Lastly, I will show how they stand
affected to their Neighbors and other Princes of Europe.

To begin with the first, I Will say, that this Republic is, by common consent
of all men, esteemed to be the first and the greatest in Power and Authority of
all other States in Italy: because she owes to none but to her self the ground;
and beginning of her dignity she ever enjoyed her liberty, and never depended
on, nor ever owned any Prince as Superior: besides that, it is the most
ancient of any State in Italy: for she had her birth in the Year 421, the 25.
of March about noon, above 1246 years ago; and all this while she made the
Laws whereby she Governed her self. It Is true, she had but a weak and
inconsiderable beginning out of the ruins of some Cities of Italy, but in
succession of time, and with a continual concourse of people which resorted to
it out of all places round about, she is not only grown very rich, but has
also gotten a vast and a Potent Dominion; whence it may well be called a great
and a mighty Republic, full of Men, Arms and Riches, more then any other
State in Italy. which upon the continent, or as they call it, Terra Firma, has
three whole Provinces, namely, Istria, Friuli, with the Marca Trevigiana,
besides that which she enjoyes in Lombardy, either toward the Dukedom of
Milan, or that of Ferrara; which Lands joining one with another, may also upon
occasion supply and assist each other. But upon the Sea, the Dominion of the
Venetians goes very far, from Venice it self as far as Candia, which Island
alone, if she were in the power of an active Price, could without question much
oppose the ambition and pride of the Common Enemy; for this Kingdom setting
forth a considerable number of good Galleys well manned, and provided, they
could with their constant crusing of the Archipelago make prizes of, and
disturb the Ships which daily pass from Morea to Constantinople; whence that
City is supplied with an extraordinary quantity of Corn, Oats, and other
Provisions necessary for that populous place; of which being deprived, the
people in it might soon be brought to wants and straits, which might cause in it
discontents, tumults, risings and other extremities which despair drives men
to: And the truth of this has really been seen within these few years, when
the Venetians had stopped the mouth of the Dardanels, which has discovered to
us, that as the strength of the Ottoman Empire lies toward Hungary, so toward
the Sea it is very weak, and lies much open to the attempts of an invading
Enemy; And this I say to show how much it concerns Christians, not only to
defend Candia, which is the only City of the Island left to the Venetians, but
also to endeavor to drive the Turk out of the whole Island.

Beyond Candia the Republic has three petty Islands considerable, not for any
benefit drawn out of them, but only for their strength and further security,
being as it were the outworks of Candia: And if the Venetians could drive the
Turk out of this Kingdom, as it is not impossible, with a considerable
strength, they being still the Masters of the Sea, and in possession of the
Chief City, it would clearly appear to the world how convenient this is to carb
the Turks power that way. But besides this, the Venetians have the Islands
Corfu, Cefalonia, and Zante, with some others dispersed up and down the Gulf
nigh to the Continent, and are members of Dalmatia, Albania and Sclavonia:
though to speak the truth, they are places for the most part barren, void of
inhabitants, and a nest of Rogues, and wild Beasts, and consequently of no
great concernment: So that setting aside the Islands I have named, and few
others, the rest are of no benefit, and have more of a show then of any real
advantage; in a word, they are more chargeable then beneficial, for in
themselves they produce not all things necessary for their subsistence, but are
forced to fetch them from other places, especially their provisions of mouth,
wherefore they are inhabited by Seamen, Fishermen, Thieves and Pirates, who
after they have committed many violences; murders, fellonies, and the like,
fly into the States of the Turk's, or of the Arch-Duke's, their Neighbors. But
I insist no longer upon this Discourse, but come to the borders and situation
of other Dominions of the Republic in Italy.

Eastward it borders with the Archdukes of Austria and Inspruck, and the
Adriatic Sea, now called the Gulf of Venice. Westward, with the Dukedom of
Milan. Southward, with the Dukedom of Ferrara, part of the States Milan and of
Mantoa. And toward the North, it has the Bishopric of Trent, and a part of
the Grisons by the means of the Valtoline, which is a passage of very great
concernment to the Venetians, through the which they can bring to their
assistance men out of France, Germany and Switzerland: Within the whole State
of the Republic by Land and by Sea, are reckoned 30 Cities, whereof every one
is a Bishopric, and between 70 and 80 Castles, and fortified places: But I
intend to speak only of those which are the most considerable, especially by
Land. The Chief of these are within the Dominions they have in Lombardy, which
are inferior to no other State of Italy, in the greatness of the Cities, the
number of people, the fruitfulness of the soil, and plenty of all things
necessary to the life of man.

But first of all, I must begin with Venice, the Head, and according to the way
of Republics the best, the richest, and the most populous of the State: On
every account it is a singular place, and (especially by reason of her Site) may
be called a wonder of Art and Nature; for I am sure all Europe, and I believe
the whole known world does not afford the like: Amsterdam comes the nighest to
it, but with a vast difference, which nature, and a great distance of time,
have put between those two places. First of all, Venice was built by a mere
hazard and necessity, but afterward the advantage of her Situation being
known, many resorted thither willingly upon grounds and deliberation: It Is
sited upon above 70 little Islands, separated one from another by several
Channels: the next place to it from the Continent, is at least five miles
distant, and between two or three from a neck of land called Lito; So that
being compassed about with the Sea, she seems to rise out of it, rather then to
be built upon it: Out of six places chiefly, as out of so many Ports or
Harbors; Namely, Treporti, il lido Maggiore, di S. Erasmo, delle Castella, di
Malamocco, and di Chiogia, people come to it. Amongst the many Channels which
divide the City, there is one called Canal grande, which separates the City
into two parts, one looks to the South-west, and the other faces the
North-east, and both these parts of S. Marco and Rialto are joined by a
mavelous bridge, called Di Rialto upon the same Channel. Now these Channels,
upon the which are thought to be 15000 Gondolaes, or Boats, whereby abundance
of poor people get a livelihood, are of great convenience, not only by reason
of the narrowness of the streets, which are so far from being able to receive
Coaches (of which there are none in Venice, nor indeed is there any use for it,
nor Sedans, which in those parts of Italy are used by none but Princes) that
two men in front fill the whole street in some places; they are also convenient
for the carrying of things from one place to another, which every moment is
necessary to be done by reason of the great Trade, and several Manufactures
settled in or about the City: of which their glass-houses at Murano, an Island
not far distant from the City, are the most Famous; this admirable secret they
have been so willing to keep to themselves, that under pain of death every
workman is forbidden to go out of the State; but what will not men dare out of
hopes of gain and profit? Therefore not long since the French found out a way
to persuade several of them to the number of 8 or 10 to go into France, where
they are settled, and succeed well by the encouragement they receive from that
King. But as this people were married, they had not been long away from their
Wives, when they expressed they would have them or else not stay; and such an
effectual course was taken to satisfy them in it, that one undertook to carry
Letters to their Wives, and to bring them into France, which he effected, though
they narrowly escaped those who pursued them.

Now Venice is 7 miles in circuit, within which compass are a great number of
stately Palaces, built after the Gothic way; besides 6 Scnole grandi adorned,
especially that of S. Rocco, with a number of extraordinary pictures, as are
great many of their fine Churches; Within it are accounted to be above 300000
souls: and as it is a delicious place, specially for sensual pleasures, so it is
an invitation to many strangers to come to it, who are thought to be, comparing
one day with another, no less then 30000, and hereby one must conceive the
excellent good order settled to bring all manner of necessaries into a place
where nothing grows, and where if they will have so much as good fresh water,
except they have it from the rain, they must bring it from shore, especially
from the River Brenta.

One would think that a place seated in the midst of, and compassed about with
waters, should be very unhealthfull, and have an unwholesome air, there being
much filth and corruption cast into the Channels, some of which stink very
much, specially in summer: yet for all this, the air is very good, by reason of
certain winds which usually blow gently there, and so do purify it,
dissipating the bad vapors. Also the Tide which comes in constantly, carries
away the excrements of the City, salt water being no friend to corruption;
besides the care which is taken now and then to cleanse these Channels.

But a City sited as this is, must be very strong; indeed this situation is so
advantageous, that she may disturb others, and not be disturbed, but with
extraordinary and almost unconquerable difficulties, for great ships cannot
come nigh to it, the water not being deep enough to receive them, especially
when the Tide is gone; and yet it is too deep for any Land Forces, either Horse
or Foot, to come night to it: These waters do also much contribute to her
safety within; for certainly it is very advantageous to the peace and quietness
of a State, when Subjects are so distant in places, as not to have an easy
communication one with another: Now by the means of the Channels in Venice,
people cannot without a long time and great difficulties (besides the danger of
being discovered) meet to plot, and especially to execute any Design against
the State; for the Channels are so narrow, their Traghetti, stairs, or landing
places, on both sides of the Channels so few, and their bridges so strait, as
are their streets, that there is no coming to a Body. Furthermore, the people
having reason to be content in many things, could hardly be brought to
entertain any such thoughts; for the State has wisely considered how necessary
it is for Rulers to gratify people in slight things, and of no moment, though
they must oppose them in those of a great and weighty concernment; for he who
is severe and rigid in every thing, who never yields nor dissembles, but shows
himself wilful, moross and unplacable, does nothing else but dispose, provoke,
and use people to debates and quarrels.

I must come to Padoa, a very Noble and ancient City, greater then any of the
rest under that Republic: for she is above seven miles about, very strong,
with Bulworks, and a very deep and broad ditch, counterscarp, and other
necessary fortification for the defense of a place of such an importance:
seeing the possession of this, was the foundation and the ground of the
Venetians enlarging their Dominion toward Lombardy, by which means afterward
by degrees, and under several pretenses they got further and further. In this
City is the most Famous University of all Italy, by reason of the eminent
learning of its Doctors, in all Professions, and of the great number of
Scholars: The Country about it does abound in all manner of Pulse, Oats,
Gattel, Wool, Linen Cloth, and Fish; but two things cause a great prejudice
to it; The first is, That she is too nigh Venice: which with the convenience of
a Navigable River, conveys from thence in vaste quantities the things I
expressed: insomuch, that sometimes it has been necessary to get back from
Venice, things necessary for the subsistence of that City. A Second thing which
prejudices that place, is, because many years ago, particular men in Venice
having neglected their Sea affairs, have given themselves to purchase in the
Padovano, Trevisano, and Polesene, Territories in such aquantity, that at
present the Nobles of Venice have three parts of four in that of Padova, to the
great impoverishment of the inhabitants, who formerly had competent means to
live well upon, but are now poor: there being not above five or six families
worth above 2000 Crowns a year, and none of the rest has 1000: And were it not
for the great concourse of Scholars, especially outlandish, they would be in
a worse condition. On the other side, some of the Venetian Nobility make use of
their prerogative with so much liberty and authority, that the Padoans look
upon themselves to be in a miserable condition, as indeed this City is the
hardest dealt withal of all others within that State of the Republic; the
reason is, that those of Padoa being of a proud and revengefull nature, upon
the least occasion they fall out, commit extravigancies, and kill one another,
after which immediately their goods are confiscated, and presently bought by
some Venetian. Furthermore, this people is so given to do mischief, that they
are almost undone before they can come off the troubles they brought thereby
upon themselves.

After Padoa comes Vicenza, which though she be no great City, is at least as
well peopled as the former, there being in it above 30000 persons; it is afair
City, pleasant, plentiful, and very rich, but the people are dangerous,
offensive and cruel. In all the State of Venice, there are no Subjects so
bloody and revengeful as the Vicentines are accounted to be: whom it is no
prudence to trust; The reason of it is, because their faults and wickednesses
are but lightly punished except it be in very horrid crimes, whereof the cause
is, That in point of criminal justice, the Venetian Magistrates in Vicenza may
give no sentence without the advice of some of the Chief Citizens who are
appointed for that purpose, by virtue of an ancient privilege of the City, of
whom one half are Gown-men, and the other half are Tradesmen, and they ever
have a share in matters of justice with the Rettore and his Court; and this
jurisdiction is called the Consolaria; whence it is that constantly they
overvote the Potesta (this is the name of the Chief Magistrate in every City)
and his Court: This is their way of absolving or chastizing the guilty for the
faults which daily are committed amongst them; but because the Republic took
notice, that in crimes of a higher nature, justice was not duly administered,
after a debate upon the matter it was resolved to elect an extraordinary
Magistrate, called Avogadore, who upon occasion of heinous faults should go
into the City to get secret informations of the whole business, which being
done, he brings it to Venice, where sentence is pronounced. Thus great
mischiefs are restrained, and justice is duly executed: but this manner of
proceeding displeases very much, and causes great alterations in the minds of
those high spirits, who see their privileges are thereby weakened and derogated
from; however, the Vicentines seeing they have in their hands no strong holds,
nor none that can be made such, think it fit to yield obedience in a thing
which is just in it self.

Now follows the City of Verona, which has six miles in circuit; she is one of
the fairest within the Venetian Dominions, with a very large Ditch,
Counterscarps, and good Bulwarks; in the midst of it is the Castle, very
strong, stored with all manner of provision and ammunition; the City is
strongly seated in the midst of a great, open, and champion Country, and in a
place somewhat high, it is backed with some little hills, upon the which is
another Castle, with other strong fortifications, which command the Country
about: and through the middle of the City runs the River Agide, very great and
navigable, which falling into the Gulf of Venice, the City may easily receive
thence supplies of men and provision. She is one of the Chief Keys of Italy,
toward Germany, as it appeared clearly in the wars of Maximilian, and Charles
the fifth, Emperors against the Republic. That it has been a considerable
City the Amphitheatre there, which is the least defaced of any in Italy, does
testify: and Histories tell us, that when some of the Family Seala were Lords
of it, she was the head of a potent State, of which Padoa, Vicenza, Treviso,
Ceneda, Belluno, Feltre, Brescia, Parma, and Luca, were members.

Part of its Territory is barren, of sixty miles in length; but for the
unfruitfulness, there is never great plenty in the City, which as well as
Vicenza has the Consolaria; and though those of Verona be not so bad as the
Vicentini, nor do not so many mischiefs, yet upon extraordinary cases the
Avogadore is sent to them; which the more it appears unjust, the more it is
unsufferable for them to see this breach made to their privileges, and they
are the more exasperated when they see that Governors act sometimes contrary
to their Laws and Customs. Within the Jurisdiction of this City are two
indifferent good strong holds; one is Legnago toward the Mantoan, which also
does defend that part of the Padoan; the other is Peschigra, of a far greater
concernment then the former, for it is accounted to be the Key of all other
places beyond the River Mincio: whence it is easy to make incursions upon all
other places thereabouts; if once this were lost, all the rest would be in a
great danger: Those of Verona are accounted to be of a proud nature, and of a
fantastical humor. To this purpose, I think it not amiss to mention a Proverb
usual in those parts, when some great mischief has been committed there (which
happens very often) they use to say, Such a mischief has been committed
according to the custom of Padoa, Vicenza and Verona: whereby is meant the
number of murders without grounds, which is according to the temper of the
people: The truth is, a great number of murders and of like mischiefs is daily
committed in those Countries, and in the rest of the Republic, and as far as I
could observe, this is chiefly caused by the example of some of the Nobles, and
by the favor they show to delinquents in such cases. It Is very strange, that
upon a Trial for a man's Estate, no body will speak a word for him; for in this
matter they are just enough; but upon life and death, for murder, or any other
wicked act, provided it be not against the State, there will be friends enough
to speak on ones behalf; So that in this, justice often is corrupted by favor.
Those of Verona are further of a High and Lordly carriage, because they are
very rich, but spend it very profusely, and often they run very deep into debts.

Then is Brescia a very Noble City, sited in a levelled ground, yet at the foot
of some hills: it has four miles, and two hundred paces in circuit. Upon the
hill is a Castle of very great strength, with Ravelins, Bullwarks, and sure
places for succors infallibly to come in, with such store of provision and
ammunition, that according to probability they may hold out for several years
in their own defense. There are also springs of very good water; with a matter
of six score pieces of Ordinance. Between the City and the Castle are places
underground, and Vaults very deep, through the which can come to them all
manner of relief. Above the City is a ditch of thirteen paces broad, with
Bullwarks, and the Walls have good Ramparts; in it are above 62000 Inhabitants,
who are so throug'd by reason of the great quantity of Wares, especially of all
manner of Arms, that in it there is no place empty; and as Verona is the
fairest, this is the richest, and the most Merchant of all others: There are
not many fine houses, for those of Brescia do not much care for the
Magnificence of Palaces. The Territory is 100 miles in length, and 50 in
breadth, and about 300 in compass, and is full of all things. This City has
within her Jurisdiction, above 240 Towns, wherein are accounted to be 350000
Souls: Moreover the City enjoys a very noble privilege, (viz.) That no man, of
what Nation soever he be, though he were a Venetian, may purchase any Lands
within her Territory, except he be a Brescian; and herein does consist the
safety and the greatness of that people, all the States thereabouts remaining
incorporated to the Citizens. So that for this, as other Concessions which the
Republic has granted them; Namely, That the Citizens are chosen to be Rectors
Potesta, or Magistrate of all Towns and Castles within their Jurisdiction:
Brescia is the happiest of all other Cities within the State of the Republic.
They have further in their hands two Fortresses of concernment, (viz.) Asola
and Orcinvovi, which last has been of late repaired, and reduced to a perfect
and Royal Fortification; it is of the bigness of a mile and a half, seated in a
Champion Country, and flanked or sided by seven Bullwarks, with a large and a
deep ditch; in a word, it is safe enough upon all occasions. Those of Brescia
are very rich, and consequently proud; their Pomp and Ambition is to keep a
great Attendance, and to set forth themselves and their Women in Clothes,
Coaches, Liveries, and fine Horses, but above all, they delight in great,
delicious, and costly banquets; yet they take great pleasure to stand upon
their Arms, as much as in any thing else; and so they may well do, more then
any other place subject to the Venetians: for the Republic is but slow, and
very circumspect, as in Ruling, so in punishing them, because it is a frontier
place toward the Milane's and the Brescians are very sensible of wrongs;
besides that, being so remote, the Venetians are not so well acquainted with
them, and cannot reach them so well as they do other nearer Cities.
Nevertheless they are not free from burdens, for as it is the best of their
Cities, so they lay upon it great Taxes, Contributions and quartering of
Soldiers, for the Republic is in a perpetual jealousy of that place, caused
by her Neighborhood with Milan, whence some attempts could be made upon it,
and some succors called in, in case of a defection; and should the Venetian
lose it, they would thereby be deprived of one of the Chief members of their
Republic.

Bergamo is a pleasant City, which many years ago was much fortified, it being
also upon the frontiers of the Dukedom of Milan: She is 3 miles about,
strengthened with 9 Bullwarks, and some Counterforts raised upon a hill of a
considerable height, which are as a platform to the City, which is well stored
with all necessaries, for provision and ammunition: There are above 26000 Souls
in it, and not many more within the Territory, which is poor and barren,
producing Corn to serve only 6 months in the year: this is the reason
wherefore this people being not very well to live at home, do disperse
themselves through the would more then any of their Neighbors: They are so
full of wit, though otherwise of a boorish conversation, that where they go,
they Trade so as to grow very rich for the most part; and in Venice
particularly, there are those of Bergamo, whose Fathers and Relations have been
Porters, and such inferior sort of people, who at present have Lands, Palaces,
and other great Riches. In Bergamo they live very contentedly, because by
reason of their poverty, and the barrenness of their Country, they are the
less burdened: and being so remote they suffer not the injuries which others
undergo. They trade in Wools, wherewith they made broad clothes, which in
houses are used instead of hangings; they have also some Iron mines; it borders
with the Valteline on the North, with Milan on the West, with the Cremonese on
the South, and with the Brescian on the East. The whole length is 50 miles, and
the breadth 36; it has within her Jurisdiction 236 places, the people whereof
mind Wool and Cattle.

The City of Crema is the last place the Republic has in Lombardy: sited in a
level ground, but built after the old Gothic way, and of late has been
repaired with all possible industry; they have made to it some Bulwarks,
Ramparts, Platforms, and other chargeable Fortifications, besides the
enlargeing of the Ditch. It is two miles about in compass, and contains 26000
Souls; her Territory is so narrow, that it is not above 25 miles in length, but
it is so fruitful, and has such a plenty of all things necessary to life, that
not only it may compare with any, but also goes beyond the most plentiful of
all Lombardy, supplying others which want it; it is said to produce at least
250000 horse loads of all mannet of Corn, besides great quantities of Flax and
Wines. This City is seated in the midst of the Territories of Cremona Lodi, and
other places of the Milan's, so that there is but one way to go to it, and on
all sides it is beset and compassed about (as it were a prison) with soldiers,
and is kept with an extraordinary care and watchfulness.

All the places which the Venetians have in Lombardy are very considerable,
then which better cannot be seen nor desired: because those Cities are reckoned
amongst the greatest in Italy, and are very populous, rich, full of trade, and
which for abundance and plenty of all things may compare with any in that
Country; but they go beyond in stateliness of buildings, in the extent of many
great and rich Towns and Castles, and in every thing else that proceeds from
man's industry. One only thing there is, whereat the people are dissatisfied,
(to wit) the insolency of several of the Nobles: who would every one of them be
looked upon as their Master and Superior, and be respected, yea, obeyed in
things which are neither just nor honest; because these take upon themselves
the command by the connivance of other Nobles who will not oppose them; whence
do arise sometimes to people great damages ruin and misery: So much the best
of things are subject to be abused.

But I will proceed and say, that at present the Venetians have a State in
Terra Firma, or upon the Continem, which is extended above 1000 miles, which
they made a shift to get by the improvement they made of the occasions given
them by their Leagues and Confederacies with the Dukes of Savoy, the Visconti
or Duke of Milan, with the Florentines, French and other Nations, for they were
sure to keep better that which they got nearer at hand. Thus, first of all,
Trevigi fell into their hands, then Verona, afterward Brescia, and so from
hand to hand, all the forenamed places in Lombardy, besides those of Dalmatia
and Albania, formerly Subjects to the Crown of Hungary: because the Republic
ever declaring her self the head of the Liberty of Italy, she got and united to
her former State one thing or other: as in the Wars of Ferrara, she had Il
polesene di Rovigo, and so it has been of the rest of her State, either by
Land or by Sea. And to speak the truth, the Republic has laid the foundation
of her Dominions just as the Turks, and others have done of theirs, that is, by
the means of Divisions, Differences and Quarrellings between Neighbors: and
also by reason of so many petty Lords, who falling our one with another, became
in time an easy prey to the Republic, which probably would have attempted and
effected the same over the rest of Italy, if they had seen grounds and
favorable occasions to do it.

Besides the State of Lombardy, the Republic has 3 whole Provinces, namely
Istria, Friuli, and Marca Trevigiana; in the first are five, though small
Cities, with some Castles; but because their air is very bad, and somewhat
infectious, the Country is not peopled, and so the ground is neglected and
barren; yet for all this, the Republic draws out of it a great profit from the
Salt which is made there in great abundance, besides other necessary
provisions, as Flesh; Fish, Wood, Timber, Fuel, Oil, and excellent Freestone,
with other things from thence carried to Venice. The Province of Friuli has
three Cities, one is Aquileja, that ancient City, which upon good reason may be
called, the Mother of Venice; for, this last was peopled in part by the
inhabitants of the former: It is a Patriarchate of which Cardinal Delphini is
the present Patriarch: The Romans built it to stop the Incursions into Friuli
of the Enemies of the Empire, this being the passage through the Carnichian
Alps, which yet could not be secured by the places of Gradisca and Goritia;
for in the days of Bajazet, the Turks came that way between the two Towns,
almost to the Gates of Trevigi; therefore the Venetians have built there Palma:
But besides Aquileja, there are two other Cities, the one is Vdine, and the
other Cividal; the first is sited in a Champion Country, and the last between
the Mountains, scant of Corn, but rich in Cattle and Wines, as is the whole
Country, which wines are carried into several parts of Italy; it has also
some Iron and Steel in Cadore, a Fortress strongly sited upon a hill. In this
Province is also that extraordinary strong place Palma Nuova, which is a wonder
to beholders, having been built with all the Art and Industry which the spirit
of men could devise, according to the best rules of Fortification.

De Marca Trevigiana has 3 small Cities, whereof the Chief is Treviso, very
strong by reason of the situation, and that it cannot be undermined: This
Country abounds with Corn, Fish, Wines, all manner of Pulse; Beasts, Cattle,
and Fruits, but above all, with Timber for the Arsenal; amongst several Woods:
there being one of 15 miles in length. In that Province are also very Noble and
fair Castle-Towns, pretty rich, Merchant and Populous. Lastly, the Republic
has Il Polesene di Rovigo, which like another Puglia does wonderfully abound
with all manner of Corn, Cattle and Fish: But I will not insist upon this, nor
upon what they have in other places, but come to some of their strong Holds.

The Fortifications and strong Holds of all the States of Venice, do lie in two
places, namely in Lombardy upon the Frontiers of the Dukedom of Milan, and
toward the Sea side; the one, because of the Neighborhood of the Spaniard, and
the other, by reason of their being exposed to the attempts of the Turks: To
this effect all their places in Lombardy have Garrisons in them more or less.
Oreinvovi is good to help Crema, Brescia and Bergamo; Pontevico is for Brescia
and Bergamo, Legnago for Verona, Vicenza and Padoa; so is the Fort of
Peschiero; there are also Garrisons in their places along the Sea; in Friuli is
the most important Fortress Marano, seated between Ponds and Moorish grounds,
then Palma, Monfalcone, with Osofo and Cadore little Holds, and able to receive
only a small Garrison, but of a very strong Situation, being on the top of
Mountains and Rocks. In Slavonia are Zaea strongly built, Cataro, of a strong
situation, and Clista, a most important place within these few years conquered
by the Republic; Trau also and Sebenico are very good places, and the Castle
of S. Nocolo de Sebenico is very strong. I shall hardly mention the Islands,
Corfu, Cefalonia and Zante, which being Outworks against the Turk have been
fortified very much; and seeing the City of Candia has holden out so long
against the Turk, I think I am dispensed to speak of her strength; only I Will
add, that in those things which concern the Defense of their States, they have
spared neither charges nor pains: and they keep their places constantly
provided with ammunition, and necessary provisions for many years, whereby they
are secured from all invasions: especially their Cities in Lombardy, which are
able not only to receive, but also to destroy, any considerable Army: And let
this be enough concerning the Land and Sea States of that Republic.

The Revenues and yearly Incomes are at present very great; not so much by
reason of their Trade by Sea (which first the Portuguezes spoiled, when they
found out a way to bring Spices and Jewels from the Indies, and now the present
War with the Turk) as by Land, where, as it is already said, they are in
possession of some of the greatest Cities of Italy, with very large and most
plentiful Territories: seeing Bergamo is 50 miles in length, and of a great
breadth; that of Brescia 100, Verona 60: which Dominions are full of Towns, and
of vaste numbers of people, which in all, is accounted to come, to above three
millions of Souls, all very industrious and much given to Trade: Where are also
Bishoprics, Abbeys, and Monastries of all sorts, of the richest of Italy, and
Families illustrious for their Nobleness of extraction and quality, and very
considerable by the greatness of their riches: which to speak of (especially
those of Venice) are vaste and exceeding great. So we might mention those of
great Cities, chiefly in Lombardy, which upon occasion can assist, as they have
done it of late years, and relieve the necessities of the Republic in other
places; Insomuch that the State yields to no other Country for plenty of all
things: wherein Venice being the Head of all, may be accounted a happy City, if
that may be called a true happiness which depends upon the will of others; for
Venice wants within her self every thing necessary to life, wherewith she is
supplied part from her own States, from the Popes, from the Spanish in Italy,
from the Turks, and in some things out of England, and other places: which
supplies if she were deprived of, she could soon fall into great wants. So it
is not to be wondered at, if that Republic uses all possible means, and is at
great charges (and even now with great danger, by reason of the present War) to
be at peace, and hold good correspondency with the Ottamons: because her
Islands, Rivers, and the rest of her States nigh the Sea, are much exposed to
danger and invasions from thence, even to their utter ruin and destruction;
besides, that Venice, as I have said, has no Territory sufficient to subsist
by, and her Islands, Rivers and Sea-Towns do not produce provisions sufficient
for the third part of the year; so that they are continually depending for
supplies upon other places, and no Prince can do it so plentifully, with so
much ease, and less charges, then the Turk, who withdrawing these supplies, can
put them to inconveniences: as they find it by experience in the present War,
which now does almost wholly interrupt the Sea trade, and in part that by Land.
And as Venice is a Merchant City, those riches which are drawn from the Levant,
must needs receive some prejudice by it: which being very well known to that
Republic, although the War be very hot in Candia, after the death of their
late Minister at that Court, they have sent Molino to supply his place; and
they will ever embrace Peace upon any tolerable conditions. To this may be
added the iustitution and form of Government of the Republic, which is aiming
at peace, having found out by her own experience, how much she is concerned to
preserve it.

But to return again to the present Subject, I will say, that the riches of
that State in a peaceable condition and before the late War, were raised to
above three Millions and a half of Gold by the year, which is a very
considerable sum: since we find, that several years ago, though the Republic
were in actual possession of the Kingdom of Cyprus and Candia, and of some
other places, both by Land and by Sea, their yearly Revenue did not exceed two
Millions and an half. But the Farms have been so raised, Customs, Taxes, and
other burdens, so increased (though to the great prejudice of Subjects) that
it cannot be otherwise. The City of Venice, one year with another, yields above
one Million and an half of Ducats (pieces of gold, worth nine shillings and
sixpence of English money) raised upon Wines (for every Pipe brought in, five
Ducats are paid, and so of the Malmsie or Candy Wines) Salt, of which there is
abundance, and very dear, and of all imported or exported Commodities: the
Republic furnishing several parts of Italy and Germany with Drugs, Wax,
Glasses and Crystals, Soap, Silk, Silver and Gold, Manufactures, Iron-works,
and several other things; they also make a great benefit of Fish, Flesh, Oils,
and of the Warehouses which Germany have in the City, of Taxes upon Lands,
Houses, and other Goods not moveable; so that in the City of Venice alone, out
of all the forenamed things, they raise one Million, six hundred ninety seven
thousand, seven hundred twenty two Ducats.

From Padoa, they have one hundred thirty six thousand and seventy eight
Ducats.

From Vicenza, One hundred thirty four thousand seven hundred and forty two
Ducats.

From Verona, Two hundred and thirteen thousand, and eighty four Ducats.

From Brescia, Three hundred thirty seven thousand, six hundred ninety three
Ducats.

From Bergamo, One hundred four thousand, seven hundred thirty Ducats.

From Crema, Thirty seven thousand five hundred and twenty six Ducats.

From the whole Potesene, Forty thousand ninety seven Ducats.

From the Province called Marca Trevigiana, in all, One hundred eighty four
thousand four hundred eighty five Ducats.

From the Province of Friuli, Fifty two thousand seven hundred sixty six
Ducats.

From Istria, Six thousand two hundred thirty four Ducats.

From all the States of the Sea, Eight hundred seven and thirty thousand, nine
hundred sixty six Ducats.

Which all sum'd up together, makes Three Millions, seven hundred, nine and
fifty thousand, one hundred twenty one Ducats.

These are their ordinary Incomes, but upon extraordinary occasions they also
have several other ways of raising moneys; namely, by raising of Taxes, or
calling twice a year for that which should be paid but once; So they do of
Farms and Customs upon imported or exported Commodities: they also lessen the
pay of their great Officers, and reduce it to half of what it was before; and
if this be not enough, they admit into the Order of the Nobility, whom they
think fit: every one paying 100000 Crowns for it. Further, they sell some
places, which at other times are freely given. Thus they have so much increased
the number of the Procuratori, or Proctors of S. Mark. And last of all, they
borrow moneys from particular persons: and upon urgent necessity, several of
the Nobles make sometimes liberal and free Contributions: as indeed many who
are mighty rich, are very able to do it.

On the other side, their expenses are very great and necessary, because as I
said before, all their Dominions at Sea and Land, being compassed about or
bordered by the Turks Territories, and other Princes; the Republic is forced,
besides the charges of buildings, repairings, fortifications and ammunitions,
to keep in every place good and strong Garrisons both of Horse and Foot, which
are very chargeable; the number of their ordinary Guards and Garrisons by Land
and by Sea, in time of peace comes to 10000 Foot, and 700 Horse: but every year
there is occasion of some extraordinary expenses both at Sea and Land. But how
great must they be now; by reason of the War with the Turk, which has lasted
these several years? But because the expenses of the Republic, with admirable
order and exact rule, are assigned to several Offices, I think it will be
profitable and necessary to know the particulars of it: as I received them from
knowing and credible persons.

About the charges and expenses of the Republic, there are several Offices,
and under several names, called by them Casse, Chests, or places where they lay
up things: which signifies nothing else but a distribution or assignment of all
the moneys raised out of the Revenue, and to be disposed of, by such a Chest in
Venice. So that every one of these Casse has its particular incomes assigned
to it out of such Customs, Taxes, or the like. Wherefore the Chamberlains,
Camerlengh, as they call them; or rather Treasurers of the City, are ordered to
pay unto every one of these Chests or Offices in Venice the revenues assigned
to them: which afterward they lay out according to order peculiar to every
Office, and this in a good and due order without any confusion.

First, There are the expenses made by the three Treasurers or Directors, who
have the management of the Revenue of the Republic, who have under them
Notaries, Writers, casters of Accounts, Overseers, and several others in pay,
to keep the particulars of every thing that brings in moneys: This Office one
year with another does spend above One thousand four hundred Ducats. There are
also the expenses of the Chamberlains di Commune, who pay the allowance of the
Doge, their own, of the Censori, delle Quarantie, of the Colleges, and of
other Magistrates who are under pay; their expenses one year with another, do
amount to one hundred seventy two thousand four hundred and fifty Ducats. Then
there are the charges of the Proveditori di Commune, whose Office is to build
and to repair Bridges, Harbors, lay foundations, and do other public
buildings: for the which are laid out one year with another, about forty eight
thousand three hundred seventy seven Ducats. The Office Delle Blade, or of all
manner of Corn, for the Salary of the Officers thereof, spends above two
thousand seven hundred and ten Ducats.

The Office of the Soprastanti, all camere, overseers, or presidents of the
Chambers, whose care is to pay the general Officers of War, Colonels,
Governors of Cities, the forces of Terra Firma, Dalmatia and Albania, and
those who belong to the Office, does one year with another spend about eight
hundred seventy seven thousand on hundred and forty Ducats; but this is to be
understood in time of peace, for in time of War, expenses are greater, and
sometimes uncertain. The Office Delle Zeccha, or coining moneys, pays workmen
about it, and provides all necessary tools and instruments: which amounts to
four thousand seven hundred ninety five Ducats.

The Office of the Set Savi, at Rialto, spends one year with another five
hundred fifty four Ducats. The Office Della Legna, about wood, timber, etc.
lays out for Salaries seven hundred and eighty Ducats. The Office Delle
Beccarie gives to many pensioners one thousand three hundred and seventy
Ducats by the year. The Office Dell Aque, about waters, in preventing any harm
they can do, either toward the shore, or within the land, rivers, lakes,
ponds, and the like, by raising banks, sconces, etc. then in lead, water pipes,
iron, and other things relating to fountains, does spend about seventy two
thousand six hundred ninety four. The Office Delle Fortezze, whose charge it is
to make new fortifications or repair the old ones, does spend by the year above
twenty five thousand nine hundred eighty three Ducats.

The Office delle Raggioni vecchi, which has charge to lay out moneys for the
public Processions which often are made in Venice, pays the charges of the
Dukes Chancery, provides the balls wherewith Magistrates do vote and make their
Elections, defrayes the reception of those who are received and treated at the
public charges, and pays for the D^ge's Funeral: it does spend about two and
twenty thousand six hundred seventeen Duck ets. Butaconsiderable expense is
that of the Office about the Arsenal, upon Officers and Workmen, which amounts
one year with an other to twelve thousand seven hundred sixty six Ducats,
besides moneys laid out upon materials, as timber, hemp, pitch, oars, all
manner of tackling, and other things necessary for Ships and Galleys, whereupon
they bestow one hundred and twenty thousand two hundred forty five Ducats.

Then follow the expenses for the ordinary subsistence of the Forces they keep
constantly on Foot for the guard and safety of their Sea dominions; as first
the pay of the Proveditor, Governor, and other Officers, which amount taking
one year with another, to Two hundred sixty seven thousand three hundred ninety
six Ducats. Then the charges for the Biskets necessary to the Galleys
constantly kept in time of peace, and for victuals, come to Two hundred fifty
three thousand, one hundred thirty six Ducats. And for the rowers clothes of
Serges, canvas, linen clothes, shoes, and such necessary things, they spend
thirty nine thousand one hundred forty eight Ducats.

Further, the Exchequor of the Consiglio di dieci, does spend great sums of
moneys, in the pay of rewards to them who have taken or killed the Banditi (men
fled away for rebellion or felony) for the guards of the places of Rialto, and
San Marco, for gifts bestowed upon several strangers, for Courriers, Frigates,
and the like expenses: which come every year, that is, one with another, to One
hundred twenty seven thousand, three hundred eighty five Ducats. Then to the
Exchequor of the Colledgio, do belong to make the secretest expenses of the
State, seeing this Office pays the ordinary expenses of Residents, and
Ambassador of the Bailo (so they call their Ambassador there) at
Constantinople, of the Tributes, gifts and acknowledgements, which in time of
peace the Republic pays to the Turk: And because this last particular does
above all the rest excite curiosity, I think 'twill not be amiss to say
something of it, according to very credible informations given to me about it.

In time of peace usually the Republic paid to the Turk for the Kingdom of
Candia seven thousand five hundred and fifty Zecchini (pieces of Gold of of
their coining, every one of which is worth between nine and ten shillings;) for
the Island Zante she does pay five hundred Zecchini. There are besides the
expenses of the ordinary gifts, and of the extraordinary, not only for the
Grand Signior himself, but also for the Grand Visiro, and Bashaw's, namely
cloth of Gold, Silver, Silk, and of Wool, with rich Beds, Purple, Wax, and
several other fine things of a considerable value: and to the Baili of the
Levant, as Gran Cairo, Alexandria, Aleppo, and some few others. Which expenses
in time of peace have been of of very great concernment, and it has been
accounted one of the greatest interests and concerns of the Republic. And I
have been credibly informed, and by judicious and knowing persons, that before
the present War broke forth, the Ottoman did cost the Republic at least six
hundred thousand Ducats by the year.

The Chest for the ordinary Militiaes of Candia and Corfu cost two hundred
thousand Ducats; that which is to pay La Cavalleria grossa, constantly kept on
foot, comes to Eighty thousand: The Cassa, called per Loccorrenze, which
defrayes the charges for extraordinary emergencies, amounts to One hundred
sixty seven thousand, four hundred and forty. La Cammera de gli imprestiti, or
for lending of moneys to them who have occasion for it, is allowed forty
thousand Ducats: Out of the use of these moneys that are lent, the Republic
makes a purse of above One hundred thousand Ducats: which are commonly laid
out to buy Corn to make Biskets for the use of the Armata or Fleet, and for
such other occasions as the public service does require.

And this is all I think fit to be said upon this matter: whence it appears,
that though the Republic has yearly a great income, yet her disburfements are
great also, to supply the ordinary and extraordinary occasions of the State;
for in time of peace (and not at present by reason of this chargeable War, the
expenses of which cannot be so certain and so regulated as otherwise they are)
they come at least to three Millions of Ducats, and they lay up some Six
hundred and seventeen thousand, or thereabouts, which is a considerable sum, if
a just account was given of it. But as things use to change and alter from what
they are at their first beginning; so it happens to the Republic in this,
wherein she receives some alteration in the qualities of persons, and in the
fidelity of those who manage their Exchequer; Many Ministers and Officers of it
proving either careless or unfaithful, applying the public moneys to their
particular uses, relying upon their power and credit, and upon the favor which
they show one to another; So that by reason of an interest, or of
consanguinity, or some other relation, they do not find any strong opposition:
Besides that all Offices in the Republic, excepting that of the Duke and
Procurators of S. Mark, being bestowed but for a time, every one is in hopes of
being promoted by the help of his friends and interest, whereupon they avoid to
make any one their enemies who could hinder them in their design: and by these
means one time or other there is a change in every ones condition, and the
multitude of those who are concerned will not allow of an exact and strict
inquiring into such things; so that this disorder increases every day without
hopes of remedy: which in time may happen to cause a malignant and remediless
distemper. It Is true, that according to the ancient institution of the
Republic, they use to lay up a certain sum of moneys paid, out of some
Revenues appointed to that end, in a particular place or treasure, which in
Venetian they call Casson Grande, with this inscription;

Quando questo scrinio Saprira
Tutto 'l mundo tremera:
That is in English;

When this great Chest shall open be,
The world to tremble you shall see.
Hitherto it has not been meddled with, for all their extraordinary occasions;
but it is reserved to the last extremity; and as far as I heard some few years
ago, it was not much above six Millions of Gold: which cannot be much increased
by reason of the present War, which has forced them to borrow moneys. And this
is all, I intend to say, about the incomes and expenses of this Republic.

I must now speak of her Forces, which do consist in her Arms, and Martial
posture; to the perfection of which, and the observation of Military
Discipline, four ways are to be followed. The First settles that general
manner of Education, whereby men are brought up to obedience unto the Laws, and
fitted to undergo hardship, and other inconveniences which constantly do
attend a warlike profession: and which are the grounds of strength and
activity, qualities so necessary to Soldiers. The Second shows how to make a
right choice of Soldiers, a thing very useful, seeing the diversity of
Climates causes such a variety in particular qualifications of Nations; for,
let breeding in every Country be what it will, it can never work in a Soldier
born in a hot Country, such a strength of body, an undaunted heart, and a not
valuing of death, as it will be found in those who are born and brought up in a
cold Climate: who on the other side will not be so prudent, so subtle, and so
considerate as the former: and he who is born in a temperate Country, is
thereby disposed both to prudence and strength: whence appears the error of
that common saying, He who has Men, has Soldiers. Forms cannot be applied
nor imprinted, but according to the disposition of the Matter. The Third way
gives those orders and directions, which teach how to arm States with their
proportion, and the Soldiers with those Arms which they are fittest for,
because some Nations have greater inclinations and dispositions to be horsemen
then to be footmen; some are fitter for Land-service them for the Sea: and the
very sorts of Arms, and the way of arming men, are of great concernment, to
observe good orders, and so to do great services. The Fourth way does teach the
five Functions or Duties of War; namely, Navigation, how to encamp, and fight
in the field, how to defend himself, and how to besiege, assault, and take
strong places. These four ways are of such a concernment to the greatness of
an Empire, that though it was otherwise ill-regulated in some things, the only
military Discipline being well performed, and upon good grounds, would be
sufficient to make it subsist a long time; as by experience it has been seen
in every State, but above all, in that Potent Roman Commonwealth: which more
then any other that ever was, had almost every hour the causes of her ruin at
hand, but the exactness and goodness of her Discipline, was a present remedy to
the distempers of that State, and hindered the sad effects of them.

And to come to the first head, which is the true and right ground of all
States; the Republic has settled her Militia, called Le-Cernide, upon such
manner of Soldiers, as no great success is to be expected; not to mention long
or old things, the examples of their last Wars in Friuli, show it: where the
Republic having gathered these men to offend some places, and to defend
others, and they not being used to hardships and inconveniences of War, before
they could be put upon any Service of concernment, diseases got in amongst
them, so that only for want of rest many fell into great distempers; insomuch,
that according to the common opinion, either by the sword or of natural death,
there died about thirty thousand. However, when they are employed in the
defense of places, if they enjoy necessary conveniences, and be not reduced to
wants and hardships, they are fit enough to perform their part, better then in
the field: Of this sort of Soldiers the Republic has forty thousand foot
listed, and could raise many more upon occasion; but as I said, no great hopes
are to be conceived of them, they wanting experience in that profession: as a
thing which they do not apply themselves to, except upon emergencies; and what
they act is out of impetuosity, more then out of any real courage, or well
grounded valor, and they (excepting some few) are fitter for the plough then
the sword, especially the Padoans, out of which Country the Republic has many
such ones; and this is to be attributed to their natural genius and temper,
rather then to any want of exercise and care taken of them, for they are often
exercised and trained up to shoot Guns and Muskets, though their Officers, who
take this care upon themselves, being chosen more by favor, then according to
merit, know for their part as little of it as others, and they still remam in
the same pass: Hence that Commonwealth does find, how vain it is to rely upon
an unexperienced multitude of people; So that to say the truth, that Republic
is more inclined to follow Sea affairs, then those of any other sort: and from
her beginning, and the situation of the Chief city, it does appear that she
has no exact experience of Land business: because in their deliberations and
counsels about Land-affairs, they are forced to make use of strangers for
Officers; and that which is of great importance, they must lay the ground of
all their hopes upon the strength and valor of foreign Soldiers, who often
prove to be dangerous, and many times unprofitable. On whom a Prince can never
settle his Empire upon sure grounds, they being disunited by reason of the
ambitious temper of the Nations, which is often attended with unfaithfulness.
And suppose they are neither of these, yet they will be lusty and ready to
commit insolences, because neither the desire to defend a a just cause, nor
any other motive of that nature makes them to be Soldiers; all that they can
say for it, is a short pay, which not being sufficient to put them very far
upon venturing of their life, often they become stubborn and disobedient to
their Officers. and upon this account the Republic will ever prefer to live in
peace, rather then offend others, for too much trusting to their own Forces:
which though they be great, yet they are such in name and opinion, if not more,
at least as much, as in reality.

I say further, that with the help of some strangers, and by the means of those
few light horsemen which they can raise out of their own Dominions, they could
for a while be masters of the field; but at last they could not keep it. And of
this kind of men they could set on foot somewhat above 6000 light horsemen and
musketeers of their own Subjects, with some strangers in part of Albania and
Sfaciotti, as they call them, drawn from the Sea Coasts and Inland Towns; the
former are good enough to rob, to scout and interrupt the Convoyes of
provisions for Armies, and even to fall unawares upon the Enemy; but having
weak horses, and themselves being not well armed, they cannot hold out very
long against the Enemy; the latter likewise are not much worth, only inasmuch
as they have better horses then the former, and because also they are better
men. Nevertheless the Republic keeps on foot but few Troops of those of
Albania in time of peace to suppress the Banditi, who gathering sometimes in a
body, do much disturb the Country with their robberies and other oppressions:
As for the rest in time of peace, the Republic has no other body of Soldiers
but five troops of Horse, which are in all 460, and are obliged to keep two
horses a man, whose pay is ten Crowns a month, which persons are all alike in
this, that none are willing to serve, except their privileges and freedoms be
made good to them; notwithstanding, their horses are weak and dull, and cannot
very long endure hardships, being of very little or no account at all.

These are all the Land Forces of the Republic, which at present are not
increased, except in Dalmatia, and the Recruits sent from time to time to
Candia; for the great charges that the present War engages them to, are by Sea;
hence it appears, that these Land Forces are not constant, nor ordinary, but
collective, gathered here and there; of not much valor, nor experience,
wherewith all humane actions ought to consist, which tend to the safety of
Princes, although it be the hardest and most difficult to be attained unto.
Nevertheless to what we said may be added, that there are 6000 Cannoniers or
Gunners, and others belonging to Artillery, who indeed are serviceable men.

Now I will come to the Sea-forces of this Republic, which I consider, either
as to materials ready fit and disposed, or in all manner of provisions, and
other things necessary for war, as are Soldiers, Ammunition, Arms, and the
like. As to the first, the Republic is plentifully provided with every thing
necessary to such occasions, as Timber, and all manner of Wood, Iron, Hemp,
Pitch, etc. Of every one of these there is great store and quantity in the
Arsenal, placed in a good order: Now this Arsenal is the most ancient, and at
present the best known in the world, without exception or hyperbole; as for the
generality and variety of things made in it, so for the number and quantity of
them, there being no Army, how strong soever and great, but it may be supplied
thence with all manner of necessaries: for in the year 1570, they armed 150
light Galleys, 11 great Galleys, 1 Galeon, and 25 great ships; and of late
years 'twas also observed by experience, when it furnished 120 Sails, besides
that vast quantity of what remained in it of offensive and defensive arms,
which are all placed and distributed in an admirable order. This Arsenal is in
a place separated from the City, compassed about with high walls, upon the
which are two little Towers, and has the Sea water round about it; there is
but one Gate to go into it, and a channel whereby their shipping goes in and
out. Within it, for these six hundred years and above, they have gathered
almost an infinite number of all sorts of warlike instruments: of galleys,
oars, masts, say ls, and all manner of tackling; in the making or preparing of
which, are constantly employed rare and excellent workmen, who have nothing
else to mind. It is a known story, that when Henry the third of France, took
Venice in his way out of Poland into France, one day whilst he was at dinner,
an handsome and a stately Galley was fitted for him to go upon the Sea to take
the air: and though two pieces of it, were not together, before he sat down,
as soon as he had dined 'twas ready to go out, which shows how ready are their
materials, and how quick are their workmen; and nothing was done then, but what
could again as easily be performed upon occasion.

But to come to some particulars of the description of this Arsenal; I say
there are vaste and spacious rooms full of head pieces, breast and back pieces,
pistols, muskets, swords, pikes, halbards, partisans, two-handed swords, bows,
arrows, small guns, etc. And under these rooms are others, which in an
excellent and orderly disposition are full of great Guns, half Canons of brass
and iron, Culverins, and a vast number of Grenades, Mortar-pieces, and of all
manner of Artillery, besides the great quantity of bullets of iron, of which
the Republic has several good mines: All the forenamed things are looked to,
by men appointed to that purpose, who are not only curious to get into the
Arsenal all manner of new invented instruments of War, but also take an
extraordinary care of those they have already, which are placed in so good an
order, that it is a great pleasure and satisfaction to behold it. In a word,
they have in this place every necessary thing for 150 ships, and to arm above
200000 men, besides that great number of arms, which are in the palace of St.
Mark, and in the houses of particular Noblemen, whereof they are the pomp and
part of their ornaments. But because it is not enough for a State to have great
store of arms, except there be in it people enough fit to make use of them,
both out of their natural disposition, and experience gotten by the exercise of
the discipline of War, and except they have good and experienced Officers to
train them to it; So the Republic wanting some of these things, is put to it
when it is needful to get good Soldiers, especially when there is some
extraordinary occasion of arming by Land or by Sea, but chiefly by Land.

Now I will mention some particulars about their Sea affairs: they have a
constant and settled body of a Fleet or Armata of 50 Galleys, which in a
fortnights time may be fitted for service with all necessary provisions, seeing
the Scuole, the several companies and secular fraternities are obliged to
furnish 25 with Rowers, to which end they cast lots, thereby to know who is to
serve; so that either they must go themselves, or else find persons fit to do
service: Also all the watermen, as well those of Venice, as others, who go upon
the Rivers of the State, are obliged to arm other 25 Galleys, and find Rowers,
these, as the former, are chosen by lot: But further, the Provinces of Istria
and Dalmatia are to set out 12 Galleys more; and before the War, the Island of
Candia was to give 10: which made up a body of 72. In this lies the advantage
of the Republic, That she has the best and most experienced Galley Soldiers
and Rowers of the Adriatic Sea, because they are almost all taken out of the
watermen of every Town, who from their childhood are brought up and used to
this manner of life. So that in this particular the Republic is admirably well
provided; and for this service are constantly kept about 2000 men condemned to
the Galleys, either their own Subjects, or of others who are sent to them, or
slaves. As for the provisions, they are drawn from the places I named before,
of which there is need every year; and this necessity is the more increased,
that Corn is at present in the hands of greedy and covetous Noblemen, who take
advantage of occasions and conjunctures. Of Rice, and all manner of Pulse, and
other necessary provisions for their Fleet and Armies, the Republic has great
abundance, because all grows within her Dominions.

As to Soldiers, either Subjects of the Republic, or of some other parts of
Italy, of Corsica, or fugitives from other Dominions, and others who are not
Italians, as Germans, French, Switzers, etc. At first they are well enough
served by this ordinary Army; but if it be brought to suffer much, either by
diseases, want of provisions (which last happens very seldom) or loss of
ships, then the Republic is put to it again, as they are also when any
extraordinary Army is to be raised: their Subjects as I said already, being not
very fit for such services, and strangers being so chargeable, not used to the
climate of Candia, and the Archipelago, besides, that in the world there is no
power so weak, as that which grounds its hopes, and depends upon the will of
others: as the Republic has had experience when she has made use of Dutch
and French, who are not able to endure the scorching heat of the Sun in those
hot Countries; besides the difficulty there is to get Soldiers of these
Nations; and when they have with great expenses done it, sometimes are sallen
out discontents, disturbances and mutinies, to the great prejudice of the
public service, to the inconvenience of their own Subjects, and to the general
offense of the Republic.

The Venetian ships have usually ten or twelve pieces of Artillery every one,
that is, ten pieces of six, with Canons of fifty, and two of twelve, besides
the great muskets of the rowers, of which every Galley has between 170 and
180, which are well furnished with every other thing; but for the foresaid
reasons, the Republic will ever desire to be in peace both by Sea and by Land
with all her Neighbors, and will stand only upon the defensive, or else
successes will hardly answer her expectation; and there is reason for it,
because offensive wars are not to be undertaken but by very potent Princes,
stronger then they whom they offend, at least in the conjuncture they begin the
war. This Venice knows well, therefore she loves peace, and does what she can
to preserve it by Art and otherwise; and if need be, buys it at a dear rate.

As it is not enough for a State to be strong against attempts from without, but
they ought to be provided, against those which may arise within. Three things
cause alterations and ruin in States and Principalities; one is outward,
(viz.) the power and violence of enemies, which the Venetians are provided
against by the means of the forces I have already spoken of; the other two
arise from within, and are either the division of Subjects amongst themselves,
or against their Governors, or else the treason of some particular men
combining with the Enemies of the State.

These divisions are made and carried on by factions and parties about matters
of Religion, State, or private interest, arising from error, ambition, envy,
hatred, etc. which Rulers are by all means to put an end to; and above all they
are to avoid declaring themselves the head of any party, seeing they are all
his Subjects, and therefore it is contrary to his interest, thereby to foment
and keep up divisions within his State. Henry the third of France, was by his
Enemies forced to make himself the head of the League, but the second part was
to have stripped him of his Kingdom, to invest therewith one of the Family of
Lorrain: But here I must take notice of the advantages of Monarchies over
Republics. When a Republic is subject to divisions, there is hardly any
remedy, but by the destruction of one of the parties, whereby the whole is
weakened; and if every side be potent, they grow obstinate, which carries them
often to extremities, every one thinking his right and his cause better then
his Neighbors. And it is a certain truth, that Commonwealths, and even those
Monarchies which have most the nature of Republics, especially those which are
elective, were ever more subject to troubles and divisions, then those
Dominions which depend upon a successive Sovereign: witness the Athenian,
Lacedemonian, and other Greek Republics, and the Roman as much as any: which
divisions bring them to such inconveniences as are often the causes of their
ruin. If in the time of the second punick war the Barchins had been the
masters of Carthage, in probability Hannibal receiving the supplies which he
expected from thence, had made himself absolute Master of Italy, which was
hindered by Hanno's faction. Now a Monarch, by all purties being acknowledged to
be the Lord and Sovereign, by virtue of his Power and Authority, can make up
breaches, unite parties, reconcile differences, and take resolutions, with more
speed and secrecy.

However, I do not deny, but that such things (though not so easily) may be
effected in Republics: especially to make divisions cease when they are
between Rulers and the people. Who are apt to raise tumults, either for dearth
and want of necessaries, as bread, or by reason of great extorsions made by
Ministers and Officers, or because they are oppressed by foreign enemies, or
governed with unreasonable and unseasonable severity: all which things often
drive them to despair. Therefore to keep people content and quiet, they must
procure them plenty, justice, peace, and a certain honest liberty, not
degenerating into licentiousness; because plenty affords men subsistence and a
livelihood, justice secures ones State, peace promotes both, and liberty makes
peace sweet and acceptable: plenty frees one from wants, civil justice from
cheat and deceit; the criminal secures our persons from violence, peace from
the attempts of foreign Enemies, and liberty from the fear and jealousy men
are apt to have left Princes would encroach upon and destroy their privileges.

Now the Republic of Venice has sufficiently provided for every one of these
things. As to the first, which is Plenty, besides the nature and situation of
her States, which are fruitful, and have the convenience of the Sea, and of
navigable Rivers, they have encouraged Trade, and Manufactory; So that they
have not only that which is necessary for life, but also the delights and
rarities of all parts of the habitable world are to be had there; they have
also settled the Office, Dei proveditori all biade, whose care it is to see
that Corn be never wanting in the City. As for justice and liberty they are
well secured, as it will appear from what I am to say afterward.

Now as to moneys, this being the first aliment, and the right sinew of war;
and as a State has two things to do, to make war, the one is to raise men and
put them in a body, and the other to send them where occasion requires; but
neither of these can be done without moneys, which yet must last, because the
manner of carrying on wars does require it; and seeing there are two ways of
managing it, either when men come to decide it with a battle as soon as can be
done, and then all lies at the stake, it is necessary as to pay the arrears of
Soldiers, so to encourage them also, and in a doubtful case to bestow some
liberality upon them: or if war be protracted, and slowly carried on, with an
intent to tire, waste and consume the Enemy; this manner of war, more then the
former, does wholly depend upon the abundance of moneys wherewith Soldiers are
duly paid, and the Army supplied with all manner of necessary provisions.
Indeed the riches of this Republic are very great; not only the Public, but
also the private, first, by reason of the large extent of her Dominions both by
Land and by Sea, wherein are great, plentiful and populous Cities which yield
very great Revenues, as has been showed before; by which means she may lead
Soldiers where occasion does require, making War to last when it is her
advantage so to do; whereunto I add, that the Republic has means and
inventions enough to find out moneys, as we expressed before. Moreover, if ever
the Venetian Nobility were rich, they are now, and in a high degree, whereof
there are several causes. First, in all Italy there is not a City more Merchant
then Venice is, there being in it at least fifty very rich Merchants. Then, the
convenience of the Sea brings to them a great Trade from the Levant, and (in
time of peace) fills the City with rich wares, with a notable advantage of
customs to the Republic Revenue, and to particular men; and because of the
long Peace which they had with the Turks before the breaking forth of the
present war, both public and private men had time to gather great means: It Is
no wonder therefore, if in consideration of this, the Republic is at present
so solicitous, and so willing to have Peace with the Turk, that war being a
prejudice to all in it; it not only hinders them from gathering, but also
forces them to lay out what they had before.

But to speak of the riches of the Nobility of Venice, they are very great, and
almost inestimable upon these two accounts: first, of all the beneficial and
gainful charges of the Republic are distributed amongst them; and the other
is, that having bent all their thoughts upon the gain and profit in the Land,
they have a hand in the management of all the Chief Affairs in it, there being
none so fit and so able as the Nobles; and they are very subtle to get thereby
all the advantage they can, and yet with so much dexterity, that people cannot
handsomely complain of them, it being an Italian saying, That Governors within
the State of the Church do cheat with zeal and devotion; Those under other
Princes with authority and bravery, but the Noble Venetians with dexterity; yet
for all this, some are poor, but these are very few in comparison of the rest;
and to these also the Republic takes care to give some Offices, that however
they may not want: For all this, I know for certain, that some of them use to
go up and down into Alberghi, or places where strangers lodge, to beg. Indeed
forrainers, who are not acquainted with the persons, are surprised to see men
come in to them in the Noble Venetians habit, which is a long black Gown
hanging upon the ground, and the Berrotta or Cap (for they wear no hat.) One
pretends to ask for a Gentleman lodged in the house, who, says he, promised to
lend me so much; then seeming to be troubled, he proffers a Ring with Venetian
stones, or the like, to be pawned for much more then it is worth; and if this
takes not, then he refers himself to the Gentleman, to lend him or give him
what he pleases: and a stranger, who is dazzled with that name of a Venetian
Nobleman, does hardly know how to be rid of him, without giving him something;
the only way being to tell him, take heed what you do, for I belong to such an
Ambassador: after which he departs immediately, because under pain of death,
no Venetian Nobleman may keep company with any one belonging to a foreign
Minister. Another of these Noblemen, but a Greek by Nation, comes directly and
begs, pretending to have lost all by the present Turkish war: These two (the
only presidents in that kind) are examples of poverty in that order; but they
are also the shame of the Nobility, the rest being provided for, as I already
expressed. I could here come to some particulars about the manner of the
Nobility, of the proceeding with the Subjects, of their manners, customs and
qualities, but of this another time; at present I intend to say few things of
their public Treasure.

As to the particular sum of moneys which the Republic may have, it cannot be
well known, the present Turkish war having much exhausted them, and the
supplies which they have received from some few Princes, or other great
Persons, have been very inconsiderable, comparing them with their occasions. On
the other side, it is true, that the moneys which they have spent, either in the
pay of Soldiers or Provisions, and ammunition for the Fleets and Land Forces,
has been like the circular blood, and not gone out of their State, which
(except some Soldiers) has afforded them all necessary provisions for war.
It Is a common opinion, that before this war (for to speak a certainty of these
things, one must consider the Republic in peace, and a settled condition) the
public treasure could amount to fifteen Millions of Gold, and not more,
because every year there were extraordinary occasions of laying out much money,
sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, not only for the Service of
their own States, but also for the use of other: so they furnished the Duke of
Savoy with sixty thousand Crowns a month; and they did lend something in the
wars of Bohemia: but the present war has forced them to borrow moneys upon
use, from some of their own Merchants, and of Genoa, and they have been put to
coining of brass and coper, which formerly was forbidden amongst them; and at
present they allow of the Gold and Silver Coins, not only of other Brinces of
Italy, but the French and Spanish are current in the City. There was also above
One Million of false coin, which was taken in from the Subjects, without giving
them any satisfaction for it, which they since have made use of, So that from
all this one may judge. that the public Treasure is not so great as has been,
and is still talked of, people usually looking upon such things through a
multiplying Glass: It is true, that there is still a very rich Treasure in St.
Mark (and this is properly that which is called the Treasury of Venice, and not
a Treasure in moneys, as many do imagine) which I have seen several time; it
consists in work of Gold well wrought, and in Jewels and precious Stones of
very great value, and of an extraordinary beauty, which comes behind no other.

The particulars are, first, the Golden Crown, wherewith every new Duke is
Crowned, all set with jewels of very great value; then twelve Corselets of
massy Gold of an indifferent bigness, all full as can be of Emerald stones, and
Saphires, which were gotten at the taking of Constantinople; and there are
twelve golden Crowns of an extraordinary beauty, and full of precious stones,
taken in the same City: further, two very fair Crowns of gold, all set with
Jewels, the one for the Kingdom of Cyprus, the other for that of Candia; there
are also some Carbuncles of an extraordinary bigness, Saphirs, Turkoises
stones, Granets, and other precious stones of a rare beauty and value, besides
some Censor pans, a papal golden Cup, with the Chalice, and other rare works
admirable to look upon; there are some household stuff, and works of antiquity,
of all manner of ancient Arms, as breastplates, which anciently the Princes
used to carry to war when they went in person; Halbards after the Turkish way,
Rapiers, two hundred Swords, Pikes, great cross-Bows, with some other presents
given to the Republic by the Persian, and other Princes of the East, with some
other Tokens received from Genoa, Germany, from the Turks, and other Nations;
of all which things three rooms of a good bigness are stored: But the rarest of
all these things is the workmanship of a wooden horse, between the legs of an
armed man, an excellent invention, and wonderfully fair; and this is all which
is to be found there most magnifick, most fair, and most rare; for I do not so
much as take notice of their several pretended Relics, which contribute to
superstition, more then to devotion.

And here upon the subject of Riches, I must take notice of a question started
by State-men, whether Riches or Poverty, do best qualify Subjects? that is,
whether it be better for a Prince that his Subjects be rich, or that they be
poor? To which I answer, That extremities are very dangerous; and first, for
those subjects who are extraordinarly rich, they are apt to be proud,
ambitious, and given to pleasures and vices; all which things are dangerous in
Monarchies and Commonwealths, especially if they be any ways disaffected and
popular; so that if they do any good action, it is to be suspected they do it
for their private ends and designs, more then for the public good: Upon these
grounds Princes do suspect them so, that sometimes merely upon jealousy of
State, they are kept low, and undone; for often times Supreme Authority is not
satisfied with this only, that one will do no harm, but it requires also that
he have not the power to do it, the great intention being to disenable him from
it; Rulers not being so solicitous of what a man will do, as of what he can do.
Thus it falls out with high Cedar trees, to be stricken with thunderclaps,
whilst low shrubs are free and safe. Should a Star shine as bright and as
glorious as the Sun, it would be accounted a prodigy; so in States, especially
in Monarchies, there ought to be a greater difference between the Sovereign and
the first of Subjects, then between this and the last of the people; for what
greater light the former has he borrows and receives it from his Prince, who
is the fountain of Honor, and who can make him as low, as himself or his
Ancestors made him high. Now the greatest men in Kingdoms are but Subjects, as
the lowest of the people, and between them there is only a difference in
degree, or at the most in order; and it is easier for one to pass from a low
degree of subjection to a higher one, then from the highest degree of
subjection to pass to Sovereignty; only some mitigation of this must be made
for those who are Heirs apparent, and (if they live) infallible successors of
the Crown, yet till then they are but Subjects.

Now I say, this greatness of some particular man is more dangerous in
Republics then in Monarchies, for the Glory of Sylla, Marius, Crassus,
Pompeius, Caesar, and others, proved very fatal to the Roman Republic, more
then that absolute Authority which Sejanus usurped to himself, was to Tyberius
in his absence, though for a while the Emperors Authority was eclipsed by the
glory and the greatness of that favorite. Neither is it very proper that some
Families should enjoy more riches and credit then the Republics wherein they
live, as it has been, and at this day it is in Genoa; but this may be
attributed to the several revolutions and changes which have befallen that
Republic, for other Commonwealths have been, and are more careful then so:
Thus at Venice, though rewards be given to those who have done well, yet the
great glory and reputation of all comes to the State, and does not stay nor fix
in particular men. But the jealousy of the Commonwealth of Athens, went
beyond all this; for they denied Miltiades, a Crown of green leaves (an usual
thing amongst the Romans) after that glorious and immortal Victory of his at
Marathon; One of the Senators stood up and said to him, When thou Miltiades
fighting alone shall have obtained Victory of our Enemies, then thou shall
alone be honored: And this jealousy of theirs introduced the Ostracisme into
their Republic, whereby any particular man who far exceeded others in riches
or credit, was for ten years exiled out of the City; severity, which though it
seems to secure them from troubles and alterations, yet it does really
discourage virtue and merit: for take away from virtue reward of honor or
riches, she loses much of her life and strength, Languescit sine praemio
virtus. This extremity is not so easily found in Monarchies, neither do I see
how it may consist with justice, because some men are very great in a State,
that merely upon suspicion they should be deprived of what riches and honors
their Ancestors merit and virtue, or their own, have been rewarded with,
except indeed they would turn the course of them against their Spring, and make
use of them for wrong ends, and contrary to those for which they were given;
yet in all this the State and Sovereign Authority must find their safety.

Now to the second extremity, whether it be better for a State that all the
subjects of it should be kept low and poor? I will omit particular customs and
constitutions of some Countries, grounded upon their manner of Government, and
temper of the people, to come to a general, and I think a rational Rule; I say
therefore, that to oppress people who are Obedient to Authority, merely to keep
them poor and low, or under pretense of taking from them the means and
occasions of troubles and seditions, is a thing unmerciful, unjust, and unsafe.

First, unmerciful. One of the characters which Scripture gives of a righteous
man is, that he is merciful to the beast, which God was pleased not only to
have some respect to, when he prescribed the observation of the Sabbath, but
also to take a special care of, when he forbids his people, Not to muzzle the
Ox which treads the Corn, because he ought to have some fruit of his labors;
much more is God mindful of men, created all of one and the same lump, after
his own Image and likeness; therefore the Son of God commands us to be
merciful, even as our Heavenly Father is merciful, who causes his Sun to shine
upon all men, and sends his rain for the benefit of all. Tenderness is becoming
Princes and Rulers, who must be fathers and protectors of the people, knowing
also they have a Lord and a Master in Heaven, who is no excepter of persons;
therefore in those things they exact from subjects they ought to consider their
strength and abilities, so as not to require brick where there is no straw, and
not inflict upon them a greater curse then that which God pronounced in the
beginning, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread; Indeed according
to this, they must work hard to have it, but what a crying sin is it after they
have as it were sweated out their heart, to deprive them of the end and benefit
of their labors, which was to get bread in the sweat of their face; this is to
be neither (...) nor Christian.

But I must show how unjust this is; for though men are to pay Tributes,
Customs, and indeed till the last farthing of their purse, and the last drop
of their blood, to contribute to the relief of the necessities of the State;
yet extraordinary occasions ceasing, in justice they ought to be eased of their
burdens, for the cause ceasing the effect must also cease: And in all sorts of
ranks and qualities, there is a right of propriety, which if you take away, all
the world shall go up-side down; there is that meum and tuum, which ought to be
preserved to every one. If Princes do give way to the disturbance of the
propriety of the Subject, unawares they may happen to give presidents, and lay
a foundation of destroying in time their own right and prerogative. When the
Rubicon is once past, and men are engaged in a wrong way, there is no end, and
things may go much further then they thought at first they could go; and this
shows the danger of such practices. Furthermore, there ought to be a difference
between subjects and slaves: the former depends upon Laws, and the latter upon
the will and fancies of men, not only as to goods, if any they have, but also
as to their persons and lives, yet this is only amongst Infidels and
Barbarians. Now when a man engages himself to be a servant to another, it is
upon certain conditions so tolerable as he intends, not to give his Master an
absolute and despotick power over his goods and person; this same consideration
must be supposed to have been had by those who first of all freely and
willingly submitted to Authority, yet still with this vaste difference, that
men are servants by their choice, but subjects by birth and nature; so that one
may not be a servant, but of unavoidable necessity he is a Subject; and so with
stricter bonds tied to his Sovereign, more then any servant is to his master:
however this shows what I said, That there ought to bounds and limits to the
sufferings and burdens of subjects, as all created things have without
exception, the will and power of God alone being boundless and unlimited.

Neither is it safe for States to keep subjects exceeding low and poor, for
people are thereby reduced to wants and to despair, which put them upon any
extremities; they are apt to raise Tumults and Seditions; for nothing in the
world spurs on men so much as want and necessity do. Men who have nothing to
lose care not what they do, but will seek to fish in troubled waters, for they
are sure to lose nothing but a poor life, which may be they are weary of; and
they are in hopes (perhaps not without probability) of getting something. That
State is in a dangerous condition whose subjects are in great poverty, not only
by reason of the disturbance which thereby may arise within, but also because
upon occasion no great help can be expected from them against a foreign Enemy,
the Rulers having already lost the hearts of the people, who have no purse to
assist them, nor hardly hands to lend, poverty taking away the heart and the
spirit of men, whereby they are unresolved, wanting experience and capacity to
do any service; so that the Prince alone, or very weakly assisted, must curb
troubles within, and repel hostilities from without, for the most part these
sort of subjects being like fit-sick folk a bed, who think to ease themselves
by often turnings and changings of place. Rehoboams words, My father chastised
you with whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions, cost him very dear,
seeing he lost thereby Ten Tribes: which God forbid I should speak as to the
right but only as to the matter of fact, knowing also there was a special hand
of God in it; but to my mind, this makes the danger of this practice very
palpable.

Therefore the safety and prosperity of a State does consist in a middle way
between two extremities; that is, in a mediocrity of means and riches of
subjects; and these questionless are the strength of a Nation, who are not so
rich, so credited, nor so strong of themselves, as to oppress others, or
attempt any thing against the Government, or so poor as to undertake any thing
to get bread, or to seek their fortune in the troubles and ruins of the State,
seeing they have enough of their own to live upon, according to their quality,
which they are afraid to lose, and would not hazard upon any uncertainty, it
being a great folly in a man who ventures to lose more then probably he can
gain; and certainly the more these means or riches are dispersed, the better
and safer it is for the State and the Public, for so every one has something,
and none has enough to cause, or reason to wish for disturbances: being a
counterpoise one to anther, and every one having some ground of satisfaction,
and content, though some more, and some less; there is no danger that the lean
Kine shall devour the fat, nor shall the fat devour the lean. This truth is
confirmed by the wise man, Give me neither Poverty nor Riches; the first, to
the end I do not steal; and the last, that I grow not proud.

Having spoken of the Riches of the Republic, I must in the next place
discourse of her Government, and of the Order of her Councils. The Prince,
called Doge, or Duke, is the head of the Republic: who though he has the Name
of Prince, yet he has no Authority without the Council: he may not so much as
open a public Letter without one of the six Councillors, neither does he keep
a Court as other Princes, but only a handsome Family: He is ever in a Dukal
dress, and in such clothes as make him appear venerable; He wears a Cap, which
behind rises up like a horn, or if I may so call it, a crimson kind of Mitre,
with a gold border, and a thin Coise under it; his upper Garment is like a
cloak hanging down to the ground; He has on his shoulders Ermin skins, which
hang round about him to his middle, and are closed before with precious stones;
about his Waste he wears a rich embroidered girdle, set with many Jewels of
great price; the Bells of St. Mark ring when he goes out of his Palace, and
before him are carried some little spread flags, and also are sounded some
silver Trumpets of an extraordinary bigness; then are carried the Cushion, and
the golden chair, after follows the Prince under the Vmbrellon or Parasol
instead of a Canopy, between two of the Chief Ambassadors who are present;
last of all come a matter of thirty ranks, of two in a rank, of Noblemen, all
clothed in Red; and he who is at the right hand of the first rank, bears the
Sword naked in his hand; and this is done when he marches in State.

So then the whole Authority of this Government does depend upon some certain
Noble Families; which almost from the beginning of the Republic were united
together, and to them upon several occasions others have been added; so there
has been some alteration of this Nobility, when by reason of some wars the
door into it has been open to some Families, who though they exceeded others
in riches, yet were very short of them in Nobleness of blood, and extraction;
Hence have sprung some Emulations or Envyings of one against another, as it is
expressed in their Baloting or voting, whereby sometimes are named to Offices,
not they who have most merit, but they who have most friends, and most favor;
but these things happen every where else. Because I will draw no inference to
disparage either their Persons or their Government, it being natural to every
one to promote his friends and relations, rather then an enemy or a stranger:
All these Families may be reduced to the number of 150, which make up about
3000 Noblemen of all Qualities and Conditions, out of whom are chosen the
Consiglieri in this manner.

First, there is the Gran Consiglio, the Great Council, which is the Assembly
of all the Venetian Nobility, from 25 years of age upwards: But first, it is
necessary for one to prove he is so many years old, to which effect he presents
himself to the Avogadori di Commune; and the Oath of the Parents, and of the
next relations, is taken to confirm he is 25 years Old; then there must be two
credible witnesses to affirm that he is such a Noblemans Son, which being done,
he may go into the Great Council: there are also some few others of the
Nobility, who may be present at this Council, after they are 21 years Old,
which they obtain by lot in this manner. It is the custom on St. Barbara's
day, in remembrance of a great Victory obtained upon that day, for all those
young Nobles who are entered into the 21 year of their age, to give in their
names, which are put in a box, out of which some are taken and put into another
with the Golden Balls, and he whose name is taken out is made of the Council,
and the rest, whose number is sometimes greater and sometimes lesser, must stay
till another year. Now this Gran Consiglio is the basis and foundation of the
Republic; in it are created all the Magistrates, not only of the City of
Venice, but also of the whole State: it commonly consists of 1500 Noblemen, who
meet usually every Sunday, and almost every Holy day.

Then follows the Council called Pregadi, which is one of the Chief members of
the Republic, for in it are treated of, and decided, all the great affairs of
the State; it consists of 120 Noblemen, of whom ordinarily five may be of one
Family; besides some other Councils and Magistrates, some whereof have right of
Balloting (or giving in their Votes by way of Balls) and others have it not,
only they may hear what passes there: Therefore they who enter into this
Council are first the Doge; the six Consiglieri, the Consiglio di dieci, the
Avogadori, all the Procuratori, the Quarantia Criminale, the three Consiglieri
da basso, the two Censori, the three Sopra gli atti, the Sopragastaldi, the
three Governors dell'entrale, the three Lords Sopra le biade, the four Lords
over the Salt, the three Chamberlains di Commune, the three Lords of the
Raggioni Vecchie, the three of the Raggioni nuove, the three Proveditori di
Commune, the three Lords over the Arsenal, the three proveditori sopra le
Camere, the three Proviseri delli dieci Savi, and the three Cattaveri, or
inquisitors of truth. All these names I set down in Italian, there being hardly
in English any to express them, but hereafter I will make out how they are to
be understood.

Those who have no vote in Pregadi are the College of the Savii, the three
Delle Sanita over the health, the three over li daci, gabels or customs, the
Provisori over the Costimo of Alexandria the three over that of Damascus, and
the twelve over that of Candia; all these together make up the Council of
Pregadi, which meets whenever it pleases the Collegio, and the Bell rings
when they are to meet; they are also called to it by public Officers,
appointed to that effect. This Pregadi may take no resolution, except there be
in it four Consigliori, and at least sixty of the Noblemen who have Vote, to
make a Quorum: All matters of great concernment to the Republic, are treated
of, in this Council: namely, the resolutions about Peace, War or Truce, Leagues
and Confederacies, of the ways of raising moneys, of giving assistance to
Princes, of making new Laws, choosing new Generals, and high Officers of the
Fleet, and Army, and of the electing the Savi of the Land, of the Sea, and the
Savi Grandi.

But because I speak here of several Offices under Italian-names, for indeed
some of them cannot be rendered into English, I must now explain in few words
what some of them are, and hereafter I shall have occasion to mention others;
There are the Procuratori di S. Marco, which is one of the greatest and the
most honorable dignities of the Republic, for they are such for life, they
take care of the Church and Treasure of St. Mark; they see that the Wills of
Testators be put in execution by their Heirs, being themselves Commissioners of
Legacies, they are allowed to wear the Dukal Vest, and to have some few
servants to attend them; they take place of all Magistrates, except the six
Consiglieri, and the three Capi di Quaranta, and have a particular lodging
allowed them by the Public, or sixty Ducats by the year: They all enter into
Pregadi, and three of them into the Council di Dieci, by which they are chosen.
Formerly they were but two, then three, and thence twelve, but now there are
twenty five, some having gotten the place by strength of mouses. They never go
into the Gran Consiglio, but when a Duke is to be chosen, and usually they are
not allowed any other place but that of Savi Grandi, though sometimes upon
extraordinary occasions they be admitted into others.

The Consiglieri are six in number, and to understand this one must know that
the City of Venice is divided into two parts; The one on this side Rialto, and
the other on that side: Every side has three Sessiori quarters or parts, for
every one of which a Consigliero is chosen by the Gran Consiglio, three at one
time, and that is once of one side of Rialto, and the next time on the other:
which dignity is but for one year.

The word Pregadi comes from Pregati, prayed to, or wished and entreated: for
when Venice was divided into petty Islands, one of every place was prayed to go
and give his advice about public affairs: This Council does choose Ambassadors
to be sent to Princes, with whom ever goes a Secretary taken from amongst the
people, without whose knowledge the Ambassador must do nothing of public
concernment, and before this same Pregadi, Ambassadors after their return home
make Relations of the Courts whence they come. To enter into it one must be at
least thirty years old: Of the 120 that compose it, sixty are named by the
Pregadi, and other sixty by the great Council: Every one of those who have Vote
in it name one, he who has most votes remains in it: However, as this Council
does confirm or reject Laws made by other Magistrates, so in point of the
Election of a Generalissimo, which is the greatest of all Military charges, the
great Council must approve or disapprove of him whom the Pregadi has chosen:
There enters also into this a sort of men who lend moneys to the Republic
until they be paid again; in which privilege their Children succeed, not to
Vote, but only to hear what passes therein; And this has been to encourage
men to lend moneys in the present War against the Turk. The extraordinary
meeting of this Council depends upon the Collegio, but usually it is thrice a
week, and always in the afternoon, and so they pass the whole night if
businesses do require it. In Venice they have a Law made by the Censors and
approved by Pregadi and Gran Consiglio, that when a Nobleman has obtained a
charge from either of these two Councils, no body must go to their lodgings to
congratulate with them, nor publicly in the streets.

The Collegio or College, which is the third member of the Republic, is in
great esteem, and of high importance: It does consist of sixteen persons, of
six Savi Grandi, five Savi di Terra, and five di Mare: These last take care of
all Sea affairs concerning Peace or War: the others do mind Land affairs of
Peace or War, especially they are obliged to keep an account of the listed Land
Forces of the Republic; but the Savi Grandi take care of all businesses both
by Sea and Land, who indeed do almost govern the whole Republic; all
businesses of Peace and War do pass through their hands; they write to Princes,
and receive their Answers: therefore none is chosen Savio Grande, except he be
a man of riper years, and of great repute and experience: So the Savi of the
Land are ever men of credit, which is not so much tequired in those of the Sea,
or de gli Ordini, as they are usually called, who are chosen for exercise, and
to learn more then to rule. When the Savi or wise men of the Land will treat of
a business which they are not willing to impart to those of the Sea, they
desire them to go out as the others do to them upon the like occasion; but the
Savi Grandi must be present to every thing.

Every one of these Savi is chosen by the Pregati, and amongst themselves, as
they are of three sorts, so every week they choose one of their number to be
their head, who is to move, and to make proposals of every thing they think fit
to be done, which thence are carried to Pregadi to be put to the Vote, whom
this Collegio fits and prepares things for: and to the same they make their
reports of things proposed by foreign Ministers in the audience they have given
them, or in the visits they received from them. This Collegio uses to meet
every day betimes in the morning, into it also do enter the Duke and Signoria.

This Signoria we must now speak of, otherwise called Consiglio di Dieci, the
Council of Ten, because it consists of ten persons, (viz.) the six Consigliori,
the three Capi di quaranta, and the Prince: Of the three Capi di 40, or heads
of the 40, one is chosen every week to preside and be the chairman, who ever
fits over against the Duke: This Council is of great importance, for it does
enter into all others; yet its authority may be called annexed rather then
principal, it being equal to that of Pregadi: It may indeed treat of matters
of State as they think fit, and not depend upon a higher power; but they make
no use of this Authority, except in cases of the highest concernment, and when
it cannot be done otherwise: as the sudden making of a War, or concluding of a
Peace, to send with speed a Providitore to the Army, and to treat secretly of a
business which requires speed; which things, if they were to be debated and
resolved upon, first by the College, then in Pregadi, that diligence, and may
be that secrisie which are necessary, could not be obtained.

There is the Consiglio only and simply of ten, and the Consiglio con
l'aggiunto, double, and with the additional; in the former are only the ten
persons forenamed, and besides them come into the last, the Savi grandi, and
those di terra, the three Avegadori, nine of the Procuratori, and fifteen
others who are appointed for that purpose; the former sits almost once every
day, but the latter once in eight days, which time has been prefixed within
these two last centuries of years to settle the minds of people who were
mightily stirred and afraid when this Council used to meet, it being known
that it is only upon businesses of the highest importance, as to punish Rebels
and Traitors to the Republic, false Coyners, and excesses of another nature,
as profanation of their Churches, as it happened within these very few years upon
this occasion.

One day a young Gentleman of the Family Nani, lately come from abroad, having
met with (whether it was by accident, or with a premeditated design it is not
known) the wife of the Signiore Giovanni Grimani within a Church in a remote
part of the City, something passed between them, it may be nothing but words;
but however the thing was misrepresented to the Prior or Superior of the
Cloister by one of the Priors, who reported he had seen something unbecoming
the place; this hare-brain'd Prior, without any consideration of the
consequences, in a passionate fit went and complained to the Council of Ten,
that some obscene act had been committed in their Church by such persons;
whereupon immediately the Council sent the Gentleman a Warrant to appear before
it within twenty four hours, and give an account of such things; but he having
consulted with his friends, thought fit to let this fury be over, and therefore
absented himself; but the Council who first of all is hot upon businesses, (a
thing indeed unbecoming the gravity they do profess) proceeded against him in
his absence with a great severity, and declared him convinced of the fact: By
this Thunderbolt two birds (as we say) were killed at once; for the Lady was
thereby condemned (though no ways mentioned) of Adultery; And as it is usual
in such things, that they who are the most concerned, are warned last of all,
the Ladies Husband that walking by the Palace of St. Mark, not knowing any
thing of what passed, some of his acquaintance turned away from him, others
hanged down their heads at the sight of him; but at last some of his friends
not daring to speak themselves, did write a note to him about what was past;
the grief which he received upon so surprising and unwelcome news is not to be
conceived: but home he went, and in a Council between him and his two Brothers,
the Abbot, and Petro Grimani, it was resolved to send several, after young Nani
to make him away, if they could find him: for though he were innocent, yet his
flight had laid a note of infamy upon the Lady, and consequently upon the
Family; On the other side the Lady must be made away with poison; the first
failed, but the second did not, although the Husband was much against it, yet
the Abbot, as they say, undertook to cure her of all diseases, and with a Pill
to send her into another world, which was effected in a fortnights time. In the
mean while Nani and his friends were not asleep, for the Ladies Husband was
quickly sent by poison, as it is thought, packing after his wife; and a while
after when the brunt was over, Nani appeared before the Consiglio: who having
heard of his justification absolved him, too late indeed as we use to say,
After death comes the Physician.

This Consiglio manages also certain sums of mouies as they are assigned to it,
has an absolute power over the Artillery, and all Officers belonging to it: It
has also in the Arsenal certain Galleys at his command, which are marked with
these two letters, C. X. signifies the Capi, or Consiglio, and the second
letter X. makes Ten, or di dieci. When Princes have a mind to treat secretly
with the Republic, they direct their Letters thus; To the Serenissime Prince,
N. N. (as now Contareni) Duke of Venice with his Council of Ten; which method
is observed in the answers given to these Letters. When a guilty man is brought
before this Consiglio, he is allowed no Council, nor any one to plead for him,
but one of the Consiglio must do it, for him, or else it will not be done at
all: There is no appeal from their Sentence, which may be reversed by none but
by themseves, or their successors, for they are changed every year, the Duke
excepted; this severity and great authority makes it formidable to the City.

Upon the subject of this Consiglio di dieci, it is to be observed, that the
three Capi di 40 are otherwise called Consiglieri da basso, and that the six
Consiglieri Grandi are in charge but eight months, that is, in their assisting
with the Duke, and the four months following, by three and three, they are
Consiglieri da basso, that is in the Quarantia: so that thus they end the year
of their Consiglierato or Council-ship. And the three Capi are not taken out of
the old Quarantia, nor out of the new, but out of the Criminal, which all are
called Quarantie, because in every one of them are forty Noblemen. All these
things are necessary for foreign Ministers to that Republic, to be known by
them, that they may accordingly make their applications; and this at all times
has been a great help to the dispatch of very difficult and important affairs.
But I must come to another head.

The Administration of Justice is wholly committed to the Noble Venetians, who
are sent into all Cities, Towns and Buroughs to govern them under the title of
Podesta: these have a Supreme Authority both in Civils and Criminals: their
Courts consisting of one Vicar, of one judge all' maleficio against Crimes and
Delinquents; another Judge all vettoa aglie, about Victuals and Provisions;
and another all' Aouija, who are Doctors at Law of the State. To the Rectors of
Cities are subject all other Governors of Towns, Castles and Villages, who
have Authority in the Civil; but over the criminal it is extended only to the
rope they call Strapado, Banishment, Prison, to the Galley, and to some
pecuniary fine, but not to death, which is belonging to the Governors of
Cities. So that the chief charges of the Government of that Republic are
within all her Dominions bestowed upon the Nobility (excepting Brescia, which
has it otherwise by a special privilege) and the Subjects may rise no higher
then to be made Governors of some Lands, or some strong places, because the
Republics custom is to employ strangers, rather then their own Subjects; and
in the choice made of those Nobles there is a great deal of corruption; for
capacity, age, experience, integrity of life, merits and virtue are not so much
looked upon, as the riches, interest and dependancies of the Family, and
whether the person be able to render some service to those who favored him in
his Election; And this is an universal practice all the world over, to carry
out things by way of favor, parties, bribes, and interest.

As for the Laws, every City is Governed according to her own Statutes and
Customs, so that except by Public Readers in the Schools, there is no mention
made of the Civil Roman or Imperial Laws; and what is read in these Schools
(at Padoa especially) is more for show and ostentation, and to bear up the
credit of the place, then for any use and observation of them: For the
Republic within this century of years, has taken away not only the
Authority, but also the very name of Imperial, or any other name relating to
Monarchy, out of her State, and has deprived the people of their privileges;
of creating Notaries, of Knighting, Legitimating, Naturalizing, and the like.
It is also forbidden to Notaries to use the name as Imperial or Royal: So that
all things are done by the Name and Authority of Venice, it being their
pleasure, that upon all occasions of High Justice, Degrees and Honors, the
Laws of the Cities, and places, and sometimes of Venice her self, be observed
in all places.

As to the manner of their judiciary proceedings, things are judged and decided
according to a long custom and experience of many years, more then out of any
learning gotten by studies; seeing the Nobility of Venice, not only does not
follow the study of the Law, but also they think it were a shame for them to do
it; so that instead of it they learn a little of Philosophy, and something of
Rhetoric, whereby they are enabled to make discourses upon occasion; and this
I say as to the generality, there being amongst them persons of a deep and
Universal learning: However they have certain forms of cases decided before,
which are registered and kept upon record; and from this, as from the advices
they receive from some Lawyers they carry along with them, they are enabled to
give sentences, and pass judgments, which (as in other places) are sometimes
unjust, and very prejudical to the parties: The thing they mind most of all,
is, to instruct themselves of the Laws and Customs of their Republic,
wherein they succeed well: But those who are employed to be Ambassadors in
foreign Courts, and those who are Lawyers and plead causes, study both Law and
Learning, though the Art of relating Histories well, and the belle lettere, or
curious humane learning, be that which they affect most of all: As to the rest,
practice more then theorie, is their guide; but as this experience is of two
sorts, the one from the long standing of the world, which does afford general
rules, and the other is that which men acquire in particular through the course
of their life, which if it be without great parts and learning, is so confuse
and cloudy, that hardly it ever comes to that degree of excellency which is
found in some actions, and the judiciousness of some men: Hence it is, that
this bare experience, and without method, proves very often prejudicial to
particular men, and dangerous to the Republic, because it learns to undo more
then to do, and never knows order, but by the sight of disorders: So it happens
sometimes to this Republic, for sending often young unlearned, and
unexperienced men to be Governors of Cities and places, who thereby commit
many errors and disorders, whereof the worst falls upon the Subjects, who are
thereby involved in many troubles and charges: However the Republic is very
severe in punishing those faults which these do commit of a set purpose,
especially if they suffer themselves to be bribed to do some unjustice. Upon
this account, a Nobleman who had been possessed in Crema, was beheaded some
years ago, because he had received, as it was proved, fifty pieces in Gold,
with promise to favor the giver: And as the very report of a bad
administration of Justice and Government is sufficient, not only to have the
Nobles hereafter excluded from further preferments, but also to cause them to
be punished for the present, and to make them forfeit their reputation, which
also reflects somewhat upon their families: So when they come to the discharge
of their employments they are very careful of doing justice, and of promoting
the public good: and what abuses they commit, are acted with great dexterity:
So that for all the particular failings I have mentioned, which are altogether
unavoidable in humane things; that Republic for the right and just
administration of her Government must receive her due praises: and although in
point of life and death, amongst them, one friend be very earnest to solicit
for another; yet as to civil matters, to speak in a man's behalf it would do him
more harm then good.

It is true, as to their seats of Justice, that there is nothing so tedious and
so chargeable as the suits that are before them, neither is there any place
where are so many Courts of Justice as in Venice, and in the Cities of her
Jurisdiction; for the poor people who are at Law being forced to follow appeals
to Venice are put to tedious and extraordinary charges, and see no end of their
causes, especially if they are to deal with some of the Nobles, or other rich
persons, for in all places where Appeals are admitted the richest will tire out
the poor: So that this is one of the greatest faults of that Republic, but it
is committed upon a politic account, as we said elsewhere, to keep people in
exercises, and the Courts of Justice in credit. Now in Venice are all the
Courts and Tribunals following.

First, the Court of the Procuratore, which judges of things relating to the
Proctors: Before this Court are brought matters of Legacies, differences
arising between men of different profession concerning the same, and
Controversies between Husbands and Wives.

The Court della Petitione, of Requests, hears Causes of above an hundred
Venetian lire or pounds, (that is, four pound in English, or thereabouts)
concerning those whom guilt made fly away; orders the pawning and surveying of
goods in the Custom house; obliges men to stand to their bargains and
agreements made by word of mouth, or in writing; does Tax and Regulate charges
upon the desire of the Commissioners, or rather Executors, settles and confines
expense of those who are under age, decides differences about Wills, and
Confirms, Arbitrary Sentences from fifty Ducats downwards.

The Office dell' Fuarastiero of forrainers, judges Cases between Venetians
and strangers, and about household stuffs, Boats hire, and of accidents
depending thereupon, as when wares are cast into the Sea out of Ships; it does
not relieve Causes about less then ten Ducats, but it proceeds summarily.

The Tribunal dell' Mobile, of movables, judges of things of fifty Ducats
and less, it is of its jurisdiction to decide controversies about movables
disposed of by Wills and Testaments, and of other things which a dead man has
done in his life time, if it be his own handwriting signed by two witnesses.

The Tribunale dell' proprio judges of four things of concernment; the first
is the matter of portions after a divorce, and of joyntures; the second about
differnces arising between Brethren, when they divide any State: the third is
concerning successions ab intestato, when a man has made no Will: The fourth
is matter of bounds and limits of buildings, that one does not encroach upon
another ground, and the like. Further, this Court judges of all Causes between
nigh and strict relations.

The Court dell' Essaminatore, examines witnesses ad perpetuam rei memoriam,
takes cognizance whether sales were well or ill made, and intervenes to sales
made by the Commissary, does sign the instruments of Donation, and keeps a
register of all conditional Legacies.

There are also li Cattaveri, who take care to recover those goods which fall
to the State from them who dye without making any Will, and leave no
Successors; they revoke and take away penalties laid by other Judges, if they
think it fit; they sell all Incanto by the public Cryers invitation, in the
name of the State, those Lands which belong to it, to those who offer the most
at port-sale: They are judges of things found at Sea, and of treasures
discovered under ground: They hear differences between those who go in
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and the Masters of ships who carry them; wherefore in
this Office is written the name of every Pilgrim bound for that place; they
also decide matters of prices.

The Piovego does judge about contracts of Usury; Of Causes about high ways,
and takes care that no particular man does build or otherwise trespass upon the
Channels, or upon the Streets.

The Office of the Sindici is to oversee unreasonable and excessive charges,
made in the acts of Justice, they take the place of ordinary Judges, when they
are chosen by the parties.

The Sopragastaldi are ordinary Judges of the Execution of Sentences, they sell
goods by an intermitted Sentence, and hear differences about Intermissions,
Executions and Contradictions.

The Superiori are to censure and mend the acts of the Supragastaldi in those
errors which may happen to arise from their Sentences.

The Auditori Vecchi are to hear the Appeals of the City, Causes of the Courts
of St. Mark, and of Rialto; they either do refer Causes, or else bring them
into the Quarantia civil Vecchia: They judge whether the testimony of Witnesses
ought to be received or not; and generally the causes of Compromessi or
references to Arbitraters are brought into this Office.

The Auditori Nuovi hear of Causes from abroad by way of Appeal, they interpose
arbitrary sentences where judges have judged amiss, they order suspention of
trials for two months; In a word, this Office decides all broils made by
Rectors of places, receiving all Appeals, except from two like sentences. After
these Rectors are gone from their Government, the Auditori do receive Appeals
one month after, within the State called Trevigian, and of other Cities and
Castles two months after: But about Sea-affairs they receive it at all times,
receiving privileged persons and things, as Orphans, Widows, the poorest sort
of people, to whom no time is limited to Appeal, and Churches, Universities,
and pious places. Their letters of Appeal do usually suspend definitive
Execution, except within the Trevician State, the Sebenico, and places of the
Levant: Within the Frinli, Appeals are decided within four months, otherwise
they are executed by Sureties.

The Auditori Nuovissimi judge of Causes to the value of fifty Ducats and
less; for those of more, they come before the Auditori Nuovi.

The Lords di notte in Civil, or Civil Causes, take cognizance of Leases, of
Houses, matters of cheat; see that bonds made about charges at Law be executed;
and are likewise Executors of Sentences passed without the City.

The Lords di notte in Criminale, in Criminal Causes, are appointed to prevent
and stop fires within the City; to keep goods orders at nigh, and hinder all
manner of violences; even by drawing of blood, and wounding, if it cannot be
done otherwise: These being joined with the Quarantia, do order the punishment
inflicted upon thieves; and against Husbands, who have more then one Wife; and
against Wives who have many Husbands; they chastise those who have defloured
Maids, killed Thieves, or bought stolen goods: They have authority over the
Jews who kept communication with Christians; and also they punish Physicians,
Apothecaries, and Chyrurgeons, who do not declare who are those who lay under
their hands to be cured of wounds.

The Quarantia vecchin Civil does judge of Causes of the Auditori vecchi,
which themselves have brought into this Court: where also is debated about
pardons, graces, and amnesties granted to Malefactors; they judge of Baloting
between equal numbers, or when there is no casting Vote or Ball, and they see
that in baloting the oath taken be observed; They also receive Appeals from
Judges within the City, and woe be to them who have any thing to do here upon
that account, for nothing in the world is so tedious as are their proceedings.

The Quarantia Nuova hears Causes brought in by the Auditori Nuovi, once a
month gives in a Cause to those about the Kingdom of Candia, with some other
dispatches and provisions; and also receives some Appeals from Judges in the
Country. One must be past 30 years old to be admitted into these Quarantia's.

The Collegio of the 25, passes definitive sentences upon Causes of 300 Ducats
and less; For the space of two months hears the Causes of the City, and for two
other months, those of the Country.

The Quarantia Criminale does decide Criminal Causes, as well Originatively, as
brought before them by way of Appeal: The Avogadori do bring them in, as into
their right and proper Council, where they are debated Pro and Con, the States
Council speaking against the guilty, whom answers are returned to by the
Advocate of the prisoner, or by the, Straordinarii.

Likewise the Sindici, or the Overseers of Governments at Sea, do speak against
the guilty, as do the Avogadori; They also supervise the acts of public
Notaries.

The Lords All Acque, about waters, are the Overseers of Lakes, Ponds, and
other fresh waters; They take care that the Channels be kept clean.

The Lords, or Signiore all' Biade, take care that the City be plentifully
supplied with all manner of provisions: So for the Sea places, and the like.

Those All' Sanita, for health, look to every thing that might bring an
infection into the City, as Diseases, or any filthy and corrupt thing that is
brought to be sold. Physicians who are willing to practice must take a License
in this Office; as Mountebanks, and others, who appear so upon Stages must also
do so: Herein are entered the names of Cortagiane, or prostitute women, at
present, as it is guessed, to the number of twenty five thousand, or there
abouts; besides the number of those who are private, and of married women,
which must needs be vast in so populous a City. The causes of which I think to
be in part the nature of the Climate, of the Diet, the temper of the people,
and in part that severity and rigidness of parents and husband; to their
daughters and wives, who are deprived of an honest liberty; so that that upon
occasion they pass from one extreme to another: and they think they may allow
themselves a licentiousness, because they are deprived of a lawful liberty.
Nitimur in vetitum, is a true and a common saying: People long after, and are
greedy of that which is forbidden, being persuaded that stolen waters of
pleasures are sweet, they watch opportunities to come by it. A horse who has
liberty to go from the stable to the water, and thence to run up and down the
grounds, is not so wild, nor so hard to be come by, as one which is constantly
tied in a stable, and under bridle and curb, if once he slips out of the Grooms
hand. So it is of men and women who are kept under too severe a guard: if once
they break loose, they will not easily come in again. And comparing both their
conditions, the bitterness of the former adds much to the sweetness of the
latter, which the more they like, the longer they are willing to enjoy:
doubting whether ever hereafter they shall have any such opportunities, and
therefore the more loath they are to return home, to be again under a restraint.

Another cause of this miscarriage of Venetian women (I call all thosel so who
live in Venice, for otherwise there are many in it from other parts of Italy,
and several of Candia, and other Greek women) is the inticements of the place,
especially the suggestions and company of some subtle cunning persons both of
men and women, who have by a constant practice attained to such an Art of
insinuating themselves, that as soon as they have access to a woman, with their
pestilentious breath they will blast any thing of honesty or chastity that was
in them. Such a one has been that great Ruffiano, who dyed not long since,
named Paola Gemma, who in his life time had seduced almost as many women as he
had hairs on his head; whose words were so powerfully destructive, that it is
thought in Venice, the man never spoke twice to a woman, but she yielded to his
temptation; he used so much to press things upon them, upon the grounds of
interest, pleasure, and other plausible and specious pretenses and reasons, and
that in so eloquent and pathetick away, acting sometimes the part of a
Confessor, of a Preacher, and of an Orator, in his Threatenings, Admonitions,
Persuasions, Commendations and inticements, that it is to be wondered at the
Senates (who knew well how dangerous a man this was) suffering of him, were it
not that by report some of them made use of him. Something else of this nature
I shall say anon, but before, I must continue my enumeration of the Courts of
Justice.

The Signori alla dogana di mare, of the Custom-house about the Sea, do take
care that none of the Galleys of the Republic, or any other particular ship do
bring in any wares, or unload them till first of all the Custom-house be
satisfied.

The Lords alla Pace, are Judges over all those who fight, wound, or who revile
one another with injurious expressions.

Those Della Giustitia vecchia, do punish them who falsify weights, scales,
measures, and the like; they set a rate on fruits: In this Office are registered
all those who take a Salary to serve in shops, and all manner of Trades are
under the jurisdiction of this Court, by which the signs of shops must be
approved of.

The Cons^li di Mercanti, the Consuls of Merchants, have a jurisdiction over
matters of Merchandise, and the cognizance of faults committed by Merchants,
and matters of pawns, they take Oath from those who owe moneys, or bail, to
avoid being put into prison, cause those who are fled to be proclaimed to
appear, if not, they sell their goods, and pay the Creditours.

The Lords delle Pomp look that sumptuary Laws be put in execution concerning
clothes and diet, and also they oversee the Cortisans.

Those Alla Favina are over the Warehouses and Rialto, or matters of Trade and
Exchange; they hear all difficulties arising about the same, and keep by them
the keys of the place.

The Governatori dell' Entrate, take care of Taxes and Tithes, and punish the
faults of Officers belonging to the Custom-house.

The Signori suprd datii, over customs, farms and gabels, find out all those
who are endebted for the same, and see the Laws about it put in execution.

Those Supra la Giustitia Nuova, take care over Inns, Taverns, and over those
who let out Lodgings, and keep Pensions or Ordinaries; they get the custom due
for Wines sold by Retaile; and they oversee Magazines.

The Set Savi receive Appeals from the Giustitia Nuova, whereof they regulate
the Offices, and make provisions for the Magazines.

The Signori all Sale, about Salt, let out the Farms and Customs of the Salt
of Venice, as of all the Dominions of it, and are constituted Judges over all
businesses concerning Salt.

Those Supra i Canti, over the Accounts, have right and power to force those
who owe moneys to the Republic for what thing soever, to pay it; So they have
authority over ships and galleys.

The Providitori di Commune, take care that ships be built great, according to
their proportion, and that there be no alteration, when once they are built;
they take care of the Streets, and cause the City Bridges to be repaired; they
are also Overseers of the Traghetti, or passages over those Channels which run
through every street.

The Lords Suprd le Camere, that is, of the Office of the Chamberlains of every
City, do receive the public moneys which come from the Chamberlains Office of
every such City.

Those delli dieci Officii do gather or cause Collection to be made of the
moneys raised by the Custom-houses upon Land or Sea Commodities, they do the
like in point of hire of the great Galleys.

Those all' Arende do exact from debtors to the State those moneys which remain
due by them upon the account of Taxes and Tithes.

The Dieci Savi, do examine whether these Tithes be laid even and equal, and
upon just grounds, and whether there be any fraud or deceit in it.

The Lords All Raggioni Nuove, do let out farms and customs, and they make
twenty four chief partners, who dividing amongst themselves the shares or
parts, they make a Body and a Society to make good to the Republic the moneys
promised for such a Farm and Customs; And this Office constrains those who
owe moneys upon that account, that is, as they are of the twenty four, upon
whom also they may lay penalties.

Those All Raggioni Vecchie, in the name of the Republic do defray the
charges of Princes and Ambassa dours whom the Republic receives, of which they
keep an account.

Those supra il datio del' vino, over the Wine-Customes do judge matters
concerning the same, let them come either by Land or by Sea to the City; they
are also surveyours of the just payment of the custom, which being very
beneficial, and of great concernment, is ever collected by the Republic,
because the Noblemen not being willing to pay the Rights, no particular man
will or dares undertake it: This Custom yields above 300000 Ducats by the
year.

The Office of the Ternaria Vecchia, receives the moneys of customs upon Oils.

The Signori alla Grascia, take care about salt meats, cheese, and the like;
and upon occasion they pass sentence upon differences arising about the same.

Those Della dogana di terra, do receive the moneys of Customs upon things
which come by Land; and by them goods are searched.

Those delli panni doro, have a care that those who weave, or any other way,
work silver and gold clothes, and other sorts of manufactories, either to be
used at home, or to be sent abroad, be faithful in the doing of it, without
cheat or deceit; and they have power to cut or spoil the same.

The five, or Cinque all Mercantia, do regulate charges about merchandises and
wares, and see that they be not extraordinarily over-valued; so they judge of
superfluous charges about wages and salaries.

The Office della Segreta, has in custody all old and new books, and those of
the subsidies; which books may not be perused without the consent of the
Consiglio di dieci.

The three Chambers delli Monti vecchio Old, Nuovissimo New, and del, Sustidio
of Subsidies, do daily pay dues and fees, according to the order from the
Sestieri, or Governors of Quarters; and they have a full authority over things
belonging to their jurisdiction.

There is also the Office, called, La causa della Affrancatione, which does
free borrowed moneys from the great use agreed upon, and brings it to a lower
rate for the good of the State.

The Providitori della Zecchia, look that coins and moneys be not adulterated.

The Avogadori Fiscali have authority and power over any other Office when they
make extortions.

The Chamberlains or Camerlenghi di Commune have lying by them all the moneys
of the Republic by Land, as well as by Sea, which is disposed of as it
pleases the State: by virtue of Writs and Orders issued by the Collegio, and
signed by the Consiglieri, and the Savii.

The Estraordinarii do receive moneys for the hire of great Galleys and Ships
belonging to particular men: When goods are laden upon any sort of shipping,
it is necessary to have a License from this Office, for without it, no leave is
granted to go out.

The Tavola dell' Vscita, is an Office where are received the rights and
customs of all the goods carried out of the City.

The three Signori all' Arsenale, have the care of all things belonging to it,
and hear differences arising about things in it, between those who serve
therein.

Lastly, the Mossetaria is an Office which takes cognizance of the price of
things bought and sold, and for their interposition between the buyer and the
seller, by the great, by parcels or by retaile; they have two for the hundred.

Of these Offices, some consist of 40 Senators, others of 25, 20, others more
or less, but none is of less then three; and although all these Courts appear
to be much regulated, as indeed they are in themselves, yet, many of them are
superfluous, and introduced only to keep in exercise and from idleness the
great number of the Nobility, to bring them up in the management of affairs,
and that thereby some may get a subsistence and a livelihood; and as the best
things are apt to be corrupt, so corruption has crept into several of these
Courts: which very often men are admitted into, by strength of moneys. And
although this long enumeration of Seats of Justice may seem tedious to some;
yet thus much I thought necessary to mention: for they are all different ways,
which one time or other he who lives there, shall have occasion to make use of;
all which public Ministers are much concerned to know how to carry on more
successfully the interests of their Princes with that Republic.

Now for variety sake, I must pass to things of another nature; and here the
manner of Electing a Doge, and some things precedaneous to that action, must
not be omitted. As soon as one Duke is Dead, the six Consiglieri, and the three
Capi di 40, who compose the Council of Ten, do shut up themselves within the
Palace of St. Mark: whence they do not go out till after the Election of a new
one; and the Eldest of the Consiglieri acts the part of Vice-Duke. The Corpse is
soon buried in the night time by the care of some of his Relations: but withal
his Effigy in Wax clothed with the Ducal Garments is carried into a room,
called, Sala de proveghi, there to lie in State for the space of three days,
twenty of the Nobles being appointed to sit about it in their Scarlet Robes:
and then without any expression of public grief, mourning or sorrow, his
Funerals are performed in a great Pomp and Solemnity in the Church of St. Mark;
the next day after, the Gran Consiglio meets, the Great Chancellor puts them
in mind, that feeing a new Duke is to be chosen, they owe according to custom
to name the [three Inquisitori, and the five Correttori, after which the
Vice-Duke says something in commendation of the deceased, and exhorts every
one to mind the good and honor of the Republic in the future Election, and
nothing else: Consequently are chosen the Inquisitori and Correttori; in short,
the task of the former is to examine the life and actions of the late Duke, to
see whether he has observed the Laws; and if they find he has failed in any
thing, they are bound to accuse him before the Gran Council, for the which his
heirs are fined, or otherwise punished, just as if they were his own person; So
the heirs of the last Duke, of the Family Loredano, were fined to 1500
Vecchini, because it was found he had not lived according to the Majesty of his
degree and quality; and this is a way to keep Dukes in awe, for fear their
successors should bear the punishment of their faults. Now the Office of the
Correttori, is to see what things are fallen amiss, in the administration of
the late Duke, that accordingly as they find and acquaint the Great Council
with it, by the plurality of Votes, things may be annulled, added to, or
altered, as they see occasion for it.

Within a fortnight after the Doge's death, all the Noble Venetians that are
full thirty years Old, do meet in the great Council Hall; and as many Balls as
there are men, are cast into a box: of which Balls, thirty are of Gold, or
gilt, and the rest of Silver; every Noble draws one Ball, and they who have the
thirty of Gold, retire into a room to cast the lot of thirty Pallotte, as they
call it, or Balls, for they put in thirty, nine of which are of Gold, and they
who draw these, do remain in the room; but others do go into the great Council
Hall; in the mean while, of the nine who remained, the four who had the first
four balls, do name five men apiece, whom they please; and the five who had the
five last balls, do every one name four others; which number makes forty in
all, and every one may name himself for one; and these are called the Electors
of the first Election, who are confirmed by the Gran Consiglio, after which
they break up. But the next day the forty men do put in forty balls, of which
twelve are of Gold, and the rest of Silver; of these remain only the twelve,
who have drawn the golden balls, who are called the Electors of the second
Election. Every one of these does name two more, but he who drew the first
golden ball, names three, in all twenty five; then these twenty five put in
balls again, of which nine are of gold, and they who draw them, are called the
Electors of the third Election. Again, every one of these nine, names what four
he pleases, but he who drew the last golden ball, names only three, this makes
up thirty five, who put in as many balls, whereof eleven are of gold, and they
only who draw them do remain: these eleven name every one four, in all forty
four; after which are again thrown in forty one balls of gold, and three of
silver, the three with the silver ones are excluded, but the others remain, who
are confirmed by the Gran Council, and these do Elect the Duke.

In order thereunto, they lock up themselves within the Council Hall, though
the whole Palace be at that time under lock and key; and three of the most
venerable of the company they choose to be Priori of the Election, and two
others to be Secretaries; the other thirty six divide themselves into four
parties, every one going into what party he pleases; after this the three
Priori do sit upon three chairs higher then the rest, and the two Secretaries
over against, with a Table before them; then the Secretaries call the thirty
six one after another, who put every one in a Box prepared for that effect, the
name of him whom he desires should be Duke, and usually all those of one party
do put in but for one; So that thereby four only are in nomination; after this
the Secretaries open the Box, and read the names of those who are put in: who
if they be in the company, are desired one after another to withdraw into
another room; after which the Priori or Presidents ask every one of the
Electors, whether they have any thing to object against those who are in
nomination, why any one should not be chosen; and if any thing be brought
against him, he is called in to clear himself: which if he cannot do, he is
excluded, and another named in his place. Then are laid two boxes before the
Secretaries, the one for the affirmative, and the other for the negative;
within these every one is to put alittle ball, and if in the affirmative there
be more then in the other, it will remain; and this is done for every one of
the four, of whom he who has most balls does remain: but the Votes for the
affirmative must not be less then twenty five; and they will not give over
voting till it be come to that number, or past it: This being done, if he who
is chosen be without, he is sent for; if within, they make him sit, and the
forty or forty one acknowledge him to be Duke, and wait upon him to his house:
where he stays for two days, till his Ducal habit be made; then in the
morning he goes to hear Mass at the Church of St. Mark, attended by all his
Electors, and foreign Ministers; then he goes into a Pozzo, as they call it, a
kind of seat or chair with one of his nighest relations, and the Chancellor,
and so is carried by twenty four Masters of the Arsenal about the Palace of St.
Mark; at the same time the Doge and his kinsman, throwing moneys amongst the
people, till they come to the gate of the Ducal Palace, where he is expected by
those who elected him, and the chief of the Priori lays the Ducal Cap, which
is a kind of Crown; upon his head, giving him the title of Serenissimo, and so
wait on him to the ordinary lodging of the Doges, where he begins to receive
public visits of the Magistrates, and foreign Ministers.

He is allowed by the Republic five hundred Zecchini, or about two hundred and
fifty pound by the month, for they are not very willing to bestow both honor
and riches upon one; it is true, he has also the disposal of some
Ecclesiastical Offices, and of other places, which he may sell if they happen
to be vacant in his time; once a week, that is every wednesday, he uses to go
down into the Courts of Justice when Judges do sit, exhorting every one of them
to do good speed and justice; and if any one has applied himself to him, he
Commends the cause to the Judges, as the case requires.

The Ceremony I mentioned, of the Dukes instauration, is the more considerable,
because it befalls him but once in his life. But there is another which once a
year he performs, when he Espouses the Sea upon Ascension day, which to see as
well as the Carnaval, is worth the curiosity of strangers; for as one allows a
great liberty of Mascarads, and variety of sports; so the other affords as
curious a show as can be seen. The Duke attended by Ambassadors, and by the
Chief Nobles in a rich and stately Ship or Barge, (though indeed it is neither,
but of a singular making) named Bucentoro, attended by several thousands of
Gondola's, goes three or four miles out to Sea, amongst the shooting of the
Guns in the ships, which are thereabouts, and the sounding of Trumpets; he
casts a Ring into the Sea, and pronounces these Italian words; Io ti sposo in
Segno di Dominio, I Espouse thee in token of my Dominion over thee; this he
does in the name of the Republic, which (by a grant of Pope Alexander the
third, thereby expressing his Obligation to her for her assistance against the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, with the approbation of all Italian Princes and
States, and of several parts of Europe, and by a long successive possession)
has the Royalty of the Adriatic Sea, or gulf of Venice, which hitherto the
Republic has stoutly secured from Turks and Pirates.

Having mentioned the Carnaval, I must explain what it is: At a certain time of
the year, immediately before Lent, about Shrove-Tuesday, but some days sooner,
according to the new Style, Roman Catholics do observe a custom which they
received from Heathens, which is, to pass that time with all the mirth and
sports they can conceive, glutting themselves with pleasures before they enter
into Lent, which they account to be a time of Penance to them; Rome her self is
as busy at it as the rest, a great street of it named the Corso, being the
ordinary place for Races of Jews, Horses, Buffles, etc. for shows of some new
Coaches, Charrets, people disguised, and in vizzards, who throw up to the
windows (which are full of women) eggs full of perfumed Waters, Sweetmeates,
Sugar-plums, etc. The most grave Cardinals and Prelates, give themselves a full
Carrier, some as spectators, others as actors, it being a thing well known, how
one of the Cardinals was by the late Pope commanded out of Rome, because in a
woman's clothes, he had been riding on horseback in this Corso.

But in this, Venice goes beyond all other places, if one considers the number,
variety and quality of their sports, amongst which are their famous Operas, so
much talked of abroad; it is indeed a great delight to see their comical pieces
acted upon their Stages, with such a variety of Scenes, number of Machines, and
excellent music, of Voices and instruments; which Vocal music, though it
seems not to please those who are not used to it, by reason of certain
Fredonies or quakings, yet it is the most learned of any music in other
places: Nor only they employ their good Cantarine, as they call them, that is,
women in Venice who have good Voices, and make profession of singing, but also
when they hear of any extraordinary ones abroad, they are sent for (as has
been that rare singing woman of Bologna) and are liberally rewarded for their
pains. In point of Plays, that which is the most Comical, is that whereat
Venetians are pleased best of all, and indeed their Bouffoons go beyond any in
the world; and if the young Nobles who stand by be not pleased at what is
acted, sometime out of frolic, they hiss, whistle, throw Apples and other
things upon the Actors, and do such like things, which if it were not in
Carnaval time, were much unbecoming the Venetian Gravity. One day as one of the
Actors fell upon a learned Discourse about Natural Philosophy, one of the grave
Venetian Nobleman had hardly patience to let him go so far as he did, but at
last he could forbear no longer, but took his Bezetta or Cap, and threw it at
him, saying, You Fool, I am come hither to be made to laugh, and not to be
instructed; and therefore change Discourse, and make me laugh.

At that time there is also great dancing after their way, that is, leading one
unknown to you, (neither can you tell whether it be a man or a woman) but no
speaking at all, and they are all disguised, and in visards, at the playing of
the Violins, they dance from one chamber to another. And as the people of
Venice are great Gamesters, so specially about this time in a disguise, they
Dice and Card away many thousands of pounds: Women also who at other times are
kept so close, have liberty allowed them to run up and down Incognito, which
does favor many a meeting, and a rendevouz, which at other times they would
tremble to think of; as indeed it would cause poysonings, stabbings and
murders; but then a man happens sometimes to Game and Dance with his Wife, and
yet not know her, because they never speak a word: Indeed it is a wonder to see
what a topsy turvy there is at that time in that City, so much they have given
up themselves for the time to their pleasures; and therefore 'twas not without
reason that one of the Gran Turk's Servant whom he had sent thither about that
time, told him at his return, That the Venetians were very Grave and Wise, but
once a year they were used to run all stark mad; and again upon a sudden (on
Ash wednesday) they came to themselves from their distractedness; yet some are
so foolish (but this is specially in Rome) under pretense of doing penance for
their extravagancies, as to beat and whip themselves under their Mistresses
windows, and up and down the streets, and fetch blood out of their backs and
shoulders.

Now after this Discourse, it will not be amiss to pass from the pleasant, to
that which is serious, and speak very few words of a politic practice of the
Republic, which at first was introduced by necessity, but by experience has
been found beneficial to them, it is the use they make of strangers, not only to
be their great and inferior Land Officers, but also their common Soldiers, as
Germans, French, Switzers and Italians, Subjects of other Princes; by the
first, they free themselves from dangers, which valiant and ambitious men make
their Country run, who having an interest at home, and the love of an Army in
the field, may be enticed to attempt against the liberty of their Country,
which a stranger must not pretend to; besides that, when wars are ended, they
are dismissed, and the State eased of his charges: And by the last they spare
the life of their Subjects, with the price of that of strangers, who do fight,
offend and defend as they are put upon it; and whilst their own Subjects have
been safe, and grown numerous at home, they have made Conquests with the loss
of Forrainers blood: By a practice contrary to this, and by sending too far and
too many of their people out of the Land, the Spaniards have unpeopled their
Country, and made it void of inhabitants.

But from this general and public practice of the Venetians, I will pass to a
more particular and private one, introduced also for the safety of the State;
for hereby discoveries are made, not only of horrid and secret crimes, by what
rank soever of persons committed, but chiefly of Plots and Conspiracies against
the State, or the Laws, which to reveal in those parts is very dangerous; and
if the Accuser was known, the accused could take one course or other quickly to
make him away; therefore in a public place of the Palace of St. Mark, there is
for the Office of the Inquisitors a little hole in the wall, through the which
one can put in any Bill of Accusation, without naming the accuser, yet with
circumstances, and some necessary directions, whereby further informations may
be had. This place is under several Keys, without which it cannot be opened, so
that in case one of the Keepers were concerned, it could not be concealed from
the knowledge of others. But this way is subject to many great inconveniences,
that every one would not approve, were it not for any other consideration but
this, that hardly any one is safe thereby from troubles and accusations; yet
that jealousy of State of the body of that Republic is so great, that as they
think to prevent dangers, they are carried to an extraordinary severity, and do
unjust things; As the example of the Noble Foscarini can witness; he was
accused by two wicked fellows, to have had correspondency with a foreign
Ambassador, whereupon he was hanged; and yet a little while after one of the
Rogues being condemned to dye for some villainies he had done, Confessed that
Foscarini was innocent, and that what he had done against him was out of spleen
and malice; whereupon what remained of the Corpse was by order taken down,
honorably buried, and some satisfaction given the Family by the State; but
alas this could never bring the man to life again.

Now I shall come to the nature and customs of Venetians, whence it will
appear how Subjects there stand affected to their Superiors; because from the
beginning of this discourse I determined to speak of every most important and
essential thing concerning that Republic; but I will do it briefly: And as the
good or bad nature, manners and customs of a Nation, are that which make it
flourish, or cause its ruin; so hence one may be able to ground his judgment
about this, how long or how little that Republic is like to last.

The Republic of Venice is an Assembly consisting of a great number of
Noblemen, so much differing in temper, judgment and affection, that it may be
compared to a Sea blown upon by all manner of winds: Private ends and interests
are strong amongst them, of late years more then they were heretofore,
according to that decay which every thing on Earth is exposed unto; and after
the height which through her virtue this Republic has attained unto, it is
not to be admired, if in these last years she is fallen into some declination,
through that general corruption which is in the World. These Nobles are greedy
to increase their Riches, which sometimes makes them shrink from that which is
honest and just; they are very desirous of glory, and of getting a name, which
is indeed a commendable thing (as long as men aim at it by good and lawful
means) were it not that this works jealousies, envies and emulations of one
against another: They love to be feared, and look for an extraordinary respect;
Hence it is that they dislike so much chidings, censures, smart Counsels, and
that they will not confess the faults which they have committed; they are apt
to suspect others of having designs to diminish their greatness; and therefore
they balance one another, that they should not grow so potent as to give a
just ground of fear to their Neighbors, whose Glory they both observe and
envy, except they be of the same party, which are things unavoidable in
Republics; they take much notice of those who put delays to the obtaining of
their desires, or who exclude them from their pretensions, till they have
occasion of being avenged.

Further, the love of the Noble Venetian, and the confidence which he seems to
have in others, or which he wishes others to have in him, are not real nor
sincere, but fained, except there be a golden chain to make it fast: the truth
is, they are much self-ended, and their friendship lasts no longer then does
their interest; they are extraordinary dissemblers, and therefore make great
shows, and would give signs of great affection one toward another, as indeed
the State's practice is in a high degree, with all those Princes who are able
to do them a kindness, or a discourtesie one time or other, for indeed they
look not only to the present, but also to that which is to come.

The meetings which upon every holy day they have in a place about St. Mark,
called Broglio, do not breed that love and affection which they talk of, but
rather a high and extraordinary dissembling; whence arises the use of low
Congees, and humble Salutations, and those sweet and courteous words they speak
one to another, which are given under the pretense of the dignity of them who
receive it, and in hopes that others will return it to them in the same degree;
so they think thereby to become the more venerable to the people, to whom this
becomes as a president of that respect they are to give to the Nobility: And
the truth is, they love excess in every thing that pleases them, but hate to
hear others commending any thing they have; they love gifts and favors, which
do bring honor or profit to them, whereby afterward are obtained those graces
and kindnesses which they desire.

Their peace and preservation by any means they endeavor to get, out of this
wrong principle, that the evil which accidentally produces good may be
committed, according to the practice of those Statesmen who walk merely upon
politic grounds. They are very exact in the choice they make of their
Ambassadors, for they choose subtle, sagacious, and dexterous persons, who know
the way how to insinuate themselves and their affairs into the esteem and
affection of those whom they treat withal; accute and eloquent in their
Discourses, of a sweet conversation; wise to take advantages, and to improve
opportunities; prudent to overcome difficulties, and not to provoke when they
refuse those things which they have no mind, or which it is not their interest
to grant, and indefatigable in their endeavors to obtain their ends, and in
their writing to their Masters every particular thing worthy of their
knowledge: They search, and usually find out the love, hatred, the favors,
disgraces, interests, dependencies, and contrary parties, the strength,
inclinations, favorites, and the designs of Princes, and who upon the least
overtures do find out, observe and dive into things of any great concernment,
and they spare nothing to get information of every thing. This in politics is
the nature of the Nobility of Venice, wherein if they do amiss, they are not
alone; the same being found in other Countries, for States are governed by
Policy, more then according to Conscience or Religion, (though seldom without
some pretenses to this last) and self ends, interest, Covetousness and
Ambition grow in others Gardens as well as in Venice.

Now in ordinary things, and of another kind, the nature of the Venetian
Noblemen, specially of those who are young, is very odious, by reason of their
pride, and of their insolences; it causes them to commit strange things, as
almost every Subject and every place can testify, as well as the curses
pronounced against them: So that although their Government be so excellent, and
the general administration be so much esteemed as indeed it deserves it, yet
their moral and particular actions are very irregular: And as Laws are severe
in punishing faults committed against the State, so they are remiss (at least
in their Execution) against particular failings and miscarriages; hence are
caused insults, damages and violences, which some suffer from the Nobles in
their Goods, States, Honor and Life, specially those who are poor, and who
have no friends nor favor, nor means enough to resist them. So the Estates of
the Widow and the Fatherless are exposed to their Covetousness; the honor of
Maids and Women to their Luxury, and the persons and lives of men to their
hatred and revenge: And these evil courses they are strengthened in, by reason
of their Birth, Riches, Power, Authority, Relations and Friends; for as they
are almost all subject to these actions, they avour one another, not knowing
how soon it may happen to be the turn of every one of them; upon this account
they go unpunished, so that of a hundred hardly the third part is accused; and
of these the proofs are clear hardly against the half, and those who are
convinced are but slightly punished; so that this proceeding encourages them to
be imperious, peremptory, and unjust to others.

Yet the fault of this is not to be attributed to the Magistrates, for in
things of concernment they are very exact in doing justice, when they who are
wronged apply themselves to them for redress. But the question is, how they may
bring in their complaints to them, which is very difficult, not only because
clear proofs are not easily brought in against them, some of their excesses
being committed either in the dark and secretly, or very dexterously, but
chiefly, because as soon as a Nobleman has misdemeaned himself, he stops
proceedings against him, either with threatenings or flatteries, promises, and
if need be, with money, which indeed is the last remedy they use: but for the
most part they lay the fault upon the Bravi, that is in plain English, the
Hectors, who being men of no fortune, do for a subsistence accompany them, and
act according to their orders; or else upon some of their Servants whom they
send out of the way; or they induce some to be false witnesses for them,
whereby they put a cheat upon the Laws and Justice; whence we see, that in
Venice they have also as in other places, a new Logic, and a way of drawing
strange consequences, as this, He is a gallant man, for he has three or four
thousand pound a year, because by the strength of his moneys he can come off
with any bad and base actions; like great flies, who having strong wings fly
through cob-webs, when poor weak ones are caught: So that if sometimes it falls
out that a Nobleman be punished with Exile or Prison, in a short time he is
released by the means of friends and moneys. This shows how the best things are
apt to be corrupted, and that this Republic so famous and so excellent does
degenerate in her members, which in time may infect the head and the whole
body, for bad humors of this kind are apt to break out at one time or other,
especially in this place, where the old as the young Noblemen are divided into
factions and parties, and have intestine hatred one for another, and against
the Citizens; with the former by reason of envyings in point of honor and
dignity, with the latter upon the account of Riches, and this ever causes
corruption in a Commonwealth.

Hence it is, that on the other side Subjects of all degrees and qualities are
dissatisfied for things named before, and particularly seeing themselves
deprived of their goods upon slight grounds, and that they cannot enjoy charges
and offices, wherein they think themselves used not as patriots, but like
strangers. Merchants also and Tradesmen have some grounds of discontent,
because the Nobles having of late turned their Trade which was by Sea, into
that which is by Land, either by Authority or by strength of moneys, have
engrossed it to themselves, whether it be Corn, Wine, Silks, Iron, Wool,
Timber, Coals, and any other considerable commodities, which is the cause of
complaints and miseries pitty-worthy; for the Nobles being monied men they get
things over the head of their inferiors.

But the worst is, that these excesses are committed in a cruel manner; and
they in great numbers are sent into all parts of the Dominions, where they
extort from the Subjects moneys to satisfy their Covetousness and Ambition,
and act many unjust things, which are effects of their tyranny, but are the
cause of the damages and injuries of Subjects, whereby justice is perverted,
charity destroyed, honesty suppressed, the fear of God removed from before
their eyes, and the people defrauded of the protection they have a right to
expect; whence sad consequences may be drawn against those States where crimes
go unpunished, for it is not enough to see good actions rewarded, if bad ones be
not discountenanced; though as I have already expressed, the Magistrate is not
to be blamed for these miscarriages, yet in time these things cause ruin and
destruction to States. A great prosperity is the greatest enemy of men, for it
makes them insolent, licentious, bold to do evil, and even apt to disturb their
own rest, and of others; and it is certain that usurpation, abuses, and other
injuries take so deep roots in the breasts of Subjects, that upon a favorable
occasion they will resent it.

These corruptions as they are prejudicial to the States wherein they are
spread, so they prove oftentimes beneficial to foreign Public Ministers, who
know how to use the Covetousness of some useful persons and their Masters
moneys, according to the fidelity they ought to have for his interests; and
it is a thing which Venetians practice, and the Spaniards most of all other
Nations, to leave it to the discretion of their Ministers in foreign places to
distribute that way what sums they think fit, for which they take their word,
and ask no further account of it, knowing that to stint and confine, would not
only discourage them, but also prove prejudicial to their affairs, no moneys
being better employed, then those which are laid out upon such occasions; and
though they should amount high, yet a good advice, or another good affair pays
for all: And in this case no manner of friendship is to be slighted or
rejected, though it were never so low and contemptible, because it may be
profitable upon some accounts, and it may serve at one time or another.

Now as to matter of Trade, which just now I was speaking of, although it be
commonly known to be beneficial to Nations, yet because every one is not well
acquainted with the reason and causes of it, 'twill not be amiss to say
something about it, not as to the particulars of it, for it would take up too
much time, there being so many and several ways, according to the nature of
places and Countries; and those who understand well the manner of it are to be
esteemed in a State, and their advice is to be taken about the way of settling
and improving it, by Princes and their Ministers; the truth of which is so well
known, and so important, that in all Countries there are Councels and
Committees settled about it, who are willing to hear any thing that may be
proposed tending to the advantage of it; and they who make a constant practice
and profession of it, must needs by their own experience be able to give light
and directions about it; and herein their opinion is to be taken as soon, if
not sooner, then that of the greatest Statesmen, if reason be joined to their
experience. The truth is, I look upon this as the ground and bottom of Policy;
for let the occasions of the State as to charges be what they will, when there
are sure and constant yearly incomes it is ever supplied, and so is able not
only to settle peace at home, but also preserve it self from foreign attempts,
and even upon occasion to look abroad.

Trade therefore is not to be neglected, neither is it to be accounted a shame
for a Gentleman to follow it, as it is in a potent Kingdom of Europe, which
indeed is nothing but a policy of the Prince, even to be sure of men to follow
him in the wars; for they having nothing to do are glad of any occasion to
bestir themselves, which they would be loath to do if they were gotten to a
settledness of life; yet poverty and want of employment makes many a one drop
to the Gallows before there be occasion for them in the War. Now the advantages
which come by Trade are these. First, It makes some places famous and flourish,
which otherwise would be poor and of no esteem, which are so far from having
any thing within themselves to procure them plenty and riches, that they want
bread and necessaries wherewith to subsist, if it be not brought them from
without: Of this sort is Venice, the riches of whose Nobility have been much
increased, if not wholly gotten by Trade, easily carried on there with the help
of the Sea, and of some navigable Rivers. And what is it else but Trade which
has made Amsterdam so rich and so famous? And I dare say, according as it
flourishes or decays, it makes places famous, or of no note. By this means
Legorn, formerly a dark hole, is become so universally known, Savena is almost
forgotten, and Genoa, which has undone the Trade of this last, is so much
talked of. What is become of Antwerp since the Trade of it has been carried to
Amsterdam? And how many more instances could I give of this.

Secondly, Trade keeps people in exercise, those who follow it minding their
businesses; otherwise if they lie in idleness, it is of them as of still waters,
which usually breed corruption, and like those bodies, in which for want of
exercise, bad and malignant humors do abound: so lazy and idle people are a
dangerous burden to the States wherein they live.

Thirdly, Trade keeping men in exercise, frees them also from wants and
straits, which often drive men to great extreamities; hereby many are kept at
work, and get a livelihood, and so are thereby engaged in the defense of the
State, under whose protection they enjoy it; and being thus content and quiet,
they are submissive and obedient to Authority.

Fourthly, They who understand the way of Trade about Manufactures or
otherwise, if they be frugal they thrive and grow rich, whereby they are able
upon occasion to assist the States, to relieve their neighbors, and pay Taxes
and other Duties.

And Fifthly, The better Trade is, the greater store of moneys it brings into
the public Treasure, by the way of Taxes, Excise, Farms and Customs raised
upon imported or exported Commodities, when people send or carry their VVares
to the good Market, or when they bring things from thence; all which is for the
public good, and for the particular advantage of Princes: besides that, these
Reasons I have brought why Trade should be promoted, are all grounded upon
politic grounds; and several others I could name, which I omit for brevity
sake. The truth is, that all Nations are so generally and so fully convinced of
it, that they now apply themselves to it, as England of old, and Holland since
the States were formed, and of late the French, the Swede, and others.

I omit to speak of that lust of the flesh which Reigns every where in Venice,
where it is fulfilled by young and old of all Sexes in the way of fornication,
adultery, incest, sodomy, etc. so that though they be great Politicians, they
are bad Christians and moral livers. Not long since, within these five or six
years there burst out a business in Venice which made a great noise. A widow
(of a competent estate, according to her quality, but inferior to her heart)
named Signora Cecilia, resolved to bestow her means, and the rest of her life
(as she said) upon pious uses; to this effect, with the private encouragement
she received from some of the Nobles, and being publicly countenanced by two
of the most credited amongst them; one of which was of the Family Sagredo; she
got a great house, and upon the account of charity, she received in it many poor
young Maids, whom she afforded necessary provisions unto, and on the other side
she made them work for it: And when once she had them in, she would suffer none
of the Relations, not so much as the Mother, to speak with them; and as many
poor people who had three or four Daughters were very glad to dispose of one of
them, so in a little time she got a number of between four or five hundred
within her walls; according to their ages they were kept in different places;
and as they say, a great severity was observed with the generality of them,
insomuch that the Mothers and some of the Relations began to clamor, that she
cruelly tormented their Children (though they could hardly know what was done
within her house:) Some said she kept them in fetters, others, that she whipped
them often for no offense; and as there is no end, when once common ignorant
people have given way to their fancies, so others said she roasted some of them
to satisfy her cruelty; and although she heard of these things, she seemed not
to be moved at it, and so held out several years; but at last the State could
not avoid taking notice of it upon many pregnant informations, that under
pretense of retiredness and Nunnery, this was a Seminary of laciviousness, and
that some of the Chief Nobles had been seen to go in at undue hours, and
against the Orders seemingly settled in her house, not to admit men into it: The
business came to a great debate; and although she had potent friends, yet the
plurality carried it against her; though it was thus mitigated, only to avoid
suspicion, yet she was found guilty of too much severity, and of profaneness,
for she had inserted this into the Letany, Sancta Cecilia ora pro nobis: so
that after twelve years standing her School was thus broken up.

And this story calls to my mind one of another nature, which at the same time
was acted at Rome by a person of the same Sex, though for contrary ends; the
former being for propagation, and this last for destruction. In the last Plague
in Rome, an Ancient Woman, called Madonna Giulia, took that opportunity to use
her Art, which (as she confessed since) helped several hundreds into the other
world, under the notion of the Plague. Her pretended profession was to dress
Women's heads, but her real practice was to play the Ruffiana, as they call it;
and as by many married women she was sent for to comb their hair, and the like,
and after they were entered into discourse, she felt which way their pulse did
beat, all tending to this, that one had a cruel Father, the other a jealous
Husband, and a third, a troublesome Brother; but she undertook to rid them of
them all; and she was as good as her word, for by the means of certain clear
water which was given them to drink, they were soon dispatched, and no sign of
poison appeared without: But God did thus please to put an end to her wicked
life; there began to be some suspicion of her, because almost every one of
those whom she frequented had lost one Relation or other; and one of these let
fall some words, expressing repentance of a wicked Act she had done, which she
charged upon this Giulia; which words did not fall to the ground, but being
reported to some Magistrate, hereby was laid the ground of the jealousy, which
afterward they had of her; and therefore to find her out, they contrived thus:
A Woman well instructed of what she had to do, sent for her one day to dress
her head, and as she was about it, the other began to sigh from time to time,
which she taking notice of, asked what all'd her, she answered with sighs, and
said, she was an unfortunate married woman; she went about to comfort her, but
the first and second visit they went no further; but the following, this woman
to her sighs adding tears (which she had at command) and complaining of her
unhappiness, and many times calling her self an unfortunate woman, the other
gave her some comfortable words, and hopes of remedy; So that (not to insist
longer upon this) the other having showed a purse with moneys in it, she said
solemnly she would give it to any one who would rid her of her Husband; she
promised to bring her the water on the next day, which she did in a little
bottle: but against the time of her coming some Officers had hid themselves
behind a hanging, and having heard all the discourses that passed between them,
as she was stretching the hand to give her the bottle, these men laid hold on
her, and by good chance she did not let the bottle fall, as she might have
done, which may be had saved her life; but having it, they tried it upon a Dog,
and other Creatures, which died of it; whereupon she was condemned, and told
the ingredients of it; discovering also the remedy to hinder its operation,
which was published to prevent further mischiefs, in case there were more of
that water abroad; and this was only to drink a little Vinegar: but she was
carried to Campo di fiori, the place of Execution for Heretics, as they call
them, Witches, and great and notorious Malefactors, and there she was executed.

But now I must come to the particular way of an efficacious negotiating with
the Republic of Venice, which it is not only difficult, but almost impossible
to express; for though the Laws and Offices be still the same, yet a change of
persons will work a necessity of alteration in the method; So that public
Ministers ought to Act according to the nature of businesses, and the
conjuncture of affairs, and to take such resolutions as their wisdom shall
suggest, for this depends chiefly upon the prudence of the Minister, who having
received before from his Predecessor an exact relation of the present State,
and a Character of the Prince, and of all his Ministers, how they stand
affected, and which way they may be wrought upon, as also of the adherents to
his Masters interest, will be enabled thereby to negotiate with more success;
which to attain unto at Venice, a great watchfulness is required to lay hold
upon the occasions, which slightings, hatred and persecutions between the
Nobility do afford, wherein a great activity and quickness is to be used; and
this for certain will prove very satisfactory and advantageous.

For indeed, when once the Nobles are bent one against another, their passion
drives them to utmost extremities, and all things they sacrifice to their
desire of revenge. And because Rules are strengthened by demonstrations, and
precepts are more effectual being backed with examples, I will bring here a
late one, as notable as any the Venetian History can afford, which is this: A
Churchman commended by the Arch Duke of Inspruck, to the Abbot Grimani in
Venice, in the Abbots absence, at a Play received one day a box on the ear from
one of the Nobles called Querini, about a seat, of which the fault was laid to
this last; but because the other was not a man to dispute it with a Noble, he
went out and complained of it to Grimani, who as soon as he heard of it, run
immediately to the Playhouse, but it was too late, however he met Querini in
the street, and after few complaining words, namely, that he ought to have had
a respect to him; the other not returning him a satisfactory answer, he gave
him a cuff on the ear; but immediately they were parted, and very shortly after
the Churchman was cudgelled, whereat the Abbot was highly incensed, yet the
friends of both sides did what they could to reconcile them; which they did
seemingly, but not in effect, for not long after, Querini with several men
waited for Grimani's coming out of a house which he was in, as he knew't by his
Gondola's being there, and other informations; but it happened that Pietro
Grimani, one of the Abbots Brothers; being there also came out, and as he began
to call for the Gondola, he was saluted with a volley of shot, but not hurt,
and some who were with him returned the like toward the place whence they had
received theirs; at the hearing of which the Abbot was alarmed, and having
said, they murder my Brother, he came down, and went presently into his boat,
having ordered those men that were with him to range about the place; and they
were not gone very far, but some of them lighted upon a man, of whom having
enquired what he did there, he said, as he was going home, he had been wounded
in the leg by the way; Grimani hearing of it, by all means desired him to come
into his boat, either to take a lodging with him that night, for it was late,
where he should be sure of a good Chyrurgion, or else he would carry him to his
own house; the other refused it absolutely, but of necessity they would have
him to come in; and when he was in the Boat, the other knew him, though in a
disguise, to be Querini, who had been wounded by some of Pietro Grimani's men,
and forsaken by his upon the Abbots coming out; away they carry him into
Grimani's Palace, where a Council was held by the three Brothers, what they
should do with him. Giovanni (as it has been reported since) a man of a mild
nature, represented the advantage of the present occasion to do a generous and
glorious action, advising to use him well and kindly if he would stay, if not,
to carry him safely to his own house; but it being considered by the others,
that in this he was the aggressour, and that since, for all the late agreement,
he had showed himself to be unreconcileable, was the surest for them to make
him away, and so it was done; neither could it be heard of since, what was
become of his body: The Senate upon complaint ordered Grimani to appear, which
they refused, whereupon sentence was past against them for contempt of the
Court, and declared convinced of the fact, by reason of their flight, and the
house to be pulled down; which was effected: the other two lay private, but the
Abbot got together a considerable number of people, and plundered several
houses of the Noblemen, and burnt others, doing a great deal of mischief up and
down; and after retiring himself sometimes into the Arch Dukes Countries, and
other times into the Mantoan, both these Princes being his intimate friends; at
whose earnest solicitations the Republic weary of the troubles he made
several parts of the Country to suffer, gave him and all leave to come in;
since which time Giovanni died, as I said before; the Abbot also is dead not
long since, whom two of his Sisters married to Noblemen would not suffer a
Jesuit to come nigh to confess him, as I heard from him that was kept out, a
sign that several of the Nobility have no kindness for that Order: So that of
the three Brothers, Petro is left alone; all these troubles have brought low
that Family.

And let this be said by the by, to show how far animosities can go between the
Noble Venetians. Now I must speak of the dependency, and good or bad
intelligencies of that Republic with other Princes. This is the most
difficult, and most important part which a Minister can treat of, seeing it is
no question to treat of clear, evident and visible things, but of those
affections which are hidden in the heart of men, hard to be discovered in
Princes, but hardest of all in a Republic, which has a mixture of so many
tempers and heads, in whom is to be seen a palpable difference of judgment and
affection: however some observations may be made of it about the common
interest, which do set forth the minds of men; for by the effects we judge of
the affection, as this in Princes is overruled by their interest.

First, With the Pope the Republic is glad to keep a good correspondency, and
upon certain occasions she would persuade him of her good intentions, not so
much to take away the bad opinion which several Popes had of the Republic, as
not to be crossed by them in the Tithes or Tenth parts which they receive from
the Clergy, and other benefits of the same nature; besides that, part of the
State of Venice lies open to the attempts of the Pope by the way of the
Potesine, which is an open Country exposed to any incursions, and wherein is no
strong holds, only some Valleys, which being once passed by an Army, they could
find all manner of necessary provisions to make it subsist, and could without
any hinderance (except there were an Army in the field) run to the very Gates
of Verona and Padoa, which Hostilities would go nigh to work some Revolutions
in the State, at least an alteration in the affections of subjects, whom
discontents and oppressions make very often desirous of changes and novelties,
especially if they did not suddenly receive that protection which they expect
from their Superiors; besides that the very name of the Pope, and the interest
he has with the Subjects of those States, which own his Religion, by the means
of Monks, Friars, and Emissaries, who would work scruples in their minds, and
so weaken their hearts and their hands, beside that; some other neighbor
Prince might be induced out of some aversion to the Venetians, or their own
interest (as we have seen the Spaniard to be) to share in the spoil, or out of
a persuasion of the justice of the Popes Arms. All this the Republic is well
informed of, as also of the pretensions of the Church upon the Potesine, which
has been dismembered from the Dukedom of Ferrara, besides several other claims
upon the Patriarchal of Aquileia, and the liberty of the City of Zeneda, and
upon some other Sea-places. Out of these considerations the Republic
endeavors as handsomely as she can to keep a fair correspondency (though 'twere
but in show) with the Pope, with some easy demonstrations of it, as to make
the Relations of Popes Noblemen of Venice: And although she does not sue for
the friendship of many Cardinals, as it was done before, yet she has some
there born within the State, who do the Republic all the Services they can,
neither does the Republic altogether neglect their friendship, though 'twere
for nothing else but to have an account what passes in the College of
Cardinals and elsewhere; yet Popes have much complained of the Republic, by
reason of the losses which the Ships of the Subjects of the Church have
suffered from Pirates, for want of keeping a Squadra of Ships or Gallyes for
the security of the Yolfe, as Venetians are obliged to do, and because of that
alliance and friendship which the Republic has formerly contracted with
Protestants and reformed States; so by reason of the authority which she
assumes over Ecclesiastical persons, for they give those Noblemen whom they
send Governors into places power to be Keepers, Interpreters, Lawgivers, and
Judges over the Clergy within their Jurisdiction and things belonging to them;
however the breaches which upon these accounts have been between them, were
ever made up one way or other, and the Venetian Subjects by the extraordinary
care of the Senate kept in obedience as before. And at present the Pope and the
Republic do well agree, having very lately obtained not only his Galleys, and
several sums of money, and number of men, but also the suppression of some
Monasteries, whose Revenues fell into the hands of the Republic.

With the Emperor the Republic has no great friendship, there being old
grudges upon the account of the Vscocchi, and the great troubles she received
from Maximilian and Charles the V. of the House of Austria; neither does she
esteem him much, knowing that his forces alone are not able to hurt her, as we
have seen when the last war was carried on between them, for the Venetians fell
lustily upon the Seaplaces of the Emperor; so that upon occasion the Republic
has not only rejoiced at his troubles, but also has given Counsels, (and some
think Moneys) to his enemies, as 'twas done in the Wars of Bohemia, if we will
believe what the Austrians say, who add, that when the late Prince Palatine
was crowned King of Bohemia, there passed a good correspondency between him and
the Republic, and that some Letters from Venice to that King were intercepted,
full of kind and affectionate expressions, whereby the intercepters made a
discovery of the supplies he received from thence: Now upon this and other
accounts the Republic will ever be jealous of the greatness and prosperity of
the Emperor, that is of the present family for the hereditary Countries joined
to the Imperial Dignity; and that union which a wise and high spirited Emperor
can make of several Princes of Germany to his interests, will render him
formidable to the Republic, which for all this gives an outward show of
friendship and confidence to the Emperor, whose Dominions joining with great
part of theirs makes them to mistrust him, and wish him to fall rather then to
rise higher.

With the Crown of France the Republic had of old a great correspondency, and
she renewed it, since the Spaniards were grown so potent in Italy, and so
dangerous to the Liberties of it, with an intent thereby to balance the
affairs of it, and to be esteemed in a Court so potent and so absolute as that
is. The truth is, there has ever been a great friendship, as long as it might
consist with their interest; for then and when the French Power became too
great, they fenced against it, only to keep themselves from being swallowed up
with it, which the necessity of self-preservation will allow to any State: And
as in the present Turkish War they have sometimes received sums of money from
thence, and men, though not so much as they wished for, or their necessities
required, yet this has laid upon them a further obligation to continue in that
friendship, which has not been interrupted with fallings out about places,
pretensions, and interests, as it has happened to them with the Spaniards:
Hence it is that in the troubles of Monferrat and Savoy, the Republic gave the
French some supplies of moneys, and other encouragements against the Spaniards,
whose interests, inclination and manners, providence has made directly
opposite to the former; And when they saw the Spanish Forces employed another
way, they made use of theirs against them, and they laid so much to heart the
taking of Vercelli from the Duke of Savoy by the Spaniard, that the Republic
by the means of her Ambassadors did her utmost to engage all great Princes to
force the Spaniard to a restitution of it: This I speak concerning that which
is past, in time of peace, for no consequence is to be drawn from their present
dealings, because by reason of the War they stand in need of every Neighbor,
and so must keep fair with all.

The Republic is well affected to England, omitting no occasion of doing a
pleasure to it, and upon good grounds too, for in times of War she has
received thence, men, ships and ammunition, though not in the proportion she
desired; yet England is so well disposed toward it, out of a principle of
generosity, charity, and some interest, that upon occasion she may expect help
and protection from thence; as it was made appear to the world, when Paul the
fifth fell out with the Republic; neither does the difference of Religion
obstruct such an inclination, the Republic being very politic, and of all
other States of Italy, caring least for the Pope.

The Duke of Savoy is the Prince of Italy, whom the Republic has stricter
union with, for there he is esteemed, as for the valor which all the Princes
of that Family are endowed with, so for their strength, independent and
absolute Authority, the Republic putting a great deal of confidence in them,
and upon all occasions they will unite their Counsel, and their Forces in the
defense one of another; and there was never more joy expressed at Venice for
the success of any foreign State, as for the victories of the late Duke,
manifested openly, and upon public places; and although there happened some
little misunderstanding between them from the Duke of Savoy's part after the
sentence of excommunication was fulminated against them, it was soon rectified,
and at present the Republic receives considerable supplies from thence in the
business of Candia, he not only entertaining some Forces in their service, but
also having lent them his General Marquess Villa, who since has been called
home.

The Republic loves also the Gran Duke of Toscany for their common ends, which
they say, are tending to the preservation of the public liberty of Italy; and
are both concerned to bridle the Pope, and the Spaniard in Naples and Milan.

All their correspondency with Genoa is from that ancient emulation between
both, and for their common interest, which is to promote Trade between them:
And now the Genoesi are so degenerated, and the Venetians so busied, that the
grounds of their former jealousies are extinct, and their enmities changed into
a desire of preserving the public liberty, and their own in particular;
especially the Genoesi, who have reason to be afraid of their Neighbors.

Of Mantoa, the Republic is very tender, for he is their next neighbor, who
in some kind, though he be absolute and sovereign, stands under her protection.
The late Duke was by several of the Nobles called the Son of the Republic; he
was often at Venice conversing every day with some of the Nobles, especially
with the Grimani, of whom they had no jealousy, as they have of their Princes
and their Ambassadors; it is true, that their conversation was done in public
more then in private, though in both.

With the Dukes of Parma and Modena the Republic keeps fair for the common
preservation, and the more, that these two Families are of late fallen from the
Spaniard, to be for the French interest, though of late a petty discontent
appeared with the former, upon the account of his Brother; and these Princes do
seldom act of their own heads, but they follow the motions of others.

They stand well affected to the Hollanders, not so much out of any natural
inclination and conformity of temper, for in this, there is a vast difference;
but upon the account of interest, for upon occasion Venice has received from
thence Soldiers, Arms, Ammunition and Ships; and although they be at a
considerable distance one from another, yet the convenience of the Sea does
favor their communication: And this friendship is grounded chiefly upon the
common jealousy they have both of the house of Austria, from whose obedience
the Hollanders were forced to withdraw, and against which the Venetians have an
interessed and politic antipathy; out of this consideration they have had the
complacency to allow some Dutch men the liberty of their Presses, even in
things about Religion, who have there great Warehouses; and who also are
winked at in the exercise of their Religion: Yet to this I must add, how the
Hollanders jealousy of the house of Austria is much decreased, to give place
to a new one of a nearer and more potent Neighbor, the Austrian interest lying
at present very low in the world; though the Venetians matter not very much
that growing power, because it keeps at a distance from them, and they have
enough to do elsewhere.

With Spain the Republic never had nor has at this day any real friendship;
and whenever there has been any concurrence of their Councils and Forces,
they were merely forced to it by their interest and security: the truth is, as
often as she could safely cross the Spanish designs she has done it, as it
has appeared upon several occasions about the affairs of Milan, Germany, the
Low Countries, but especially in the cases of the Valteline, and of Sabionetta,
neither have they neglected in the Courts of other Princes any thing which
might prejudice the Spanish interest; and indeed that enmity is mutual and
reciprocal between them, because the Venetians having observed the great
designs of that Crown to subdue Italy, ever senced against it with the utmost
of their power; and the more, because they being their next Neighbors by the
way of Milan, they were exposed to her first attempts: On the other side, the
Spaniards looked upon Venice as the Champion of the Italian Liberty, and the
great let and hindrance in his way, as being judicious, and able to oppose him;
neither can he forget that Venice has dismembered from the Dukedom of Milan,
and united to her State these three considerable places, Brescia, Bergamo, and
Crema, with their annexes and dependencies; and as they are as high, and as
crafty as the Spaniard; so they would not suffer themselves to be led by the
nose, or any ways, to promote his interest. No greater demonstration can be
given of this disaffectedness then this is: The Republic has kept
correspondency and friendship with the Enemies of that Crown, especially with
Protestant Princes and States, whose interest she knew it was to oppose the
house of Austria, and the Spanish Ministers at Venice have taken notice of it,
and confessed this disaffectedness of the Republic to their Monarchy.

There are two things which do declare the good will, or the bad, of one Prince
or State toward another; one is the words, and the other the effects:
Spaniards do complain that the good words of the Republic to them, ever proved
empty and fallacious, because the effects have not answered thereto: the same
they say of the effects, because (say they) in all manner of negotiations
either public or private, upon their account, or that of the Arch Dukes of
Austria and Inspruck, they ever met with great difficulties, even in those
things which were easy, clear, and ought to have admitted none: But this has
been done with so much dexterity on the Venetians side, that as the heart of
man is hard to be known, the Spaniards were satisfied, or seemed to be so of
such dealings, and have been mistaken therein; but the Nature of the Venetian,
well known to them upon other accounts, made them judge aright of their
proceedings. But this more is to be observed, that although the greatest part
of the Venetian Noblemen be enemies to Spain, which has proved to them so
potent and so dangerous a Neighbor; yet as that Crown is very liberal in
bestowing moneys upon those, who to them may be useful, so as to get their
confidence and friendship: and as in such a number of Nobility there are
enmities, discontents, and animosities (as in a great body, by reason of
fullness of Stomach and surfeits, bad humors do abound, and so one member or
other will suffer) because in the distribution of places and offices every one
cannot have his desire, so in some there remains a disposition to make
themselves amends another way, for that which (as they think) their merit and
virtue have been unjustly deprived of, and to disturb others in the
administration of what they have obtained to their prejudice; therefore they
dare sometimes hearken to proposals from public Ministers, and receive their
gifts and pensions; I say, they dare, for they venture much, it being, as I
told before, as much as their life is worth; but sometimes covetousness,
discontent, ambition, and desire of revenge, make men hazard all to satisfy
their passions, which an active, vigorous, and dexterous Minister will lay hold
on to the advantage of his Masters affairs. Besides other means to preserve
States, two chiefly are the props of them; the one is strength; and the other
is Reputation: Strength is the ground, basis, and foundation of them: and
Reputation has so much authority in it self, that when Forces have been
wanting, this has not only upheld them, but also overcome greater Powers. Now
to conclude this particular, I say, that the power of the Spaniard and his
Neighborhood to the Venetians, besides that of other Dominions of the House of
Austria, and those who depend thereupon, will ever make the Republic look upon
him as dangerous to her state and liberty.

This in time of peace is the right and true sense of the Republic in relation
to the Princes and States I mentioned, for with the Swedes, Danes, and
Polanders, she has little to do, only inasmuch as some of them had to deal
against the house of Austria; and upon this account she has been very glad to
see Portugal withdrawn from under the Spanish Yoke: But now as change of
condition, and the like accidents, oblige men to new resolutions and practices;
so the demonstration of this, especially disaffectedness, has been suspended
since the beginning of the present War with the Turk; for the Venetians having
their hands full that way, instead of disobliging, they must of necessity Court
and please those from whom they may expect some succors: Upon this account
they were so earnest in the late War between the Pyrenean Treaty, to mediate a
peace between the two Crowns, thereby to receive some assistance from both,
which would be a president to others, it being the common interest of all
Christians to act against the Turk, and because they are the Bulwark of that
part of Christendom: But this remote interest is not so strong as a nearer
one, for Christian Princes have interests contrary one so another, which oppose
the carrying on of the great and public one; for it is to be feared, if one
Prince did send any considerable Forces against the Common Enemy, some of his
Neighbors would take advantage of their absence, and so fall on him at home;
after the sad experience of Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, of the Kingdom of
Navarre, and of other instances which History relates, Princes have great
reason ever to stand upon their guards. And this it is which exposes the
Christian Cause to so many dangers, and that betrays, if I may so say, the
Venetians to that dreadful Enemy.

But something is to be said of the Republics inclination to the Turk; him she
ever feared more then she loved, whom she was content in time of peace to pay a
Tribute to for some Islands, as we said before, that she might be at rest, and
not fall out with so potent an Enemy. But the Gran Signior, by the Advice of
that notable Statesman Kupriuli the Gran Vizier, being resolved upon any
account to be rid of many Janisaries, because of the frequent mutinings they
were fallen into, which proved not only so pernicious to their Princes, but
also so dangerous to the Ottoman Empire, providence favored him with an
occasion to execute his resolution, and withal, to enlarge his Dominions; for
the Knights of Maltha having made some considerable price of persons dear to
the Turk, he took this pretense to Arm; and though he threatened Maltha, yet the
storm fell upon Candia, that Bulwark not only of Veniee, but also of all Italy.
Indeed the Republic was never more overseen in any thing then she was in this;
for though they heard of the great preparation the Turk made, yet trusting to
the peace they had with him at that time, they were surprised. The Turks
landing in that Island, and taking Canea, it is thought, that in case the
business had not succeeded, the Sultan had disowned the attempt, and made the
Generals head fly off for a pretended satisfaction; but they got their ground
and kept it: and as they had thought upon, so it fell out; for though the
design had miscarried, yet if could not without the loss of many Janisaries; if
it succeeded, then a considerable conquest was made, which could not be without
the loss of thousands of Janisaries; so that let the event be what it would, he
would still have attained to one of his ends; but as it fell out, he had both,
not only he got the place, but also lost 40000 Janisaries in the attempt, or a
while after, and in time (unhappily for Christians) that excellent Island is
wholly fallen into their barbarous hands, the City Candia only excepted, which
for these two last years has been so hardly put to it by the close siege they
have laid against it; in the defense of which the Venetians have gotten a great
deal of credit, and if it should happen to be lost, Christians would incur a
great shame, having had a sufficient warning to relieve it.

It Is a wonder indeed that the Republic has holden out so long that place
against the Ottoman Forces; the more, that the whole Kingdom of Cyprus was
lost in less then a years time; the reason of it may be, not only that
diversion which the Turks have had elsewhere, and that extraordinary care the
Republic has taken to supply it from time to time with necessaries, but
chiefly her application and endeavors to keep the Mastery and Dominion of the
Sea, without which she had received no benefit by the two former.

This consideration puts me upon an inquiry of the fittest and more suitable
means of successfully carrying on the War against that common Enemy of
Christendom; for certainly hitherto there have been mistakes upon that
account, by reason of Christians standing only upon the defensive, and
suffering their ground to be the only Soil of War; for as in his preparations
for such a war, he has had the help of his whole Empire, so he has the same
to back him in the carrying of it on, instead that if diversions were made,
Armies could in part be kept at the Enemies charges, and use or spoil those
provisions which are conveyed to his Camp, or to supply the wants of other
places, or which make those wherein they grow to subsist; neither are people of
the Countries where such diversions are made into, able to pay charges and
taxes as before, and if they go about to exact it, they are apt to fall into
mutinies, of which an enemy may draw some advantage. Now former and late
experience shows us, how advantageous is this manner of war: Is War to be made
against the Romans? then, says Hannibal, Italy must be the seat of it; for
thus, said he to Antiochus, we shall employ those means against them, which in
other places they will make use of against us: Is Hannibal to be forced out of
Italy? then Scipio must go with a Roman Army into Africa. In a word, when the
Romans (who knew very well how to make war) had it with any one, they carried
it home to them. Is not this here the way which the French and Spaniard have
used one against another? and the Swedes understand it admirably well. Lately
the King of Denmark fell upon the Dukedom of Bremen, to draw the King of Sweden
out of Poland; and what does he do? Instead of going to defend Bremen, he
marches in person into Holstein, Jutland, Denmark, and every one knows how well
he sped. I do not deny but that the diversity of Countries, temper of Nations,
and other circumstances, with some conjunctures, do require sometimes diversity
of methods in such things; but I am persuaded that what I have already
mentioned, might with success be used against the Turk.

And to make war against him in Hungary, is to take him where his strength
lies, for his stronger places and best Soldiers are in those parts; and
thereby occasion is given him to make use of his best Militia's which are
leavied in the Countries he has taken from Christians, as Hungary, Wallachia,
Moldavia, and now Transylvania, and he has besides, all his Empire to back him.

Now methinks, to carry it on more effectually, he is to be fallen upon where
he is weakest. I know, that to take it generally, that Empire has already lost
much of its strength (as I will show by and by) almost all the Old Janisaries
and Spahies, wherein consisted its great forces, have been destroyed in the
Persian, Hungarian and Candia wars, according to the design of the forenamed
Gran Vizier; so that now they are forced to make use of raw Soldiers, and new
Militia's, which indeed are not so mutinous as the others were, but withal,
are not so courageous, so well disciplined, nor experienced: But that which I
insist upon most of all, is, that he is not so strong by Sea as by Land,
wanting good ships, but above all able Seamen, and experienced Sea-officers,
that Empire having ever employed it self by Land more then by Sea, which they
have minded only out of necessity; so that the few skilful Seamen they have
(if any at all) are Renegadoes of several Christian Nations. Now experience
has showed us, that he is to be pursued by Sea more then by Land, because
there he is the weakest, seeing we have seen the Venetians alone, or at least
weakly assisted by the Knights of Maltha, etc. have of late very often obtained
by Sea Glorious Victories over that Enemy.

But to make some overture of that which upon occasion might be more enlarged
upon, I conceive it were well to get a matter of twenty five, or thirty good
ships, carrying aboard a Land-Army, not under fifteen, nor above twenty
thousand, to land them upon occasion in one place or other, and in case the
first and second attempt should miss, yet according as the wind should prove,
the Fleet might in twenty-four houses be fifty, eighty, or an hundred miles
from that place; so that at last one place or other could be surprised, or at
least it would keep the enemy every where in continual alarums, whereat they
should have a constant diversion, and grow weary of being kept upon a constant
duty, wherein also they could happen to be remiss and neglectful of. By these
means the communication between their Islands in the Arcipelago should be
interrupted, and also some of them whence they have their Galleys could be
snatched out of their hands; and this in time might have more general
influences upon the the subjects, or rather slaves of that Empire, consisting
of so many Nations, who are all breathing after liberty, whose desire after it
would thereby increase, be encouraged and countenanced.

On the other side a considerable number of Galleys should constantly be
cruising upon their Coasts, especially of Morea, to hinder the communication of
their ports, and the gathering of any Ships or Galleys: But that which I
account to be of the greatest concernment would be to stop the mouth of the
Dardanels, for thereby the City of Constantinople, being deprived of all manner
of supplies which she receives from Morea, could be reduced to wants and
straights; Hence should arise Seditions and Mutinies in it, which to them would
prove dangerous; the more, that there are in it so many thousands slaves, who
ever watch for an opportunity of cutting their Masters throats; and all these
disturbances could mightily be increased if moneys were given to the Costacks
to come into the Black Sea, who though they be a perfidious, yet they are a
mercenary people, and a sudden irruption of theirs could strike a great terror
into that City (for of all Enemies, these she is the most afraid of) which
might afford a fair opportunity to Christians to attempt some considerable
thing on this side.

And I do not think that any great difficulties could hinder the execution of
this design: I know that every great undertaking, especially in matters of war,
is subject to lets and hindrances; which either have been foreseen, and so men
have prepared against it, or else such as fell out when they were not looked
for, which must not be very important, seeing they escaped the foresight of men
judicious and experienced in their ways, who at least have some general
remedies applyable to particular accidents: But this I think is seasible and
easy, considering the importance of it, for here is proposed nothing besides
the Land Army, but that which the Venetians alone, or with small assistance,
have already done, namely, cruising of the Seas, and stopping the mouth of the
Dardanels, as I mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse: So that if to the
Venetian Armata were joined the Italian Galleys, namely, the five of the Pope,
the seven of Maltha, the eight of Genoa, besides those of particular men in it,
the four of the Gran Duke, or at least the two which are fit for service, and
those of Naples, Sicily and Sardignia, with several privateers, which would be
set forth, with half of the French and Spanish Galleys, the other half being
not only sufficient to secure their Coasts, but also to scour those of
Barbary, and they could order their ships which they keep constantly, to go
where there should be occasion for them; all these joined together in case of a
fight, could form a formidable Fleet, and able to carry on the design before
expressed; but else every one, or two of these Squadrons at the most, could
have their post together, and course appointed them to prevent divisions which
might arise from the antipathy of some Nations, or of some other interest of
State, yet so within a distance, as they might soon be together upon occasion;
and as all these Forces do belong to Catholic Princes, so they would without
dispute give the Pope's Flags the precedence, and obey a General of High Merit
and Quality, chosen by common consent. As to the men of War, they should be
half English, and half Dutch, with at least ten thousand men of both Nations,
of the fifteen or twenty thousand, the rest might be in part Germans, French,
Spanish, Portuguzes, and others better used to those Climates; or moneys
instead of men, and some satisfaction in the same to England and Holland, by
reason of their great proportions.

And in all these nothing would be extraordinary besides the Land Army, for all
these Princes and States keep constantly Galleys and Ships for the security of
their Coasts and Trade; so that this were no more charges to them, then every
year they are at; and certainly whilst they keep them in pay, it were as well
to put them upon some honorable and advantageous service, as to let them be
idle at Sea all Summer long. Furthermore, the Prizes which they could make,
might contribute much toward the entertaining of these Forces; and the
Conquests, if any were made, could somewhat help toward the defraying of the
war: so that it would be an easy, and not chargeable enterprise, to get
together the Galleys which Princes and States do keep in pay, and joining the
English and Dutch Squadrons, which both Nations do send every year into the
Straits; for whose wintering, if occasion required, provision might be made
there. This indeed were noble and christian prudenc, and I doubt not might
prove very beneficial.

Such a thing, if carried on could give a great pull to the Turkish Empire;
what place could not such a Land Army attempt, or rather take; and such a Fleet
of brave English and Dutch ships exploit? I verily believe, that this being
carried on in a private way, that is, by a man of Note entering into the Service
of the Republic, with a matter of twelve or fifteen good men of war, and five
or six hundred men aboard, could yet produce brave effects; for alas! what I
say is not out of any hopes that such a thing will take any effect,
contrariwise I am persuaded it will not, for Princes do seldom approve of those
Councils which themselves are not the Authors of; it is an easy thing to show
what could or ought to be done, all the difficulty lies in persuading to do:
But in this I am like one who is much taken with a pleasant dream, and if this
be one, I like it so well, that to humor my self, I will make it last a little
longer.

Yet I think it is but realities, if to encourage Christians, I show the
grounds and causes of the decay of the Turkish Empire and Power: The ground of
my Discourse shall be wholly upon this known and experienced maxim, As States
and Dominions have been gotten, so they must be kept, whether it be done by
Force, Fraud, or fair and plausible means: And the same means which reason has
introduced, successes approved of, and experience confirmed, ought to be used
in the settlement and preservation of of what has been gotten; a Prince must
certainly make use of the ways whereby he has increased, enlarged, and settled
his Empire, as the fittest and most proper to preserve it, they being the basis
and foundation of it.

Now it will not be hard for me to show, that of late the Ottomans have not
followed this maxim, and consequently, that this is the cause of the present
decay of their Empire: First, their Predecessors and great Conquerours went
ever in the head of their Army: Thus they kept their Great Ministers and
Officers in subjection, and united, which otherwise out of envy, ambition and
Covetousness, had fallen out amongst themselves; thereby the Army was kept upon
duty, and in obedience, and the Janisaries to the observation of their
Discipline: Furthermore, the eye of a Prince, who is present, not only to see,
but also afterward to reward merit and valor, is a great encouragement to
Soldiers, who seeing him according to his proportion to share in the hardships
and dangers of war, do conceive a high esteem, love and respect for him. This
must be the way of Conquerours (for the reason is different about those Princes
who are settled in their Dominions, and who mind no more but to preserve
themselves, and stand only upon the defensive) as was practiced by Cyrus,
Alexander the Great, Pompeius, Caesar, etc. and of late by Charles the eight,
Francis the first, and Henry the fourth, Kings of France; and by the two late
Kings of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, and Charles Gustavus, who with their
presence inspired life, courage and valor into their Armies: By these means
also the Mahomets, Bajazets, Solomon, and others, did so much enlarge their
Turkish Empire; but their successors, who would make war by proxy, found the
inconveniences of it.

For when the Gran Sultan marched into the field, they were followed by the
best, and the strength of their Subjects: to understand this, one must know
that their person was attended by twelve thousand Janisaries, all choice,
valiant and experienced men, who were exactly and duly paid once a month, and
made a very formidable body in the field; but now not only many must remain
with the Princes person, whose help their Armies are deprived of, but also they
have increased their number with men not qualified for the place as others
were; and that which is the worst, they have diminished their pay; besides
which, they had every one a Bow, two shirts, and a Suit of Clothes given them
every year, which now and then they are cheated of; out of the best of these
two hundred are chosen to go by the Princes person, and three hundred more
about his Lodgings or Tents when he is in the field.

Besides these foot, three thousand Spahies or Horsemen are to march on the
Sultans right hand, and other three thousand on the left, all select men; every
one of the former is to be attended by five servants a horseback able and
fighting men, and the loft are to keep four, or at least three every one, and
they are divided into two bodies, every one of which follow their Masters.
These are followed of two other Squadrons of a thousand horse, the one does
consist of men of low degree and condition, who by some exploit of theirs have
been taken notice of, and raised to that degree; the other composed only of
natural Turks, who are singularly skilled in some particular thing, as may be,
the handling of a Symeter, Lance, Dart, Horsemanship, or the like, and they are
obliged to keep every one two servants: Besides this, the servants of the great
Officers, as Treasurers, Judges, Counselors, Bathaws, etc. are to follow the
Court, some of whom have at least two or three thousand, which in all cannot
amount to less then twenty thousand, and several others there are who attend
the Court: Now when the Sultan does not go into the field, these people lie at
home, and do no Service in the present war. To this I may add, that when the
Prince goes himself to the War, he gets experience in military affairs, and so
does not take things upon trust; he takes notice of his advantages, and of the
defects of his Soldiers, which he applies timely remedies unto, and prevents
mutinies, which they are apt to fall into under the command of men, who
sometimes are of no credit in the Armies: and his being constantly amongst
Soldiers, raises his heart and spirit to a high and martial temper, which
afterward put him upon great designs: Furthermore, the Forces he keeps at home
fall into idleness, thence into vices, and so grow stubborn and Effeminate.

Another important maxim of the Ottoman Empire has been constantly to be at
War, thereby to keep Soldiers in Exercise; but withal, to make a short War
with those against whom they fell out; So usually the end of a War has been
with them the beginning of another, they fell suddenly, and like a storm upon a
Country, and when they had seized upon all what they could for the time, seeing
those parts and their Neighbors began to put themselves in a considerable
posture of defense, they presently clapped up a peace, to settle in their new
Conquests, and to fall upon some others who thought them deeply engaged in the
present War; so well they have observed that maxim, which says, If a Prince
has three Enemies, he must be sure to make peace with one, truce with another,
but fall with his whole Power upon the third: Yet of late they have not
followed this Rule, whence to them are befallen these two great
inconveniences; the one is, that waging a long War with a Nation; necessity
and a constant exercise have made their Enemies to be good Warriers, and so the
better able to oppose them; the other is, that in these long Wars they have
lost the best and stoutest of their Soldiers by their too much forwardness, as
we have seen by experience in the Persian, Hungarian and Candia Wars, as I
already observed: In few words, I say, that the decay of the Turkish Empire is
caused by their Princes staying at home, by their engaging in long Wars, and
having given time as well as occasion to their Neighbors to train up
themselves to War; and by two other things, which are their destroying the
Lands of their Conquests, for the ground being not manured could not produce
necessaries for the people of the Country, and Towns being sacked and burned,
were deprived of inhabitants, whereby Trade was wholly destroyed: The other is,
that at last they fell a raising of fortifications, out of a^distrust of the
affection or valor of people, and so left in them strong Garrisons, which not
only made them weaker in the field, but these, like Hannibal's soldiers, lost
their hearts in the midst of their pleasures; and every Town like another Capua
ex Gallis fecit Capones, as one used to say, and now their Armies of 200000
men, are reduced to 30 or 60000, and their Fleets mightily decreased in number
and power.

Difficulties dissuade men from taking resolutions; and if they be taken, they
stop and hinder the execution; but one of the greatest (to wit the strength of
the Turk) being removed, I think this motion might be carried on successfully:
Indeed the greatest of all is, how to unite Princes, and persuade them to
concur in this work; for their private interests are so different, and their
affections so contrary, that it is a very difficult, if not an impossible task
to make them agree to it; the reason is, that some would have the great and
public interest to be subservient to their particular ends; for as to the
main, it will ever be found to be the right interest of every Prince and
Christian State, to oppose the Common Enemy, though I know it to be of some
more nearly and immediately then of others; yet at last the one, as the other,
may happen to be involved, not in the danger, but the hurt it self. May be in
the late dreadful fire in London, such as were in one part of the City, when
the fire was but in another part remote from that, did say, What Is that to us?
yet at last they suffered by it; so those who at present seem to be the
furthest from the blows, may in time be sensible, at the overflowings of the
Turkish power; and this should make all jealousies and animosities give place
to the care of every ones security. It Is indeed a lamentable thing to see how
often these Divisions have given the Turk occasion of enlarging his Empire, and
how Christians have thereby lost occasions of repelling him back again; for
certain they were the cause why no improvement was made of the victory of
Lepanto; for it was not enough to have stopped the violence of that torrent, but
also Cyprus, which was the occasion of the Leaguer, ought to have been snatched
back from his hands, but the Spaniards thought fit to have it otherwise.

What shall I say of the late betraying, or if they please, forsaking of
Ragotzki, Prince of Transylvania, a fair opportunity was offered to give a
great blow to the Turks, when the Princes of Wallachia and Moldavia were up to
shake off his yoke; at the same time Ragotzkie was up with a considerable Army,
which being united to the Forces of those two Princes, and backed with a
considerable supply from the Emperor, might happened to have freed all those
Countries from the Ottoman dominion. The Transylvanian asked some assistance,
but was refused, why? he was a Protestant, and the Jesuitical Council given to
the Emperor, desired his destruction, in hopes that the Country should be
forced to put her self into their hands for protection, but were disappointed;
for the Turk not only settled his authority in Wallachia and Moldavia, but also
got Waradin, and subjected Transylvania, and quickly after came into Hungary,
and got Newhausel, which he could not have effected if he had not been kept at
play in Transylvania: So the Venetians, for all they can say, must be blamed by
what experience teaches them now, for their not joining more nearly with the
Emperor in the late Hungarian War, and not making a strong diversion toward
Candia and the Arcipelago: But men matter not much how heavy the burden falls
upon others, if themselves do not lie under it. I do not say this to excuse the
Emperor for making peace after so glorious a victory obtained at the Raab, and
not including the Venetians in it, or not so much as communicating it to them,
or to any other concerned States, neither for not assisting them now; for both
the Emperor and the Venetians may easily see their fault, and how the Turk
makes fools of both, for he has no sooner done with one, but he begins with
another. Therefore this should open the eyes of Christian Princes, so as to
make them unanimously oppose, before it be too late, that enemy of the
Christian name.

But before I leave this Subject, I must in few words answer the particular
and, I think, the chief Objection of England and Holland; who drive a great
Trade in Turkey: Some will say, If any way we do assist the Venetians, then all
our Trade in the Levant is spoiled. But I say, though such a help as we
mentioned before, be of great concernment to the Venetians, yet it is not
considerable to England; and I believe the Turk is wise enough to give no such
provocations, as to draw thence a greater power and stronger Fleets against
himself; besides that, I believe that Christians do much mistake him in this,
for he is well acquainted with his interest, and he knows how beneficial
Trading is to his Country, without which he could not gather so much moneys as
he does; so that he would be as loath to break off trading with England, as
England is to break with him; and he would be found as ready to renew it with
others, as others would be to renew it with him, if once he were driven upon
his own ground, for he is as much concerned. Furthermore, as it is certain,
that in England in Q. Elizabeth's days Spanish wares were as cheap for all the
War as in time of peace; so it may be by the Turkish Commodities, by reason of
the prizes which could be made of them; and certainly if Merchants would but be
honest and content with a reasonable gain, things would be as cheap as before,
for the Turkish Subjects must sell openly or underhand; and as there would be
no open Markets, they would part with their Wares at low rates, rather then not
to sell them at all and ever to have them upon their hands: And let this be
spoken as to Holland also. One thing, I confess, were fit for England to
observe, namely, That the Dutch should contribute the same help against the
Turk, to be in the same Category at the Divan, to the end they should not have
a free Trade in the Levant, whilst the English were forbidden it.

One thing more I must say as to England and Holland, which are so remote from
the Turkish Dominions, and from those Parts which should be the seat of War: I
confess, that to avoid breaking with the Turk, 'twere better and more
convenient to carry on the design, if some gallant and experienced men would,
with the leave or winking at of both States, enter into the Service of the
Reipublick, and mind only that same thing. However, the case being as I stated
it from the beginning, and some Princes and States of those Parts contributing
to the payment of part of the Forces, could easily upon occasion afford them
good and convenient harbors, with all necessary accommodation for winter
quarters in so plentiful a Country: Or else, suppose it were but to try for one
Summer, they should go betime, and carry provisions for several months. But I
must engage no further upon this Discourse, my whole design being only to make
such a motion, which being thought upon by wise and concerned persons, might be
brought to some maturity, reduced to a good form, and in all the circumstances
thereof laid in such a way, as might best of all suit the importance of the
matter, and become the wisdom of the undertakers.

By what I say of the great interest of all Christians against the Common
Enemy, I do not intend by any means to prejudice another great concern between
Christians themselves, and that is the Protestant interest, which is grounded
not only upon differences about Religion, but also upon reason of State; for
alas! as the world goes now men are not much acted with principles of Religion,
except there be with it one thing or other of temporal concernment. Policy is
the great mobile of the actions of Statesmen; but if Religion be brought in,
it is more the name then the power of it, and according to the rule of
Machiavel, as a show and a pretense only: Therefore I say, that Protestant
Princes and States are not to neglect the Protestant Cause, in the defense of
which lies the safety of their persons, and preservation of their States and
Authority; for as ever it is the Popes interest, so his constant endeavors,
are either to bring again into his Church all those who make profession of the
Protestant Religion, or else to destroy them. And as it is natural for a man to
wish that every one would be of his Religion; So he is countenanced and
assisted by those Princes who are of his persuasion, wherein the house of
Austria has been so forward, that ('it is believed) thereby she has brought
upon her self the heavy hand of God, which at present has so much humbled her.

I further assert another truth, that the Pope is more dangerous to Protestants
then the Turk; First, by reason of the distance of places; for Providence has
so seated the States of the Protestants, that, excepted Transylvania and
Hungary, which yet belongs in part to a Roman Catholic Prince, he cannot come
nigh to them: but the Pope and his upholders are close by, and so the more
formidable, because in some sense he is a domestic enemy, who ever is at work
how to bring out some occasion, which when he sees he soon lays hold on it;
which advantage the Turk is deprived of, for though an opportunity was offered
to him, it would be lost before he were ready to make use of it. Secondly, The
Turk comes in by mere force and violence, which his Neighbors being warned of,
do provide against with the utmost of their Power; but the Pope has his
Devices and his Depths, whereby he plots and contrives designs destructive to
others; he has his Thunderbolts of Excommunication (which Protestants, and at
present some other States laugh at.) He takes upon him to dispense Subjects
from the obedience they owe to their Sovereigns, and an absolute Authority in
every Ecclesiastical affair, and over all Ecclesiastical persons in the
Dominions of others (a thing so unjust, that some States of his persuasion,
especially France and Venice, have denied it to him.) He attributes to himself
an unquestionable authority over Consciences, of binding and loosing all
spiritual things, under which name of spirituals, all moral things may directly
or indirectly be reduced; so that thereby he must take from Princes in their
own Dominions, the Sword of Justice, and punish Adulterers, Thieves,
Murderers, and all crimes expressed or employed in the Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments: And what else is this but to divest Princes of the Authority they
ought to have within their own Dominions, and to pull down their Tribunals and
Seats of Justice, to set up his own upon their ruins. From this let every one
judge how much all Princes are concerned to oppose this pretended and usurped
Authority, so destructive of their own. Besides all this he takes upon himself
to dispense with divine Precepts, and yet he absolutely commands the
observation of his own under pain (as he says) of eternal damnation: And when
all these things cannot serve, he has Ravaillacs, and such Emissaries who have
vowed a blind obedience to his orders; so that St. Paul's Sword does cut what
St. Peter's Keys cannot open. But the Turk has none of these helps.

Moreover, The Turk is acted only by a principle of ambition, but the Pope acts
out of a desire of revenge: The Turk pretends no right upon others, but that
which the Sword gives him; but the Pope pretends a divine and spiritual right
made over to him by Christ, and so looks upon all Protestants as rebels to him,
because they are withdrawn from his obedience, and consequently he is the more
bitter enemy to them; and wheresoever he could reach any of them, he made the
Sword, the Fire, the Gibbet, and Prison, instruments of his vengeance: So that
when a hundred thousand have had their throats cut in one night at Rome, there
has been for it public and extraordinary expressions of joy. Fourthly, The
Turk has no Inquisition within his States; contrariwise, by the means of an
yearly Tribute, he allows Protestants that liberty of Conscience which is
denied them by some Princes of the Roman persuasion; and this very thing has
strengthened his interest in Hungary, where whole Towns have sometimes submitted
to his yoke: so that in this the Popes and Turk's interests are contrary, for
the former will admit of no such tolleration, and consequently by reason of his
interest, is more dangerous to Protestants then the other.

Yet for all this, I do no ways derogate from what I said before of the common
interest of all Christians against the Turk, provided the Protestant can be
secured, which can be done no better, then by uniting the whole body under one
head, settling between all the Members a good correspondency, grounded upon
their common interest and safety, having them all knitted in affection, and as
much as may be in judgment, and concerning themselves in the affairs one of
another, being tender hearted and charitable to those members who are
persecuted for Religion sake, assisting each other, and by no means suffering
one Prince or State of the same profession to be oppressed upon any pretenses
whatsoever; and they must watch and oppose the designs of those who are able
and likely to carry on the Roman Interest, out of the discovery which may be
made of their Councils: and in all these things Protestants ought to carry
themselves unanimously and with vigor.

After this, there is no danger for the chief amongst them, and those who are
able and can conveniently assist the Venetians, to do it, the question being
not to assist the Pope, but a Republic, which has had several fallings out
with the Sea of Rome about privileges and jurisdiction, and which is moderate
in the point of Inquisition; besides that this is a matter of State, and not of
Religion; and if the Pope were in the same condition as Venice, he might be
assisted, Salva Conscientia, by Protestant Princes, just as are the outworks of
a Town by those who are in the Town, who have reason to concern themselves in
their preservation, for if once they be taken the Enemy will draw nearer to the
City, and make use of them against it; so that when any Christian Prince does
repel the violence offered to another, he does nothing else but meet with that
which is preparing against him; he hastens to quench the fire which is in his
neighbors house, for fear it should come into his own; and gives his helping
hand to make Sconces, Dams, and other oppositions to the Sea, which having once
drowned his Neighbors Country, would quickly overflow his own. In a word,
diversity of Religion, in this cases is not a sufficient ground to hinder the
Venetians from being assisted by those who make profession of another, seeing
such a succor is to be employed against that Tyrant who has usurped so many
members of the Christian Empire, and who by his Religion is bound by a
perpetual vow to destroy Christian Religion, and all the professors of it.

To this I add, that if the whole Island of Candia was once lost, whole
Christendom would feel the inconveniences of it, even those parts which are
the most remote; for their Trade should suffer much by it, because there could
be no passing by the Arcipelago, without being exposed to the mercy of the
Turks, and of the Rowers of Barbary; and as the passage is very dangerous
between those Islands, who knows what Tolls might be laid upon the Shipping
that go by, which should be forced to submit to it, rather then to run danger
of Shipwreck: but nearer countries would be more sensible of it, for Candia
which is the bullwark of Christendom in those parts being once taken, Zant,
Corfu and Cefalonia could not hold out, and so nothing could hinder the Turk
from falling upon the Kingdom of Naples, and the Islands of Sicily and and
Sardigna, then the Seacoasts of the Popes Dominions shall lie open both
toward the Gulf and the Mediterranean; so shall the Gran Dukes, and the
Genoeses Dominions, especially the Island Corsica; so that as Italy is the
nearest and the most concerned Country, it is to be admired, that the Princes
of it do not bestir themselves more then they do, to be a president, and give
good example to those who are further of, who think it not fit for them to
awake, whilst those who lie nearer to the danger are asleep.

But before I make an end of this, it will not be amiss, if I endeavor to
satisfy the curiosity which some may have to know the present condition of the
Republic; I do not mean their Warlike posture; for the number of their Ships,
Galleys, Galleasses, and other sort of Shipping, is known to be very great; so
are their Land, but especially the Sea Forces: but I mean how they are at home,
whether hearty or dejected, rich or poor. I answer to the first, That there is
no Republic, nor any other State in the World, which has had, and still does
retain so much of the Ancient Roman Courage, Patience and Constancy, which
Virtues have been put to hard trials in their Wars with Genoa, with Maximilian
the Emperor, when all was lost, except Venice, Padoa and Trevigi, and of late
in the Wars with the Turk; yet for all this, they bear it out, and are so
undaunted, as to refuse to condescend to any Conditions dishonorable, or very
disadvantageous to the Republic. As for their Riches, the public Treasure
must necessarily be exhausted; for what State in Europe could without a
considerable diminution, carry on a War against so formidable an Enemy for
about twenty five years time? I will grant, it is in part of their moneys laid
out, as of the circular blood which comes again to the heart, and to the
center; and though most of their provisions be bought in their own Country, yet
Trade by Sea being interrupted, and Taxes much raised and multiplied, the
people who bears the greatest burden of them must needs be disenabled to pay,
and consequently, the whole Republic, seeing the people ever makes the
greatest part of it, and that Tradesmen and Workmen are they who labor and
get moneys for great and rich men, so that they fill the purse: I account
therefore that State to be rich, where all, or at least the generality of the
Subjects are so; now indeed money is stirring, but the Nobles and great
Officers have the Chief benefit of it, though indeed every one must need have a
share in it, so many men being employed upon several things, but Taxes take it
away again; so that the Subject is poor, and the public Treasure empty; for
the Trade by Land, and the plenty of their States makes them hold out: but
considering the present occasions afford nothing to be laid up. Upon such
occasion as this, War affords gain to one great man or other, but deprives
thousands of their due. That General Foscolo who has been so much talked of,
left, a report goes, above two Millions of Ducats in his Coffers, which he had
gotten in few months time, but his Army was much the worse for it: Therefore I
conclude, that this long and chargeable, War which the Republic has against
the Turk, has much wasted her Treasure; and were it not for the loanes of
particular men, she had been disenabled to hold out any longer; therefore she
stands in need of assistance from other Princes and States, in moneys, as well
as in men: and thereby many have been impoverished, and some few made rich; so
others are thereby grown better Soldiers and Statesmen, having gotten a great
experience in martial and politic affairs.

And for the corruptions of particular men, as I mentioned before, all are so
fully convinced that their particular safety lies in that of the Republic,
that they are unanimous in the defense of it; besides that Laws there are so
severe to Delinquents against the State, that hardly any man dares to be
wanting to his duty upon important occasions; so that although some of their
Noblemen grow rich upon the account of the present Turkish War, and they are
glad it does last, yet they dare not commit any base action, though it were
upon no other ground, but for fear of a sure and severe punishment: yet I am
persuaded that many of them act out of better principles then this, for
although Venetians have defects and vices common to all other Nations, yet they
have some virtues particular to themselves, amongst which gravity and
settledness of mind (which Nepolitans and many of Lombardy are deprived of) are
none of the least.

An Account of the War in CANDIA.
BUt because the War of Candia is at present the greatest concern of the
Republic, men will expect to hear some particulars of it; and herein I am
willing in part to gratify their curiosity, yet I do not intend to go back
again so many years, and speak of this War from the beginning of it, which
proved so fatal to the Venetians, and imported no less then the loss of a
considerable Kingdom, which the several Victories obtained since by Sea cannot
make amends for: This would be too long a task, therefore I will look no
further back then these two last years, or thereabouts, and as it were the
renewing of the War.

The Turk immediately after the great loss he had suffered at the River Raab in
Hungary, having concluded a peace with the Emperor (who thereby deprived
himself of the fruits of so notable a Victory, and of the advantage he might
have received from the auxiliary Forces he had out of Germany and other
Countries, and who thereby gave his Enemies Army time to breath after so great
a blow, and to settle in his new Conquests) he turned his thoughts toward
Candia, knowing full well the importance of that Island for his designs against
those parts of Christendom; therefore to alter the Scene, and make the
Venetians look to themselves, who, though they seemed at that time to be at a
stand, had blocked up Canea by Sea, and hindered supplies of men and provision
from going into it, thereby to bring so troublesome a Neighbor to some straits,
he resolved to attempt the City of Candia, and to reduce the Republic only to
the defensive: And because the Gran Vizier had been more fortunate in taking of
places, then in the Field, he would try whether Candia would run the Fate of
Newhausel: To this effect he is sent over with an Army of about fourscore
thousand men, with all necessary preparations for their design.

At first he endeavored to carry it by several desperate assaults he made
against it, being put upon it, in part to draw some benefit from the courage
and strength of his Soldiers, who then were fresh, and also out of hopes that
the Venetians might happen not to be prepared against that sudden storm; but
they who were surprised the first time that this Island was attempted, had
learned at their own cost to be ready against a second assault; and therefore
with much courage and resolution they repulsed and beat off the Ottoman Forces.
Whereupon the Gran Vizier betook himself to new Counsels, and resolved upon a
formal Siege, seeing his other way had not proved successful; and thereupon
writ to his Master for new supplies, giving him hopes of a good success, and
that in time he would be able to give him a good account of the place: so that
there he sits down before it, and so is engaged to conquer or to dye, his head
being to answer for the success of his undertaking.

The Republic being more then awaked at this (yet glad to see the first brunt
over) according to her usual care and diligence, prepares at home to oppose
that numerous enemy, and sends continual supplies of men, moneys, ammunition
and provision to the besieged, with promises of more timely to be sent to them,
which to effect the more easily, they make themselves strong by Sea, and
resolved to keep the Mastery of it. On the other side, they sent to most
Princes of Europe, to represent the common danger, and the urgent necessities
of the Republic: In consideration of which they desired some assistance, as
they had asked before, and obtained it, viz. 5000 men from the French commanded
by one Prince of the Family of Modena, and from some other Princes, even
particular men having contributed to it, as Mazarini 100000 Crowns, Cardinal
Francesco Barbarini set out a Galley at his own charges, and some others had
done the like; which had been discontinued, because the War in Hungary against
the Emperor, had taken the edge off from that of Candia; but the Turks as I
said, falling to it again, the Republic desires new supplies almost every
where, which she obtained from several Parts.

But because she knew the importance of a brave and experienced Commander, to
make him General in the besieged City, she sent to ask of the Duke of Savoy the
General of his Forces, the Marquis Villa, who was granted with a considerable
supply of men; he went to Venice, and thence with all convenient speed he shipped
away for Candia, where he puts every thing in a good order and posture of
defense, and upon all occasions repulses the enemy with loss, from the places
he attempted. On the other side the Turk finds it a great difficulty to send
any recruits to the Vizier; for not only many of the Janissaries and other
Soldiers, either run away from their Colors, or else fall into a mutiny,
refusing to be shipped for Candia, which they look upon as their grave,
suspecting still that the Divan continued in the former design to destroy them;
and those others who were shipped either by force, or by the means of fair
promises, were several times intercepted by the Venetians, who were crusing up
and down the coasts of Morea, and those of Candia, and so toward those Islands
of the Arcipelago, whence the Vizier might probably expect any relief. So that
by these means the Turks Army was brought to great straits; and at the same
time God did fight against them from Heaven, sending his arrows of the Plague
and diseases amongst them, so that thereby the Army being much lessened aad
disheartened, many went from their Colors, and did much complain, if not
mutiny, and the Rains falling thereupon, forced the Vizier to withdraw further
off from the City, giving thereby time of refreshment to his Army, and to the
besieged also; who immediately after fell a repairing of those Fortifications
which had been endammaged by the Turks in this Campagna: The Turks lost
abundance of men, their Army being reduced, as was thought, to 20000 at the
most: The Venetians also lost several Soldiers, and some few men of note, and
gallant Officers.

In the VVinter the Sultan was solicitous to assist the Vizier against Spring;
so were the Venetians of sending new supplies to the besieged. Some thousands
passed from Morea to the Camp; Candia also received some; but withal, those
which the Venetians received from the Emperor, and from the Crown of Spain, by
the way of Naples and Sicily, were stopped by reason of the war which broke forth
in Flanders: And several other Princes and States began somewhat to give over
the thoughts of Candia, to look another way; but the Venetians went on
vigorously, for though the enemies were come again before the City, yet still
keeping Masters of the Sea, they put into the City all manner of necessary
supplies, whereby the besieged were enabled to hold out, and resist the furious
assaults of the Turks now against one place, and then against another, it being
known that no Nation falls on with more fury then the Turks, being
overperswaded by the opinion they have of predestination, I mean as to their
life, which is mixed with a great error, to wit, of separating the means from
the end. But this matter I must speak no more of, to say, that the Duke of
Savoy, by reason of a design he seemed to have against Geneva and them,
concerning himself in the War between Prance and Spain, though the time was not
come for him openly to declare it, he called home the Marquis Villa from the
Venetian Service to give him again the General Command of his Forces. The
Republic desired he might have leave to stay longer; the Pope himself joined
his solicitations to theirs; but the Duke would not revoke his Order, only
allowed him time to leave things in the best posture he could possibly do,
which he did, and to come home from Venice to give an account of the place; but
before, he exploited many brave things, not only repulsing courageously the
Turks when they came to storm any Fort, but also by making lusty Sallyes upon
them, and upon occasion by springing Mines under them, and blowing them up,
whereby thousands of them were destroyed at several times.

Now are the Venetians put again to 't, to get a man of credit and experience
to be General in Candia. And since I brought it again to the purpose, I must
not omit to say, that few years before, they had sought after an English man, a
person of great worth, courage and experience, to enter into their service, who
willingly embraced such a motion, and had done it in a way as glorious and
honorable as can be the Government of Candia, though of a different nature,
had not some thing fallen out by the way: And the merit of this same person was
so well known, and so esteemed abroad, that he received the same offers and
invitations from the Emperor, as they were made known to him by a great Prince
of the Empire: But this, as the other, took no effect. This passage I would not
omit, it tending to the honor of the English Nation, that the Republic should
look so for and choose one of the Nation to carry on a design so glorious as
that which they had then in hand, and that the Emperor should overlook
Germany, a warlike Nation, to find in England a person fit for his purpose; and
let this also be spoken to the honor of that person.

I return now to the Venetians where I left them, that is, looking for a man
fit to succced the Marquis Villa in his Command in Candia; they find him in
France a person indeed well qualified for such an employment, but somewhat aged;
he is of the protestant Religion, of a very noble Family in the Province of
Dauphind, who ever produced men very zealous for the interest of their
Religion, upon whose account some have lost their lives; the name of the Family
is Monbrun, the Eldest whereof is a Marquess, and they have been so long ago.
Now this St. Andre Monbrun has been Lieutenant General of the French Armies in
Italy, he harkened after the proposals made to him by the Republic, and begins
a Treaty with her by the leave and consent of his King, which being concluded
he marches toward Venice, to go thence and take possession of his Charge.

In the mean while Alexander the Seventh being dead, and the present being
chosen and settled, the Venetians receive much encouragement from him, not only
assisting them himself, but also soliciting others to do the like^ In the mean
time the besieged in Candia have much ado to defend themselves from the
reiterated Assaults of their Enemies, who having received some fresh supplies
of men, though not very considerable, and being encouraged by the promises of
more, and put on by the obstinate Resolution of the Grand Vizier, who sees his
Head lying at the stake, and his life or death depending upon the good or bad
success of the Siege, they fell a storming of the place twenty-five and thirty
thousand at a time, and neglect no other ways that could promote the design:
wherefore having observed the great difficulty they met withal, caused chiefly
because the besieged could at any time receive new supplies, the Harbor being
free and open, they were contriving of a way to raise a Battery, which should
command the coming into the Port; and in this they were favored by the
directions they had from a Fugitive, so that it took effect for the present,
insomuch that no Ships could come in without a great danger; and then indeed
people began to fear very much for the City; yet the Venetian Armata being come
that way, some Sallyes being made, and Counter-Batteries raised, the Harbor
was again free and open: Yet the designs of the Enemy do still lie that way,
and their most frequent and furious assaults have ever been against the Forts
which are toward those Parts of the City, as are that of Mooenigo, and
Panigra, but especially St. Andre and Sabionera.

These continual Assaults given often once a Week, and sometimes two or three
days one after another, and this for many hours without interruption, could
not but extraordinarily tire those within the City, and lessen their number;
and indeed, had it not been for the good Examples and Orders they have from
several good Officers that are amongst them, and the great care the Republic
has taken to supply them from time to time, they could not in probability have
held out so long. It Is true that their Gunners, and most belonging to the
Artillery, understand it admirably well; and from them in Candia and at Sea the
Republic receives great service: But for all this, which indeed are
reallities, they were fed with hopes, and flattered with promises of
considerable succors, which indeed were preparing for them, but alas, not with
the success which was expected from them, for usually there has been an
unhappy misunderstanding between the Auxilaries and the Republics Ships, or
amongst themselves; The Galleys of Maltha and those of Geneva must not meet
there, or else they will fall out about certain differences that are between
them; and even the last Summer those of Maltha took exceptions, and came away,
because they would not be obliged to salute the Capitana or Admiral Galley of
Venice; and at the same time the Galleys of the Pope, and those of Naples and
Sicily, which, after the Peace was concluded between France and Spain the Pope
had obtained, should be sent to assist the Venetian, went as it seems only to
see Candia, but not to fight, for they came soon away and before they were
expected home; so that Vicenzo Rospigliosi. has nothing to brag of against
Prior Bichi.

And upon this account the Venetians were indeed hard put to it in Candia,
insomuch that the Generalissimo was forced to disarm some of his Galleys first,
and then a Galleyass, and land the Soldiers and Rowers to fight in the defense
of the City; which opportunity the Turk did not let slip away, but he sent his
Army out of Morea several supplies of Men and Ammunition, which landed all
safely and without any interruption, because at that time the Venetian Armata
could not keep at Sea, and at the same time fight within the City: Then were
their courage and valor put to a hard trial, as indeed many did in an
extraordinary manner, some of which lost their lives in the Field of honor,
and others outlived to see themselves rewarded, for indeed the Republic
hardly leaves any great action to go without a reward, which encourages others
to strive after the same. Some Venetian Noblemen carried themselves very
gallantly in the repulses they gave the Turks, especially from the Fort St.
Ande: the Rowers and Slaves, many of them, behaved themselves very valiantly,
it being observed that one of them in an assault of the Turks killed forty
with his own hand; yet for all this it had gone hard with them, for they had
been overpowered; but it was Gods pleasure to bring them very seasonably fresh
men, and other necessary supplies, sent from Venice, and others out of Naples,
and Monsieur de St. Andre Monbrun with the former, which raised their spirits
very much, so that since from time to time having received new supplies of
Germans and Italians, they made Sallyes, and did execution upon the Enemy,
venturing very far, the General himself in one of them receiving a Musket shot
in one of his Shoulders, though not dangerous.

A thing which indeed kept up very much the hearts of the besieged, was the
hopes of succors preparing for them in France, which to them was given out to
be more forward then indeed it was: I must say something as to the nature of it:
This was not sent by the French Kings Order, but only by his permission, upon
this account; A French man of great courage and experience, named Count de la
Fueillade, brought up in the French Armies, and who was in this late War in
Hungary, having taken it ill, as the report goes, that in the late promotion,
he was not made a Marshal of France, instead of which the King his Master had a
while before made him Duke of Roannes and Peer of France; or rather, as I am
apt to believe, out of a Martial desire, seeing peace concluded at home,
resolved upon this service, with the Kings leave, and levied three thousand
brave fighting men, of which above eight hundred are old Officers; and having
Shipped them at Marseilles he sailed toward Maltha to take in 40 Knights of his
Nation, men willing to venture their lives in the defense of Candia, to whose
succor also the Grand Maltez has sent three hundred men; from whence they
sailed all together toward Candia, where they are now arrived according to
their desire, and to the great satisfaction of the besieged, and very likely
they will fall upon action whilst they are fresh, and before the Climate, and
perhaps a dissolute manner of life, do work distempers amongst them.

But to return to the Siege, the Vifier hearing of great succors expected in
Candia, would hasten to do something before their arrival; but for two days
together being repulsed with the loss, as it is thought, of about ten thousand
men, he was disheartened as well as his Army; which having wrought a contrary
effect upon the besieged, they made some Sallyes, which joined to the Rains,
which toward the end of Autumn fell there abundantly, have made the Grand
Vizier to retire, with a design, as it is very probable, of coming on again; in
the mean while the Venetians are very much refreshed by the arrival of their
expected succors of French, Germans, and Italians, the number of which comes
to about ten thousand men, who likely will send out some parties to look
abroad, if there be occasion for it. On the other side, having received
Pioneers, and other workmen, with some materials, they are about repairing
their Fortifications, which must needs have received great damages, by the
springing up of so many Mines about them, but especially by the Turks
Artillery, of which they ever have great quantity, and of the greater sort, it
being their custom not to draw them to Sieges as other Nations use, but they
cast them in their Camp, and when they are to march off, they break them to
pieces, which they carry away: By these means they are freed of the trouble and
the charges which do attend trains of Artillery; and so they cast them as big
as they will, and to carry bullets of what weight they please, and then the
continual shooting of this Artillery must needs shake any Works and and
Fortifications how strong soever they be: Yet against this the besieged have
secured themselves the best they could, for Candia, which formerly was a sweet
and a pleasant place, is now wholly made a City of War, and as I am informed by
some lately come from thence, their Soldiers for the most part are lodged
under Vaults, Caves, and other places under ground, where they are secure
enough from the bullets till they be called to the defense of the breach when
any is made.

This is the present posture of Candia, which has now time to breath till the
Enemy falls on again; which when it comes, God knows what will be the success
of it, for oftentimes valor being overpowered, must at last yield to number;
wherefore the Republic is at present soliciting for help almost every where
by the means of the Ambassadors she has sent to most Courts; and as according
to all probability Candia is secured enough for this Winter, so sufficient
preparations are to be made to resist the attempts which on the next Spring
shall be made against it, there being a timely warning given of it. I say
further, that if the Republic was somewhat Assisted, she could be able, not
only to secure the City of Candia, but if she could form any indifferent body
of Army about it, to get ground of the Turk from keeping the Mastery of the
Sea, they could receive constant supplies of all manner of things when the
Enemy should want it; for stopping those which he receives from Morea, and few
other places, his Army could not subsist, because, though the Island of Candia
be of a good and fruitful soil, yet at present it is barren and desolate, the
ground being neither tilled nor manured, it being the Turks custom to destroy
the places of their Conquests, to make them void of Inhabitants, and so
unfruitful. Now in this case the Vizier and his Army should be as birds in a
Cage, and could wish themselves farther off, or that they had never come there;
so that it may be said of him, he is fallen into the snare he had prepared for
others: and truly should he and his Army perish in this, it would prove a sore
and a fatal blow to the Ottoman Empire. And I pray to God, who has the hearts
of all men in his hand, even those of Kings, which he turns like Rivers of
waters, to make Christian Princes so sensible of it, as to work upon them a
desire, and a taking such an effectual course as might promote the great
Interest of Christendom against the Common Enemy; for if ever it be done, I am
fully persuaded it must be the effect of a strong influence and providence of
God overruling the hearts and interests of men, without their designs, and even
against it, for he is able to move, bow and incline the wills of men as it
seems good unto him.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed these four Books, to be sold by John Starkey
Bookseller at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar.
IL Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews; wherein is related
the reasons which move the Popes to make their Nephews great: Together with all
the good and mischief they have done to the Catholic Church from the Year,
1471, to 1667. Also the difficulties which Public Ministers find in treating
with them, and how to free themselves from those difficulties; and the reasons
why none of the Families of the Popes have remained long in any Grandeur.
Written in Italian by the Author of Donna Olympia, and Englished by W. A. in
Octavo, price bound 3 shil.

The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced; so plain and easy, that it is
fitted to the meanest Capacity: Written in French by P. Thibault Chemist to the
French King, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society in Octavo,
price bound 3 shil.

A Relation of the French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish-Netherlands in
the Year 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing His Title thereunto,
and an account of the peace between the two Crowns made in May 1668. Englished
by G. H. in 120 price bound 1 shil.

The present state of the Princes and Republics of ITALY, with Observations on
them; By J. Gallhard Gent. in 12o price bound 1 shil.


