AN ESSAY OF THE True Happiness OF MAN. In Two Books. BY SAMUEL GOT of GRA. I.
ES.

LONDON, Printed by Rob. White, for Thomas Underhill, at the Blew-Anchor in
Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-Door. 1650.

The First Book.
I. OF True Happiness. 1 II. Of the Degrees of Happiness. 8 III. Of Perfect
Happiness. 13 IV. Of the Vanity of all Worldly things. 20 V. Of the Goods of
the Body. 25 VI. Of Health. 30 VII. Of Strength. 35 VIII. Of Beauty. 40 IX. Of
the Goods of Fortune. 46 X. Of Riches. 52 XI. Of Pleasures. 61 XII. Of Honor.
66 XIII. Of the Goods of the Mind. 71 XIV. Of Learning. 77 XV. Of Wisdom. 83
XVI. Of Philosophy. 90 XVII. Of the Sceptikes and Cynikes. 98 XVIII. Of the
Cyreniakes and Epicureans. 108 XIX. Of the Stoikes and Peripatetikes. 115 XX.
Of the Platonikes, and of Socrates. 125
The Second Book.
I. OF Religion. 135 II. Of Faith. 142 III. Of the Scriptures. 148 IV. Of God.
154 V. Of Christ. 163 VI. Of the Spirit. 174 VII. Of a Christian Life. 183
VIII. Of Nature. 191 IX. Of Providence. 198 X. Of Prosperity. 206 XI. Of
Adversity. 213 XII. Of Death. 220 XIII. Of Sin. 229 XIV. Of the Restuaration of
the Soul. 237 XV. Of Graces. 248 XVI. Of Duties. 254 XVII. Of Conscience. 261
XVIII. Of the last Judgment. 270 XIX. Of Hell. 278 XX. Of Heaven. 288
The Preface.
I Beg no Patronage, I need no Apology. Truth is the best, and indeed only true
Patroness: if in any thing I have offended her, let it be as a Null among
Ciphers, and signify nothing. As Popish Writers use to say concerning the
Church and Fathers. If any thing be writ or said against them, let it be
unwrit, and unsaid. Though I should seem to Apologize, it shall not be for any
thing I have writ; but only for writing, in an Age, wherein Letters are either
neglected, or distasted. We have lately surfetted of Knowledge, and now
disgorge, and nauseate it: or if any Books be read, they are only such as we
disdain to read twice; Pamphlets and Stories of Fact, or angry Disputes
concerning the Times. In times of Action, whosoever would appear considerable,
and make any moment in Business, must pursue one of the Extremes, and
desperately run up to the hight of it: and so in Writing, Preaching, or the
like; to speak plausibly of the Times, or vehemently to oppose them, most
advances Fame and Followers. Yea in all other Times, either to Flatter
Princes, and humor the Vices and Vanities of the Age, or Satyrically to lash
them, has been the common Art of Writing; which I wittingly waive, and leave
to others. Sober and Solid Truth passes on in a straight Line through the Crowd
of Errors and Confusions, without any great noise or show of it self. Besides,
good Books, as they are profitable, so they are very chargeable. We may not
call them our own when we have bought them; nor when we have read them. To
understand them rightly, didicisse fideliter, will cost almost as much as to
indit^e them; and to practice them far more. Men think it sufficient to turn
over the Leaves, but never care to gather the Fruit: without which a Book is
wholly lost; writ and read to no purpose. For my own part, though I know
writing of Books to be a very mean employment, and of no great efficacy; when
such writing as the famous Talbot set on his Sword, Pro vincere inimicos meos,
is by many counted the best Logike and Rhetorike, and most authentike: yet I am
content to make use of it, because I have no better antidote against Idleness,
and the inconveniences thereof. Having often consulted with my self* how a man
might live most happily both here and hereafter, I used to commit my Thoughts
to Writing: finding by experience, that as Meditation is the Glass of the Soul,
so Writing steels it, and strengthens the Reflection: representing our
scattered Notions in a more entire and exact manner; and imprinting them first
on our own spirits. I have lately collected my loose Papers, and digested them
into Method; and now present them to the public view: that so others, if they
please, may share with me: and if I may communicate some considerable benefit
to any one Reader, I shall account my endeavors very well bestowed. However
they shall return into my own Breast, and be always welcome at Home.

The first BOOK Of the True HAPPINESS Of MAN.
I. Of True Happiness.
HAppiness is the Life of Life, and the Enjoyment of all our Good things.
Enjoyment begins in Knowledge. Happy men if they Knew it, is a common
exprobration, and in part true of all. There is none who has not something
more then Hope left in the bottom of Pandroa's box, at least so much as to
maintain him in that state of Hoping, which every man should improve to his
best advantage, and make the most of a little. On the contrary, Sentiat se
mori, was a torture as like Hell as the wit of man could invent. Knowledge is
the view of things, and Contemplation the review and gazing on them, bathing
and soaking the Mind throughout with more piercing and fixed apprehensions.
Thus a Covetous man enjoys his treasures, by counting and studying them: as he
in Horace, Nummos contemplor in arca -- Admiration is more then Contemplation,
extending the Mind to the very utmost capacity, yea in some sort transporting
it beyond it self, by wondering at that which it cannot comprehend. These beget
Love, which is an Appetite of union. Knowledge presents the Object to the Soul,
but Love resigns the Soul to the Object, embracing and mingling with it, and so
sucks out all the sweetness that is in it. This heat of Love begets Joy and
Delight, as a flame of Light flowing from it: and this Rejoicing in the Object
is the most perfect Enjoyment thereof. True Happiness consists both in the true
Taste of the Soul, and also in the truth of the Thing it self. An ingenious
Poem, or pleasant Fable, made only to take the ear, raise quicker affections in
the mind of the Reader, then the bare nakedness of more profitable Truth. There
is indeed a truth, of Art in witty fictions, which is real matter of delight,
yet it argues great vanity, to be more affected with the Embroidery of an
artificial Ly, then with the Plain work of better Instructions. There are other
mere deceptions. The outward Senses deceiv the Fancy, and which is more
strange, the Fancy can deceiv the very Senses, and operate on them as much as
the Thing it self, not only as in a Dream, but when they are waking and most
intent. He who sat in the empty Theater, and seemed to see most wonderful
Tragedies, was in a farther degree of vanity then common Spectators, who
contemplated an Hercules. or Achilles, or a great Prince in the person of some
mean fellow, whom they knew to be most unlike to them, but his Fancy was both
Spectator and Actor, which is a double delusion. I do not think, as Avicenna,
that Fancy can work miracles, or as Paracelsus, that it can create any thing:
but though it cannot form a Being, it can frame a Fantasm, acting it within its
own Theater, and also delude the Senses by it, which is as much as it receives
from them even of those things which we really see or hear: For the Thing it
self remains without us where it was, and that which comes to the Fancy, is
only a Show or Apparition thereof. Thus Fancy irritateth the Bodily Humors,
and provokes the Affections; and those Imaginary Objects of Joy, or Fear may
as really affect the Mind, as if they were real. But the worst of all are
Intellectual Errors, and false Judgments, for these seduce the Mind it self
(which being rectified would correct the inferior Faculties) and betray us to
vice and sin. As the Heathen worshipped almost all things eminently delectable
or formidable, Pleasures, War, Diseases, Riches, Honor, Virtue, Princes, a Good
and Bad Genius, Gods Supernall and Infernal, and any thing rather then the
true Deity, so we still commit moral Idolatry with the same things, by our
falls opinions and adoration of them. Contemplation of any vain thing, as of a
Beauty, or the like, does strangely infect the soul, tainting and dying it with
the Image of the Object. But above all, vain Admiration ravisheth most: I call
that a vain Admiration which is not grounded upon Knowledge, but mere
Ignorance, and such as would be abated by a right Undestanding. As he who sees
only what is presented on the Stage, is more affected with the Show, then they
in the Tiring room, whose eyes are conscious to the dressing and personating of
the Actors. Thus to admire nothing, was by the Philosophers (whose ambition was
to know all things in their causes) made a chief part of true Happiness:
whereas the Admiration of things truly admirable, is a farther degree of
Happiness: when we rationally know by what may be known, that there is more
excellency in the Object, then we do or can know, and therefore justly admire
it. So we admire the Divine Glory, which is the highest enjoyment we can have
of the Infinity thereof. All these are only Juglings and deceptions of the
Mind, but vain Love bewitcheth and wholly possesses it: and the Delight which
it causes is as falls and vain: for there can be no true Happiness in being
deceived: nor does the Pleasure extend further, or last longer then the
Delusion. A Dream may satiate Imagination, but cannot fill the Belly: and when
a man wakes he finds himself more hungry and unsatisfied. These Enchantments of
the Mind dissolv in a moment at the presence of Truth, who as she is the
Daughter of Time will at last arise like a bright Sun, and chase away all those
vain shadows. In the mean time the more we are ravished with the sense of any
falls Happiness, and thereby withdrawn from that which is true, we are so much
the more truly Unhappy.

II. Of the Degrees of Happiness.
HAppiness is founded in Knowledge: and therefore only Knowing Creatures are
capable thereof, and according to their several degrees of Knowledge, they are
capable of several degrees of Happiness. There are many Worlds in one, and
several Shows and Faces of the same things. The first and lowest is the gross
Body of Heaven and Earth, which though to us it appear glorious and beautiful,
is in it self dark and dull, and without apprehension. The Iron seems to
embrace the Loadstone with great delight, and to be rapt with an amorous
Ecstasy, so as Thales thought it animal, and yet that motion is as void of the
least sense of pleasure, as the common inclination of Gravity to the Center.
The next is a World of Sense, which is a Theater of Species and Emanations
arising from the former, being purified and sublimated to the hight of Sense,
which by a conjunction with them, begets a lively and sprightfull delight. The
least Be finds more pleasure in making and tasting a little Honey, then the
Sun and all the self moving Planets in their perpetual Courses, and benign
Influences, or the Plants in their most flourishing Vegetations. Another World
is the Shop of Fancy, which is a faculty more spiritual then Sense, refining
and composing the simple Species thereof into various forms and figures: and as
it thus works within doors, so it also apprehends the Beauty and Composure of
exterior objects: which is greater matter of delight then to view them at
large. It has also a power of Meditating and Admiring, which is an higher kind
of enjoyment then Sense. Naturalists suppose Insects, and some such Animals to
be wholly without Imagination; but certainly the more perfect enjoy it in a
very notable degree. That Discourse whereof they seem to partake, is only the
work of Fancy, and a collation of sensitive notions. Yet though Beasts excel
Man in his outward Senses, he probably excels them all in Imagination: it being
a faculty in the next degree to Reason, and much advanced by it. Hence we so
far exceed them in all Mechanical Artifices: Nature has furnished us with
Hands, as fit Instruments for such Workmen, and so with a larger portion of
this Ingenious faculty to direct and manage them. Certainly Man has more
acquaintance with the Graces, and does not only enjoy much pleasure in the
apprehension of Beauty, Harmony, and Elegancy; but also in the very
prevarications thereof: we admire strange Deformities, and behold them with
Mirth and Delight and are much affected with Humors and ^ooleries, which are as
Satyrs or Monsters of the Mind* Therefore Nature has bestowed on us Laughter,
to express some extraordinary Affection, whereof no other Sensitive Souls are
capable. This excellency of Fancy, though somewhat above the nature of Beasts,
is yet below Reason and Judgment, for many men who have least thereof, excel
in the other by a certain natural aptness and felicity. Beyond this Sphere of
Fancy is the Intellectual Orb, or World of Intelligences, which is an Academy
of Sciences, furnished with higher and more abstracted Notions, whereby the
Mind discovers the very Idea and Module of Nature, and her wise Government by
Causes and Effects, the Law of Reason and Policy, the being of Spirits, and
Divinity it self. Out of this Intellectual World Beasts are wholly excluded.
Language is the chief Instrument of a Rational Life, which they want. As in
Speaking or Books they may hear and see what is Sensible, namely the Sound and
Letters, but understand not what is signified by them, so though they hear the
same Voice of Nature, and view the same Book of the World with us, yet they
understand not the Intelligible, or Philosophical part thereof, which is a
Scene of things as far above Sense as that is above Vegetation. Adam had a
larger share of Paradise then the Brutes, though he fed like them on Herbs and
Fruits: and joyed more in contemplating their Natures, and translating them
into fit Names, then we now do in feasting on their Carcases. Man chiefly
excells in these spiritual delights, not only by apprehending all other
things, but also by reflecting on Himself. It is a pleasant thing to behold our
face in a Glass, much more to see our own Soul, which is both Face, Mirror, and
Ey. But the least sight of Divine Glory ravisheth the Soul with the greatest
joy. Here the Mind having mounted the utmost Circle of Natures Globe, takes
her flight, and passes over into Infinity, and there enjoys not only the
perfection of all created Good, but finds out another and better Nature, and a
new World of Worlds: As God is the chiefest Good, so Man being capable of
Knowing him, is also capable of the highest Happiness.

III. Of Perfect Happiness.
THE several degrees of Knowledge are capable of a proportionable Happiness and
perfect Happiness must be perfectly adequate and proportionate to Knowledge:
for whatsoever the Soul can apprehend, it may in some kind enjoy, and there
cannot be perfect Happiness, without perfect Enjoyment. Beasts have no other
end of living, but to live: put them into pleasant pastures, and leav them to
themselves to eat and drink, and follow the motions of their own nature, they
are Happy enough; because they know no better or greater thing to desire. When
I hear the Nightingall singing in a Wood, though Poets Fancy her to complain
of I know not what injuries, I conceiv her then perched welnigh on the top of
her highest felicity, free from care and grief, and entertaining her self with
her warbling notes. Surely these inferior Creaturus attain a nearer degree of
their perfect Happiness then Man does of his. A little satisfies a small
stomach, whereas larger Bodies require more. The Soul of Man, though finite,
has some apprehension of Infinity: and therefore nothing less will satisfy
it: the very negative Knowledge thereof does forbid any finite thing to be the
adequate Happiness of Man, whose vast and boundless Appetite exceeds every
thing which has bounds and limits, and can swallow down the whole World at one
draught: like the ut most Sphere, whose concavity comprehends all things, and
the convexity thereof joyneth to an endless immensity: though as Man cannot
directly and affirmatively apprehend Infinity, so neither is he capable of an
Infinite Enjoyment: yet the least defect or want of that Infinite Good which he
naturally coveteth, being Infinite, does more unsatisfie then any finite
delight can content him: for so much as is wanting of requisite Happiness, is
filled up with Vanity and Vexation. All men have not a distinct apprehension,
and explicit desire of an Infinite Good, yet the same Instinct being naturally
in all, the Soul is insensibly carried out unto it, and cannot finish the
progress of her desire, till she have gained that which is beyond all
apprehension, and all desire. Vulgar spirits tasting some drops of finite
Goodness in the several Creatures, suppose that by an endless multiplication
of them they shall at last attain that Infinite Good which is the utmost object
of the Mind: and therefore never cease adding House to House, Land to Land, and
World to World, and so think to piece up an Infinite Good with an endless
variety of finite Good things: though the more they have, the more they
explicitly desire, as drawing nearer toward an Infinite Good, which is that
endless end to which they are implicitly tending. Others through their
boundless Lusts, and vast Imaginations fancy to themselves some kind of
Infinity, or at least a Center of rest, in the finite Objects of their
particular desires; thinking if they may accomplish some petty design, to which
they are wholly devoted, that then they shall be perfectly Happy; and
flattering themselves like the Young man in the Comedy, who boasted, if he might
but enjoy his Mistress, Ipsam fortunam anteibo fortunis meis. Hence the Mind of
Man while it is in the pursuit thereof, and has any farther expectation
whereon to feed, goes on cheerfully and with much delight, hunting after this
shadow of fansied felicity: but having once arrived at the utmost Period, is
soon confuted by its own Experience, and the vehemence of this vast Appetite
suddenly languishes, and the Soul shrinks up, and pines away in shame and
discontent. There is many a petty Miser, who takes more pleasure in multiplying
a few pence, then if he had been born Heir of the whole Earth. There is more
ravishing delight in wooing, and courting, and the Romances of Love before
Enjoyment then after. Give a Pyrrhus the Empire of the whole world at once, and
you undo him. The Game is more pleasing to such Humors, then both the Stakes
without it. Hence also is that common and natural affectation of Novelty:
because the Mind being unsatisfied with any thing it has already, still
coveteth more. New things please at first, but are afterward found to be as
vain as the rest. But as no finite thing can fully satisfy the Mind of Man, so
it is most evident that no multiplication of finites can make up an infinite:
for all the Parts being finite and numerable, the whole must necessarily be
finite also. Therefore it must be One Infinite Good, in the Enjoyment whereof
the true Happiness of Man does consist, and which as the Chief Good renders all
those finite things Good by a subordination to it self, as the utmost End. This
was the chief study of all the ancient Philosophers, to find out the Chief
Good: and by their several opinions concerning it, they were distinguished
into their several Sects. It is the Elixar of Life, the true Philosophers
stone, which infuses a Golden tincture into all inferior Metalls, and cures all
the diseases of the Soul, by reducing it to a right temper. Solomon has
discovered it to the World: a Work worthy of a King, not only of Israel, but of
the whole Earth, being so profitable a Good to all Mankind. Great Wits bewail
the loss of his Natural History, but make no use of his Ecclesiastes, wherein
the discourses of every Plant which grows in the Paradise of Man, from the
lowest Hysope to the tallest Cedar, and so leads us to the Tree of Life, placed
in the midst of the Garden, I mean that Infinite and Universal Good, which is
the Perfection of all the rest.

IV. Of the Vanity of all Worldly things.
VAnity of Vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. We
have here a Preacher, and his Text, containing a Doctrine sufficient to confute
all the Heretics of this World, who place their Happiness in any Creature: for
having strictly examined the Particulars, he casts up ^he Account, and finds
the total^ Sum to be but a Cipher. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.
Knowledge and Experience make a perfect Doctor, and both met together in him.
If all men since the fall of Adam had consulted among themselves whom they
should employ to seek the lost Adonis of their Happiness, they could not have
found a fitter then Solomon, whom God and Man had prepared for it. Lo, says
he, I am come to great Estate, and have got more Wisdom then all that have been
before me in Jerusalem: yea my heart had great experience of Wisdom and
Knowledge: and I gave my heart to know Wisdom: and to know madness and folly.
The felicity of Augustus was purchased, but Solomon's hereditary. He was the Son
of King David, and came to a great Estate in the early Spring of his Youth,
as soon as he was capable of enjoying it. His Father left him a greater Treasure
then any History can parallel: and his Empire extended it self from the border
of Egypt to the River Euphrates, a morsel sufficient for any one man's mouth,
if any thing might suffice. Thus were all things ready for this great work
brought to his hand, and while he like the Halcyon was bringing it forth, the
silent alm of undisturbed Peace seemed purposely to favor the Design. As his
Materials, so his Wisdom and Skill of using them was not acquired by labor and
long study, but given by special Inspiration. He was wiser then all the Kings
and Philosophers in the world. Nor was he of a severe and Stoical temper, as
Cat^, Antoninus, and such other wi^e men: but had a most critical palate and
curious relish of all humane delights, and freely exercised it in tasting them.
Whatsoever his eyes desired he kept it not from them, nor witheld his heart
from any joy, for his heart rejoiced in all his labors, yea he laid hold on
Madness and Folly, that so he might squeez out all the juice and sweetness that
is in them. He went so far as to try what was in the mad Humors and Follies of
Jo^all men: only he was not enchanted with this Circean cup, but the Moli of
his Wisdom remained with him: so that he was most fitly instructed to make both
the Search and the Report. And least men should dream of any Golden Age before
him, or any new Inventions, and Sophisms of Cookery, or Engines of Pleasure
since his time, he prevents the Objection, and tells us, That which is done, is
that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun. The Earth
affords the same provisions, and Man is endued with the same Senses and
Faculties to make use of them: and though some new thing may be added, it is of
the same kind with the former; and there being such a Vanity in the whole frame
of Nature, it must certainly be as vain as the rest. As for his own part he
knew how to enjoy as much in one Age as any, and none can hasten more then he.
Thus having ascended the highest Olympus of earthly felicity, and viewing all
things, both before, and behind, and round about him, he proclaims to all
below, who might suppose him to have attained the very Heaven of Happiness,
that he found nothing but empty air. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. For
weighing the Pains of Man's Life with the Pay, and his Miseries with his
Pleasures, he professes there is nothing to be got by the bargain: So that he
praised the Dead more then the Living, and the Unborn then them both. Lastly,
that all men might for ever despair of finding any such Happiness in this
World, he averreth the Vanity thereof to be so great, and so far from being
filled, that it cannot be fathomed. That which is crooked cannot be made
straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered. Wherefore not to believ
him who has made such a perfect Inquiry, is of all Vanities the greatest, and
adds Vexation to it, which he shall never want, who seeks that which cannot
be found: whereas a sober acknowledgement of this Vanity may prevent the
Vexation. Content is the Deputy of outward felicity, and supplies the place
where its absent. The first step to true Happiness is to see the vanity of all
worldly things: that so knowing where it is not, we may seek it where it is.

V. Of the Goods of the Body.
IT is the Humor of Pedants to extol things that are eminent above their just
proportion, and to declaim inferior things into nothing: but Solomon like a
sober and wise man, weighing all things in the balance of a right judgment,
and first putting that Infinite Good which only can satisfy the Mind of man
into one scale, and the whole World into the other, he finds it lighter then
Vanity it self, as being infinitely preponderated, and bearing no weight with
the other: but then weighing the World and the several particulars thereof by
themselves, he discovers the just weight of Finite Good which is in them, and
which by a subordination to that in-Finite Good from which they are all derived
may be allowed to them. As it is said of the Stars, that they have no light in
themselves, but derive their several lights from the Sun, and shine only by
participation of the Solar light: or as the meanest members of the Body are in
man the instruments of a Rational life, which in a carcass are Dead, and in
beasts merely Sensual. Thus the very relics of Nature may be rightly enjoyed,
as partaking of the Chief Good and in order to it, though none of them do now
retain their first Perfection. And indeed it is folly and madness in any man to
neglect the least and meanest Good which God and Nature have provided for him.
We will begin with the Goods of the Body, as the lowest of all. The Body,
though not at all allied to the Soul, yet is married to it, and brings some
Portion along with it. It is reported of Apollonius Tyaneus that he had a
familiar Spirit engaged in a Jewel: such is the Soul of man in the Body: by
which conjunction he becomes a Little World, not only as a Map or Index, but as
an Epitome of the whole: whereby he is made capable of enjoying all in himself,
differing from the Angels in his Body, as from Beasts in his Soul: For
Angelical Spirits enjoy no sensible pleasures, otherwise then by an
intellectual speculation, their nature being far above them: Whereas man
enjoyes them by sense and experience in his Body and sensitive part, which is
connatural unto them. Not that we may flatter our selves, and prefer our natures
before the Angelical, or disparage our hope of a more glorious state when we
shall be like unto the Angels, but only to assert our present nature and
conjunct state, which is made up of the meanest parts of the Body as well as of
the highest faculties of the Soul: and as Soul and Body do consist together, so
may the delights of the one with the pleasures of the other. But no bodily good
can possibly be the highest Happiness or Chief good of Man: For though the Body
contain the Soul, yet it cannot fill it, no not the Body of the whole Universe.
To prove Spiritual delights far greater and better then Corporeal, we need not
the authority of a Solomon, we have the confession of a Julian, though an
Apostate from the true Happiness of the Soul; yet he professed the pleasures of
the Body, far below a great Spirit. Apostates of all other men most strictly
embrace this present world, and study to extract the greatest sweetness it can
afford, their desires being greatly enlarged with the taste which they had of
the Chief good, and they have reason to do so, for at the best they make but a
bad bargain: but all fall not in the same manner, some fall forward with their
faces toward the earth and wallow in the mire of sensual uncleanness, as
Nicholas the Libertine and his beastly Sect: others of a more generous and
sublime Spirit, by supine gazing on the Heavens from which they fell, and
barking at the Stars which they left fixed in their Orbs, such were Lucian,
Julian, and the Devils. It seems Spiritual wickedness is most sublime and
delightful, much more Spiritual virtues and graces, which are the proper
perfections of the Soul. Averroes and the rest of the Arabian Philosophers are
ashamed of that sensual and beastly Paradise which their Mahomet provided for
them, as most unworthy of the soul of Man, and far short of his true Happiness.

VI. Of Health.
HEalth is the temperate Zone or habitable part of Man's Life. As sleep is the
image of Death, so is sickness of Hell, being rightly termed a Dying Life,
whereof Death many times is the sole Physician. Many Princes dwell in stately
Palaces, whose souls are ill seated in Cadaverous bodies. Health is commonly
the Peasants prerogative which no riches can purchase of him: whereas if he
could be bought out of it, he might sell it at the dearest rates: what would
not a rich man give to another to undertake the pain of the Stone or Gout for
him, could they be laid upon others as outward burdens and labors are? Health
in Great men is a great advantage. Henry the fourth of France was bred hardly
among the Peasants, which preserved his life, and prepared him for those great
Actions, which he afterward performed. Cicero reports of one of the Scipio's,
that he had equalled Africanus, if he had not been kept under by perpetual
sickness* Besides, health is the very Paradise of all Sensual Pleasures in
which they grow and flourish: yet Courtiers usually corrupt it by a licentious
course of life, and so disable both Body and Mind, not only for the performing
of Civil Actions, but also for the enjoying of Natural Pleasures which they
so much affect. So unnatural is the vice of voluptuousness that it destroys
Health, which is its own foundation. As Health consists in Temperament, so the
best way to preserve it is Temperance. Diseases caused by emptiness may be more
dangerous, but there is more danger in exceeding. Hence are most of our vulgar
sicknesses, Fevers, Pests, Catarrhs, and Coughs, the Trumpeters of Death.
Violence and excess may be good Physike, but are bad Diet, unless we dare
venture on them, as Mithridates used Poison, to fortify our selves against
casual extremities. But a sober and discreet mixture of both seems most conform
to the various occasions of life. The Ecclesiastical Order was to fast the Eve
before a Feast; but the Physical rule holds as well afterward till it be
digested; and the best kind of fasting is to eat a little. Excess of
Affections, especially Malignant, as Fear, Grief, Envy, Malice, and all Anxiety
of mind, destroys the body more then that of Food: but delightful objects and
pleasant studies are the minds Recreations. Keep both Body and Mind clean and
fresh, freeing them from all burdensome and offensive things. But Tiberius his
Aphorism, That every man is his own best Phisician is worth all others, being
most true as to the preservation of the ordinary state of Health, though not in
extraordinary cases, or overgrown Diseases, which must be helped by the hand of
Art; Experiments first founded the Art of Physike, and no Experience like that
within a man's self: and Tiberius his life set a Probatum est to his Aphorism,
for though he was generally most licentious and libidinous, yet he preserved
himself in good health to a reasonable old age, living seventy and eight years.
He was indeed of a strong constitution, but we find the same effect in men very
crazy and more sober, as Hippocrates, Galen, and others, who first studied
their own cases, and thence became most eminent Physicians: Though Health be
very precious, yet it may be overvalued; some are so curious of it that they
fear the least blast and shadow of Inconvenience, as he who imagined himself
made all of Glass and was afraid lest every knock should break him; whereas
indeed this tender niceness is rather a destroier then a preserver of Health.
Caesar by continual employment and hard usage overcame two constant Diseases,
the Head^ ach, and Falling Sickness; and many in our late Wars, who before were
thought weak and infirm, being put upon Service and the necessity of suffering,
have proved able and hardy beyond expectation. However health must be
adventured as well as life, Pro salute publicae. Pompey said, Necesse est ut
eam non ut vivam, when the Commonwealth was concerned. He who makes health his
chief good and utmost end, lives only that he may live, and prolongs his time
to no purpose.

VII. Of Strength.
STrength is the Issue Male of Health, and Beauty the Female; the conjunction
of both is very rare and the perfection of Hero's. We will speak of them
severally. There are two kinds of Strength, one of Acting, the other of
Enduring. The former is the meniall servant of a Man's self, and he who is not
his own best Man, is his slaves slave, and a voluntary Criple. There are many
offices of life which cannot handsomely be performed by others, as necessary
Actions, and all Exercises. The manner of the Turks to sit on Carpets shooting
their Arrows, and have their slaves fetch them, is an unmanly Exercise. Some
are so vainly idle, that they commit the very dressing and undressing of
themselves to their servants, which is a womanish Fashion; there may be some
state in it, but certainly no convenience. A small competency of Strenght
suffices for common Actions, and Agility serves the turn better then Robust
Force. Gross and fat bodies are more strong in their Center, but have a less
Circumference or Sphere of activity, being burdens to the earth and themselves:
Light and nimble bodies, though of less Strength, have more* use and enjoyment
of it. The want of a convenient proportion of ordinary Strength, renders the
Body more infirm and defective then any extraordinary measure thereof can
advance in happiness: for even in those things, whereof there can be no excess,
and so a mediocrity cannot be the perfection, yet it is the Center and heart of
the whole. It may seem strange that Strength should be increased by sickness
and distemper, which is an Infirmity, as in Fevers, Madness, Anger, yea
sometimes by fear it self. But this Strength arising from a sudden conflux of
spirits is not solid and permanent, consisting rather in a violent quickness
then in a constant endeavor; and this extraordinary expense of spirits ends
afterward in a greater weakness. Besides, in Man there may be another reason
more strange then the former, which is, that the mind by doubting and disputing
gives a check to the full and free delivery of Bodily Strength (whereas in such
cases Reason is suspended) and the same power does many times effect that by a
nimble impulse, which it could never do by a dull contention. Prudent Caution
is an hindrance in Action, yet in that it prevents the occasion it is better
then Strength, the confidence whereof betrays us to Duels and Dangers. The
other which is the Strength of Bearing is as necessary in the life of man as
the former, yea in all bodily action there is some striving and suffering,
especially if there be a want of natural ability. Lameness adds pain to
weakness, and a crooked back is its own burden. A hardy carcass is a strong
Brest-work or Fortification to the soul: Hardiness in the one being analogous
to Patience in the other, yea the former facilitates the latter, and many times
saves it the labor. No Bodily Suffering in this life can be extreme, for when
it exceeds, nature yields and gives up the Ghost, and as long as she
affords strength it is baseness not to bear. He who inures his Body to
Suffering beforehand, has so much the less to endure afterward, so that it
comes not upon him all at once. But Man's Happiness cannot consist in Bodily
Strength, it being not seated in his Spiritual, but in his Corporeal part.
Reason, as has been showed, may hinder Strength by Caution and declination, or
otherwise back it with a good Resolution, and wisely manage it with Discretion,
but adds no sensible for^e to it: Nor does the mind act its own body as an
Angel does an assumed carcass. Yet has Nature armed man with such a proportion
of Strength, by which, with the advantage of his Wit he is able to tame or
subdue any Beast, at School-play, as we say, with Instruments and Engines,
though not by downright Blows. Thus I esteem Archimedes a stronger man then
Milo, for he by his Engines could perform far more then the other by his Arms:
and so was Caesar a greater Soldier then either Hercules or Achilles, really
effecting greater things by a wise conduct of his affairs then are fabled of
the others: and perhaps the Monopoly of Gunpowder when it was first invented
might have effected more then them all, and conquered the whole World. As for
this strength of enduring, Man has naturally less of it then most of Beasts,
not only as he is more tenderly bred, and his Body mollified with warm
clothing, but in his very constitution, being more infirm in his Infancy, and
more decrepit in his Old Age.

VIII. Of Beauty.
STrength is a Tyrant, but Beauty a natural and lawful Prince, born to reign,
as the Philosopher observes. There is a kind of natural Magike in it which
bewitcheth us we know not how; as ingenious Xenophon in the person of
Critobulus elegantly expresses it. The very first sight and presence of it
attracteth the eyes of every beholder, like the sudden appearance of a Candle
in a dark room. It is the most excellent Object of the most excellent Sense,
the darling of Fansy, which tradeth in Images and Idea's within, and meeting
with such curious pieces abroad entertaineth them with great delight. And if it
were true, that the Soul is the Architect of its own Body (as certainly the
Body is prepared and fitted for the Soul) it were a very good reason why it
should so much delight in the beautiful composure of another Body, which it
intended in its own: as an Artist is much affected with any excellent Work of
the same kind. This Venus of Beauty is the Mother of vulgar Love, and so also
of that which they call Heroical: though the Graces attend her, and Virtue the
true Beauty of the soul bear her company, yet she usually acts the chief part
in the Play, but always the first: the very Picture of Philoclea first
enamoured Pyrocles. By it, says Siracides, Love is kindled as with a flame. It
is the chief ingredient in Loves Philtrum, which so much enchanteth the minds
of men, ravishing and transporting the soul, and putting it into a strange
ecstasy of delight; and is indeed the chief of all sensual pleasures, the
inmost Bower in Fools Paradise, as Ausonius describes it, Myrtrus amentes ubi
lucus opacat Amantes. where they live together in the secret shade of wanton
Vanity and pleasing Madness. Surely this most generous and glorious Affection
was never intended by God and Nature for so mean an Object, nor for any created
excellency, but for him who is the Beauty of all Beauties, to whom Solomon in
his Canticles does rightly apply it, and the blessed Spirits in Heaven
perfectly exercise and enjoy it in their Beatificall Vision. But vain men
having set their hearts upon an Earthly Beauty, Idolize it with a Divine Love;
and we may observe them in their courting and dallying, still to run out into
Deifying Complements and Divine Adoration: which plainly shows that the
natural Instinct and Inclination of Love ascends toward a Divinity, but being
thus debased by Lust, is prodigally spent upon an inferior Object. Yet this
created Beauty is a chief excellency of Nature, and a Beam of that Infinite
Brightness. As the erect Posture of Man's Body, so his Face, which is the chief
part thereof, being composed of greater variety of curious Lineaments, and
fairer Colors, is more excellent then any Beasts, Generally all kind of Beauty
is of great esteem. In building or furnishing of an House, the Show and Sight
cost as much as Convenience. In Apparel, Fashion and Comeliness are as dear as
Usefulnes. Handsomeness in an Horse does as much advance his price, as
Goodness. In Civil conversation, Formosa facies muta commendatio est,
bespeaking and gaining favor and good will, which is no small advantage in
humane affairs, and certainly the greatest of worldly comforts. Absalom gained
much upon the People by his Beauty. It preferred Alcibiades to the love and
care of his Master Socrates. It endeareth Children to their own Parents, and is
many times a sufficient Portion in Marriage. It prevails much by its own proper
authority, but is an excellent setter off to great Fortunes, and true Virtues;
as Varnish to Colors, or the refraction of Light upon Metals. But the vanity
thereof does sufficiently appear in it self, being but a mere Superficies of
the Body, which is the far meaner part of Man, and not so much as skin deep, as
some allow it, for turn the skin outward, and it will appear to be the Reverse
of all Beauty, and a most horrid Spectacle of Blood and Rawness: So that indeed
this beautiful Idol is not much more then the reflection of it from the
Glass, which is but a mere Spectrum or Shadow. Either Beauty is no real
excellency, or rather Fansy, which is the Judge thereof, is such a wanton
Spirit, that it is not always constant to it self; for it is not only
variously apprehended by several men, as it is said the Aethiopians paint the
Devil white: but the same persons at several times variously judge of it. The
Persians highly esteemed an Hawk-Nose, because their Cyrus was so shaped.
Alexanders Courtiers wried their Necks like him, and the Roman Ladies affected
the color of Poppaea's Hair. The Irish do the like: and we alter the cut of our
Heads and Beards almost every year, and I am persuaded, if it were as much in
our power, we should have as many new fashions and changes of our Bodies as we
have of our Garments and Attires. But whatsoever the true value of Beauty may
be, surely the owner enjoys it only at the second hand, either from the
Glass, as the Flower thereof, or from the favor of others, which is the best
Fruit it yields.

IX. Of the Goods of Fortune.
THE Gifts of Fortune are the Good things of the great Body of the World: and
are of three sorts, Riches, Objects of Pleasure, and Titles of Honor: which one
rightly terms the Worlds Trinity.

Ambitiosus Honos, and Opes, and Foeda Voluptas,
Haec tria pro trino Numine Mundus habet.
These three make up the whole Inventory of Fortune, and are all summed up in a
Crown, or the Royal State, which the Heathen called the fairest Gift that the
Gods bestowed on mortal men. Besides it has a peculiar Prerogative, which is,
that Grandeur or Supremacy, which we commonly call Majesty, whereof no inferior
condition is capable. Princes are in this sense more then men, Political
Giants, like Briareus having an hundred hands, yea thousands, and millions of
hands, with all which they act good or ill. Regum ingenia sunt fata temporum.
We cannot well discourse of the goods of Fortune without this, which is the
greatest of all, and because it is the summary of them, eminently including all
in it self, we will particularly insist on it, not as a Civil Institution,
though of the best kind, but as a Personal Felicity; which is so great and so
much admired by other men, that the labor lies most on the other hand to
demonstrate the Vanity thereof. The World has always declaimed against
usurping Tyrants, and Philosophers have as much cried down their happiness.
They are Kings of a Bastard kind, which yet commonly afterward obtain a
Legitimation. Certainly Tyranny, even in lawful Princes, is as great a misery
to themselves as to the people. It is the happiness of Christ's Kingdom, That
his people shall be willing in the day of his power. The love of the Subjects
makes Sovereignty pleasant, without which it is like the Kingdom of Satan, a
very Hell of Disorder and Discontent. All men admire a Crown, because they see
the luster, but feel not the weight of it; this seems lighter, because they
never wore it, and that greater then it is, because they cannot wear it: we
naturally admire that which we cannot attain as well as that which we cannot
understand, looking upon it as Peculiar and Sacred. Therefore it is a very hard
thing to give a clear demonstration of the Vanity of this opinion, which cannot
be confuted by experience. The Spanish Page, who in a high distemper of Fansy
imagined himself a great Emperor, and was maintained in that Humor by his Lord,
had some kind of taste thereof. The Scripture expresses the greatest Glory and
Pomp of Princes in no better a Phrase then, Much Fansy: There are some more
real tastes of Royalty, which any private man may have. Every Master of a
Family is a King within doors. The best pedigree of lawful Monarchy is from
it, and Princes still affect to be called Fathers of the Country. Though
Families are subordinate to Kingdoms, yet it is true of Kingdoms as well as of
them, Omne sub regno graviore regnum est: the greatest Potentates are not
Omnipotent, but as much crossed in their wills as others, who as they have
lesser Abilities, so they have lower Designs. Thus may private men Degustare
Imperium, even that Empire which is without them, and over others, but
certainly every man may be Rex Stoicus, a King in his own Microcosm: which he
who knows how to rule well, may despise a Crown. But the most satisfactory
Evidence is that which may be collected from Princes themselves, especially such
who have had the experience of a Private life, and so can best judge of both.
Such commonly prove the ablest and the wisest, enjoying and improving Roialty
to the utmost. Sylla the Happy laid aside his Dictatorship, because he esteemed
a Private life more Happy. Augustus was partly of the same mind, and
deliberated about it, but not so confident. As Periander said of Tyranny, It
was a hard thing to keep, and dangerous not to keep. Our common saying is very
true, That the best Condition of life, is between a Constable and a Justice of
Peace, if the Constable and the Justice would support such in that middle
estate: but commonly men in Office take a pride and a delight in oppressing
Private men: they think Justice but an ordinary and dull thing, Injustice is
more eminent and extraordinary: so that many wise men, who would fain live
quietly, are necessitated to accept of Authority, and part with some of their
Happiness to secure the rest. Yet Dioclesian, though he judged it absolutely
necessary to continue the Empire, voluntarily left it, and would never after
reassume it, though he were highly threatened to it. In Julius Caesar himself,
who professed it his Chief Good to be Chief, Insultare omnium capitibus, and
had rather be the best man in a Parish, as we say, then second in the City of
Rome, yea, was not contented with the Thing, unless he might also have the Name
of a King (which partly intimates the Vani^y thereof) we shall find Venus and
the Muses among his chiefest delights: and there is no Prince who has been
eminently addicted to either of them, but has placed them among his greatest
pleasures: Now the one being the natural pleasure of the Body, and the other
of the Mind, a common Plebeian may enjoy both as fully as any of them. What
shall we then say of Fidling, and Fooling, and the vain Humors of weaker
Princes? Surely a wise man would judge a King of Beggars as happy as some of
those young Roman Emperors.

X. Of Riches.
MOney is the eldest Son and Heir of Fortune, Lord Paramount, and universal
King in every particular Kingdom. The Image and Superscription of Caesar on his
Coin is more powerful then Caesar himself. Witty men have many conceited
disparagements of it, calling it, The Excrement of Earth, Metal turned up
Trump, and the like: but they speak of it in its Natural capacity, whereas
they ought to consider it in its Politic, as Money, and not at Metal: and so
it is rightly defined, the Measure of all commutable things. In this sense
Petronius calls it, Iovem in arca: and they who profess an absolute contempt of
it, must also despise all external things, whereof it is the price and value:
and without a competency whereof the outward Man cannot be maintained: for
particular men having impropriated all the Good things of the World necessary
for the life of Man, they will be left in a worse condition then Brute Beasts,
who are either nourished by Men, or may Forage for themselves. Wherefore
leaving such who have Bodies, and yet despise the means of preserving them, to
feed on their airy notions, we will discourse of the several Estates and
Revenues of others who too much admire them, and show what Happiness every
Degree and Census of them may contribute to the life of Man. The first sort are
such as have all their Estates in their own Hands, that is, live upon their
daily labors, being slaves to every man who will hire them: which is a
condition almost as servile as to be enslaved to one proper Master, the one
being of Necessity, as the other of Compulsion. For this reason the Jews
generally refuse even Mechanical Trades, as bordering upon the same
inconvenience, and are commonly either Merchants or Physicians. Yet this mean
Condition has a blessing in it, for as such are sure never to gain much, so
they are sure never to want much, so long as Health and Strength last. Rich men
need their Labors as much as they need their Riches. An able Body may well earn
its own Living. The second sort is of them whose Revenues are sufficient to
maintain them in a generous and free kind of life, or at least so as they may
command Business, and need not be commanded by it, taking as much or as little
thereof as they please; which renders it the best of Recreations, and takes off
the Burden and wearisomness of it. This sort of men, though not the richest,
may live as happily as any, if they do not wrong themselves by covetous Desires,
or too pressing Emploiments. The last are such as have an Excessive and
Superfluous Estate, which as it is a great advantage of doing Liberal and
Magnificent things, so it is a very great tentation, not only to Idleness, but
also to Luxury and Prodigality. A great Estate, without great Abilities to
manage it, cannot be improved to the hight in the right use of it, but that the
greatest part of the Water will run beside the Mill: on the one hand Vain
Company, Parasiticall Servants, French Cooks and Tailors, Gamesters, Usurers,
and such Birds of prey will devour most of it: on the other hand Covetousness
will rust it, and bury it like a hid Treasure or Talent in the ground. Of all
three the middle is the safest, and Agars Dimensum the best, if a man can think
so as he did. Yet the highest Degree of an inferior Rank does not only excel
in the same, but is more valuable in the true Account of Estates, then the
lowest Degree of an higher Rank. As for example, A rich Yeoman if he turn
Gentleman, may be a poor and mean Gentleman, and a rich Gentleman made a Lord,
may be a poor and mean Lord, not only in the Estimate of Honor, for that is
another consideration, but even in this Account of Riches, with relation to the
Degree of Honor, for the Estate must always hold a proportion with the State
and Port which a man bears. Again, the Rates of particular things are wisely to
be considered, as well as the quality of Estates in general. The first
consideration to be had in Expense, is of things Necessary, as of Food,
Raiment, and the like. Diogenes wondered that a Statue should be sold for more
then a bushel of Wheat. The second is of things Useful and Convenient. It is
very ill Husbandry to want any cheap conveniences, and it is far better laying
out money upon small Wares of daily use, then upon costly Trifles. To want a
good Book, because it is somewhat dear according to the rate of Printing, or not
to have the best advise in a Case of Physike or Law, because it may cost a
little more, is foolish; for such Intellectual things are worth nothing if
they be not worth far more then they cost. The last consideration is of
Ornament and Delight, as Jewels, Flowers, Pictures, and such like rarities of
Nature or Art, which are also valuable in their kind, and are commodities fit
for superfluous Estates. Rich men seem purposely to have inhanced the price of
them, that so they might have occasion of laying out their great Riches for
themselves, which otherwise they could never spend in an ordinary way. The
Vulgar honor Great men for those things, and value them according to the price
which is set upon them: but a Wise man, who considers their true and natural
worth, need not envy them the Happiness of a fair Diamond, or strange Tulip, or
Michael Angelo's Masterpiece. Or if these things be so valuable, why should we
not as highly value such Ornaments of Nature as cannot be bought for money:
Beauty is a richer Ornament then gorgeous Apparel, and discreet Elegancy then
great Cost. When others presented Socrates with their several Gifts, poor
Aeschines presented himself, and outvied them all with a Complement. Credit and
Reputation are the greatest Expenditors, Garbs and Fashions of Apparel,
Sumptuous Entertainments, the Pomp of Festivals and Funerals, and the like,
which are the Customs of the People, are more chargable then the Customs and
Imposts of Princes. The bravest Minds could be content with the lest, but they
stand upon their Honor, and others make them pay for it. The strangest Humor is
of the Covetous, who least need Money, and yet most affect it, and of
Prodigalls, who most need it, and least regard it. The way between both, is so
to spend, as a man may continue spending through the whole course of his Life,
and leav to his to spend after him. The first is a Debt which he owes to
Himself, the second to Posterity. But no Money can purchase true and perfect
Happiness, because it trades only in the Market of things commutable, and
cannot buy out the proper Goods either of Body or Mind. Crassus counted him a
Rich man who could maintain an Army with his own Revenues: and indeed he spoke
the most of Riches, for he who has an Estate to keep an Army, may have an Army
to keep his Estate: yet we have a sad Instance of the contrary in the same man:
for both he and his great Army, with his Son and Heir fell together, and left
his great Estate to others. The Examples of such great Rich men in former
times, may teach us to despise the poor Pedlers of our times, who spend all
their lives in gaining some few Thousands, and when they have scraped together
all they can, die Beggars in comparison of a Crassus, or a Seneca: and so are
defeated of their chiefest ambition, which is to be said to die Rich.

XI. Of Pleasures.
MOney is the Pandar of Pleasure, and Purveior general for the Flesh: as he
said to his Soul, Thou have much Goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. We speak not now of Pleasures Spiritual, which
Orpheus intends in that Metaphorical Sentence, Perpetual Drunkenness is the
reward of Virtue: and our Wise man expresses more soberly, A Good Conscience
is a continual Feast: but of those Pleasures to which these Metaphors allude:
not as they are the native Pleasures of the Body, but the outward Objects and
Instruments thereof which the World affords, and the Body uses; the Divine
Oracle tells us, There is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat,
and drink, and make his Soul enjoy good in his labor. Pleasure is the Pay of
Nature, which turns Work it self into Sport: Yet there are are some strange
Spirits, who seek to put off their own Nature, and are displeased with the very
Pleasures thereof, differing from other men, as though they were Creatures of
another Species. Such were some of the ancient Philosophers, who affecting to
be singular and supervulgar, and taking advantage of the common inclination to
Excess in Pleasures, resolved upon the contrary Extreme, that so others being
conscious to themselves of their own Infirmity, might admire them as more then
Men. But it is a great and universal Error to admire things for their
difficulty and rarity rather then value them according to their true worth: We
are naturally so fond of this Humor, that if we do but hear of any strange
thing, we love to enlarge it, and act it in Buskins. Difficulty seems to add
the honor of a Miracle, which is Sacred and Religious: but such are the
Miracles of Juglers and Enchanters, whereas all Gods Miracles are of great use
and efficacy. There are difficult trifles and difficult vices. To starv a man's
self is as sinful as it is difficult. It has been the practice of
Superstitious persons in all Ages to torture themselves like Baals Priests: as
though to destroy or wrong Nature, were to worship the God of Nature, Who will
have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; Mercy to our selves, as well as to others. It is
true, there is Spiritual Physike as well as Natural: but neither Feasting nor
Fasting are a Christians constant Diet. Discreet Sobriety is the best use of
Nature, not only most wholesome, but also most pleasant, Hunger is the best
Sauce: for it sawceth the Palate, as others do the Meat: and the reducing of our
Stomach to our Diet, yields more sweetness and delight, then the fitting of our
Diet to our Stomach. The first exhalations of Corporeal Spirits are always
freshest and quickest: therefore we should never set our Pleasures on tilt, nor
jade our Recreations. Too much Honey is not good. Surfeiting is ever nauseous
and crapulous, and so a forfeiture of that Pleasure wherein it exceeds. The
best way of enjoying Pleasures, is fairly and soberly to entertain them when
they offer themselves, not Gnathonically to hunt after them, or feed on them
with longing desires which cannot be satisfied. Thus a sober man may enjoy more
even of those outward Pleasures then all the mad Roman Emperors: and certainly
they did overrun the purest part of Pleasure by cloying their Appetite, and
dulling the Relish thereof, and therefore invented new prodigious Pleasures, as
nothing satisfied with natural and ordinary. As a Bear is mad after Honey, so
some men, by reason of their natural Constitution, or unnatural Lusts, are so
madly set upon some particular Pleasures, that whenever the Objects thereof
are presented unto them, they cannot possibly forbear, prostituting Fame, and
Fortune, Reason, Religion, and all to their foolish Fancies and vain Desires.
The Vanity of all these worldly Pleasures appears in this, that if they be
strong and quick, they are very short, and if they last longer, they are very
dull: and the Griefs and Miseries to which we are all subject, are far greater
in proportion then our Pleasure. A Fit of the Stone or Gout puts us into an
Ecstasy of Pain, more acute and lasting then the greatest ravishments of any
bodily Pleasures: nor was ever such an Instrument of Pleasure invented, as the
Rack, the Cross, the Persian Boat, the Bull of Phalaris, were terrible and
tormenting. Many Pleasures are very shameful, but all have something of Levity
in them, which is expressed by our Laughing, Playing, Dallying, and the like
relaxations of Body or Mind. This shows that we should only use them as
Recreations, and not make them our constant Business, or Course of Life.

XII. Of Honor.
HOnor moves in an higher Sphere then Pleasure, and commonly Retrograde to it:
For Honor consists in Action, but Pleasure in Recreation. Honor is the price or
value of any thing set upon it by God or Man. Every Creature is Gods Coin, and
he has stamped upon it the valuation of that worth and excellency which is in
it, according to that Classis in which it is ranked, and the particular
Eminency of it in its own Kind. This is Honor in honor abili, true natural
Honor, though not honored by men, as Beauty is truly beautiful, though no Ey
see it. The other is Man's Estimate or Indication thereof, which is Honor in
honorante, and this is the Honor whereof we now speak, as one of the Goods of
Fortune. Civil Honors are very necessary in a State, for thereby the State it
self becomes more Honorable, and more compact within it self, by an orderly
disposition of all the Members in their several places and degrees. The Romans
made the best use of it of any State in the World. They divided themselves into
three sorts, Nobles, Knights, and Commons, as their highest, middle, and lowest
Ranks: and all of them were capable of most honorable Emploiments and Offices
of State; so that they who were not born to Honor, might acquire it, and they
who were might augment it; from their Birth they were styled Libertine,
Plebeian, Patrician, and the like; from their Offices, Consular, Praetorian,
Quaestorian, Senatorian, and the like: from their Actions, Triumphall, African,
Asiatike, Father of the Country, and the like: and though Titles of Honor were
not to be purchased for Money among them, yet in their Censing they had some
consideration of men's Estates: For he who well husbandeth his private Estate
does thereby enrich the Commonwealth, and bears a greater share of the public
Charge. Their Images or Arms were not Ensigns of the Family, but of the Person;
and no man was permitted to set up his own Image, till he had ascended the
Curule Chair, which was a Personal advancement. Continuation of a noble race
for many ages is a great blessing of God upon it, and the Honor of the
Ancestor, an Heirlome as due to the Posterity, as any Honorary Estate annexed
unto it, yet certainly Personal Honor is the worthier, and the best foundation
of the other; though that prevail far more in the favor and opinion of men; so
that whereas New men by their most honorable performances can hardly defend
themselves from contempt, Hereditary Nobility is as hardly* lost by the greatest
vices; Though the Law and Princes who first bestowed it, revoke it for Treason
or other forfeiture thereof, yet I know not how something still sticks in the
Minds of men, and the Character of their ancient Nobility seems indeleble: so
Fatal is it to be born, or not to be born of Great Parents in the judgment of
the world. The Case is the same with that between Protestants and Papists
concerning Antiquity: the Papists deduce it through many Successions, but the
Protestants derive it from the first Original. God has made us all of one
Blood, and We are also his Offspring, and descend from one common Ancestor.
But it must be so as the World will have it, and wise men should not be too
Philosophical herein; for it is Politically good and useful in the general,
at least far better then a confused equality. The best Rule for all things of
this nature, is neither greatly to affect them nor disdain them. The greatest
Happiness of Honor is the favorable respect and inclination of others, which
of all outward things, Honor and Beauty, (the Escutcheon of Nature) do most
effectually procure; and the Good will of men is a very great Comfort,
sweetning a man's whole Life, and entertaining him in all Companies; but the
very same thing sufficiently demonstrates the Vanity thereof, that it is in the
power of others, whose Humors are as inconstant as the Waves, and their Breath
as vain as the Winds. The very Ensigns of Honor show what it is; the Trophies,
Banners, Escutcheons Crests Pictures, Images, and the like. Vespasian was tired
with a Triumph, the greatest solemnity and show of Honor that ever was
instituted among men: and certainly it could not but weary a grave and wise man
to be carried up and down the Streets to make a show to the People.

XIII. Of the Goods of the Mind.
THE Mind is the third and highest Region of Man, which includes the other two
within it self, and communicates Heat and Life unto them. As it informs its
own Body, so it manageth and improveth all the Gifts of Fortune. Thales to show
how easy a thing it was for a Philosopher to grow rich, foreseeing the
fruitfulness of some Olive yards, bought them at the beginning of the year, and
got a great sum of money by them. Solomon having a large Heart, employed and
husbanded his large Estate as providently as any mean man does his small
Fortune. He was a great Merchant, trading into Egypt and Tire, even as far as
Ophyre, and thrived exceedingly by it: and he expended his great Riches in a
most Glorious and Magnificent manner. Lucullus was famous for his Feasts and
Entertainments. Petronius a Master of Pleasures inventing Laws and Orders even
of Licentiousness. What Honor is, without Activity and Nobility of Spirit,
these times of trial sufficiently discover. The Mind of one Man suffices for
the Government of a whole Nation, yea of all the Nations in the World: which
though it never happened to any, yet we have large Instances in the first four
Monarchs of the sufficiency of some Great Spirits. The Mind of man is capable
of knowing all things: God has set the World in his Heart, which is an
Intellectual Globe, wherein all things subsist and move in Spiritual Images
and Idea's, not only Individually and Physically, but also Universally and
Metaphysically. Thus the whole World is Man's University: and there have been
some such Monarchs of Learning, as have been singularly excellent in almost all
Arts and Sciences. Animus cujusque est quisque: The Mind is the Man. The Genius
of a Wise man seems to differ almost as much from a Fools, as a Man does from a
Beast. It is true, all souls are equal in their Kind and Faculties* but
certainly not in the degrees of their Powers and Virtues. In Heaven, where the
Spirits of just men shall be made perfect, yet they shall all differ one from
another in Glory, which is the perfection of their Grace. Homo homini quantum
tum interest? and as the enjoiment of the Chief Good is the proper perfection
of the Mind, so the Excellency or Baseness thereof is best discovered by the
higher or lower moving thereof toward this perfection. Some men's Minds are set
wholly upon drudging and moiling, which is a condition not much above Beasts.
Others have a Humor of Gaming, others of Dallying and Sporting, of Eating and
Drinking and making themselves Merry, such as think themselves no mean Fools, of
making themselves Famous in the World, of Rising higher and higher, like seeled
Doves they know not whither. Some of Learning much, and Practicing little; some
of Ruling others, and yet neglect themselves; others of Ruling and Governing
themselves, and yet neglect their Chief Good, which is infinitely above
themselves, setting up those inferior ends instead thereof. Like Barclays
Heraleon, we have all some particular Madness and private Fansy. It is commonly
said, that Men are twice Children, or rather the follies of Childhood grow up
into our whole life in greater degrees and more maturity. The old Adage is very
opposite, Children play with Nuts, and elder men with Oaths, then which no
sport can be more foolish and dangerous. Thus do men's Ends and Aims discover
their Principles. The White of the Ey and the White of the Mark are tied
together with a direct Line. Every Creature in its several kind has a natural
Acme or Period of perfection to which it tends, and which it endeavors to
attain with all the power and vigor it has, only Man degenerates into lower
and baser Ends then that for which he was made, busying himself about some
particular Design, and so goes on from one thing to another, neglecting that
highest and chiefest Good, whereof he is capable, which is the greatest Error
of Life, and brings upon him the curse of Cain, rendering him a Vagabond on the
face of the Earth, and makes him wander up and down like a Beggar, knocking at
every door, and crying out to every Creature, Who will show us any Good? Never
thinking to gain this settled Estate of Universal and perfect Happiness, which
may supply all his wants, and maintain him in a State of perfect Felicity; but
rather chooses to live miserably upon the scraps of the Creatures, sharking and
shifting as well as he may, to support this frail life, and satisfy the
necessities thereof: and at last wishes he may die like a Beast, having lived
like a Beast, and made no provision for an Eternal Life. The Jewel of Man's true
Happiness is to be found in this Treasury of the Mind, yet not among the
inferior and particular Goods thereof, but in the fruition of the Chief and
Universal Good, without which all the rest are vain, and of no value.

XIIII. Of Learning.
THe first and lowest of the Goods of the Mind, is Learning, or Speculative
Knowledge, that Pabulum Animae which never satiates, but is more increased by
feeding, and not diminished by communicating. No sort of men who ever had any
taste of Letters have distasted or despised them; Whether they have been Beggars
or Kings; as Diogenes, and Alexander; Courtiers, or Scholars, as Aristippus and
Plato; Soldiers, or Gownmen, as Caesar, and Cicero; Epicures or Stoikes, as
Horace, and Brutus; Christians, or Heathens, as Paul and the Athenians. The
fame of Learning is far less then the inward pleasure and delight thereof.
Antisthenes being asked what he gained by it, answered, That he could talk with
himself, so that he needed not to go abroad and be beholding to others for
exercise or delight. It is no small Happiness to live comfortably within doors:
and to entertain our selves with our own Thoughts, being never less alone then
when we are alone. Intellectual Contemplation is more pleasant then Sight, and
Generation of the Mind then that of the Body. The lowest and meanest part of
Learning is, that which we commonly call Pedantical, consisting in the forms
and Paedagogy of Art, as Grammar and all other Humane Institutions, though such
be very useful in their kind, and may conduce much toward that knowledge which
is Natural and Real, as being the Instruments and vehicles thereof: yet the
Knowledge of the Things themselves being the End of them is far more excellent:
and the more or less they contribute thereunto, they are so much the more or
less considerable. The common Infirmity of this kind of Learning is to be more
curious then needful. What a strange madness is it in our Grammaticasters to
trouble the world with their diversity of opinions concerning the right
pronunciation of an Iota, or the Orthography of a word, as whether we should
write Foelix or Felix, rather then studying to be so? Not much unlike is the
Humor of Critikes, who study Cabalistical Interpretations of Classike Authors.
The Fiction concerning the Grammarian is very witty who consulted Homer in Hell
why he began his Ilias with (...), and he answers him, because it came into his
head to do so. Nor much better is our too great affectation of old and obsolete
Languages: though something may be picked out of them: yet as there are some
Mines which have some Grains of Gold in them, but so few that men think it not
worth their labor to extract them: So in all those Studies, it is first to be
considered whether the Profit will answer the Pains: certainly it is a great
vanity to cry up that for the only Learning, which conduces least to Practice,
and the true Happiness of Man, only because it is rare and difficult. To know
that which few know, better pleases and more advances Fame, then to know that
which all should practice. This is that kind of Knowledge which puffs up
rather then edifieth: and you shall observe generally a strange tumor in the
Professors thereof; like Courtiers and men of Ceremony, who being exactly
curious in their Complements and Puntilio's, which others despise, and
therefore neglect, think themselves the only Brave men. Next above this kind of
Learning is History, or the Knowledge of former Times and Actions of men, which
is very profitable, ripening and preparing the Mind for Business, by
acquainting it with the greatest Affairs of the World: yet there is much
Pedantry in the Study thereof, where men are most curious in the most
inconsiderable passages and circumstances, and most affected with the
antiquated pieces thereof, seeking to set together some scattered fragments and
remains which are very uncertain and conjecturall, and such as Time, the best
of Critikes, has resigned to Dust and Oblivion.

The most excellent Learning is the Study of Nature and the works of God, of
Moral Virtue, and true Piety, and the like, which more immediately concern the
Happiness of Man: yet in those also there may be as much Pedantry, and more
dangerous then the former: when this Knowledge of Practical things terminates
only in Speculation and Notion. There is nothing more hurtful to Man then such
Pedantical Knowledge: it fills the Head with Conceits and Caprichio's, the Life
with Fooleries and Formalities, the Schole with Sects and Opinions, the Church
with Schism and Superstition. As Aristippus compared the Sophisters of his time
to the meaner sort of Penelope's Suitors, who were entertained by her Maids,
but never had the sight of her self: So they studied only such Arts and
Sciences as are the Handmaids of Wisdom to dress and adorn her, but were not
acquainted with this Mistress of Life. It is reported of a great and wise
Nobleman of this Nation, who being entertained by the University, and brought
to view the public Schools, the Logike-Schole, the Rhetorike-Schole, the
Physike-Schole, the Divinity-Schole, and the rest; after he had seen them all,
asked the Scholars whether they had one Schole more, namely a Schole of
Discretion. Such wise men as Solomon, Xenophon, Caesar, and others, being also
learned, have by their Wisdom directed Learning to the right end, and improved
it to the hight, gaining honor by it, and being themselves an honor to it. Bare
Learning, though of the best kind, is but a Map of Happiness, and no real
Felicity.

XV. Of Wisdom.
WIsdom or Prudence is the Art of Living. It is a cheap Caterer, a neat Cook, a
wise Steward and Dispenser of all things. The first and fundamental part of
Wisdom is a clear and solid Judgment, whereby a man, like a well-sented Hound,
rightly pursues all the windings and turnings in the whole course of Business,
and as it is said of Achitophel, speaks Oracles, foreseeing and foretelling the
success of things by the strength of this sagacious faculty, which the
poreblinde Vulgar cannot discern: and such commonly were the Devils Oracles:
for he having a farther ken of things then men, saw them rising and coming on
before them, and so foretold them. But because the Fortune of all Humane
affairs is so britle, that the least crack may endanger the whole fabrike, and
therefore none but God can certainly foreknow; there must be another subsidiary
Art to second the former, which as a present and ready Wit to obviate or
advance sudden Accidents: for as there is no Business so secure but has some
flaws in it, so there is scarcely any so desperate, but has some opportunity
of recovery, even to the last, as it is said of eternal Salvation, Inter
pontem, and fontem, if a man have the grace to lay hold on it. Caesar herein
excelled all men: as Lucan says of him, -- Semper feliciter usus.
Praecipiti cursu bellorum, and tempore rapto*


He who is quick in Action, had need be quick of Apprehension: and he who is
sure of the latter, may more safely venture on the former; both together work
Miracles. Thus Caesar effected his great Designs: he seldom lost any
opportunity, but was sure to clap up a good bargain for himself whenever it
was offered, which is the most thriving way in the world. Craft is of a bastard
kind and supposititious to Wisdom. Though Stratagems may be useful in War,
where all depends upon sudden action, and they on whom they are practiced are
Enemies beforehand, and so more lawful: yet even in that, Scipio gained more
by the reputation of his Justice and Fidelity, then Hannibal by all his
Cunning: Certainly he was more to be honored and better beloved. But in all
Civil and Domestike affairs, fair and square dealing, joined with good
discretion, is generally as effectual, and always more comfortable. The next
part is Action and Execution. It is an universal Law imposed upon all men,
That in the sweat of our face, we must earn our Bread. He who shuns Labor runs
upon Inconvenience, which is far more troublesome, and so the Burden returns
upon him with greater Pressure. Many men of large Abilities relying wholly upon
their Wit, and neglecting the use of ordinary means, suffer others less able,
but more active and industrious, to go beyond them. The way to dispatch much,
is to be always doing, to keep beforehand with Business, and rid it off our
hands as fast as it comes on, which makes it go away merrily. Order and Method
are good helps, but not to be too precisely observed, especially such as
consist in Imaginary Lines and Figures; as to defer to begin a business till
the beginning of a Day, a Week, or a Year; whereas perhaps the end of the time
precedent may be as good an Opportunity, and so much the better, because it is
sooner. Lastly there are certain Ceremonies and Forms which must neither be
affected nor neglected. To be of a sober and grave carriage, to use a civil
respect toward the Person, but yet retain the thing, yielding in Circumstances,
that we may better hold the Substance. We must live according to Fashion and
Custom as far as lawfully we may. To salute, to visit, to court, and such like
civil Complements are very commendable. It is the unhappiness of some Learned
and Wise men, who because they see through the vanity of these things, do not
only despise them, but declaim against the World for them, so long, till the
World exclaim on them. Though Wisdom be the most curious Artifice of the Mind,
effecting those things which Poets imagine, and Historians relate, yet it is
also vain and uncertain. The wisest man knows not always how to level his
Ordnance aright, by reason of the inconstant waving of the whole sea of
Business; and all great enterprises and dealings in the World are like Cranes,
or such other mighty Engines, which if they be well managed, perform Wonders;
but if the foot once slip, or the Engine fail, it may knock out his brains who
uses it. But the worst and greatest opposition is from the wickedness of men.
The whole World lies in sin, which a Good man cannot forbear to oppose, though
it be most contrary to all rules of Policy, and may prove the certain ruin of
himself. Many a man against whom the World has nothing to say, but in the
matter of his God, has been undone only by his Piety. Machiavel has truly
observed, that the way of Christian Religion, if strictly pursued, is directly
contrary to the way of Policy. As our Savior said of himself, so may all his
Servants say likewise. Their Kingdom is not of this world: The Jews have a
Proverb much to the same purpose concerning such great dealers in the world.
That a greater Huckster cannot be innocent: which makes me wonder at those
ancient Worthies, Joseph, Moses, Daniel, and the rest, how they could govern
great Empires, and yet continue so strictly Honest and Religious: but I
consider that they were assisted by an extraordiself Spirit, and sometimes God
himnary was fain to help them out with a Miracle. But to fear God and keep his
Commandments, is the only Wisdom, and will at last, when the Accounts of the
whole World shall be cast up, be found to be the best Preferment, and highest
Happiness.

XVI. Of Philosophy.
SOlomon says, He who rules his own Spirit, is better then he who takes a
City: Yea it is no small advantage in Civil affairs for a man to have the
command of himself upon all occasions, standing upon the shore of a firm Mind,
and beholding others tossed on the Sea of their own Passions, and so suffering
them like great Whales to beat themselves till they become tame and tractable.
The greatest Conquerors have been conquered by their Lusts, which we may truly
style, as Diogenes does Kings Concubines, Regum Reginas. The end of true
Philosophy is to rectify the Soul: The strange effect thereof in Polemon may
seem a kind of Theological Conversion; who coming into the Schole of Xenocrates
with his drunken company crowned with Garlands, purposely to outface him and
his Philosophy; Xenocrates going on with his Lecture of Temperance, pressed it
so far, and wrought so much upon him, that he immediately abandoned his former
course of Life, and became his Disciple, succeeding him in the same Schole, and
proved the most strict of the whole Sect. But though Conversion to God, from
whom Man is wholly alienated, cannot be wrought without Divine Grace, yet as
there are Remainders of Bodily Excellence, so also some seeds and Principles of
Moral Virtue, which may be advantaged by a good Constitution of Body, and
greatly improved by Education and Instruction: In this the Philosophers went
too far, that they attributed to Man a full liberty and power of governing
himself and all his affairs by the absolute Sovereignty of his own Spirit; and
indeed the Poets seem better Divines in their Expressions to this purpose then
the Philosophers, beginning their Poems with A Jove principium, or the
invocation of a Deity: and ascribing the acts of their greatest Hero's to some
Tutelar God. We may, yea we ought to exercise and improve any power we have in
our selves, but we must always depend upon God for his blessing and assistance
herein, as well as for the obtaining his supernatural Grace. The Spirit of a
Man is very Malleable, if it be carefully and wisely handled. The first and
most immediate Issues of the Mind are our Thoughts, being as it were the Animal
Spirits thereof, whereby it acts all its Business, or like Leucippus his
Atoms, the Seeds of the Spiritual World: which while they float in a vast
Inanity are lost, and come to nothing, but being fixed and embodied, prove most
beautiful and excellent Forms. He who intends what he does, is most like to
do what he intends: Yet we must not be so intent upon any thing, as to loose
the command of our selves. Delightful Studies are like strong Wines drunk in
with pleasure, but after fill the head with a throng of unruly Spirits, which
distemper and intoxicate it. In such cases it is good to entertain some other
Studies as pleasing, and so pass from one to another, till the Mind be lulled
asleep. Some by the help of a Game at Chess, which is a most studious and
sollicitous Sport, have escaped the Tyranny of their serious Anxieties. As we
must thus manage our Minds, so we must govern them by a right Judgment and pure
Reason, abstracted from all Fancies and Opinions. Some are wholly led by
Traditions, and the Authority of others, or by their own Education and Custom,
which is a slavery of the Mind worse then that of the Body. Some on the other
side do so much affect liberty of Spirit, that they conceive a general
prejudice against all common Truths, because they are backed by such common
advantages, though they are not grounded upon them. But a clear and free Spirit
seeks Truth it self, and entertaineth it wheresoever he finds it, which is
the right temper of a true Philosopher. The truest Philosophy, and that which
distinguishes it from Sophistry, is to deduce it from Speculation to Action:
and instead of Disputing to prove it by Exercise and Example. There is commonly
a great distance, and in some a kind of contrariety between Theory and
Practice: for that Good which engages the Will and the whole Man to Practice,
is not simple Right, but rather Profit; not Duty but Benefit. Thus though the
Mind judge a thing to be Just and Honest, and so fit to be done in general, but
withal judges it Unprofitable, and so not Convenient for him to do, his
Practical Judgment opposes and overcomes his Speculative. He sees better and
follows worse, that is, worse in point of Right, but not worse as he deemeth,
in point of Profit. Cicero like a true Philosopher, in his excellent Book of
Offices, harps upon the right string, proving Honesty to be the greatest
Utility, yea one and the same thing; and so indeed they are in themselves, but
the Mind of Man apprehends them under several Notions: The fallacy consists in
this, that we look only upon the particular present Good, though far less, and
do not consider the more universal and greater Good to which it ought to be
subordinate, and being opposed, becomes Evil, for so it is the loss of a
greater Good then it self. A Temperate man looking upon the Wine as it is red
in the Glass, is by his Appetite incited to drink thereof as well as a
Drunkard, and knows there is a natural Good and Pleasantness in it: but when he
wisely considers the whole state of his Body and Mind, and thereupon finds it
will do him more Hurt then Good, he most willingly abstains from it as Evil. So
a man who has a Member gangraenated, as he looks upon it particularly, is loath
to loose it with so much pain, but considering that it is better for him to
part with it, then that the whole Body should perish, he as willingly abdicates
it, as he would pull out an arrow sticking in his side. Thus if in all our
actions we would seriously reflect upon the whole Nature of Man, and of the
universe, and upon God the Creator of all, we should clearly understand that
this great King and Governor of all has prescribed such Common Laws for the
safety of the whole Empire, and the true Good of every Subject, that though
Justice may seem contrary to some particular and lesser Good, yet it is most
consonant to our Chief Good and true Happiness, to which the others must be
reduced. And thus we may gain the Practical Judgment of a right Philosopher:
but yet in the Executive part we shall meet with many difficulties through
humane frailty and natural impediments, which must be overcome by constant
Exercise. Acts of Virtue confirm Habits, and Habits facilitate Acts. Virtus
docetur art, vita discitur. There are so many Errors and Lusts within the
Soul, and such Temptations without, that this Summus Philosophus is but an
Idea: and if there were any such, yet without true Piety he were but a painted
Image.

XVII. Of the Sceptikes and Cynikes.
THere is scarcely any Humor of Men or Manner of Living, that has any shadow
of Happiness, which the Philosophers have not refined and dressed up in its best
Attire, and so presented it to the World for the Chief Good: only Money, that
common Idol of other men, was never professedly set up by any Philosopher: as
Luther said of himself, that he had been tempred to all sins except
Covetousness. The strangest kind of Philosophy, or rather the contradiction of
all Philosophy, is Skepticism, which sprang up after all the rest, out of their
Differences and Disputes. In all Ages when Skepticism abounds it is a most
certain Symptom of the declination of true Philosophy, and a prognostike of a
general decay thereof ensuing, which we may justly suspect in these times,
wherein plain and solid Truth is every where arrained, and men affecting the
name of a Great Wit and Liberty of Spirit, leave the beaten path of true
Learning and Wisdom and wander at large in the Wilderness of their own
Imaginations: which at first much please and delight them, but afterward prove
vain and unsatisfactory: and then they grow malecontent, and quarrel with all
Learning, Knowledge, Reason, and Religion, like distracted men, who by too
strong an intention of their Imagination have hurt their Cranium; so these by
too much nicety and subtilty of Wit strain their Criterion. But the most
dangerous is Practical Skepticism, which depends upon the other; and yet the
other many times proceeds from it. Men of loose and vicious lives, indulgent
to their own Genius, cannot endure to be controlled neither by others, nor by
their own Judgments: and therefore affect a Licenciousness in Thinking as well
as in Acting. Others who are Dogmaticall enough in Opinion prove Scepticall in
Practice, having a Form of Knowledge, but denying the Power thereof: yea many
who have proceeded very far in the Practice thereof, being at last confuted by
adverse Fortune, renounce Truth, and Virtue, and Religion, and yield up all to
her: as Brutus said when he came to die, O Virtus, colui te ut rem, at tu nomen
inane es! Socrates indeed professed, that he knew only this, that he knew
nothing: which was a modest complaint arising from a thirsting desire of
knowing more, not an abandoning of that he had already: for he was a constant
Teacher and Instructor of others, and most clear and positive in all his
Instructions, which is farthest from Skepticism: yea he was so contrary to it,
that he affirmed it to be Madness and Wickedness to enquire of the Gods
themselves concerning those things which men by their own reason and
understanding might comprehend, as it is not to enquire of them concerning
future Contingencies, which no Humane Reason can certainly foreknow. That
Speech of Socrates was rather in opposition to the Sophisters, who know least,
and yet were most peremptory in their opinions, and imposed them on others.
Confidence without Reason, or taking Truth upon trust is a great impediment to
sound Knowledge: but to despair of knowing any thing, and so to sit down in
perpetual distrust, is an absolute bar to all Knowledge. Sceptikes place the
Happiness of the Mind in a Tranquillity or Indifferency to all Opinions. There
is undoubtedly one Truth, but they say there is no Reason which has not a
contrary Reason, so that Man cannot certainly know it. To what end then is
Reason bestowed upon Man, if he can only hunt after Truth, and never find it
out? He who despaireth to find it, loses it, as well as he who mistakes it.
A man in a Journey meeting with many several ways, and not knowing which to
take, must enquire, and judge, and satisfy himself as well as he may, and so
proceed: for should he stand still and spend the whole day in doubting and
musing, he should certainly run into the same inconvenience which he seeks to
avoid: whereas by pursuing the most likely way, he may more probably accomplish
his intended Journey. If the danger of Erring, to which all Humane Nature is
subject, were a sufficient excuse, not only Knowledge, but also all Action
should cease. Judges should not judge, Teachers should not teach, Professors of
Physike or any other Art should not practice. Men should doubt of acting or not
acting any thing, living, or not living, and so to avoid the Waves of
uncertainty, sink into the Sea of confusion. Sceptikes are commonly in the
Schole captious, in Life Satyrists, in the State Neutrall, in Religion Scoffers
and Despisers, which are all as destructive Errors to Humane society, as can
arise from any Dogmatical opinions. They generally incline to contradiction and
are vehement in opposition, and yet know not but that their contrary Reason may
be as weak as the other; And thus to presume that their own Negative Arguments
are right and true is as much Dogmatical as any positive Affirmation, which
shows the falseness and perversity of this Humor, which if it were true to it
self the professors thereof should suspend all Reason whereby they act as Men,
and only sit still and look about them like Beasts. As the Sceptikes were
opposite to all Philosophy, so were the Cynikes to all Humanity: for
considering the certain Miseries and uncertain Comforts of the Life of Man,
they judged it best to contract themselves and all their affairs into as narrow
a compass as they could, discharging themselves of whatsoever was more then
necessary. Diogenes seeing a Boy drink out of his Hand, threw away his Dish:
and Crates wished that the Stones of the River were Bread, as the Water is
Drink, that so he might be furnished with a certain Provision by Nature. Hence
they despised both the Flattery and Fury of Fortune, harding their Minds and
Bodies against her, by lying in the Snow in Winter, and in the hot Sands in
Summer, begging of Statues, and provoking common Whores to scold with them.
Though Skepticism may seem Modesty, and Cynicism Humility, and Poverty of
spirit as well as of all outward things, yet these Humors puff up the Mind with
a conceit of Liberty and Greatness as much as any. Diogenes when he stood in
the Market to be sold for a slave, and others cried out, Who will buy a good
Slave? cried out as fast, Who will buy a good Master? and his behavior toward
Alexander was such, that it made him wish himself Diogenes if he were not
Alexander. No mean condition could suffice him, nor could he like Parmenio,
divide Empires, but resolved to conquer the World either by subduing, or by
despising it. But this cannot be the true Happiness of Man, for though
preparation and obstinacy are great advantages in suffering, whereby the very
Boys of Sparta turned torments into sport and exercise, yet he is truly wise,
who can both endure Evil, and enjoy Good, which is a temper most suitable to
the whole State of Man: and the one without the other but an half part of
Wisdom joined with as much Folly, for it orders but one half of the Life of
Man, and destroies the other. This strange and uncouth Sect had another Humor,
far wors then the former, to despise and deride all others: which plainly
discovers the vanity and petulancy thereof. Some have so great a Felicity of
wit, that they make wit their greatest Felicity, jesting themselves out of all
that is earnest, and will not suffer any solid Truth to fix upon them; but like
fools, make a sport of every thing. Others think to jeer men out of their
follies, and reform them by abusing them: Such Satyricall scoffs and quips are
like Squibs and Crackers, which do harm in Festivalls, and no good in Fights:
imbittering and provoking ingen^ous spirits, and marring the best Reproofs,
turning Physike into Poison. To make a sport of other men's Infirmities, is as
impious and inhumane, as to laugh at their miseries. Heraclitus was far more
charitable herein then Democritus: yet such is the natural pravity and
malignancy of Men, that they delight almost as much in speaking* and hearing
ill of others, as in their own praises; whereas the nature of the Tongue is not
to wound, but to supple and heal. But the worst of this sort, and indeed rather
a Devil then a Man, was Timon the Athenian, who hated all Mankind. It may be
said of such Misanthropi, as it was of that conceited Misogynus, whose Mistress
was Nullae, that it was like to prove a happy Match; for he loved Nulla, and
Nullae loved him. They who hate all, deserv to be hated of all; which is a
condition so far from Happiness, that no Humane thing can be more contrary unto
it.

XVIII. Of the Cyreniakes and Epicureans.
THE Cyreniakes were most contrary to the Cynikes, as may appear by the
discourse which passed between the two grand Masters of the Sects. Aristippus
told Diogenes, That if he knew how to live at Court, he should not need to eat
Herbs, and Diogenes answered him again, That if he knew how to eat Herbs, he
should not need to live at Court. These Cyreniakes did not profess any state of
universal Happiness, but pieced and patched it up with particular acts of
Pleasure, chiefly Corporeal. Their main Argument which they use to defend this
sensual Philosophy, is a sufficient Confutation thereof. They say that Man,
while he is yet a Child, and not deluded with false opinions, does naturally
delight in Bodily Pleasure, and is offended with the least Pain, which only
proves it a Childish Felicity, and not far from Brutish, an Infant little
differing from a Beast, being strong in Sense, and weak in Reason: but to make
any Corporeal thing the Chief Good of a Rational Soul, is most Irrational.
This sensual Lust or Love of Pleasure is always accompanied with a gross
self-love, or rather proceeds from it: which the Cyreniakes did openly
profess and avow, making the whole world their Circumference, and themselves the
Center. Aristippus went so far, as to cast off Natural Affection to his
Children, who are the next to a man's Self, yea as Limbs and Parts of the
Parent: when he abdicated his Son, he approved it to be as just and natural,
as to cut off his Hair, or pair his Nails when they grow offensive. Theodorus
was so infamous for these gross opinions, that he was commonly called, The
Atheist, and again Ironically, a God: for indeed he who denies God, is his own
God, making himself his utmost end, which is to Deify himself. Aristippus is
the Patron of voluptuous Courtiers, and merry Companions; though he had fewest
successors in the Schole, he has most followers in the World. This Geniall
kind of Happiness consists in easy and delightful Studies, pleasant
Discourses, amorous Fancies, Feastings, Maskings, Revellings, and all kind of
Courtship and Joviality, All which ravish weaker Minds, who when they enter
into Princes Courts, think them the only Heaven upon Earth, and their pomp and
pleasure the very Life of the Gods, as the Cynike fitly styled them, Miracula
Stultorum. Men's spirits are no where better discovered then in a Court. Vain
men having once tasted of the delights thereof, can hardly ever after endure to
live privately, whereas a sober man will love a private life better then ever
he did before. That which is most to be lamented, is the loss of many a Brave
and Gallant man through this Humor of Geniality. How sad a thing is it to see
the companions of an Ulysses charmed by this Circe, and transformed into
Beasts, men like Aristippus, of great Wit and Learning, or as Petronius, Pares
negotiis, fit for Business, and of excellent Abilities, to make no other use of
them, then to trifle away their time more pleasantly, and ruin themselves more
wittily, as strong Must resolving wholly into Spume and Vapor? All Ages are
full of such Examples, but never did any man fool away a great Spirit, and a
greater Fortune, like Mark Anthony; who was so far bewitched with his
Cleopatra, that in the heat of the Battle of Actium, when the Empire of the
World, his life, and all lay at stake, he fled from Augustus to pursue her;
whereas if he had fled from her, he might very probably have pursued Augustus.
The Epicureans far excel the Cyreniakes: for though they make Pleasure their
Chief Good, yet they refine it from the dross and dregs, and exalt it from the
particular acts and motions thereof, to a constant state of universal Delight:
gratifying the Mind with all pleasing things, and defending it from grief and
perturbation, in the midst of external pains: which opinion, if rightly
understood, holds forth as high an Happiness as this World can afford,
marshalling the several sorts of Pleasures according to their several natures
and degrees, and making the Pleasure of Virtue to be Chief: for the enjoying
whereof we should cheerfully endure any inferior pains or miseries. Yet they
placed not this Happiness in the goodness of Virtue, but in the Pleasure
thereof, But the Chief Good, and the Chief Happiness differ only in the Notion,
and not in the Thing: For this Pleasure of Virtue cannot be had or enjoied
without the Love of Virtue, from which it does arise: To do a virtuous action
without Love and Delight, is no Virtue; and to do it with the greatest Delight,
is the greatest Virtue: and thus Epicurus well expresses himself; That
Pleasure may be separated from all other things, but not from Virtue: for all
other things must be subordinate to Virtue, orherwise there is no true Pleasure
in them. But as Cicero observes, the Epicurean Opinion was very sublime and
Philosophical, had their Practice been answerable unto it. Horace plainly
confesses himself -- Epicuri de grege porcum. Those outward Pleasures, though
admitted only as subservient to Virtue, so prevailed against it, that leaving
the Mistress, they fell in love with the Maid, and instead of making Virtue the
Chief Pleasure, made Pleasure the Chief Virtue. Thus was this most excellent
Opinion, which dressed up Virtue in her fairest habit, and presented her most
lovely aspect to the Minds of men vitiated by a corrupt Practice. Epicurus is
the Institutor of a Private and Sedentary Life, prescribing to dwell in a
Garden of Pleasure, enjoying the purest delights of Nature, and entertaining
our selves with most beautiful Contemplations, or good Society, free from all
cares and troubles. Pomponius Atticus was a most exact man in this kind of
Life, and far more happy then all the great Conquerors of his time, who
troubled the World and themselves with their vast Designs, and great
Enterprises. This Epicurus thought to be the Happiness of God; and did not only
separate him from the care of Men, but also Men from the care of God: esteeming
all Religion as Superstition, or the impertinent curiosity of a fearful Mind.
Yea, he seems to separate us from the mutual care of one another, by
withdrawing us from all public affairs, which must maintain every private
State: and therefore we ought to share in the Burden as well as in the Benefit;
and when it becomes our Duty, is also part of our Happiness.

XIX. Of the Stoikes and Peripatetikes.
THE Epicureans favored those Affections which entertain Pleasure, and
mortified those which induce Pain, but the Stoikes considering the great
passion and perturbation which both the one and the other cause in the soul,
renounced them all, and retired to the highest and purest region of Man, which
is his Mind: as the Poet does excellently describe it in his 6. Aeneid, Igneus
est ollis vigor and coelestis origo
Seminibus: quantum non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra:
Hinc metuunt, gaudentque, dolent, cupiuntque, nec auras
Recipient clausae tenebris, and carcere caeco.


Comparing the Soul and Body of Man to Heaven and Earth. The Mind, which he
calls a Heavenly seed, is pure and Ethereall, enjoying perpetual peace in all
its motions, like the Heavenly Orbs. But the Body, like the Earth, of which it
is made, is dull and heavy, and the Affections, as the Air or middle Region
between both, by Vapors ascending from the Earthly members, fill the Soul with
Clouds and Tempests, which darken and imprison the Heavenly Light. Now the
Stoikes would have us live above these Clouds, like Angels and Spirits: but we
can no more live in this World without Affections, then without Bodies: nor may
we affect a Separate state in this Life. The Rational and Sensitive parts of
Man are not two distinct Persons, as an Horse and his Rider; but rather like
the Poetical ficton of the Centaur, who was both Horse and Rider in one, so
that the one being wounded, the other feels it, and sympathizes with it. Thus
the Mind rules the Fansy and Affections, and they excite or damp the Corporeal
spirits, and cause fluxes and refluxes of them: and so likewise the Body by the
Humors thereof irritates the Fansy and Affections, and they tempt and solicit
the Mind: but as the Inferior part cannot compel the Superior, so the Superior
may not abdicate or sequester the Inferior. Wherefore it may be justly admired
how the Stoikes, who made it their Chief End to live according to the Nature of
the Universe, should not allow Man to live according to the Universality of his
own Nature, in the full latitude and extent thereof. It is an high exprobration
of God and Nature, to think that these Affections were placed in us, only to be
opposed and trampled on, as evil: whereas indeed they are of greatest use,
being the Wings of the Soul, and quickest Inciters of Action. What a dull thing
were Generation and Nutrition, if there were no Concupiscence? What comfort in
educating Children without Natural Affection? What spur to mutual
Opitulation, if there were no pity? So that to deprive Man of his Affections
which mediate between the Soul* and Body, is to murder himself; to forbid
natural Affection, is to ruin whole Families: to deny Pity, is to wrong all
Mankind: which last is the most bloody and barbarous Sentence in all the
Stoicall Philosophy: for though they allow some other Faculties in the
Rational part, analagous to those Sensitive Affections which apprehend Good
(and undoubtedly the Angels have some such Powers of exercising their Love and
Hate, Joy and Grief, and the like) yet they wholly exclude Pity, as well as
Fear and Grief, from a wise man, because these pierce and wound the Soul;
though being rightly exercised, they may be as isntrumental to Reason, and
produce as happy effects as the other. But these and such like are
Philosophical Conceits and Braveries, like the Poetical labors of Hercules,
as much exceeding the condition of the Soul, as the other the strength of the
Body: and their own Practice commonly confuted their Opinion. Dionysius, one of
that Sect, being vexed with a very sore pain in his eyes, was forced to confess
that Pain is no indifferent thing. Antigonus caused a servant to step in
suddenly, and tell Perseus, the Scholar of Zeno, that the Enemies had plundered
his house, whereupon perceiving him very much troubled, he convinced him that
Riches were no such indifferent thing as he professed. To take away Affections
is unnatural, but not to manage them rightly, is irrational, and so against
the Nature of Man, whose Reason is his Guide and Governor, instead of all those
Natural Instincts in Brute Beasts, which move and limit their Affections; and
therefore when Man neglects to rule them by Reason, they hurry him away
violently beyond the fury and lust of Beasts. We should never be wholly acted
and possessed by them, as a Sea is universally troubled with a Tempest: but
keep them always in our own hand and power, as Ulysses did the Winds in a
Bottle, letting them out more or less, as he pleased. There are three several
ways of governing them. First, by the Light of Understanding and right Reason,
to dissolv and dissipate the Cloud of Passion. Secondly, by keeping under the
Body (the Humors and Vapors whereof do feed and nourish our Affections) to tame
them. Thirdly by committing them among themselves, and tempeting one with
another, to break them. The Peripatetikes, who were more accurate and judicious
in the study of Nature then the Stoikes, or any other Sect of Philosophers,
allow Man all things whatsoever which do belong to his Nature, to make up his
perfect Happiness; not only the exercise of his Affections, but all other good
things where of he is capable from the highest to the lowest. Both Stoiker and
Peripatetikes agree the Chief Happiness of Man to be Virtue, but the Stoikes
place it in the Habit of Virtue, and the Peripatetikes in the Act* and yet the
Stoikes were generally greater Practicers and Actors of Virtue then the
Peripatetikes. But these two Opinions may be thus reconciled. The Stoikes
intend such an Habit of Virtue which produces the Acts thereof, and the
Peripatetikes such Acts of Virtue as flow from the Habit thereof: and so the
Habitual Felicity of the Soul consists in the Habit of Virtue, and the
Actual Felicity in virtuous Actions. The Foundation is the Habit, but the Act
or Exercise is the Perfection. A virtuous Intention or Endeavor is some kind of
Exercise of the Habit, and instead of the Act, but not so noble and
illustrious, because it wants an outward existence. Aristotle's Happy man is
an Hero or Hercules, made up of all Humane Excellencies. His Zodiake of Virtues
reaches from Head to Feet, from Magnanimity to Urbanity. Both which, though
some severer Christians have arrained as vicious, and exceeding the just
proportion of Virtue in both extremes, yet certainly in a sober sense may well
be allowed. True Magnanimity is not opposed to Humility, but to Baseness and
Meanness of Spirit, yea it consents with Humility against Pride. Africanus,
the most perfect example of all Aristotle's Virtues, is famous for both. His
Magnanimity was so great, that his very stately deportment and outward
presence, as Livy reports of him, drew many out of the Country round about to
behold him, and his Greatness of Spirit was sufficiently testified by his Great
Actions: and yet his Humility was as great, both in his private conversation,
and also in his most willing submission to the Commonwealth; so that he waived
all those fair advantages he had of making himself as absolute as Caesar: and
by a voluntary recess, yielded to the injuries and ingratitude of the People,
rather then he would make any commotion in the State. Nor is Urbanity an enemy
ot Gravity, but to Rusticity, and opposes Levity as much as it. Socrates, Cato
Major, and other sober men have been very pleasant and facetious. Xenophon was
very virtuous, and no less elegant. I do not affect to defame Philosophy, nor
by depressing it, to exalt Christianity: but rather suck out of every Flower
whatsoever may make an Ingredient of this Universal Happiness of Man. The
chief thing wanting in all those Philosophers is true Piety, which is the same
proportionably toward God, as Virtue is toward Man, and therefore if there be
any Happiness in Virtue, it cannot be perfect, nor indeed true, without Piety.

XX. Of the Platonikes, and of Socrates.
ARistotle is called the Philosopher, and Plato the Divine. Aristotle was a man
of the sharpest Reason among all the Philosophers; but he relied so much on
Reason, that he both neglected Sense, and sensible Experiments, and denied
Faith and Divine Mysteries. His Rational discourses and Metaphysicall notions
are most probable, and exactly Philosophical: but his Empiricall observations
very uncertain, and unworthy so great a Philosopher: and his opinions
concerning matters of Faith, as the Creation of the World, and dissolution
thereof, most false and absurd. As Physicians and Chymicall Philosophers have
exceeded him in the former, so the Platonikes and Theologists in the latter.
Plato having travailed into Egypt, was there by the Priests instructed in their
Mystical Divinity, which the Egyptians most probably received from Joseph, and
the Hebrews, corrupting it with their own Idolatry and Traditions. But he as a
Philosopher endeavored to refine it with the Grecian Theology, which he had
learned from his Master Socrates, and his own Speculations. We may find in him
some fragments, and little Aires of the most profound Mysteries in Divinity,
but so broken and imperfect* that they are rather matter of admiration to us
Christians to read them in a Heathen, then any clear information or evidence of
the Truth. He attributes much to the authority of the Ancients, as better and
wiser then Posterity, but propounds no Word of Divine Truth on which to ground
a Belief. Yet he happily hit upon the true End and Chief Happiness of Man,
which is to be made like unto God by a conjunction of the Mind with him,
erecting Piety above Virtues and so leads us into another World, acquainting us
familiarly with God, and Angels, and spiritual Idea's, by abstracting the Soul
from those inferior and Corporeal things, and advancing it to the
Contemplation of the first Cause, and Creator of all things: which is a most
beautiful and glorious Vision, and a great advantage to true Piety and
Religion. Yet notwithstanding these high speculations, he seems to fall short
in the Practice of Divinity. I do not speak of his own exemplary Practice, but
of his Practical documents, and rules concerning true Piety and the power of
Godliness. As Aristotle in his Natural Philosophy, so he in his Divinity are
generally more Notional then Practical. Of the Philosophers who either
preceded or succeeded, Socrates was certainly the ablest and wisest, and
himself the most perfect Example of his own Doctrine, Heraclitus, Pythagoras,
and others before him are dark and obscure, full of Imaginary Fancies and
Cabalisticall conceits. The seven Wise men may be all summed up in one
Socrates. Plato, Aristotle, and all who followed him are more notional and
Sophistical: nor could any of his own Scholars exactly follow him, but
presently degenerated into vain Opinions, and a more licentious Life: nor do we
read of any distinct Sect of Socratikes, but rather all succeeding Philosophy,
and the several sorts thereof, were Branches growing up out of this Root.
Plato followed him in Divinity, seeking to improve it with Mystical
traditions, Xenophon was most like him in Civil conversation, but more Glorious
and Active. The Peripatetikes followed his Study of Nature: but are more
subtle and Sophistical. The Stoikes chose his study of Virtue and professing
to live according to the Universal Nature: but stretched it to a strange
severity and most unnatural Inhumanity. The Cyreniakes and Epicureans
pretended to his pure delights and freer use of Pleasures: but defiled them
with gross voluptuousness. The Cynikes emulated his contempt of all unnecessary
things, and that excellent sentence, That he who needs least, is most like
God, but became Brutish and Nasty. The Sceptikes his opposing the presumptuous
confidence of the Sophisters, pursuing it so far that they overthrew all his
foundations of Truth and Knowledge. He had a very clear and right Understanding
of all the Affairs of Life from the meanest and most Mechanical, to the
highest and most Intellectual, and made it his Business to edify others, that
every man with whom he conversed might be bettered by his company: which is a
most Noble and Divine emploiment. Observe his discourses in the Streets with
Strangers and Passengers, in the Shops with Artificers, in his House with his
Family, in his Meetings and Symposiums with merry Company, in his Conferences
with his Scholars, and in public Assemblies with the Citizens; and you shall
find in them all most apposite and solid Instructions concerning all occasions
of Life, Private, Domestical, Civil, Military, Natural, and Divine, in a
free and familiar way of arguing by mutual Conference, and a rational
Induction through undeniable concessions, without any cunning Sophistry or
flourishing Rhetorike, and yet more persuasive and effectual then either. He
was absolutely the best Master of Life among all Heathen. Horace a good
Critike, though herein he prefer Homer, and the Poets before Chrysippus, and
Crantor, and such other curious disputers; yet instructs his Poet to borrow
Matter from Socraticall Philosophy. Rem tibi Socraticae possnnt ostendere
chartae. But the most strange and wonderful thing in him was his familiar
conversing with a God, or Demon, who, as he professes, ever certainly advised
in all doubtful affairs. It has been a known Policy in many Great men to make
their Laws and Counsels seem Oraculous, by pretending that a Deity dictated
unto them: So did Numa, Sertorius, Mahomet, and others: but none of them so
credibly true as this. Probably God might inspire him with an extraordinary
Spirit of Natural Wisdom, and perhaps with a Spirit of Divination in this way
of Counsel and Advice concerning future and contingent things: as he did
revele higher and more divine things to Balaam, and the Sybills: yet I dare not
with Erasmus almost Canonize him for a Saint, nor with Socinians be confident
of his Salvation. Xenophon in his Apology for him tells us how he worshipped
the same Gods which the City worshipped, and taught him to sacrifice to their
false Gods. As the Oracle of Apollo did him the honor to pronounce him the
Wisest of men, so he requited it by acknowledging him a God, and accepting his
Testimonial. Though probably, as we may guess by Plato's discourses, he
esteemed those inferior Gods as Demons and Spirits of a more Divine nature
then Men, yet this does not excuse him of Idolatry, nor can such worshipping of
Angels or Spirits be allowed in any true Divinity. And though he were most free
from Vulgar or Philosophical pride, yet there are strong arguments of
suspicion, that he was guilty of that spiritual pride which most opposes
Salvation. In his Life, and at his Death he judged himself the best of Men, and
expresses little or no confession of Sin, or any thing like Christian Humility.
Without which there can be no true conversion to God nor Communion with him,
and without Divine Communion the Soul cannot attain her true and perfect
Happiness.

The Second Book Of the True HAPPINESS Of MAN.
I. of Religion.
WE have now travailed over the Terrestrial Globe, and shall proceed to
describe the Celestial; not as Astronomers, who delineate it by Epicycles and
Eccentrikes, and such like Imaginary things, nor as Poets, who fill it with
Giants and Beasts, and Fabulous Monsters: but as it is in it self, and may be
best discovered by its own Light. Religion is the Law of the Supreme King,
commanding and directing that Duty and Worship which we ow unto him, and
rewarding us with that Happiness which we may enjoy in him, both which consist
together in the conjunction of the Mind and Will of Man with the Mind and Will
of God. As the highest Knowledge of God which the Heathen attained, was dark
and doubtful, so was their service weak and saint. The Athenians inscribed
their Altar, To the unknown God, and their Worship was as vain and ignorant.
Whom therefore, says the Apostle, ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto
you: Where he plainly shows the difference between Heathenish Worship of God
and true Religion. They had some glimmering apprehensions of God, If happily they
might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us:
but they abused it with their Idolatry, and corrupted it with their Lives,
being so taught by their Priests and Poets, who made Gods of Men, and Men of
Gods, attributing Divine Virtues to their Hero's, and Humane Vices to their
Deities. Yea the Philosophers, who justly condemn them for this double Impiety,
yet fall short of the Glory of God, gazing on him at a great distance, and
retaining this Knowledge as a Secret or Mystery in Nature, being indeed afraid
of the People, who were prepossessed with their own Idolatry, which was the
Religion of the Stat^, and therefore might not be contradicted or disputed. And
it is observable of all such National Religions, that they may be more safely
abused then denied. The Poets were allowed to corrupt their Divinity with their
Fables, rather then the Philosophers to reduce it to Truth. Socrates himself so
far complied with this Policy of State, that he prescribed to worship God
according to the manner of the Country, subjecting the rule of Gods worship to
the Laws and Customs of Men: which shows the weakness of the highest
Philosophy in the practical part of Religion, which is the life and strength
thereof; Whereas the Apostle directly encounters the Athenian Idolatry, and
plainly preaches unto the People the Doctrine of the true Deity, of Creation,
Providence, Sin, Redemption, Repentance, Resurrection, and the last Judgment.
All false Religions are most Cabalisticall and reserved, thereby seeking to
gain the reputation of Sacred, and are satisfied with a vain Admiration, and
blind Devotion: but true Religion freely and clearly reveals it self to the
world, not concealing the most difficult points, and Mysterious parts thereof:
though sublime Truths be most offensive to weak Minds. Immanis verit as proxima
est mendacio, that is, in their apprehensions who cannot well undestand it, yet
being sure of it self, and like a great Light, impossible to be hid, it shines
forth in its own beams, and fears not to appear as it is, however men may
entertain it. The Jews and Christians had commonly a more familiar knowledge of
the highest points in Divinity, then the greatest Philosophers, and though all
do not express the power and efficacy thereof, yet some Holy men have
exceedingly transcended the best of Heathenish Devotion. But nothing more
discovers their weak Knowledge of true Piety, then their ignorance of the true
nature of Sin, which is the contrary, or privation thereof. They speak of it
generally under the notion of Vice, as it is a depravation of Nature, and
common Enemy to Mankind, but rise not to the Infinite aggravation thereof,
which is the transgression of the Royal Law of an Infinite God, and a direct
opposition of the Creature to the Creator, wherein the very Sinfulness thereof
does consist: as David clearly saw and confessed, Against thee, thee only have
I sinned. So likewise all their Doctrine of Moral Virtue, whereof they so much
boast, tends to their own Praise and Merit, the Good of others, and the
perfection of the Universe, rather then the Glory of God, which is the only
Religious and Supreme End, infusing Holiness into all inferior actions, by
subordinating them to it self. True Religion consists in a true Belief, and
true Love of God. There is in all men some kind of Belief of God, but being
conscious to themselves, they fly from him as their greatest Contrary; as it is
said of the Devils, They believ and tremble. This terror and trembling puts
Atheists upon a strife, and endeavor within themselves to cast off their Belief,
which yet they can never do, but that at some time or other it will recoil upon
them with greater trouble and horror of Mind. It makes the Superstitious to
fear and worship God as a severe Master in a base and servile manner, with the
drudgery of Duties, especially such as are most rigorous and cruel. It makes
Hypocrites to bribe their Own Consciences, and flatter God with a show of
Holiness, which is rather a worshipping of Men then God. Thus Poets frame a
Religion according to their own Fansy; and Philosophers according to their
imperfect Reason; and Statesmen shape it according to Policy and Reason of
State; and the Religious dress it up in several forms and fashions according
to Tradition, and their own Humors; and naturally every man propounds to
himself such a Religion as will serve his own turn, and whereby he may be sure
to be saved: yea some are so uncharitable to exclude all others which are not
exactly of their size. But the sum and substance of true Religion is contained
in that great Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might: This Love unites the Soul to God,
with infinite Joy and Delight in him, which is the highest enjoyment of the
Chief Good, and the perfect Happiness of Man.

II. Of Faith.
REason is most properly exercised in things of Nature, and Faith in matters of
Religion; it being the Echo of Divine Authority, yet not merely as an Echo,
which reports the sound without any sense of Hearing; nor the Echo of a
Parasiticall assentation, Ais aio, negas nego, which is a Flattery furthest
from Belief; nor the vulgar Implicit Faith depending upon the Authority of
men; but an Intellectual assent, and a Voluntary consent to that which is
reveled by God. Our Great Wits set up Reason instead of Faith, and the light of
Nature against Divine Light, which is at once to deprive man of his highest
Faculty, and God of his greatest Grace. As if because a Dog usually hunts by
Sent, we should deny that he can see by Sight. Faith in general is as natural
to a Man as Reason, and he may as well know by Believing as by Discoursing: yea,
it is a more clear and certain knowledge of the very Objects of Reason then
Reason it self, by relying on a Divine Authority. Through says, faith the
Apostle, we understand that the Worlds were framed by the word of God, so that
the things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear: which yet
may be comprehended by the strength of natural Reason, for he says elsewhere.
That the invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead: but the same Word which created the World, creates a Belief in a
spiritual Understanding. Belief is in this life in stead of Intuition, and
shall at last be resolved into it. Naturalists admire Socrates, and cry him up
for an high Instance of the sufficiency of natural Light to instruct a man in
the way of true Virtue and Piety, and they willingly admit of those
Inspirations of a God or Demon whereof he speaks, and yet will not allow the
like to Christians in the ordinary way of a spiritual Belief. Faith and Reason,
like Antipodes, seem contrary, but both meet in their Center, Truth. Right
Reason leads us to Faith, but leaves us there, and resigns us up to it. If God
were not omnipotent he could not justly not reasonably command us to believ
whatsoever he says, but being such, it is most irrational not to believ him:
for this were to confine the Infinite Creator of all things within the Finite
Circle of this World and the Sphere of Nature, which is the utmost extent of
the Ken of Reason. Surely this whole Universe is but a small portion of his
power and workmanship, who is able to create new Worlds, and a new Nature of
things: but this is the most natural corruption of the Mind of Man, to exalt
it self against the Glory of God, by setting up Natural Light against Faith,
as Works against Grace, and so confine God within our Compass, as Conjurers
deal with Spirits, Certainly Adam in his primitive state was generally capable
of believing any Divine Revelations which were or might be presented unto him.
That very Commandment concerning the forbidden fruit was a Statute specially
enacted and published by God, and no part of the Common Law written in his
heart: and his first sin was Infidelity, since which we are all naturally most
prone to it, and the Saving Grace or Remedy is Faith: Adams Faith was a work
whereby he was to be justified, and the chief part of his obedience, and such a
Faith was also in Christ the second Adam believing in God concerning those
things which as Man he could not foreknow. But this Kind differs much from
Evangelicall Faith, which does not justify as a work, but as an Isntrumental
Mean, whereby we apply unto our selves the Merits of another. Yet though there
be remaining in Man's Nature Faith as well as Reason, there is no saving Faith
left in him but only such a malignant Faith as is in the Devils, for as the
Natural man cannot know the things of God by a Practical Knowledge, producing
Love and Obedience, unless he be first taught of God, so neither can he so know
Christ nor believ in him, unless it be given to him to believ. This is Life
Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ him
whom thou have sent. God is said to confound the wisdom of the Wise by the
Gospel of Faith, which declares unto them, that without believing they cannot
be saved, and yet without a supernatural Grace they cannot believ. Thus being
confounded in themselves, and not knowing how to escape, they break through
all, and will not allow others that Faith which they have not themselves though
they cannot deny that it is possible for God to do that which is believed nor
is it improbable that he should make them believ it for whom he has prepared
it. As God is the chief Good and perfect Happiness of the soul, so by Faith,
which is the highest Knowledge we have in this world, the Soul enjoyes him, and
by him the most excellent Gifts and Graces whereof it is capable.

III. Of the Scriptures.
THe Scripture of Word of God in Paradise was the Moral Law written in Man's
heart, and the revelation of extraordinary commands. After the fall God
immediately preached to Adam, and while the Church was confined within Families
lie taught them by Visions and Revelations; but when he began to found the
National Church of the Jews, he delivered unto them written Laws and the
Examples of former times, from the very first Creation, and so proceeded by
Prophetical revelation to the End of the World, and then was the Scripture
finished and sealed up by the last of the Apostles, as a perfect Institution,
or Pandect of all things requisite to be known or believed for the salvation of
Man. The First Evidence of the Divinity of the Scripture, is that of all other
Books in the world, it most clearly and familiarly discovers unto us the God of
Nature in a most glorious and worthy manner. The Second this, that the Moral
Law, and the sum of all Duties toward God and Man are in it most perfectly
declared. Though since the fall there may still remain in the Mind of Man some
scattered fragments and obscure characters thereof, yet they are so much
defaced and disordered, that they cannot be plainly read, nor otherwise
restored then by seting forth the second Edition by the same Author, according
to the first Original: without which we might have spent our whole Lives, as
the Philosophers did, in doubting and disputing, while we should be practicing
and obeying. The Third, that it fully describes the whole History of the world
from the first Creation to the Dissolution thereof; joining with those Precepts
of the Law the Examples and Monuments of all Ages. The Last, that the Divine
Sentence, Nosse teipsum, of which Iuvenal says, Coelo descendit, is not only
prescribed herein, but also performed by this clear Mirror, whereby the Face of
the Soul and the Secrets of the Heart are made manifest; and therefore we ought
to confess that God is in it of a truth. These Arguments which are natural and
rational Demonstrations may be some persuasion to believ these supernatural
Truths with which they are accompanied. As a man whom we know to be grave and
true in all his other Discourses, is the more credited in relating things
strange and wonderful: or as Socrates said of the writings of Heraclitus, What
he understood was very good, and so he did believ that to be which he
understood not. And in the matters of Faith which the Scriptures revele unto us
there is no Unreasonableness, though they are above Reason, nor Inconsistency
among themselves, yea the wholly Symmetry and Analogy of Faith is more glorious
and beautiful then the very Law of Nature and Reason it self. This blessed
Harmony and just Proportion is the surest Index of all the parts, and the best
Interpreter of the most doubtful points: the neglect whereof has introduced
all Errors and Heresies in the Church, which are no other then the Monstrous
Mutilations, Excrescences, or Distortions of the particular Members of the Body
of Faith not corresponding to the Whole, commonly occasioned by wresting the
Text, or too curious criticizing upon it. Though that which is picked out of it
sometimes may be true in it self, yet if it be beyond the scope and meaning, it
is a belying of the Holy Spirit, making him speak that which he never intended:
and this emboldens to do the like another time, for the maintaining of such
Opinions as are neither true in this Text, nor in the Thing. This is the
dangerous Humor of our Age, wherein men hunting after new Notions and sublime
Mysteries, gather up all these Allegorical and Sophistical Expositions which
Calvin and other sound Textuaries have with great Judgment rejected, and so
patch up a new kind of Divinity with these Cento's of Scripture and their own
specious Conceptions and strange Fancies. As for the Style of Scripture, it is
very admirable, though by reason of the Idioms of the Times and Languages
wherein it was wrote it may now seem to us uncouth and strange; yet, if we
rightly attend it, we shall find in it a wonderful mixture of Simplicity and
Majesty, Perspicuity and Mystery, being sometimes dark and cloudy, and
sometimes again thundering and lightning, and shooting flashes of sacred fire
into the heart of the Reader, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul
and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow. The very first verse of the Divine
Evangelist; which by superstitious persons is used as a Charm or Exor^ism,
proved an holy spell to Francis Iunius, metamorphosing him from an Atheist to a
Christian. I cannot but wonder how Politian, or any judicious Critik, could so
far undervalue the Scripture, as to disparage and despise it. Certainly, though
it express not so much elegancy as to humor vain minds, yet it has sufficient
to defend it self from contempt, and is most apt and genuine for the Divine
matter which it expresses: we may justly suspect they never faithfully studied
it, nor well relished the matter and scope thereof; and then no wonder if they
contemn it, as many Wise men do their Tully and Virgil, because they were never
well versed in them, nor rightly understand their Art and Intention. But a true
Believer, who apprehends the true Sense and Savor of the Scriptures, looks upon
them as Gods Great Charter to Man, and the Evidences of all his Happiness.

IV. Of God.
IN the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. God who made the World,
and no Ey saw him, and who only can dissolv it, and best knows how and when he
will do it, has most evidently set it forth in his Word: whereas the
Philosophers speak doubtfully of it, and are strangely perplexed and troubled
about it. Divine Knowledge proceeds from Causes to Effects, and begins with God
the first Cause of all things: but they according to the way of Humane Reason
proceed from Effects to Causes, and so travailing to the utmost end of Natures
Firm Land, find out those first created Principles of Matter, and Atoms which
are but the Dust of Matter, and a Chaos or Heap of all things, and discovering
nothing beyond these but a Vast Ocean and Gulf of Infinity, rather turn back
into the bosom of Nature, and ascribe this self-creating power, which is
infinite and eternal, to those lowest and meanest things, then to an infinite
and eternal Creator, though God seems purposely so to have ordered the
Course of Nature that the most perfect things should be constituted of things
less perfect, that thereby we might be led on to the acknowledgement of him:
for if the Superior Natures, as Angels and Men, had produced the inferior, we
might more reasonably have supposed them to be the first Causes of themselves
and others: but to deify Matter, or Atoms, and make them our Creators, is most
irrational. Though Philosophy seems to doubt it, yet all Religions and all
Nations have confessed an Eternal Creator. Every Creature is a Letter of his
Name, and the beautiful Fabrike of the whole World plainly spells a Deity: and
as the Creatures prove a Creator, so also they prove both what he is not, that
is, not like them, finite and vain; and in some sort what he is, that is, the
infinite perfection of all these excellencies which are in them, and infinitely
more in himself then them all. Thus David argues. He that planted the Ear shall
he not hear, and he that framed the Ey shall not he see, He that teaches Man
Knowledge shall not he know? That is God in his own Divine and Infinite manner
does see, and hear, and understand all things, as we do in our finite and
imperfect manner: the Excellency thereof must be attributed to him, but the
Imperfection must be removed from him. So he is said to be angry at sin, that
is, he is a perfect enemy to all Sin; but Passion and Offense, which is an
Infirmity in us, may not be conceived of him. Thus God himself vouchsafes to
condescend to our capacities, interpreting and translating himself into our
Language by Anthropopathies and Anthropomorphies, and the like. If we might
only speak properly of him, it were impossible for us to express or apprehend
him: for nothing can be univocally predicated of God, and the Creature, there
being an infinite disproportion between them. So God is infinitely Good not by
any multiplication of degrees above us which do not alter the Species of
Goodness, but in another kind of Infinite Goodness, for no multiplication of
degrees can arise to an Infinity. As our Savior said. There is none Good but
God* that is, as he is Good; so we may also say, There is none but God, that
is, as he is whose Name is Iam. Again, our Notions of Essence and Goodness
being Finite, the expressions thereof cannot perfectly declare him who is
Infinite, and therefore are not properly predicated of him: but those and the
like highest Titles of Nature, as Substance, Spirit, Act, must be understood of
him infinitely otherwise then of us: for, To whom shall we liken God, or what
likeness shall we compare unto him? He is that Rule of Goodness, that General
and Metaphysicall Good whereof we speak at large, and therefore Abstracts do
better express him, then Concretes and Adjectives. He is Being, Bonity, Power,
Wisdom, Justice, Mercy it self, and so it is said, God is Love, not properly,
but potentially and infinitely, and as he is One, because he is Infinite, so
also because he is Infinite all these must necessarily be One in him, yea One
with himself: for an Infinite cannot consist of Parts, which cannot be all
Infinite, because they are many, and if they be Finite, cannot make up one
Infinite. Therefore the highest conception we can have of God is, that he is
One Infinite Perfection in himself, which is eminently and virtually all
Perfections of the Creatures: and the most perfect knowledge we have of him is,
that we cannot perfectly know him, because we do know him to be thus infinitely
perfect: yet is this knowledge sufficient to make us perfectly happy in the
enjoiment of him, whom we know to be virtually and effectually all Finite Good,
and Infinitely Good in himself. Let us therefore look round about the whole
frame of Nature, and view all the parts thereof, considering all their
Excellencies as so many Rays of Divine Glory, whereof he is the Sun from which
they proceed, and on whom they depend, comprehending all in himself as their
first Cause, in whom they were potentially before they were created. Then let
us ascend above the highest Heavens, and the whole Compass of Nature, which
cannot contain him, and go forth out of this World into that vast and boundless
Temple of Immensity and Eternity which he inhabiteth, and at once universally
possesses, and so return into the bosom of that Infinity out of which we have
proceeded. Let us consider the possible effects of an unlimitted Power, and we
shall find Worlds very cheap with him, who made this great Globe out of
nothing. Let us contemplate that Infinite Goodness which exceeds all
Covetousness, and that Glory which surpasses all Ambition, and ground all upon
the real foundation of Being it self, and so fill and overwhelm our selves in
this Ocean of endless Perfection. From this hight of Contemplation let us look
back again upon the World, which will appear to us but as a shadow of his
Being, a Molehill full of busy Ants, or a show of self-moving Puppets, acting
their parts upon a Stage set up for that purpose, which must be taken down when
the Play is done. This is true Liberty and Greatness of Mind, full of truth and
delight, and worthy our selves whom God has made capable thereof. They who
travail over diverse Countries, thereby greatly enlarge their Spirits, and
reflect upon that corner of the Earth in which they were born with other Eyes
then when they set forth; The fansy of Lucian, who places Charon on the top of
an high hill viewing all the affairs of living men, and looking on their
greatest Cities as little Birds nests, is very pleasant. Socrates by making
himself a Citizen of the Universe, became an Universal Freeman. But all those
Contemplations are still bounded within the Circle of a finite Nature. Let us
escape out of this Prison of the World, and enfranchise our Souls by restoring
them to their native and perfect Liberty. Let us realize and eternize all
things by enjoying them in him who is All in All, which is such an Ingredient
in all our Good things, as does not only Sanctify, but Deify them, and without
which they are as vain and nothing in the Enjoyment, as they are in their own
Being without him. Thus the Soul being united to God by that Union, partakes of
his Unity and Universality, resting on him as in its Center, and enjoying all
the Creatures as so many Lines Streaming from him, and again reflecting unto
him, having no other Inclination, Motion, nor End, but only God himself, in
whom it dwells and abides for ever

V. Of Christ.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made. The same Word was also made Flesh; and so the Founder of the First
World became the foundation of the second; which is a World of Mysteries and of
Faith, as the first was a World chiefly of Nature and Reason. Now these being
two several Worlds or Natures of things, it is as irrational to measure
matters of Faith by Reason, as it is to weigh the Air, or measure a Spirit. It
begins with the great Mystery of Mysteries, the Trinity, and so proceeding to
the Incarnation of the Son of God, end^ in our Mystical Union with Christ and
God. The Deity of the Creator may be plainly proved by the Creation, which is
the Work and Effect thereof, but Divines say that the Works of the Trinity out
of themselves are undivided, and so nothing in Nature can lead us to that
distinction of Persons in the Godhead, nor demonstrate it to us. Yet there is
nothing in this great Mystery contrary to Reason, though it be far above it:
for they are not three Infinites, not three and one in the same consideration,
but three in one, that is, three Persons in one Nature. The Nature and Unity of
God are both Infinitely diverse from ours, and therefore unless Finite Reason
should limit Infinity, it must acknowledge that it may be so, and Faith
believes that it is so: but neither Reason nor Faith can possibly comprehend
how it is so, because it is infinitely and incomprehensibly so. The Incarnation
of the Son of God is a Mystery almost as wonderful as the former, and
evidently sets forth the Mystery of the other: for God the Son only is
incarnate, and not God the Father, nor God the Holy Ghost, though they all
equally partake of the same Divine Nature which is incarnate. Besides there are
two Natures infinitely diverse united in one Person. Therefore Arrians and
Socinians who deny the Divinity of Christ, do also deny the Trinity, which is
the ground thereof. This Mystery is so far above all natural Reason, that it
cannot possibly be comprehended by it, and therefore most improbable to be the
Invention or Conception thereof: for certainly Reason would rather have
produced something like it self, or at least that which it might in some sort
comprehend, as all false Religions have done. The sinfulness of all men does
evidently demonstrate the necessity of a Savior, and the nature of sin, being a
transgression of the Divine Law of the Creator, binding the Creature to perfect
and perpetual obedience, shows the necessity of a Divine Savior. There is no
other Name under Heaven given among men whereby we may be saved, nor has any
Religion or Philosophy offered to the World any other probable way of Man's
Salvation: and yet the Mind of Man is naturally so far from Saving Faith, that
it hardly entertains an Historical Faith of Christ's Divinity and Incarnation.
Men have stretched their Reason and Fansy to the utmost to find out any other
way of Salvation, rather then accept of this which is most Glorious and Divine.
Philosophers seem to weigh our Virtues with our Vices, and according to the
preponderation of either, denominate us Good or Bad, and so deliver, us up to
Reward or Punishment, Whereas Man being bound to perfect obedience to the very
utmost capacity of his Nature, the least Sin attaints the Soul, as one Act of
Treason makes a Traitor. The Poets Fansy a Purgatory in another world wherein
all are to be cleansed and purified, as Virgil describes it, Ergo exercentur
panis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt: aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igne.
Quisque suos patimur Manes --
But though we should admit of such a washing away the Filth of sin, yet this
is no abolition of the Guilt. Imprisonment is no payment, and punishment no
satisfaction, but the perpetual Vengeance of an unsatisfied Justice; and can
no more restore a past defect, then make that which is done to be undone.
Julian the Apostate in despite of Christ set up a Poetical Savior,
Aesculapius the God of Physike, who coming down in the beams of the Sun his
father should purge the World from Sin and Evil. But this is a Creed of his
own making, and believed by none but himself. Heathenish Religion taught the
purging away of sin by the blood of Bulls and Goats; which shows the common
opinion of the World, that there should be some bloody Sacrifice for sin. But
certainly if a man's own sufferings cannot expiate Sin, much less the Suffering
of Brute Creatures Mahomet and others have pretended to be Saviors of the
World, but none knows how, nor does all their Doctrine hold forth any probable
Color or Shadow of effecting it: whereas the Incarnation of that Son of God who
took upon him the Humanity, to that very end that he might satisfy for Man, and
so was no otherwise obliged to obedience, and by his Divinity infuseth an
Infinite Virtue into all his merits, and is able to regenerate as well as
redeem, does most perfectly suit with our necessities, and fully supply them.
His own Doctrine, Life, and Death are the best Arguments of his Divinity, yet
does he not want other testimonies, The Sacrifices of the Patriarchs and the
Jewish Types, did prefigure him. The Prophets were his Harbingers to bespeak
places and seasons for him. The Martyrs his Heralds to proclaim him to the
World, dying in that Belief which the nature of Man so much opposes; and the
whole World either has or shall both persecute and embrace it. The third great
Mystery is our Union with God and Christ, who has prayed, that we might be one
as he and his Father are one; not Essentially, nor Personally, but Spiritually,
so as no other Creature is united to God. For Man being made last of all the
Creatures, as the sum and Epitome of the rest, Christ by taking upon him the
Humane Nature, invested himself with the whole World; and though he has
purchased all the inferior Creatures for the use of Man, and the Elect Angels
as ministering Spirits may partake of a Confirmation in their good estate, yet
the Conjugall Union is contracted between God and Mankind in a more special
and immediate manner. Nor is this a Natural Union, such as was that between
Adam and all his Posterity, whereby sin is derived to them, but Spiritual by a
more particular and personal application, Christ apprehending us by his
Spirit, and we him by Faith. Now as the Union of God and the Soul is that
wherein our Happiness consists, so this being the highest and nearest Union,
advances Man to a further degree thereof then any other Creature whatsoever. And
this is the highest Evidence of the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ. For God being
Infinite, and the whole World Finite, and so Infinitely below him, though after
he had perfected the first Creation, he rested from his Works, yet he rested
not in them as in his Son, whom he begat from all Eternity, and in whom he only
rests satisfied, and declared from Heaven that he is well pleased. And though
he pronounced them very good, that is, in their kind, yet in respect of
himself, who only is truly and Infinitely Good, they are all as Vain and Null.
But Jesus Christ thus Espousing the Creation, and Endowing it with his
Infinity, gathers up all in himself, and so presents both together as an Object
Infinite and adaequate to his Father. Let us therefore entertain this blessed
Savior with the full embraces of our Soul, and think no other thing worthy our
affections who have such a glorious Object presented unto us. When we read the
Histories of mighty Kings, and the great Captains of the World, our Minds are
filled with honorable thoughts of them, and we applaud them with great delight.
The very Romances of Heroike Love work strangely upon our Fancies, and we are
ready with the Tyrant to wish over selves a part in them; whereas here we have
the only Son of God, the King of Glory, the mighty Conqueror of Principalities
and Powers, yea of Death, and Hell, and Sin, triumphing over all the strength
of Evil, the chiefest among ten thousand, yea fairer then the Children of men,
The brightness of his Fathers Glory, and express Image of his Person, who
having set his heart on the most wretched and deformed Soul of Man, left his
Fathers Court, laid aside his Royal Robes, taking upon him, not the Disguise,
but the Form of a servant, living in the meanest, and laying down his life in
the basest and most cruel manner, for her sake, whose Love was less then her
Desert, and Enmity against him greater then her Misery, Espousing her to
himself, and at once infusing both Love, and Beauty, putting his own Crown upon
her Head, and so bringing her home to his Fathers House to live with himself in
eternal Bliss. This is the high Perogative of Divine Love, to love the
Unlovely, and make them Lovely; to purchase the Poor, and make them Rich; to
affect the Unwilling, and make them Willing; to pity the Miserable, and make
them Happy; O my Lord, and my God! thou Beauty of all Beauties, and Perfection
of all Perfections! The God of Love, yea Love it self! Teach me the Law of
Divine Love, and inflame me with this Celestial flame, inspire me with thine
own Spirit, and let me live in thy Life, rejoicing in the pure fountain of thy
Joy, and resting in the Bosom of thy eternal Rest.

VI. Of the Spirit.
WE enjoy God only in Christ, and Christ only by the Spirit. As the Spirit of
God in the first Creation moved upon the face of the waters, and brought forth
the perfect Beau^^ thereof out of a Chaos of confusion, and the same Spirit
formed Christ himself in the womb of the Blessed Virgin, so he brings forth
Grace out of the Chaos of sin, and forms Christ in us, regenerating us unto
eternal Life. Though the Spirit be a sure witness of its own work where it is,
yet it is a most easy thing to mistake the spirit of Satan or our own spirit
for it, where it is not, Socinians and men of Reason esteem Faith only to be
Fansy, and Enthusiasts set up Fansy in stead of Faith, as the Poet well
expresses it. Aut Deus, aut sua cuique Deus sit dira cupido. There is a
Spiritual Drunkenness and Madness, which in some is so strong and prevalent,
that it ends in a natural Madness, and distemper of the brain, which is hurt
and tainted with the vehement impression of these Imaginations as much as with
the Fancies of Carnal Love, or Pride, or any other violent affections which
commonly distract men, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be filled
with the Spirit, says the Apostle, showing, that in Wine, and in all the
spirits of Creatures there may be excess and inebriatiation, only the Spirit of
God does fill and satisfy the Soul with Spiritual Grace, which yet some who
would seem more Spiritual then others least regard, and rather affect
extraordinary and miraculous Gifts which have ceased long since: having been
chiefly exercised in three extraordinary seasons and upon
extraordina-occasions; by Moses who delivered the Law to the Jews; by Elias and
Elisha who restored the Law which they had made void; and lastly by Christ and
his Apostles who preached the Gospel, with the last of whom they seem to have
expired: for soon after when the ceasing of the Heathenish Oracles was objected
by the Christians against Julian the Apostate, he retotred upon them the
ceasing of their Prophecies. Some suppose that these extraordinary Gifts shall
be restored unto the Church when she shall be fully recovered out of the
Antichristian Eclips, but why might we not rather expect to have found them in
our first Reformers. Luther was a man of an extraordinary Faith, and yet
wrought no Miracles. The Anabaptists at the same time affected them, and
pretended to them, but were found Vain and Fanatike. Though some of them were
mere Impostors, yet others verily believed that they were divinely inspired.
The Miracles of Saints and Martyrs since the Apostolical times seem rather
Legends and Fables then credible Stories. The confident persuasions of a
strong, Faith may seem somewhat like a Prophecy, though far different from it,
and of another kind: and so the Judgments of some wise men have been taken for
Predictions; whereas Prophecy is not so much the confirmation of a man's own
Spirit in the ordinary way of believing or judging, as an extraordinary
revelation of Future things immediately and expressly by God, perhaps in a
rapture or ecstasy, when he who utters it, least understands it. Also there
may be a power of casting out Devils by Prayer and Fasting; which is not now to
be performed as formerly by any special Gift, with a word of command certainly
effecting it; but in the ordinary way of Prayer, which God is pleased to honor
with an equal effect. There are also Miracles of Providence as we may so call
them, whereby God is pleased to deliver his Church out of her greatest
streights in an extraordinary manner, and by unexpected means, as he did
formerly by Signs and Wonders, and Miracles of Nature. Such was the recovery of
Germany by the same hand which first betrayed the Protestant Cause: Maurice
Duke of Saxony after all his Successes and Preferment, strangely revolting from
Charles the fifth to the contrary party: the defeating of the Spanish Aramado,
as Drake termed it, with Squibs; the discovery of the Gunpowder Treason by a
Letter, or whatsoever other Indicium there was of it: yea the preservation of
Christian Religion in all Ages, maugre all Persecutions and Heresies, and the
restoring of it in these latter days without a Miracle, is none of the least
Miracles. Certainly the clear revelation of the Mysteries of Faith, and the
manifestation of the Graces of Gods Spirit in the Hearts and Lives of men are
evident testimonies that God has not forsaken his Church; the least dram of
true Grace being more valuable then all Miraculous Gifts whatsoever, and the
principal end thereof. As for Enthusiasms and Revelations they were of use in
former times, and very necessary before Scripture was finished, being either
Scripture, or instead of Scripture; but since St. John's time, who wrote the
last Book of Scripture in the Isle of Pathmos under Domitian, they seem also to
have ceased: for if this were true they ought to be believed equally with
Scripture, being the immediate and infallible Word of God as well as it, which
is now the only rule and measure of Faith, sufficient to make the man of God
perfect. But all those Fancies are not so dangerous as other Spiritual Errors
in the Foundation and Essentials of Faith, to which such Spirits are very
prone, striving to ascend above Truth as much as others fall short of it. Thus
by exalting the free Grace and Spirit of God they destroy the Moral Law, and
with the Penalty take away the Precept or Commanding power; though the Law be
as obligatory in it self and prevalent over the Conscience of a Good man
without it as with it, and most perfectly consistent with Grace, which enableth
us to perform what the Law commands. Others trample on the very Ordinances
and Duties of the Gospel, presuming to find a nearer way to Heaven then God
has appointed. There are new fashions and dresses of Religion very pleasing
and popular, as all Novelties are, especially such as seem more sublime and
Spiritual. But the old Orthodox Truth, is the best, and still prevails at
last. There is no Doctrine in the world which has been so curiously scanned
and thoroughly sifted in every Point and Puntilio thereof, as Christianity: the
greatest Scepticisms, and most subtle Criticisms and niceties of Wit have been
exercised about it, and the whole Body thereof like the Body of our Savior
hanging upon the Cross, vexed and tortured in every joint, and yet it continues
whole and entire; though there may be some prints of the Nails and Spears of
Heretics remaining upon it, yet not a bone thereof may be broken, which
plainly proves it to be Spiritual and Divine, preserved only by the Author of
it. Paracelsus threatened that he would deal with the Pope and Luther as he had
done with Galen and Aristotle, and probably if he had undertaken it we should
have had some such Mercuriall Theology from him as is now vented in our times.
The difference seems not much unlike. Sound Divines, like Galenists administer
solid and substantial Truth, whereas our Paracelsian Preachers deal in
Quintessences and Spirits, and the like Chemistry of Divinity, and cloth them
with strange words and Mystical expressions. Divinity has found the same
usage in these times with all other Arts and Sciences, and the same Humor of
this fantastike Age runs through all. Men think to advance Learning by fine
Conceits and strong Lines, as they call them* which have enervated the solid
part thereof: so do these emasculate Religion by their vain Opinions and quaint
Expressions. There is no greater Bane of true Piety then Error on the right
hand, and sublime Heresy; especially when it grows Popular and is generally
received. Yet Truth is no less Truth though all the World should be in an
Error. One Athanasius may stand to his Creed in the midst of an Arrian Empire.
As a man who sees the Sun shine, though all others should say the contrary, is
no whit less assured of it, because he sees it. Indeed we can hardly guess at
things which are before us, how much less can we find out Spiritual and Divine
Truth, or practice what we know? Let us therefore pray to God for his Spirit,
who first reveled it to the world, and who only can lead us into all Truth, and
into all Grace, which is our true Happiness.

VII. Of a Christian Life.
THe great work of the Spirit of God in our Hearts is the new Creature, and the
effect thereof new Life. Christian Life is the Enjoiment of all things, for
enjoying Christ, who is Heir of all things, and has purchased all with his
blood, we enjoy all things by a new and better Title, and in a more excellent
and Spiritual manner, as the Fruits of his Redemption, and Gifts of his Love.
It is generally affimed by Divines, that true Grace chiefly respects Gods
Glory, and our own Happiness in a subsequent and inferior manner, so that we
should be willing to suffer even the pains of Hell it self for the Glory of
God; which is a fine Notion and an high Expression: but if rightly considered,
we shall find no such distinction in the Thing it self. Indeed if we take
Happiness for a releaf from Pains, or a Paradise of Pleasure, or any other
thing then the very enjoiment of God and Christ, it is a true Sentence: but the
highest Happiness of the Soul being that very enjoiment, the one cannot be
separated nor really distinguished from the other. He who truly loves the
Person of another, without any collateral respects, loves to love it, and this
Love being most true and pure is also must lovely and delightful. Thus does
Divine Love pay it self, and as Virtue, so much more Grace, is its own Reward.
This is that blessed Communion and Copartnership of profit and advantage which
God affords us with himself, which is no equalling of our selves with him, but
consists in the very subordination of our selves to him. To glorify him is our
highest Glory, to bless him our truest Blessedness: his Will and our Good do
most perfectly and entirely concenter. To divide these, is to cut in sunder the
very intrinsecall bond of our Union with him: and the contrary apprehension is
the greatest deceit and highest prejudice that can be against the service of
God: for it keeps the Soul at a perpetual distance, and frights it out of the
way of Piety: whereas the right understanding hereof ingages it most fully and
freely, with the mutual embraces of Duty and Benefit. As true Philosophy
resolvs Honesty into Utility, so does true Divinity resolv* Grace into Glory.
While the Soul remains corrupt and contrary to God, it cannot enjoy him nor any
Happiness in him, but a new Nature begets new Principles and new Enjoiments:
and it being the highest perfection of our Nature to be conformable to God and
united to him, is also our highest Happinness: for the perfection of every
Nature affords the greatest and truest Pleasure. Now what can we rationally
desire more then to be most Happy? why then should we not rather desire a right
constitution of Soul which produces true Happiness, then the false Happiness
of a corrupt Mind? Sin is as much against every man's general and implicit
Intention, which is to be Happy, as it is against Gods express Command, which
is that we should be Holy. Nor does the Command of God and his absolute
Sovereignty over us diminish the freest Liberty of a rectified Soul. Perfectum
imperium cum perfecta liberate consistit. God is Good, and does Good, and
commands nothing but Good: which is but like the Latin Complement, Iubeo te
valere, I bid you farewell. By Conversion the Unwilling Will is made a Willing
Will, and to such the Command of God sounds only thus, Do what you will. A
wicked man says, Quod libet licet, but a Godly man inverts it, Quod licet
libet. Thus most connaturally and harmoniously has the great Creator and
Governor of the World subordinated all to himself without the least discord or
offense. It is sin which has wrought all confusion and malignity in our
Nature, and all the mischief in the World. As our Being is founded in our
dependence on God, so is our VVell-being in our subordination to him, and it is
impossible it should be otherwise. The perfection of his Nature is to be
perfectly supreme, and the perfection of our Nature is to be perfectly
subordinate and subject to him, whose Service is perfect Freedom. Thus we
enjoy all things in him as they are eminently in himself, and as he gives us
all things richly to enjoy. As a Woman married to a Rich man enjoieth him and
all his estate, though she uses no more thereof then what is fit for her,
which is the right enjoyment of all. God makes all things work together for
the best to them that love him, and so they enjoy the best of all; as well of
that which he gives, as of that which he denies. Adam should have enjoied the
forbidden fruit by forbearing, and not by eating: as Sin is a Privation of
Good, so the only enjoiment thereof is Privative, or Relative to Grace, which
is the Contrary thereof: and as it is Duty to omit things which are to be
omitted, so it a kind of Enjoiment not to use things which are not to be used.
It is the great Error of Men, that they cannot understand this kind of
Enjoiment as well as the other, but are taken with every bait of Pleasure, and
led captive by the Devil at his will: finding some sinful Delight in sinful
Pleasures, as a corrupt Stomach longs for corrupt Food, and abhors that
which is better and more wholesome. But unless the Devil could turn the Tables
of the World, and put God and his party to the loosing side, it is most
impossible that there should be any true Happiness in any other thing* or in
any other way then as he has appointed and prescribed. Nor can it be
reasonably imagined that God should suffer his friends to loose by him, or his
Enemies to shark any thing from him who is Lord of all. If Intemperance could
afford more pleasure then Temperance, Heliogabalus should have been more happy
then Adam in Paradise: yea if there were the least real delight in Sin there
could be no perfect Hell, where men shall most perfectly Sin, and most
perfectly be tormented with their Sins, which are the prepared fuel thereof,
and though now they neither glow or burn, shall then consume them with
unquenchable fire. Wicked men, like Prodigals, live riotously and run in debt
for it; but the time will come when they must repay both Principal and
Interest, and so shall gain nothing by all their Voluptuousness. Sardanapalus
his Account was not rightly cast up. Haec habui quae edi -- for he lost more by
what he spent, then by what he left. We will now descend to the Particulars of
this Universal Enjoiment of a Christian Life.

VIII. Of Nature.
THe first part of a Christian Life is the Enjoyment of Nature, and of the
Works of God, wherein a Christian far excels the wisest Philosopher, and
moves above him in his own Sphere. Vulgar Minds view the face of Nature, as a
Brute Beast does a Picture, regarding only the Surface and Show rudely and at
large. The Philosopher, as an Artist, contemplates the curious Workmanship
thereof, observing with much pleasure and delight the proper Colors, and comely
Features and Shadows, and the whole Composure of the beautiful Image; as the
Painter answered him who wondered at his gazing on an excellent Piece. O, said
he, if you had mine eyes you would be affected with it as I am* But a Christian
looks upon Nature, as a Lover does on the Picture of his Beloved, delighting
more in the Resemblance then in the Table. Thus David rightly enjoyed Nature in
his pious Contemplations thereof. So he begins his excellent Hymn of the
Creation of the World. Bless the Lord O my soul! O Lord my God thou art very
great! Thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty! Thou coverest thy self with
Light as with a Garment! etc. and he concludes in the same manner, I will sing
unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praises unto the Lord while I have
a being, my meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord. So
when he reflects upon the little World, Himself. I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; marvailous are thy works, and that my Soul
knows right well. So comparing both together. When I consider the Heavens,
the work of thy fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained, what is
Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him?
etc. Naturalists are much affected with the Sucly of Nature, and Poets express
a fluent and sweet delight in describing her, but there is more Life and Spirit
and Angelical Speculation in one of David's Psalms then in all their writings;
this Spiritual use thereof being more sublime and divine then any natural
contemplations: as the Cardinal plainly confessed, when he found a Countriman
meditating on a Toad, and blessing God who made him a Man. As Adam was created
in a state of Perfection, so he had a great advantage of us in other respects,
being created in the perfect maturity of Understanding, and rising up suddenly
from the Earth out of which he was taken, whereby he had a quicker and fresher
view of the World then we whose Minds are dulled through Custom and Use, and
the edge of our apprehensions much rebated thereby. Let us therefore make
trial whither the Imagination of such an advantage may not somewhat excite and
sharpen our understanding. Let a man suppose himself made, as David speaks
Metaphorically, in the lowest parts of the Earth, in an adult State of Body and
Mind: Surely if he could well discern it, he would judge it to be the common
dunghill of the World, and would wonder to find any Metalls or Jewels hid in
the rubbish thereof. And then coming nearer the Surface, and meeting with heaps
of rotten Carcases, and a few noisome Living Creatures, he would deem it a very
Grave and Hell of all things; and could never expect that it should produce any
thing but filth and corruption. But then lifting up his head above the Ground,
and seeing it covered with the curious Tapestry of Herbs and Flowers, spread
for him as a Prince to tread on, painted with the variety of all pleasant
Colors, and perfumed with most fragrant Odors, and enriched with many secret
and excellent Virtues; then beholding the Armies of standing Corn, and Forests
of goodly Trees crowned with innumerable Leaves and Fruits; and perceiving the
several kinds of Beasts and Birds, like so many Automata or self-moving
Engines, stirring up and down about him in their several Postures and Motions,
he must needs stand amazed at so strange a sight, and praise the fruitfulness
of the womb which bare them. But looking back upon the deep and wide Sea which
threatens the shore with his insulting waves, he would fear least that roaring
Monster should step in among them, and swallow up all in his devouring Jaws;
till he perceiv how when he is swollen to the hight of his pride and fury, he
begins to retreat and fall back into his native den, without doing the least
hurt, and fetches off the tall ships, carrying them away upon his Back, and
furnishes all the Aquaeducts of the Earth with fresh Springs and Streams,
ministering drink to the whole Family. Again, considering the pure Air which he
scarcely felt or perceived, and yet is so far from Inanity that it fills up all
the Chinks and Cranies of the World, fanning the Earth with the VVings of
VVind, and driving the great Ships to and fro with various Gales of Breath,
sometimes causing a quiet Calm and universal peace among the Elements, and
suddenly muffling the face of Heaven with black Clouds, and rowsing up the
sleepy Ocean, tossing and tumbling it over and over, and tearing the Bowels of
the Earth, making the Sturdy Mountains to tremble, and the Rocks cleav in
sunder, is again as suddenly pacified he knows not how nor by whose persuasion;
how it carries about the Limbikes of the Clouds which distill down fruitful
showers, and drop fatness on the Earth, and in a moment convey all the Gifts
and Blessings of Heaven to it. Lastly, contemplating those vast Orbs or Worlds
of Light in their swift Motions and perpetual Courses, which never fail one
minute of their appointed Time, nor wander an inch out of their constant Way,
blessing the Earth with their very smiles, and illuminating it with their
Glorious Light; he must necessarily acknowledge and adore the great Creator,
who has founded this stately Globe, and does manage the Universal Empire of
Nature by Secret Laws and inward Principles. And though he cannot discern him
by outward Sight, yet his Understanding will as easily discover him, as it does
an invisible Spirit in a living Body. Besides, as a Christian he tastes the
blood of his Savior in all things, which renders those relics and fragments
of nature more sweet to him then all the first Paradise of perfection was to
Adam.

IX. Of Providence.
A Theists, though partly convinced by Nature, draw their chief arguments
against a Deity from Providence and the present state of things: whereas indeed
this is the greater argument against them, and such as fortifies the other: for
had Nature still flowed in a constant Stream of Causes and Effects, she might
more probably have been supposed to be the only Fountain of all things: but
when we see Nature, which always intends the Best, not able to fulfill her
own Laws, nor effect her Intentions, and so fall short of that end which she
prescribes to her self, we may plainly perceiv that there is a higher Power
which overrules her; for the Creature was made subject to Vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope. Again, she
being thus lapsed and diseased might easily decay and perish, if the same Power
did not still preserv and continue her in all her Species, though Individualls
die daily. How little excess of drought or heat destroies the hopes of the whole
Year. A pestilentiall Air may infect the whole world, and an Age of successive
Famines and Pests might prove an universal destruction of all Living
Creatures. But he left not himself without witness, in that he does good,
giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, and filling our hearts with
food and gladness. Let a man seriously consider how Strangely his own Life is
preserved; how many several Ingredients are requisite to patch it up; how many
sorts of Materials are necessary to build an House; how many Utensiles to
furnish it; how many kinds of Creatures are spent in feeding him, and almost as
many in clothing him, besides all other occasional Instruments of Life: and he
may justly wonder at the daily provision which God has made for him* Let him
also consider how many possible Deaths lurk in his own bowels, and the
innumerable hosts of external Dangers which beleaguer him on every side; how
many invisible Arrows fly about his ears continually, and yet how few have hit
him, and none hitherto mortally wounded him; and he shall find the meditation
of those things, which now he so much neglects, strangely affect him. Vives
reports of a Jew, that having gone over a deep river on a narrow plank in a
dark night, and coming the next day to see what danger he had escaped, fell
down dead with astonishment. The common sort of men walk in the dark, and so
regard not these things, but like adventurous Soldiers are hardened with past
success, though their fellows fall daily on every side. Stoikes satisfy
themselves with their Opinion of a Fatal Necessity, so the Turks say, their
Destinies are written on their foreheads, which is a desperate Humor, but no
Security: and upon such a conceit to neglect the means of our own preservation,
adds Guilt to Misery, and deprives us of no small comfort in suffering, that we
were not wanting to our selves for the prevention of it. But as it is the
Destiny of such men to perish, so it is their Destiny to perish by their own
folly, which is a double Evil: And so Zeno the Stoike could answer his servant
when he would have excused his fault, by pleading that it was his Fate: he
telling him, that it was his Fate also to be beaten. Politicians think to build
above Providence, and to set their Mountain so sure that it cannot be moved:
but how easily are the greatest designs and wisest counsels overturned by the
least and most unexpected accidents? Julius Caesar was a man of the largest
abilities, and no less performance. He so far prosecuted all natural means, as
if no man had more distrusted his Fortune, and yet so much relied on his
Fortune, as if he had needed no other means: when he was in that extremity
wherein he could make no use of his Wit or Strength, he boasts of it, and
trusts to it alone: Caesarem vehis and Fortunam ejus. He so often succeeded
well in such cases, that he kept an Ephemeris thereof. God who had ordained him
to be the Founder of the Roman Empire did strangely excite and support his
Spirit: and though it cannot be presumed that he had any knowledge of Divine
Revelations and Prophecies concerning himself, yet he seems to have had some
kind of Belief of the thing, I mean an extraordinary Confidence and Assurance
of success. We shall find him as great an Instance of Divine Providence both in
his Rise and Fall, as ever was in the World. We will begin with his Civil War,
and recite only his own observations. First he had the good hap to deal with an
Army without a General, and then with a General without an Army: both which
met together might probably have matched him. He was so put to it by Petreius
and Afranius at Ilerda in Spain, that it was reported at Rome they had ended
the War; which might have been made good if Pompey had come to their aid
through Mauritania, as was expected. Again, before the great Battle of
Pharsalia, when he was assaulted in his trenches, he was so far worsted, that
he plainly confessed he had been conquered, if Pompey then had known how to
conquer. Lastly, in the Battle of Munda he was put to fight for his safety, as
at other times for Honor: Labienus only by wheeling about with his Horse for
advantage was apprehended by the rest to fly, and so resigned the Victory to
him: so small a matter does many times turn the Die of War over and over, and
determine the greatest affairs of the World: and the most secret conspiracies
many times leak and run out at the least hole. Caesar escaped a most imminent
danger of being murdered at supper in the Egyptian Court, if the Conspirators
had then attempted it: and afterward when they were fully prepared for the
action, his Barber, who had no other direction then the strange Instinct of a
natural fearfulness, was thereby put upon the search, and discovered the
Treason: which was as weak a Guard to his Person, as the Geese to the Capitol,
yet both proved effectual. But when God had determined to ruin him, we shall
see how no advantages, no warning could preserv him. He always held Brutus and
Cassius in suspect, and professed some fear of those pale lean fellows. The
Conspirators were many, the business long in agitation, the danger foretold by
Spurinna, his wife dreamed of it, and had almost staid him, He had a Paper of
the whole Plot delivered into his hands as he was going to the Senate, and had
begun to read it; the Conspirators themselves were daunted, and thought they had
been betrayed, yet all this could not preserv him from being slain in the midst
of the Senate, and made a sacrifice to Pompeys Image. Now let all the great
Captains and Counselors of the World learn to acknowledge an overruling
Providence, and submit all their Power and Policy to the Beck of a Divine Will.
A Christian enjoies Providence by referring himself to Gods Protection, and so
walks constantly in a straight way in the midst of all changes and vicissitudes
with aequanimity of Spirit, being most assured, that though he cannot well
understand the Particulars, yet the Sum of all shall be Gods Glory and his own
Good, which is that Happiness to which he is tending.

X. Of Prosperity.
PRosperity and Adversity are the different Issues of the same Parent, being
the several dispensations of Providence: and as they have the same Root, so
they yield the same Golden Fruit of Happiness. I have learned, says the
Apostle, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, Both may be enjoied
with Content, but learning and skill to do it are requisite. Men think it an
easy thing to be happy in Prosperity, accounting that the only Happiness;
though they know not how to enjoy it. As if a Mariner sailing with wind and
tide he knows not whither, should think he is making a very good Voyage. There
is a silent and still stream of Fortune, wherein some men swim down quietly
from the spring of their Birth to the common Ocean of Death, so that they do
not much remember the days of their Life, because God answers them in the
joy of their heart. This is that kind of Prosperity so much commended by
Philosophers and Poets: Beatus ille qui procul negotiis, etc. A pretty kind of
idle Felicity, a Pastime, or sweet Sleep, stealing away our Time with the soft
hand of ease and rest, and at last shutting it up like a fair Day in the common
Darkness of Death with others. There is also a strong Gale of success carrying
on the Designs of some Great Men, who adventure themselves and all their
fortunes on the Ocean of the World, in such a constant course of Prosperity,
that they never meet with any cross winds. Many of the Grecian and Roman
Captains proved always victorious, and were never beaten by any. Many rich men
thrive perpetually, and never suffer any considerable loss: yet this is no
other then a busy Dream, or a Play well acted: as Augustus the most fortunate
Prince intimated, who when he was going off the Stage, took his leav of his
friends like an Actor, Valete, et Plaudite. The right way of enjoying
Prosperity is rightly to understand it, and the true worth and nature of it.
The Covetous and Querulous, like sick men, are never satisfied, but undervalue
all the Good things which they possess, and because they have not what they
would, neglect to enjoy what they have. On the contrary, Prodigalls and
Parasites, like Children, Idolize every trifle; which overweening Opinion as
much hinders true enjoiment as the diminishing Humor and Discontent of others,
and ends in the same Insatisfaction wherein the other begins. A Christian
looking upon all his Prosperity as the effect of Gods Providence, enjoies it in
another manner then any worldly man. The ancient Hebrews seem to have had a
most familiar knowledge of Gods Providence. When Isaac asked the supposititious
Esau concerning his Venison. How is it that thou have found it so quickly my
Son? He answered, Because the Lord thy God brought it to me. Though he lied in
the thing, yet the Phrase discovers what apprehensions they had of the most
common mercies, which also Isaac elegantly expresses, speaking of the pleasant
sent of his Garments, See! the smell of my Son, is as the smell of a field
which the Lord has blessed. When we thus look upon God as the Father of
Lights, the author and giver of every good and perfect Gift, we see him as
easily begetting and multiplying Mercies as the Sun does Beams; This takes away
all Anxiety and Fear of loss or want, which does more diminish the Comfort of
them then that Care and Labor which they cost in purchasing. Again, as Gods
chief intention in bestowing his Gifts, is to allure and bring us home to
himself, so a Christian accepts them upon the same terms, as the Pledges of
his love and Favor. A Penny, which is the Earnest of some great Bargain is
another manner of thing then an ordinary Penny, being given and received under
another notion: and this is the right way to improve and sublimate Prosperity
to the hight more then any Ambitious Humor or vain Sensuality can do; eating
and drinking with a merry heart, for God accepts our works, and so we may well
accept his Gifts. But though outward Prosperity be a Jewel in the Treasury of
Gods Mercy, yet it is not the White Stone of his Justice. The very Heathen, who
were most affected with sensible Divinity, knew how to distinguish between the
Cause and the Success. They who insist on this argument commonly want a better,
and will not stand to it themselves when they are worsted. Decision by the
Sword, even in a lawful War is like waging Batail in a Writ of Right, which
the purer light of Christianity has antiquated, as very uncertain and
unwarrantable. Success is the Blessing of God upon a Good Cause, and his Curse
upon a Bad. It is at most but a concurrent witness, which signifies nothing of
it self, the Justice of the thing is its own best proof. God has not promised
that his Church and People shall not suffer; but that though they suffer they
shall not perish, like the bush which burned but was not consumed: and that in
the day wherein he has appointed to judge the world they shall prevail and
triumph for ever over all Injustice and Oppression. But to improve Success to
the use of all advantages, which it puts into our hands, though otherwise
irregular and unlawful, and to justify it by Gods Providence giving us such an
opportunity, is as if a man should plead that he may do any evil which is in
his power, and justify it by this, that God has given him the power and
opportunity of doing it; and so make Gods Providence patronize his Lusts, and
turn his Grace into wantonness. Though Adversity be a necessary preparation for
Heaven, by reason of our corruption, which is best mortified by it, yet
Prosperity in it self is as fair and ready a way, and the beginning thereof to
the Godly. He is certainly a most Happy man who can so enjoy it, as to profit
as much by it as by Adversity. Judgments drive, but Mercy leads to repentance.
This is an excellent temper of Spirit, most pleasing to God, and comfortable to
our selves, but very rarely to be found in any.

XI. Of Adversity.
THere is such a various mixture of Prosperity and Adversity in the Life of
man, that he who knows not how to enjoy both, can never live happily in either.
Nemo confidat nimium secundis;
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis.
Many men's spirits are like tender and delicate Bodies, which have a Most quick
and exact sense of Pleasure, but a little Pain kills them: like Flies, very
brisk and busy in the Summer of Prosperity, but when the Winter of Adversity
overtakes them, dead in the nest. Man is born to misery, and Christians have
commonly a double Portion of it, and of all Christians the best and strongest
are usually exercised with the greatest Afflictions, or made such thereby. If
therefore there were no Enjoiment nor Fruit of suffering, they should then be
indeed of all men most miserable: but as it is Gods usual way of dealing with
his Children, so his Promises and Benedictions run generally that way. Though
Affliction has no natural Good in it self, yet it produces much Moral Good;
yea it commends the natural Good, and corrects the Moral evil which is
in Prosperity: for Prosperity is as Diet, but Adversity as Physike, which
recovereth from Surfets, and reduces to a right taste. Though Prosperity be
more honorable in it self, yet the Virtues of Adversity are more honorable then
of Prosperity. The highest Romances of Worldly Glory are always founded in the
deepest Sufferings. -- O nunquam tranquilla exordia fatis
Heroum eximiis, nec denique naufraga Virtus!
And those real Conquerors are most famous who have encountered the greatest
Adversaries. Adversity overcome is the highest Glory, and well undergone the
greatest Virtue. The Poets feign of Hercules, not only that he slew Tyrants and
Monsters, but also that he bore the whole weight of Heaven on his shoulders;
showing thereby, that Virtue is as well exercised in Bearing as in Acting. Have
you not heard, says James, of the Patience of Job, as of a most famous and
memorable thing: and it is indeed very admirable to contemplate him assaulted
by Satan, and overcoming only by enduring. Satan had challenged Job before God,
that he would make him curse him to his face: and God permits him to try him,
and torture him to the utmost, only sparing his Life, which was no advantage,
but a lengthening of his fuffering: yet Job armed with nothing but Patience,
like a Rock in the midst of the waves, repells all his assaults: standing so
firm, that he cannot force him to a complaint, which is the most natural
Infirmity of men in such a condition; nor extort one foolish word from him. In
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly: yea, instead of Cursing he
falls to Blessing. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, and
blessed be the Name of the Lord: which was a far greater torment to Satan then
all his could be to Job. Julius Caesar when he had almost lost the field at
Munda, was ready to have killed himself: so great a Conqueror knew not how to
conquer Adversity: and yet no man is totally vanquished by it, till he yield to
it. Quicquid erit superanda omnis Fortuna ferendo est. Though we loose all, we
may still possess our souls in Patience. This is our last Reserv, and that
strong Hold whereunto he who is beaten out of the Field may always retire, and
cannot be forced out of it but by surrendering it. The common sort of men in
Adversity are like Children when they are whipped; either wholly surprised with
Grief and Horror, never striving to keep it from the Heart, but give up all
presently; betraying themselves by an utter despondency of Spirit, and neglect
of all Remedies or Cordialls; and so ly whining under the power of their
Adversary, bemoaning and pitying themselves to no purpose: which is a most
evident Sign of an absolute conquest, and sinks the Soul wholly under water;
whereas Patience keeps up the Head: yea many conspire with their miseries, and
are, as Quintilian expresses it, Ambitiosi in malis, augmenting and
aggravating them as much as they can; as though they found some Pleasure in
Grieving, and some Music in their mournful Ditties: Or else Sturdily and
Sullenly bear their Afflictions with a settled obstinacy of Mind, like strong
Bodies, on whom no Physike can work when they most need it, and so their
Disease proves incurable. This is to out-brave God and Nature, and rather to
fly and shun the sense of Affliction, then to conquer it. Men of Pleasure seek
to divert it by inordinate and unseasonable Mirth, Gaming, Drinking, and
Surfeiting on the remainders of the Feast of Prosperity, which is to abuse
both: Politicians strive by all means to make an Escape and get out of
Adversity, turning and winding every way, like an Eel, as long as there is any
Life; but care not to profit by it, or perhaps grow wiser, but not better.
Philosophers fortify against it by the strength of natural Reason: as he said
concerning the death of his Son, Scio me genuisse mortalem; accounting it a
gallant thing to be no more affected with the death of a Man then the breaking
of a Pitcher. Only a Christian Fruitur malis, which is indeed a most admirable
Enjoiment. Angels excel in strength, Doing the will of God, but Christians in
Suffering: and a patient enduring of necessary evils, is next to a voluntary
Martyrdom. A Christian hears the Rod and who has appointed it, which
teaches him to suffer, and sweetens his suffering more then all the Arts and
shifts of worldly men whereby they fence against it. He has a most acute sense
of the Pain, as feeling the anger of a God in it, and yet bears it patiently as
the hand of his Father, who chasteneth every Son whom he loves, punishing for
Sin, that so he may punish from Sin: and so enjoieth the Love of God and more
comfort in all his Evils, then worldly men do in all their Good things.

XII. Of Death.
DEath in it self, as it is a cessation of Life, is an indifferent or middle
thing between Good and Evil, and parallel with not being Born. In the Ages
which have preceded we did not live, and in the succeeding we shall not live;
the first is a negative Death, the second a privative. Therefore we may as
reasonably griev that we were born no sooner, as that we shall live no longer.
Our very Life is a continual Death: for that which is past is dead already:
Quicquid retro est mors habet, and when Death at last shall shut up all and put
a full period to the Whole, it shall do no more then what every moment does to
the several Parts. The last Sand in the Glass runs out in the same manner as
the first. Therefore Death should not seem so strange and monstrous being thus
familiarly conversant with us every moment. The difference between this Mortal
Life and Immortality is like that between a Lease for years and an Estate in
Fee Simple: both go hand in hand together, and equally spend the same minutes
of Time; but the one still runs on, whereas the other stops in a certain
period. Immortality loses nothing by spending, being renewed as fast as it
decaieth, and continues still the same Term; which the other does not, but is
diminished by every moment. Fools flatter themselves, and suppose a kind of
Immortality in the present Instant of Life; because it suffices for the
present, as well as Immortality it self: and they hope still to continue one
year or day, or moment longer. Thus the momentany and uncertain condition of
Life, which should most mortify, is by vain men abused to the contrary.
Consider Death in relation to the Evil things of this Life, and so it is a
Release from them all, and no part of them: Diseases, Pains, Griefs, and all
those sad groans and ougly faces which are put upon Death belong to Life which
many times exercises more cruelty and tyranny then Death. Racking is a greater
pain then Beheading, yet not so deadly. As Soon as Death enters upon the Stage
the Tragedy is done. In relation to the Good things of Life it is a total
deprivation of them, and the Grave of all our worldly affairs as well as of our
selves; yea as to our share and interest therein, a dissolution of all this
World. The Tyrants wish, That the whole Earth might perish with him, took
effect in himself: Death laugheth at all the Actions of mortal men, and
stepping in when he pleases, dasheth all in pieces. Death stops the mighty
Conqueror in the full Career of his Victories, and bids him quit the field.
Death deposes all Kings, and reduces them to the common equality of their
originals. Death sweeps down the great Politician, and the curious Cobweb of
his high Designs. Death silences the learned Clerk, and makes the Poet cease in
the midst of his work, like the Poetical Swan, -- Qui fixus arundine carmen
Mill modis querulum quod caeperat interrumpit.
Death is the best Comment upon Life: set him by the most beautiful Mistress,
and he will convert our deifying fancies into dust and rottenness: as Caligula
used to say of his. Tam bona cervix simulac jussero demetur. Place him on the
Table among our dishes (as the Ancients used to do at their Feasts) and he will
turn all into worms meat: Nothing can stand before him, but all vanish and
disappear at his affrighting presence. Honor, which of all wordly things only
seems to survive, passes away with our Breath into the empty Air; as Boethius
wittily descanteth.

Vbi nunc fidelis ossa Fabricii jacent?
Quid Brutus, aut rigidus Cato?
Signat superstes fama tenuis parvulis
Inane nomen literis.
Sed quid decora novimus vocabula?
Number scire consumptes datur?
Iacetis ergo prorsus ignorabiles!
Nec fama notos efficit:
Quod si putatis longius vitam trahi
Mortalis aura nominis:
Cum sera vobis rapiet hoc etiam dies,
Iam vos secunda mors manet.
Where now is just Fabricius? Brutus where?
Or Cato the severe?
In a few Letters their surviving Fame
Presents an empty Name.
But can those Titles which we read or hear
Make Dead men to appear?
In dark oblivion ye all lie down!
Nor are your Persons known:
Or if you t^ink your Life by others Breath
May be redeem^d from Death:
Time which this Life shall also from you take,
A second death will make.
The arguments which the World commonly draws from Death are very strange.
Epicures say, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. Certainly Death
is the worst Master of Revells. The Covetous will live Poor, that he may die
Rich: whereas indeed none die Rich, but the richest depart as poor and naked out
of this world as any, leaving all their wealth to others. Glorious men die
daringly, that so they may be famous after Death: yet all their Fame is but as
a stately Monument set over their Graves. Miserable men invoke Death and fly to
it as their only Remedy: but they are the worst Physicians who cure by killing.
These and the like are false enjoiments of Death, and to no good end. The
reference it has to another World, as it is a parting Line between Life and
Eternity, does best instruct us rightly to enjoy it. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, says the Wiseman, do it with thy might, for there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou go. He makes
Death an incitement to Work, not an invitation to Play: and the chief Work and
Business of our Life is to gain eternal Life. Blessed are the dead who die in
the Lord, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
All other Works, all Arts and Sciences, and the vast Projects and famous
Enterprises which fill the History of the World, end in the Grave, In that very
day his thoughts perish: those only are our Stock and Provision for another
World. Thus a Christian enjoies Death by being familiarly acquainted with him,
and taking him by the hand, goes along with him in all his steps and motions,
dying daily to the World, and living to God and Heaven: and when Death at last
summons him to depart, he willingly resigns up all as things which no longer
concern him. He looks upon Heaven as a Kingdom in Reversion after his own Life,
and looses nothing in the mean time by staying for it: while he lives he
increases his future Glory, and when he dies he goes to possess it. Men of this
world, whose hope is only in this Life, put Death far from them, though it be
most natural and nigh unto them, and the most certain of all future things:
and when Death appears and stares them in the face, they behold him as a most
strange and horrid thing; either dying away through fear and astonishment, as
Nabal did; or enraged, like a wild Bull in a net, as the famous Duke of Biron;
or with Judas desperately plunge themselves into Hell; like Empedocles, who cast
himself quick into Mount Aetna. The best of them look upon Death as an
indifferent thing, as Martial concludes his Happy Life. Summum nec metuas diem,
nec optes. But to me, says the Apostle to live is Christ, and to die is Gain:
which is the best and truest enjoiment both of Life and Death.

XIII. Of Sin.
SIn is the Death of Souls, the Father of Perdition, which like the Cici or
Worm in Jonas Gourd, corrupted the world almost as soon as it was made. The
Mystery of Iniquity is almost as wonderful as the Mystery of Grace and
Godliness; that it should be so exceeding sinful, and that being such it could
possibly enter into the World, when it was so perfectly constituted, that
there was no cleft or crany in it, by which Sin might creep forth and enter
into it, until it made way for it self. Before Adam by fatal experience
acquired the Knowledge of Good and Evil, Sin might seem an incredible thing:
for how could it be imagined that a reasonable Creature, of perfect
understanding and exact integrity, made only to serve and obey his Creator, and
conscious that all his Happiness consisted therein, should rebel against him,
and at once plunge himself and all his Posterity into everlasting Misery? As
there was no reason for Sin, so neither was there any root or ground out of
which it should spring, only a bare Possibility of doing that which was most
unreasonable and unnatural. God made Man upright, but they have sought out
many inventions, he was fain to seek out and invent the way of undoing himself,
and to create Sin, which God had not made. But that which is most wonderful in
Sin, and which has puzzled the most profound Doctors, is the consideration of
Gods Permission and Providence; how and why he should suffer such an Enemy to
himself and all his Creatures, to invade the World and ruin the whole Creation.
It is certainly the greatest quarrel and highest blasphemy which the Devils
and damned have against God, that he should make them to damn them, and it is
the strongest argument in the corrupt minds of the sinners of this World who
have not yet felt the Hell of Sin, that it is no such great matter as Divines
would persuade them: thinking, that because God does permit it, therefore he
will also tolerate it. This is the strange and prodigious birth of Sin, and the
Nature of it is answerable thereunto: for it is no less then the doing of that
which we ought not to do, or the not doing of that which we ought to do, and what
we ought not to do is in the very next degree to what we cannot do. Chaste
Joseph puts the one for the other. How can I do this wickedness and sin against
God? making moral Entity and Bonity as convertible as Natural, and Gods
Interdiction as restraining as his Interposition. This Monster as soon as it is
born is so strong and adult in mischief, that it destroieth the Womb that bare
it, and infecteth the whole Sphere of its activity: though acts of Sin make it
grow, yet the first birth thereof makes it a complete Body, and merits an
universal and eternal punishment. It has blasted the whole inferior world
and laid the foundations of Hell it self: hence are all the Evils in Nature,
all the disorders in Humane society, and villainies of Men. The Story of the
Italian, who first made his Enemy deny God, and then Stabbed him, and so at once
murdered both Body and Soul, declares the perfect malignity thereof: and should
the dire imprecations of revengefull Spirits be always executed on others, we
should create Devils and Hells enough to destroy all Mankind. But all this is
the least and lowest Evil in it; the perfection thereof consists in the
contrariety and enmity against God. It is called a Law of Sin, as being
directly opposite to the Law of God: for what God says, Thou shall do, Sin
says, Thou shall not do, and what he says, Thou shall not do, Sin says, Thou
shall do; and so inverts the whole Decalogue, and the very Law of Nature,
robing God of his Creature, and setting it up against him, and in his throne.
No created Majesty can endure a Consort, much less Divine, which is most
absolutely and infinitely Supreme. It is true, Sin can never effect what it
intends, and therefore wicked men think it is nothing, because it cannot hurt
and wrong God: but a declared intent is Treason, even among men, much more by
the Law of God, who is chieifly served or disserved by our Spirits and Wills:
yea this shows the most perfect malice of Sin, that it fights against a Majesty
which cannot be wronged; and breeds a more haughty disdain and just revenge in
him whom it opposes, to be defied by so base and Enemy. Men may say, they do
not intend to hurt God; yet they do transgress and offend his Law, which is to
offend himself, though the intention may be to do God good service. If
therefore there be any such difference in Nature, as Good and Evil; if there
be any Monster or Mischief in the World, Sin is really the worst of Evils,
being most contrary to the Chief Good: and in this relation it is infinitely
evil, though as it is a finite act it cannot be really and properly infinite,
for then it should be an Enemy equal to God: but it comes as near to infinite
as possibly it can: and if the Soul were infinite it would Sin infinitely, as
being eternal it will sin eternally: yea it is as it were infinite to us, for
we cannot measure nor comprehend the utmost extent of the sinfulness thereof,
no more then we can number the particular acts. Let us therefore stand amazed
at the sight of this Hydra, this killing and never dying Serpent, devouring all
Good, and propagating all Evil. Now what enjoiment can there be of such a
perfect Evil. Certainly next to the Grace of God a Christian reaps the
greatest Happiness from it; yea Grace it self, which delivers from Sin,
cannot be enjoied without the enjoiment of Sin from which it delivers: and
the more horrid and hellish Sin is, the more does the Love of God appear in
delivering us from it, and in preserving the little spark of his Grace in the
midst of an Ocean of corruption. There is no such Antipathy in Nature, as
between Holiness and Unholiness, the contrariety of Vice and Virtue is far
short of it: Grace is the highest perfection of the Soul, and Sin the greatest
imperfection. As sin is the occasion of our greatest Good and highest
Preferment, so it is also of Gods greatest Glory, and therein we should
rejoice. There is more Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, then over
ninety and nine Just persons who need no repentance. Thus the more we hate it,
the more we enjoy it, and our greatest abhorrency does most excite this
affection of holy Joy: and this is the high privilege of a Christian, to enjoy
that which is most contrary unto him, not only by forbearing it, but also by
Gods forgiving and recovering out of it to a state of higher Perfection and
Happiness.

XIIII. of the Restoration of the Soul.
THe Restoration of the Soul is the Conversion of it from Sin to God, as the
Corruption thereof was a defection from God to Sin. This is a greater and more
glorious work then the first Creation, and the utmost Design of God in making
the World. As in an ingenious Poem, which is the Creature of Fancy, the chief
excellency is the Plot, and the excellency of the Plot is the strange
difficulty and intricacy of the Epitasis, or troublesome state of the Business,
which is afterward beyond all expectation cleared up, and resolved into an
happy Catastrophe: whereas if it should be carried on in a constant course of
Prosperity, it would seem very flat and dull without art or wit. Thus God
having made all things for himself, and the manifestation of of his own Glory,
as the wisest end which he could propound to himself, was not satisfied with
the first work of Creation, though exceeding good and perfect in its kind: but
as soon as it was finished, suffered Sin to enter upon the Stage, bringing Death
and Hell along with it, and so to confound and destroy all. This was the Dignus
vindice nodus, such as all the Wit of Men and Angels could not unty, till God
himself came down from Heaven, and resolved it into this more glorious work of
Redemption; which is an uncreating of Sin, and a creating of Grace: God cannot
make Factum infectum, but by pardoning Sin he makes it Quasi infectum: Sin
remitted is as though it had never been committed. Thus Justice it self
justifies the unjust, and being overcome it triumphs. Justice and Mercy could
not meet together in any other way, and there is no other Instance in the whole
History of the World of any act of God which does so perfectly exercise all
his Attributes, and manifest all his Glory, and consequently fulfill the end of
Creation. As God justifies the Ungodly, so he makes him Godly, which is the
other part of this great work, and no less wonderful then the former. If the
entrance of Sin into the World be so stupendous, the expulsion thereof is
much more. The Peripatetikes suppose the Soul of Man to be like a plain Table,
or as we say, a blank Paper, on which Good or Evil may be imprinted, and so
equally indifferent to both. But other Heathens have confessed the contrary,
Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur -- and all Christianity is against it. If their
Opinion were true, probably some one man among so many millions might have
lived pure from Sin, perhaps through the whole course of his life, or for a
year, or day, or hour; or at least might perform some one action perfectly
good, which none ever did. Therefore the Platonikes, say the Soul is like a
Chariot drawn with two Horses, whereof one is fair and generous, the other
deformed and resty. The first is the Rational part, the second the Sensual:
some Platonicall Divines call them Flesh and Spirit; but it is most evident
that not only the inferior faculties, but also the superior are corrupted;
otherwise the inferior could not draw them away; they being able of themselves
to put forth their own acts pure and incorrupt; the Mind is free and cannot sin
but from it self, though it may be tempted and urged by others. On the
contrary, sometimes the Mind urges the inferior faculties to sin beyond the
common bounds of their nature, and the utmost desires of Beasts: besides, there
are many rational and spiritual Sins wherein the inferior Faculties have no
share. The Pelagians seem to grant a mixture of both principles of Good and
Evil in every Faculty, and that by our own endeavors the Good Principle may be
so exercised and excited, that it may prevail against the other: but then why
might it not proceed so far, as wholly to extinguish the other? for by
prevailing in part, it gains some farther degree of strength, and the other
loses as much; and a greater strength of Good may more probably prevail
against a lesser strength of Evil, then a lesser strength of Good could
against a greater strength of Evil; or if the Good can never overcome the
evil, then every act flowing from both, will be mixed and imperfect, and can
merit nothing but the just indignation of a pure and perfect God, and so leav
us in the same state of misery in which it found us. The Semipelagians
therefore, who have spun out this thread to the utmost fineness which it will
bear without breaking, say, there is indeed left in Man a free will to Good,
but such as cannot act the Good it would without a Divine assistance; yet the
Will of Man freely inclining it self to Good, inclines God to assist him with
his Grace: and that God eternally foreseeing this Good inclination, did
therefore, and not otherwise, pre-ordain such to Grace and Salvation; So that
God does not turn the Will, which they say is contrary to the freedom thereof,
but concur with it in promoting it. Thus they think they have fairly decided
this great Controversy, by parting the stakes between Gods Grace and Man's Will:
but they err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, subordinating
the will of God to the will of Man, rather then the will of Man to the will of
God, and make this greatest work of Redemption lesser then that the Creation,
which proceeded from nothing. Though it may be a problematicall Question in
Divinity, whether one sin does naturally of it self destroy all Grace, yet it
is most true, that the eating of the forbidden fruit was such a Critical and
Fatal sin which did incurr the sentence of Death, by which this Spiritual
Death of Grace is chiefly intended, and so judicially produced the same effect;
for as one sin may be punished with another, so may it be punished with all
Sin, by virtue of such a precedent Compact: and thus is that Original Sin
imputed and derived unto us, not only by natural propagation: for then all
other sins of Parents should descend upon their Children in the same manner:
but as that Command was a trial of Man's universal obedience, so the breach
thereof was an universal sin, and the punishment equal unto it. Yet the will
of Man remains free in its own nature, else it should not freely sin, and so
not sin at all; nor does necessity take away freedom; for God does most
necessarily, and yet most freely will his own Glory; and the will of man does
necessarily and freely will Good, real or apparent: yea in the very act of
willing it is necessarily determined to one particular object, and yet does
then will most freely, that is, not as Beasts, through Appetite and Instinct,
but with a Rational Election. The will of man is free according to the Law of
Nature, and by that very Law it is impossible that it should be so free as not
to be subordinate to God, and manageable by his supernatural and infinite
power, in such a supernatural and infinite manner as does not destroy the will
it self, not the freedom of it, which is of the nature thereof: for if God
should not govern the will of Men and Angels, as well as all other things, he
should not rule and order the highest acts of his noblest Creatures; nor can
there be any Pre-vision in God, without this Pre-ordination. Providence in the
Word signifies Foreseeing, but in the Thing Fore-ordaining, because God by
foreseeing does fore-ordain; and so that distinction whereon they so much
depend falls to the ground, which Tully ingenuously confesses, and therefore
denying Fate, denies also Oracles and Divine Prescience; and Bradwardine
disputes it affirmatively thus; He who made this World, and all things therein
did certainly foresee what he made, and it being eternally true, that
whatsoever has been, is, or shall be in the World, should be before it was,
God who is omniscient, must certainly foreknow it; now this certain
foreknowledge in God could not be grounded on the things themselves which should
be, for the World had yet no being, but was a mere Nothing; and Nothing could
not be the Cause nor Object of Gods foreknowledge of things which should be,
but God himself, or as the Platonikes and Schoolmen speak, the Idea in the Mind
of God, which is in himself, and of himself; and according to which the thing
was produced, in that manner as he had ordained; otherwise the foresight of God
could not be infallible, nor any foresight at all; and therefore only God can
certainly foreknow, because he only can certainly pre-ordain; and there can be
no exemption of the Will of Man more then of the actions of any other Creature.
The vast consequences thereof, and that grand objection concerning sin, Why
does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his Will? are resolved by the
great Apostle so fully, that if all the Cavils of men against this Truth were
now presented unto him, he could not answer them more directly then he does;
nor is it possible for any mortal man to satisfy him whom the Spirit of God
Speaking so expressly in that place does not satisfy. As one says, At the day
of Judgment we shall fully understand his 9. Chap. to the Romans: This being
the great and general Case between God and Sinners, is reserved for that great
and general Assizes; That God may be justified in his sayings, and might
overcome when he is judged. And the more proud men do now exalt themselves
against this Truth, the more should a Christian admire and enjoy the
wounderfull work of his Conversion, which as it is supernatural, so it is
incomprehensible, and say of his new Birth, as David said of his natural
Birth, Fearfully and wonderfully am I made.

XV. Of Graces.
AS Being is the foundation of Welbeing, so is Welbeing the Perfection of
Being. Christ said of Judas, It had been good for that man if he had not been
born. Contrarily, Spiritual Regeneration and the new Birth is better then the
Natural. Being of it self is morally neither Good nor Evil, out capable or
either. Thus Grace, though Accidental, is more valuable then the Substance of
the Soul. Grace is that which the Scripture calls A Good and Honest Heart,
that is, Ingenuity or Goodness toward God; As the word Piety generally
signifies a good disposition toward all Relations. So the Poet calls his
Aeneas Pious, as well for his officious dutifulness toward his Father Anchises,
as for his religious devotion toward his goods. The contrary hereof is either a
direct malignity, or Hypocritical and double dealing with God. This Ingenuity
consists in Spiritual Discretion, or Ingenium, and a towardly Disposition, or
Indoles of the Soul. Discretion, or a right discerning between things that
differ, is the genuine sense of divine Goodness, and the sinfulness of Sin;
whereby the Mind clearly beholds the Beauty of the one, and the Deformity of
the other, and is so satisfied and filled with this Light, that there is no
reserv of any contrary opinion, or secret subtilty of a corrupt wit, lurking in
any corner, which may prevail against it, and seduce the Soul from God. Good
Disposition is the bias or inclination of the Soul toward God, and aversion
from Sin, a rising from an inward Sympathy with the one, and Antipathy against
the other. These two beget a Christian Nobility and Gallantry of Spirit -- in
coctum generoso pectus honesto. The Mind thus settled and fortified within it
self, is able to encounter all the proud Fancies and vain Imaginations of men,
whereby they exalt themselves against Heaven; to despise the greatest prosperity
of the most glorious Sinners, to nauseate the Circean Cup of their sweetest
pleasures, and scorn the witty impieties of a Lucian, or a Julian, and the
whole Stage of profane Scoffers; to pass through the Labyrinth of a thousand
Errors, and keep the straight path of Truth, though covered all over with the
thorny arguments of the acutest Sophistry, or possessed with Lions and Dragons
of persecution. Hence proceeds an inward Joy and sweet Delight in God and all
Goodness, as naturally pleasing to the new Nature of a rectified Soul. David is
a most famous example of this happy temper of Mind, and therefore styled A Man
after Gods own Heart, judging as he ^udgeth, loving what he loves, and hating
that which he hates: and when he had sinned against this Ingenuity by those
presumptuous sins of Murder and Adultery in the matter of Vriah, which checked
this honorable title with the Rein of a sad exception, in his Poenitentiall
Psalm he prays for the restoring of this right and free spirit. Paul, the
greatest Conqueror that ever was in the world, was eminently acted by this
Spirit, being the most profound and powerful Preacher of the Gospel of Grace,
and the highest Example thereof in himself. And though this spirit of Grace
were not perfect in them, much less in common Christians, yet it is that true
Genius thereof in all, striving and prevailing against the evil spirit of
Corruption in them; and being the very Characteristicall note of true
Conversion, and that which Divines call Sincerity. Of all particular Graces,
the first and fundamental is Faith in Christ, because this unites the Soul to
him who is the Fountain of this new Life, sucking from him a Divine influence,
and deriving it to all other Graces, and so mingling it self with them, resigns
all back again to Christ, not as works or merits, but as his Gifts and Graces,
by him to be presented to God. This Evangelicall Faith does more perfectly
unite the Soul to Christ and God by him, then all the inherent Grace of Adam;
and this union of Faith is perfected in a more high and spiritual Love, which
also flows from it; for as we are now more beholding to God, so we are more
obliged to love him, and God also loves most where he gives most. This Love
begets Obedience, Love being the most serviceable and active Affection of the
Soul, and not only binds us to the Command, but ingages us of it self to become
like to him whom we do love: nor can there be any mutual delight between God
and the Soul without likeness. Can two walk together except they be agreed?
Glory being Grace perfected, where there is no Grace, there can be no Glory. As
Christ, though he suffered for sin, yet would not endure the least stain
thereof in himself, so though a Christian by his suffering is freed from the
curse of Sin, yet is he no less an enemy to all Sin. And as the Grace of God
does not restrain him from commanding, by which he works Grace in us, so
neither should it hinder us from using the means by which it is conveied to us.
This obedience of a Christian, though very weak and imperfect in it self, yet
being performed in the Strength of Christ, is more acceptable to God then all
the perfect obedience of Adam. There is no condition which has not a Grace fit
for it, whereby it may be sweetened and sanctified, which is the happy Enjoiment
thereof, a Heaven within, though there be a Hell without. In the world, says
Christ, ye shall have tribulation, in me ye shall have peace. Grace is a
Panoply against all troubles, and a Paradise of all Pleasures.

XVI. Of Duties.
DUties are the Exercise of Graces, or the Souls Gymnasium, the ordinary way
wherein God has appointed to meet us and converse with us, and so instead of
all those extraordinary manifestations of his presence in former times. As in
our Natural and Civil life he has ordained several Callings and Emploiments
for the well spending of our time, and advancing our temporal Estates, so also
in the Spiritual life he has instituted certain Ordinances and Duties for the
acting and improving of our Graces. They who live without a Calling and some
constant Business, wander up and down in the Wilderness of Vanity and Vice, and
such as despise or neglect Duties, prove as extravagant and licentious in
Religion. There is a double Error concerning them. Some are very strict and
sedulous in Duties, but rest in the work done, and count them by their Beads,
or measure them by their Hourglass, rather then weigh them in the Balance of
the Sanctuary; not regarding how and with what Spirit they perform them:
whereas the very Heathens esteemed it no Litation, if there were any notable
defect in the Intralls; but sacrificed again, taking that for none, yea worse
then none, as being omnious and unlucky. Others speak so much of the Spirit and
inward part of the Duty, that they wholly neglect the Body thereof: but there
is a great difference between a Body and a Carcass. Outward worship without
Spirit and Truth is a dead Carcass, but with it is a living Body. They pretend
to the Spirit, and wait for the impulses and motions thereof, but neglect the
ways and means which the Spirit has prescribed in his Word, and if we
strictly observe them, we shall find such generally to be as formally
Spiritual; as others are formal in Duties; full of words and notions, and
placing all religion in them God has purposely ordained solemn and set Duties
to restrain our wandering Spirits, and bind them to his service, which otherwise
through the manifold diversions of worldly occasions, or this vain pretension
of waiting upon the Spirit, we should wholly neglect. David was a most holy and
spiritual man, and his Psalms as full of spiritual life and vigor as any part
of the Old Testament, yet we may observe in them; how commonly he begins heavily
and with much diffidence, and so quickening by degrees, concludes with much
assurance of Faith and Spiritual Joy. Therefore Duties are not to be deferred,
because we are dull and indisposed, but so much rather to be practiced; that
thereby we may gather heat and life: and we have no warrant otherwise to expect
the Spirit of God then in his own way. Our Spirits are like Instruments of
Music which must be often tuned, or like Watches which must be wound up daily.
The morning and evening sacrifices under the Law seem to typify to us under the
Gospel the spiritual offering up of Christ at the beginning and end of the
day. Duties are the Diet of the Soul, and it is best to make constant and set
meals of them; though as our natural food, they may be iterated or deferred
upon special occasions: but to omit them for any long time is dangerous, and
wholly to neglect them, deadly. Christian Duties, whereof we now speak, are
either such as God has prescribed in the way of natural worship which we ow
unto him; as to pray, preach, meditate, confer, and the like, and in these
there is nothing ceremonial or servile, more then in the Worship it self which
is exercised by them: or such as are specially and extraordinarily instituted
by God; as the Sacraments: and being such, may not be rejected, unless we
should plainly resist God: or else such as are mixed of both, and so partake of
the nature and reason of both, as moral Duties circumstantiated by Divine
Institution. As for those proud and foolish Spirits, who say they are above
Ordinances and Duties, they may as well say they are above all Religion and God
himself. The right enjoiment of Duties is first to attend them as our main
business, without which we do not use them, much less enjoy them. Mary was as
much busied in hearing Christ, as Martha was about his entertainment. The
Heathen Priests began with, Hoc age: they thought it a very irreligious thing
to be remiss and vain, though in a vain Religion. When a Coal fell upon the
hand of him who held the Censer, while Alexander was sacrificing, he rather
suffered it to be burnt, then stir it. To Attention we must join Intention of
Spirit: as we must love God, so also we must serve him, withal our heart,
withal our Soul, and with all our might. Good intervenient thoughts may be
generally good, but are very sinful in this particular circumstance; Again we
must mingle every Duty as well as Hearing with Faith, beginning, proceeding,
and ending all in Christ, who is the great and universal Ordinance of God. As
our Spirit does animate the Duty on our part, so does the Spirit of God on his
part. This communion of our Spirits with the Spirit of God in the Duty, is the
happy enjoiment thereof, which renders it as spiritual as immediate influxes
of the Spirit in any extraordinary way. Hence proceeds Joy and Delight: men of
action naturally delight in Business, chiefly such as they find profitable to
them. As profit begets delight, so delight begets profit. Be not slothful in
Business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. God does not impose Duties upon
us as tasks and burdens, as a Master exercises his Servant; but as a Teacher
his Scholar, for his instruction and education. They are the Paedagogy of
Heaven, preparing us for it: this apprehension of them takes off all the
drudgery and servility from them, and renders them our reasonable and willing
service, most profitable to our selves, and acceptable unto God.

XVII. Of Conscience.
COnscience is the greatest obligation to Duty; the supreme Dictator, and chief
Magistrate in the Soul, and not only as a Magistrate externally imposing Laws
and Commands, but rather as a Genius or Demon within us, speaking Oracles, and
exercising a Divine authority over us; which must be exactly satisfied in every
point with a direct and active obedience: and in this respect it has some kind
of coordinate power and authority with God himself: for as Conscience without
Divine authority will not justify an action, so God will not accept it without
the concurrent authority of Conscience: there must be as it were mutual
Indentures between both parties: God first indites and seals the deed, and
Conscience must also seal the Counterpart: without the one our service is
unlawful, and without the other unreasonable. This double authority being
requisite to every action, any contrariety or diversity between them, puts the
Soul into a strange confusion: for whether we do follow an erring Conscience we
sin, or whether we do not we sin, and when the Conscience doubts and hangs in
suspense between two contrary opinions, not knowing which way to take, like
Pentheus, who thought he saw Et solemn geminum, and geminus se ostendere Thebas.
it sins whether it goes one way or other, or neither, if the case be such, as
the thing ought to be done, or not done. This miserable condition in which the
Soul is thus entangled proceeds from the natural corruption thereof, which is
a difformity from the Mind of God, and that Divine authority, as a right
Judgment is a conformity thereunto: yet men secretly charge it upon God as a
severe exactor of that which is beyond their understanding, and think very
hardly of him, that they should be involved in this Labyrinth of Error, and put
into such a necessity of sinning; though this proceed not from any darkness of
Truth, which is a most pure and clear Light, but the blindness which is in
their Minds. To avoid this, Naturalists and Socinians suppose him a good easy
and indulgent God, content with any thing, and well liking to be served with
their good meaning, subordinating the authority of God to Conscience, rather
then the authority of Conscience to God: and so to deify their corrupt Reason,
debase and dishonor the Deity. Others who are not so impudent as to expect a
toleration for their Consciences from God, yet exact it from men. It is true,
no humane authority can force the Conscience, which to imagine is as ridiculous
as that there should be a Law made against thinking: but if it may not restrain
words and actions, which are things overt, and belong to the outward man, it is
an ordinance of God to no purpose, for where there is no Law, every man may act
according to his own Conscience, and if he may do so where there is a Law, the
Law is vain, and of no force or authority. This is another difficulty of
Conscience, when the public and authoritative Judgment, and the private
differ, but more easily resolved then the former. If the thing be unlawful, it
is better to obey God then Man; yet God who has commanded us to be active in
such cases, has also commanded us to be passive in suffering; which is the
only lawful escape he has reserved for such as are under lawful authority:
and which neither destroieth the public authority, nor our private Conscience.
But proud and furious Spirits, impatient of suffering, and despising this low
and humble way of passive obedience, whereof Christ himself, and all his
Apostles have given us both the precept and the example, will rather confound
all Laws and Bonds of Humane Society, then be crossed in their own wills. A right
Conscience will preserv it self in a right way, and by right means, both in
doing and suffering, otherwise Martyrdom it self should be only Patience
perforce, and the hight of Christian Grace inferior to Heathenish Virtue* As
Religion is a chief Bond of Humane Society, and indeed the very Spirit and Soul
thereof, which governs the inward man; so the differences and dissentions
about it have always proved dangerous, and sometimes fatal to the State: and
therefore may be no more to lerated then civil Seditions: What confusion and
mischief did the Arrian Heresy work in the Roman Empire: the different
expositions of the Mohammedan Law serve to foment the wars between the Turks and
Persians: So does the Popish and Protestant Doctrine among Christians; and the
Lutheran and Calvinisticall, Arminian and Antiarminian among Protestants. The
most strange and prodigious villainies which were ever acted among men have been
commonly the effects of an erring Conscience. Such was Agamemnons sacrificing
his Daughter, whereof Lucretius does so much complain; Orestes his killing of
his mother, being persuaded to it, as Euripides relates, by the oracle of
Apollo. The Vespers, Massacres, Powderplots of false and furious Zelots, the
most impious Paricides, Rebellions, and Treasons of Anabaptisticall Spirits
have been the Dictates of their fanatike Consciences. An evil Conscience is
the greatest Tyrant; a man's own evil Spirit, or the Devil within him,
possessing and engaging the whole man, and disturbing the world. Yet because of
the Errors in Conscience, and much mischief proceeding from them, to abdicate
Conscience it self is a most desperate and profane Humor, destroying all sense
of Good or Evil, and confounding Heaven with Hell, whereas a good and right
Conscience is like the Holy Spirit, our best Director and Comforter, As we
cannot serve God without it, so neither can we enjoy any actual Happiness in
him without the testimony thereof; his Spirit bearing witness with our Spirit
that we are his Children. This is both the Basis and Acme of the Soul, the
foundation and perfection of a Christian life, being indeed the most royal and
generous thing in Man. Horace his description thereof is, as Calvin observes,
too high for a Heathen; but true of a David, and a right Christian. Iustum, and
tenacem propositi virum,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida; neque Auster
Dux inquietae turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Iovis manus,
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
The Just man's Iugdement and resolved Will
No fury Popular injoining ill,
No urging Tyrants face
Shakes settled on a solid Base.
Not the Souths Stormy breath which does command
Rough Adria; nor great Jove's thundering hand:
Though the cracked Globe should fall,
He fearless bears the breach of all.


XVIII. Of the last Judgment.
Conscience is the supreme Judge within a man, but very erroneous in matter of
Right, though seldom erring in matter of Fact: nor is it always rectified by
the Judgment of others, whereof their Consciences are also Dictators: yea the
very Providence of God in this world, which men look upon as his Judgment at
present, supposing him always to favor the Victorious, is so various, and many
times so contrary, that many times a Cato may justly prefer the other side. But
certainly there is such a thing in nature as Justice, though she have long
since left the earth; and the Judge of all the earth must do right, and does
immediately pass sentence upon every evil act as soon as it is committed,
though it be not speedily executed. The greater the present confusion of all
things is, the greater is the certainty of the last Judgment. God never made a
world to no purpose, and Rational Creatures, which are his chief Subjects,
only to rebel against him. The Heathen were so perplexed with the
consideration hereof, having no certain knowledge of this last Judgment, that
sometimes they thought there was no God, Esse deos credamne? -- denying the
very Creed of Nature, and surrendering the belief of a Deity to their doubting
of his Providence, it seeming more credible to them that there is no God, then
that he should be unjust. Sometimes they thought God did not regard these
inferior things, but only made a sport and pastime of them. Ludit in humanis
divina potentia rebus. Sometimes they thought one God favored one side, and
another the other. Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo;
Saepe premente Deo fert Deus alter opem.
The Manichees went so far in this Opinion as to set up an universal and
standing Pair of contrary Gods, whereof one is the Author of Good, and the
other of Evil: which is the natural Idolatry of many barbarous Nations. The
Mysteries of Providence have puzzled the whole world: and indeed it is so
strange an Administration, that there seems to be left no more then what is
merely necessary for the preservation of the world. As Soon as any Family or
State grows up to a maturity, they have their period, and are thrown down
again: and when any man becomes strictly honest and religious, he can hardly be
suffered to breath, nor enjoy a common being among men. Aristides the Just, and
Socrates who lived as he taught, could not be endured in the most learned City
of the world. Even among Christians the power and life of that Religion which
is generally professed, is most opposed; whereas they who have been most
forward in any false Religion have been always most honored. Certainly there
is another manner of account to be taken of these things, or else we must
suppose God to be a most indiscreet Phaeton and unwise Governor of the World,
which is very irreligious and irrational. God can no more rest in this
confusion of all things, then he could in the first Chaos; but will a^ last
bring forth the perfect module of his Providence and Justice, and the cerrain
expectation thereof is that which does easily absolv him, and answer all
objections: for then shall this Face of Providence which now toward us seems
monstrous and deformed, as it shall look toward God, appear most beautiful,
not only in the principal lineaments thereof, but in every hair of the least
circumstance: then shall every thing attain that perfection for which it was
ordained and designed by him, and be set in its right place and order, never to
be removed or disordered any more. The first Creation was but an Embrion of
this other world of perfection, which shall be then completed: and so shall
ensue that eternal Sabbath, wherein God shall rest and reign for ever. The
chief materials of this new World are Angels and Men, the everlasting Monuments
of his Mercy and Justice, who are now in a continual progress toward the most
contrary terms of extreme Happiness and Misery. Then shall Truth and Error,
Good and Evil, be as clearly distinguished and discerned by all, as now the
Eye does judge of Colors, Black and White, Light and Darkness, and every one
receive according to his Deeds: so that there shall not be one farthing got or
lost by all this forbearance. Though Hell has most of men, yet Heaven had the
first, who died a Martyr: and God will have some of both sorts in all Ages and
Parts of the World to fill both places. As for wicked men, Iuvenal tells us,
Quocunque invenias populo, quocunque sub axe. Though he thought a Brutus or a
Cato could hardly be found in any corner of the earth: but Christ tells us that
better then they shall come from the East, and West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: and they in Heaven sing unto him. Thou
have redeemed us unto God out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation; As when any man has filled up the measure of his Sin or Grace he is
taken out of this world; so when the whole number of Sinners and Saints shall
be accomplished, then shall the World it self cease and be resolved into this
perfect Kingdom. Christ shall have his mystical Body made of all his Saints,
as so many members of several proportions; and the Devil shall have his made
up of sinners of all sorts and Sizes; and God shall be perfectly glorified in
both. God made the first world in order, measure, and weight, much more this
second world, which must be most perfect and perpetual. The perfection of this
perfection, and that wherein God is most glorified, is the salvation of Man:
therefore as the first man that died was saved, so the dead in Christ shall
rise first: though there shall be more of the damned, which is also to set
forth the singular and extraordinary Grace of God toward the blessed, yet there
is greater manifestation of Gods Glory in them that are saved then in the
other. Justice is equally balanced by rewarding the good, and punishing the
bad: but the saving of one Sinner, which is an act of free Grace and Bounty,
far exceeds both: and damnation, which is but a due punishment, holds no
proportion with it. There is more merit in the blood of Christ, by which we are
saved, then demerit in the Devils and all the damned. A Christian enjoies this
day of Judgment by a constant and joifull expectation thereof, which is so
terrible unto others: and as God will then reduce all the confusions of this
world into a state of perfection, so shall all the reproaches and sufferings of
the Saints end in eternal Glory and Blessedness.

XIX. Of Hell.
HEll is the Executioner of Gods last Judgment against Sinners, the Nadir of
the new World, as Heaven is the Zenith Paul the 3d on his death bed, said, he
should shortly be resolved of three things whereof he had ever much doubted;
Whether there were a God, an Immortality, and a Hell, or no: and indeed we can
hardly deny the last, unless we also deny the first. God who is the great Judge
will not only pass sentence, which is but an Idea of Justice, but also execute
it upon the damned, which is the life and existence thereof. Therefore every
Religion has instituted some kind of Heaven and Hell, places of reward and
punishment suitable to it self: and the more pure and spiritual the Religion
is, the more exact are the Heaven and Hell belonging to it: for as it deals
with God himself, so it does with his Justice and Mercy. The Barbarous Nations
suppose that after Death they shall be transported beyond I know not what
Mountains, and there receiv some childish rewards. The Poets have their Elysium
and Tartarus, and have furnished them with several kinds of Pleasures and
Pains. The Turks fansy a Paradise of all carnal Delights, and a place of
corporeal Torments, very gross and sensual, nearer Poetry then Christianity.
The Papists acknowledge a true Heaven and Hell; but as they deal with all other
parts of Religion, so to these they add some, Suburbs, certain Limbo's and
Purgatories of their own invention. But the Scriptures set forth the true
Heaven and the true Hell, in a most perfect manner, becommig the Mercy and
Justice of an Infinite God, and befitting the Spiritual nature of the Creatures
capable thereof. Wicked men persuade themselves that God who made them will not
damn them, or at most that they shall only suffer to the purging away of their
Sin: and then afterward -- Vbi mill rotam volvere per annos, as Origin held
even of the Devils, they shall be released: because their Sins cannot hurt
God, therefore they think God will not hurt them. Thou thoughtest, says God, I
was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set thy
sins in order before thine Eyes. He is so far from any such blind and dull
negligence, that he will bring forth all their sins, and set every one of them
in order, attired with all their Circumstances, and exactly proportion
punishments to them by a most just and equal compensation. He who would suffer
none to escape in this life whom he had cursed with a temporal Curse, but most
severely punished the foolish pity of Saul, in sparing Agag; and Achan for
reserving only a wedge of Gold and a Babylonish Garment of the spoil of that
execrated City; who drowned the old World with a Deluge, and saved only eight
Persons in the Ark, will certainly in a most exact manner execute his great
Anathema and final doom against Sinners, whereof those former examples seem to
be but the types, and the evidences of his severe wrath; the perfection whereof
is reserved for Hell. These things are no Monkery, nor Christian Poetry, no
Bruta fulmina, but most certain truths grounded on Reason and Scripture. God is
not slack, as men count slackness, nor rigid as they count rigor: but as he
perfectly hates Sin, so he will perfectly punish it; and go to the very utmost
Apex and Puntilio of Justice, that so his Justice may be manifested to the
utmost. Hell is the privation of all Good things, depriving the irreligious
Cardinal at once both of his part in Paris, and of his part in Paradise. There
the voluptuous Dives has not the least drop of water to cool the tip of his
tongue, but is exprobrated and tormented as well with the remembrance of the good
things which he formerly enjoied, as of the evil thing he suffers. But Heaven
it self is that which does infinitely provoke the envy of the Devils and the
Damned; making the great Tyrants and cruel Persecuters of the world to gnash
their teeth, when they behold a poor Lazarus, whom they disdained to diet with
their dogs, advanced to so high a Glory, and trampling on their captive necks.
Hence they conceiv as much torment, as they see the Saints enjoy of bliss: for
this is the nature of perfect Envy, to be as much vexed in it self, as it
apprehends Happiness in another. Coelum est altera Gehenna damnatorum. The
sensible sufferings of Hell are the other part thereof, the Tunica molesta,
which covers the whole Man all over with pain and misery. The pains of the Body
are set out by the terrible violence of Fire and Sulphur, which are put for the
whole power of Nature, armed with all its weapons and engines, and sharpened to
the quickest activity it has, yea beyond the present condition thereof, as the
Body it self shall be then fortified, only to endure those torments which now
would consume it in a moment: Yea, through this Hellish discord and distemper
it shall become a most perfect engine of its own Misery, more then all the
external impressions of Sicilian or Turkish tortures, the tedious Tragedy of
Raviliac, or the horrible Disease of a dying Antiochus. But the Soul, which is
the chief Sinner, shall be chief Mourner at its own Funeral. God who made it,
and knows how to punish it, shall cause his wrath to pierce into the very
Inwards and Vitalls of it, which no other Creature can reach. His dreadful Ey
shall shoot beams of Vengeance through and through the damned Spirits. Every
wicked man carries about him his own Hell, and lays up barrells of Gunpowder
against that time: which when the breath of the Lord like a flame of fire shall
once have kindled, will blow him up, and fill the Soul and all the faculties
thereof with an universal conflagration. Sin is the fuel of this fire which
shall never fail: for neither shall the Guilt thereof be purged away by
Suffering, nor the Power be suppressed by Punishing, but they shall for ever
rage and blaspheme his name through the sense of their pain and anguish, and
for ever be punished for it. Thus shall God to the utmost fight against the
damned, and they against him to all Eternity. There shall be no discharge in
that was. This Wheel of Eternity is that on which the Soul shall be perfectly
broken; that Abyss which renders the pit of Hell bottomless, and the continual
sense thereof is the most bitter Ingredient in every moment of suffering,
making the Soul endure all at once, through the constant expectation of a
succeeding perpetuity. Eternity begets that Monster, Despair, which like a
Medusa's head, astonisheth with its very aspect, and strangles Hope, which is
the breath of the Soul: as it is said, Dum spiro spero, so it may be inverted,
Dum spero spiro. Other miseries may wound the Spirit, but Despair kills it dead.
Now a Christian enjoies Hell in a contrary manner, as the damned are tormented
with the sight of Heaven. Gehenna est alterum Coelum beatornm. The miseries of
this Life commend Heaven unto us, much more the torments of Hell. Deliverance
from great dangers affect the Soul far more then perpetual security. When a
man shall consider with himself, that he was in the same condemnation with
others, and yet is pardoned and preferred while they are executed, it will make
him hug himself, and fill his Soul with the sense of a double delight,
conceiving as much joy in his deliverance, as there is torment in others
suffering. Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis
E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
It is at present a natural delight, but not without some tincture of cruelty
to behold the Tragedy of others: but when the Justice of God has once past
sentence upon the damned, as they shall for ever depart from him, so shall they
also depart from us: and then all Humane Relations, the grounds of Pity shall
cease, and be swallowed up in the Love of God; so that we shall as well rejoice
in his Justice, and their Punishment, as God himself, who has said, He will
laugh at their destruction. Let the Saints be joifull in Glory, let them sing
upon their beds: Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged
sword in their Hand; To execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments
upon the People; To bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with fetters
of iron; To execute upon them the judgment written. This honor have all his
Saints.

XVII. Of Heaven.
HEaven is the contrary of Hell, but far more glorious then Hell is miserable.
It is not only a paradise, or reduction of Man to his primitive state of
perfection, but an higher exaltation of his nature, as far above it in Glory,
as it is in situation. Though Man was created perfect according to that state
in which he was then made, yet he was capable of an higher perfection; and that
capacity was not imperfection, but the foundation of this greater perfection;
not a want of any thing which he then ought to have, but only an absence of
that which he might afterward have. As a Child in the womb is a perfect Child,
and of a more excellent nature then the Foetus of any Beast, though it be not
perfect in all the degrees and operations of Man; so is Man in the womb of this
World: or as the Apostle expresses it by a Grane or Seed, which is a perfect
Grane, but not a perfect Ear of Corn, though it be the Seed thereof. As
Redemption was the End of Creation, so is Glorification the End of Humane
Perfection. The Body shall be changed in qualities, but not in substance, for
it must still continue the same, and not be transubstantiated. It shall be
cleansed and purified, not only from all natural imperfections, as Pains, and
Diseases, and all Distempers, or Deformities; but also be stripped of all those
natural Virtues, which are inferior perfections, serving to supply the present
necessities thereof, as Eating, Drinking, Matrimony, and the like. For as in
the natural state Augmentation cease, when a man has attained his Acme, so
shall Nutrition and Generation, when he shall thus be perfected in himself, and
in his whole Species. Then also all the objects of these inferior delights
shall cease. As it is the sumptuous excellency of a great feast to want all
grosser meats, being furnished with more curious dainties; so it is the
super-excellency of Heaven to want them all. The Crowns and Scepters of the
most glorious Princes, their rich Treasures, their Pomps, and Triumphs, and
Royal State, and all the Glory of the world, and the Delights of the sons of
men are so much inferior and heterogeneall to Heaven, that they cannot mingle
with the pure nature thereof: and so far from adding the least moment to that
weight of Glory, that like the dust of the Balance, they would rather defile
it: which shows the perfect Vanity of all those worldly things whereof we
formerly discoursed, though in this Life they are the Handmaids of Happiness,
to do the drudgery thereof, yet must they then, when there shall be no more use
of them, turned out of their service. Surely Mahomets Heaven is very mean and
base which is made up of the dross and refuse of the true Heaven of Christians.
The Body being thus stripped of all those Husks, shall be endued with all
Glorious qualities, and perfectly fitted to serve and attend the Soul, which now
is forced to drudge for the Body, and lay in Provision for it, as the Wise man
says, All labor is for his mouth, and yet the Appetite is not satisfied: but
then the main and only Business shall be Spiritual; and therefore the Apostle
calls it a Spiritual Body, not a Spirit, but advanced to the nearest likeness
whereof it is capable, and made as fit an Instrument for the Spirit as may be.
Probably it shall be purified and sublimated to the perfection of the
Celestial matter, which is the purest part o^ the whole Body of the world, and
the Country or Region wherein Man shall live for ever: and therefore as now
living on the Earth his Body is suitable and connaturall to it, so when he shall
be taken up to Heaven it shall be refined to the temper thereof: and shall need
none of Mahomets Loadstones to lift it up, but like the Stars in their Orbs
move in the highest Heaven of Heavens most freely and naturally. Thus the
Apostle speaking of the resurrection of the Body seems to argue, Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can Corruption inherit
Incorruption: and again, The first Man was of the Earth Earthly, the second Man
is the Lord from Heaven; as we have born the Image of the Earthly, so we shall
also bear the Image of the Heavenly. This is the highest perfection whereof the
Body is capable, and was reserved for Christ the second Adam, and his glorified
members: as the Apostle does also infer. Howbeit that was not first which was
Spiritual, but that which was Natural, and afterward that which was
Spiritual. As God is the Light of that place, so the Soul is the Ey which
shall see him, and immediately enjoy him: and as the Body, so the Soul much
more shall then be discharged of all Imperfections, as Errors, Lusts, and the
like: Reason and Discourse, yea, Faith it self shall then be resolved into
Vision; Desire into Joy, and Hope into Fruition. Not only all Sin shall be
excluded out of Heaven, but also many inferior Graces, which now serve to bring
us thither. The Soul shall then attain an higher perfection then it has or can
have in this world: God says, No man can see him and live, that is, no living
Man can possibly see him, though the common Jews did interp^^^ ^therwise, as
appears by the Story of Manoah, yet Moses who saw as much of God as man could
do, did not therefore die. But he saw only his Backparts, or Attributes, which
are but the demonstrations of his Nature: in Heaven we shall behold him face to
face, and know him as we are known; according to the utmost capacity of finite
Creatures: and thus the Soul shall be wholly filled with the sight of God, as
the Ey is filled with Light, possessing and enjoying it in it self, and changed
by it into the same Glory. Then shall we also love God as we are loved of him;
yea, as he loves himself according to our finite capacity; and so accordingly
partake of the same Happiness which he enjoieth in himself: which is a most
wonderful and inconceivable Blessedness; and therefore sensual and carnal
men who are only acquainted with the Creatures, wholly neglect it, as being
(...) for fools to understand, and would be better pleased, and more taken with
a Poetical Elysium, or Circean Paradise. But a true Christian may satisfy
himself with this, that though he cannot comprehend this future Blessedness
fully and particularly, yet in general he believes it to be the highest and
purest Happiness whereof he is capable. Every Vessel of Mercy, as a Vessel,
shall be made only to hold Mercy, and be wholly filled with it; Yet shall not
all the Saints be equal in Glory, but differ therein, as in Grace: for though
all the Spirits of Just men shall be then made perfect, yet they shall be
proportionably perfected in Glory according to their degrees of Grace, by an
Arithmeticall, not by a Geometrical proportion: as in the Parable of the
Talents, He who gained two Talents, was made Ruler over two Cities in his Lords
Kingdom: and he who gained five Talents was made Ruler over five Cities. There
is no proportion between (...) and Cities, yet there is a proportion between
Two and Two, and beween Five and Five. Thus shall we be recompensed according
to our works, though not for our works: and this may be as great and quick an
incitation to working, as the proud opinion of merit, attaining the same
effect, and ending in the same reward of Blessedness. And though there cannot
properly be any merit in the Creature, but only a performance of Covenants; yet
the obedience of Angels, through that Grace which was first implanted in their
Nature, and never forfeited, is far short of this free Grace of God in Christ*
which as it is a manifestation of the greater Love of God to Man, and the
ground of his greater Delight in him, so it begets in us proportionably a
greater Love toward him, and a greater Delight in him, wherein the chief
Happpiness of the Creature does consist and thus the Soul of Man ^^nds the
highest perfection of Glory, and the very Heaven of Heaven, through free Grace
enjoying Christ as the fountain of all Happiness, and God himself as the Ocean
thereof. As Heaven in the separation from all worldly things does most plainly
manifest the Vanity thereof, so in it self, and in its own nature it is the
most perfect, universal, and eternal Blessedness; and the preparation for it,
and expectiation of it, the only true Happiness of Man in this Life.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 1. Read Pandora's. p. 6. l. 23. r. highest Sense. p. 29. l. 5. ^
Nicolas. p. 34. l. 12. r. publica. p. 40. l. 12* 13. r. ingenuous. p. 42, 1. 6
r. Myrteus. p. 47. l. 9. r. kind of regality. p. 53. l. 6. r. as Metal. p. 75.
l. 4. r. apposite. p. 89. l. 6. r. great. l. 14, 15. r. himself. p. 107. l. 16,
18. r. Nulla. p. 132 l. 2. r. Sibylls. p. 147. l. 8. r. Christ whom. p. 150. l.
7. r. Nosce. p. 152. l. 6. r. the Text. p. 167. l. 6. r. poenis. p. 175. l. 17.
r. inebriation. p. 176. l. 13. r. retorted p. 189. l. 2. r so it is. p. 201. l.
23, 24. r. by telling. p. 209. l. 18 r. in the story. p. 224. l. 23. r.
consumptos. p. 255. l. 20. r. ominous. p. 262. l. 16. r. geminas. p. 270. l.
14. r. that a Cato. p. 278. l. 8. r. Immortality of the Soul.


