A PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented: OR, A Twofold Character of POPERY.
THE ONE Containing a Sum of the Superstitions, Idolatries, Cruelties,
Treacheries, and wicked Principles of that POPERY which has disturbed this
Nation above an hundred and fifty Years; filled it with Fears and Jealousies,
and deserves the Hatred of all good Christians. THE OTHER Laying open that
POPERY which the Papists own and profess; with the Chief Articles of their
Faith, and some of the Principal Grounds and Reasons, which hold them in That
Religion.

Narraverunt mihi Iniqui Fabulationes; sed non ut Lex tua,

Psalm. 119. v. 85: By I. L. one of the Church of Rome.

To which is added, A Book entitled, The Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome, truly Represented. In Answer to the aforesaid BOOK. By a Protestant of
the Church of England.

And for the Readers better convenience, in the Re-printing, it is so ordered,
that every Chapter of the latter immediately follows that of the former, to
which it is an Answer.

Licensed according to Order.

Dublin, Reprinted by A. C. and S. H. for the Society of Stationers. 1686.

A PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented: OR, A twofold Character of Popery.
To which is added, The Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly
Represented, etc
THE INTRODUCTION.
THE Father of Lies is the Author of Mis-representing. He first made the
Experiment of this Black Art in Paradise; having no surer way of bringing God's
Precept into Contempt, and making our First Parents transgress, than by
mis-representing the Command, which their Maker had laid upon them. And so
unhappily successful he was in this his first attempt, that this has been his
chief stratagem ever since, in all business of difficulty and concern:
esteeming That his best Means for preserving and propagating Wickedness amongst
Men, by which he first won them to lose their Innocence. And therefore there
has nothing of Good yet come into the World, nothing been sent from Heaven, but
what has met with this Opposition; the Common Enemy having employed all his
Endeavors of bringing it into discredit, and rendering it infamous, by
mis-representing. Of this there are frequent instances in the Old Law, and more
in the New. The truth of it was experienced on the Person of Christ himself,
who, though he was the Son of God, the immaculate Lamb, yet was he not out of the
reach of Calumny, and exempt from being misrepresented. See how he was painted
by malicious Men, the Sons of Belial, Ministers of Satan; a profane and wicked
Man, a breaker of the Sabbath, a Glutton, a Friend and Companion of Publicans
and Sinners, a Fool, a Conjurer, a Traitor, a Seducer, a tumultuous Person, a
Samaritan, full of the Devil; he has Beelzebub, and by the Prince of the
Devils, casts he out Devils, (Mark 3.22.) There being no other way of
frighting the People from embracing the Truth, following the Son of God, but by
thus disfiguring him to the Multitude, reporting Light to be Darkness, and God
to be the Devil. The Disciples of Christ every where met with the like
encounters. Stephen had the people stirred up against him, because they heard
he had spoke blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, (Acts 6.11.)
Paul also and Silas, for exceedingly troubling the City, (Acts 16.20.) Jason
also with them, because he had turned the World upside down, and did contrary
to the Decrees of Caesar, (Acts 17.6, 7.) Paul again, because he did teach all
men every where against the people, and polluted the holy place, (Acts 21.28.)
And because he was a pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the
Jews throughout the World: to which the Jews also assented, saying that these
things were so, (Acts 24.5, 9) Neither did these Calumnies, these wicked
Mis-representations stop here; he that said, The Disciple is not above his
Master, if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub; how much more
shall they call them of his Household? did not only foretell what was to happen
to his Followers then present, but also to the Faithful that were to succeed
them, and to his Church in future ages, they being all to expect the like Fate;
that though they should be never so just to God and their Neighbor, upright in
their ways, and live in the Fear of God, and the Observance of his Laws; yet
must they certainly be reviled and hated by the World, made a byword to the
people, and have the repute of Idiots, Seducers, and be a scandal to all
Nations. And has not this been verified in all ages; See what was the State of
Christians in the primitive times, when as yet Vice had not corrupted the
purity of the Gospel. It Is almost impossible to believe in what contempt they
were, and how utterly abominated. Tertullian, who was a sharer of a great part,
gives us so lamentable a account of the Christians in his time, that it is able
to move compassion in stones. He tells us, so many malicious Slanders were
dispersed abroad, concerning the manner of their Worship; and their whole
Doctrine described, not only to be folly, and mere toys, but also to be
grounded on most hellish Principles, and so to be full of Impieties, that the
Heathens believed a man could not make profession of Christianity, without
being tainted with all sorts of Crimes; without being an enemy to the Gods, to
Princes, to the Laws, Apog. c. 2.
to good Manners, and to Nature. Hence they conceived such prejudice against
them, and they were rendered so impious in the opinion of the Vulgar; that
whatsoever Accusations were brought in, though never so false and malicious;
whatsoever Villainies were laid to their charge; all was welcome to the enraged
multitude, to which nothing seemed incredibie concerning those, that were thus
already odious. Upon this it was, that they were brought in guilty of Atheism,
of Superstition, of Idolatry, of Cruelty, of Sedition; of Conspiracies, of
Treasons: and bloody Persecutions were raised against them, to which the people
were exasperated by Fears and Iealousies: Quod Pontifices, (as Spondanus says)
Gentilitiae superstitionis Christianos more solito, calumniis circumvenissent,
Sp. Anno 286. Par. 5.
quasi aliquid contra Imperium molirentur; Because the Priests did use to
divulge it abroad, that the Christians were plotting against the Government.
Nor were these Crimes the whole Sum of their Charge; For besides, every public
calamity and misfortune that befell the Commonwealth, was thrown upon them. If
Spond. An. 362.
Daphnes Temple was consumed by Lightning from Heaven, yet must the Christians
be condemned as the Incendiaries: If Id. Anno 66.
the City was laid in Ashes, it must be revenged on the Christians; Nay Apo. c.
40.
Tertullian has it, if Tiber overflowed, if Nile watered not the Plains, if
Heaven stopped its Course, and did not pour its Rains here below; if there were
Earthquakes, Famine, or Plague; they would immediately cry out, Christianos ad
Leones, Cast the Christians to the Lions, as the cause of all the Calamities
that arrived in the World, and all the Evils that People suffered. And now the
Christians being thus reputed profane in their Worship, Enemies to the
Government, and the undoubted occasions of every misfortune throughout the
Empire; it is easy to conceive, in what contempt they were, and how detestable
amongst the Heathens; But because none can relate it so to the life, as Apo. c.
3.
Tertullian has done, I Will set it down in his own words, as translated by P. 1.
page 936.
Dr. Howel, in his History of the World. Is it not strange (says he) that the
hatred wherewith this Name is pursued in such manner, blinds the minds of most
Men, that when they witness the Probity of a Christian, they mix in their
Discourse as a reproach, that he has embraced this Religion. One says; Truly,
he of whom you speak is an Honest Man, if he were not a Christian, and his Life
would be free from blame. Another; Do you know such a one, who had the
reputation of a Wise and Discreet Man? He is lately turned Christian. (Again)
These people, by an extreme blindness of hatred, speak to the advantage of the
Name Christian, when they strive to render it odious. For, say they, How
pleasant, and of what a good humor, was that Woman? How sociable and jovial
was that Man? It Is pity they should be Christians. So they impute the amendment
of their Lives to the Profession of Christianity. Some of them also purchase
the aversion they carry against the Name Christian, which we bear, with the
price of what is most precious to them; rather desiring to lose the sweetness
of life, tranquillity of mind, and all sorts of Commodities, than to see in
their Houses That which they hate. A man, who heretofore had his mind full of
Jealousy, can no longer endure the company of his Wife, what assurance soever
he has of her Chastity, after once he perceives her to be turned Christian; and
parts from her now, when her actions full of Modesty have extinguished all
suspicions, wherewith he was heretofore moved. A Father, who of a long time
endured the Disobedience of his Heathenish Son, resolves to take from him the
hope of succeeding him in his Inheritance, for turning Christian, when at the
same time, executing his Commands without murmuring. A Master that used his
Slave gently, when his Carriage gave him some cause of distrust, now puts him
far from him, for being a Christian, when he has most assurance of his
Fidelity. It Is committing a Crime to correct the disorders of a Man's Life, by
the motions of a Holy Conversion to the Christian Faith; and the good which is
produced by so happy a Change, works not so powerfully in the minds of men, as
the hatred they have conceived against us. Indeed this hatred is strange; and
when I consider, that the Name of Christian only, makes it be so, I would
willingly know, how a name can be criminal, and how a simple word can be
accused? Thus was Christianity wholly infamous amongst the Heathens, contemned
and detested by all; and where Lies were in credit, Calumnies and Slanders
confirmed and backed by Authority, there was no other Crime but Truth. And
'twas these Calumnies, these false Accusations (invented to cry down the
Christian Religion,) obliged Tertullian to write his Apology, wherein he
declared to the World, that Christianity was nothing like that, which the
Heathens imagined it to be: That Idolatry, Superstition, Impiety, Cruelty,
Treachery, Conspiracies, etc. was none of their Doctrine, but condemned and
detested by them; that these Crimes were only the malicious inventions of the
Heathenish Priests, who finding themselves unable to withstand the force of
Christianity, had no other way to preserve themselves in Repute, and the People
in their Error, than by forming an ugly, odious, and most horrid Vizor, a
damnable Scheme of Religion, than holding this forth to the World, and crying
out, This is the Religion of the Christians, these are their Principles; Behold
their Ignorance, their Stupidity, their Profaneness; Behold their Insolence,
their Villainies, a People unsufferable in a Commonwealth, Enemies to their
Country and their Prince: And thus representing it as monstrous as they
pleased, they brought an odium upon as many as owned that Name, and condemned
them for Follies and Crimes, that were no where, but in their own Imagination.
And 'twas not only in Tertullians time, that Christianity lay under this
scandal, but also in after ages: And therefore, as for the Vindication of the
Christian Profession, he was forced to apologize for his time; so did after him
St. Cyprian, Arnobius, and many other Ecclesiastical Writers; nay, and under
Christian Emperors, the Calumnies of the Heathens yet being urged with much
vigor and confidence, Orosius was obliged to write his History, and St.
Augustine his City of God, in defense of the Faith and Doctrine of Christ. And
now, when by the propagation of Christianity, and the laborious endeavors of
her Professors, Heathenism was pretty well extinct; yet was not the Mouth of
Malice stopped; the same Calumnies, which had been invented by the Infidels,
being taken up by evil Christians. No one going out from the Communion of the
Church of Christ, but what did, by reviving old Scandals, (and the addition of
fresh ones,) endeavor to make her infamous, and blacken her with such Crimes,
as could be thought most convenient for rendering her odious to all. It being
looked upon by as many as ever went out of her, the best means to justify
their Separation, and to gain to themselves the credit of Orthodox Christians;
to paint her out in all the Antichristian Colors, and represent her as
Hellish, as Wickedness could make her. It Is strange how much she suffered in
this Point from the Manichees, and from the Donatists, and how much pains it
cost Saint Augustine, to prove their Accusations to be mere Calumnies,
principally intended to raise prejudices in the minds of the People against
her; that so being convinced by these Hellish Artifices, of her teaching
unsound and profane Doctrine, wicked Principles, and humane Inventions instead
of Faith, might never think of going to her, to learn the Truth; nor even so
much as suspect her to be the Church of Christ. This, Saint Augustine
complains, was the chief cause of his continuing in the Error of the Manichees
so long; and that he impugn'd with so much violence this Church. And therefore,
after he was come to the knowledge of the Truth, he discovered this to the
World for the undeceiving others, who were caught in the same snare, making it
part of his Confessions, Confess. l. 6. c. 3. p. 1.) When I came to discover,
says he, that -- I mingled Joy and Blushes, and was ashamed, that I had now for
so many years been barking and railing, not against the Catholic Faith, but
only against the fictions of my carnal conceits. For so temerarious and impious
was I, that, those things which I ought first to have learned from them by
enquiry, I first charged upon them by Accusation; readier to impose Falsehoods
than to be informed of the Truth, -- And thus I so blindly accused the
Catholic Church; now sufficiently cleared to me that she taught not the
Opinion, I so vehemently persecuted. And this he did, deluded and deceived by
the Manichees. And now since it is certain, that this has not been the case of
Saint Augustine alone, but of as many almost, as have given ear to the
Deserters of this Church; nay, is at this day the case of infinite numbers, who
following that Great Father, when as yet in his Errors; do not enquire, how
this thing is believed or understood by her, but insultingly oppose all; as if
so understood, as they imagine; not making any difference betwixt what the
Catholic Church teaches, and what they think she teaches: and so believing her
to be guilty of as many absurdities, follies, impieties, etc. as the Heathens
did of old: It Is evident, there is as much need now of Apologies, as ever there
was in Tertellian's or S. Austin's time: Not Apologies to vindicate what is
really her Faith and Doctrine; but rather to clear her from such Superstitions,
Profaneness, and wicked Principles, as are maliciously or ignorantly charged
upon her. And though the number of Calumnies, the in-sincerity of Adversaries,
the obstinacy of a biased Education render a performance in this kind, a just
Task for a Tertullian's, or St. Augustine's hand; yet because I find no such
eminent Pen engaged in this design at present; and the showing the true
Religion in its own Colors, seems a Duty incumbent on every one that is a lover
of Truth; I Will endeavor to pull off the Vizor from suffering Christianity, and
apologize for the Cotholick Faith; that Faith, I mean, maintained by those
Primitive Fathers, with so much Vigor and Zeal; which being first planted in
the Head City of the World by St. ^eter, has been propagated throughout the
Universe, and derived down to us by many Christian Nations, in communion with
that See, under the Protection of the Holy Ghost, and the Charge of A Chief
Pastor, which beginning in that great Apostle, has continued in a visible
Succession to these our days. This Faith it is, for which at present I design
to make an Apology, which having been in all ages violently opposed, does at
this time most wrongfully suffer, under Calumnies and false Imputations. I Will
endeavor therefore to separate these Calumnies and Scandals, from what is
really the Faith and Doctrine of that Church; I Will take off the Black and Dirt,
which has been thrown upon her; and setting her forth in her genuine
Complexion, let the World see how much fairer she is, than she is painted; and
how much she is unlike that Monster, which is shown for her. And because the
Members of this Church are commonly known by the name of Papists; I think I
cannot take a more sincere, open, and compendious way, in order to the
completing this design, than by drawing forth a double Character of a Papist:
The one expressing a Papist in those very colors as he is painted in the
imagination of the Vulgar, Foul, black and Antichristian; with the chief
Articles of his imagined Belief, and reputed Principles of his Profession. The
other representing a Papist, whose Faith and exercise of his Religion, is
according to the Direction and Command of his Church. That so, these two being
thus set together, their difference and disproportion may be clearly discerned,
and a discovery made, how unlike Calumny is from Truth; and how different a
Papist really is, from what he is said to be. The former Character is of a
Papist Misrepresented; the other of a Papist Represented. The former is a
Papist so deformed and monstrous, that it justly deserves the hatred of as many
as own Christianity; It Is a Papist that has disturbed this Nation now above an
hundred years with Fears and Jealousies; threatening it continually with Fire
and Massacres, and whose whole Design has been, to rob the Sovereign of his
Crown, and the Subject of his Liberty and Property. It Is a Papist, that is so
abominable, so malicious, so unsufferable in any Civil Government, that, for my
part, I detest him from my heart; I conceived an hatred against him, and all
his, from my Education, when as yet a Protestant; and now, being a Roman
Catholic, I am not in the least reconciled to him, nor his Principles, but
hate him yet worse. I am so far from thinking the Laws too severe against such
Popish Recusants, that I could wish a far greater severity were executed
against them, their Favorers, and all such as make men so sottishly Religious.
And if to be a Protestant, nothing more be requisite, than to protest against
such Popery, to hate and detest it; I think my self, and all Roman Catholics,
as good Protestants, as any whatsoever throughout his Majesty's Dominions. And
I dare engage, that not only as many Roman Catholics, as under the name of
Papists have severely smarted in this Nation, for being the Professors of such
kind of Popery, but also that all Roman Catholic Nations in the World shall
subscribe to the Condemnation of all such Popish Principles and Doctrines,
shall join with all good Protestants for the extinguishing it, with all that
profess or practice it, and utter rooting it out from his Majesty's three
Kingdoms, and the whole Universe. The other Papist is one, that lives and
believes according to what is prescribed in the Council of Trent, in Catechisms
set forth by Catholics, and other Spiritual Books, for the Direction and
Instruction of all in their Communion, whose Faith and Doctrine I have here set
down, with some Grounds and Reasons of it, and will so leave it to apologize
for it self. In drawing out the Character of the former, I have quoted no
Authors, but have described him exactly according to the Apprehension I had of
a Papist, framed by Me when I was a Protestant; with the addition only of some
few points, which have been violently charged against Me by some intimate
Friends of late, to show the unreasonableness of my choice, after the quitting
of that Communion. The latter is wholly copied out from the Papist that I am
now; being the Sum of what I was taught, when reconciled to the Church of Rome,
and which after sixteen years conversation with Men of that Communion, in
hearing their Sermons, in being present at their Catechizing, in reading their
Books, and discoursing with them, I have found to be their Doctrine. I have
done both, I hope, with Sincerity and Truth, and without Passion. For as my
endeavors have been, that my Religion should lose nothing by Lies, so neither
do I desire it should gain by them; And did I but know of any thing in the
following Papers, that has any relation to that unchristian Artifice, I would
strike it out immediately. And do here oblige my self, upon information, either
from Friend or Adversary, to acknowledge the mistake, as it shall be made
appear, and make a public Recantation. But it is time, we should see what
these Papists are.

An Answer to the Introduction.
THE Introduction consists of two parts, I. A general Complaint of the Papists
being Misrepresented among us. II. An Account of the Method he has taken to
clear them from these Misrepresentions.


I. As to the First; Whether it be just, or not, must be examined in the
several particulars. But here we must consider, whether it serves the End it is
designed for in this place, which is, to gain the Reader's good Opinion of
their Innocence: Not merely because they complain so much of being injured, but
because the best Men in all Times have been misrepresented; as he proves at
large in this Introduction, from several Examples of the Old and New Testament,
but especially of Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians. But it
is observable, that when Bp. Jewel began his excellent Apology for the Church
of England, with a Complaint much of the same Nature, and produced the very
same Examples, his Adversary would by no means allow it to have any Force,
being, as he called it, Exordium Commune, which might be used on both sides,
and therefore could be proper to neither. And although it be reasonable only
for those to complain of being misrepresented, who having Truth on their side,
do notwithstanding suffer under the Imputation of Error; yet it is possible for
those who are very much mistaken, to complain of being misrepresented; and
while they go about to remove the Misrepresentations of others, to make new
Ones of their own. And as the best Men. and the best Things, have been
misrepresented; so other Men have been as apt to complain of it: and the worst
Things are as much misrepresented, when they are made to appear not so bad as
they are. For Evil is as truly mis represented under the appearance of Good, as
Good under the appearance of Evil; and it is hard to determine whether has
done the greater Mischief.

So that if the Father of Lies be the Author of Mis-representing, (as the
Introduction begins) we must have a care of him both ways. For when he tried
this black Art in Paradise, (as our Author speaks) it was both by
mis-representing the Command, and the Danger of trangressing it. He did not
only make the Command appear otherwise than it was; but he did very much lessen
the Punishment of Disobedience, and by that means deluded our first Parents
into that Sin and Misery, under which their Posterity still suffers. Which
ought to be a Caution to them, how dangerous it is to break the Law of God
under the fairest Color and Pretenses; and that they should not be easily
imposed upon by false Glosses, and plausible Representations, though made by
such as therein pretend to be Angels of Light.

But although the Father of Lies be the Author of Mis-representing: yet we have
no reason to think, but that if he were to plead his own Cause to Mankind, he
would very much complain of being misrepresented by them; and even in this
respect, when they make him the Father of those Lies which are their own
Inventions. And can that be a certain Argument of Truth, which may as well be
used by the Father of Lies?

And the great Instruments he has made use of in deceiving and corrupting
Mankind, have been as forward as any to complain of being misrepresented. The
true Reason is, Because no great Evil can prevail in the World, unless it be
represented otherwise than it is; and all Men are not competent Judges of the
Colors of Good and Evil; therefore when the Designs of those who go about to
deceive, begin to be laid open, they then betake themselves to the fairest
Representations they can make of themselves, and hope that many will not see
through their pretenses.

If I had a mind to follow our Author's Method, I could make as long a
Deduction of Instances of this kind. But I shall content my self with some few
Examples of those who are allowed on both sides to have been guilty of great
Errors and Corruptions.

The Arrians pleaded they were misrepresented, when they were taken for
Enemies to Christ's Divinity; for all that they contended for, was only such a
moment of time, as would make good the Relation between Father and Son.

The Pelagians, with great success for some time (and even at Rome) complained,
that they were very much misrepresented, as Enemies to God's Grace; whereas
they owned and asserted the manifold Grace of God; and were only Enemies to
Men's Idleness, and neglect of their Duties.

The Nestorians gave out, that they never intended to make two Persons in
Christ, as their Adversaries charged them; but all their design was to avoid
Blasphemy, in calling the Blessed Virgin the Mother of God; and whatever went
beyond this, was their Adversaries Mis-representations, and not their own
Opinions.

The Eu^ychians thought themselves very hardly dealt with, for saying, there
was but one Nature in Christ; they did not mean thereby (as they said) to
destroy the Properties of the Humane Nature, but only to assert that its
Subsistence was swallowed up by the Divine; and of all Persons, those have no
reason to blame them, who suppose the Properties of one Substance may be united
to another.

Even the Gentile Idolaters, when they were charged by the Christians, that
they worshipped Stocks and Stones, complained, they were misrepresented; for
they were not such Idiots, to take things for Gods, which had neither Life, nor
Sense, nor Motion in them. And when they were charged with worshipping other
Gods as they did the Supreme; they desired their Sense might not be taken from
common prejudices, or vulgar practices, but from the Doctrine of their
Philosophers; and they owned a Sovereign Worship due to him that was Chief; and
a subordinate and relative to some Celestial Beings, whom they made application
to as Mediators between him and them. Must all these Complaints now be taken
for granted? What then becomes of the Reputation of General Councils, or the
Primitive Christians? But as, if it were enough to be Accused, none would be
Innocent; so none would be Guilty, if it were enough to complain of being
misrepresented.

Therefore in all Complaints of this Nature, it is necessary to come to
particulars; and to examine with care and Diligence the Matters complained of,
and then to give Judgment in the Case. I am glad to find our Author professing
so much Sincerity and Truth without Passion; and I do assure him I shall follow
what he professes: For the Cause of our Church is such, as needs neither Tricks
nor Passion to defend it; and therefore I shall endeavor to state the Matters
in Difference, with all the clearness and calmness that may be; and I shall
keep close to his Method and Representations, without Digressions, or provoking
Reflections.

II. But I must declare my self very much unsatisfied with the Method he has
taken to clear his Party from these Mis-representations. For,

1. He takes upon him to draw a double Character of a Papist; and in the one he
pretends to follow a certain Rule, but not in the other; which is not fair and
ingenuous.

As to the one, he says, He follows the Council of Trent, and their allowed
Spiritual Books and Catechisms: and we find no fault with this. But why must
the other Part then be drawn by Fancy, or common Prejudices, or ignorant
Mistakes? Have we no Rule, whereby the Judgment of our Church is to be taken?
Are not our Articles as easy to be had and understood, as the Decrees and
Canons of the Council of Trent? I will not ask, How the Council of Trent comes
to be the Rule and Measure of Doctrine to any here, where it was never
received? But I hope I may, why our Representations are not to be taken from
the Sense of our Church, as theirs from the Council of Trent? If he says, his
Design was to remove common Prejudices, and vulgar Mistakes; it is easy to
answer, if they are contrary to the Doctrine of our Church, we utterly disown
them. We know very well there are Persons, who have so false a Notion of
Popery, that they charge the Rites and Customs of our Church with it: but we
pity their Weakness and Folly, and are far from defending such
Mis-representations. But that which we adhere to, is the Doctrine and Sense of
our Church, as it is by Law established; and what Representations are made
agreeable thereto, I undertake to defend, and no other. But if a person take
the liberty to lay on what Colors he pleases on one side, it will be no hard
matter to take them off in the other, and then to say, How much fairer is our
Church than she is painted! It is an easy, but not so allowable a way of
disputing, for the same person to make the Objections and Answers too; for he
may so model and frame the Arguments by a little Art, that the Answers may
appear very full and sufficient; whereas if they had been truly represented,
they would be found very lame and defective.

2. He pretends to give an Account why he quotes no Authors for his
Mis-representations, which is very unsatisfactory, viz. That he has d^scribed
the Papist therein, exactly acco^ding to the Apprehension he had of him when he
was a Protestant. But how can we tell what sort of Protestant he was; nor how
well he was instructed in his Religion? And must the Character now supposed to
be common to Protestants, be taken from his ignorant, or childish, or wilful
Mistakes? Did ever any Protestant that understands himself, say, That Papists
are never permitted to hear Sermons which they are able to understand, or that
they held it lawful to commit Idolatry; Or, that a Papist believes the Pope to
be his great God, and to be far above all Angels, etc? Yet these are some of
his Misrepresentations. Did he in earnest think so himself? If he did, he gives
no good account of himself: if he did not, he gives a worse; for then how shall
we believe him in other things, when he says, He has drawn his
Mis-representations exactly according to his own Apprehensions? It is true, he
says, he added some few points, which were violently charged on him by his
Friends: but we dare be bold to say, these were none of them. But let us
suppose it true, that he had such Apprehensions himself. Are these fit to be
printed as the Character of a Party? What would they say to us, if a Spanish
Convert should give a Character of Protestants; according to the common Opinion
the people there have of them; and set down in one Column their monstrous
Mis-representations, and in another, what he found them to be since his coming
hither; and that in good Truth he saw they were just like other Men? But
suppose he had false Apprehensions before he went among them; why did he not
take care to inform himself better before he changed? Had he no Friends, no
Books, no Means to rectify his Mistakes? Must he needs leave one Church, and
go to another, before he understood either? If this be a true Account of
himself, it is but a bad Account of the Reasons of his Change.

III. The Account he gives of the other part of his Character, affords as
little Satisfaction: For although in the general, it be well that he pretends
to keep to a Rule,

(1.) He shows no Authority he has to interpret that Rule in his own sense.
Now several of his Representations depend upon his own private Sense and
Opinions, against the Doctrine of many others as zealous for the Church as
himself; and what reason have we to adhere to his Representations, rather than
to theirs? As for instance, he says, The Pope's personal Infallibility is no
Matter of Faith: But there are others say it is, and is grounded on the same
Promises which makes him Head of the Church. Why now must we take his
Representation rather than theirs? And so as to the Deposing Power, he grants,
it has been the Opinion of several Popes (and Councils too) but that it is no
matter of Faith. But whose Judgment are we to take in this Matter, according to
the Principles of their Church? A private Man's, of no Name, no Authority, or
of those Popes and Councils who have declared it, and acted by it? And can any
man of their Church justify our relying upon his Word, against the Declaration
of Popes and Councils? But suppose the Question be about the Sense of his own
Rule, the Council of Trent: Bulla Pii 4 ^i super Confirmat. Council. Tridentini.
what Authority has he to declare it, when the Pope has expressly forbidden
all Prelates to do it, and reserved it to the Apostolical See?

(2.) He leaves out, in the several Particulars, an essential part of the
Character of a Papist since the Council of Trent; which is, that he does not
only believe the Doctrines there defined to be true, but to be necessary to
Salvation. And there is not a word of this in his Representation of the Points
of Doctrine, but the whole is managed as though there were nothing but a
difference about some particular Opinions; whereas in truth, the Necessity of
holding those Doctrines, in order to Salvation, is the main Point in
difference. If Men have no mind to believe their own Senses, we know not how to
help it; but we think it is very hard to be told, we cannot be saved unless we
renounce them too. And this now appears to be the true State of the Case, since
Pius the 4 th drew up and published a Confession of Faith, according to the
Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent, wherein Men are not only required
to believe their Traditions as firmly as the Bible, the Seven Sacraments,
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, Indulgences, Supremacy, etc. but they must believe, that
without believing these things, there is no Salvation to be had in the ordinary
way; for after the enumeration of those Points, it follows, Hanc veram
Catholicam sidem extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, etc. This is the true
Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved; i. e. The belief of these
things is hereby declared as necessary to Salvation, as of any other Articles
of the Creed. But it may be objected, The subscribing this Profession of Faith,
is not required of all Members of that Church. To which I answer, That to make
a Man a Member of it, he must declare that he holds the same Faith which the
Church of Rome holds: And this is as much the Faith of the Roman Church, as the
Pope and Council of Trent could make it. And it is now printed in the Roman
Ritual at Paris, set forth by Paul the 5 th, as the Confession of Faith owned
by the Church of Rome. And therefore this ought to have been a part of the true
Representation, as to the Doctrinal Points; but when he comes to the 35 th
Head, he then owns, That unless Men do believe every Article of the Roman
Faith, they cannot be saved, and he that disbelieves one, does in a manner
disbelieve all. Which may as well reach those who disown the Deposing Power,
and the Pope's personal Infallibility, as Us, since those are accounted
Articles of Faith by the ruling part of their Church, to whom it chiefly
belongs to declare them; and the former has been defined both by Popes and
Councils.

(3.) He never sets down what it is which makes any Doctrine to become a
Doctrine of their Church. We are often blamed for charging particular Opinions
upon their Church; but we desire to know what it is which makes a Doctrine of
their Church; i. e. whether frequent and public Declaration, by the Heads and
Guides of their Church, be sufficient or not to that End? Our Author seems to
imply the Necessity of some Conditions to be observed; for besides the Popes
Authority, he requires due Circumstances, and proceeding according to Law: But
who is to be Judge of these Circumstances and legal Proceedings? And he never
tells what these Circumstances are. And yet after all, he says, The Orders of
the Supreme Pastor are to be obeyed, whether he be infallible or not. And this
now brings the Matter home; The Popes, he confesses, have owned the Deposing
Doctrine, and acted according to it: And others are bound to obey their Orders,
whether infallible or not; and consequently they are bound by the Doctrine of
their Church to act, when the Popes shall require it, according to the Deposing
Power. But he seems to say, in this Case, that a Doctrine of their Church is to
be judged by their Number; for, says he, There are greater numbers that disown
this Doctrine. I will not at present dispute it; but I desire to be informed,
Whether the Doctrines of their Church go by majority of Votes, or not? I had
thought the Authority of the Guides of the Church ought to have over-ballanced
any Number of Dissenters. For, what are those who refuse to submit to the
Dictates of Popes and Councils, but Dissenters from the Church of Rome? The
distinction of the Court and Church of Rome, is wholly impertinent in this
Case. For, we here consider not the mere Temporal Power which makes the Court,
but the Spiritual Capacity of Teaching the Church: and if Popes and Councils
may err in Teaching this Doctrine, why not in any other? I know there are some
that say, Universal Tradition is necessary to make a Doctrine ^f their Church.
But then no Submission can be required to any Doctrine in that Church, till the
Universal Tradition of it, in all Times, and in all Parts of the Christian
Church, be proved. And we need to desire no better Terms than these, as to all
Points of Pope Pius the 4 th his Creed, which are in dispute between us and
them.

(4.) He makes use of the Authority of some particular Divines, as delivering
the Sense of their Church, when there are so many of greater Authority against
them. Whereas, if we proceed by his own Rule, the greater Number is to carry
it. Therefore we cannot be thought to mis-represent them, if we charge them
with such things as are owned, either by the general and allowed Practices of
their Church, or their public Offices, or the generality of their Divines and
Casuists; or in case of a Contest, with that side which is owned by the Guides
of their Church, when the other is censured; or which was approved by their
Canonized Saints, or declared by their Popes and councils, whose Decrees they
are bound to follow. And by these measures I intend to proceed, having no
design to mis-represent them, as indeed we need not.

And so much in Answer to the Introduction.

A Papist Misrepresented and Represented.
I. Of Praying to Images.
A Papist Misrepresented, Worships Stocks and Stones for Gods. He takes no
notice of the Second Commandment, but setting up Pictures, and Images of
Christ, the Virgin Mary, and other his Saints; He prays to Them, and puts his
Trust and Confidence in them; much like as the Heathens did in their Wooden
Gods, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, etc. And for this reason, He erects stately
Monuments to Them in his Churches, adorns them sumptuously, burns Candles,
offers Incense, and frequently falls down prostrate before them, and with his
Eyes fixed on them, cries out, Help me Mary, assist me Anthony, remember me
Ignatius.

A Papist Represented, believes it damnable, to Worship Stocks and Stones for
Gods, to Pray to Pictures or Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other
Saints; as also, to put any Trust or Confidence in them. He keeps them by him
indeed, to preserve in his Mind the Memory of the things Represented by them;
as People are wont to preserve the Memory of their deceased Friends by keeping
their Picture. He is taught to use them, by casting his eye upon the Pictures
or Images, and thence to raise his heart to the Prototypes, and there to employ
it in Meditation, Love, Thanksgiving, Imitation, etc. as the Object requires:
As many good Christians, placing a Death-head before them; from the sight of
it, take occasion to reflect often upon their last End, in order to their
better preparing for it; or by seeing Old Time painted with his Fore-lock,
Hourglass and Scythe, turn their thoughts upon the swiftness of Time, and that
whosoever neglects the present, is in danger of beginning then to lay hold,
when there is no more to come. These Pictures or Images having this advantage,
that they inform the mind by one glance, of what in reading requires a Chapter,
and sometimes a Volume. There being no other difference between them, then that
Reading represents leisurely and by degrees; and a Picture, all at once. Hence
he finds a convenience in saying his Prayers with some devout Pictures before
him; he being no sooner distracted, but the sight of these recalls his wandering
thoughts to the right Object; and as certainly brings something good into his
mind, as an immodest Picture disturbs his heart with naughtiness. And because
he is sensible that these holy Pictures and Images represent and bring to his
mind such Objects, which in his heart he loves, honors, and venerates; he
cannot, but upon that account, love, honor, and respect the Images themselves.
As whosoever loves their Husband, Child, or Friend, cannot but have some love
and respect for their Pictures; and whosoever loves and honors his King, will
have some honor and esteem for his Image: Not that he venerates any Image or
^icture, for any Virtue or Divinity believed to be in them, or for any thing
that is to be petitioned of them; but because the honor that is exhibited to
them, is referred to the Prototypes which they represent. So that it is not
properly the Images he honors, but Christ and his Saints by the Images: As it
is not properly the Images or Pictures of Kings or dukes we generally respect
or injure; but by their Images or Pictures we respect or injure Kings or Dukes
themselves. All the veneration therefore he expresses before Images, whether by
kneeling, praying, lifting up the Eyes, burning Candles, Incense, etc. it is not
at all done for the Image, but is wholly referred to the things represented,
which he intends to honor by these actions. And how, by so doing, he breaks
the Second Commandment, he cannot conceive; for he acknowledges only one God,
and to him alone gives Sovereign Honor; and is so far from honoring Images as
Gods, that for any ones satisfaction, he is ready to break or tear a Crucifix,
or other Image whatsoever, into a thousand pieces, and cast them into the fire.
And what respect he shows them, seems to him no more injurious to any of the
Commandments, than it is for a Christian to love and honor his Neighbor,
because he bears the Image of God in his Soul; to kiss and esteem the Bible,
because it contains and represents to him God's Word; or to love a good
Preacher because he minds him of his Duty; all which respects do not at all
derogate from God Almighty's Honor; but are rather testimonies of our greater
Love and Honor of him, since, for his sake, we love and esteem every thing
that has any respect or relation to him.

I. Of Praying to Images.
IN this, and the other Particulars, where it is necessary, I shall observe
this method;

1. To give a clear and impartial Account of the State of the Controversy in as
few words as I can.

2. To make some Reflections on what he says, in order to the clearing them
from Misrepresentations.

As to the State of this Controversy, as it stands, since the Council of Trent,
we are to consider.

1. We must distinguish between what persons do in their own Opinion; and what
they do according to the Sense of the Divine Law. It is possible that men may
intend one thing, and the Law give another Sense of it: as is often seen in the
Case of Treason; although the persons plead never so much they had no intention
to commit Treason, yet if the Law makes their Act to be so, their disavowing it
does not excuse them. So it is in the present Case; Men may have real and
serious Intentions, to refer their final, ultimate, and Sovereign Worship only
to God; but if the Law of God strictly and severely prohibits this particular
manner of Worship by Images, in as full, plain, and clear words as may be, and
gives a Demonination to such Acts, taken from the immediate Object of it; no
particular Intention of the Persons can alter that Denomination, or make the
Guilt to be less than the Law makes it.

2. There can be no Misrepresenting as to the lawfulness of many External Acts
of Worship, with Respect to Images, which are owned by them. But it does not
look fairly to put the Title, Of Praying to Images; for the Question is, about
the Worship of Images: Whereas this Title would insinuate, as though we did
directly charge them with Praying to their Images, without any farther Respect.
Which we are so far from charging them with, that I do not know of any People
in the World, who are not like Stones and Stocks themselves, who are liable to
that Charge. The PENDETS in the East Indies are fully cleared from it, by
Thavenet, as well as Bernier. The veno^ Voy^ge (...) In^es p. 188. Bernier
Memoirs. Tom. 3. p. 172.
And it would be hard we should not allow the same to our Fellow Christians. I
do therefore grant what our Author says, viz. That all the Veneration they
express before Images, whether by kneeling, praying, lifting up the Eyes,
burning Candles, Incense, etc. is not at all done for the Image, but is wholly
referred to the things represented, which he intends to honor by these
Actions. But I hope now, it is no Misrepresenting for us to say, that they do
kneel, pray, lift up their Eyes, burn Candles, Incense, etc. before their
Images; which is all I charge them with at present.

3. To perform these Acts before Images, without a design to worship the Images
by them, is declared, by great Divines of the Church of Rome, to be next to
Heresy. The Case was this; There were before the Council of Trent, several
Persons who lived in Communion of that Church, but by no means approved the
Worship of Images, such as Durandus, Helcot, Picus Mirandula, and others. Now
these Persons thought fit to comply in these External Acts, but declared they
intended not to worship the Images, but the Objects before them. Since the
Council of Trent decreed Images were to be worshipped, this Case has been
debated by the Divines and Casuists of greatest Reputation among them; And
Suarez says, Suarez i^ 3. per^. Qu. 2^. Disp. 53.. 3.2. ^^. (...), ^5 5.
This way of Durandus is dangerous, rash, and savours of Heresy; and he says
further from Medina, That it was Victoria 's Opinion, that it was Heretical,;
but he adds, that his own Opinion, that Images were truly and properly to be
Worshipped, was generally received by their Divines: and therefore I need name
no more.

4. It is granted by their Divines and Casuists, that the People in the Worship
of Images may easily fall into Idolatry.

(1.) If the Worship do not pass from the Image to the Thing represented. And
so Aquinas himself determines, That no Irrational Creature is capable of
Worship, but as it has, Respect to a Rational Being. But here lies the
Difficulty, how an Extrinsecal Relation to an Object of Worship, where the
Thing is confessed to deserve none, can give any Reason, for its being properly
worshipped. But they all grant, if the Worship stop at the Inanimate part, it
can be no other than the Worship of Stocks and Stones.

(2.) If the Worship be given to the Image, which is proper to God alone. This
Bellarmine is forced to grant, because the Evidence is so clear in Antiquity,
Bellarmine de Imag. l. 2. c. 2.^.
that the Gnostics were condemned for some Worship which they performed to the
Image of Christ. Now, we cannot think that these Gnostics were such Sots, as
to take the Image of Christ to be Christ himself; and therefore whatever
Worship it was, it must be Relative, i. e. given to the Image for the sake of
Christ represented by it.

(3.) If the People believe any Divinity to be in the Images, Con^il. Trident
Sess. 25.
or put any Trust or Confidence in them, then the Council of Trent it self owns
such to be like the Heathen Idolaters. Now, how shall it be known when the
People believe Divinity to be in Images, but by some more than ordinary
Presence or Operation in or by them? by their having a greater Opinion of one
Image than of another of the same Person? by their going long Pilgrimages to
certain Images in hopes of Relief, when they might easily cause Images to
represent at home?

And that such are no extravagant Imaginations, is known to all who have heard
of Loretto, or Compostella, or other places nearer home. I need not mention the
Complaints of Polydore Virgil, Cassander, or Wicelius to this purpose, who all
died in the Communion of the Church of Rome; for the same is very lately
complained of by a considerable Person in that Communion, who says, The
greatest part of the Devotion of the People of Italy, Spain, and Portugal,
Moy^n^ Surs and (...) Co^version de to^s les Here^iqu^s. To. 2. p. 115.
consists in prostrating themselves before Images, and going in Pilgrimage to
them, and hoping for Remission of their Sins by so doing. And another very
lately yields, That to avoid the peril of Idolatry, to which (he says) the
People is evidently exposed by the use of Images, Entre^iens de Philal^the and
Phile^^ne. 2da part. p. 157.
it would be necessary to take them away from the Altars, and by no means to
have them allowed for the Objects of Religious Worship.

The Question now is, Whether the Council of Trent has taken any effectual
Course to prevent these Abuses? If not, what Mis-representing is it to charge
the Abuses upon the Doctrines and Practices allowed by it?

The Remedies prescribed by the Council, are these;

1. Declaring that there is no Divinity or Virtue in them for which they should
be worshipped; and that nothing is to be desired of them, nor any Trust or
Confidence to be put in them.

2. Expressing their earnest desire, that if any Abuses have crept in, they may
be removed.

But in the mean time the Council decrees, the Images not only to be useful to
be set up in Churches, but to have due Honor and Worship given them there, for
the sake of those they represent; as not only putting off the Hat, but falling
down before them, And the Roman Catechism declares, That this Worship is very
beneficial to the People, Catechis. Romans Part. 3. ^ ^.. 14.
and so much is to be told them; and that Images are to be in Churches, not
merely for Instruction, sed ut colantur, that they may be worshipped.

But what could the Council do more, than to desire all Abuses may be taken
away; and is it not then the fault of others, and not of the Council, if they
be not?

I grant, the Council does desire Abuses may be taken away, if any such be; but
then it enumerates those Abuses, in Heterodox Images, in making Gain of Images,
in painting them too wantonly: but besides, it does say, that all Superstition
be removed in the Sacred Use of Images; but it does not say in the Worship of
them; and so it may relate to Magic and Divination, But that the Council could
not prevent, or design to prevent the Abuses mentioned in the Worship of
Images, will appear by these things.

1. The Cuoncil of Trent allows the highest relative Worship to be given to
them: it setting no bounds to it, so it be for the sake of the Prototypes.

2. It allows a Worship to be given to the Images themselves too; for it
confirms the second Council of Nice, which decreed an inferior Adoration to be
given to them.

3. It disapproves no Customs then practiced among them in the Worship of
Images; which were all known, and by many complained of, both as Pilgrimages to
them, and the carrying of them about in Procession, and the solemn Consecration
of them; the Form whereof is not only inserted but enlarged in the new
Pontifical since the Council of Trent. And it is to be observed, that in the
old Pontifical, A. D. 1511. there is no Form for consecrating an Image; in that
of Paul the 3 d, it is inserted; but out of Durandus; but in that of Clement
the 8 th, it is put in more largely and as authentically as if it had been
always there. And is not this the way to reform the Worship of Images?

To come now to our Author's Reflections, on the Mis-representation he says
has been made as to this Point.

1. A Papist represented, believes it damnable to worship Stocks and Stones for
Gods; to pray to Pictures or Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other
Saints.

These Expressions are capable of a double Sense, and therefore this is not
fair Representing.

(1.) To worship Stocks or Stones for Gods, may signify two things. (1.) To
believe the very Stocks and Stones to be Gods. And this we do not charge them
with. (2.) To give to Images made of Wood and Stone, the Worship due only to
God; and so by construction of the Fact, to make them Gods, by giving them
Divine Worship. And if they will clear themselves of this, they must either
prove that External Adoration is no part of Divine Worship, (notwithstanding
the Scripture makes it so, and all the rest of Mankind look upon it as such,
even Jews, Turks, and Infidels) or that their external Adoration has no
respect to the Images (which is contrary to the Council of Trent) or that
Divine Worship being due to the Being Represented, it may be likewise given to
the Image. And how then could the Gnostics be condemned for giving Divine
Worship to the Image of Christ, which Bellarmine confesses; and is affirmed by
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and Damascen?

(2.) To pray to Images of Christ, or the Blessed Virgin, may likewise be taken
in two senses. (1.) To pray to them, so as to expect to be heard by the mere
Images, and so we do not charge them with it. (2.) To pray to them, so as to
expect to be rather heard by themselves for praying to them by their Images.
And if this be not so; to what end are the Prayers made in the Consecration of
Images, for those that shall pray before them? To what purpose do so many go in
long Pilgrimages to certain Images, if they do not hope to be better heard for
praying there?

But he goes on, 2. He keeps them by him indeed, to keep in his mind the memory
of the things represented by them. And is this all in good Truth? We will never
quarrel with them, if this be true Representing. No, that he dares not say.

But, 3. He is taught to use them. But how? by custing his Eye upon the
^ictures or Images, and thence to raise his Heart to the Prototypes. And is
this all yet? No.

But, 4. He finds a double convenience in the use of them. (1.) They represent
at one glance; and Men may easily make good Reflections, as upon the sight of a
Death's Head, or Old Time painted with his Fore-lock, Hourglass, and Scyth.
And will he undertake, that Images shall be used in Churches for no other End?
Was the Picture of Old Time ever consecrated, or placed upon the Altar, or
elsewhere, that it might be worshipped? as the Roman Catechism speaks of their
Images. (2.) They cure Distractions; for they call back his wandering Thoughts
to the Right Object. What is this Right Object? the Image, or the Person
represented? And that must be either a Creature, or God himself. If it be a
Creature, does not this imply that it is made a Right Object of Worship? If God
himself, how does an Image cure our Distraction, in the Worship of an infinite
invisible Being; when the very Image is most apt to distract our Thoughts, by
drawing them down from his Divine and Adorable Perfections, to the gross and
mean Representations of an Image. But are we yet to come to the utmost use of
them? No.

But, 5. He cannot but love, honor, and respect the Images themselves, for the
sake of those they represent. Will this content them? And will he promise to go
no further? It is hard to part upon Terms of mere Respect and decent Regard,
where there is no encroachment upon Divine Worship. And here we are at a stand.

But he goes further. 6. And so he is come at last, to Veneration before
Images. And is this all? Dares he deny Veneration to Images, when the Council
of Trent has determined it. Eisque venerationem impartiendam? What is this
Veneration before Images only? Bellarmine has a Chapter on purpose to prove,
that true and proper Worship is to be given to Images. And was he a
Misrepresenter? Suarez says, It is an Article of Faith, that Worship is to be
given to them. But if the Veneration be only before them, why are they
consecrated, and set up in places proper for Adoration?

But, 7. To satisfy any one that he is far from making Gods of his Images, he
is ready to break them into a thousand pieces. What, a Consecrated Image? Dares
he take a Crucifix from the Altar and tear it in pieces? This does not look
like the Love, Honor, and Respect he mentioned before, not to name Veneration.
And I am afraid this is a strain beyond true Representing: Yet at length he
has found some pretty Parallels for the Veneration of Images themselves; and
so we are come at last to the main Point. But this is not directly owned; yet
in the way of his Representing, it is fairly insinuated by his Parallels.

1. A Christian loves and honors his Neighbor, because he bears the Image of
God in his Soul. But does he therefore take him and set him before him when he
kneels at his Devotion: to raise his Mind, and cure his Distractions? Would he
set him upon the Altar, and burn Incense before him, because of the Image of
God in him? Is there no difference between the Object of Christian Love, and of
Divine Worship? Nor between a Spiritual Invisible Divine Image in the Souls of
Men, and a Material and Corporeal Representation?

2. We may kiss and esteem the Bible, because it contains and represents to Us
Gods Word. But when we kiss and esteem the Bible, we remember the second
Commandment is in it; and we dare not break his Law, when we pretend to honor
his Word. But we think there is some difference between Reverence and Respect
to the Bible, and falling down before an Image. The Circumstances of the one
declare it to be mere Respect, and a Religious Decency; and if the other be not
External Adoration, we know not what it is

3. A good Preacher is loved, because he minds Men of their Duty. But what
should we say to him that should therefore kneel down and say his Prayers, and
burn Candles and Incense before him, out of a Respect to his good Doctrine? Did
S. Peter, or S. Paul like this, when Men would have worshipped them? A good
Preacher would tell them of their Duty, as they did; and take Men off from the
Worship of any Creature, animate or inanimate, and direct them to worship God
alone, who made Heaven and Earth.

II. Of Worshipping Saints.
HE makes Gods of Dead Men, such as are departed hence, and now are no more
able to hear, or see, or understand his necessities: And though God be so good as
to invite all to come unto him, and to apply themselves to their only and
infinite Mediator Jesus Christ: Yet so stupid is He, that neglecting, and, as
it were, passing by both God and his only Son, and all their Mercies, he
betakes himself to his Saints, and there pouring forth his Prayers, he confides
in them as his Mediators and Redeemers, and expects no Blessing, but what is to
come to him by their Merits, and through their hands: And thus, without scruple
or remorse, robs God of his Honor.

HE believes there is only one God; and that it is a most damnable Idolatry to
make Gods of Men, either living or dead. His Church teaches him indeed, (and he
believes) That it is good and profitable to desire the Intercession of the
Saints, reigning with Christ in Heaven; but that they are Gods, or his
Redeemers, he is no where taught; but detests all such Doctrine. He confesses,
That we are all redeemed by the Blood of Christ alone, and that he is our only
Mediator of Redemption: But as for Mediators of Intercession, (that is, such as
we may desire lawfully to pray for us) he does not doubt, but it is acceptable
to God, we should have many. Moses was such a Mediator for the Israelites; Job
for his three Friends; Stephen for his Persecutors. Ep. ad Romans Cor. Ephesians.

The Romans were thus desired by Saint Paul to be his Mediators; so were the
Corinthians, so the Ephesians; so almost every sick man desires the
Congregation to be his Mediators; that is, to be remembered in their Prayers.
And so he desires the Blessed in Heaven to be his Mediators; that is, that they
would pray to God for him. And in this, he does not at all neglect coming to
God, or rob him of his Honor; but directing all his Prayers up to him, and
making him the ultimate Object of all his Petitions, he only desires sometimes
the Just on Earth, sometimes those in Heaven, to join their Prayers to his,
that so the number of Petitioners being increased, the Petition may find better
acceptance in the sight of God. And this is not to make them Gods, but only
Petitioners to God; it is not to make them his Redeemers, but only Intercessors
to his Redeemer; he having no hopes of obtaining any thing, but of God alone,
by, and through the Merits of Christ; for which he desires the Saints in
Heaven, and good men on Earth, to offer up their Prayers with his; the Prayers
of the Just availing much before God. But now, how the Saints in Heaven know
the Prayers and Necessities of such, who address themselves to them, whether by
the Ministry of Angels, or in the Vision of God, or by some particular
Revelation, it is no part of his Faith, nor is it much his concern it should be
determined. For his part he does not doubt, but that God, who acquainted the
Prophets with the knowledge of things, that were yet to come many hundred years
after; That informed Elijah of the King of Syria's Counsel, though private,
resolved on in his Bedchamber, and at a distance; (2 Kings 6.12.) can never
want means of letting the Saints know the desires of those who beg their
Intercession here on Earth: Especially since our Savior tells, That Abraham
heard the Petitions of Dives, who was yet at a greater distance, even in Hell;
and told him likewise the manner of his living, while as yet on Earth. Nay,
since it is generally allowed, that even the very Devils hear those desperate
wretches, who call on them: Why should he doubt, that Saints want this
Privilege, in some manner granted to sinful men, and to wicked Spirits; who,
(tho departed this life) are not so properly dead, as translated from a mortal
life, to an immortal one; where, enjoying God Almighty, they lose no
Perfections which they enjoyed, while on Earth, but possess all in a more
eminent manner; having more Charity, more Love, and being more acceptable to
God than ever; becoming like Angels: And as these offered up their Prayers for
Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, (Zach. 1.12.) so undoubtedly they likewise
fall down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harps, and golden Vials
full of Odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints, Apoc. 5.8.

II. Of Worshipping Saints.
FOr the clear stating this Controversy, these things are to be premised.

1. We do not charge them, that they make Gods of dead men, i. e. that they
believe the Saints to be Independent Deities. For this our Author confesses
were a most damnable Idolatry.

2. We do not say, that the State of the Church of Rome, with respect to the
Worship of dead men, is as bad as Heathenism. For we acknowledge the true
Saints and Martyrs to have been, not only good and Virtuous, but extraordinary
Persons, in great Favor with God, and highly deserving our Esteem and
Reverence, as well as Imitation; whereas the Heathen Deified Men, were vile and
wicked Men, and deserved not the common Esteem of Mankind, according to the
Accounts themselves give of them. And we own the common Doctrine and Advantages
of Christianity to be preserved in the Church of Rome.

3. We do not deny, that they do allow some external Acts of Worship to be so
proper to God alone, that they ought to be given to none else besides him. And
this they call Latria; and we shall never dispute with them about the proper
signification of a Word, when the Sense is agreed, unless they draw Inferences
from it, which ought not to be allowed. To this Latria, they refer not only
Sacrifice, but all that relates to it, as Temples, Altars, and Priests: so that
by their own Confession, to make these immediately and properly to the Honor
of any Saint, is to make a God of that Saint, and to commit Idolatry.

4. They confess, that to pray to Saints to bestow Spiritual or Temporal Gifts
upon us, were to give to them the Worship proper to God, who is the only giver
of all good things. For else I do not understand, why they should take so much
pains to let us know, that whatever the Forms of their Prayers and Hymns are,
yet the Intention and Spirit of the Church, is only to desire them to pray for
us, and to obtain thngs for us by their Intercession with God.

But two things cannot be denied by them.

1. That they do use solemn Invocation of Saints in places of Divine Worship,
at the same time they make their Addresses to God himself, with all the
Circumstances of External Adoration, with bended Knees and Eyes lifted up to
Heaven; and that this Practice is according to the Council of Trent, which not
only decrees an humble Invocation of them, but declares it to be impiety to
condemn mental and vocal Supplication to the Saints in Heaven. Sect. 25.


2. That they do own making the Saints in Heaven to be their Mediators of
Intercession* but not of Redemption; although Christ be our Mediator in both
senses.

And upon these two Points this Controversy depends.

Let us now see what our Representer says to them.

1. His Church teaches him indeed, and he believes that it is good and
profitable, to desire the Intercession of the Saints reigning with Christ in
Heaven; but that they are either Gods, or his Redeemers, he is no where taught,
but detests all such Doctrine.

There are two Ways of desiring Intercession of others for us.

1. By way of Friendly Request, as an Act of mutual Charity; and so, no doubt,
we may desire others here on Earth to pray for us.

2. By way of Humble Supplication, with all the external Acts of Adoration: and
we cannot think St. Peter, or St. Paul, who refused any thing like Adoration
from men, would have been pleased to have seen men fall down upon their Knees
before them; and in the same posture of Devotion in which they were praying to
Almighty God, to put their Names into the middle of their Litanies, and so pray
them then to pray for them.

But how are we sure that their Church teaches no more than this? I have read
over and over the Council of Trent, and the Roman Catechism about it, and I can
find no such limitation of their sense there, where, if any where, it ought to
be found. The Council of Trent mentions both the Prayers, and the Help and
Assistance of the Saints which they are to fly to. If this Help and Assistance
be no more than their Prayers, why is it mentioned as distinct? Why is their
reigning together with Christ in Heaven spoken of, but to let us understand
they have a Power to Help and Assist? For what is their Reigning to their
Praying for us? But I have a further Argument to prove the Council meant more,
viz. the Council knew the common Practices and Forms of Invocation then used
and allowed, and the general Opinion, that the Saints had power to Help and
Assist those who prayed to them. If the Council did not approve this, why did
it insert the very words upon which that Practice was grounded? They likewise
very well knew the Complaints which had been made of these things; and some of
their own Communion cried shame upon some of their Hymns. Wicelius says, one
of them, Wicel. in Elencho Abusuum.
Salve Regina, etc. is full of downright Impiety, and horrible Superstition,
and that others are wholly inexcusable. Lud. Vives had said, He found little
difference in the Peoples opinion of their Saints in many things, Vives in Aug.
de C^^it. Dei l. 5. c. 27.
from what the Heathens had of their Gods. These things were known, and it was
in their power to have redressed them, by declaring what the Sense of the
Council was, and that whatever Forms were used, no more was to be understood by
them, but praying to them to pray for them Besides, the Council of Trent, in
the very same Session, took care about reforming the Missal and Breviary; why
was no care taken to reform these Prayers and Hymns, which they say are not to
be construed by the Sense of the Words, but by the Sense of the Church? There
was time enough taken for doing it; for the Reformed Missal was not published
till six Years after the Council, (...) de Philalethe and ^hi^erene Part 2. p.
160, 163.1^^.
nor the Breviary till four. In all that time, the Prayers and Hymns might
easily have been altered to the Sense of the Church, if that were truly so. But
instead of that, a very late French Writer cries out of the necessity of
Reforming the Breviaries as to these things; wherein he confesses, Many Hymns
are still remaining, wherein those things are asked of Saints, which ought to
be asked of God alone; as being delivered from the Chains of our Sins, being
preserved from Spiritual Maladies, and Hellfire; being inflamed with Charity,
and made fit for Heaven. In good Conscience, says he, is not this joining the
Saints with God himself, to ask those things of them which God alone can give?
And whatever Men talk of the Sense of the Church, he confesses, the very Forms,
and natural Sense of the Words; do raise another Idea in Men's minds; which
ought to be prevented.

But does not the Roman Catechism explain this to be the Sense of the Church?
Catech. Romans Part 4. c. 6. n. 2, 3.
I have examined that too, with all the care I could, about this matter. And I
cannot find any necessity from thence of putting this Sense upon them. I grant
in one place, where it explains the difference of the Invocation of God and
Saints, it says, We are to pray to God as the Giver, and to Saints that they
would obtain things of God for us; and then it adds, the Forms differ, that to
God is, Miserere Nobis, and Audi Nos; that to Saints is, Ora pro Nobis. Very
well! And is there then no other Form owned or allowed in the Church of Rome to
Saints besides this? Hold a little, says the Catechism, for it is lawful to
make use of another Form; and that is, we may pray to Saints too, Vt nostri
misereantur. And how does this now differ from that to God, but only in Number?
But it adds, that the Saints are very pitiful; then surely we are encouraged to
pray to them for Help and Pity. Yes, says the Catechism, we may pray to them,
that being moved with pity toward us, they would help us with their Favor and
Intercession with God. But yet this does not clear the Matter; for elsewhere
the Roman Catechism attributes more to Saints than mere Intercession; Catech.
Romans Part. 3. c. 2. n. 4, 6.

Cum praesint nobis Sancti and rerum nostrarum curam gerant. Bellarm. de Sanct.
Beatit. l. 1. c. 20.. deinde. Nou solum ab A^gelis sed etiam a spiritibus
bearorum hominum Regi and Gubernari fideles viv^n^es. Id. ib. c. 18.. nos au^em.


and we may pray to them for what is in their Power: For where it undertakes to
give an exact Account of the Reason of Invocation of Saints and Angels; it
there parallels them with Magistrates under a King; and says, they are Gods
Ministers in governing the Church; Invocandi itaque sunt quod and perpetuo Deum
intuentur, and Patrocinium Salutis nostrae libentissime suscipiunt. What is
this Patrocinium salutis nostrae? Is it only Praying and Intercession with God?
That cannot be, for it instances presently in Deliverances by Angels, and Jacob
's praying to the Angel to bless him, and not merely to intercede for him. But
though this is spoken of Angels, yet from hence it infers the Invocation of
Saints too. But what need we insist more on this, since they do own the
Ministry of Saints as well as Angels, with respect to the Church; and do
Canonize Saints for particular Countries, as lately S. Rosa for Peru. And where
there is such a particular Protection supposed, what incongruity is it to
interpret the Form of their Prayers, according to a Doctrine so received and
allowed? But of this more under the next Head.

2. He confesses that we are all redeemed by the Blood of Christ alone, and
that he is our only Mediator of Redemption; but as for Mediators of
Intercession, he does not doubt but it is acceptable with God we should have
many.

I would ask, concerning this Distinction, the Question which Christ asked
concerning John's Baptism, Is it from Heaven, or of Man? No doubt there may be
such a Distinction of Mediators, if God please to make them. But who has
Authority to appoint Mediators with him besides himself? Is it not usurping his
Prerogative, to appoint the great Officers of his Kingdom for him? Would any
Prince upon Earth allow this, viz. when he has absolutely declared his
Pleasure, that his own Son should present Petitions to him, that others shall
take upon them to set up Masters of Requests themselves? John 14.13, 14, 16,
23, 24. Heb. 7.25. and 9.7, 24. 1 Jo. 2.1.
Can any thing be plainer in the New Testament, than that God has appointed
the Mediator of Redemption, to be our Mediator of Intercession? And that his
Intercession is founded upon his Redemption. As the High Priest's going into
the Holy of Holies to intercede for the People, was upon the Blood of the
Sacrifice of Expiation, which he carried in with him. If there were no
Revelation in this Matter, there might be some reason for it. But since the
Revelation is so clear in it, this Distinction looks just like the Socinians
Distinction of a God by Nature, and a God by Office; which was framed on
purpose to avoid the plain Texts of Scripture which called Christ God. So does
this look as if it were intended to avoid that clear Text, which says, 1 Timothy
2.5.
There is one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Which is
presently answered with this Distinction; although there be not the least
ground in that or any other Text for it.

Yes, says our Author, Moses was such a Mediator for the Israelites; Job for
his three Friends; Stephen for his Persecutors: The Romans were desired by S.
Paul to be his Mediator, and the Corinthians and Ephesians; so almost every
sick Person desires the Congregation to be his Mediator, that is, to be
remembered in their Prayers.

But is there no difference between Men praying for one another, and desiring
others to pray for them here on Earth, and an humble Invocation of the Saints
in Heaven to be our Mediators of Intercession with God there?

There is a threefold disparity in the Case.

1. Here upon Earth we converse with one another as Fellow Creatures, and there
is no danger of our having an Opinion thereby, that were able to assist one
another any other way than by our Prayers. But the case is very different as to
the Saints in Heaven, who by being addressed to there by such solemn
Invocation, may too easily be conceived to have the Power of bestowing such
Blessings upon those who call upon them.

2. Heaven is looked upon by all Mankind who direct their Devotions thither, as
the particular Throne of God, where he dwells, and discovers himself after
another manner than he does upon the Earth. And we are directed to pray to our
Father in Heaven; where he is represented as infinitely above all his
Creatures; and the great Concernment of Religion is, to keep up the
apprehension of this distance between him and them. Now it is hardly possible
to keep it up, if in the Public Offices of Religion; in the solemnest postures
of Devotion, with Eyes lifted up to Heaven, they do make Addresses, both to God
and to his Creatures.

3. Men are sure, when they pray to others on Earth to pray for them, that they
do no more than they can justify in point of Discretion, when they speak or
write to those that can understand what their desire is: But no man on Earth
can be certain that the Saints in Heaven can do it: For it is agreed they
cannot do it without Revelation, and no Man can be assured there is a
Revelation; and it is not reasonable to expect it; for they pray to Saints to
pray to God for them, and they cannot tell what they pray for, unless God to
whom they are to pray, reveal to them what it is they must pray to him for. Is
it not then the better, the safer, the wiser way, to make our Prayers to him,
who we are sure is able to hear and help us; and has promised to grant what we
ask in his Son's Name? But there is no other Name, either under Heaven, or in
Heaven, whereby we can be saved, or our Prayers accepted, but his alone.

But our Author says, It is no part of his Faith, how the Saints in Heaven
know the Prayers and Necessities of such who address themselves to them.

But how comes it to be any part of his Faith, that they know them? However he
does not doubt but God can never want means of letting the Saints know them.
And is this a sufficient ground for solemn Invocation of Saints? God does not
want Means to let the Emperor of Iapan know a Request any one here has to make
to him; but is this a reasonable Ground, for him at this distance to make it to
him? God does not want Means to let the Pope know what a mighty Service it
would be to the Christian World, to make a wise and truly Christian-Reformation
in the Church; but would this be a Ground sufficient for me at this Distance,
to make a Speech to him about it? I knew a Man who understood not a word of
Latin, but yet would needs go to hear a Latin Sermon: some asked him
afterward, what he meant by it; and the chief Reason he gave was much like
this, God did not want Means to let him know what the Preacher meant:

But after all, Suppose God should make known to the Saints what is desired of
them; I ask, Whether this be sufficient Ground for solemn Invocation, when
Socinus was not able to defend the Invocation of Christ himself, supposing that
he could know our Hearts only by Relation? And he had nothing material to say,
but only that there was a Command for it; which can never be so much as
pretended in this Case.

As to what he alleges of the Elders falling down before the Lamb, having
Vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints, Apoc. 5.8. It must
be strained hard to be brought to this purpose, when both Ancient and Modern
Interpreters take it for a Representation of what was done upon Earth, and not
in Heaven. And if it were in Heaven, Prophetical Visions were never intended
for a Measure of our Duties. If the Angels do pray for Mankind, Zech. 1.12.
Does it therefore follow we must pray to them? But we say as the Angel did to
S. John, Revel. 19.10. in a like Case; See thou do it not: worship God.

III. Of Addressing more Supplications to the Virgin Mary than to Christ.
HE believes the Virgin Mary to be much more powerful in Heaven than Christ,
and that she can command him to do what she thinks good: And for This reason he
honors her much more than he does her Son, or God the Father; For one Prayer
he says to God, saying ten to the Holy Virgin.

HE believes it damnable to think the Virgin Mary more powerful in Heaven than
Christ; Or that she can in any thing command him. He honors her indeed, as one
that was chosen to be the Mother of God, and blessed amongst all Women: And
believes her to be most acceptable to God, in her Intercession for us: But
owning her still as a Creature, and that all she has of Excellency or Bliss, is
the Gift of God, proceeding from his mere Goodness. Neither does he at any time
say even so much as one Prayer to her, but what is directed more principally to
God; because offered up as a thankful Memorial of Christ's Incarnation, and an
acknowledgment of the Blessedness of Jesus the Fruit of her Womb. And this
without imagining that there is any more dishonouring of God in his reciting the
Angelical Salutation, than in the first pronouncing it by the Angel Gabriel and
Elizabeth: Or that his frequent Repetition of it is any more an idle
Superstition, than it was in David to repeat the same words over twenty six
times in the 136 Psalm.

III. Of Addressing more Supplications to the Virgin Mary, than to Christ.
HEre is no need of farther starting the Question, this only relating to the
extraordinary Service of the Blessed Virgin. And therefore we are presently to
atttend his Motions.

He believes it damnable to think the Virgin Mary more powerful in Heaven than
Christ, or that she can in any thing command him.

But in good earnest, Is is not damnable, unless a man thinks the blessed
Virgin more powerful than Christ? Suppose one should think her to have an equal
share of Power with Christ; Is this damnable, or not? Is it not setting up a
Creature equal with God?

But what thinks he then of those who have attributed an universal Dominion to
her, over Angels, Men, and Devils? What thinks he not only of Psalters, but of
a Creed, Litany, and all the Hymns of Scripture being applied to her? S.
Bonavent. Opusc. Tom. 1. ad sin.
All which was done by a Canonized Saint in their Church; and the Books printed
out of the Vatican Manuscripts, and dedicated to the Pope. And there we find
something more than an Ora pro nobis in the Litany; for there is Parce nobis,
Domina, Spare us, good Lady: and Ab omni malo, libera nos, Domina: From all
evil, Good Lady, deliver us.

S. Bernardin. Sen. apud Bernadin. a Bustis Marial. Part 12. Sermon. 2.
What thinks he of another Canonized Saint, who said, these two Propositions are
both true, All things are subject to God's Command, even the Virgin; and all
things are subject to the Command of the Virgin, even God. Was this damnable in
a Canonized Saint?

What thinks he of the noted Hymn? O felix Puerpera nostra pians scelera.
Iure Matris impera Redemptori!
Was not this damnable? And I have not only seen it in the old Paris Missal,
but Balinghem a Jesuit, Balinghem Parnass. Marian. p. 208.
says, it was in the Missals of Tournay, Liege, Amiens, Artois, and the Old
Roman. I could produce many other Passages cited by him out of the old Offices
to the same purpose; but I forbear.

But I cannot omit the Approbation given to the blasphemous saying of St.
Bernardin by Mendoza, Mendoza. Virid. Sacr. l. 2. Probl. 1. and 4.
(who endeavors to prove the blessed Virgin's Kingdom, not to be a
Metaphorical, but a true and real Kingdom). And by Salazar, Salazar pro Immac.
Concept. c. 32.
another noted Jesuit, who says, Her Kingdom is as large as her Son's. And we
have lately seen how far this Divinity is spread, for not many years since,
this Proposition was sent from Mexico,

I ^er. peers de Nueros Lapidicina Sacra Tr. 1. Sect. 12. N. 148.
Filius non tantum tenetur audire Matrem, sed and obedire;

The Son is bound not only to hear, but to obey his Mother. And is it still
damnable for to say, she commands him?

But our Author says, Whatever esteem they have for her, They own her still as
a Creature. Is he sure of that? What thinks he of another saying, which Mendoza
approves of, viz. of Christ's saying to his Mother, Viridar. Sacr. l. 2. Probl.
2. N. 11.
As thou have communicated Humanity to me, I will communicate my Deity to thee?

But it may be said, We are by no means to judge the sense of a Church by some
men's extravagant sayings.

I grant it. But I have something considerable to reply; viz. That we may
easily judge which way the Guides of that Church incline, by this following
passage: About ten years since a Gentleman of that Communion published a Book,
called, Wholesome Advice to the Worshippers of the Blessed Virgin, and the whole
design of it, La veritable Devotion envers la S. Vierge Etable and Defendu par
le pere Crasset a Paris, A. D. 1679.
being Printed in Latin and French, was to bring the people of that Church to a
bare Ora pro nobis to the Blessed Virgin. But this was so far from being
approved, that the Book was condemned at Rome, and vehemently opposed by the
Jesuits in France; and a whole Volume published against it.

Here I have reason to enquire, Whether the Virgin Mary then, according to the
sense of the Church of Rome, be only a Mediatrix of Intercession or not, since
so large Power and Dominion is attributed to her? And why should not her
Suppliants go beyond an Ora pro nobis, if this Doctrine be received; as it must
be, if the contrary cannot be endured? For that Author allowed her
Intercession, and Prayer to her on that account; Monita Salutaria B. V. Mariae
ad Cultores suos indiscretos. 3. n. 56.. 4.
but he found fault with those who said she had a Kingdom divided with her Son;
that she was the Mother of Mercy, or was a Co-savior, or Co-Redemptrix; or
that she was to be worshipped with Latria; or that men were to be slaves to
her. Now, if these things must not be touched without Censure, and no Censure
pass on the other Books; it is not easy to judge, which is more agreeable to
the Spirit of the Guides of that Church?

But we have a fresh Instance of this kind at home, Contemplations of the Life
and Glory of Holy Mary, the Mother of Jesus, A. D. 1685.
in a Book very lately published; Permissu Superiorum. There we are told in the
Epistle, That not only the Blessed Virgin is the Empress of Seraphims -- the
most exact Original of Practical Perfection which the Omnipotency of God ever
drew; but that by innumerable Titles she claims the utmost Duty of every
Christian, as a proper Homage to her Greatness. Page 4.
What can be said more of the Son of God in our Nature? In the Book it self she
is said to be Queen of Angels, Patroness of the Church, Advocate of Sinners;
that the Power of Mary in the Kingdom of Jesus, is suitable to her Maternity,
and other Privileges of Grace; and therefore by it she justly claims a
servitude from all pure Creatures. But wherein does this special Devotion to
her consist? Page 8.
He names several Particulars.

1. In having an inward, cordial and passionate value of the Maternity of Mary,
and all other Excellencies proper to, and inseparable from the Mother of God.

2. In External Acts of Worship, of eminent Servitude toward her, by reason of
the Amplitude of her Power in the Empire of Jesus. And can we imagine these
should go no farther, than a poor Ora pro nobis? He instances in these External
Acts of her Worship. (1.) Frequent visiting holy Places dedicated to her
Honor. And are not those her Temples then? which Bellarmine confesses to be a
peculiar part of the worship due to God. Bellarm. de Culiu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4.
inis.
And the distinction of Basilicae cannot hold here: because he believes the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin; and he will not pretend to her Honor is only
for Discrimination. (2.) A special Reverence toward Images representing her
Person. (3.) Performing some daily Devotions containing her Praises,
congratulating her Excellency, or imploring her Mediation: and by often calling
upon the Sacred Name of Holy Mary, etc.

(3.) In having a firm and unshaken Confidence in her Patronage amidst the
greatest of our outward Conflicts, and outward Tribulations; through a strong
Judgment of her eminent Power within the Empire of Jesus, grounded upon the
singular Prerogative of her Divine Maternity. I have not Patience to transcribe
more, but refer the Reader to the Book it self; only the eighth Particular of
special Devotion is so remarkable, that it ought not to be passed over, Page 12.
viz. Entering a solemn Covenant with Holy Mary, to be for ever her Servant,
Client and Devote under some special Rule, Society, or Form of Life, and
thereby dedicating our Persons, Concerns, Actions, and all the Moments and
Events of our Life to Jesus, under the Protection of his Divine Mother,
choosing her to be our Adoptive Mother, Patroness and Advocate; and intrusting
her with what we are, have, or do hope, in Life, Death, and through all
Eternity. And is all this no more than an Ora pro nobis? Page 14.
And it follows, Put your self wholly under her Protection. What a pitiful
thing was the old Collyridian Cake, in comparison of these special Acts of
Devotion to her! But there are some extraordinary strains of Devotion
afterward, which it is pity to pass over. As, I will ever observe thee as my
Sovereign Lady, Page 22.
Adoptive Mother, and most Powerful Patroness; relying on thy Bowels of Mercy,
in all my Wants, Petitions, and Tribulations of Body and Mind. Could any thing
greater be said to the Eternal Son of God? And in the Praise:

Verse. Open my Lips, O Mother of Jesus.

Resp. And my Soul shall speak forth thy Praise.

Verse. Divine Lady, be intent to my Aid.

Resp. Graciously make haste to help me.

Verse. Glory be to Jesus and Mary.

Resp. As it was, is, and ever shall be.

Then follows the Eighth Psalm, applied thus to her.

Mary, Mother of Jesus, how wonderful is thy Name, Page 24.
even unto the Ends of the Earth!

All Magnificence be given to Mary, and let her be exalted above the Stars and
Angels.

Reign on high as Queen of Seraphims and Saints; and be thou crowned with
Honor and Glory, etc.

Glory be to Jesus and Mary, etc.

In the next Page, follows a Cantique in imitation of the Te Deum.

Let us praise thee, O Mother of Jesus! Page 25.
Let us acknowledge thee our Sovereign Lady.

Let Men and Angels give Honor to thee, the first conceived of all pure
Creatures, etc.

I think I need mention no more; only three things I shall observe; (1.) That
this is now printed Permissu Superiorum; and we thank them for the
seasonableness of it, in helping us in true Representing, what their allowed
Doctrines and Practices are. (2.) That this is published in English, that our
People, as well as theirs, may be convinced how far we have been from unjust
charging them as to such things as these. (3.) That at the same time they plead
for keeping the Bible out of the hands of the People, wherein their Discretion
is so far to be commended, since the Scripture, and this new Scheme of
Devotion, can never stand together. There being not one word in the Bible
toward it, but very much against it; and the Psalms and Hymns must be
burlesq'd to found that way.

But what says our Author to their Rosaries, wherein there are ten Ave Mary's
to one Pater noster; which is accounted a special piece of Devotion; and great
things are said of the Effects of it by Alanus de Rupe, and many others.

1. As to the Ave Mary's, he says, there is no more Dishonor to God in
reciting the Angelical Salutation, than in the first pronouncing it by the
Angel Gabriel and Elizabeth. But it may not be altogether so pertinent. But
does he really think they said the whole Ave Maria, as it is used among them?
Did the Angel and Elizabeth say, Sancta Maria, Matter Dei, ora pro nobis
peccatoribus, nunc and in hora mortis nostrae? If not, to what purpose are they
mentioned here?

2. As to the Repetition; that, he says, is no more an idle Superstition, than
David 's repeating the same words 26 times in the 136. Psalm. But what is this
to the Question, why more Supplications to the blessed Virgin than to Christ?
And not one word of Answer is given to it. But Alanus de Rupe answers it
roundly, Alanus de Rupe de usu Psalierii, l. 1. c. 6.
Because the blessed Virgin is our Mediatrix to Christ, the Mother of Mercy,
and the special Patroness of Sinners. This is indeed true representing.

IV. Of paying Divine Worship to Relics.
HE believes a kind of Divinity to remain in the Relics of his reputed Saints,
and therefore adores their ro^ten Bones, their corrupted flesh, their old Rags,
with Divine Honor; kneeling down to them, kissing them, and going in
Pilgrimage to their Shrines and Sepulchers. And he is so far possessed with a
conceited Deity lying hid in those senseless Remains, that he foolishly
believes they work greater Miracles, and raise more to life, than ever Christ
Himself did.

HE believes it damnable to think there is any Divinity in the Relics of
Saints, or to adore them with Divine Honor, or to pray to their rotten Bones,
old Rags or Shrines, or that they can work any strange Cures or Miracles, by
any hidden Power of their own. But he believes it good and lawful to keep them
with a Veneration, and give them a Religious honor and respect. And this he
thinks due to them, in as much as knowing himself obliged to respect and honor
God Almighty from his heart; he looks upon himself also obliged to respect and
honor every thing that has any particular Relation to him: But this with an
inferior Honor; as the Jews did to the Ark, to the Tables of the Law, to
Moses's Rod, to the Temple, to the Priests: So we generally allow to the Bible,
because it contains Gods Word; to the Church, because it is Gods House; to Holy
Men and Priests, because they are Gods Servants. And so he does to Relics,
because they appertain to Gods Favorites; and being insensible things, are yet
very sensible Pledges, and lively Memorials of Christ's Servants, dead indeed
to us, but alive with him in Glory. And more especially, because God himself
has been pleased to hnour them, by making them Instruments of many evident
Miracles he has visibly worked by them; as is manifest upon undeniable Record.
And this he believes as easy for God Almighty now, and as much redounding to
the honor of his holy Name, as it was in the Old Law, to work such miraculous
effects by Moses's Rod, by Gideon's Trumpets, by Elia's Mantle, after he was
taken up into Heaven, (2 Kings 2.14.) Eliseus's Bones, (2 Kings 13.21.) and
infinite other such like insensible Things: And also in the New Law, by the Hem
of his own Garment, (Mat. 9.21.) by the Shadow of St. Peter, (Acts 5.15.) by
the Napkins and Handkerchiefs that had but touched the Body of S. Paul, casting
out Devils, and curing Diseases, (Acts 19.12.) and such like. And thus by
having a Veneration and Respect for these, he honors God: And does not doubt,
but that they that contemn and profane these, do the like to God, as much as
they did, who profaned the Bread of Proposition, the Temple, and Vessels that
belonged to it.

IV. Of paying Divine Worship to Relics.
FOR the right understanding this Controversy, we are to consider,

1. That there is a due Veneration to the Bodies of Saints and Martyrs, allowed
on both sides; and there is an undue Worship of them, which is disowned on both
sides. The due Veneration is, a Religious Decency to be observed toward them;
which lies in avoiding any thing like Contempt or Dishonor to them, and using
all such Testimonies of Respect and Decency, which becomes the Remains of
Excellent Persons; provided we are satisfied of their Sincerity, without having
recourse to Divine Omnipotency to prove them: which Ferrandus the Jesuit runs
so much to, Ferrandi Disquisitio Reliquiaria.
to prove the Truth of many Relics, worshipped in the Church of Rome in many
places at once. But that it is possible to exceed in the Worship of true
Relics, even Bellarmine confesses, who says, that God took away the Body of
Moses, lest the People should give Divine Worship to it. And S. Ierom, as hot
as he was against Vigilantius, De Imag. sanct l. 2. c. 4.
yet he utterly denied giving any Adoration to the Relics of Martyrs. It
seems then it is very possible to exceed that way.

2. The Question then is, Whether those Acts of Worship which are allowed in
the Church of Rome, do not go beyond due Veneration? For it is unreasonable to
suppose those who give it, to believe those Relics to be Gods; and therefore
it must be such a Worship as is given to them, supposing them to be only
Relics of such Persons. The Council of Trent decrees Honor and Veneration to
be given to them, but never determines what is due, and what not: it forbids
all Excesses in drinking and eating, in the visiting of Relics; but not a
word of Excesses in worshipping of them, unless it be comprehended under the
name of Superstition. But Superstition lies in something forbidden, according
to their notion of it: therefore, if there be no Prohibition by the Church,
there can be no Superstition in the Worship of them. And if they had thought
there had been any in the known Practices of the Church, they would certainly
have mentioned them; and because they did not, we ought in reason to look on
them as allowed. And yet not only Cassander complains of the great Superstition
about them; Cassand. Consult. Art. 21. Tract. special. 4. Controv. 4.
but even the Wollenbergii lately confess, that the abuses therein have not
only been offensive to us, but to themselves too.

But what says our Representer to them?

He believes it damnable to think there is any Divinity in the Relics of
Saints, or to adore them with Divine Honor. But what is this adoring them with
Divine Honor? A true Representer ought to have told us what he meant by it,
when the whole Controversy depends upon it. Is it only saying Mass to
Relics, or believing them to be Gods? Is there no giving Divine Honor by
Prostration, burning of Incense, etc. Nothing in expecting help from them? Yes,
If it be from any hidden Power of their own. But here is a very hard Question:
If a Man does not believe it to be an intrinsic Power in the Relics, may a
Man safely go to them. Opis impetrandae causa, as the Council of Trent says,
in hopes of Relief from them? Is it not possible for the Devil to appear with
Samuel's true Body, and make use of the Relic of a Saint to a very bad end?
Then, say I, no Relics can secure Men against the Imposture of Evil Spirits,
who, by God's Permission, may do strange things with the very Relics of
Saints.

But God has visibly worked by them, says our Author, by making them
Instruments of many Miracles; and it is as easy for him to do it now. This is
the force of all he says. To which I answer.

1. It is a very bold thing to call in God's Omnipotency, where God himself
has never declared he will use his Power; for it is under his own Command, and
not ours. But there is no Reason to deduce the Consequence of using it now,
because he has done it formerly. Rabat. Joy de Iansenist, A.D 1656.
And that they may not think this is cavilling in us, I desire them to read
Pere Anna^'s Answer to the Jansenists pretended Miracle at Port Poyal, viz. of
the Cure wrought by one of our Savior's Thorns. There he gives another account
of such Miracles than would be taken from us. But where he says, It is as much
for the Honor of God's Name to work such Miracles now; their own Authors will
tell him the contrary; and that there is no such Reason now, as in former
times, when Religion was to be confirmed by them; and when Martyrs suffered
upon the sole account of the Truth of it; and therefore their Reputation had a
greater Influence upon converting the unbelieving World.

2. Suppose it be granted, yet it proves not any Religious Worship to be given
to them. For I shall seriously ask an important Question: Whether they do
really believe, any greater Miracles have ever been done by Relics, than were
done by the Brazen Serpent? And yet, although that was set up by God's own
Appointment, when it began to be worshorshipped after an undue manner; it was
thought fit by Hezekiah to be broken in pieces. What now was the undue Worship
they gave to it? Did they believe the Serpent, which could neither move nor
understand, was it self a God? But they did burn Incense to it. And did that
make a God of it? Suppose Men burn Incense to Relics; What then, are they
made Gods presently? Suppose they do not, but place them upon Altars, carry
them in Procession, fall down before them, with intention to show the Honor
they do them; are not these as much as burning a little Incense, which could
not signify so much Honor as the other do? and it is hard then to make the one
unlawful, and not the other.

V. Of the EUCHARIST.
HE believes it lawful to commit Idolatry, and makes it his daily practice to
Worship and adore a Breaden God, giving Divine Honor to those poor empty
Elements of Bread and Wine. Of these he asks Pardon for his sins; of these he
desires Grace and Salvation; these he acknowledges to have been his Redeemer
and Savior, and hopes for no good but what is to come to him by means of these
household Goods. And then for his Apology, he alleges such gross
contradictions, contrary to all sense and reason, that whosoever will be a
Papist, must be no Man: Fondly believing, that what he adores, is no Bread or
Wine, but Christ really present under those appearances; and thus makes as many
Christ's, as many Redeemers, as there are Churches, Altars, or Priests. When,
according to Gods Infallible Word, there is but one Christ, and He not on
Earth, but at the right hand of his Father in Heaven.

HE believes it unlawful to commit Idolatry; and most damnable to Worship or
Adore any Breaden God, or to give Divine Honor to any Elements of Bread and
Wine. He worships only one God, who made Heaven and Earth, and his only Son
Jesus Christ our Redeemer; who, being in all things equal to his Father, in
Truth and Omnipotency, he believes, made his words good, pronounced at his last
Supper; really giving his Body and Blood to his Apostles; the Substance of
Bread and Wine being by his powerful Words changed into his own Body and Blood,
the Species or Accidents of the Bread and Wine remaining as before. The same he
believes of the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, consecrated now by
Priests: That it really contains the Body of Christ, which was delivered for
us; and his Blood, which was shed for the remission of sins: Which being there
united with the Divinity, he confesses Whole Christ to be present. And him he
adores and acknowledges his Redeemer, and not any Bread or Wine. And for the
believing of this Mystery, he does not at all think it meet for any Christian
to appeal from Christ's Words, to his own Senses or Reason, for the examining
the truth of what he has said; but rather to submit his Senses and Reason to
Christ's Words in the obsequiousness of Faith: And that being a Son of Abraham,
it is more becoming him to believe as Abraham did, promptly, with a Faith
superior to all Sense or Reason, and whither these could never lead him. With
this Faith it is, he believes, every Mystery of his Religion, the Trinity,
Incarnation, etc. With this Faith he believes that what descended upon our
Savior at his Baptism in Jordan, was really the Holy Ghost, though Senses or
Reason could discover it to be nothing but a Dove: With this Faith he believes,
That the Man that Joshua saw standing over against him with his Sword drawn, (
Josh. 5.13.) and the three Men that Abraham entertained in the Plains of
Mambre, (Genesis 18.) were really and substantially no Men; and that
notwithstanding all the information and evidence of Sense from their Color,
Features, Proportion, Talking, Eating, and many others, of their being Men;
yet, without any discredit to his Senses, he really believes they were no such
thing, because God's Word has assured him of the contrary: And with this Faith
he believes Christ's Body and Blood to be really present in the Blessed
Sacrament, though, to all appearance, there is nothing more than Bread and Wine:
Thus, not at all harkening to his Senses in a matter where God speaks, he
unfeignedly confesses, That he that made the World of nothing by his sole word:
That cured Diseases by his Word: That raised the Dead by his Word: That
expelled Devils: That commanded the Winds and Seas: That multiplied Bread: That
changed Water into Wine by his Word, and Sinners into Just Men, cannot want
Power to change Bread and Wine into his own Body and Blood by his sole Word.
And this without danger of multiplying his Body, of making as many Christ's as
Altars, or leaving the right hand of his Father. But only by giving to his Body
a supernatural manner of Existence; by which, being left without extension of
parts, and rendered independent of place, it may be one and the same in many
places at once, and whole in every part of the Symbols, and not obnoxious to
any corporeal Contingencies. And this kind of Existence is no more, than what
in a manner he bestows upon every Glorified Body: Than what his own Body had,
when born without the least violation of his Mothers Virginal Integrity: When
he arose from the Dead, out of the Sepulcher, without removing the Stone: When
he entered amongst his Disciples, the Doors being shot. And though he cannot
understand how this is done, yet he undoubtedly believes, That God is able to
do more than He is able to understand.

V. Of the Eucharist.
THere are two material Points under this Head which are to be examined,
because he endeavors to set them off with all the advantage he can, viz.
Adoration of the Host, and Transubstan^iation.

I. Of the Adoration of the Host.
1. The Question is far enough from being, Whether it be lawful to commit
Idolatry? as our Representer puts it. For the Misrepresenter says, That a
Papist believes it lawful to commit Idolatry: and to clear this, our Author
gravely says, He believes it unlawful to commit Idolatry. page 9. As though
any Men ever owned it to be lawful: Which is, as if the Question were, Whether
such a Man committed Adultery, and he should think to clear himself by saying,
he believed it unlawful to commit Adultery.

2. The Question is not, Whether Christ may be lawfully adored by us in the
Celebration of the Eucharist; which we are so far from denying, that our Church
requires our receiving it in the posture of Adoration.

3. The true Question is, Whether the Body of Christ, being supposed to be
present in the Host by Transubstantiation, be a sufficient ground to give the
same Adoration to the Host, which they would do to the Person of Christ.

And that this is the true state of the Question, will appear by these things.

1. The Council of Trent first defined Transubstantiation, and from thence
inferrred Adoration of the Host; as is most evident to any one that will read
the fourth and fifth Decrees of the Thirteenth Session. Nullus itaque dub^tandi
locus, etc. i.e. If Transubstantiation be true, then Adoration follows. It Is
true, the sixth Canon only speaks of Christ being there worshipped; but that
ought to be compared with the first, second, and fourth Canons, where the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is fully set down, as the Foundation of that
Adoration.

2. The Adoration is not fixed on the Person of Christ, as separate from the
Host, but as making one Object of Worship together with it. And so the Council
of Trent declares in the sixth Decree; when it says, The Sacrament is
nevertheless to be adored, because it was instituted to be received This cannot
be otherwise understood, than as relating to the Sacrament: and so that
whatever it be, must be granted to be the Object of Adoration. By the
Sacrament, says Cardinal Pallavicini, Pallavicin. his.. Council. Trident. l.
12. c. 6.
is understood the Object made up of the Body of Christ, and the Accidents. The
Worship then being confessed to be Adoration, which is due to God alone, and
that Adoration directed to the Sacrament as its proper Object; the Question now
is, Whether such a Supposition in the Sacrament, does justify that Adoration?

Our Author says, He accounts it most damnable to worship or adore any
Breaden God, or to give Divine Honor to any Elements of Bread and Wine.

Then, I say, by his own confession, if it be only Bread, he commits Idolatry;
for the Adoration he cannot deny. But our Representer loves ambiguous
Expressions, which to the People sound very well, but have no sincere meaning:
for what is it he understands by his Breaden God? If it be that he worships a
God, which himself supposes to be nothing but Bread, we do not charge him with
it; but if it be what we believe it to be, the Substance of Bread, but himself
believes to be turned into the Body of Christ, then he cannot deny his
Adoration to be given to it.

All that can excuse them is, the Supposition; and whether that will or not, is
now to be considered.

1. If it be not true, themselves grant it to be Idolatry. The Testimonies of
Bishop Fisher, and Costerus, Roffeus. c. Occolamp. l. 1. c. 2. Coster.
Enchirid. c. 8. n. 10.
are so well known to this purpose, that I shall not repeat them. And
Catharinus, a Divine of Note in the Council of Trent, confesses it is Idolatry
to worship an unconsecrated Host, although the Person, through a Mistake,
believes it consecrated. And he quotes Saint Thomas and Paludanus for his
Opinion; and gives this Reason for it; Catharin. in Cajet. p. 133, etc.. Ed.
Paris 1535.
Because Christ is not worshipped simply in the Sacrament, but as he is under
the Species; and therefore if he be not so present, a Creature has Divine
Worship given it. As those were guilty of Idolatry, who worshipped any
Creatures of old, supposing God to be there, as that he was the Soul of the
World. They were not excused, says he, that they thought they worshipped but
one God; because they worshipped him as present in such a manner, as he was
not. Lugdan. 1542.
And this Book of hi^, he says, in the Review of it, was seen and approved by
the Pope's Order, by their Divines at Paris.

2. If the Bread were taken to be God, our Author does not deny it would be
Idolatry, for that were to worship a Breaden God. Yet here would be a Mistake,
and a gross one; yet this Mistake would not excuse the Persons committing it
from most damnable Idolatry, as he confesses: Why then should the other Mistake
excuse them, when they suppose the Substance of the Bread not to be there, but
the Body of Christ to be under the Species? Yes, say they, then no Creature is
supposed to be the Object of Worship. But when the Bread is supposed to be God,
it must be supposed not to be a Creature. There is no Answer to be given in
this Case, but that the Bread really is a Creature, whatsoever they imagined;
and if this Mistake did not excuse, neither can the other.

II. Of Transubstantiation.
Three things our Author goes upon, with respect to this.

1. He supposes Christ's words to be clear for it. 2. He shows the possibility
of it, from Gods Omnipotency. 3. He argues against the Testimony or Evidence of
Sense or Reason in this Case, from some parallel Instances, as he thinks.
1. He believes Jesus Christ made his Words good, pronounced at his last
Supper, really giving his Body and Blood to his Apostles? the Substance of
Bread and Wine being, by his powerful Words, changed into his own Body and
Blood; the Species only, or Accidents of the Bread and Wine, remaining as
before. The same he believes of the Eucharist consecrated now by Priests.

This is a very easy way, of taking it for granted that the words are clear
for Transubstantiation. And from no better Ground, to fly to God's Omnipotency
to make it good, is as if one should suppose Christ really to be turned into a
Rock, a Vine, a Door; because the words are every jot as clear, and then call
in Gods Omnipotency, which is as effectual to make them good. I confess, these
words are so far from being clear to me for Transubstantiation, that if I had
never heard of it, I should never have thought of it, from these or any other
words of Scripture, i.e. not barely considering the sound of words, but the
Eastern Idioms of speaking; the Circumstances of our Savior's real Body at
that time when he spoke them; the uncouth way of feeding on Christ's real Body,
without any Objection made against it by his Disciples; the Key our Savior
elsewhere gives for understanding the manner of eating his Flesh; and withal,
if these words be literally and strictly understood, they must make the
Substance of Bread to be Christ's Body; for that is unavoidably the literal
sense of the words. For can any Men take This to be any thing but this Bread,
who attend to the common sense and meaning of Words, and the strict Rules of
Interpretation? Yet this sense will by no means be allowed; for then all that
can be inferred from these words is, that when Christ spoke these words. The
Bread was his Body. But either Christ meant the Bread by This, or he did not;
if he did, the former Proposition is unavoidable in the literal sense; if he
did not, then by virtue of these words, the Bread could never be turned into
the Body of Christ. For that only could be made the Body of Christ which was
meant, when Christ said, This is my Body. This seems to me to be as plain and
convincing as any Demonstration in Euclid. Which has often made me wonder at
those who talk so confidently of the plain Letter of Scripture, being for this
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But several Divines of the Church of Rome
understood themselves better, and have confessed, that this Doctrine could not
be drawn out of the literal sense of these words; as it were easy to show, if
it had not been lately done already. It is enough here to observe, that Vasquez
confesses it of Scotus, Vasq. in 3 part. Disc. 180. Q. 75 Art. 2. c. 5.
Durandus, Paludanus, Ockam, Cameracensis; and himself yields that they do not,
and cannot signify expressly the Change of the Bread and Wine into the Body of
Christ. For how can, This is my Body, literally signify, this is changed into
my Body? If that Proposition were literally true, This is my Body, it
overthrows the Change; For how can a thing be changed into that which it is
already?

2. He believes Christ being equal to his Father in Truth and Omnipotency, can
make his words good. We do not in the least dispute Christ's Omnipotency, but
we may their familiar way of making use of it to help them out, when Sense and
Reason fail them. And therefore Cajetan well said; Cajetan. in 3 Part. Q. 75.
Art. 1, 2, 3.
We ought not to dispute about Gods Absolute Power in the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, being things of such constant use; and that it is a foolish thing
to attribute to the Sacrament all that God can do.

But we must consider what he says against Sense and Reason. For the believing
this Mystery, he does not at all think it meet for any Christian to appeal from
Christ's Words, to his own Senses or Reason, for the examining the Truth of what
he has said, but rather to submit his Senses and Reason to Christ's Words in
the obsequiousness of Faith. What! whether we know this to be the meaning of
Christ's Words, or not? And thus we shall be bound to submit to every absurd
Interpretation of Scripture, because we must not use our Senses or Reason for
examining the Truth of what is said there. Can any thing be plainer said in
Scripture, than that God has Eyes and Ears, and Hands? Must now every Man
yield to this in the obsequiousness of Faith, without examining it by
Principles of common Reason? And we think we are therefore bound to put another
Sense upon those Expressions, because they imply a Repugnancy to the Divine
Perfections. Why not then where something is implied which is repugnant to the
Nature of Christ's Body, as well as to our Senses? But the Question about
judging in this matter by our Senses, is not, as our Author is willing to
suppose, viz. Whether our Senses are to be believed, against a clear and
express Divine Revelation; but whether the Judgment of our Senses and Reason is
not to be made use of for finding out the true sense of this Revelation? And we
think there is great reason for it.

(1.) Because we have no more certain way of judging the Substance of a Body,
than by our Senses. We do not say our Senses go beyond the Accidents; but we
say, our Senses, by those Accidents, do assure us of the bodily Substance, or
else it were impossible for us to know there is any such thing in the world.

(2.) Because Christ did himself appeal to the Judgment of his Disciples Senses
concerning the Truth of his own Body after the Resurrection; Behold my Hands
and my Feet, that it is I my self: S. Luke 24.39.
handle and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have. Now
we think we have reason to allow the same Criterion which Christ himself did
about the very same Body. Unless he had then told his Disciples, that there was
to be another supernatural manner of Existence of the same Body, concerning
which their Senses were not to be Judges.

(3.) Some of the most important Articles of the Christian Faith do suppose the
Judgment of our Senses to be true. As about the Truth of Christ's Body; whether
he had really a Body, or only the outward Accidents and Appearance of a Body?
if he had not, he did not really suffer upon the Cross, and so the Sacrifice of
Propitiation there offered up to the Father for the sins of mankind, is lost.
There was a great Controversy in St. John's time, and afterward, Whether
Christ had any real Body? Those who denied it, brought Revelation for it; those
who asserted it, proved it by their Senses, as S. John himself, 1 S. John. 1.1,
3.
That which we have seen, and heard, and our hands have handled, etc. He does
not tell men, they must submit their Sense and Reason to the pretense of
Revelation; but they ought to adhere to the Judgment of their Senses concerning
the Reality of Christ's Body. Since therefore Christ himself appealed to it,
the Apostles made use of it, without any caution or limitation, we have great
reason to rely still on the Judgment of our Senses concerning the same Object,
viz. the Body of Christ.

3. But we must now consider his Instances to overthrow the Judgment of our
Senses and Reason in this Point.

1. He believes Christ to be God, though to Senses he seemed nothing but Man.
Do we ever pretend to judge of Christ's Divinity by our Senses? How then can
this be pertinent, when our only Dispute is about judging his Body, and the
substance of Bread and Wine by them? And yet the Senses were of great use as to
the proof of his Divinity by the Miracles which he wrought? which if they had
been like the pretended Miracles in Transubstantiation, could have convinced no
man, because they could never see them.

2. He believes the Holy Ghost descended on our Savior, tho Senses or Reason
could discover it to be nothing but a Dove. If there were no reason to judge
otherwise, the Judgment of Sense were to be followed: but since the Scripture
declares it was the Holy Ghost descending as a Dove, we have no reason to
question that Revelation. For we do not pretend that our Senses are so far
Judges of Divine Appearances, as to exclude the possibility of God's assuming
the shape and figure of his Creature when he pleases, by moulding the substance
of a real Body into such a Representation. Thus we do not deny the possibility
of an appearance of the Holy Ghost under Bread and Wine, if God thought fit,
any more than under a Dove; and in this Case we do not pretend that our Senses
can exclude the presence of a Spirit under the Elements; but that is very
different from the present Case, for here the Substance is supposed to be gone,
and nothing but Accidents remaining; and no spiritual Presence of Christ is
denied, but that of his Body, the very same Body which suffered on the Cross.

3. He believes the Man who appeared to Joshua, ( chapter 5 13.) and the three Men
to Abraham, (Genesis 18.) were really and substantially no Men, notwithstanding
all the Information and Evidence of Sens^ to the contrary, from their Color,
Features, Proportion, Talking, Eating, and many others. And what follows from
hence, but that Spiritual Invisible Substances may be under the appearance of
Bodies, and that our Senses cannot be Judges of them? Which is not our
Question, but Whether Bodies can be so present after the manner of Spirits, as
to lose all the natural Properties of Bodies? and whether a Material Substance
can be lost, under all the Accidents proper to it, so as our Senses cannot be
proper Judges of one by the other?

But our Author seems to grant this, in a natural way of the Existence of a
Body: but he says, Christ gives to his Body a supernatural manner of
Existence, by which being left without extension of Parts, and rendered
independent of Place, it may be one and the same in many places at once, and
whole in every part of the Symbols, and not obnoxious to any corporeal
contingencies.

This is to me a Mystery beyond all comprehension by Sense or Reason; and there
is certainly a great difference between governing our Understandings, and
giving them up, as we must do if this Doctrine hold good; for it overthrows any
fixed Principles of Reason in mankind concerning the Nature and Properties of
Bodies.

For, 1. We must still suppose the Body of Christ to be the very same
individual Body which suffered upon the Cross; but if it had no extension of
Parts, and be reckoned independent upon Place, it cease to be a Body. It is
granted, that after a natural way of Existence, a B^dy cannot be in more places
than one: but let the way of Existence be what it will, if it be a body, it
must be finite; if finite, it must be limited and circumscribed; if it be
circumscribed within one place, it cannot be in more places, for that is to
make it circumscribed, and not circumscribed; undivided from it self, and
divided from it self at the same time. Which is a manifest Contradiction, which
does not depend only on Quantity or Extension, but upon the essential Unity of
a Body.

2. If it be possible for a Body to be in several places by a supernatural
Existence; why may not the same Body be in several places by a natural
Existence? Is it not because Extension and Circumscription are so necessary to
it, that in a natural Way it can be but in one Place? Then it follows that
these are essential Properties of Bodies; so that no true Body can be conceived
without them.

3. This Supernatural Existence does not hinder the Body's being individually
present in one place: My meaning is this; A Priest Consecrates an Host at
London, and another at York; is the Body of Christ at London, so present there
by virtue of Consecration, as to be present at York too, by this Supernatural
Existence? What then does the Consecration at York produce? If it be not, then
its Presence is limited to the Host, where the Consecration is made; and if it
be so limited, then this supernatural Existence cannot take off its relation to
place.

4. The same Body would be liable to the greatest Contradictions imaginable:
For the same Body after this supernatural way of Existence, may not only be
above and below, within and without, near and far off from it self: but it may
be hot and cold, dead and alive; yea, in Heaven and Hell at once.

5. What is it that makes it still a Body after this supernatural way of
Existence, etc. if it lose extension and dependency on place? If it be only an
aptitude to extension, when that supernatural Existence is taken off, then it
must either be without quantity, or with it. If it be without quantity, how can
it be a Body? if with quantity, how is it possible to be without Extension?

6. This confounds all the differences of Greater and Less, as well as of
Distance and Nearness. For upon this Supposition, a thing really greater may be
contained within a less: for the whole Organical Body of Christ, with all its
parts, may be brought within the compass of a Wafer; and the whole be in every
part without any distance between Head and Feet.

7. This makes Christ to have but one Body, and yet to have as many Bodies as
there are consecrated Hosts. No, says our Author, This supernatural manner of
Existence is without danger of multiplying his Body, or making as many Christ's
as Altars. But how this can be, is past all humane Understanding: For every
Consecration has its Effect, which is supposed to be the Conversion of the
Substance of the Bread into the Body of Christ. Now, when a Priest at London
converts the Bread into the Body of Christ there, he does it not into the Body
of Christ at York, but the Priest there does it; therefore the Body of Christ
at London, is different from that at York; or else the Conversion at London
would be into the Body, as at York. But if not, what is the substantial Term of
this substantial Change, where nothing but an accidental Mode does follow? If
there be any such Term, whether that must not be a production of something
which was not before; and if it be so, Christ must have as many new Bodies, as
there are Consecrations.

8. This makes that which has no particular Subsistence of its own, to be the
Subject of a substantial Change; for this is the condition of Christ's Body,
whatever its manner of Existence be, after the Hypostatical Union to the Divine
Nature. For, when Bellarmin, Petavius, Bellarm. de Incarn. l. 3. c. 8. Petav.
de Incarnatione p. 6. c. 1.. 3.
and others of their greatest Divines, undertake, against Nestorius, to explain
the Hypostatical Union, they tell us it consists in this, that the human Nature
loses its proper Subsistence, and is assumed into the Subsistence of the
Divine Nature. From whence I infer, That the Body of Christ, having no proper
Subsistence of its own, there can be no substantial Change into that which has
no proper subsistence, but into that which has; and consequently the Change
must be into the Divine Nature principally; from whence it will follow, the
Elements losing their Subsistence, upon Consecration the Divinity must be
united hypostatically to them, as to the human Nature; and so there will be as
many Hypostatical Unions, as there are Consecrations. And so this Doctrine not
only confounds Sense and Reason, but the Mysteries of Christ's Incarnation too:
Which I think is sufficient for this Head.

VI. Of Merits and Good Works.
HE believes Christ's Death and Passion to be ineffectual, and insignificant,
and that he has no dependence upon the merits of his Sufferings, or the Mercy
of God for the obtaining Salvation; but that he is to be saved by his own
Merits. And, for this reason he is very zealously busy in fasting, in whipping
himself, in watching, in going in Procession, in wearing Hair-shirts, and using
a thousand such like Mortifications: And having done this, he thinks himself
not at all beholding to God for his Salvation, and that to give him Heaven,
will be no favor: It being now his due, upon the account of his own
meritorious Achievements, without any God-a-mercy to Christ's Passion, or his
Makers Goodness.

HE believes it damnable to say that Christ's Death and Passion is ineffectual
and insignificant: And that it is the Doctrine of Devils to belive, That he has
no dependence for his Salvation upon the Merits of Christ's Sufferings, or the
Mercy of God; but only upon his own Merits and good Works. It Is his Faith to
believe, That of our selves we are not sufficient, so much as to think a good
thought, that the Grace by which we are justified, is given us purely gratis
upon the account of Christ's Merits; moreover, that no Man, how just soever, can
merit any thing, either in this life, or in that to come, independent on the
Merits and Passion of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, that through the Merits of
Christ, the good Works of a just Man proceeding from Grace, are so acceptable
to God, that through his Goodness and Promise, they are truly meritorious of
eternal Life. And this he has learned from the Apostle, (2 Timothy 4.8.) where he
is taught, that there is a Crown of Justice, which our Lord, a just Judge, will
render at the last day, not only to Saint Paul, but also to all those, that
shall have fought a good sight, and consummated their course, kept the Faith,
and loved his coming. Knowing therefore that at the day of Judgment, he is to
receive according to his Works: He endeavors by good Works to make his
Vocation and Election sure. And in following this Counsel, he thinks he no more
offends against the fullness of the Merits of Christ's, or God's Mercy, than the
Apostle does in giving it.

VI. Of Merits and good Works.
FOr the true stating this Controversy, we are to observe:

1. That we do not charge those of the Church of Rome, That they belive
Christ's Death and Passion to be ineffectual and insignificant, and that they
have no dependence on the Merits of his Sufferings, or the Mercy of God for
attaining Salvation; but that they are to be saved only by their own Merits and
Good Works; as the Misrepresenter says.

2. We do not charge them with denying the Necessity of Divine Grace in order
to merit; or with asserting that they can merit independently thereupon.

3. We do by no means dispute about the Necessity of Good Works, in order to
the Reward of another Life; or assert that Christ's Merits will save Men
without working out their own Salvation; but do firmly believe, that God will
judge Men according to their Works.

The Question then is, Whether the Good Works of a just Man, as our Author
expresses it, are truly meritorious of eternal Life? Which he affirms, but
qualifies with saying, That they proceed from Grace, and that through Gods
Goodness and Promise, they are truly meritorious. But the Council of Trent
denounces an Anathema against those who deny the Good Works of justified
Persons, Council. Trident Sess. 6. Can. 32.
to be truly meritorious of the increase of Grace, and of eternal Life.

Here then lie the Points in difference, (1.) Whether such Good Works can be
said to be truly meritorious? (2.) Whether those who deny it, deserve an
Anathema for so doing? As to what relates to Gods Acceptance and Allowance, and
his Goodness and Promise, we freely own all that he says about it; and if no
more be meant, what need an Anathema about this matter? There must therefore be
something beyond this, when Good Works are not only said to be truly
meritorious, but we are cursed if we do not say the same.

To make any thing truly meritorious, we must suppose these Conditions
requisite.

1. That what we pretend to merit by, be our own free act. 2. That it be not
defective. 3. That there be an Equality between it, and the Reward due to it.
4. That there be an Obligation in point of Justice, to give that Reward to him
that does it.
And from these Considerations, we deny that good Works, even of justified
Persons, can be truly meritorious.

1. It is granted by themselves, That what is truly meritorious, must be a free
Act of the Person who does it. Meritum est actio libera cul Merces debetur ex
justitia. Coster. Enchirid. de Meritis bon. Oper. c. 7.
Now the good Works of justified persons cannot be said to be their own free
Acts, if the Power of doing them depend upon Divine Assistance, and there was
an antecedent Obligation upon them to perform them: So that they can do nothing
but what they are bound to, as God's Creatures; and their very Power of doing
it is from the Grace of God. If Men pretended to merit at another hands by
what God gives, there were some color for it; In quantum homo propria
voluntate facit id quod debet, meretur apud Deum, alioquin reddere debitum non
esset meritorum. Aquin. 1, 2. qu. 114. artic. 1. resp. ad. 1.
but to merit from God himself by what he gives us, seems very incongruous. If
I ow a Man an 100 l. and another knowing me unable to pay it, gives me so much
to pay the Debt, this is no more than what may be called strict Payment, as to
the Creditor; but if the Creditor himself gives me this 100 l. to pay himself
with, will any Man call this strict Payment? He may call it so himself, if he
pleases, but that only shows his Kindness and Favor; but it does not look very
modestly or gratefully, for the Debtor to insist upon it as true legal Payment.
Just so it is in good Works done by the Power of God's Grace, which we could
never have done without it; and therefore such cannot be truly meritorious.

2. What is truly meritorious must not be defective; because the Proportion is
to be equal between the Act, and the Reward due to it; which being perfect,
requires that there be do Defect in the Acts which merit it. But this can never
be said of Good Works of justified Persons, that they have no Defects in them.
We do not say, they are not Good Works, but they are not exact and perfect: for
although the Grace of God, as it comes from him, be a perfect Gift; yet as it
acts upon Men's Minds, it does not raise them to such a degree, but that they
have Imperfections in their best Actions. And whatever is defective, is faulty;
whatever is faulty, must be forgiven: whatever needs forgiveness, cannot be
truly meritorious. But not only their Good Works are defective; but if they
would merit, they ought to have none but Good Works, whereas the mixture of
others renders the good incapable of being meritorious, because there is so
much to be pardoned, as takes away all claim of Merit in the good they perform.
And themselves do not pretend, that Men can merit the Grace of Remission; but
it is very strange that those who cannot deserve to be forgiven, should deserve
to have an infinite Reward bestowed upon them.

Meritum se habet ad praemium sicut pretium ad illud quod emitur. Altisiodor.
l. 3. tr. 12.

Absoluta aequalitas inter mercedem and meritum poni^ur per modum Iustitiae
commutativae. Bell. Justice. l. 5. c. 14.


3. There must be an exact Proportion between the Act and the Recompense: for to
merit, is to pay a Price for a thing; and in such Acts of commutative Justice,
there must be an Equality of one thing with another. But what Equality can
there be between the imperfect Good Works of the best Men, and the most perfect
Happiness of another World, especially when that consists in the fruition of
the Beatifical Vision? For what Proportion can there be between our Acts
toward God, and God's Acts toward the Blessed in Heaven? Let the Acts be of
what Person soever, or of what Nature soever, or from what Principle soever; as
long as they are the Acts of finite imperfect Creatures, it is impossible there
should be any Equality, or exact Proportion between them and the Eternal Favor
of God, which is the Reward promised.

4. Where Acts are truly meritorious, there follows an Obligation of strict
Justice, to pay the Recompense due to them. But what strict Justice can there
be between the Creator and his Creatures, to recompense the Service they are
bound to perform; when their very Being, Power to act, Assistance in acting,
and Recompense for it, are all from his Bounty and Goodness? But our Author
would avoid all this, by saying, that though Good Works are truly meritorious;
yet it is through the Merits of Christ, and as they proceed from Grace, and
through his Goodness and Promise that they are so; i. e. they are truly
meritorious, because it appears from all these things they neither are, nor can
be meritorious. For,

(1.) How come the Merits of Christ to make good Works truly meritorious? Are
the Merits of Christ imputed to those Good Works? Then those Good Works must be
as meritorious as Christ's own Works; which I suppose he will not assert. Or,
is it that Christ has merited the Grace whereby we may merit? But even this
will not make our personal Acts truly meritorious; and the Nature of Merit
relates to the Acts, and not to the Power.

2. How comes the Power of Grace to make them truly meritorious; when the Power
of Grace does so much increase the Obligation on our side? If it be said, That
the state of Grace puts men into a capacity to merit: we might more reasonably
infer the contrary, that it puts them out of a capacity of meriting; because
the Remission of Sins, and the Favor of God, are things for which we can never
make him any recompense.

(3.) How comes a Divine Promise to make Acts truly meritorious? For God's
Promise is an Act of mere kindness, which is very different from strict
Justice: and although by the Promise God binds himself to performance; yet how
come those Acts to be more meritorious of Heaven, than the Acts of Repentance
are of Remission of Sins? Yet none will now say, that there can be any Acts
meritorious of that. Yet certainly there is a clear promise of Pardon upon
Repentance, as there is of Heaven upon Good Works: And if the Promise in the
other case does not make Repentance meritorious of Pardon; how can it make Good
Works truly meritorious of Eternal Life? But notwithstanding, we do not deny
God's Fidelity to his Promise may be called Justice, and so God, as a Righteous
Judge, 2 Timothy 4.8.
may give a Crown of Righteousness to all that follow St. Paul's Example,
without making Good Works to be truly meritorious.

VII. Of Confession.
HE believes it part of his Religion to make Gods of Men; foolishly thinking
that these have power to forgive sins. And therefore as often as he finds his
Conscience oppressed with the guilt of his Offenses; he calls for one of his
Priests, who are commonly more wicked than himself, and falling at his feet, he
unfolds to him the whole state of his Soul; and having run over a Catalogue of
his Sins, he asks of him Pardon and Forgiveness. And what is most absurd of
all, he is so sillily stupid as to believe, That, if his Ghostly Father, after
he has heard all his Villainies in his Ear, does but pronounce three or four
Latin words, making the sign of a Cross with two fingers and a thumb over his
head, his sins are forthwith forgiven him, although he had never any thoughts
of amendment, or intention to forsake his wickedness.

HE believes it damnable in any Religion to make Gods of Men. However he firmly
holds, that when Christ speaking to his Apostles, said, ( Ioh. 20.21.) Receive
ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven, and whose
sins you shall retain, they are retained: He gave to them, and their
Successors, the Bishops and Priests of the Catholic Church, Authority to
absolve* any truly penitent sinner from his sins. And God having thus given
them the Ministry of Reconciliation, and made them Christ's Legates, (2 Cor.
5.18, 19, 12.) Christ's Ministers, and the Dispensers of the Mysteries of
Christ, and given them power to loose on Earth whatsoever was to be loosed in
Heaven, (Mat. 18.18.) he undoubtedly believes, that whosoever comes to them
making a sincere and humble confession of his sins, with a firm purpose of
amendment, and an hearty resolution of turning from his evil ways, may from
them receive Absolution, by the Authority given them from Heaven, and not doubt
but God ratifies above, the sentence pronounced in that Tribunal; Loosing in
Heaven whatsoever is thus loosed by them on Earth. And that, whosoever comes
without the due preparation, without a Repentance from the bottom of his heart,
and real intension of forsaking his sins, receives no benefit by the
Absolution, but adds sin to sin, by an high contempt of God's Mercy, and abuse
of his Sacraments.

VII. Of Confession.
WE do not charge the Church of Rome, that in the power of Absolving, they make
Gods of Men, as our Misrepresenter pretends.

2. We do not deny, That Christ gave to the Bishops and Priests of the
Catholic Church, Authority to absolve any truly penitent Sinner from his Sins,
(which he therefore needlessly proves out of Scripture) and that such Absolution
is ratified in Heaven.

3. We are glad to find that our Author declares, That no Man receives benefit
by Absolution, without Repentance from the bottom of his Heart, and real
intention of forsaking his Sins; by which we hope he means more than Attrition.

But yet there are some things which stick with us, as to the Doctrine and
Practicee of the Church of Rome in this matter, which he takes no notice of.

1. That Secret Confession of Sins to a Priest, is made so necessary to
Salvation, Sess. 14. Can. 6.
that an Anathema is denounced against all that deny it, when they cannot deny
that God does forgive Sins upon true Contrition. For the Council of Trent does
say, That Contrition, with Charity, Sess. 14. c. 4.
does reconcile a Man to God before the Sacrament of Penance be actually
received. But then it adds, Lomb. l. 4. Did. 17.

Great. d^ Poenit. Did. 1. c. 90. Quidam.


That the desire of Confession is included in Contrition: Which is impossible
to be proved by Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity. For so lately, as in the time
of the Master of the Sentences, and Gratian (in the 12 th. Century) it was a
very disputable Point, whether Confession to a Priest were necessary. And it is
very hard for us to understand how that should become necessary to Salvation
since, which was not then. Some of their own Writers confess, that some good
Catholics did not believe the necessity of it. I suppose the old Canonists may
pass for good Catholics; and yet Maldonat says, Greg. de Valentia. de
necessit. Confess. c. 2.

Maldonat. Oper To. 2. de Poenit. c. 2, and 3.


That all the Interpreters of the Decrees held, that there was no Divine
Precept for Confession to a Priest; and of the same Opinion he grants Scotus to
have been. But he thinks it is now declared to be Heresy, or he wishes it
were. And we think it is too much already, unless there were better ground for
it.

2. That an Anathema is denounced against those who do not understand the words
of Christ, Whose Sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. of the Sacrament of
Penance, John 20.23.
so as to imply the necessity of Confession: Whereas there is no appearance in
the words of any such Sense; and themselves grant, that in order to the
Remission of Sins by Baptism, (of which St. Matthew and St. Mark speak in the
Apostles Commission) there is no necessity of Sacramental Confession, S. Mat.
28.19. Mark 16.16. Iansen. Concor. Evang. c. 147.
but a general Confession is sufficient. And from hence the Elder Iansenius
concludes, That the Power of Remission of Sins here granted, does not imply
Sacramental Confession. Cajetant yields, Caiet^n. in. loc. Ed. Paris, 1540.

Catharin. i^ Cajetan. l. 5. p. 444.


There is no Command for Confession here. And Catharinus adds, That Cajetan
would not allow any one Place of Scripture to prove Auricular Confession. And
as to this particular, he denies that there is any Command for it; and he goes
not about to prove it, but that Cajetan contradicts himself elsewhere, viz.
when he wrote School Divinity, before he set himself to the study of the
Scriptures. Vasques says, Vasques. ^: 3. Part. Th. Tom. 4.

Qu. 90. Art. 1. Dub. 2. Number. 2. Greg. de Valent. in Thom.


That if these words may be understood of Baptism, none can infer from them the
Necessity of Auricular Confession. But Gregory de Valentia evidently proves,
that this place does relate to Remission of Sins in Baptism; not only from the
Comparison of places, but from the Testimonies of Saint Cyprian, Tom. 4. Disp.
7. Qu. p. Punct. 2. p. 284.
Saint Ambrose, and others.

3. That it is expressed in the same Anathema's that this has been always the
Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church from the beginning. We do not
deny the ancient practice, either of Canonical Confession, as part of the
Discipline of the Church for public Offenses; nor of Voluntary Confession, for
ease and satisfaction of the perplexed Minds of doubting or dejected Penitents;
but that which we say was not owned nor practiced by the Church from the
beginning, was this Sacramental Confession as necessary to the Remission of
sins before God. It is therefore to no purpose to produce out of Bellarmine,
and others, a great number of Citations, to prove that which we never deny; but
if they hold to the Council of Trent, they must prove from the Fathers, that
Sins after Baptism cannot be forgiven without Confession to men: Bonavent. in
l. 4. Sent.

Did. 17. part 2 Godign. de rebus Abyssin. l. 1. c. 28.

Trinerarium Orientale. l. 5. c. 8.

Galan. Council. Eccl. Armenae. Tom. 2. p. 605. History Critique de la Creance
and de Courums des Nations du Levant. c. 8. p. 105. Chapter 1. pap. 14. Resp. 1.
Ierem. patriarch. ad Theolog. Wirtemberg. p. 87. Arcud. de Concord. Ecclesiae
Occident. and Orient. in 7 Sacram. l. 4. c. 3. Goar in Eucholog. p. 681.


which those who consider what they do, will never undertake, there being so
many Testimonies of undoubted Antiquity against it. And it is observable, that
Bonaventu^e grants, that before the Lateran Decree of Innocentius 3. it was no
Heresy to deny the necessity of Confession; and so he excuses those who in the
time of Lombard and Gratian, held that Opinion. And all other Christians in the
World besides those of the Church of Rome, do to this day reject the necessity
of particular Confession to a Priest, in order to Remission, as the Writers of
the Church of Rome themselves confess. So Godignus does of the Abyssins;
Philippus a SS. Trinitate, of the Iacobites; Clemens Galanus of the Nestorians,
who says, They made a Decree against the use of Confession to any but to God
alone. And Alexius Meneses of the Christians of St. Thomas in the Indies. The
Greeks believe Confession only to be of Positive and Ecclesiastical
Institution, as the late Author of the Critical History of the Faith and
Customs of the Eastern Nations, proves. And the very Form of their Absolution
declares, that they do not think particular Confession of all known Sins,
necessary to pardon: for therein the Priest absolves the Penitent from the sins
he has not confessed through forgetfulness, or shame. And now let any one
prove this to have been a Catholic Tradition by Vincentius his Rules, viz.
That it has been always received, every where, and by All.

VIII. Of Indulgences.
HE believes, that his Holy Father the Pope can give him leave to commit what
sins he pleases; especially, if he can make him a present of a round Sum of
Money, he never need doubt of an Indulgence or Pardon for himself and his Heirs
for ever, for all sorts of Crimes or Wickedness, he, or any of his Posterity
may have convenience of falling into. And having this Commission in his Pocket,
under the Popes Broad Seal, he may be confident that Christ will confirm, and
stand to all that his Vicar upon Earth has granted, and not call him to any
account for any thing he has done, although he should chance to die without the
least remorse of Conscience, or Repentance for his sins.

HE believes it damnable to hold, that the Pope or any other Power in Heaven or
Earth, can give him leave to commit any sins whatsoever: Or, that for any Sum
of Money he can obtain an Indulgence or Pardon for sins that are to be committed
by him, or his Heirs, hereafter. He firmly believes that no sins can be
forgiven, but by a true and hearty Repentance: But that still, there is a Power
in the Church of granting Indulgences, which concern not at all the Remission
of sins either Mortal or Venial; but only of some Temporal Punishments
remaining due after the Guilt is remitted. So that they are nothing else, but a
Mitigation or Relaxation upon just causes, of Canonical Penances, which are or
may be enjoined by the Pastors of the Church, on penitent sinners, according to
their several degrees of demerit. And this he is taught to be grounded on the
Judiciary Power, left by Christ in his Church, of binding and loosing: whereby
Authority was given to erect a Court of Conscience, to assign Penalties or
release them, as circumstances should reguire. And this Authority he knows S.
Paul plainly owned, (2 Cor. 2.6.) where he decreed a Penance; Sufficient (says
he) to such a man, is this punishment: And (2 Cor. 2.10.) where he released
one; For your sake (speaking of the Penance enjoined the incestuous
Corinthian,) I forgive it in the Person of Christ. And what Money there is given
at any time on this account, concerns not at all the Pope's Coffers, but is by
every one given as they please, either to the Poor, to the Sick, to Prisoners,
etc. wherefore they judge it most Charity. And though he acknowledges many abuses
have been committed in granting and gaining Indulgences, through the default of
some particular Persons; yet he cannot imagine how these can in Justice be
charged upon the Church, to the prejudice of her Faith and Doctrine;
^specially, since she has been so careful in the ret^enching them: As may be
seen by what what was done in the Council of Trent. Dec. de Indulg. cum
potestas.

VIII. Of Indulgences.
1. THey must be extremely ignorant, who take the Power of Indulgences, to be a
Leave from the Pope to commit what Sins they please; and that by virtue
thereof, they shall escape Punishment for their Sins, without Repentance, in
another World. Yet this is the sense of the Misrepresentation, which, he says
is made of it. And if he says true in his Preface, That he has described the
Belief of a Papist, exactly according to the apprehension he had when he was a
Protestant: He shows how well he understood the Matters in difference, when I
think no other Person besides himself ever had such an apprehension of it, who
pretended to be any thing like a Scholar.

2. But now he believes it damnable to hold that the Pope, or any other Power
in Heaven or Earth, can give him leave to commit any Sins whatsoever; or that
for any Sum of Money, he can obtain any Indulgence or Pardon for Sins that are
to be committed by him, or his Heirs hereafter. Very well! But what thinks he
of obtaining an Indulgence, or Pardon, after they are committed? Is no such
thing to be obtained in the Court of Rome for a Sum of Money? He cannot but have
heard of the Tax of the Apostolic Chamber for several Sins, and what Sums are
there set upon them. Why did he not as freely speak against this? This is
published in the vast Collection of Tracts of Canon Law, Tractat. Tractatuum.
To. 15. Part. 1. s. 368.
set forth by the Popes Authority, where there are certain Rates for Perjury,
Murder, Apostasy, etc. Now what do these Sums of Money mean? If they be small,
it is so much the better Bargain, for the Sins are very great. And Espencaeus
complains, Espencae. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. digress. 2.
that this Book was so far from being called in, that, he says, the Popes
Legates renerred those Faculties, and confirmed them, It seems then a Sum of
Money may be of some consequence toward the obtaining Pardon for a Sin past,
though not for a License to commit it. But what mighty difference is there,
whether a Man procures with Money a Dispensation, or a Pardon? For the Sin can
hurt him no more, than if he had License to commit it.

3. He does believe there is a Power in the Church to grant Indulgences; which,
he says, concern not at all the Remission of Sins, either mortal or venial,
but only of some temporal Punishments remaining due after the Guilt is
remitted. Here now arises a material Question, viz. Whether the Popes or the
Representer be rather to be believed. If the Popes, who grant the Indulgences
are to be believed; then not only the bare Remission of Sins is concerned in
them, but the plenary and most plenary Remission of Sins is to be had by them.
So Boniface the 8 th, in his Bull of Iubilee granted, Non solum plenam and
largiorem, imo plenissimam veniam peccatorum. If these words had no relation to
Remission of Sins, the People were horribly cheated by the sound of them. In
the Bull of Clement the 6 th, not extant in the Bullarium, Bullar. Cherubin. in
To. 1. p. 204.
but published out of the Vtrecht Manuscript, not only a plenary Absolution
from all Sins is declared to all persons who died in the Way to Rome; but he
commands the Angels of Paradise to carry the Soul immediately to Heaven. And I
suppose, whatever implies such an Absolution as carries a Soul to Heaven,
Prorsus mandamus Angelis paradisi, quantum animam illius a Purgatorio peni^us
absolutam in paradisi gloriam introducant.

Bulla Clem. 6. Vltrajecti A. D. 1653.

Gobel. Person. Gosmodr. aet. 6. c. 86. p. 278. Bullar. To. 3. p. 74. To. 4. p.
80.


does concern Remission of Sins. Boniface IX. granted Indulgences, a Poena and
a Culpa; and those certainly concerned Remission of Sins; being not barely from
the temporal Punishment, but from the Guilt it self. Clement VIII. whom
Bellarmine magnifies for his care in reforming Indulgences, in his Bull of
Iubilee, grants a most plenary Remission of Sins; and Urban the 8 th, since
him, not only a Relaxation of Penances, but Remission of Sins; and so lately as
A. D. 1671. Clement the 10 th published an Indulgence upon the Canonization of
five new Saints, wherein he not only grants a plenary Indulgence of Sins, but
upon invocation of one of these Saints in the point of Death, a plenary
Indulgence of all his Sins. And what does this signify in the point of Death,
if it do not concern the Remission of Sins?

4. Indulgences, he says, are nothing else but a Mitigation or Relaxation,
upon just Causes, of Canonical Penances, which are or may be enjoined by the
Pastors of the Church on penitent Senners, according to their several degrees
of Demerits. If by Canonical Penances, they mean those enjoined by the
Penitential Canons, Greg. de Valentia says, This Opinion differs not from that
of the Heretics, Greg. de Valent. de Indulg. 2.

Bell. de Indulg. i. 1. c. 7.


and makes Indulgences to be useless and dangerous things. Bellarmin brings
several Arguments against this Doctrine. (1.) There would be no need of the
Treasure of the Church; which he had proved to be the Foundation of
Indulgences. (2.) They would be rather hur^ful than profitable, and the Church
would deceive her Children by them. (3.) They could not be granted for the
Dead. C. 2.
(4.) They who receive Indulgences, do undergo Canonical Penances. (5.) The
Form of them does express, that they do relate to God, and not only to the
Church. And this, I think, is sufficient to show how far he is from true
Representing the Nature of Indulgences; for we do not dispute the Church's
Power in relaxing Canonical Penances to penitent sinners upon just Causes.

IX. Of Satisfaction.
HE believes very injuriously of Christ's Passion, being persuaded, that his
Sufferings and Death were not sufficiently satisfactory for our sins; but that
it is necessary for every one to make satisfaction for themselves. And for this
end, after he has been at Confession, the Priest injoyns him a Penance; by the
performance of which, he is to satisfy for his offenses; And thus confidently
relying upon his own penitential Works, he utterly evacuates Christ's Passion;
and though he professes himself a Christian, and that Christ is his Savior;
yet by his little trusting to him, he seems to think him to be no better, than
what his Crucifix informs him, that is, a mere Wooden one.

HE believes it damnable, to think injuriously of Christ's Passion. Nevertheless
he believes, that though condign Satisfaction for the Guilt of Sin, and the
Pain eternal due to it, be proper only to Christ our Savior; yet that penitent
Sinners being redeemed by Christ, and made his Members, may in some measure
satisfy by Prayer, Fasting, Alms, etc. for the temporal pain, which by order
of God's Justice, sometimes remains due, after the Guilt, and the eternal pains
are remitted. So that trusting in Christ as his Redeemer, he yet does not think
that by Christ's Sufferings, every Christian is discharged of his particular
Sufferings; but that every one is to suffer something for himself, as S. Paul
did, who by tribulations, and in suffering in his own flesh, did accomplish
those things, that wanted of the Passions of Christ; and this not only for
himself, but for the whole Church, Col. 1.24. and this he finds every where in
Scripture, viz. People admonished of the greatness of their sins, doing Penance
in Fasting, Sackcloth and Ashes, and by voluntary austerities, endeavoring to
satisfy the Divine Justice. And these personal Satisfactions God has
sufficiently also minded him of, in the punishments of Moses, Aaron, David, and
infinite others; and even in the Afflictions sent by God upon our own Age, in
Flagues, Wars, Fires, Persecutions, Rebellions, and such like: Which, few are
so Atheistical, but they confess, to be sent from Heaven for the just
Chastisement of our sins; and which we are to undergo, notwithstanding the
infinite Satisfaction made by Christ, and without any undervaluing it. Now
being thus convinced of some temporal punishments being due to his sins, he
accepts of all Tribulations, whether in Body, Name or Estate, from
whence-soever they come, and, with others of his own choosing, offers them up to
God, for the discharging this debt, still confessing, that his Offenses deserve
yet more. But these penitential Works he is taught to be no otherwise
satisfactory, than as joined and applied to that satisfaction which Jesus made
upon the Cross; in virtue of which alone, all our good Works find a grateful
acceptance in God's sight.

IX. Of Satisfaction.
1. HE believes it damnable to think any thing injuriously of Christ's Passion:
But then he distinguishes the Eternal and Temporal Pain due to Sin. As to the
Guilt and Eterternal Pain, the satisfaction, he says, is proper to Christ; but
as to the Temporal Pain, which may remain due by God's Justice, after the other
are remitted, he says, that Penitent Sinners may in some measure satisfy for
that by ^rayer, Fasting, Alms, etc.

2. These Penitential Works, he says, are no otherwise satisfactory, than as
jo^ned and applied to Christ's Satisfaction, in virtue of which alone our good
Works find a grateful acceptance in God's sight.

But for right apprehending the State of the Controversy, we must consider;

1. That they grant both Eternal and Temporal Pain due to Sin, to be remitted
in Baptism; so that all the satisfaction to be made, is for Sins committed
after Baptism.

2. We distinguish between Satisfaction to the Church before Absolution, and
Satisfaction to the Justice of God for some part of the punishment to sin which
is unremitted.

3. We do not deny that truly Penitential Works are pleasing to God, so as to
avert his displeasure; Catech. Roman. part. 2. c. 5. n. 52.56.
but we deny that there can be any Compensation in way of Equivalency, between
what we suffer, and what we deserve.

The Matter in Controversy therefore on this Head, consists in these things.

1. That after the total Remission of Sins in Baptism, they suppose a Temporal
Punishment to remain, when the Eternal is forgiven; which the Penitent is to
satisfy God's Justice for; and without this being done in this Life, he must go
into Purgatory for that End. Of which more under that Head.

2. That this Satisfaction may be made to the Justice of God, after Absolution
is given by the Priest. So that although the Penitent be admitted into God's
Favor, by the Power of the Keys, according to their own Doctrine; yet the
Application of the Merits of Christ, together with the Saints in the Sentence
of Absolution (according to their Form) do not set him so free, but he either
wants a new Supply from the Treasure of the Church, i. e. from the same Merits
of Christ and the Saints; or else he is to satisfy for the Temporal Punishment
by his own Penances.

3. That these Penitential Works are to be joined with the Merits of Christ, in
the way of proper Satisfaction to Divine Justice. And however softly this may
be expressed, the meaning is, that Christ has merited, that we may merit, and
by his Satisfaction, we are enabled to satisfy for our selves. And if the
Satisfaction by way of Justice be taken away, the other will be a Controversy
about Words.

4. That these Penitential Works may not only be sufficient for themselves,
Catech. Romans de panit. Sacr. n. 61.
but they may be so over-done, that a great share may be taken from them to
make up the Treasure of the Church, for the benefit of others who fall short,
when they are duly applied to them in the way of Indulgences. And about these
Points, we must desire greater Proof than we have ever yet seen.

X. Of Reading the Holy Scripture.
HE believes it part of his Duty to think meanly of the Word of God, to speak
irreverently of the Scripture; to do what he is able, to lessen the repute of
it, and bring it into disgrace. And for this end, he says it is obscure, full
of ambiguous expressions, plain contradictions, not fit to be read by the
Vulgar, nor fit to be translated into Vulgar Languages: And without respect to
Christ, or his Apostles, profanely Preaches, that no Ten Books in the World
have done so much mischief to Christianity as this one: And under a vain
pretense of preventing farther inconveniences, endeavors to deprive all of
this Spiritual comfort, of this Divine Food, of this Heavenly Light; that so
being kept in darkness, they may be also preserved in ignorance, and Damned
Eternally.

HE believes it damnable in any one to think, speak, or do any thing
irreverently toward the Scripture; or by any means whatsoever to bring it into
dis-repute or disgrace. He holds it in the highest Veneration of all men
living, he professes it to be the Dew of Heaven, Oracles of God, Fountain of
Eternal Life; that to profane it, is to incur the guilt of Damnation: And that
we are rather bound to lose our lives, than concur any way to its profanation.
It Is true, he does not think it fit, to be read generally by all, without
License, or in the Vulgar Tongues: Not for any disrespect to it; But, I.
Because he understands, that private Interpretation is not proper for the
Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.20. II. Because that in the Epistles of St. Paul are
certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave,
(as also the rest of the Scriptures,) to their own perdition. III. Because God
has given only some to be Apostles, some Prophets, other-some Eva^gelists, and
other-some Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4.11. For these Reasons he is taught, That
it is not convenient for the Scripture to be read indifferently to all men, but
only such as have express License, and good testimony from their Curates; that
they are humble, discreet, and devout persons; and such as are willing to
observe directions in the perusing this Sacred Volume: That is, take notice of
all Godly Histories, and imitable examples of Humility, Chastity, Obedience,
Mercy to the Poor, etc. and all such places as are apt to provoke and stir up
the hatred of Sin, fear of God's Judgments, love of Virtue, etc. and in all
Hard, Obscure and Disputable Points to refer all to the Arbitrament of the
Church, to the judgment of those whom God has appointed Pastors and Doctors:
Never presuming to contend, control, teach, or talk of their own Sense and
Fancy in deep Questions of Divinity, and high Mysteries of Faith; but
expecting the sense of these from the Lips of the Priest, who shall keep
knowledge, and from whose mouth they shall require the Law, Mal. 2.7. And this
caution is used, lest that the Scripture coming into the hands of a presuming
sort of proud, curious and contentious people, be abused and perverted; who
make it their business to enquire into Dogmatical, Mystical, High and Hidden
secrets of God's Counsels, into Predestination, Reprobation, Election,
Pre-science, and other such incomprehensible Mysteries; and upon the
presumption of I know not what Spirit, immediately become Teachers,
Controllors, and Judges of Doctors, Church, Scripture, and all; and
acknowledging no Authority left by Christ, to which they are to submit; under
pretense of Scripture and God's Word, make way for all sorts of Profaneness,
Irreligion and Atheism. So that it is not for the preserving Ignorance, he
allows a restraint upon the reading the Scriptures, but for the preventing a
blind ignorant Presumption. And that it may be done to edification, and not to
destruction, and without casting the holy to dogs, or pearls to swine.

X. Of Reading the Holy Scripture.
1. HE believes it damnable in any one, to think, speak, or do any thing
irreverently toward the Scripture, or by any means whatsoever to bring it into
disrepute or disgrace: but not being contented with this, he adds, That he
holds it in the highest Veneration of all Men living. Now, here we must desire
a little better Representation of this Matter. For certainly, those who derive
its Authority from the Church; who set Traditions in equal esteem with it; who
complain so much of its Obscurity, can never be said to hold in equal
Veneration with those who maintain its independent Authority, its Sufficiency
and Perspicuity. And these are known and material Points in Controversy between
us and them: therefore let them not say, they hold it in the highest Veneration
of all men living; tho those thought themselves thorough Catholics, who have
compared it to a Nose of Wax, to a Lesbian Rule, to a dead Letter, unsensed
Characters, and to other things, not fit to be repeated. But we are well
pleased to find them express such Veneration for it. Wherefore then are the
people to be kept from reading it?

2. He says, It is not out of disrespect to it. But why then? (1.) Because
private Interpretation is not proper for the Scripture, (2 Pet. 1.20.) One
would think the Scripture were not kept only from the people, by such a Sense
being put upon it; for any one that would but consider that place, will find it
must relate to the Prophets themselves; and does he think the Prophets were to
be debarred from reading the Scriptures? But this is playing with Scripture,
and not reasoning from it (2) Because in the Epistles of S. Paul are certain
things hard to be ^nderstood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also
the rest of the Scriptures, to their own Perdition, (2 Pet. 3.16.) Now in my
Opinion, such men deserve more to be debarred from meddling with the Scripture,
who make such perverse Inferences from it, than ordinary Readers. And if they
use all other places, as they do this, they cannot be excused from depraving
it. It is granted, there were then unlearned and unstable men, who
misunderstood, or misapplied the Writings of St. Paul, and other Scriptures.
And what then? There are men of all Ages, who abuse the best things in the
World, even the Gospel it self, and the Grace of God. Does it hence follow,
that the Gospel must not be preached to them, or the grace of God made known to
them, for fear of men's making ill use of it? If this had been the just
consequence, would not St. Peter himself have thought of this? But he was so
far from making it, that he advises those persons he writes to, to have a
mighty regard to the Scriptures, even to the Prophetical Writings, as to a
Light shi^ing in a dark place, 1 Pet. 1.19. According to this way of deducing
Consequences, St. Peter should have argued just contrary; The Prophetical
Writings are dark and obscure, theref^r^ meddle not with them, but trust your
Guides: Whereas the Apostle, after he had told them what the Apostles saw and
heard, he adds, That they have a more sure Prophetical Word, as the Rhemists
translate it. How could that be more sure to them, unless they were allowed to
read, consider, and make use of it? (3.) Because God has given only some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and
Doctors, Ephesians. 4.11. Does it hence follow that the People are not to read the
Scriptures? In the Universities, Tutors are appointed to interpret Aristotle to
their Pupils; does it hence follow that they are not to read Aristotle
themselves? It is, no doubt, a mighty Advantage to have such infallible
Interpreters as the Apostles and Prophets; and all Christians are bound to
follow their Sense, where they have delivered it. But suppose the Question be
about the Sense of these Interpreters; must their Books not be looked into,
because of the danger of Error? This Reason will still hold against those who
go about to deliver their Sense; and so on, till by this Method of Reasoning,
all sort of Books and Interpretations be rejected; unless any such can be found
out, which is not liable to be abused or misunderstood. And if there be any
such to be had, they are much to blame who do not discover it. But as yet we
see no Remedy for two things in Mankind, a proneness to Sin, and to Mistake.
But of all things, we ought not to take away from them one of the best Means to
prevent both, viz. a diligent, and careful, and humble reading the Holy
Scriptures.

But, 3. He denies that all persons are forbid to read the Scriptures, but only
such as have License, and good Testimony from their Curats: and therefore their
design is not to preserve Ignorance in the people, but to prevent a blind,
ignorant presumption.

These are plausible pretenses to such as search no farther; but the Mystery of
this matter lies much deeper. It was, no doubt, the Design of the Church of
Rome to keep the Bible wholly out of the hands of the people. But upon the
Reformation they found it impossible; so many Translations being made into
vulgar Languages; and therefore care was taken to have Translations made by
some of their own Body; and since the people of better inclinations to Piety
were not to be satisfied without the Bible; therefore they thought it the
better way to permit certain persons whom they could trust, to have a License
to read it: And this was the true Reason of the fourth Rule of the Index Liber.
prohibit. made in pursuance of the Order of the Council of Trent, and published
by Pius IV. by which any one may see it was not an Original Permission out of
any good Will to the Thing; but an Aftergame to get the Bible out of the hands
of the People again: And therefore Absolution was to be denied to those who
would not deliver them to their Ordinaries when they were called for: And the
Regulars themselves were not to be permitted to have Bibles without a License:
And as far as I can understand the Addition of Clement VIII. to that fourth
Rule, he withdraws any new Power of granting such Licenses; and says they are
contrary to the Command and Usage of that Church, Quod quidem in^iold^e serus
d^m est. Clem. VIII. ad R^g. 4 Indicis Roman.
which, he says, is to be inviolably observed: Wherein I think he declares
himself fully against such Licenses: And that inferior Guides should grant them
against the Command of the Head of the Church, is a thing not very agreeable to
the Unity and Subordination they boast of.

XI. Of Apocryphal Books.
HE believes it lawful to make what Additions to Scripture his Party thinks
good; and therefore takes no notice of the ancient Canon approved by the
Apostles and primitive Christians; but allows equal Authority to the Books of
Toby, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and the Macchabees, as to the other part
of the Scripture; although these were always rejected by the Jews, never exant in
the Hebrew Copy, and expressly condemned by St. Jerome, as not Canonical, and
never admitted by the Church, but only of late years, in some of their Synods,
which made these Innovations contrary to the Sense of their Ancestors.

HE believes it damnable to add any thing to the Scripture. And yet allows the
Books of Toby, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Macchabees, to be Canonical:
because the Church of Christ has declared them such; not only in these later
ages, but even in the primitive times. S. Gregory Nazianzen, (Orat. de S S.
Macc.) who lived in the year 354. Also S. Ambrose, (lib. de Jacob. and vit.
beat.) An. 370. Innocent. I. (Ep. ad Exup.) They were also received by the
third Council of Carthage, An. 419. which approved all these Books as
Canonical, Can. 47. and was subscribed by S. Augustine, and confirmed in the 6
th General Synod, August. lib. 2. Doct. Christ. cap. 8. So that to him it is of
little concern, whether they were ever in the Hebrew Copy; the Canon of the
Church of Christ being of much more Authority with him, than the Canon of the
Jews: He having no other assurance that the Books of Moses, and the four
Gospels, are the true Word of God, but by the Authority and Canon of the
Church. And this he has learned from that great Doctor S. Augustine, who
declares his mind plainly in this case, saying, That he would not believe the
Gospel, except the Authority of the Catholic Church moved him threunto.
(Contra Ep. Fundam. c. 4.) Now he is well satisfied, that many doubted whether
these Books were Canonical or no; and amongst others, S. Ierom; because the
Church had not declared them so: But since the Church's Declaration, no
Catholic ever doubted; no more than of other Books, viz. of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of St. James, the second of St. Peter, the second and
third of St. John, St. Jude 's Epistle, and the Apocalypse: All which were for
many years after the Apostles time doubted of; but afterward declared and
received as Canonical. This he finds S. Jerome expressly confessing of himself,
viz. That for some time the Book of Judith seemed to him Apocryphal; to wit,
till the Council of Nice declared it otherwise. Praef. in Judith. The like he
affirms of S. James's Epistle, that it was doubted of by many for several
years; Paulatim tempore procedente meruit authoritatem: By little and little in
process of time it gained Authority. De viris illus. verb. Jacob. For this
reason he matters not what Books have been reputed Apocryphal by some, and for
some years: But only what Books are received and declared by the Church,
Canonical, in what year, and at what time soever. For believing the same spirit
of Truth assists her in all Ages; he looks upon himself equally obliged to
receive her Definitions of the Year 419. as of any of the precedent years: It
not being possible for Christ to fail of his Promise, or the Holy Ghost to err
or misguide the Church in that year, more than in any other.

XI. Of Apocryphal Books.
1. WE do not charge the Church of Rome with making what Additions to Scripture
they think good, as the Misrepresenter says; but we charge them with taking
into the Canon of Scripture such Books as were not received for Canonical by
the Christian Church; as those Books himself mentions, viz. Toby, Judith,
Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and Maccabees.

2. We do not only charge them with this, but with Anathematizing all those who
do not upon this Declaration believe them to be Canonical; since they cannot
but know, Consil. Trident. S^ss. 4.8. Ap. de Canon Scrip^.
that these Books never were in the Jewish Canon, and were left out by many
Christian Writers. And if the Church cannot add to the Scripture, and our
Author thinks it damnable to do it; how can it make any Books Canonical, which
were not so received by the Church? For the Scripture in this sense is the
Canon; and therefore if it add to the Canon, it adds to the Scripture; i. e. it
makes it necessary to believe some Books to be of infallible Authority, which
were not believed to be so, either by the Jewish or Christian Church, Bp Cosins
Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture.
as appears by abundant Testimonies to that purpose produced by a learned
Bishop of this Church; which ought to have been considered by the Representer,
that he might not have talked so crudely about this matter.

But however, I must consider what he says;

1. He produces the Testimony of Greg. Nazianzen, Greg. Nazianzen. in carmin. 2
Vol. p.. 98.
who is expressly against him, and declares but Twenty two Books in the Canon of
the Old Testament; but how does he prove that he thought these Books Canonical?
He quotes his Oration on the Maccabees; Orat. de Maccab. ^ol. 1. p. 398.
Where I can find nothing like it; and instead of it he expressly follows, as he
declares, the Book of Josephus, of the Authority of Reason concerning them. So
that if this proves any thing, it proves Josephus his Book Canonical, and not
the Maccabees.

2. He adds the Testimony of S. Ambrose, Ambros. de Jacob. and Vitae Erat. l.
2. c. 10, 11, 12.

Coc^i. These. Cathol. l. 6. Act. 18.


who in the place he refers to, enlarges on the Story of the Maccabees, but
says nothing of the Authority of the Book. And even Coccius himself grants
that of old Melito Sardensis, Amphilochius, Greg. Nazianzen, the Council of
Laodicea, S. Hierom, Russinus, and Gregory the Great, did not own the Book of
Maccabees for Canonical.

Scholastical history, n. 83.
3. Innocentius ad Exuperium speaks more to this purpose. And if the Decretal
Epistle be allowed, against which Bishop Cosins has made considerable
Objections; then it must be granted, that these Books were then in the Roman
Canon; but that they were not received by the Universal Church, Eusebius. l.
5.^.24. Orig. Pref. in Psalm.

Athan. in Synopsi.

Hilar pres. in Psalm.

S. Cyril. Cawe^. 4.

Epip. har. 8.76 Basil. philo^al. c. 3.

Amphil. Epist. Canon. ad Selenc.

Chrysostom. hom. 4. in Genesis

Scholast. Hist. n. 71.


appears evidently by the Canon of the Council of Laodicea, c. 60. wherein
these Books are left out; and this was received in the Code of the Universal
Church; which was as clear a Proof of the Canon then generally received, as can
be expected. It is true, the Council of Carthage took them in; and S. Augustine
seems to be of the same Opinion: But on the other side, they are left out by
Mel^to Bishop of Sardis, who lived near the Apostles times, Origin, Athanasius,
S. Hilary, S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, S. Basil, Amphilochius, S.
Chrysostom, and especially S. Ierom, who has labored in this point so much,
that no fewer than thirteen places are produced out of him to this purpose, by
the forementioned learned Bishop of our Church, who clearly proves there was no
Tradition for the Canon of the Council of Trent in any one Age of the Christian
Church. But our Author goes on.

4. It is of little concern to him, whether these Books were ever in the Hebrew
Copy. I would only ask whether it be of any concern to him, whether they were
divinely inspired or not? He says, It is damnable to add to the Scripture; by
the Scripture we mean Books written by Divine Inspiration: Can the Church make
Books to be so written, which were not so written? If not, then all it has to
do, is to deliver by Tradition what was so, and what not. Whence should they
have this Tradition, but from the Jews? and they owned no Divine Inspiration
after the time of Malachy. How then should there be any Books so written after
that time? And he that says in this matter, as he does, It is of little
concern to him whether they were in the Hebrew Canon, does little concern
himself what he ought to believe, and what not, in this matter.

5. Since the Churches Declaration, he says, no Catholics ever doubted. What
does he mean by the Churches Declaration, that of Innocent, and the Council of
Carthage? Then the same Bishop has showed him, that since that time, there
have been very many, both in the Greek and Latin Church, of another Opinion.
And a little before the Council of Trent, Catharinus says, Cathar. Adver.
Cajet. p. 48. ed. Paris 1535.
That a Friend of his, and a Brother in Christ, derided him as one that wanted
Learning, for daring to assert these Books were within the Canon of Scripture;
and it is plain, Card. Cajetan could never be persuaded of it: But if he means
since the Council of Trent, then we are returned to our Difficulty, how such a
Council can make any Books Canonical, which were not received for such by the
Catholic Church before? For then they do not declare the Canon, but create it.

XII. Of the Vulgar Edition of the Bible.
HE makes no Conscience of abusing the Scripture, and perverting, for the
maintenance of his Errors and Superstitions. And therefore, though he dares not
altogether lay it by; lest he should, by so doing, lose all claim to
Christianity: Yet he utterly disapproves it, as it is in its genuine Truth and
Purity, and as allowed in the Church of England; and crying this down, he
believes it unlawful to be read by any of his Communion. And then puts into
their hands another Volume, which in its Frontis-piece bears the Title indeed
of the Word of God, with the names of the Books and Chapters; but in the
context of it, is so every where full of Corruptions, Falsifications, and
intolerable Abuses, that it almost every where belies its Title, and is unfit
for any one, who professes himself a Christian.

HE believes it a damnable sin, to abuse the Scripture, or any ways to pervert
it, for the maintenance of Errors or Superstitions, and thinks himself obliged,
rather to lay down his life, than concur to, or approve of any such
Falsifications or Corruptions, prejudicial to Faith or Good Manners. For this
reason, being conscious, that in all Ages, there has been several Copies of
this Sacred Volume, quite different from the Originals in many places, either
through the mistake of the Transcribers, or malice of others, endeavoring by
this means to gain credit to their new Doctrines: He is commanded not to
receive all Books indifferently for the Word of God, that wear that Title; but
only such as are approved by the Church, and recommended by her Legitimate. And
such is that he daily uses, commonly known by the name of the Vulgar
Translation; which has been the principal of all other Latin Copies in all
Ages, since the Primitive times; much commended by St. Augustine; and never
altered in any thing, but once heretofore by the Holy Studies of St. Hierome:
And twice or thrice since, being reviewed by Authority, and purged of such
mistakes, as in length of time, had crept in by Transcribers, or Printers
faults. And that this Translation is most pure and incorrupt, as to any thing
concerning matter of Belief, or differences in Religion, is not only the
Doctrine of his Church; but also the Sentiment of many Learned Men of the
Reformation, who approve this Version, and prefer it before any other Latin one
whatsoever. Beza in his Preface to the New Testament, Anno 1559. blames Erasmus
for rejecting it. Paulus Fagius cries out against all that disallow it, ( Cap.
4. Verse. Lat. Paraph Chald.) Ludovicus de Dieu, with admiration confesses it to
be most Faithful, (in Not. ad Evang. Praef.) Causabon prefers it before the
Greeks Text now in use; and acknowledges that it agrees with the Ancient
Manuscripts, (in Not. ad Evang. and Act.) Grotius professes to the World, that
he highly esteems it, for that it contains no erroneous Opinions, and is very
Learned; ( nulla dogmata insalubria continet, and multum habet in se
eruditionis, Pr^f. Annot. in vet. Test.) And for this reason, he refers his
Annotations generally to this Translation, as he declares himself. So that,
seeing this Version is delivered to him with the approbation of his whole
Church, and is commended by most Learned Adversaries; he thinks he has great
reason to receive it, and that he may peruse it, without any danger that can
come to him, from any Corruptions or Falsifications. And because he has not the
like assurance of the English Translation allowed by Protestants, or any other
made since the Reformation, by any of that Persuasion; but sees, that there has
been almost as many different Translations made and published by these, as
there had been men of different Humors, different Spirits, and different
Interests; whereof none have ever approved the Versions of any of the rest; but
cried out against, and Condemned them, of many Alterations, Additions,
Detractions, and Forgeries; Bucer, and the Osiandrians exclaiming against
Luther, Luther against Munster; Beza against Castaleo; Castaleo against Beza;
Calvin against Servetus; Illyricus against Calvin and Beza. Our English
Ministers against Tindal and his Fellows: And this, not upon the account of
some oversights, or like mistakes, or the following of different Copies; but
accusing one another of being Absurd and senseless, in their Translations of
obscuring and perve^ing the meaning of the Holy Ghost, of Omissions and
Additions, of perverting the Text in eight hundred forty and eight pieces; of
corrupt and false Translations; all which in express Terms, has been charged by
great Abbetters of the Reformation against a Bible yet used in England, and
ordered to be read in all Churches by Queen Elizabeth, and to be seen in the
Abridgement of a Book delivered by certain Ministers to King James, page 11.12.
in Mr. Burges's Apology, Sect. 6. Mr. Broughton's Advertisement to the Bishops.
And in Doctor Reynold's refusing before the King at Hampton Court, to subscribe
to the Communion-Book, because it warranted a corrupt and false Translation of
the Bible. For these and such other reasons, he is commanded not to read any of
these Translations; but only that, which is recommended to him by the Church.

XII. Of the Vulgar Edition of the Bible.
1. WE do not dispute about the Vulgar Edition, whether it may not be preferred
before modern Latin Editions, because of its great Antiquity in some parts of
it, and its general Reception since the time of Gregory I. But our dispute is,
whether it be made so Authentic since the Council of Trent, that no Appeals
are to be made to the Originals, i. e. whether that Council by its Authority
could make a Version equal to the Originals out of which it was made?
Especially since at the time of that Decree, In hac Vulg^^a Editione visa sunt
nonuulla mutanda. qu^e consul^o m^tata non sunt. Clem. VIII. in Buila.
the Vulgar Edition was confessed to be full of Errors and Corruptions by
Sixtus V. who says, he took infinite pains to correct them, and yet left very
many behind, as appeared by Clement VIII. who corrected his Bibles in very many
places, and grants some faults were left uncorrected still: Now, how was it
possible for the Council of Trent to declare that Edition Authentic, which was
afterward so much corrected? And, whether was the correct Edition of Sixtus V.
Authentic or not, being made in pursuance of the Decree of the Council? If
not, how comes Clement his Edition to be made Authentic, when the other was
not, since there may be Corruptions found in that, Luc. Brugens. in variis Lect.
as well as the other; and no one can tell, but it may be reviewed and
corrected still; as some of their own Writers confess it stands in need of it?

Not. Alexan. dissert. de vulg. verse. quaest. 6.
2. Our Controversy is not so much about the Authority of the Vulgar Latin,
above other Latin Versions to those who understand them; but whether none else
but the Latin Version must be used by those who understand it not? And here our
Representer says, That he is commanded not to read any of these Translations
(speaking of Tindal's, and that in Queen Elizabeth's time) but only that which
is recommended to him by the Church. If this relate to the Vulgar Latin, then
we are to seek, why the common people should have none to read, but what they
cannot understand; if to Translations of their own, then we doubt not to make
it appear, that our Translations allowed among us, is more exact and agreeable
than any they can put into their hands.

XIII. Of the Scripture as a Rule of Faith.
HE believes it lawful; nay, that it is his obligation to undervalue the
Scripture, and take from it that Authority, which Christ gave it. For whereas
Christ left this to the World, as the Rule of Faith, and as a Sacred Oracle,
from whence all his Followers might be instructed in the Precepts of a good
Life, learn all the Mysteries of their Faith, and be resolved in all difficult
and doubtful Points of Religion: He is taught flatly to deny all this; and to
believe that the Scripture is not capable of deciding any one point of
Controversy, or reconciling the different Sentiments of Men in Religion: And
thus demeans himself toward the word of God, in a manner most unbecoming a
Christian.

HE believes it damnable to undervalue the Scripture, or take from it the
Authority given it by Christ. He gives it all respect due to the Word of God;
he owns it to be of greatest Authority upon Earth, and that it is capable of
leading a Man to all Truth, whenever it is rightly understood. But to any one
that misunderstands it, and takes it in any other sense, than what was intended
by the Holy Ghost; he believes it to such a one, to be no Scripture, no word of
God; that to such a one, it is no Rule of Faith, nor Judge of Controversies.
And that what he thinks to be the Doctrine of Christ, and Command of Heaven, is
nothing but his own Imagination, and the suggestion of the Devil. And since, by
the experience of so many thousand Heresies since our Savior's time, all
pretending to be grounded on Scripture, he finds that almost every Text of the
Bible, and even those that concern the most Essential and Fundamental Points of
the Christian Religion, may be interpreted several ways; and made to signify
things contrary to one another; and that while thus contrary meanings are by
several Persons drawn from the same Words; the Scripture is altogether silent,
without discovering, which of all those Senses is that intended by the Holy
Ghost, and leading to Truth, and which are Erroneous and Antichristian: He is
taught to believe that the Scripture alone can be no Rule of Faith to any
private or particular person; not that there is any thing wanting on the
Scripture-side; but because no private person can be certain, whether amongst
all the several meanings every Text is obnoxious to, that which he understands
it in, is the Right, or no. And without this certainty of Truth, and security
from Error, he knows, there is nothing capable of being a Rule.

XIII. Of the Scriptures as a Rule of Faith.
THE only thing insisted on here is, That it is not the Words, but the Sense of
Scripture is the Rule; and that this Sense is not to be taken from Men's private
Fancies, which are various and uncertain; and therefore where there is no
security from Errors, there is nothing capable of being a Rule.

To clear this, we must consider,

1. That it is not necessary to the making of a Rule, to prevent any
possibility of mistake, but that it be such that they cannot mistake without
their own fault. For Certainty in it self, and Sufficiency for the use of
others, are all the necessary Properties of a Rule; but after all, it is
possible for Men not to apply the Rule aright, and then they are to be blamed,
and not the Rule.

2. If no Men can be certain of the right Sense of Scripture, then it is not
plain in necessary things; which is contrary to the design of it, and to the
clearest Testimonies of Antiquity, and to the common Sense of all Christians,
who never doubted or disputed the Sense of some things revealed therein; as the
Unity of the Godhead, the making of the World by him, the Deluge, the History
of the Patriarchs, the Captivity of the Jews, the coming of the Messiah, his
sending his Apostles, his coming again to Judgment, etc. No Man who reads such
things in Scripture, can have any doubt about the Sense and Meaning of the
Words.

3. Where the Sense is dubious, we do not allow any Man to put what Sense he
pleases upon them; but we say, there are certain means, whereby he may either
attain to the true Sense, or not be damned if he do not. And the first thing
every man is to regard, is not his security from being deceived, but from being
damned. For Truth is made known in order to Salvation: If therefore I am sure
to attain the chief end, I am not so much concerned, as to the possibility of
Errors, as that I be not deceived by my own fault. We do not therefore leave
Men either to follow their own fancy, or to interpret Scripture by it; but we
say, They are bound upon pain of Damnation to seek the Truth sincerely, and to
use the best means in order to it; and if they do this, they either will not
err, or their Errors will not be their Crime.

XIV. Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
HE believes that his Church, which he calls Catholic, is above the Scripture;
and profanely, allows to her an uncontrollable Authority of being Judge of the
Word of God. And being fondly abused, into a distrust of the Scriptures; and
that he can be certain of nothing, even of the Fundamentals of Christianity,
from what is delivered in them, though they speak never so plainly; he is
taught to rely wholly upon this Church, and not to believe one word the
Scripture says, unless his Church says it too.

HE believes, that the Church is not above the Scripture; but only allows that
Order between them, as is between the Judge and the Law. And is no other than
what generally every private Member of the Reformation challenges to himself,
as often as he pretends to decide any doubt of his own, or his Neighbors in
Religion, by interpreting the Scripture. Neither is he taught at all to
distrust the Scripture, or not to rely on it; but only to distrust his own
private Interpretation of it, and not to rely on his own Judgment, in the
Res^lution of any doubt concerning Faith or Religion, though he can produce
several Texts in favor of his Opinion. But all such cases he is commanded to
re-cur to the Church; and having learnt from her the sense of all such Texts;
how they have been understood by the whole Community of Christians, in all Ages
since the Apostles; and what has been their Received Doctrine, in such doubtful
and difficult Points; he is obliged to submit to this, and never presume on his
own private Sentiments, however seemingly grounded on Reason and Scripture, to
believe or preach any New Doctrine opposite to the Belief of the Church; But as
he receives from her the Book, so also to receive from her the Sense of the
Book: With a Holy Confidence, that she that did not cheat him in delivering a
False Book for the True one, will not cheat him in delivering a False and
Erroneus Sense for the True one; her Authority, which is sufficient in the one,
being not less in the other: And his own private Judgment, which was
insufficient in the one, that is, in finding out the True Scripture, and
discerning it from all other Books; being as incapable and insucffiient in the
other; that is, in certainly discovering the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and
avoiding all other Heterodox and mistaken Interpretations.

XIV. Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
1. THE Question is not, Whether Men are not bound to make use of the best
means for the right Interpretation of Scripture, by Reading, Meditation,
Prayer, Advice, a humble and teachable Temper, etc. i. e. all the proper means
fit for such an end? but whether after all these, there be a necessity of
submitting to some infallible Judge, in order to the attaining the certain
Sense of Scripture?

2. The Question is not, Whether we ought not to have a mighty regard to the
Sense of the whole Christian Church in all Ages since the Apostles, which we
profess to have; but, Whether the present Roman Church, as it stands divided
from other Communions, has such a Right and Authority to interpret Scripture,
that we are bound to believe that to be the infallible Sense of Scripture which
she delivers?

And here I cannot but take notice how strangely this matter is here
misrepresented: for the Case is put,

1. As if every one who rejects their pretense of Infallibility, had nothing to
guide him but his own private Fancy in the Interpretation of Scripture.

2. As if we rejected the Sense put upon Scripture by the whole Community of
Christians in all ages since the Apostles times. Whereas we appeal, in the
matters in difference between us, to this universal Sense of the Christian
Church, and are verily persuaded they cannot make it out in any one Point
wherein we differ from them. And themselves cannot deny, that in several we
have plainly the Consent of the first Ages, as far as appears by the Books
remaining, on our side; as in the Worship of Images, Invocation of Saints,
Papal Supremacy, Communion in both kinds, Prayer and Scripture in known
Tongues; and I may safely add, the Sufficiency of the Scripture,
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession, Public Communions, Solitary Masses,
to name no more.

But here lies the Artifice; We must not pretend to be capable of judging
either of Scripture, or Tradition; but we must trust their Judgment what is the
Sense of Scripture, and what has been the Practice of the Church in all Ages,
although their own Writers confess the contrary: which is very hard.

But he seems to argue for such a Submission to the Church;

1. Because we receive the Book of Scripture from her; therefore from her we
are to receive the Sense of the Book. An admirable Argument! We receive the Old
Testament from the Jews; therefore from them we are to receive the Sense of the
Old Testament, and so we are to reject the true Messiah. But this is not all:
If by the Church, they mean the Church of Rome in distinction from others, we
deny it: if they mean the whole Christian Church, we grant it: but then the
force of it is quite lost. But why is it not possible for the Church of Rome to
keep these Writings, and deliver them to others, which make against her self?
Do not Persons in Lawsuits often produce Deeds which make against them? But
there is yet a further Reason; it was not possible for the Church of Rome to
make away these Writings, being so universally spread.

2. Because the Church puts the difference between true and false Books,
therefore that must be trusted for the true Sense of them. Which is just as one
should argue, The Clerks of the Rolls are to give an account to the Court of
true Records, therefore they are to sit on the Bench, and to give Judgment in
all Causes. The Church is only to declare what it finds as to Canonical Books;
but has no Power to make any Book Canonical, which was not before received for
such. But I confess Stapleton says, the Church if it please may make Hermes
his Pastor and Clemens his Constitutions Canonical: Conti^v. 5. Qu. 4. art. 2.
but I do not think our Author will therein follow him.

XV. of Tradition.
HE believes the Scripture to be imperfect: And for the supplying of what he
thinks Defective in it, he admits Humane Ordinations and Traditions of Men;
allowing equal Authority to these, as to the Scriptures themselves; thinking
himself as much obliged to submit to these, and believe them with Divine Faith,
as he does, whatsoever is written in the Bible, and confessedly spoken by the
Author of all Truth, God himself. Neither will he admit of any one to be a
Member of his Communion, although he undoubtedly believes every Word that is
written in the Scripture; unless he also assents to these Traditions, and gives
as great credit to them, as to the Word of God, although in that there is not
the least footstep of them to be found.

HE believes the Scripture not to be imperfect, nor to want Humane Ordinations,
or Traditions of Men, for the supplying any defects in it: Neither does he
allow the same Authority to these, as to the Word of God; or give them equal
credit; or exact it of others, that desire to be admitted into the communion of
his Church. He believes no Divine Faith ought to be given to any thing, but
what is of Divine Revelation; and that nothing is to have place in his Creed,
but what was taught by Christ, and his Apostles, and has been believed and
taught in all Ages by the Church of God, the Congregation of all True
Believers, and has been so delivered down to him through all Ages. But now,
whether that which has been so delivered down to him, as the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, has been by Word of Mouth or Writing, is altogether
indifferent to him; he being ready to follow, in this point, as in all others,
the command of St. Paul, that is, To stand fast, and hold the Traditions he has
learned, whether by Word, or by Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. And to look upon any
one as Anathema, That shall preach otherwise than he has (thus) received Gal.
1.9. So that as he undoubtedly holds the Scripture to be the Word of God,
penned by Prophets and Apostles, and inspired by the Holy Ghost, because in all
Ages, from Moses to Christ, and from Christ to this time, it has been so
Taught, Preached, Believed and Delivered successively by the Faithful; and
never scruples the least of the truth of it; nor sticks to assent to it, with a
steadfast and Divine Faith; although they are not, nor have not at any time been
able to prove what they have thus taught, and delivered with one Text of
Scripture. In the like manner, he is ready to receive and believe, all that
this same Congregation has, together with the Bible, in all Ages successively,
without interruption, Taught, Preached, Believed and Delivered as the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles; and assent to it with Divine Faith; just as he does
to the Bible; and esteems any one Anathema, that shall Preach otherwise than he
has thus received. And although some may seriously endeavor to convince him,
that several Points of Faith, and other Religious Practices, which he has thus
received and believes, are not the Doctrine of Christ, nor Apostolical
Institutions, but rather Inventions of Men, and Lessons of Antichrist, and
should produce several Texts of Scripture for the proving it: He is not any
thing surpised at it: As well knowing, that he that follows not this Rule, of
Believing all to be of Christ, that has been universally taught and believed as
such, by the Church of Christ; and of understanding the Scripture in the same
sense, in which it has in all Ages been understood by the same Church; may very
easily frame as many Creeds as he pleases, and make Christ and his Apostles
speak what shall be most agreeable to his Humor, and suit best with his
Interest, and find plain proofs for all: And make no more difficulty in
producing Scripture against Christ's Doctrine. than the Jews and the Devil did
against Christ's Person, who never wanted their Scriptum est; ( It is written;)
when 'twas necessary to carry on their designs. And if there were any thing in
these sort of Arguments, to make him doubt of the truth of any Point of
Doctrine, thus received; he thinks it might make him call in question the Truth
of the Scripture, and the Bible it self, as soon as any thing else. They all
standing upon the same foundation of the Church's Tradition, which, if it fail
in one, leaves no security in any.

XV. Of Tradition.
1. THE Question is not about Human Traditions supplying the Defects of
Scripture, as he misrepresents it; but whether there be an Unwritten word,
which we are equally bound to receive with the Written word: Although these things
which pass under that Name, are really but Huma^e Traditions; yet we do not
deny that they pretend them to be of Divine Original.

2. We do not deny, but the Apostles might deliver such things by Word, as well
as by Epistle, which their Disciples were bound to believe and keep: 2. These.
2.13.
but we think there is some difference to be made between what we certainly
know they delivered in Writing, and what it is now impossible for us to know;
viz. what they delivered by word without writing.

3. We see no ground why any one should believe any Doctrine with a steadfast
and divine Faith, which is not bottomed on the Written word; for then his Faith
must be built on the Testimony of the Church as Divine and Infallible, or else
his Faith cannot be Divine. But it is impossible to prove it to be Divine and
Infallible, but by the Written word; and therefore, as it is not reasonable
that he should believe the Written word by such a Divine Testimony of the
Church; so if any particular Doctrine may be received on the Authority of the
Church without the Written word, then all Articles of Faith may, and so there
would be no need of the Written word.

4. The Faith of Christians does no otherwise stand upon the Foundation of the
Churches Tradition, than as it delivers down to us the Books of Scripture, but
we acknowledge the general Sense of the Christian Church to be a very great help
for understanding the true sense of Scripture; and we do not reject any thing
so delivered; but what is all this to the Church of Rome? But this is still the
way of true Representing.

XVI. Of Councils.
HE believes that the Faith of his Church may receive new Additions every day:
And that he is not only obliged to believe what Christ taught, and his
Apostles; but also every Definition or Decree, of any General Council assembled
by the Command of the Pope. So that as often as any thing is issued out by the
Authority of any of these Church-Parliaments, and ordered to be believed; he
thinks himself under pain of Damnation, immediately bound to receive it; and
having added it to his Creed, to assent to it with as Firm, Steadfast and Divine
a Faith, as if it had been Commanded by Christ himself, and Decreed in the
Consistory of Heaven. And by this means he never comes to understand his
Religion, or know what he is to Believe; but by the continual Alterations,
Additions, Diminutions, Interpretations, of these Councils he is preserved in a
necessary Confusion, and tho he changes often, yet he fondly thinks himself
always the same.

HE believes that the Faith of his Church can receive no Additions; and that he
is obliged to believe nothing, besides that which Christ taught, and his
Apostles; and if any thing contrary to this should be defined and commanded to
be believed, even by Ten thousand Councils, he believes it damnable in any one
to receive it, and by such Decrees, to make Additions to his Creed. However, he
maintains the Necessity and Right of General Councils lawfully Assembled; whose
business it is, not to coin new Articles of Faith, or devise Fresh Tenets; but
only, as often as any Point of Received Doctrine is impugned or called in
question; to debate the matter; and examine, what has been the Belief of all
Nations (who are there present in their Prelates) in that Point. And this being
agreed on, to publish and make known to the World, which is the Catholic
Doctrine, left by Christ and his Apostles; and which the new-breach'd Error.
And by this means to prevent the loss of infinite number of Souls, which might
otherwise be deluded, and carried away after new inventions; not being capable
by their own knowledge and abilities, to distinguish betwixt Truth and
Falsehood, and discover the subtilties of every crafty Deceiver. And in this
case he believes that he is obliged to submit, and receive the Decrees of such
a Council; the Pastors and Prelates there present, being by Christ and his
Apostles appointed, for the decision of such Controversies. They having the
care of that stock committed to them, over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers, to feed the Church of God, Acts 20.28. and to watch against those
men, who should arise from among themselves, speaking perverse things t^ draw
Disciples after them. Ib. verse. 30. And he having received Command, as likewise
the wh^le Flock of Christ, to obey their Prelates, and to be subject to them,
who watch, and are to render an account for their Souls, Heb. 13.17. with an
assurance. That, He that hears them, hearch Christ; and he that despises
them, despises Christ, Luke 10.16. And withal being taught, that as this way
of the Ancients of the Church, and Prelates meeting, in case of any danger
threatening their Flock, or any new Doctrine arising; was the means instituted
by Christ, and practiced by the Apostles, in the first planting of the Church,
for the preventing Schisms, and preserving Unity among the Faithful, and that
they should speak and think the same thing, and be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10 So it ought to be the means in
all succeeding Ages, for the preventing Divisions, and conserving Unity among
the Faithful. And that therefore, as that Controversy concerning the necessity
of Circumcision, (Act. c. 15.) arising in the Apostles times, was not decided
by any private Person, nor even by Paul and Barnabas, who nevertheless, had
received the Holy Ghost; and one would have thought, might have pretended to
the Spirit, and a Heavenly Light; but by a General Meeting of the Apostles and
Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, who were consulted by Paul and Barnabas
about this Question. So all other Disputes and Difficulties of Religion arising
in succeeding Ages, ought to be referred to the Successors of the Apostles
(whose Charge, Dignity and Office is to continue to the end of the World, though
they are dead in Person) who are to consider of the matter, (Acts 15.6.) as the
Apostles did; while all the Multitude keeps silence, ver. 12. without any one
presuming on any Learning, Gift, Virtue, Prayers or Inspiration, to intermeddle
in the Dispute, or put an end to the Question: This being none of their
business or obligation, but only with all Patience and Humility to expect the
Determination of their Prelates and Elders, and receive it with the same
expressions, as those good Christians did heretofore, who rejoiced for the
Consolation, (Acts 15.31.) And unless this that the Apostles did, and their
Obsequious Flock, be taken as a Pattern in all Ages, for the ending suchlike
difficulties; he believes it is impossible that Believers should stand fast in
one Spirit, with one Mind, (Philip. 1.27.) and be not carried away with diverse
and strange Doctrines (Hebr. 13.9.

XVI. Of Councils.
1. WE are glad to find so good a Resolution as seems to be expressed in these
words, viz. That he is obliged to believe nothing besides that which Christ
taught, and his Apostles; and if any thing contrary to this should be defined,
and commanded to be believe, even by Ten Thousand Councils, he believes it
damnable in any one to receive it, and by such Decrees to make Additions to his
Creed. This seems to be a very good saying, and it is pity any thing else
should overthrow it. But here lies the Misrepresenting; he will believe what
Christ and his Apostles taught, from the Definitions of Councils; and so all
this goodly Fabric falls to nothing; for it is but as if one should say, If
Aristotle should falsely deliver Plato's sense, I will never believe him, but I
am resolved to take Plato's sense only from Aristotle's Words. So here, he
first declares he will take the Faith of Christ from the Church; and then he
says, if the Church Representative should contradict the Faith of Christ, he
would never believe it.

2. We dispute not with them, the Right and Necessity of General Councils,
(upon great occasions) if they be truly so, rightfully called, lawfully
assembled, and fairly managed; which have been, and may be of great use to the
Christian world, for settling the Faith, healing the Breaches of Christendom,
and reforming Abuses. And we farther say, that the Decrees of such Councils
ought to be submitted to, where they proceed upon certain Grounds of Faith, and
not upon unwritten Traditions; which was the fatal stumbling at the threshold
in the Council of Trent, and was not to be recovered afterward; for their
setting up Traditions equally with the written Word, made it it easy for them
to define, and as easy for all others to reject their Definitions, in case
there had not been so many other Objections against the Proceedings of that
Council. And so all our Dispute concerning this matter is taken off from the
general Notion, and runs into the particular Debate concerning the
Qualifications and Proceedings of some which were called Free, General
Councils; but were neither General, nor Free; and therefore could not deliver
the Sense of the Catholic Church, which our Author requires them to do.

XVIII. Of Infallibility in the Church.
HE believes that the Pastors and Prelates of his Church are Infallible, and
that like so many Divine Oracles, or petty Familiar Deities, they are exempt
from Error, and cannot deceive. But this, especially when they are met
together in a General Council; It being a main part of his Faith, That then
they are secure from all mistakes; and that it is as impossible for them to
decline either to the right hand or the left, in any of their Definitions and
Decrees, as it is for God to leave Heaven, and become the Author of Lies. Thus
fondly believing these to be assisted with a necessary Infallibility, like
Gods, whom their Ignorance, ill Example, and debauched Lives, to a true
Considerer, scarce speak to be Men. As if God Almighty did so blindly throw his
Benefits and Graces amongst his Creatures, that none should have a more
powerful assistance of Gods Truth and infallible Spirit, than those in whom
there was least of God to be found.

HE believes that the Pastors and Prelates of his Church are Fallible; that
there is none of them, but may fall into Errors, Heresy and Schism, and
consequently are subject to mistakes. But that the whole Church can fail, or be
deceived in any one Point of Faith, this he believes impossible; knowing it to
be built on better Promises; such as secure her from all Error, and danger of
Prevarication. Her Foundation being laid by Christ, against which the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail, (Matthew 16.18.) The Power that protects her, being
Christ himself; Behold I am with you all days, (Matthew 28.20.) The Spirit that
Guides and Teaches her, being the Comforter of the Holy Ghost; who shall teach
her all things, and suggest to her all things that Christ has said to her,
(Ioh. 14.16.) The time that she is to be thus protected, taught and assisted,
being not only while the Apostles lived, or for the first three, for or five
hundred years next after; but for ever, to the end of the World, Behold I am
with you all days, (Matthew 28.20.) He will give you another Paraclete, that he
may abide with you for ever, (Ioh. 14.16.) And the thing, that she is to be
thus taught to the end of the World, being all Truth: He shall teach you all
Truth, (Ioh. 16.13.) Now being assured by these Promises, that the Church of
Christ shall be taught all Truth by the special assistance of the Holy Ghost,
to the end of the World; he has Faith to believe, that Christ will make his
Words good; and that his Church shall never fail, nor be currupted with
Antichristian Doctrine, nor be the Mistress of Errors; but shall be taught all
Truth, and shall teach all Truth to the Consummation of things; and that
whosoever hears her, hears Christ: And whosoever despises her, despises
Christ; and ought to be esteemed as an Heathen or a Publican, Matthew 18.17.)
The like assistance of the Holy Ghost, he believes to be in all General
Councils, which is the Church- Representative: (as the Parliament is the
Representative of the Nation,) by which they are especially protected from all
Error, in all Definitions and Declarations in matters of Faith. So that what
the Apostles pronounced concerning the Result of their Council; (Acts 15.28.)
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us; He does not doubt, may be
prefixed to all the Determinations in Point of Faith, resolved on, by any
General Council lawfully assembled since that time, or to be held to the Worlds
end. The Assistance being to extend as far as the Promise. And though it is
possible that several of the Prelates and Pastors in such an Assembly, (as also
many others in Communion with the Church of Christ) should at other times,
either through Pride or Ignorance, prevaricate, make Innovations in Faith,
teach Erroneous Doctrines, and endeavor to draw Numbers after them; yet he is
taught, that this does not at all argue a Fallibility in the Church; nor
prejudice her Faith, but only the Persons, that thus unhappily fall into these
Errors, and cut themselves off from being Members of the Mystical Body of
Christ upon Earth: Whilst the Belief of the Church remains pure and untainted;
and experiences the Truth of what Saint Paul foretold, That Grievous Wolves
shall enter in among you, not sparing the Flock: Also of your own selves shall
Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, (Act.
20. v. 29, 30.) which, as it proved true even in the Apostles time by the Fall
of Nicholas and his Followers, as also several others: So it has been verified
in all Ages since, by turbulent and presuming Spirits, broaching new Doctrines,
and making Separations and Schisms: But this without casting any more Aspersion
on the Church or Congregation of the Faithful, than the Fall of Judas did on
the A^ostles; or the Rebellion of Lucifer on the Hierarchy of Angels; which was
no more than that such wicked and presuming Spirits, went out from amongst
them, and were expelled their Communion, as unworthy. Neither does it reflect
at all on the Churches Authority, or make the Truth of her Doctrine
questionable to him; that many of her eminent Members, Doctors, Prelates, and
leading Men, have been, or are great enormous Sinners, infamous for their
Pride, Covetousness, or other Vices, whatsoever: The Promises of God's
continual and un-interrupted Assistance to his Church, being not to be
frustrated by the Wickedness of such particular Men, though in great Dignities.
These Promises being made surer to her, than ever the Jewish Church: Which
nevertheless stood firm in her Authority, and the Delivery of Truth,
notwithstanding the frequent Idolatry of the People, Nadab and Abihu's
(consecrated Priests) offering strange Fire: Corah, Dathan and Abiram's making
a great Schism, and the Sins of Moses and Aaron, and other Highpriests in all
her succeeding Ages. Nay, though all things touching Religion and Virtue, were
in a manner run to decay, in our Savior's time, both in Priests and People;
yet did he maintain the Authority of the Jewish Church; and commanded all to be
Obedient, and submit to those who had the Superiority; without calling in
question their Authority, or doubting of the Reasonableness of their Commands.
The Scribes and Pharisees, (says he, Matthew. 23.2.) sit in Moses 's Chair: All
therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe, and do: But do ye not
after their Works. If therefore God's special Assistance was never wanting to
the Church of the Jews, so as to let it fail in the Truth of its Doctrine, or
its Authority; notwithstanding the Pride, Covetousness, Cruelty, Impiety,
Idolatry, of many of her Levites, Elders, Priests and Highpriests. Why should
not he believe the same of the Church of Christ, which, (as Saint Paul says) is
built on better Promises; and that it remains entire in the Truth of her
Doctrine, and her Authority, notwithstanding the Viciousness of many of her
Governors. Especially, since he is in a manner confident, that there has been
nothing so infamous acted by any Priests, Prelates, Popes or others, since
Christ's time, but what may be followed; Nay, was outdone by the Priests of
the Jews.

XVII. Of Infallibility in the Church.
1. HE does not pretend this belongs to the Pastors and Prelates of his Church,
who may fall, he says, into Heresy and Schism; but that the whole Church is
secured by Divine Promises from all Error and danger of Prevarication; which he
proves from the Promises of the New Testament, Mat. 16.18 -- 28.20. John 14.16,
26. But however the former seems to take away Infallibility from the Guides of
the Church, yet that this is to be understood of them seperately, appears by
what follows.

2. The like Assistance of the Holy Ghost he believes to be in all General
Councils, which is the Church Representative; by which they are specially
protected from all error in all definitions and declarations in matters of
Faith.

Now here are two sorts of Infallibility tacked to one another by virtue of
these general Promises, which ought more distinctly to be considered.

1. To preserve Christ's Church so as it shall never cease to be a Church, is
one thing; to preserve it from all Errors is another: The former answers the
End of Christ's Promises as to the Duration of the Church; and the latter is not
implied in them.

2. The promise of teaching them all Truth, Joh. 16.13. is not made to the
whole Church, but to the Apostles: And their case was so peculiar and
extraordinary, that there can be no just inference from the assistance promised
to them, of what the Church should enjoy in all Ages.

3. If the diffusive Church have no infallible Assistance promised, then no
infallible Assistance can from thence be proved for the Church Representative;
so that some particular Promises to the Guides of the Church as assembled
together, are necessary to prove the Infallibility of Councils.

4. It by no means proves following Councils to be Infallible, because the
Apostle said, Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. Our
Author does not doubt, but the same may be prefixed to all determinations in
point of Faith, resolved on by any General Council lawfully assembled since
that time, or to be held to the Worlds end. But what Reason he had for not
doubting in this matter, I cannot see; the Assistance, he said, being to extend
as far as the Promise: But shall Assistance imply Infallibility? Then there
must be good store, as long as the Promises of Divine Grace hold good: But this
Assistance of Councils is very different from the Assistance of Grace, for the
Church may subsist without Councils, but cannot without Grace: What General
Council was there from the meeting, Acts 15. to the Council of Nice? Were not
Christ's Promises fulfilled to his Church all that time, when it increased in
all parts against the most violent Opposition?

5. No parity of Reason from the Jewish Church can be sufficient proof for
Infallibility in the Christian. But our Author argues thus, If Gods special
Assistance was never wanting to the Church of the Jews so as to let it fail in
the truth of its Doctrine, or its Authority; Why should not he believe the same
of the Church of Christ, which is built on better Promises? What special
Assistance was it which Israel had, when it is said, that for a long time
Israel had been without the true God, 2 Chr. 15.3.
and without a teaching Priest, and without Law? And as to Judah, was there no
failing in point of Doctrine in our Saviors time? It is true they had the Law
entire, and that was all that was good among them; for their Teachers had
corrupted themselves and the people, and made the Law of no effect among them:
If there were Infallibility any where it must be in the High Priest and
Sanhedrim; but is it possible for any Christian to think them Infallible, when
they were so grossly mistaken about the main Article of their Faith as to the
Messiah, and pronounced him worthy of Death? Is not this a fine Argument for
the Infallibility of the Guides of the Christian Church? But the Church of
Christ has better Promises: No doubt of it, greater Promises of Grace and
Mercy in this World, and in that to come: but what is all this to Infallibility
in Councils?

6. Christ's Command of Obedience to those who sat in Moses Chair, ( Matthew.
23.2.) does not prove the Infallibility of those who sat there. Yet this is
alleged to that purpose; and that men ought not to doubt of the Reasonableness
of the Commands of their Superiors. But St. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Mat.
Hom. 73 Hieron. in loc.
our Savior speaks of the things commanded by the Law of Moses. ^er Cathedram
Doctrinam Legis ostendit, Caten. Gr. in loc.
Hilar. Canon. 24.
says St. Jerome; Not their own Doctrine, but that of Moses, says Isidore;
and so Hilary and Theophylact. Theophilact. in loc.
Maldonate confesses, our Saviors Words are to be understood, not of their
own Doctrine, but of that of the Law; and therefore he yields the Obedience
here required is to be restrained to that; All things, says Cajetan, which
they teach out of Moses 's Chair: Not all their Doctrines, but as far as they
were conformable to the Law, says Ferus. Now, can any one hence infer, Matt.
15.
that no men ought to dispute any Commands of Superiors, when it is supposed,
that there is a Rule and Standard for them to speak according to; and our
Savior elsewhere does suppose these very men to teach things contrary to the
Law; as in the Case of Corban. Would our Savior contradict himself? or require
a blind Obedience in things repugnant to the Law? We do not deny a due
submission to our Superiors in the Church; yea, we allow them a Power to
determine things not forbidden; and think Obedience due in such things by
virtue of their Authority: but yet this is far enough from Infallibility, or an
unlimited implicit Obedience, which would overthrow the force of all our
Savior's Reasonings against the Scribes and Pharisees, as to their
misinterpreting the Law, and the Superstitious Practices they imposed upon the
people.

XVIII. Of the POPE.
HE believes the Pope to be his great God, and to be far above all the Angels.
That Christ is no longer Head of the Church, but that this Holy Father has
taken his place; and that whatsoever he Orders, Decrees or Commands, is to be
received by his Flock, with the same respect, submission and awe, as if Christ
had spoken it by his own mouth. For that his Holiness (having once received the
Triple-Crown on his Head,) is now no more to be looked upon as Man, but as
Christ's Vicar, whose Office it is to Constitute and Ordain such things as
Christ forgot, when he was upon Earth, not thoroughly considering, what would be
the Exigencies of his Flock in future Ages. And for this intent, he is assisted
with a certain Mysterious Infallibility; such as hides it self, when he is upon
his own Private Concerns, exposes him to all the Designs, Cheats, Malice, and
Machinations of his Enemies, and lets him be as easily over-seen, as imprudent,
as silly as his Neighbors. But when he comes into his Chair, to hear any
Public Business, then it begins to appear, and protects him from all Mistakes
and Errors; and he becomes immediately full of the Holy Ghost, though he had
the Devil and all of Wickedness in him just before.

HE believes the Pope to be none of his God, neither Great nor Little; That he
is not above the Angels, but only a Man. He believes that Christ, as he is
supreme Master, Governor and Lord of all created things, so also of his
Church, of which he acknowledges him to be the Founder and Head. But as
notwithstanding this Lordship and Headship of Christ over all things, every
Father of a Family owns himself to be Master of it under Christ; every petty
Commander of a Ship styles himself Master of it under God; and every Prince,
King, and Emperor is confessed supreme Lord and Governor of his Dominions
under God: So also, he believes, that there is a Pastor, Governor and Head of
Christ's Church under Christ, to wit, the Pope or Bishop of Rome, who is the
Sucessor of St. Peter, to whom Christ committed the care of his Flock; and who
has been followed now by a visible Succession of above 250 Bishops
acknowledged as such in all Ages, by the Christian World. And now believing the
Pope to enjoy this Dignity, he looks upon himself obliged to show him that
Respect, Submission and Obedience, which is due to his place; a thing which no
body can in reason or conscience deny to any one in Rule, or that has any
Superiority. Neither does he doubt but God assists those who have this charge,
with a particular helping Grace, such as has a special respect to the Office
and Function, more than to the Person. Such was given to all the Prophets, when
they were sent to preach: Such to Moses, when he was made God to Pharaoh, Exodus
7.1. Such to the seventy Elders, when God taking of the Spirit of Moses, gave
it unto them, and constituted them Judges. Such to Caiphas, who to council,
prophesied of the death of Christ, which St. John ascribed not to his Person,
but to his Office of High Priest, Job 11.51. And this spoke he not of himself,
but being High Priest that year, he Prophesied, that Jesus should die for that
Nation. By privilege of his Office, uttering a Truth, which he himself never
meant. With such like helping Grace, he doubts not, but God generally assists
the Pastors of the New-Law, and more especially the High Priest, for the Good
of the whole Flock. And therefore, though he were as wicked as Caiphas, yet he is
ready to tender him all respect due to his Function, and obey him in every
thing concerning the Exercise of his charge, not for any consideration of his
Person, but merely for the Office he bears: It being the Duty of a good Son to
Obey his Father, and of a Loyal Subject his King, and never to question their
Authority, or dis-respect them in their Office, though for some particular Vices,
they may have little respect for their persons. In this manner is he ready to
behave himself toward his chief Pastor, with all Reverence and Submission,
never scrupling to receive his Decrees, and Definitions, such as are issued
forth by his Authority, with all their due circumstances, and according to the
Law, in the concern of the whole Flock. And this, whether he has the Assistance
of a Divine Infallibility, or no: Which, though some allow him, without being
in a General Council, yet he is satisfied, it is only their Opinion, and not
their Faith, there being no Obligation from the Church, of assenting to any
such Doctrine. And therefore, as in any Civil Governments, the Sentence of the
supreme Judge or Highest Tribunal, is to be obeyed, though there be no
assurance of Infallibility, or Divine Protection from Error or Mistake: So is
he taught, should be done to the Orders of the Supreme Pastors, whether he be
Infallible or no.

XVIII. Of the POPE.
1. WE do not charge them with Believing the Pope to be God; which it seems
himself did, if we believe the Misrepresenter in his Preface: but there is some
Reason to doubt whether they do not at some times give him greater Honor than
becomes a Man. Cerem.. 1. c. 2.
I instance in the Adoration after his Election, when the new Pope is placed
upon the Altar to receive the Submissions of the Cardinals: but the Altar,
themselves do confess, to be sacred to God alone: And there they profess to
Worship Jesus Christ, as present in the Host. This therefore looks too much
like assuming the Place of Christ, and not becoming the Distance between God
and Man.

2. The Question is, Whether Christ has appointed the Pope or Bishop of Rome
to be Pastor, Governor, and Head of his Church under him? This, he says, he
believes, and this he knows we deny, and therefore had reason to expect some
proof of it, But instead thereof he tells us how they look on themselves as
obliged to show him the Respect due to his place, which he knows is not the
matter in question. Two things however he says, which seem to justify his
Title.

1. He is the Successor of St. Peter, to whom Christ committed the Care of his
Flock. But how far is this from proving the Pope to be Head of the Church under
Christ? For, how does it appear that Christ ever made St. Peter Head of the
Church, or committed his Flock to him, in contradistinction to the rest of the
Apostles? This is so far from being evident from Scripture, that the Learned
Men of their Church are ashamed of the Places commonly produced for it; it
being impossible ever to justify the sense of them according to their own Rules
of interpreting Scripture, viz. by the unanimous consent of the Fathers For,

1. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, is interpreted
by many of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, of S Peter's Confession, and not of
his Person; so by S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Basil of Selucia,
S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nyssen, and Theodoret; Matt. 16.18. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in
P^ntec. Tom. 5. ed. Savill. p. 97^. Am^^^s^ de Incar^^^. Dom. Sacramento c. 5.
A^pus^. de Verbis Dom. ad Evang. secund. Matthew. Sermon. 13. Tract. in Joh. 124.
Basil. Seluc. Orat. 25. ad sin. Hilar. de Trinit. l. 6. Greg. Nyssen de Advent.
Domini cap. ult. Theodoret Epist. 77.146. Matt. 16.19.
all great and considerable Persons in the Christian Church, whose words are
plain and full to that purpose; and so they can never produce the unanimous
Consent of the Fathers for S. Peter's Supremacy out of these words.

2. And unto thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, are
interpreted by the Fathers, of S. Peter in common with the other Apostles; so
Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Hilary, S* Hierom, and S. Augustine, Orig. Comment. in
Mat. Gr. Lat. p. 275. Cyprian de Unit. Ecclesiae. Hillar. de Trinit. l. 6.
Hier. c. Jovin l. 1. c. 14. in Matt. 16. Aug. in Joh. Tr. 118.124. in Epist.
Joh. To. 10.
as they are all owned by some Members of the Roman Communion.

Moyens surs and honestes, etc. p. 34. etc. Entretiens de Philaleth. et
Phileren. p. 121. Joh. Lannoi. Epist. part 5. Reim. Formentino, and Part. 2.
Ep. 5. p. 47, etc.
And, 3. For these words, Feed my Sheep, a late learned Doctor of the Sorbon
shows, that if they prove any thing peculiar to Saint Peter, they must prove
him sole Pastor of the Church, which was the thing Saint Gregory disputed
against so warmly. But that there was nothing peculiar to Saint Peter, above or
beyond the rest of the Apostles, he shows at large from S. Chrysostom, S.
Cyril, S. Augustine, and others, to whom I refer the Reader, and to the former
Authors. But suppose it were made to appear, that Saint Peter was Head of the
Church; How does the Bishop of Rome's Succession in that Headship show it self?

To that he says, 2. That there has been a visible Succession of above Two
hundred and fifty Bishops, acknowled as such in all past Ages by the Christian
World. As such: What is that? As Bishops of Rome? That is not of weight enough
to put it upon Trial; as Heads of the Catholick-Church? That he knows is not
only denied by us, but by all the Greek, Armenian, Nestorian, Abyssin Churches;
so that we dare say, it was never allowed in any one Age of the Christian
Church. But we need not insist on the proof of this, since the late mentioned
Authors of the Roman Communion have taken so great pains, not only to prove the
Popes Supremacy to be an Incroachment and Usurpation in the Church, but that
the laying it aside is necessary to the Peace and Unity of it. And until the
Divine Institution of the Papal Supremacy be proved, it is to no purpose to
debate what manner of Assistance is promised to the Pope in his Decrees. Our
Author is willing to decline the Debate about his personal Infallibility, as a
matter of Opinion, and not of Faith; and yet he says, he doubts not but God
does grant a special Assistance to the High Priest, for the good of the whole
Flock, under the New Law, as he did under the Old, and produces the Instance of
Caiaphas, Joh. 11.51. This is a very surprising way of Reasoning; for if his
Arguments be good from Scripture, he must hold the Popes personal Infallibility
as a matter of Faith; and yet one would hardly think he should build an Article
of Faith on the instance of Caiaphas: For what consequence can be drawn from
Gods overruling the Mind of a very bad man, when he was carrying on a most
wicked design, to utter such words, which in the event proved true in another
sense than he meant them, that therefore God will give a special Assistance to
the Pope in determining matters of Faith? Was not Caiaphas himself the man who
proposed the taking away the Life of Christ at that time? Was he assisted in
that Council? Did not he determine afterward Christ to be guilty of Blasphemy,
and therefore worthy of Death? And is not this a rare Infallibility which is
supposed to be consistent with a Decree to crucify Christ? And does he in
earnest think such, Orders are to be obeyed, whether the Supreme Pastor be
Infallible or not? For so he concludes, That his Sentence is to be obeyed,
whether he be Infallible or no?

XIX. Of Dispensations.
HE believes, that the Pope has Authority to pispense with the Laws of God; and
absolve any one from the obligation of keeping the Commandments. So that, if he
has but his Holy Fathers leave, he may confidently Dissemble, Lie, and Forswear
himself in all whatsoever he pleases, and never be in danger of being called to
an account at the last day; especially if his Lying and Forswearing was for the
common good of the Church: there being then a sure Reward prepared for him in
Heaven, as a recompense of his good Intentions and Heroic Achievements. And
if at any time he should chance to be caught in the management of any of these
public and Church-concerns, and being obnoxious to Penal Laws, should have
Sentence of Death passed on him; he has liberty at his last hour on the
Scaffold or Ladder, to make a public Detestation of all such Crimes, to make
protestations of his Innocence; to call God to witness, that he denies
unjustly; and that as he is immediately to appear before the Supreme Judge, he
knows no more of any such designs, and is as clear from the Guilt of them as
the Child unborn. And this, though the Evidence against him be as clear as
noonday, though the Jury be never so Impartial, and the Judge never so
Conscientious. For that he having taken the Sacrament and Oath of Secrecy, and
received Absolution, or a Dispensation from the Pope, may then Lie, Swear,
Forswear, and Protest all that he pleases, without scruple, with a good
Conscience, Christian-like, Holily and Canonically.

HE believes, that the Pope has no Authority to dispense with the Law of God;
and that there is no Power upon Earth can absolve any one from the Obligation
of keeping the Commandments; or give leave to Lie or Forswear; or make, that
the breaking of any the least Divine Precept, shall not be accountable for at
the day of Judgment. He is taught by his Church in all Books of Direction, in
all Catechisms, in all Sermons, that every Lie is a Sin; that to call God to
witness to an Untruth damnable; that it ought not to be done to save the whole
World; that whosoever does it, either for his own personal account, or for the
Interest of Church or Pope, or whatsoever else, must of necessity answer for it
at the last day, and expect his portion with the Devil and his Angels, if
unrepented: And that no one can give leave for Lying, Perjury, or committing
any Sin; or even pretend to it, unless it be the Devil himself, or some
devilish Ministers of his, such as he detests in his heart, and utterly
abominates. And in consequence to this believes, that whosoever at the hour of
his death denies any Crime, of which he is guilty, and protests himself to be
innocent, when he is not so; can have no hope of Mercy: but departing out of
this World, an enemy to God, and the Truth, shall infallibly be received as
such in the next; and dying with a Lie in his mouth, can expect no reward, but
from the Father of Lies. And this, whatsoever his Crime was, whether incurred
by an undertaking for Mother Church, or no; and whatsoever his pretenses for
the denial of the Truth were, whether Absolutions, Dispensations, the
Sacrament, or Oath of Secrecy, or whatsoever else: nothing of these being
capable of excusing him in Lies or Perjury, or making them to be Innocent, and
not displeasing to God. Nor indeed did he ever hear of these so much talked on,
Dispensations and Absolutions, from any Priests of his Church, either in
Sermons or Confessions; he never read of them in his Books and Catechisms; he
never saw the Practice of them in any of his Communion; it having been their
Custom, ever since Oaths were first devised against them, rather to suffer the
loss of their goods, banishments, imprisonments, torments, and death it self,
than Fors^ear themselves, or protest the least Untruth. And it is not out of the
memory of man, that several might have saved their Estates, and Lives too,
would they have subscribed to, and owned but one Lie, and yet refused it;
choosing rather to die infamously, than prejudice their Conscience with an
Untruth. So that it seems a great Mystery to him, that those of his Profession,
should have Leave and Dispensations to Lie and forswear themselves at pleasure,
and yet that they should need nothing else but Lying and Perjury, for the quiet
enjoyment of their Estates, for the saving their Lives, for the obtaining
Places of highest Command, and greatest Dignity; such as would be
extraordinarily advantageous for their Cause, and the interest of their Church.
And yet that they should generally choose rather to forego all these so
considerable Conveniences, that once Lie or Forswear themselves. And is it not
another great Mystery, that these Dispensations for Lying and Swearing should
be according to the Received Doctrine of his Church; and yet that he, or any of
his Communion, were never instructed nor informed of any such Diabolical Point?
nay, had never come to the knowledge of it, had it not been for the information
received from some Zealous Adversaries, such as relate either merely upon
Trust, or else such as have received a Dispensation of Lying from the Devil,
that they might charge the like Doctrine on the Church of Rome, and the Pope.

XIX. Of Dispensations.
HEre the Misrepresenter says, That a Papist believes that the Pope has
Authority to dispense with the Laws of God, and absolve any one from the
Obligation of keeping the Commandments. On the other side, the Representer
affirms; That the Pope has no Authority to dispense with the Law of God, and
that there is no Power upon Earth can absolve any one from the Obligation of
keeping the Commandments: This matter is not to be determined by the one's
affirming, and the others denying; but by finding out, if possible, the true
sense of the Church of Rome about this matter. And there are three Opinions
about it.

1. Of those who assert, That the Pope has a Power of Dispensing in any Divine
Law, De Concess. Praebend e proposuit. Abb. c. proposuit de Conc. Praebend. C.
5. Q. 6. c. Auctoritate.
except the Articles of Faith. The Gloss upon the Canon Law says, that where
the Text seems to imply, that the Pope cannot dispense against the Apostle, it
is to be understood of Articles of Faith: And Panormitan says, This Exposition
pleases him well; for the Pope may dispense in all other things: Contra
Apostolum dispensat, says the Gloss on the Decree: And the Roman Editors in
the Margin, refer to 34 Did. c. Lector to prove it: And there indeed the Gloss
is very plain in the Case, sic Ergo Papa dispensat contra Apostolum: And the
Roman Correcters there justify it, and say it is no absurd Doctrine as to
positive Institutions: Sum. Angelic. v. dispensatio.
But the former notable Gloss, as Panormitan calls it, sets down the
particulars wherein the Pope may dispense. As, 1. Against the Apostles and
their Canons. 2. Against the Old Testament. 3. In Vows. 4. In Oaths. The Summa
Angelica says, the Pope may dispense as to all the Precepts of the Old
Testament. And Clavasius founds this Power upon the Plenitude of the Popes
Power, according to that Expression in the Decretal mentioned, that he can, ex
plenitudine potestatis de Iure supra Ius dispensare; and without such a Power,
he says, God would not have taken that care of his Church, which was to be
expected from his Wisdom. Iacobatius brings several Instances of this Power in
the Pope, Jacobat. de Conciliis l. 5. p. 215.
and refers to the Speculator for more. Iac. Almain says, Almain de Potest.
Ecclesia c. 1^.
That all the Canonists are of Opinion, that the Pope may dispense against the
Apostle, and many of their Divines, but not all: For,

2. Some of their Divines held that the Pope could not dispense with the Law of
God, as that implies a proper relaxation of the Law, but could only
Authoritatively declare that the Law did not oblige in such a particular Case;
because an Inferior could not take away the force of a Superiors Law; and
otherwise there would be no fixed and immutable Rule in the Church; and if the
Pope might dispense in one Law of God, he might dispense in the rest. And of
this Opinion were some of the most eminent School-Divines, as Thomas Aquinas,
Bonaventure, Major, Soto, and Catharinus, Catharin. ^. Cajetan. 6. p. 524.
who at large debates this Question, and denies that the Pope has any Power to
dispense with Gods Law: But then he adds, that the Pope has a kind of
prophetical Power to declare in what Cases the Law does oblige, and in what
not; which he parallels with the Power of declaring the Canon of Scripture; and
this he does not by his own Authority, but by Gods; He confesses the Pope
cannot dispense with those Precepts which are of themselves indispensable; nor
alter the Sacraments; but then, says he, there are some Divine Laws, which
have a general force, but in particular Cases may be dispensed with; and in
these cases the Law is to be relaxed, so that the Relaxation seems to come from
God himself: But he confesses this Power is not to be often made use of; so
that he makes this Power to be no Act of Jurisdiction, but of prophetical
Interpretation, as he calls it; and he brings the Instance of Caiaphas to this
purpose: And he adds, that the difference between the Divines and Canonists was
but in Terms; for the Canonists were in the right as to the Power, and the
Divines in the manner of explaining it.

3. Others have thought this too loose a way of explaining the Popes Power, and
therefore they say, That the Pope has not a bare declaratory Power, but a real
Power of dispensing in a proper sense in particular Cases: For, say they, the
other is no act of Jurisdiction, but of Discretion, and may belong to other men
as well as to the Pope; but this they look on as more agreeable to the Popes
Authority and Commission; and a bare declaratory Power would not be sufficient
for the Churches Necessity; as Sanchez shows at large, and quotes many Authors
for this Opinion; Sanchez. d^ Mattrim l. 8. Dis. 6. n. 5. Say^. Clavis Reg. l.
5. c. 11. S^^^ez de vot. l. 6. c. 9. n. 7, 8, 9, 17.
and Sayr more; and he says the Practice of the Church cannot be justified
without it: Which Suarez much insists upon; and without it, he says, the
Church has fallen into intolerable Errors; and it is evident, he says, the
Church has granted real Dispensations, and not mere Declarations. And he
founds it upon Christ's Promise to Peter, To thee will I give the Keys, and the
Charge to him, Feed my Sheep. But then he explains this Opinion, by saying that
it is no formal Dispensation with the Law of God, but the matter of the Law is
changed or taken away.

Thus I have briefly laid together the different Opinions in the Church of Rome
about this power of dispensing with the Law of God, from which it appears, that
they do all consent in the thing, but differ only in the manner of explaining
it.

And I am therefore afraid our Representer is a very unstudied Divine, and does
not well understand their own Doctrine, or he would never have talked so boldly
and unskilfully in this matter.

As to what he pretends, that their Church teaches that every Lie is a Sin,
etc. it does not teach the Case; for the Question it not, whether their Church
teach men to lie, but whether there be not such a power in the Church, as by
altering the nature of things, may not make that not to be a Lie, which
otherwise would be one: As their Church teaches that men ought not to break
their V^ws; yet no one among them questions, but the Pope may dissolve the
Obligation of a Vow, although it be made to God himself. Let him show then, how
the Pope comes to have a Power to release a Vow made to God, and not to have a
Power to release the Obligation to veracity among men.

Again, We do not charge them with delivering any such Doctrine, That men may
have Dispensations to lie and forswear themselves at pleasure; for we know this
Dispensing Power is to be kept up as a great Mystery, and not to be made use
of, but upon weighty and urgent causes, of great consequence and bene^it to the
Church, as their Doctors declare. But as to all matters of fact, which he
alludes to, I have nothing to say to them; for our Debate is only, whether
there be such a Power of Dispensation allowed in the Church of Rome, or not?

XX. Of the Deposing Power.
HE believes, that the Pope has Authority to dispense with his Allegiance to
his Prince; and that he needs no longer be a Loyal Subject, and maintain the
Rights, Privileges and Authority of his King, than the Pope will give him
leave. And that if this Mighty Father think sit to thunder out an
Excommunication against him, then he shall be deemed the best Subject, and Most
Christian that can first shed his Prince's Blood, and make him a Sacrifice to
Rome: and he is but ill rewarded for his pains, who, after so Glorious an
Achievement, has not his Name placed in the Calendar, and he Canonized for a
Saint. So that there can be no greater Danger to a King, than to have Popish
Subjects, he holding his Life amongst them, only at the Pope 's pleasure.

IT IS no part of his Faith to believe, that the Pope has Authority to dispense
with his Allegiance to his Sovereign, or that he can Depose Princes upon any
account whatsoever; giving leave to their Subjects to take up Arms against
them, and endeavor their ruin. He knows that Deposing and King-killing Power
has been maintained by some Canonists, and Divines of his Church, and that it
is in their Opinion lawful, and annexed to the Papal Chair. He knows likewise
that some Popes have endeavored to act according to this Power. But that this
Doctrine, appertains to the Faith of his Church, and is to be believed by all
of that Communion, is a malicious Calumny, a downright Falsity. And for the
truth of this, it seems to him a sufficient Argument, that for the f^w Authors
that are Abettors of this Doctrine, there are of his Communion three times the
number that publicly disown all such Authority; besides several Universities,
and whole Bodies that have solemnly condemned it; without being in the least
suspected of their Religion, or of denying any Article of their Faith. Those
other Authors therefore Publish their own Opinions in their Books, and those
Popes acted according to what they judged lawful; and all this amounts to no
more, than that this Doctrine has been, or is an Opinion amongst some of his
Church; but to raise it to an Article of Faith upon these grounds, is
impossible. Let his Church therefore answer for no more, than what she delivers
for Faith; let Prelates answer for t^eir Actions, and Authors for their own
Opinions; otherwise more Churches must be charged with Deposing and
King-killing Doctrine, besides that of Rome: The University of Oxford having
found other Authors of Pernicious Books, and Damnable Doctrines, destructive to
the Sacred Persons of Princes, their State and Government, besides Jesuits, as
may be seen in their Decree, published in the London Gazette, July 26. 1683. In
which they condemned twenty seven false, i^pious, seditious Propositions,
fitted to stir up Tumults, overthrow States and Kingdoms, to lead to Rebellion,
Murder of Princes, and Atheism it self. Of which number only three or four were
ascribed to the Jesuits: the rest having men of another Communion for their
Fathers. And this Doctrine was not first condemned by Oxford; What they did
here in the Year 1683. having been solemnly done in Paris in 1626. Where the
whole College of Sorbon gave Sentence against this Proposition of
Sanctarellus; (viz) That the Pope, for Heresy and Schism, might depose
Princes, and exempt the Subjects from their Obedience; the like was done by the
Universities of Caen, Rhemes, Poictoirs, Valence, Bourdeaux, Bourges, and the
Condemnation subscribed by the Jesuits. And Mariana's Book was committed
publicly to the flames by a Provincial Council of his own Order, for the
discoursing the Point of King-killing Doctrine problematically. Why therefore
should this disloyal Doctrine be laid to his Church, whenas it has been writ
against by several hundred single Authors in her Communion, and disowned, and
solemnly condemned by so many famous Universities? And why should the Actions
of some few Popes, with the Private Opinions of some Speculative Doctors, be so
often and vehemently urged for the just charging this Doctrine upon the Faith
of the Church of Rome; which, to a Serious, Impartial Considerer, are only mere
Fallacies, capable of Libelling all Societies in the World, of overthrowing all
States and Kingdoms, and only fit Arguments for Knaves to cheat Fools withal.
There being no Government in the World which might not be easily proved
Tyrannical; No Religion, Persuasion, or Society, which might not plausibly be
indicted of Atheism; If the Actions, Pretenses, Claims, and endeavor of some
few of their Governors and Leading Men; the Opinions, Writings, Phansies of
some Authors be allowed as sufficient Evidence, for the bringing in the Verdict
of Guilty upon the whole. When Malice therefore and Envy have done their worst
in this point, to render the Papists bloody and barbarous to the World; yet 'ds
certain, after all, that Popish Princes sit as safe in their Thrones, enjoy as
much Peace and Security as any other Princes whatsoever; and that the Papists
in England can give as good proofs of their Loyalty as the best of those that
clamor so loud against them. They can bid defi^nce to their Adversaries to
show any one Person of Honor and Estate amongst them, or even four of any
condition whatsoever that bore Arms against Charles the First, during the whole
time of his Troubles. They can make good, that there was scarce any amongst
them that did not assist his Majesty either with Person or Purse, or both. And
they can say, that Charles the First was murdered in cold blood by his
Protestant Subjects, after many hundred Papists had lost their Lives for the
preventing that Butchery, and that Charles the Second, being pursued by the
same Subjects for his Life, saved it amongst the Papists.

XX. Of the Deposing Power.
TO bring this matter into as narrow a compass as may be, I shall first take
notice of his Concessions, which will save us a labor of Proofs.

1. He yields that the Deposing and King-killing Power has been maintained by
some Canonists and Divines of his Church, and that it is in their opinion
lawful, and annexed to the Papal Chair.

2. That some Popes have endeavored to act according to this Power.

But then he denies that this Doctrine appertains to the Faith of his Church,
and is to be believed by all of that Communion. And more than that, he says,
The affirming of it is a malicious Calumny, a downright Falsity.

Let us now calmly debate the matter, Whether according to the received
principles of the Church of Rome, this be only a particul^r opinion of some
Popes and Divines, or be to be received as a matter of Faith. The Question is
not,

Whether those who deny it, do account it an Article of Faith; for we know they
do not: But whether upon the Principles of the Church of Rome they are not
bound to do it.

I shall only, to avoid cavilling, proceed upon the Principles owned by our
Author himself. viz.

1. That the sense of Scripture, as understood by the Community of Christians
in all Angels since the Apostles, is to be taken from the present Church.

2. That by the present Church be understands the Pastors and Prelates
assembled in Councils, who are appointed by Christ and his Apostles for the
decision of controversies; and that they have In^allible assistance.

3. That the Pope as Head of the Church, has a particular assistance promised
him, with a special regard to his Office and Function.

If therefore it appear that Popes and Councils have declared this Deposing
Doctrine, and they h^ve received other things as Articles of Faith upon the
same Declarations, why should they then stick at yielding this to be an Article
of Faith, as well as the other.

It is not denied, that I can find, that Popes and Councils for several Ages
have asserted and exercised the Deposing Power; but it is alleged against
these Decrees and Acts. 1. That they were not grounded upon Universal
Tradition. 2. That they had not Universal Reception.

Now, if these be sufficient to overthrow the Definitions of Councils, let us
consider the consequences of it.

1. Then every Man is left to examine the Decrees of Councils, whether they are
to be embraced or not; for he is to judge whether they are founded on Universal
Tradition; and so he is not to take the sense of the present Church for his
Guide, but the Universal Church from Christ's time: which overthrows a
Fundamental Principle of the Roman Church.

2. Then he must reject the pretended Infallibility in the Guides of the
Church, if they could so notoriously err in a matter of so great consequence to
the Peace of Christendom, as this was; and consequently their Authority could
not be sufficient to declare any Articles of Faith. And so all Persons must be
left at Liberty to believe as they see cause, notwithstanding the Definitions
made by Popes and Councils.

3. Then he must believe the Guides of the Roman Church to have been mistaken,
not once or twice, but to have persisted in it for Five hundred years; which
must take away, not only Infall^bil^ty, but any kind of Reverence to the
Authority of it. For whatever may be said as to those who have depended on
Princes, or favor their Part^es against the Guides of the Church, it cannot be
denied that for so long time the leading Party in that Church did assert and
maintain the Deposing Power. And therefore Lessius truly understood this
matter, Discussio Decreti Magni Council. Late^^^. p. 89.
when he said, That there was scarce any Article of the Christian Faith, the
denial whereof was more dangerous to the Church, or did precipitate Men more
into Heresy and Hatred of the Church, than this of the Deposing Power; for, he
says, they could not maintain their Churches Authority without it.

And he reckons up these ill Consequences of denying it.

1. That the Roman Church has erred for at least five hundred years, in a
matter fundamental as to Government, and of great Moment: Which is worse than
an Error about Sacraments, as Penance, Extreme Unction, etc. and yet those who
deny the Church can err in one, hold that it has erred in a greater matter.

2. That it has not only erred, but voluntarily and out of Ambi^ion,
perverting, out of Design, the Doctrine of the Primive Church and Fathers
concerning the Power of the Church, and bringing in another contrary to it,
against the Right and Authority of Princes; which were a grievous sin.

3. That it made knowingly, unrighteous Decrees, to draw persons from their
Allegiance to Princes; and so they became the Causes of many Seditions and
Rebellions, and all the ill Consequences of them, under a show of Piety and
Religion.

4. That the Churches Decrees, Commands, Judgments, and Censures may be safely
contemned as Null, and containing intolerable Errors. And that it may require
such things which good Subjects are bound to disobey.

5. That Gregory VII. in the Canon Nos Sanctorum, etc. Urban. II. Gregory IX.
the Councils of Lateran under Alex. III. and Innocent III, the Councils of
Lions, of Vienna, of Constance, of Lateran under Leo X. and of Trent, have all
grievously and enormously erred about this matter; for that it was the Doctrine
of them all, he shows at large; and so Seven General Counc^ls lose their
Infallibility at one blow.

6. That the Gates of H^ll have prevailed against the Church: For the true
Church could never teach such pernicious Doctrine as this must be, if it be not
true. And if it erred in this, it might as well err in any other Doctrine, and
so Men are not bound to believe or obey it.

7. That Princes and all Laymen have just Cause to withdraw from their Church;
because it showed it self to be governed by a spirit of Ambition, and not by
the Spirit of God; and not only so, but they may justly prosecute all that
maintain a Doctrine so pernicious to Government, if it be not true.

Let us now see what our Author says to clear this from being a Doctrine of
the Church of Rome.

1. That for the few Authors that are abettors of this Doctrine, there are of
his Communion three times the number that publicly disown all such Authority.

If this b^ true, it is not much for the Reputation of their Church, That there
should be such a number of those who are liable to all these dreadful
Consequences, which Lessius urges upon the deniers of it: But is it possible to
believe there should be so few followers of so many Popes, and Seven General
Councils, owned for such by the disowners of this Doctrine, Discuss. Dis^u^s.
Part 3. Sect. 3. p. 1:
except the Lateran under Leo 10? The poor Eastern Christians are condemned for
Heretics by the Church of Rome, for refusing to submit to the Decrees of one
General Council, either that of Ephesus, or of Chalcedon: And they plead for
themselves, That there was a misinterpretation of their meaning, or not right
understanding one another about the diff^rence of Nature and Person, which
occasioned those Decrees. Philip. a SS. Trinir. Itiner. Orient. l. 5 c 5. Clem.
Galan. Council. Eccl. Arm. Qu. 2. SS 3. p. 92.
I would fain know whether those Churches which do not embrace the Decrees of
those Councils, are in a state of Heresy or not? If they be, then what must we
think of such who reject the Decrees of Seven General Councils, one after
another, and give far less probable accounts of the Proceedings of those
Councils in their Definitions than the other do.

2. He says, Those who have condemned it, have not been in the least suspected
of their Religion, or of denying any Article of Faith. Let any one judge of this
by Lessius his Consequences: And the Author of the first Treatise against the
Oath of Allegiance says in plain Terms, That the Opinion that the Pope has no
such Power, is erroneous in Faith, Jesuits Loyalt^^ first Treatise, p. 1. etc.
as well as temerarious and impious; And he proves it by this substantial
Argument; Because they who hold it, must suppose that the Church has been for
some time in a damnable Error of Belief, and Sin of Practice: And he not only
proves that it was defined by Popes and Councils, but for a long time
universally received; and that no one Author can be produced before Calvin's
time, that denied this Power absolutely, or in any case whatsoever. But a few
Authors that are Abettors of it, says our Representer: Not one total Dissenter
for a long time, says the other: And which of these is the true Representer?
The deniers of it not in the least suspected of their Religion, says one:
Their Opinion is erroneous in Faith, temerarious and impious, says the other.
And a Professor of Lovain, now living, has undertaken to show that the number
is far greater of those who assert this Doctrine, than of those who deny it.

Auctoritas seatis.
3. If we charge their Church with this Opinion, may not they as well charge
ours with the like; since Propositions as dangerous were condemned at Oxford,
July 26, 1683. as held not by Jesuits, but by some among our selves?
Apostolicae vindicata adversus Natal. Alexand. per Francisc. D. Enghien. Colon.
A.D. 1684.
This is the force of his Reasoning: But we must desire the Reader to consider
the great disparity of the Case. We cannot deny, that there have been men of
ill Minds, and d^sloyal Principles, Factious and Disobedient Enemies to the
Government both in Church and State; but have these Men ever had that
Countenance from the Doctrines of the Guides of our Church, which the Deposing
Doctrine has had in the Church of Rome? To make the Case parallel, he must
suppose our Houses of Convocation to have several times declared these Damnable
Doctrines, and given Encouragement to Rebels to proceed against their Kings;
and the University of Oxford to have condemned them; for this is truly the Case
in the Church of Rome; the Popes and Councils have owned, and approved, and
acted by the Deposing Principle: but the Universities of France, of late years,
have condemned it. How come the Principles of the Regicides among us to be
paralleled with this Doctrine, when the Principles of our Church are so
directly contrary to them; and our Houses of Convocation would as readily
condemn any such damnable Doctrines, as the University of Oxford? And all the
World knows how repugnant such Principles are to those of the Church of
England; and none can be Rebels to their Prince, but they must be false to our
Church.

As to the Personal Loyalty of many Persons in that Church, as I have no Reason
to question it, so it is not proper for me to debate it, if I did; since our
business is not concerning Persons but Doctrines; and it was of old observed
concerning the Epicureans, That tho their Principles did overthrow any true
Friendship, yet many of them made excellent Friends.

XXI. Of Communion in one kind.
HE believes, that he is no longer obliged to obey Christ's Commands than his
Church will give him leave. And that therefore though Christ instituted the
Sacrament under both kinds, and commanded it to be received so by all; yet he
thinks it is not necessary, for any to do so now, but Priests; because his
Church, forsooth, has forbidden the Cup to the Laity; And put a stop to the
Precept of Christ who said, Drink ye all of this, ( Mat. 26.) In submission to
which Church-Prohibition, all the poor people of his Communion contentedly
rest, while they see themselves, defrauded of great part of that benefit, which
Christ left them, as his Last Will and Testament: for the comfort of their poor
Souls, and the Remedy of their Infirmities.

HE believes, that he is obliged to obey all the commands of Christ: and that
neither his Church nor any other Power upon Earth can limit, alter, or annul
any precept of Divine Institution, contrary to the intention of the Law giver.
Neither is the Denial of the Cup to the Laity, a practice any ways opposite to
this his Belief: He being taught, that tho Christ instituted the blessed
Sacrament under both kinds, and so delivered it to his Apostles, who only were
then present, and whom he had made Priests just before; yet he gave no command,
that it should be so received by all the faithful: But left this indifferent,
as is evident from his own words, where he attributes the obtaining life
everlasting (the end of the Institution) sometimes to the receiving under both
kinds, sometimes under one: as when he says, If any Man eat of this Bread, he
shall live for ever. He that eats Me, even he shall live by me. He that eats of
this bread shall live for ever, (John 6. v. 51, 57, 58.) And a curious Reader
may find as many Texts for thus Receiving under one kind, as for the other. And
St. Augustine was so f^r of this Opinion, that he says, that Christ himself
administered the Sacrament to some of his Disciples, under one kind only, viz.
to those two going to Emaus, (Luke c. last, 30.) And that the Apostles
afterward did often practice the like, when they assembled, to break bread,
(Acts 2. etc.) Which places I Will and other Fathers explicate of the Sacrament,
(Aug. l. 49. de Cons. Evang) And that this was the Custom of the Primitive
Christians, to give it under one kind, to Children, to the Sick, and that Men
on a Journey used so to carry it with them, is attested by all ancient Writers,
and modern Historians, Nay, he finds, that this was the practice of the Church,
to Communicate under one kind only, or else under both, as every one thought
good, especially in all Private Communions, for the first four hundred years
after Christ: and that the first Precept of Receiving under both kinds, was
given to the Fait^ful by Pope Leo I. in the year 443. and Confirmed by Pope
Gelasius in 490. not for the correcting any Abuse, that had crept into the
Church, but for the discovering the Manichees, (who being of opinion, that
Christ had no true Blood, and that Wine was the Gall of the Devil,) used to
lurk among the Christians, and receiving under the form of Bread only, as the
rest did, remained und^stinguish'd, till by this Obligation of all Receiving
the Cup, (which they judged unlawful and abominab^e) they were all detected.
And, now, if a thing (till that time Indifferent,) was for these Motives
determined by an Ecclesiastical Precept, and so observed for many hundred
years, without scruple or questioning the Authority; why should he doubt to
submit to the same Authority: when (upon different Motives and Circumstances,)
they issue forth another Precept. Few doubt of this in the matter of Eating of
strangled Meats and Blood; which, tho forbid by the Apostles, ( Acts 15.) and
so unlawful, is now by another Order, and upon other circumstances, become a
thing Indifferent, and like other things. And why then should he scruple in
this, especially since there is no Injury done, nor he defrauded of any thing.
For believing the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, he cons^quently
believes whole and living Jesus to be entirely contained under either Species:
And that (receiving under one kind,) he is truly partaker of the whole
Sacrament, and not deprived of other the Body or Blood of Christ.

XXI. Of Communion in one kind.
FOR our better proceeding in this Controversy, I shall set down the State of
it as clearly as I can.

1. The Question is not, Whether the first Institution of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist by Jesus Christ, were in one kind, or two; for all confess it was
under both kinds.

2. It is not. Whether both kinds are not still necessary for the due
Celebration of it; for it is granted that both kinds are necessary to be upon
the Altar, or else there could be no complete Sacrifice.

3. It is not, Whether the People may be wholly excluded from both kinds, and
so the Sacrifice only remain: for they grant that the People are bound to
communicate in one kind.

4. It is not concerning any peculiar and extraordinary Cases, where no Wine is
to be had, or there be a particular Aversion to it, or any such thing, where
positive Institutions may be reasonably presumed to have no force: But
concerning the public and solemn Celebration, and participation of it in the
Christian Church.

5. It is not concerning the mere disuse or neglect of it, But concerning the
lawfulness of Excluding the People from both Kinds, by the Churches
Prohibition, notwithstanding the Institution of it by Christ in both kinds,
with a Command to keep up the Celebration of it to his Second Coming.

Here now consists the point in Controversy, Whether the Church being obliged
to keep up the Institution in both kinds, be not equally obliged to distribute
both as our Savior did, to as many as partake of it? Our Author not denying
the Institution, or the continuance of it, says, Our Savior left it
indifferent to receive it in one kind, or both. And that is the point to be
examined.

1. He says, Christ delivered it to his Apostles, who only were then present,
and whom he made Priests just before: yet he gave no command that it should be
so received by all the Faithful.

But were not the Apostles all the Faithful then present? I pray in what
capacity did they then receive it? As Priests? How did they receive the Bread
before the hoc facite? As Priests or as faithful? It is ridiculous to suppose
the hoc facite changed their capacity; and if ^t did, it only relates to
consecrating, and not to receiving: but if Christ gave it only to the Apostles
as Priests, then for all that I can see, the People are not at all concerned in
one kind or other; but it was intended only for Priests: If the people be
concerned, how came they to be so? Where is there any command but what refers
to the first Institution? And it had been more plausible, according to this
Answer, to exclude the People wholly, than to admit them to one kind, and to
debar them the other.

2. Christ attributes the obtaining Life Everlasting, the end of the
Institution, sometimes to receiving under both kinds, sometimes under one, John
6.51, 57, 58. He could not easily have thought of any thing more against
himself; for our Savior there makes it as necessary to drink his Blood, as to
eat his Flesh, Verily, verily, S. John 6.51.
I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you: If this be understood of the Sacrament, as he
says, How is it possible for him to make the Cup indifferent? Unless it be
indifferent whether the People be saved or not.

3. Christ himself administered the Sacrament to some of his Disciples under one
kind only, Luke 24.30. But is he sure Christ did then administer the Sacrament
to them? Or that if he did, the Cup was not implied, since breaking of Bread,
when taken for an ordinary Meal in Scripture, does not exclude drinking at it?
But S. Augustine, he says, (l. 49. de Consensu Evangel.) understands that place
of the Sacrament. If he does, it cannot be where he says; for S. Augustine
wrote but Four Books of that Subject: but l. 3.25. he does say something
toward it; yet S. Augustine in another place supposes that these Disciples did
both eat and drink. The Disciples did not know him, but in the breaking of
Bread; Tract. 2. in Epist. S. Joh.
and truly he that does not eat and drink Judgment to himself, does in the
breaking of Bread own Christ. Where it is plain, that he applies both, to the
breaking of Bread here spoken of.

4. He says, it was the Custom of the Primitive Christians to give it under
one kind to Children, the Sick, and to Men in a Journey. I would he had
produced his Authorities to prove these things; for I can bring several to
prove the direct contrary as to Children, and sick Persons, and Travelers, and
not only ancient Writers, but the most Learned of their own Church. And
therefore I cannot but wonder to find him saying, This was attested by all
ancient Writers, and modern Historians. But I have ever found those have been
most mistaken, who produce all Writers and Historians; when it may be, there is
not one that speaks home to the business. At least, we have here none
mentioned, and therefore none to examine; and it would be too hard a task to
search All.

5. He adds to this extravagancy, in saying, That Receiving in one or both
kinds, was indifferent for the first four hundred years; when the contrary is
so manifest, that the most ingenious of their own Writers confess it. If any
Persons did carry home one kind (which is very questionable; for Baronius and
Albaspinaeus say, they carried both kinds) to receive it in times of
Persecution, at what season they thought fit afterward; This ought not to be
set up against the general and constant Rule of the Church; which is attested,
not only by Cassander, and such like, but even by Salmero, Ruardus Tapperus,
and Lindanus, who make no scruple of saying, the public Celebration in the
Primitive Church was in both kinds. But then, how is it possible for us to
judge better, what they thought themselves bound to do, than what they
constantly observed in all their public Celebrations? The Church is not
accountable for the particular Fancies or S^perstitions of Men; but what was
observed in all publ^ck Offices, we have reason to think the Church thought it
self obliged so to do, out of regard to the Institution of Christ. And to show
how Un^versal this Observation was in the Church, those who give account of the
Eastern Church say, That the Greeks, Nestorians, Cotovic. Itiner. Hierosolymit.
l. 2. c. 6.

Histoir. Critique, p. 14.


Armenians, Maronites, Cophtites and Abyssins, do all observe it still, viz.
That the publ^ck Communicants do partake of both kinds. And not one of all
these Churches, but think themselves bound to observe it, out of regard to the
Institution of Christ; and why then should any think the Pr^m^tive Church
thought it indifferent?

6. The first Precept of receiving under both kinds, was given to the Faithful
by Pope Leo, A. D. 443. and confirmed by G^l^sius, A. D. 490. This is a great
mistake, for Leo gave no Precept ab^ut it; but only told the People how they
might certainly discover the Manichees, for they would conform in other things,
but they would not taste of the Wine; which argued, that all other Communicants
did then partake in both kinds. Gelasius not only confirms the Custom then
used, but he says, That it is Sacrilege to divide that Holy Mystery. And
sur^ly he did not account Sacrilege an indifferent thing.

p. 52.
7. Lastly he says, That those who receive in one kind are truly Partakers of
the whole Sacrament. This is a new way of Concomitancy; we used to hear of
Whole Christ under either Species, and that Whole Christ was therefore
received; but how comes it to be the whole Sacrament which consists of two
distinct Parts? And if it be a Sacrifice, the Blood must be separated from the
Body, else the Blood of Christ is not considered as sh^d, and so the Notion of
the Sacrifice will be lost: Which is our next Head.

XXII. Of the MASS.
HE believes an insufficiency in the Sacrifice made by Christ upon the Cross:
and that his Death will little avail us in order to our Redemption, unless we,
by daily Sacrificing him to his Father, perfect what he began: and therefore
little taking notice of St. Paul 's Words to the Hebrews, (Chap. 10.14.) where
he says, that Christ our High Priest by one Oblat^on, has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified: He thinks he shall never be sanctified, but by the
Offering made by his Mass Priest upon their Altars, when they say Mass; and
thus wholly relying upon this Superstition, ( an Invention of some crafty P^pe
for the deceiving W^dows and Credul^us Women,) he is taught to neglect the
Passi^n of Christ and to put no hopes in his Merits, and the work of our
Redemption.

HE believes that the Sacrifice made by Christ upon the Cross was altogether
sufficient: That by it he Saved and Redeemed us, paying the Debt of Sin, and
satisfying the Infinite Justice of his Father: That by it he procured means for
our Salvation; which means are Faith and Good Works, and most honorable to God
is the Offering a Sacrifice. And as Christ's Worshipping of God, Christ's
Fasting, Christ's Praying and suffering for us, does not hinder or evacuate our
Worshipping of God, our Fasting, our Suffering, our Praying, for our selves. So
neither did his Sacrifice hinder or evacuate all Sacrifices for ever. But as he
instituted ^asting, Praying, and suffering for his Followers, that by so doing
they might apply what he did to themselves; so also he instituted a Sacrifice;
that by it they might apply the merits of his Sacrifice, and make it beneficial
to their Souls. So that though he firmly believes, that Christ offered
Sacrifice for our Redemption, and by one only Offering, (spoken of by St. Paul)
perfected by way of Redemption the Sanctification of all those that are
sanctified; yet he also believes, that to receive the ben^fit of this Offering,
we must also do our parts, by our Good Works concurring with Christ, so
becoming Laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9, and in some manner purifying
our own selves, 1 John 3.3. and therefore not omit the best of all Works, which
is Sacrifice, proper to none but God: Which our Savior Jesus Christ instituted
at ^is last Supper, when leaving unto us his Body and Blood under two distinct
Species of Bread and Wine, he bequeathed, as a Legacy to his Apostles, not only
a Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice: A Commemorative Sacrifice, lively
Representing, in an unbloody manner, the bloody Sacrifice which was offered for
us upon the Cross; and by a distinction of the Symbols, distinctly showing his
Death (Christ's) until he come. This he gave in charge to his Apostles, as to
the first and chief Priests of the New Testament, and to their Successors to
Offer; commanding them to do the same thing he had there done at his last
Supper, in commemoration of him. And this is the Oblation, or Sacrifice of the
Mass, which has been observed, performed, frequented by the Faithful in all
Ag^s, attested by the General Consent of ancient Canons, universal Tradition,
Councils, and the pract^ce of the whole Church, mentioned and allowed of by all
the Fathers Greek and Latin; and never called into question but of l^te Years;
being that pure Offering which Malachy, (Prophesying of Christ) foretold should
be offered among the Gentiles in every place, Mal. 1.11. as it is understood by
several Fathers, and particularly, S. Cypr. l. 1. c. 18. advers. Iud. S. Ierom,
S. Theodoret. S. Cyril, in their Commentaries upon this Text: S. Augustine, l.
18. c. 15. de Civit. S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95. and others.

Of the MASS.
UNder this Head, which is thought of so great cons^quence in the Roman Church,
I expected a fuller Representation than I here find; as about the Opus
Operatum, i. e. how far the mere Act is effectual: About their Solitary Masses,
when no Person receives but the Priest; about the People having so little to
do, or understand, in all the other parts of the Mass; About the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Mass, how useful and important they are; About reconciling
the present Canon of the Mass, with the present Practices; About offering up
Masses for the honor of Saints. All which we find in the Council of Trent, but
are omitted by our Representer; Who speaks of the Mass, as tho there were no
Controversy about it, but only concerning the Sacrifice there supposed to be
offered up, and which he is far from true Representing: For the Council of
Trent not only affirms a true proper propitiatory Sacrifice to be there offered
up for the quick and dead, but denounces Anathema's against those that deny it.
Sess 22. cap. 2. can 1, 2, 3, etc.
So that the Question is not, Whether the Eucharist may not in the sense of
Antiquity be allowed to be a Commemorative Sacrifice, as it takes in the whole
Action; but whether in the Mass there be such a Representation made to God of
Christ's Sacrifice, as to be it self a true and propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Sins of the Q^ick and the Dead?

Now, all that our Representer says to the purpose, is,

p. 53.
1. That Christ bequeathed his Body and Blood at his last Supper under the
species of Bread and Wine, not only a Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice. I had
thought it had been more proper to have offered a Sacrifice, than to have
bequeathed it. And this ought to have been proved as the Foundation of this
Sacrifice, viz. That Christ did at his last Supper offer up his Body and Blood,
as a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God. And then what need his suffering on the
Cross?

2. He gave this in charge to his Apostles, as the first and chief Priests of
the New Testament, and to their Successors, to offer. But Where? When? and How?
For we read nothing at all of it in Scripture. Christ indeed did bid them do
the same thing he had there done in his last Supper. But did he the offer up
himself, or not? If not, How can the Sacrifice be drawn from his Action? If he
did, it is impossible to prove the necessity of his dying afterward.

3. This Sacrifice was never questioned till of late years. We say, it was
never determined to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice, till of late. We do not deny
the Fathers interpreting Mal. 1.11. of an Offering under the Gospel; but they
generally understand it of Spiritual and Eucharistical Sacr^fices; and although
some of them, by way of Accommodation, do apply it to the Eucharist, yet not
one of them does make it a Propitiatory Sacrifice, which was the thing to be
proved: For, we have no mind to dispute about Metaphorical Sacrifices, when the
Council of Trent so positively decrees it to be a True, Proper, and
Propitiatory Sacrifice.

XXIII. Of Purgatory.
HE believes, (contrary to all Reason,) the Word of God, and all Antiquity,
that (besides Heaven and Hell,) there is a third place, which his Church is
pleased to call Purgatory; a place intended purely for those of his Communion,
wh^re they may easily have admittance after this Life, without danger of
falling into Hell; for, that though Hell was designed first, for the punishment
of Sinners; yet (that now, since the blessed discovery of Purgatory,) Hell may
easily be skip'd over, and an eternal Damnation avoided, for an exchange of
some short Penalty undergone in this Pope's Prison; where he never need fear to
be detained long; for that, if he has but a friend left behind him, that will
but say a few Hail-Maries for his Soul, or in his Testament did but remember to
order a small sum to be presented to some M^ss Priest, he never need doubt of
being soon released; for that a Golden K^y will as infallibly open the Gates of
Purgatory as of any other Prison wha^soever.

HE believes it damnable to admit of any thing for Faith that is contrary to
Reason, the Word of God, and all Antiquity; and that the Being of a Third
Place, (called Purgatory,) is so far from being contrary to all, or any of
these, that it is attested, confirmed and established by them all. It Is
expressly in the 2 d. of the Maccabees, c 12. where Money was sent to
Jerusalem, that Sacrifices might be offered for the slain: And '^is
recommended as a Holy Cogitation to Pray for the Dead. Now though these Books
are not thought Canonical by some, yet St. Augustine held them as such, and
says they are so received by the Church, (l. 18. de Civit.) But whether so, or
no, one thing is allowed by all, viz. That they contain nothing contrary to
Faith, and that they were cited by the Ancient Fathers for the Confutation of
Errors, forming of good Manners, and the explication of the Christian Doctrine:
Thus were they used by Origin for Condemnation of the Valentinian Heretics,
(Orig. in cap 5. Ep. ad Rom.) thus by St. Cyprian, (Lib. de Exhor. Mart. c.
11.) thus by Eusebius. Caesariensis.) Lib. Praepar. Evang. 11. c. 15.) thus by St.
Greg. Naz. Ambros. etc. And he is in a manner certain that the Books would
never have been put to this Use by these Holy and Learned F^thers; they would
never with such confidence have produced their Authority, nor would they have
been read by the Church in those Golden times, had this Doctrine of a Third
Place, (and of Prayers for the Dead, which they maintain,) been any idle
Superstition, a mere Dream, contrary to Reason, the Word of God, and Antiquity;
or had it been any Error at all. The being also of a Third Place is plainly
intimated by our Savior, (Matthew. 12.32.) where he says, Whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this World,
neither in the World to come. By which words Christ evidently supposes, that
(though these shall not) yet some sins are forgiven in the World to come: which
since it cannot be in Heaven, where no sin enters; nor in Hell, whence there is
no Redemption; it must necess^rily be some Middlestate: And in this sense it
was understood by St. Augustine nigh twelve hundred Years ago, as is manifest
in his Works, ( Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 13, and 24. and lib. 6. cont. Julian. c.
15.) so also by St. Gregory the Great, (l. 4. Diacl. c. 39.) so by St. Bernard
against the Heretics of his time. In the same manner does St. Augustine
understand those words of St. Paul, (1 Cor. 3.15.) He himself shall be saved;
yet so as by fire. Where he thinks him to speak of a purging fire, (Aug. in
Psalm. 37.) So the same Father understands that Prison of which St. Peter
speaks, (1 Pet. 3.19.) to be some place of Temporal Chastis^ment, (Aug. Ep.
99.) And if this great Doctor of the Church in those purer times, found so
often in the Bible, a place of Pains after this Life, from whence there was
Release; how can any one say, without great presumption, that the Being of a
Third Place is contrary to the Word of God? Neither can the Antiquity of this
Doctrine be more justly called in question, of which is found so early mention,
not only by this Holy Father, but even by others his Predecessors, the
Disciples of the Apostles, and the best Witnesses of their Doctrine, ( Dionys.
l. de Eccl. Hier. c. 7. In Actis SS. Perpet. and Felicit. mentioned and
approved by S. Aug. l. 1. de Anima and ejus Orig. c. 10. l. 3. c. 9. and l. 4.
c. 18. Tertul. l. de Cor. Mil. c. 3. Cypr. Ep. 66. ad Cler. Arnob. l. 4. cont.
Gent. page ult.) and many others quoted at length by the Learned Natalis
Alixand. Tom. 9. Hist. Eccl. dissert. 41) And as for the Reason of this Tenet,
he is bound to think it does not want it, since he finds it abetted by such
Virtuous, Learned and Considering Men, whom he dares not reckon Fools; never
hearing, that these used to Believe, but upon very good Ground^ and substantial
Reasons. And he thinks he is able to give some himself, by what he has learned
from the Scriptures, and these Fathers. For having been taught by these; First,
That when a sinner is reconci^'d to God, though the Eternal Punishment due to
his sins, is always remitted, yet there sometimes remains a Temporal Penalty to
be undergone. As in the case of the Israelites. (Number. 14.) who by Moses's
Prayers obtained Pardon for their Murmuring, and yet were excluded the Land of
Canaan. As in the Case of David, (2 Samuel 12.) who was punished in the loss of
his Child, after his sin was forgiven. Secondly, That there are some sins,
which of their own nature are Light and Venial, such as cool the fervor of
Charity, but do not extinguish it, from which even Holy Men are not exempt, and
of which it is said, that the Just man falls seven times, (Augustine. Enchir. c.
70. and lib. Quaest. Oct. tr. 9.26.) Thirdly, That to all sins, whether great
or small, some Penalty is due to the Justice of God; who as he has Mercy to
forgive, has also Justice to punish: so that as St. Augustine says, (^n Ennar.
in Psalm. 50.) Whosoever seeks to God for mercy, must remember that he is just,
and that his sin shall not pass unpunished. Fourthly, That generally speaking,
few Men depart out of this life, but either with the guilt of some light
offenses and venial sins, or else obnoxious to some Temporal Punishment due to
former sins forgiven. From these Heads, Discourse leads him immediately to the
Necessity of some Third Place. For since the Infinite Goodness of God can admit
nothing into Heaven, which is not clean, and pure from all sin both great and
small: And his I^finite Justice can permit none to receive the Reward of Bliss,
who as yet are not out of debt, but have something in Justice to suffer: There
must of necessity be some Place or State, where Souls, departing this life,
pardoned as to the Eternal Guilt or Pain, yet obnoxious to some Temporal
Penalty, or with the gu^lt of some venial faults, are Purged and Purified
before their Admittance into Heaven. And this is what he is taught concerning
Purgatory. Which, though he knows not, Where it is; of what nature the Pains
are, or how long each Soul is detained there? yet he believes, that those, that
are in this Place, being the Living Members of Jesus Christ, are relieved by
the Prayers of their Fellow Members here on Earth; and that the Charitable
Works performed upon their Deathbed, and the Alms disposed on in their Last
Will, are very available afterward in order to their speedier release.

XXIII. Of PVRGATORY.
HEre our Author begins with proving from Scripture and Ant^quity, and then
undertakes to explain the Doctrine of Purgatory from substantial Reasons.

1. As to his Proof from Scripture.

1. Is that from 2 Maccab. c. 12. where he says, Money was sent to Jerusalem,
that Sacrifices might be offered for the slain; and it is recommended as a Holy
Cogitation, to pray for the dead.

To this, which is the main foundation of Purgatory, I answer, 1. It can never
prove such a Purgatory as our Author asserts; for he supposes a Sinner
reconciled to God, as to eternal Punishment, before he be capable of Purgatory;
but here can be no such Supposition, for these Men died in the sin of Achan,
which was not known till their Bodies were found among the slain. Here was no
Confession, or any sign of Repentance; and therefore if it proves any thing, it
is deliverance from Eternal Punishment, and for such as dye in their Sins
without any show of Repentance. 2. We must distinguish the Fact of Judas from
the Interpretation of Jason, or his Epitomizer. The Fact of Judas was according
to the strictness of the Law, which required in such Cases a Sin-Offering; and
that is all which the Greek implies. (...). And so Leo Allatius confesses all
the best Greek Copies agree; Leo Allat. de Purgat. p. 889
and he reckons Twelve of them. Now what does this imply, but that Judas
remembering the severe punishment of this Sin in the Case of Achan, upon the
People, sent a Sin-Offering to Jerusalem? But says Leo Allatius, It was the
sin of those men that were slain. I grant it. But the Question is, Whether the
Sin-Offering respected the dead or the living? For the Law in such a Case
required a Sin-Offering for the Congregation. Levit. 4.13.
And why should not we believe so punctual a Man for the Law, as Judas, did
strictly observe it in this point? But the Author of the Book of Maccabees
understands it of those that were slain. I do not deny it; but then, 3. We have
no Reason to rely upon his Authority in this matter; which I shall make appear
by a parallel Instance. He does undoubtedly commend the fact of Razias in
Killing himself (2. Macc. 14.42.) when he says he did it, (...), like a brave
Man; and if he had thought it a fault in him, he would never have given such a
Character of it, but he would have added something of Caution after it. And it
is no great advantage to Purgatory, for him that commends Self-murder to have
introduced it. The most probable account I can give of it is, That the
Alexandrian Jews, of whose number Jason of Cyrene seems to have been, had taken
in several of the Philosophical Opinions, especially the Platonists, into their
Religion, as appears by Philo; and Bellarmine himself confesses, Bellar. de
P^^gat. l 1. c. 8.
that Plato held a Purgatory: and they were ready to apply what related to the
Law, to their Platonic Notions. So here the Law appointed a Sin-offering with
respect to the Living; but Jason would needs have this refer to the dead; and
then sets down his own remark upon it, That it was a holy Cogitation to pray
for the dead; as our Author renders it. If it were holy with respect to the
Law, there must be some ground for it in the Law. And that we appeal to; and do
not think any particular Fancies sufficient to introduce such a Novelty as this
was, which had no Foundation either in the Law or the Prophets. And it would be
strange for a new Doctrine to be set up, when the Spirit of Prophecy was ceased
among them.

But S. August. held these Books for Canonical, and says, they are so received
by the Church, l. 18. de Civit. Dei. To answer th^s it is sufficient to
observe, not only the diff^rent Opinions of others before mentioned as to these
Books; but that as Canus notes, Can. l. ^. c 1^.2^.4.
it was then lawful to doubt of their Authority: and he goes as low as Gregory
I. whom he denies not to have rejected them. And I hope we may set the
Authority of one against the other; especially when S. Augustine himself, Aug.
cont ad Epist. Gaudent l. 2 c. 23.
being pressed hard with the fact of Razias, conf^sses. 1. That the Jews have
not the Book of Maccabees in their Canon, as they have the Law, the Prophets*
and the Psalms, to whom our Lord gave Testimony as to his Witnesses. Which is
an evident Proof, he thought not these Books sufficient to ground a Doctrine
upon, wh^c^ was not found in the other, 2. That however this Book was not
unprofitably received by the Church, if it be soberly read and heard. Which
implies a greater Caution than S. Augustine would ever have given, concerning a
Book he believed truly Canonical. But says Bellarmine, De Purgat. l. 1 c. 3.
his meaning is only to keep men from imitating the Example of Razias; whereas
that which they pressed St. Augustine with, was not merely the Fact, but the
Character that is given of it. Sancta^um Sc^ip^urarum Auctoritate laudasus est
Razias, are their very Words in S. Augustine. And therefore the Caution relates
to the Books, and not merely to his Example. And he lessens the Character given
by the Author, when he says, He chose to dye nobly; It had been better, says
he, to have died humbly. But the other is the Elogium given in the Heathen
Histories, and better becomes brave Heathens than true Martyrs. Can any one now
think S. Augustine believed this Writer Divinely inspired, or his Doctrine
sufficient to ground a Point of Faith upon? And I wonder they should not every
jot as well commend Self-murder as an Heroical Act. as prove the Doctrine of
Purgatory from these words of Jason, or his Epitemizer. For the Argument from
the Authority of the Book, will hold as strongly for one as the other. And yet
this is the Achilles for Purgatory; which Natalis Alexander (whom our Author
follows in this matter) says, Natal. Alex. Sec. 4 Diss. 4.
is a demonstrative place against those that deny it. But I must proceed.

2. Purgatory is plainly intimated by our Savior, Matt. 12.32. Whosoever
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
World, neither in the World to come. By which words, Christ evidently supposes,
that some Sins are forgiven in the World to come. I am so far from discerning
this plain Intimation, that I wonder how any came to think of it out of this
place. Well! But does it not hence follow, that Sins may be forgiven in the
World to come? Not near so plainly, as that Sins will not be forgiven in the
World to come. Not that particular Sin, but others may; How does that appear?
What intimation is there that any Sins not forgiven here, shall be forgiven
there? Or that any Sins here remitted as to the Eternal Punishment, shall be
there remitted as to the Temporal? And without such a kind of Remission,
nothing can be inferred from hence. But if there be a Remission in another
World, it can be neither in Heaven nor Hell, therefore it must be in Purgatory.
But those who own a Remission of Sins in another World, say it will be on the
day of Judgment: For the actual Deliverance of the Just from Punishment, may be
not improperly called the full Remission of their Sins. So S. Augustine, whom
he quotes, plainly says, Si nulla remitterentur in judicio illo novissimo,
etc. Julian, l. 6. c. 5. where it is evident S. Augustine takes this place to
relate to the Day of Judgment; and so in the other, ( De Civit. Dei l. 21. c.
24.) But as he supposed a Remission, so he did a Purgation as by Fire in that
day. In illo judicio poenas quasdam purgatorias futuras. De Civit. Dei l 20. c.
25. And so he is to be understood on Psalm. 37. to which he applies 1 Cor. 3.15.
But our Author was very much out, when he says S. Augustine applied 1 Pet.
3.15. to some place of temporal Chastisement in another World, when Bellarmine
sets himself to confute S. Augustine about it, Bell. de An. Christi l. 4. c. 13.
as understanding it of this World. And therefore he has little cause to boast
of St. Augustine's Authority about Purgatory, unless he had brought something
more to the Purpose out of him. H^s other Testimonies of Antiquity are not
worth considering; which he borrows from Natalis Alexander: that of Dionysius
Areopag. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 7. is a known Counterfeit, and impertinent,
relating to a Region of Rest and Happiness. And so do Tertullian's Oblations
for the Dead, De Cor. Milit. c. 3. For they were Eucharistical, as appears by
the ancient Liturgies, being made for the greatest Saints. St. Cyprian, Ep. 66.
speaks of an Oblation for the Dead: and he there mentions the Natalitia of the
Martyrs: but by comparing that with his Epist. 33. it will be found that he
speaks of the Anniversary Commemoration of the Dead, which signifies nothing to
Purgatory: for the best men were put into it: and St. Cyprian threatens it as a
Punishment to be left out of the Diptychs; but surely it is none to escape
Purgatory: Arnobius l. 4. only speaks of praying for the Dead, which we deny
not to have been then used in the Church, not with respect to any temporary
pains in purgatory, but to the Day of Judgment: And therein lies the true state
of the Controversy, with respect to Antiquity: which is not, Whether any
solemn Prayers were not then made for the dead; but whether those Prayers did
relate to their deliverance out of a state of Punishment before the Day of
Judgment. For whatever state Souls were then supposed to be in, before the
great Day, if there could be no deliverance till the Day of Judgment, it
signifies nothing to the present Question.

As to the Vision of Perpetua concerning her Brother Dinocrates who died at
Seven Years old, being baptized, it is hardly reconcilable to their own
Doctrine. to suppose such a Soul in Purgatory: I will not deny that Perpetua
did think she saw him in a worse Condition: and thought likewise that by her
Prayers she brought him into a better; for she saw him playing like little
Children: and then she awaked, and concluded that she had given him ease: but
is it indeed come to this, that such a Doctrine as Purgatory must be bu^lt on
such a Foundation as this? I do not call in question the Acts of Perpetua, nor
her sincerity in relating her Dream: but must the Church build her Doctrines
upon the Dreams or Visions of young Ladies, tho very devout? for Ubia Perpetua
was then but Twenty Two, as she says her self. But none are to be blamed who
m^ke use of the best supports their Cause will afford.

It is time now to see what strength of Reason he offers for Purgatory. 1. He
says, When a Sinner is reconciled to God, tho the Eternal Punishment due to
his Sins is always remitted, yet there sometimes remains a temporal Penalty to
be undergone; as in the case of the Israelites and David. But does it hence
follow, that there is a Temporal Penalty that must be undergone either here or
hereafter, without which there will be no need of Purgatory? Who denies, that
God in this Life, for example sake, may punish those whose Sins he has
promised to remit as to another World? This is therefore a very slender
Foundation. 2. There are some sins of their own nature light and venial. I will
not dispute that; but s^ppose there be, must men go then into Purgatory for
mere Venial Sins? What a strange Doctrine does this appear to any m^n's Reason?
That God should forgive the greater sins, and req^ire so severe a Punishment
for sins in their own nature venial; i. e. so inconsider^ble in their own
Opinion, that no man is bound to confess them; which do not interrupt a State
of Grace; which require only an implicit detestation of them; S. The part 3.
q. 87 art 3. in cor. v. Marsil. Column. Hydragiolog Sect. 7. ^. 3. n. 32. (...)
3. c. 2. n. 15 29 c 3. n. 1. Bell. de Cultu Sanct. l 3 c. 7. Sect. se^undo.
which do not deserve eternal Punishment; which may be remitted by Holy Water,
or a Bishop's Bl^ssing, as their Divines agree. 3. That to all Sins some
penalty is due to the Justice of God. And what follows from hence but the
necessity of Christ's Satisfaction? But how does it ^ppear, that after the
Expiation of Sin by Christ, and the rem^ssion of eternal Punishment, there
st^ll remains a necessity of farther satisfaction for such a temporal penalty
in another World? 4. That generally speaking, few men depart out of this Life,
but either with the guilt of venial sins, or obnoxious to some Temporal
punishment. No doubt, all men are obnoxious by their sins to the punishment of
another World; but that is not the point, but whether God has declared, That
although he remits the eternal Punishment, he will not the temporal; and although he
will forgive thousands of pounds, he will not the pence and farthings we owe to
him: But if Mortal sins be remitted as to the guilt, and Venial do not hinder a
st^te of Grace, what room is there for Vindictive Justice in Purgatory?

Yet this is the Doctrine which so much weight is laid upon; that Bellarmine
says, De Purgatorio l. 1. c. 11. SS. Haec sunt.
They must go directly to Hell who do not believe purgatory. If this be true,
why was it not put into the Representation, that we might understand the danger
of not believing so credible, so reasonable a Doctrine as this? But we believe
it to be a much more dangerous thing to condemn others for not believing a
Doctrine which has so very slender a pretense either to Scripture or Reason.

XXIV. Of Praying in an Unknown Tongue.
HE it counseled by his Church, to be present at Sermons, but never permitted
to hear any he is able to understand; they being all delivered in an unknown
Tongue. He is taught to Pray, but it must be in Latin. He is commanded to
assist at the Church Service, and to hear Mass, but it must be without
understanding a word; it being all performed in a Language of which he is
altogether Ignorant. And thus is miserably deprived of all the comfortable
Benefits of Christianity: Hearing, but without Understanding; Praying, but
without reaping Fruit; assisting at Public Assemblies, but like a Stock or a
Stone, without feeling, or any the least sense of Devotion.

HE is counseled by his Church to be present at Sermons, such as he is able to
understand, they b^ing always delivered in the Vulgar Language of every
Country: In France, French; in Spain, Spanish; in Italy, Italian: in England
(if permitted) English: they being purely intended for the good Instruction of
the Congregation present. He is taught to Pray, and alw^ys provided of such
Books of Devotion as he is capable of understanding; every Nation being well
furnished with such helps, extant in the Language proper to the Country. He is
commanded to assist at the Church Service, and to hear Mass; and in this he is
instructed, not to understand the Words, but to know what is done. For, the
Mass being a Sacrifice, wherein is daily commemorated the Death and Passion of
Christ by an Oblation made by the Priest. of the Body and Blood of the
Imm^culate Lamb, under the Symbols of Bread and Wine, according to his own
Institution: it is not the business of the Congregation present, to employ their
Ears in attending to the Words, but their Hearts in contemplation of the Divine
Mysteries, by raising up fervent affections of Love, Thanksgiving, Compassion,
Hope, Sorrow for sins, Resolutions of amendment, etc. That thus having their
Heart and Intention united with the Priests, they may be partakers of his
Prayers, and of the Sacrifice he is then offering, than which he believes
nothing is more acceptable to God, or beneficial to true Believers. And for the
raising of these affections in his Soul, and filling his Heart with the
ecstasies of Love and Devotion, he thinks in this case, there is little need of
Words; a true Faith, without these, is all-sufficient. Who could but have burst
forth into Tears of Love and Thanksgiving, if he had been present while our
Savior was tied to Pillar, Scourged and Tormented, though he opened not his
mouth to the Bystanders, nor spoke a word? who would have needed a Sermon to
have been filled with Grief and Compassion, if he had seen his Savior exposed
to the scorn of the Jews, when he was made a bloody spectacle by Pilate, with,
Ecce homo, Lo the Man? Who could have stood cold and senseless, upon Mount
Calvary, under the Cross, when his Redeemer was hanging on it, though he had
heard, or not understood a word that he spoke? Does any one think that those
Holy Women, who followed their Lord, in these sad Passages, and were Witnesses
of his Sufferings, wanted Holy Affections in their Souls, because he spoke not:
or were they scandalized at his silence? Was not their Faith in him that
suffered, by which they believed him to be Christ Jesus, true God and Man,
laying down his life for the Redemption of Man, sufficient to excite in their
Souls all the Passions due from a sinful Creature, to his bleeding Redeemer, to
his Crucified Jesus? The like Faith also is sufficient to fill him with
Devotion, when he is present at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass: For believing,
that Christ is there really present before him, under the Species of Bread and
Wine, and that He that lies upon the Altar, is the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the World; What need of more, to quicken in his Soul all the
Affections of a Devout Lover? Can he behold his Redeemer before him, and not
break forth into Love and Thanksgiving? Can he see him, that gives sight to the
Blind, health to the Sick, and life to the Dead, and yet stand still senseless
and un-mov'd, without putting any Petition to him, without asking any thing,
for his blind, sick and sinful Soul? Can he believe that he that gives his life
for the World, and died for our sins, is there before him, and not be touched
with sorrow and contrition for his Offense? Can he see commemorated every
doleful passage of his Savior's sufferings, in the several Mysteries of the
Mass, and yet not be filled with grief and compassion? Is not Jesus welcome to
a devout Soul, although he come in silence? Is not the Presence of Christ, a
more forcing motive to a Christian, than any Humane Words could be? And if he
must needs have Words, let him behold with the eye of Faith the gaping Wounds
of his Redeemer, and see if those speak nothing to his Soul? If they do not,
it is because he wants Faith. It nothing therefore concerns his Devotion, that
the Mass is said in Latin: If the Church has ordered it thus, so to preserve
Unity; as in Faith, so in the External Worship of God, and to prevent
alterations and changes, which it would be exposed to, if in Vulgar Languages,
and other good Reasons; What Is that to him? He should receive but little
advantage if it were in his Mother Tongue. For besides, that the greatest part
is said in so low a Voice, that it is not possible he should hear it; the Words
do not belong to him, That Is only the Priest's Office; and the Obligation is,
to accompany the Priest in Prayer, and Spirit, to be a joint-Offerer with him,
to contemplate the Mysteries there represented, and to excite in his Soul
Devotions according to the exigency of every Passage; according to the
Directions he finds in his English Prayer-Books, of which there are extant
great variety, set forth for the help of the Ignorant; by which they are taught
the meaning of every Part and Ceremony of the Mass, and how to apply their
Devotions accordingly. And if at any time he be present at other public
Devotions, as the Church Offices, the Litanies, solemn Thanksgivings, Exequies,
etc. which are all performed in Latin; or should say any private Prayers, or
sing an Hymn in the same Language, which he understands not; yet is he taught
that this may be done, with great benefit to his Soul, and the acceptance of
God; if at these occasions he does but endeavor to raise his thoughts to
Heaven, and fix his Heart upon his Maker. For that God does not respect the
Language of the Lips, but of the Heart, does not attend the motion of the
Tongue, but of the Mind; and if these be but directed to him in Thanksgiving,
in Praeising, in Petitioning, in Humiliation, in Contrition, and such like
Acts, as Circumstances require, he need not doubt but that God accepts his
Prayers and Devotions: It being an undeniable thing, that, to say Prayers well
and devoutly, it is not necessary to have attention on the Words, or on the
Sense of the Prayers; but rather purely on God: Of these three Attentions, this
last being approved by all, as of greatest Perfection, and most pleasing to
God. And this he can have, whether he understands the Words or no: it being
very usual and easy for a Petitioner to accompany his Petition with an earnest
desire of obtaining his suit, tho the Language in which it is worded be unknown
to him.

XXIV. Of Praying in an unknown Tongue.
THE Q^estion in short is, Whether the Church Service, at which Persons are
bound to assist, ought not to be in a Language understood by those who are
bound to assist?

For our Author grants, That a Papist is bound to assist at the Church Service,
and to hear Mass; but he is not bound to understand the Words there spoken.

This is a plain state of the case; and one would have thought St. Paul's
Discourse about Edification in the Church Service, and a known Tongue, and the
Primitive Practice, had des^rved a little consideration, but not a Word is said
to either of them; and the whole is so managed, as tho there had been no Rule,
or any appearance of Practice to the contrary. But I must consider what he does
say.

1. The Mass is a Sacrifice: And what then? Have they no other Church Service
but the Mass? What then becomes of their Breviaries, Litanies, and all other
Offices? But suppose the Priests Office in the Mass, be to offer the Sacrifice;
are there no Prayers in the Canon of the Mass, wherein the People are
concerned? Why must not they understand what they are required to assist in
Prayer for? If they have English Books, as he says, to teach them every part
and Ceremony of the Mass, why not as well the Prayers in the Mass, wherein they
are to join? They tell us, It is unseasonable then for the People to say their
Beads, and other Devotions: And I suppose as unseasonable to talk, or think of
other matters. Why then should not they know what it is they are to do, and
what Petitions they are then to make to God? Are there no Responses to be made?
No Lessons to be read? No Creed to be professed? Does not the Priest speak to
the People to pray, and they answer him? Is there no Thanksgiving after the
Communion which the People is concerned in? We are as much for their Devout
Affections as they can be, but we think they are not hindered by understanding
what they are about: We cannot but wonder, that any man should say, That it
nothing concerns his Devotion that the Mass is in Latin, if he understand it
not. Is it no part of Devotion to join in the public Prayers, not merely by
rote, but from a due apprehension of the matter contained in them? He requires,
That they accompany the Priest in Prayer and Spirit: And why not in
understanding also? But the Church has so ordered it: And that is the thing we
complain of, as done against St. Paul, against the Primitive Church, against
the natural sense of Mankind, who think it is sit for them to know what they
do, especially in the Worship of God: But it is to preserve Unity: Methinks
however Unity in Spirit and Understanding is better than without it: There are
other good Reasons: I know not one good one; and if there were more, he would
have produced them: The greatest part is said in a low Voice, that it is not
possible he should hear it: And to what purpose should it be spoken louder, if
they are not to understand it? But why so low in public? Yet the People might
have Books, and join, if they understood what was said. But why should not the
rest be understood, which is spoken as if it were?

2. As to other Offices, he says, He is taught, that he may perform them in a
Language which he understands not, with great benefit to his Soul, and the
acceptance of God, if at those occasions he endeavors to raise his Thoughts to
Heaven, and fix his Heart upon his Maker. But the Question is not, Whether a
Man may not have devout Thoughts at that time, but whether he can perform his
part in the public Offices, with true Devotion, without Understanding? for the
public Offices of Devotion were designed for the uniting the Hearts and
Desires of the People in the same things. It is not, whether one Man may not
pray for Heaven, and another for fair Weather, and another for pardon of his
Sins, and a Fourth for Patience, and so on, in the same place, and at the same
time; for all this may be done as well in a silent Meeting, where not a Word is
spoken: But there being one Form of Prayer for all to join together in that
with the united force of the whole Congregation, their Petitions may go up to
Heaven; The matter now in dispute is, Whether it be not necessary in order to
this united Devotion, that the People all know what they pray for? And one
would think nothing need to be said to prove this: But what our Author adds in
Justification of this, overthrows all public Devotion; for he says, It is not
necessary to have attention on the Words, or on the Sense of Prayers, but
rather purely on God: Which is to make all public Forms unnecessary, and to
turn all Devotion into Prayer of Contemplation: For if this be true, all Forms
whatsoever are not only useless, but burdensome; and by the stinting the
Spirit, do hinder the nimbler flights of the Soul in pure silence toward God:
And this Principle must lead men to Enthusiasms, and unintelligible Unions; and
make them despise Forms as a mean and dull Dispensation.

But at last he says, A petitioner may accompany his petition with an earnest
desire of obtaining it, though the Language in which it is written be unknown
to him. Very true, if he ind^ted the matter of the Petition, and trusted
another to put it into that Language, which the Person to whom he makes it does
understand, but not his own: But all Languages are alike to God's Infinite
Wisdom, and so there can be no pretense on that account to keep only to some
particular Tongues, tho unknown to the Party; and if it were so to all men, no
man would have a Petition presented in a Language which he did not know: But in
Prayer to God, the design of it is not to acquaint him with something which he
knew not, but to excite the Hearts and Affections of men to an earnest desire
of the things which are fit for them to ask: Now let any man undertake to
prove, that men's affections are as easily moved by Words they do not
understand, as by those they do, and I will give up this Cause.

XXV. Of the Second Commandment.
HE is kept in Ignorance as to an Essential part of his Duty toward God; never
being permitted to know the Commandments, but by halves. For in the Books
delivered to him for his Instruction, (such are Catechisms and Manuals) the
Second Commandment is wholly left out; And he by this means Superstitious
Worship, and is taught to fall into all sorts of down right Idolatry. And then
the Commandments he does learn, are in such disorder by a confusion of the two
first into one, and a cutting the last into Two, by putting only three in the
first Table, and seven in the second: That no reason can be able to justify
this mangling and chopping, in opposition to all Authority and Antiquity,

HE is instructed in his whole Duty toward God, and most especially in the Ten
Commandments. He is taught to understand them all and every one: that there is
an Obligation of observing them, under pain of eternal Damnation; and that
whosoever breaks any one of them, loses the Favor of God, and as certainly
hazards the loss of his Soul, as if he broke them all. And tho in the short
Catechisms and Manuals, in which the whole Christian Doctrine is delivered in
the most compendious and easy method, in condescendence to weak Memories, and
low Capacities; the Second Commandment (as it is reckoned by some) be wholly
omitted; yet it is to be seen at length in other Catechisms, and Doctrinal
Books, to be met with every where in great plenty. And if any one should chance
not to see any of these, yet would he be out of all danger of falling into any
Superstitious Worship or Idolatry: for that having read his First Commandment,
Thou shall have no other Gods before me; he is taught, that by this he is
commanded to Serve, Love, Adore, and Worship one only True, Living, and Eternal
God, and no more: That it is forbidden him to Worship any Creature for a God, or
to give it the Honor due to God; and that whosoever Worships any Idols,
Images, Pictures, or any graven thing (whatsoever the Object be, whether in
Heaven above, in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth) for God,
breaks the Commandment, by committing Idolatry, and stands guilty of an
inexcusable and most damn^ble sin. Now having been taught, that this is the
intent of the first Precept of the Decalogue, he thinks there can be but little
danger of his becoming Superstitious in his Worship, or an Idolator for want of
the Second; there being nothing in this, but what he is fully and expressly
inctructed in, by having learned the First: it being rather an Explication of
this, than any New and distinct Precept: And for this reason he finds them in
his Books, put together as One, or rather as the first Commandment, with its
explication; by which means it comes about, that there are only Three in the
first Table, teaching him his Duty toward God; and seven in the latter,
concerning his Duty to his Neighbor; which is the Division assigned by St.
Augustine. And tho St. Hierom observes not this method, but divides them into
Four and Six, yet there being no direction in Scripture concerning the Number
of the Commandments to be assigned to each Table; nor to let us know which is
the first, which the second, which the third Comm^ndment, or which the last: He
is taught, that it is but an unnecessary trouble, to concern himself about the
Number of them, or Division, when as his whole Business ought to be, the
Observance of them in his Life and Conversation.

XXV. Of the Second Commandment.
THE Dispute about this is not,

Whether the Second Commandment may be found in any of their Books, but by what
Authority it comes to be l^ft out in any; as he confesses it is in their short
Catechisms and Manuals* But not only in these; for I have now before me the
Reformed Office of the Blessed Virgin, Printed at Salamanca, A. D. 1588.
published by Order of Pius V. where it is so left out: And so in the English
Office at Antwerp, A. D. 1658. I wish he had told us in what public Office of
their Church it is to be found: But himself pleads for the leaving it out, when
he says. The People are in no danger of Superstition or Idolatry by it; since
the First Commandment secures them from it; and there is nothing in this, but
what is vertually contained in the First, and is rather an Explanation, than a
new and distinct Precept. But is this so plain and clear, that a Man's
Conscience can never make any just and reasonable Doubt concerning it? There is
a terrible sanction after it; and men had need go upon very good Grounds in a
matter of such moment. Has God himself any where declared this to be only an
Explication of the First Commandment? Have the Prophets, or Christ and his
Apostles ever done it? How then can any man's Conscience be safe in this matter?
For it is not a trifling Controversy, whether it be a distinct Commandment, or
an Explication of the First, but the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of the Worship
of Images depends very much upon it: For if it be only an Explication of the
First, then unless one takes Images to be Gods, their Worship is lawful, and so
the Heathens were excused in it, who were not such Idiots: But if it be a new
and distinct Precept, then the Worshipping any Image or Similitude, becomes a
grievous sin, and exposes men to the Wrath of God in that severe manner
mentioned in the end of it: And it is a great confirmation that this is the
true meaning of it, because all the Primitive Writers of the Christian Church,
not only thought it a sin against this Commandment, but insisted upon the force
of it against those Heathens who denied that they took their Images for Gods:
And therefore this is a very insufficient Account of leaving out the Second
Commandment.

XXVI. Of Mental Reservations.
HE is taught to keep no Faith with any that are reputed Heretics by his
Church; and that whatsoever Promises he has made, tho never so positive and
firm, with this sort of People, he may lawfully break, and cheat and cozen them
without any scruple. And tho he must not do this by downright Lying, and
telling Untruths, for that would be a sin; yet he may make use of any indirect
ways, such are Dissimulation, Equivocations, and Mental Reservations, and by
these means draw them into his snares; And this without fear of offending God,
who is well pleased with these kind of pious Crafts, allows of these Holy
Cheats,

HE is taught, to keep Faith with all sorts of People, of whatsoever Judgment
or Persuasion they be, whether in Communion with his Church, or no; he is
taught to stand to his Word, and observe his Promise given, or made to any
whatsoever: and that he cannot cheat or cozen, whether by dissembling,
equivocations, or mental reservations, without defi^nce of his own Conscience,
and the violation of God's Law. This is the Instruction he receives from the
pulpit, the Confessionary, and his Books of Direction. The holy Francis Sales,
in his Introduction to a Devout Life, (p. 3. c. 30.) tells him plainly, Let
your Talk be courteous, frank, sincere, plain and faithful, without
double-dealing, subtilty or dissembling: This he is taught to observe and
practice, and that without this it is not possible to please God. In the
Catechism ad Parochos, compiled by order of the Council of Trent, and
recommended to all Parish Priests for the Instruction of the Faithful, he is
taught, that by the Eighth Commandment he is forbidden all Dissimulation,
whether in Word or Deed; that cum scelere conjuncta sunt, to speak or do
otherwise than for the intimation of what is in the mind, is abominable and
wicked. That no man shall bear false witness against his Neighbor, whether he
be Friend or Enemy. And Pope Innocent XI, in a Decree issued forth the Second
of March, Anno 1679. has strictly commanded all the Faithful in virtue of his
holy Obedience, and under pain of incurring the Divine Vengeance, that they
never swear equivocally, or with any mental reservation, upon no account or
pretended convenience whatsoever; And that if any presume either publicly or
privately to teach or maintain the Doctrine of Swearing with equivocations or
mental reservation, that they de facto incur Excommunication latae Sententiae,
and cannot be absolved by any but the Pope himself, excepting at the hour of
death, He is taught therefore to speak plainly and sincerely, without
Dissimulations, Equivocations, mental Reservations, or any such like Artifices*
which cannot be but very injurious to all Society, and displeasing to the First
Truth. And now if any Authors in Communion with his Church, be pr^duced as
Patrons of inward Reserves, and grand Abettors of th^se mental Iuggles* let
them hold up their hands, and answer for themselves: Their Church has declared
for no such Doctrine, and is no more to be charged with their extravagant
Opinions, than with the unexemplar lives of other her Members, whose
Irregularities are not at all derived from their Religion, but from the neglect
of their own corrupt Inclinations, and giving way to the temptations of their
Enemy.

XXVI. Of Mental Reservations.
UNder this Head he denies Two Things.

1. That they are ever taught to break Faith with Heretics.

2. That their Church does allow any Equivocations, or Mental Reservations.

As to the former, I am sincerely glad to find a Principle so destructive to
all humane Society, so utterly disowned, when he says, He is taught to keep
Faith with all sorts of People, of whatsoever Judgment or Persuasion they be;
and to stand to his Word, and observe his Promise given, or made to any
whatsoever. And whatever Opinions and Practices there may have been of that
kind formerly, we hope there will never be occasion given to revive that
dispute.

2. As to the Second, We embrace his Declaration against it, and hope there is
no Equivocation, or Mental Reservation in it. But there are some things which
must here be taken notice of.

1. He cannot deny that there are Authors in Communion with his Church, which
may be charged with teaching another Doctrine; and those not a few, nor
inconsiderable; who not only allow the Practice of Mental Reservations and
Equivocations, but say with great confidence, it has been received in the
Roman Church for no less than Four hundred Years; and that in some Cases they
are all still agreed in it. See Parsons Treatise of Mitigation, c. 7. Sect.
2.3. c. 10 Sect. 1.

2. We do not deny, that Innocent XI. has condemned Equivocations and Mental
Reservations in Swearing, as at least scandalous and pernicious in Practice;
and therefore we cannot charge the Pope with abetting this Doctrine. But we
cannot but reflect on what our Author said about the Deposing Doctrine, That
although Popes had believed it, and acted by it, yet the greater number opposed
it. And what shall we say in this Case; if the Generality of their Casuists in
some Cases approve it, and think it no Lie or Perjury, as in that of
Confession; but if it be really so in any one Case, then it may be some other
fault; but it is not a Lie or Perjury in any other, when a Man does not think
himself bound to speak all he knows.

3. That as we highly commend the Pope's condemning such Doctrines and
Pract^ses now; so we have Reason to think the contrary did not once want the
encouragement and approbation of the Roman See: as may be found in the
resolution of some Cases by Pius V. relating to some Missionaries, who were to
be sent hither; and then it was declared, That if they were summoned before our
Judges, they might Sophistice Iurare and Sophistice Respondere; Apud G. Abl^de
de Mendacio, etc. in Praef. p. 6. etc.
and that they were not bound to answer according to the Intention of the
Judges, but according to some true sense of their own, i. e. which was made
true by the help of a Mental Reservation. But it is very well, that now the
very same things are condemned at Rome, as Scandalous and Pernicious in
Practice.

XXVII. Of a Deathbed Repentance.
HE is bred up in a total neglect of the service of God, of all Virtue and
Devotion, while he is well, and in good health, upon presumption of a Deathbed
Repentance, and a confidence, that all his sins will be certainly forgiven, if
he can but once say, Lord have mercy upon me, at the last hour And it is a
sufficient Encouragement to him, to rely wholly upon this, to see that there is
no such profligate Villain, none that has lived, tho to the height of
Wickedness and debauchery of his Communion; but at his Death he shall be
assisted by a Priest, and shall receive an Absolution from all his Sins, with
an absolute Promise of being soon admitted to Bass, and reigning with Christ,
if he can but once say, he is sorry; or if his Voice fail him, signify as much
by a Nod of his Head, or the Motion of a Finger.

HE is bred up in the Service and Love of God, taught to work his Salvation in
fear and trembling to provide in health time against the last hour, and by no
means to rely upon a Deathbed Repentance; for that Men, (generally speaking,)
as they live, so they dye; and it is to be feared greatly, that those who
neglect God Alm^ghty, and forsake him a^l their lifetime, w^ll never find him
at their death: So that (with St. Augustine) he doubts the Salvation of as many
as de^er the^r Conversion till that Hour, and has no encouragement at all to do
it. However, if any are found that have been so neglectful of their Duty, as to
put ^ff this great business of Eternity to the last moment; he is taught, that,
in Charity, they ought to have all assistance possible, to put them in mind of
their condition, to excite them to a he^^y detestation of all their Off^nces:
To let them know, that tho they deserve Hellfire in Punishment of their
Wick^dness, yet that they ou^ht by no means despair* for that God is merciful;
and, who knows, but if they heartily call upon him, and endeavor for a sincere
Repentance, with an humble confidence on the Merits and Passion of Jesus
Christ, he may hear their Prayers, show them mercy, and give them time to
repent. These are all the Promises can be given in this point; and this is what
he sees daily practiced; and if some, by these means, are preserved from
falling into despair, it is well; but as for any receiving from hence,
encouragement of coming into the like circumstances, he thinks there is but
little danger, especially since there is nothing so often repeated in Books, no
more common Subjects for Sermons, than the disp^aying the manifold perils of
delaying ones Conversion, and putting off Repentance till the last hour.

XXVII. Of a Death-bed-Repentance.
WE have no difference with them about this matter, as far as they hold to
these points: 1. That men are strictly obliged to work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling in time of health: 2. That it is very dangerous to defer
their Repentance to the last. 3. That if any are surprised, they ought in
Charity to have all possible assistance, to put them into the best way for
their Salvation.

But yet there may be some particular Doctrines owned in the Church of Rome,
which may give men too much encouragement to put off true Repentance; as 1. The
easiness of being put into a state of Grace by the Sacrament of Penance; for
which no more is required than removing the Impediment; as appears by the
Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Can. 6. and afterward it defines, That bare
Attrition does sufficiently dispose a Man to receive Grace in that Sacrament,
Sess. 14. c. 4. So that although a man has led a very bad Life, if he has but
this Attrition for his Sins when he does confess them, he is put into a state
of Grace by this Sacrament. And what can any Man expect more, and what can he
do less! I do not mean a bare natural Attrition, the sufficiency whereof is
condemned by Innocent XI. in the same Propositions, (Fifty seventh) but that
which the Council of Trent calls Imperfect Contrition, i. e. a good Motion in a
man's Mind to forsake his Sins for fear of Punishment: If really no m^re be
required for a state of Grace but this, it is no wonder i^ Men put off the
doing of that which may be done at any time so easily by the help of a Priest.

2. The Treasure of the Church is another thing which is very apt to hinder
men's speedy Repentance; for by that they believe there is a stock ready of so
many Merits and Satisfactions of others, if duly applied to them by
Indulgences, that they need not be at such pains to work out their own
Salvation with fear and trembling. When a Man by the Sacrament of Penance is
put into a state of Grace, the Eternal Punishment is discharged, and nothing
remains but some Temporal Pains: and to ease him of these he has many helps,
but especially the Treasure of the Church, which the Pope has the dispensing
of, as he is bound to believe: and by Indulgences he may easily get off some
Thousands of years of Purgatory-Pains; and if these should fail him, there is
another help yet left, which is leaving a stock of Prayers for his Soul when he
dies; which, even our Author assures him, are very available toward his
speedier release out of Purgatory.

XXVIII. Of Fasting,
HE is contented with the appearance of Devotion, and looking not beyond the
name of Mortification, he sits down well satisfied with the shadow, without
ever taking care for the substance. And this, being a great Pretender to
Fasting and the Denial of himself, he thinks he has sufficiently complied with
his Duty in this point, and made good his claim, if he has but abstained from
Flesh; and tho at the same time, he regales himself at Noon with all variety of
the choicest Fish and stuffs himself at Night with the best Conserves and
delicatest Junkets, and drinks all day the pleasantest Wines, and other
Liquors; yet he persuades himself, that he is a truly Mortified Man, that he
has most Christianlike commemorated the bitter Death and Passion of his
Redeemer, and done a work of great force, in order to the suppressing his
corrupt Inclinations, and satisfying for the Offenses of his Life past. Nay, he
has such a preposterous conceit of things, that he believes it a greater sin to
eat the least bit of Flesh on a Fasting-d^y than to be downright Drunk, or
commit any other Excess; as having less scruple of breaking the Commandments of
God, than of violating any Ordinance of the Pope, or any Law of his Church.

HIS Church te^ches him, that the Appearance of Devotion, the Name of
Mortification, and pretense to it, are only vain and fruitless things, if they
are not accompanied with the substance; and that it is but a very lame
compliance with the Ecclesiastical Precept of Fasting, to abstain from Flesh,
unless all other Excesses are at the same time carefully avoided. It Is true,
his Church has not forbidden on these days the drinking of Wine, but permits a
moderate use of it, as at other times; but is so far from giving liberty to any
of her Flock of committing Excesses, that she declares Drunkenness and all
Gluttony whatsoever, to be more heinous and scandalous sins on such days than
on any other, they being expressly contrary, not only to the Law of God, but
also to the intention of the Church, which appoints these times for the
retrenching Debaucheries and conquering our vicious Appetites. And now if any
of his Profession make less scruple of being Drunk on a Fasting-day than of
eating the least bit of Flesh, he knows nothing more can be said of them, than
of many others* who will not break the Sabbath Day by doing any servile Labor
on it, for all the World, looking on this as a most damning sin; and yet at the
same time have little scruple of Swearing, Cursing, Lying or Revelling the
greatest part of the day. Which is not because they have more liberty for these
than the former, they being all most wicked Offenses; but because they that do
thus, are but Christians by halves, who with a kind of Pharisaical and Partial
Obedience, seem to bear some of the Commandments most zealously in their
Hearts, while others they trample under their feet; scrupling many times at a
Moat, and on other occasions passing by a Beam undiscerned; for which, their
Church is not to be accountable, but They themselves; as being guilty of a
wilful blindness, and a most unchristian Negligence. This is the real case of
such of his Communion, who, on days of Humiliation, while they abstain from
Flesh, yet give scandal by their Intemperateness. They have a Command of God,
by which they are obliged on all days to live soberly, and to avoid all
Gluttony and Drunkenness; and on Fasting-days: besides this Command of God,
they have a Church-precept, by which they are bound (if able) to eat but one
Meal in a day, and that not of Flesh. And now if some are so inconsiderate and
careless, as to be scrupulously observant of one of these Commands, and wholly
negligent of the other; it is not because their Religion teaches them to do so,
(which detests and condemns all such scandalous Partiality, and complying with
their Duty by halves) but because they shut their ears to all good Instruction.
and choose rather to follow their own corrupt Appetites, than the wholesome
Doctrine of their Church.

XXVIII. Of Fasting.
THE Question here is, Whether a Man does not observe their Churches Command
about Fasting, who forbears all forbidden things, but takes liberty in those
which are not forbidden?

It is not, Whether they may not break the Commands of God, against Gluttony
and Drunkenness; but whether they break the Law of the Church about Fasting?
And notwithstanding what our Author has said, I see no Reason for the
Affirmative. I do not deny, 1. That it is a very indifferent sort of Fasting,
to abstain from Flesh, unless all other sorts of Excesses at the same time be
carefully avoided. 2. That Excesses on such days are more scandalous, because
there is a pretense of Fasting. 3. That God's Command does at all times forbid
Intemperance. Which are the chief things he insists upon. But yet this does not
reach the point, which is about their Churches Command. For their Casuists
distinguish Fasting into 1. Natural: which is total Abstinence: and this is
required only in order to receiving the Eucharist. 2. Moral: which is the same
with Temperance, or Fasting for Health. 3. Ecclesiastical: which is defined by
them to be, An Abstinence from Food forbidden by the Church. And if this
Definition be true, it cannot be broken but by eating what the Church has
prohibited.

And therefore their Casuists, as far as I can find, are agreed in these things;

1. That a Man may eat a full Meal of what is not forbidden, and not break the
Churches Precept of Fasting, provided Vespers be first said. And the later
Casuists blame Covarruvias for making any scruple about it. If a Man's Excess
comes to be a mortal Sin, Reginald. Praxis. l. 4 c. 14. n. 163.

Less. de Justit. l. 4. c. 2. Dub. 2. n. 10.

Instruct. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 2. n. 4.

P. Zacch. Qu. Medico legales l. 5. tit. 1.

Qu. 1 p 29, 30, 31

Pasqual. Decif. 120. n. 5.

Dian. Sam. v. Jejun. n. 7.

Zach. Pasqualigi, Praxis Jejunii Eccles. Decis 116, n. 3. Dec. 117.1, 2 3.


yet for all that, says Reginaldus, He shall not be judged as a breaker of his
Fast. Nay, Lessius goes further, and says, He does not lose the Merit of
Fasting. Quamvis aliquis multum excedat non solvit Iejunium, says Card. Tolet.
And Paulus Zacchias says, This is the common Opinion; and he thinks the
Intention of the Church is sufficiently answered. And so does Pasqualigus in
his Praxis of Fasting.

2. A Man may drink Wine, or other drink, as often as he pleases, without
breaking his Fast. He may toties quoties bibere, says Diana. Zach.
Pasqualigus, who has written most fully on this Subject, shows, That it is the
general Opinion, that no quantity of Wine or other drink, tho taken without any
necessity, is a violation of the Precept of Fasting; no, not although the Wine
be taken for nourishment, because the Church does not forbid it; but this last,
he says, is not the general, but the more probable Opinion

3. A Man may eat something when he drinks, to prevent its doing him hurt;
besides his good Meal, he may take what quantity he pleases of Sweetmeats or
Fruit; he may have a good Reflection at Night, and yet not break this strict
Precept of Fasting; For the eating as often as one drinks, it is the common
Opinion, says the same Casuist (who was no Jesuit) That it is not forbidden,
Decis. 119. n. 2. Decis. 86. n 34. Less. ubi supr. n. 11.

Tolet ubi sup. Regin. ubi sup. n. 185.


because it is taken by way of a Medicine; and he quotes a great number of
their Casuists for it. A Collation at evening is allowed, says he. And Lessius
says, There is no certain Rule for the Quantity of it. And Card. Tolet says,
very large ones are allowed at Rome by the Pope's Connivence; even in the Court
of Rome, says Reginaldus. And now I leave the Reader to judge of the severity
of Fasting required in the Church of Rome.

XXIX. Of Divisions and Schisms in the Church.
HE is of a Religion in which there are as many Schisms as Families: And they
are so divided in their Opinions, that commonly, as many as meet in company, so
many several Tenets are maintained. Hence arise their infinite and endless
Disputes; and disagreement of their Divines, who pretend to give a true and
solid explication of the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, and yet differ in as
many Points as they write of. Besides, what variety of Judgments are there in
their Religious Houses and Cloisters, none agreeing with another in their
Foundation, Institution, and Profession? This being of the Religion of St.
Dominick, That of St. Francis, a third of St. Bernard, Others of St. Benedict;
and so without number; so that as many Orders, as many Religions. And yet they
pretend to Christian Unity, amidst this diversity growing upon them every day.

HE is of a Religion in which there are no Schisms or Separations; all the
Members of it (however spread through the World) agreeing like one man, in
every Article of their Faith, by an equal submission to the Determinations of
their Church. And no one of them, though most Learned and Wise, ever following
any other Rule in their Faith besides this, of assenting to all that the Church
of God, planted by Christ, assisted and protected by the Holy Ghost, proposed
to the Faithful to be believed, as the Doctrine of the Apostles, and received
as such in all Ages. Which is, all unanimously to believe as the Church of God
believes. No one of his Communion ever doubting of this, or scrupling to
receive any thing after his Churches Declaration. And now, tho they all thus
conspire in every point of Faith; yet there is great diversity among School men
in their Divinity-points and Opinions of such matters as are no Articles of
Faith, and have no relation to it, but as some circumstance or manner; which
being never defined by their Church, may be maintained severally, either this
or that way, without any breach of Faith, or injury to their Religion: And of
these things only they dispute, and have their Debates in manner of a
School-Exercises, without any disagreement at all in their Belief, but with a
perfect Unity. The like Unity is there amongst their Religious Orders, all
which say the same Creed, own the same Authority in the Church of Christ; and
in every thing profess the same Faith; and have no other differences, than as
it were of so many several steps or degrees in the practice of a Devout and
Holy Life; some being of a more severe and strict Discipline, others of a more
gentle and moderate: some spending more time in Praying, others more in
Watching, others more in Fasting; some being intended for the Catechizing and
breeding up of Youth, others for taking care of Hospitals, and looking after
the Sick; others for going amongst Infidels, and Preaching to them the Gospel
of Christ, and for suchlike Pious and Christian Designs, to the greater Glory
and Honor of God: which differences make no other difference in the several
Professors, than there was between Mary and Martha, who expressed their Love
and Service to their Lord in a very different Employ; but both commendably, and
without any danger of prejudicing the Unity of their Faith.

XXIX. Of Divisions and Schisms in the Church.
TWO things he says upon this Head:

1. That they are all agreed in matters of Faith.

2. That they only differ in some School Points; from whence he infers, That
they have no Schisms or Separations among them.

But that this is no just consequence, will appear by the Schisms and
Separations among us, made by such who profess to agree in all matters of
Faith. Yet let us see how he proves that they agree in all matters of Faith;
because they agree to submit equally to the Determinations of the Church.

Now this very way evidently proves that they do not all agree, because they do
not equally submit to the Churches Determinations. For,

1. Some say they are bound to submit to the Churches Determinations, as it
represents the Universal Church; Others say no; but as the Churches Power is
virtually lodged in the Guides of it. Now this is a very material Difference:
for if it be on the former Account, then not the Popes and Councils
Declarations are to be regarded, but as they express the sense of the Universal
Church; and so the Majority of Votes, the Numbers in the Representative and
Diffusive Church is chiefly to be regarded. And on this Ground some reject the
Deposing Power, tho plainly decreed by Popes and Councils, but they unhinge
their Churches Authority by it. Now how is it possible for them to agree about
matters of Faith, who differ fundamentally about the way how any things come to
be matters of Faith? If they be decreed by Popes and Councils say some; and so
the Deposing Power is become an Article of Faith. No such matter, say others,
for a greater Number in the diffusive Church oppose it, as in the Gallican
Church, and elsewhere. Very well! But how then can these Parties be said to
agree in matters of Faith, and an equal Submission to the Determinations of the
Church?

2. Some again say, That it is not the consent of the present Church can make
any Article of Faith, but there must be an Universal Tradition from the
Apostles times. And so they tell us the Deposing Power can never be an Article
of Faith, because it wants the Consent of all the Ages before Gregory VII. So
that upon this Ground there can be no Article of Faith which cannot be proved
to be thus delivered down to us. Others again say, this is in effect to give up
their Cause, knowing the impossibility of proving particular Points in this
manner: and therefore they say, the present Church is wholly to be trusted for
the sense of the foregoing.

Now these differences are still on foot in their Church; and from these do
arise daily disputes about matters of Faith, and the Seat of Infallibility,
whether in the Guides, or the Body of the Church: if the former, whether in the
Church Representative, or Virtual? Whether the Personal Infallibility of the
Pope be a matter of Faith or not? Our Author says, Not; others say, Yes: and
yet he says, they are agreed in matters of Faith. So that by his own
Confession they differ about other things than mere School-Points.

But suppose they were agreed in Articles of Faith, can there be no Schisms or
Divisions in their Church? What thinks he of all the Schisms between Popes and
Popes? Of all the Schisms between the Popes and the Emperors Parties? Which
were as notorious, and scandalous, and mischievous, as ever were in the World.
What thinks he of the Schisms between the Bishops and the Regular Orders, which
were as cross and peevish toward the Bishops and Secular Clergy, as our
Dissenters themselves? And among the Regular Orders, what Heats and Contentions
have been, Not about the practice of a devout Life, I assure him, but about
matters of Doctrine; and which both Parties severally plead to be matters of
Faith? As in the noted Controversies of this last Age, about the Immaculate
Conception of the Blessed Virgin, the power of Grace, and the Pope's Personal
Infallibility: and they cannot say they are as yet agreed about these things.

XXX. Of Friars and Nuns.
HE is taught to have a high esteem for all those of his Communion, who
cloistering themselves up, become Friars and Nuns; a sort of People who call
themselves Religious, and are nothing but a Religious Cheat: under the cloak of
Piety, and pretense to Devotion, deceiving the World, and living to the height
of Wickedness, under the notion of Saints. They vow Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience, and observe nothing less; but live in all respects so irregular and
scandalous, that were there to be taken a compendious draught of all the
Luxury, Pride, Covetousness, Irreligion, and other Vices, through the whole
World, it might be modeled according to what is acted between any of these
four Walls, in which these Recluses live, without danger of omiting any thing
that is wicked and unchristian.

HE is taught to have a high esteem for those of his Communion who undertake
that sort of Life, which according to Christ's own direction, and his Apostles,
is pointed out as the best. A sort of People, who endeavor to perform all that
God has commanded, and also what he has counseled as the better, and in order
to more perfection. They hear Christ declaring the danger of Riches; they
therefore embrace a voluntary Poverty, and lay aside all Titles to Wealth and
Possessions. Saint Paul Preaches, That he that gives not his Virgin in
Marriage does better than he that does; and that she that is unmarried cares
for the things of the Lord, how she may be holy both in body and Spirit: They
therefore choose a single state, consecrating their Virginity to God; that so
they may be wholly intent on his Service, and be careful how to please him;
while she that is married cares for the things of the World, how she may please
her Husband, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33, 34, 38. The Gospel proclaims, That those that
will follow Christ, must deny themselves; they therefore renounce their own
Wills, and without respect to their own proper Inclinations, pass their Life in
a perpetual Obedience. And because the World is corrupt, so that to a pious
Soul every business is a Distraction, every diversion a Temptation, and more
frequently the provocations to Evil, than examples to Good; they therefore
retire from it as much as possible, and confining themselves to a little Corner
or Cell, apply themselves wholly to Devotion, making Prayer their business, the
Service of God their whole Employ, and the Salvation of their Souls their only
design. And now, if in these Retirements, where every thing is ordered as it
may be most advantageous for the promoting Virtue and Devotion, nothing
permitted that is likely to prove a disturbance to Godliness, or allurements to
Evil, yet some live scandalously, and give ill example to the World: What can
be said, but, That no State can secure any Man; and that no such Provision can
be made in order to a Holy Life, but it may be abused? But yet he does not
think that such Abuses, and the Viciousness of some, can be Argument enough to
any just and reasonable man, to condemn the whole, and the Institution it self.
Is not Marriage abused an infinite number of ways, and many forced to embrace
this State, or a^ least to accept of such particular Persons contrary to their
own choice and liking? Is there any state in this World, any Condition, Trade,
Calling, Profession, Degree, or Dignity whatsoever, which is not abused by
some? Are Churches exempt from abuses? Are not Bibles and the Word of God
abused? Is not Christianity it self abused, and even the Mercy of God abused?
If therefore there is nothing so Sacred and Divine in the whole World, which
wicked and malicious Men do not pervert to their ill designs, to the high
dishonor of God, and their own Damnation; how can any one, upon the mere
consideration of some abuses, pass Sentence of Condemnation against a thing
which otherwise is Good and Holy? It Is an undeniable Truth, that to embrace a
Life exempt, as much as can be, from the turmoils of the World; and in a quiet
Retirement to dedicate ones self to the Service of God, and spend ones days in
Prayer and Contemplation, is a most commendable Undertaking, and very becoming
a Christian. And yet, if some, who enter such a course of Life as this, fall
short of what they pretend, and instead of becoming eminent in Virtue and
Godliness, by their unexemplar lives prove a Scandal to their Profession; Is
there Rule and Institution to be condemned; or rather, they who swerved from
it? No, let not the Dignity of an Apostle suffer for the Fall of Judas; nor the
Commandments lie under an Aspersion upon the account of those that break them.

XXX. Of Friars and Nuns.
OUR Dispute is not, about the lawfulness of retiring from the World by such
Persons who are rendered unfit for doing Service in it; and the more they spend
their time in Devotion and Contemplation, so much the better.

But it lies in these Things.

1. Whether the Perfection of a Christian State of Life lies in being
cloystered up from the World, or laboring to do good in it? For this was the
great snare made use of, to draw men into it, because they represented this as
the most perfect state; whereas according to the Doctrine and Example of Christ
and his Apostles, the active Life of doing good, is far beyond it.

2. Whether, although such a Retirement be allowed, it be a thing pleasing to
God, to tie such Persons up by indispensable Vows, whatever their Circumstances
may be, not to alter that State of Life; who either in Youth, or through Force,
Passion, or Discontent, have entered into it? And this may be so much rather
questioned, because those who assert the Pope may dispense, go upon this
ground, Because Circumstances may alter the Obligation of a Vow; and when a
greater good is to be attained it cease to oblige; which to my Apprehension
does not prove the Pope's Power to dispense, but the dispensable Nature of the
Vows themselves.

3. Whether all things of this nature being liable in continuance of time to
great Degeneracy and Corruptions; and the numbers of such Places being
unserviceable either to Church or State, it be not in the Power of the King and
States of the Kingdom, to dissolve and reduce them to ways more suitable to the
Conveniences of both?

As to what he discourses about Councils of Perfection, the Distractions of the
World, the Corruptions of the best Things, etc. they reach not the main Points,
but are only general Topics, which we are not concerned to debate.

XXXI. Of Wicked Principles and Practices.
HE is Member of a Church which is called Holy; but in her Doctrine and
Practices so Foul and Abominable, that whosoever admires her for Sanctity, may
upon the same grounds do homage to Vice it self. Has ever any Society since
Christ's time, appeared in the World so black and deformed with hellish Crimes
as she? Has not she outdone even the most Barbarous Nations and Infidels, with
her Impieties, and drawn a scandal upon the name of Christian, by her
unparalled Vices? Take but a view of the horrid Practices she has been
engaged in of late years; consider the French and Irish Massacres, the Murders
of Henry III. and IV. Kings of France, the Ho^y League, the Gunpowder Treason,
the Cruelty of Queen Mary, the Firing of London, the late Plot in the Year
1678. to subvert the Government, and destroy His Majesty; the Death of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; and an infinite number of other suchlike Devilish
Contrivances; And then tell me whether that Church, which has been the Author
and Promoter of such barbarous designs, ought to be esteemed Holy, and
respected for Piety and Religion, or rather be condemned for the Mysteries of
Iniquity, the Whore of Babylon, which has polluted the Earth with her
Wickedness, and taught nothing but the Doctrine of Devils? And let never so
many Pretenses be made, yet it is evident that all these Execrable Practices
have been done according to the known Principles of this Holy Church, and that
her greatest Patrons, the most Learned of her Divines, her most Eminent
Bishops, her Prelates, Cardinals, and even the Popes themselves, have been the
chief Managers of these Hellish Contrivances. And what more convincing Argument
that they are all well approved and conform to the Religion taught by their
Church.

HE is Member of a Church, which, according to the ninth Article of the
Apostles Creed, he believes to be Holy; and this not only in Name, but also in
Doctrine; and for witness of her Sanctity, he appeals to her Councils,
Catechisms, Pulpits, and Spiritual Books of Direction; in which the main design
is, to imprint in the Hearts of the Faithful, this comprehensive Maxim of
Christianity; That they ought to love God above all things, with their whole
Heart and Soul, and their Neighbor as themselves. And that none flatter
themselves with a confidence to be saved by Faith alone, without living
Soberly, Justly, and Piously; as it is in the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 11.
So that he doubts not at all, but that as many as live according to the
Direction of his Church, and in observance of her Doctrine, live Holily in the
Service of, and Fear of God, and with an humble confidence in the Merits and
Passion of their Redeemer, may hope to be received after this Life into Eternal
Bliss. But that all in Communion with his Church do not live thus Holily, and
in the fear of God, he knows it is too too evident; there being many in all
places wholly forgetful of their Duty, giving t^emselves up to all sorts of
Vice, and guilty of most horrid Crimes. And though he is not bound to believe
all to be Truth that is charged upon them by Adversaries; there being no
Narrative of any such Devilish Contrivances and Practices laid to them, wherein
Passion and Fury have not made great Additions; wherein things Dubious are not
improved into Certainties, Suspicions into Realities, Fears and Iealousies into
Substantial Plots, and downright Lies and Recorded Perjuries into Pulpit, nay
Gospel Truths. Yet really thinks, that there has been Men of his Profession of
every rank and degree, Learned and Unlearned, High and Low, Secular and
Ecclesiastic, that have been scandalous in their Lives, wicked in their
Designs, without the fear of God in their Hearts, or care of their own
Salvation. But what then? Is the whole Church to be condemned for the vicious
Lives of some of her Professors, and her Doctrine to stand guilty of as many
Villainies as those commit who neglect to follow it? If so, let the Men of that
Society, Judgment, or Persuasion, who are not in the like circumstance, fling
the first stone. Certainly if this way of passing Sentence be once allowed as
just and reasonable, there never was, nor ever will be, any Religion or Church
of God upon the Earth. It Is but reckoning up the Idolatries, Superstitions,
Cruelties, Rebellions, Murders of Princes, Impieties, and other such like
Enormities, committed by the Jews, as they stand recorded in Scripture; and
it is immediately proved that the Jews were never the chosen People of God, nor
their Law the Dictates of Heaven. It Is but making a Lift of the Misdemeanors,
Irregularities, Abuses, Excesses, Treacheries, Simony, Separation, Discords,
Erroneous Doctrines, to be found, even in the time of the Apost^es and their
Followers, and they are all effectually proved to be the Disciples of
Antichrist, and that the World's Redeemer had no sooner ascended into Heaven,
but his Apostles left him, and began to set up for Schism and Vice. By this
way, Constantine may be evidently condemned for an Heathen, because he murdered
his Wife and his Son. And the Religion of Theodosius be marked out for Atheism,
because, by his Order, seven Thousand Thessalonians were treacherously
Massacred in three hours space, without distinction of Sex or Age, or the
Innocent from the Guilty. A confident Undertaker would find no difficulty in
proving all this; especially if he had but the Gift of exaggerating some
things, misrepresenting others of finding Authorities and Texts for every idle
Story, o^ charging the ex^ravagant Opinions of every single Author upon the
Religion they profess, of raking together all the Wickedness, Cruelties,
Treacheries, Plots, Conspiracies, at any time committed, by any ambitious
Desperado's, or wicked Villains: And then positively asserting, that what these
did was according to the Doctrine of that Church of which they were Members;
and that the true measures of the Sanctity and Goodness of the Church in whose
Communion these Men were, may be justly taken from the Behavior of such
Offenders. But certainly no Man of Reason and Conscience can allow of such
Proceedings. No sober Man would ever go to Tyburn, and Whetstones-Park, to know
what is the Religion professed in England according to Law; Nor would look into
all the Sinks, Jakes, Dung-hills, Common-shores about Town, from such a
Prosp^ct to give a true Description of the City. Why therefore should the
Character of the Church of Rome and her Doctrine be taken only from the loose
Behavior and wicked Crimes of such, who tho in Communion with her, yet live
not according to her Direction? She teaches Holiness of Life, Mercy to the
Poor, Loyalty and Obedience to Princes, and the necessity of keeping the
Commandments (witness the many Books of Devotion and Direction, made English
for Public benefit, written originally by Papists,) and great numbers there
are (God be praised) who practice this in their Lives. And now if there be many
also, who stop their Ears to good Instruction, and following the Suggestion of
their own ungoverned appetites, of Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Luxury, etc.
so lay aside all concern of Salvation, and become unchristian both to God and
their Neighbor, that they are a shame to their Profession: Why should the
Church be rep^esented according to the Wickedness of those that neglect her
Doctrine; and not rat^er by the Piety and Exemplar Lives of such as follow it?
Is not this to deal by her, (if we may use such a Comparison) as it is generally
done by the Sign of St. Dunstan, near Temple Bar, (on which, tho the Saint be
drawn almost in the full proportion, and there is no more of the Devil on it,
besides the reaching toward him with a pair of Tongs;) yet it is described only
by the name of the Devil-Tavern, without the least mention of the Saint? And is
not this partiallity unjust, and these piecemeal Descriptions unreasonable?
Let the Character of the Church be given according to what she teaches, and not
according to the Writings of every positive Opiniator, and the Practices of
every wicked Liver, and then there is no fear of its coming out so ugly and
deformed. Neither le^ any one pretend to demonstrate the Faith and Principles
of the Papists, by the Works of every Divine in that Communion; or by the
Actions of every Bishop, Cardinal, or Pope; For they extend not their Faith
beyond the Declarations of General-Councils: And standing fast to these, they
yet own, that many of their Writers are too loose in their Opinions, that all
Bishops and Cardinals are not so edifying as becomes their State; and that
Popes may have their (...) too. A Pope is a Temporal Prince, keeps a Court, has
variety of Officers ^bou^ him. And it he has Flatterers, and Mis informers too,
it is nothing but what all Princes are sensible of, but cannot remedy. And hence
he doubts not, but it is possible he may be engaged in unlawful undertakings,
and invite others to the like. And are not all other Princes subject to this
too? But what then? These Actions of Popes concern not the Faith of those who
are in Communion with them; they may throw a scandal indeed upon the Religion,
but they can never alter its Creed. But what need any other return to the
numerous Clamours made daily against the wickedness of the Papists? It Is a
sufficient vindication of their Chief Pastors and Popes, (to use the words of a
Person of Quality) that among two hundred and fifty, that have now Successively
bore that Charge, there are not above ten or twelve, against whom their most
malicious Adversaries can find occasion of spitting their Venom; and that a
Challenge may be made to the whole World, to show but the fifth part of so many
Successive Governors, since the Creation, of which there have not been far more
that have abused their Power. And as for their Flock and People owning this
Authority, it is true, many wicked things have been done by some of them; and
too many, like Libertines, neglect the care of their Souls: But however the
Generallity of them live like Christans; few come to them, but with their
Religion they change also their Manners for the better; Few desert them, but
such who seem to be fallen out with all Christianity; And whosoever will look
into any of our Neighboring Popish Towns, as Paris, Antwerp, Gaunt, etc. will
find in any one of them, more Praying, more Fasting, more receiving the
Sacraments, more visiting of Prisoners, and the Sick, more Almsgiving, than in
any ten Towns of the Reformation.

XXXI. Of Wicked Principles and Practices.
THE Misrepresenter charges the Church of Rome with many horrid Practices, as
the French and Irish Massacres, the Murders of Two Kings of France, the Holy
League, the Gun-powder-Treason, etc. And charges these as being done according
to the Principles of that Church.

But in Answer to this he says, 1. In General, That the Doctrine of it is
holy, teaching the Love of God and our Neighbor, and that none can be saved by
Faith alone. In which Doctrine we heartily concur with them. 2. That although many
uncertain things pass for certain, and false for true, yet he cannot deny that
all ranks and degrees of men have been corrupted among them, being scandalous
in their Lives, wicked in their Designs, without the Fear of God in their
Hearts, or care of their own Salvation. This is a general Acknowledgment, but
no particular Answer to the things objected. 3. That the whole Church is not to
be charged for the sake of such villainies. Very true, unless some Doctrine
owned in that Church gave encouragement to them: As suppose any should ever
have fallen into Rebellion upon the belief of the Deposing Power; is not that
Doctrine chargeable with the Consequences of it? They are extremely to blame
who charge a Church with what her Members do in direct Opposition to her
Doctrine; but it is quite another Case, when the main Ground they allege for
their Actions is some allowed Principle in it. 4. They are not accountable for
the Actions of every Bishop, Cardinal, or Pope; for they extend not their Faith
beyond the Declaration of General Councils. But suppose General Councils have
declared such Doctrines, and Popes act but according to them; is not their
Church then accountable for their Actions? 5. There is more Praying and
Fasting. and receiving the Sacraments, more visiting the Prisoners, and the
Sick, more Almsgiving in any of our neighboring Popish Towns, as Paris,
Antwerp, Gant, etc. than in any Ten Towns of the Reformation. And is there more
Charity too? It does not appear, if they be as ready to censure others, and
admire themselves, as our Author, who so freely gives his Judgment about a
matter it is impossible for him to know.

We see no reason to admire or imitate the manner of their Praying, and
Fasting, and receiving the Sacraments; for to pray without understanding, to
fast without Abstinence, to receive a maimed Sacrament, are things we do not
envy them for; but although our Devotion be not so pompous, and full of show, yet
We may pray and fast in secret, according to our Saviors Directions, far more
than they do; however our People are mightily to blame if they do not
understand what they pray for, if they do not receive more of the Sacrament
than they; and we verily believe there are as great and remarkable Instances of
true Charity among those of the Church of England, as among any People in the
World.

XXXII. Of Miracles.
HE is so given up to the belief of idle Stories and ridiculous Intentions in
favor of his Saints, which he calls Miracles, that nothing can be related so
every way absurd, foolish, and almost impossible, but it gains credit with him,
and he is so credulously confident of the truth of them, that there is no
difference to him, betwixt these Tales, and what he reads in Scr^pture. It Is a
pretty Romance, to see what is recounted of St. Francis 's Cord, the Scapular,
St. Anthony, St. Bridget, and other such Favorites of Heaven. He that has but
read the Achievements of these, may excuse the perusal of Bevis of
Sou^hampton, the Seven Champions, or Quevedo 's Dreams; For these are nothing
to compare to the former, either for the rare invention, wonderful surprises,
or performance of impossibil^ties.

HE is not obliged to believe any on^ Miracle, besides what is in the
Scripture; and for all others, he may give the credit, which in prudence he
thinks they deserve; considering the Honesty of the Relator, the Authori^y of
the Witnesses, and such other circumstances, which on the like occasions use to
gain his assent. And if upon the account of mere History, and the consent of
Authors, few make any doubt, but that there was such a one as Caesar,
Alexander, Mahomet, Luther, etc. Why should he doubt of the truth of many
Miracles, which have not only the like consent of Authors and History, but also
are attested by great numbers of Eyewitnesses, examined by Authority, and
found upon Reco^d, with all the formal^ties due to such a Process? St.
Augustine relates many Miracles done in his time, so does St. Ierom, and other
Fathers; and if they doubted nothing of them then, Why should he question the
truth of them now? He finds, that in the time of the Old Law, God favored many
of his Servants, working Miracles by their hands; and he thinks now that God's
hand is not shortened; that the Disciples of Christ are no less Favorites of
Heaven, than those of Moses; and that the new Law may be very well allowed to
be as Glorious, and as particularly priviledg'd as the Old: especially since
Christ promised that his Apostles should do greater Miracles than ever He
himself had done. And what if some Miracles (recounted by Authors,) are so
wonderfully strange, to some they seem Ridiculous and Absurd? are they the less
true upon this account? Is not every thing Ridiculous to Unbelievers? The whole
Doctrine of Christ is a Scandal to the Jews, and Folly to the Gentiles. And
what more Absurd to one that wants Faith, than the Miracles recounted in the
Old Testament? Might not such a one turn them all into Ridicule and Buffoonry?
Take but Faith away, and see what becomes of Balaam and his Ass. Sampson and
his Iaw-bone, Elias and his Fiery Chariot, Elijah's M^ntle, Ax-head, and Dead
Bones, Gideon's Pitchers, Lamps and Trumpets in demolishing the Walls of
Jericho, Moses and his Burning Bush, his holding up his hands for the Victory
over his Enemies, his parting of the Red Sea, and Joshua's commanding the Sun
to stand still, etc. Might not these, and all the rest be painted out as
Ridiculous as any supposed to be done since Christ's time, and be put in the
same List with the History of Bevis, or Guy of Warwick? A little incredulity,
accompanied with a presumption of measuring God's Works by Humane W^sdom, will
really make the greatest part of them pass for Follies, and Absurd
Impossibilities. And tho he is so far from giving equal assent to the Miracles
related in Scripture, and the others wrought since, that the former he believes
with a Divine Faith, and the rest with an inferior kind of assent, according
to the Grounds and Authority there is in favor of them, like as he does in
Profane History: Yet the strangeness of these, never makes him in the least
doubt of the Truth of them, since '^is evident to him, that all the Works of
Heaven far surpass all his reasoning, and that while he endeavors but to look
even into the very ordinary things daily wrought by God Almighty, the Motion of
the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Flowing of the Sea, the Growing of an Ear of Corn,
the Light of a Candle, the Artifice of the Bees, etc. he quite loses himself,
and is bound to confess his own Ignorance and Folly, and that God is Wonderful
in all his Works, a God surpassing all our knowledge. Whatsoever therefore is
related upon good grounds, as done by the extraordinary Power of God, he is
ready to assent to it, although he sees neither the how, the why, nor the
wherefore; being ready to attribute all to the Honor and Praise of his Maker,
to whose Omnipotent Hand, most of poor Man's impossibles, are none.

XXXII. Of Miracles.
1. OUr Author says, He is not obliged to believe any one Miracle besides what
is in Scripture.

2. He sees no Reason to doubt the truth of many Miracles, which are attested
by great numbers of Eyewitnesses, examined by Authority, and found upon
Record, with all the Formalities due to such a Process.

Now, how can these two things stand together? Is not a Man obliged to believe
a thing so well proved? And if his other Arguments prove any things, it is,
that he is bound to believe them. For he thinks there is as much Reason to
believe Miracles still, as in the time of the old or new Law. If he can make
this out, I see no reason why he should not be as well obliged to believe them
now, as those recorded in Scripture. But I can see nothing like a proof of
this. And all Persons of Judgment in their own Church, do grant there is a
great difference between the Necessity of Miracles for the first establishing a
Religion, and afterward. This is not only asserted by Tostatus, Erasmus,
Stella, Andradius, and several others formerly; but the very late French Author
I have several times mentioned, says it in expr^ss Terms. Moyens Surs and
Honestes. etc. To. 2. p. 149.
And he confesses the great Impostures of modern Miracles, which, he says,
ought to be severely punished; and that none but Women and weak People think
themselves bound to believe them. And he cannot understand what they are good
for: Not to convert Heretics; because not done among them: Not to prove there
are no corruptions or errors among them, which is a thing incredible; with much
more to that purpose, and so concludes with Monsieur Paschal, That if they have
no better use, we ought not to be amused with them.

But Christ promised, that his Apostles should do greater Miracles than himself
had done. And what then? Must therefore S. Francis, or S. Dominic, or S. Rosa,
do as great as the Apostles had done? What Consequence can be drawn from the
Apostles times to latter Ages? We do not dispute God's Omnipotency, or say his
hand is shortened; but we must not from thence infer, that every thing which is
called a Miracle is truly so; or make use of God's Power, to justify the most
incredible stories. Which is a way will serve as well for a false as a true
Religion; and Mahomet might run to Gods Omnipotency for cleaving the Moon in
two pieces, as well as others for removing a House over the Seas, or any thing
of a like nature.

But, he says, their Miracles are not more ridiculous and absurd than some in
the Old Testament. Which I utterly deny; but I shall not run out into the
examination of this Parallel, by showing how very different the Nature, Design,
and Authority of the Miracles he mentions, is from those which are believed in
the Roman Church. And it had been but fitting, as he set down the Miracles of
the Old Testament, so to have mentioned those of the Roman Church which were to
vye with them; but this he was willing to forbear, for certain good Reasons. If
most of poor Man's impossibles be none to God, as he concludes, yet every thing
is not presently true which is not impossible; and by this way of Arguing,
there can be nothing objected against the most absurd and idle Fictions of the
Golden Legend, which all Men of Understanding among themselves, not only reject
for want of Authority, but of Credibility.

XXXIII. Of Holy Water.
HE highly approves the Superstitius use of many inanimate things, and
attributes wonderful effects to such Creatures, which are but in a very
inferior rank, and able to do no such things. Holy Water is in great esteem
with him, so are Blessed Candles, Holy Oil and Holy Bread, in which he puts so
much con^idence, that by the Power of these, he thinks himself secure from all
Witchcraft, Enchantment, and all the power of the Devil; nay, that by the help
of these se^seless Medators, he may obtain remission of his Venial or lighter
sins. And in the use of these things, he is taught by his Church to so
obstinatley positive, as if he had the Authority of Fathers and Scripture to
back it, when as there is not the least grain of Reason, no hint of Antiquity.
no Text throughout the Word of God for the defense, command, or even permission
of it.

HE utterly disapproves all sorts of Superstition. And yet is taught to have an
esteem for Holy Water, Blessed Candles, Holy Oil, and Holy Bread; not doubting,
but that as such Men, who have Consecrated themselves to the Service of God, in
the Preaching the Gospel and Adm^nistration of the Sacraments, have a
particular respect due to them above the Laity: As Churches Ded^cated to God,
are otherwise to be looked on, than other dwelling Houses: So likewise these
other Creatures, which are particularly deputed by the Prayers and Blessing of
the Priest; to certain uses for God's own Glory, and the Spiritual and
Corporeal good of Christians, ought to be respected in a degree above other
things. And what superstitions in the use of them? Has not God himself
prescribed such inanimate things, and Holy Men made use of them, for an intent
above their natural Power; and this without any Superstition? Was there
Superstition in the Waters of Iealousy, Numb. 5.17. In the Shewbread, in the
Tables of Stone, in the Salt used by Elijah for sweet'ning the infected Waters,
in the Liver of the Fish taken by the Angel Raphael, for expelling the Devil?
Was it Superstition in Christ to use Clay for the opening the eyes of the
Blind; or in the Apostles to impose hands for the bringing down the Holy Ghost
upon Christians; or to make use of Oil for the curing of the Sick? Mark 6.13.
And tho there be no express Command in Scripture, for Blessing Water, Bread,
etc. yet there is this assurance, that every Creature is sanctified by the Word
of God and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. and frequent Promises, That God would hear the
Prayers of the Faithful. Why therefore should he doubt, but that these
Creatures, on which the Blessing of God is solemnly implored by the Word of
God, and the Prayers of the Priest and People, for their sanctification, are
really sanctified, according to the assurance of the Apostle, and the Promises
of God? St. Cyril of Jerusalem, who lived in the Third Century, made no
question, but that as these things which are offered to Idols, tho pure in
their own nature, are made impure by the Invocation of Devils; so on the
contrary, simple Water is made holy, and gets a Sanctity, by virtue received
from the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, Christ our Lord, and his eternal Father,
(Cyr. Catech. 3.) St. Augustine was of the same Judgment touc^ing the
Benediction of Bread; affirming, that the Bread which the Catechumens did take,
tho it was not Christ's Body, yet it was holy; yes, and more holy than the Meat
wherewith we are nourished, ( Aug. Tom. 7. l. 2. de Pecc. Mer. and Remis^c 26.)
The like is to be seen in the Epistle of St. Alexander, who governed the Church
but fifty years after St. Peter; where he declares the Custom even at that time
of blessing Water, and confirms the Practice of it by his Command. And that
Water thus blessed was capable, by virtue received from Heaven, of working
eff^cts above its own nature, was the Sentiment of Christians in the Primitive
times; Epiphanius makes early mention ( Tom. 2. l. 1. cont. haer. 30.) where he
relates a passage at length, how that Water being blessed in the Name of Jesus,
and sprinkled upon Fire which by Witchcraft was made unactive, and hindered from
burning, immediately the Enchantment ceased, and the Fire burned: as also that
a possessed Person being besprinkled with blessed Water, the Party was
immediately cured. Theodoret has the like Narration of the Devil hindering fire
from burning, and how that he was chased away, and the Charm dissolved by
blessed Water being thrown on it, ( lib. 5. Eccles. hist. c. 21.) And does not
St. Hierom (in vit. Hilarion, p. 323. Paris print,) make this relation, how
that Italicus took Water from blessed Hilarion, and cast it on his bewitched
Horses, on his Chariot, and the Barriers from whence he used to run, and that
the Charm or Witchery did cease upon the sprinkling this Water; so that all
cried out Marnas victis est a Christo, Christ has conquered Marnas (the Idol)
And now, there is no jeering and ridiculing these things will ever make them
look like idle Superstitions to one that considers seriously how much they are
grounded upon Reason, the Word of God, Antiquity, and the Authority and
Practice of the Catholic Church; which tho it approves the use of them, yet it
teaches plainly, that there is no Confidence to be put in any thing but only in
Jesus Christ; and what power these things have they not of themselves, but only
from Heaven, and by the Invocation of the Name of Jesus; who, as by his
heavenly Blessing he enables us to do things above the power of Nature; so also
by the Prayers of his Church he blesses these things, in order to the working
effects above their own natural qualities, that by them his Fatherly Benefits
may be appl^ed to us, and that so the Faithful may more particularly honor and
bless him in all his Creatures.

XXXIII. Of Holy Water.
THE Misrepresenter charges him with approving superstitious uses of inanimate
things, and attributing wonderful effects to them; as Holy Water, Candles, Oil,
Bread, etc.

In Answer, our Author 1. declares, That the Papist truly represented, utterly
disapproves all sorts of Superstition. But it he had designed to have
represented truly, he ought to have told us what he meant by Superstition, and
whether any Man who observes the Commands of the Church can be guilty of it.

2. He says, That these things are particularly deputed by the Prayers and
Blessing of the Priest to certain uses for God's Glory, and the Spiritual and
Corporal Good of Christians.

This is somewhat too general; but Marsilius Columna, Archbishop of Salerno,
who has taken most pains in this matter, sums them up; Hydragiolog. Sect. 3.
c. 2.12. p. 45.
1. As to Spiritual, they are Seven. 1. To fright Devils. 2. To remit Venial
sins. 3. To cure Distractions: 4. To elevate the Mind. 5. To dispose it for
Devotion. 6. To obtain Grace. 7. To prepare for the Sacrament.

2. As to Corporal. 1. To cure Barreness. 2. To multiply Goods. 3. To procure
Health. 4. To purge the Air from pestilential Vapors.

And now, as our Author says, What Superstition in the use of it? He names
several things of Gods own appointing to Parallel it; as the Waters of
Iealousy, the Shewbread, the Tables of Stone; but the first was miraculous,
the other had no such effects that we ever heard of. Elisha's Salt for
sweetning the Water, was undoubtedly a Miracle. Is the Holy Water so? As to the
Liver of the Fish for expelling the Devil, in the Book of Tobit, he knows the
Book is not owned for Canonical by us; and this very place is produced as an
Argument against it; there being no Ground from Scripture, to attribute the
Power of expelling Devils, to the Liver of a Fish, either naturally or
symbolically: Vallesius offers at the only probable account of it, Valles.
Sacr. Philosoph. c. 18. p. 229.
that it must be a Divine Power given to it, which the Angel Raphael, did not
discover: and yet it is somewhat hard to conceive, how this Liver should have
such a power to drive away any kind of Devil, as it is there expressed, unless
by a Devil there, no more be meant than some violent Disease, which the Jews
generally believed to arise from the possession of evil Spirits: But however
here is an Angel supposed, who made this known to Tobit; but we find not
Raphael to discover the virtue of Holy Water against Devils. As to Christ using
Clay to open the Eyes of the Blind, it is very improperly applied, unless the
same miraculous Power be supposed in it, which was in Christ himself: And so is
the Apostles laying on of Hands, and using Oil for miraculous Cures; unless the
same Gift of Miracles be in every Priest which consecrates H^ly Water, which
was in the Apostles: And Bellarmine himself confesses, That no infallible
effect does follow the use of Holy Water, because there is no Promise of God in
the case, but only the Prayers of the Church. But these are sufficient to
sanctify the Water, says our Author; And to what end? De Cultu Sanct. l. 3.
c. 7.
For all the spiritual and corporeal benefits before mentioned? Is no promise
of God necessary for such purposes as those? How can any Church in the World
dispose of God's Power without his Will? It may appoint significant and decent
Ceremonies, but it can never appropriate divine Effects to them; and to suppose
any divine Power in things which God never gave them, is, in my Opinion,
Superstition; and to use them for such ends, is a superstitious use. St. Cyril,
whom he quotes, speaks of the Consecration of the Water of Baptism, Catech. 3.
St. Augustine only of a consecrated Bread, which the Catechumens had ( De
Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. l. 2. c. 26.) but he attributes no divine Effects to
it. Pope Alexanders Epistle is a notorious Counterfeit. Those Passages of
Epiphanius, Theodoret, and S. Ierom, all speak of miraculous effects; and those
who had the power of Miracles might sometimes do them with an external sign,
and sometimes without, as the Apostles cured with anointing, and without: But
this is no ground for consecrating Oil by the Church, or Holy Water, for
miraculous Effects. If these Effects which they attribute to Holy Water be
miraculous, then every Priest must have not only a power of Miracles himself,
but of annexing it to the Water he consecrates; if they be supernatural, but
not miraculous, then Holy Water must be made a Sacrament to produce these
Effects ex opere operato; if neither one nor the other, I know not how to
excuse the use of it from Superstition.

XXXIV. Of Breeding up People in Ignorance.
HE is trained up in Ignorance; and it is the chief means made use of by his
Church, for preserving Men in that Communion to hide from them her manifold
Mysteries of Iniquity, her sottish Sup^rstitions, her un-christian Doctrines,
by performing all in unknown Tongues, and not permitting the poor misled People
to look into, or understand any thing that they Believe or Profess. And by this
blindness they are persuaded to embrace such infinite numbers of gross Errors
that were but the Vail taken from their eyes but for one half hour, and they
but permitted to have one fair prospect of their Religion, thousands and
thousands would daily desert her, and come over to the Truth.

HE has all the liberty, encouragement, and convenience of becoming learned, of
any People or Persuasion whatsoever. And none that has ever looked over any
Library, and found that the greatest numbers and choicest Books of all
Sciences, have men of his Communion for their Authors: None that in his Travels
has taken a thorough view of the Universities in Popish Countries, of the
Sorbon, Louvain, Salamanca, Boloign, etc. and considered their laborious
Studies, in Philosophy, Divinity, History, the Fathers, Councils, Scripture,
etc. and besides the Students here, has seen how many thousands there are in
Religious Houses, who, free from the disturbances of the World, make Virtue and
Learning the business of their whole Life; will ever lay Ignorance to the
charge of the Papists; but must in Justice confess, that amongst them are to be
found as many and as great Scholars as amongst any People or Societies in the
World. And tho the vulgar and common sort, of that Profession, understand not
Latin, yet are not they trained up in ignorance of their Religion, nor led
along in blindness; but are so provided of Books in their own Mother Tongue, of
Instruction and Devotion, wherein is expl^cated the whole Duty of a Christian,
every Mystery of their Faith, and all the Offices and Ceremonies performed in
the Church; that they must be very negligent, or else very meanly parted, who
do not arrive to a sufficient knowledge of the^r Obligation in every respect.
And whosoever has seen the great pains and care some good men take abroad, in
Explicating (on Sundays and Holy Days in their Churches, and on Weekdays in
the Streets,) the Christian Doctrine to the crowds of the ignorant and meaner
sort of People, not omitting to reward such as answer well with some small
gifts, to encourage Youth, and provoke them to a commendable Emulation; will
never say, that the Papists keep the poor people in Ignorance, and hide from
them their Religion; but rather that they use all means for instructing the
Ignorant, and omit nothing that can any ways conduce to the breeding up of
Youth in the knowledge of their Faith, and letting them see into the Religion
they are to profess. Neither does it seem to him even so much as probable, that
if the Church-Offices, and Service, etc. were performed in the vulgar-tongue,
that upon this the now-ignorant and blinded People would immediately discover
so many idle Superstitions, senseless Devotions, and gross Errors, that they
would in great numbers, upon the sight, become deserters of that Communion in
which now they are professed Members. For since there is nothing done but in a
Language which the Learned, Judicious, and Leading Men of all Nations do every
where understand, and yet these espy no such Ridiculosities which fright them
from their Faith; but notwithstanding the seeing all through and through, they yet
admire all for solid, holy, and Apostolical, and remain steadfast in their
Profession; how can it be imagined that the vulgar, weak, and unlearned sort,
(did they but understand all as well as they) would espy any such Errors and
Superstitions which these others, with all their Learning and Judgment cannot
discover? No, he thinks there is no reason to fear, that what passes the Test
among the Wise and Learned, can be groundedly called in question by the
Multitude.

XXXIV. Of breeding up People in Ignorance.
THE Misrepresenter charges them with this, on these accounts. 1. By keeping
their Mysteries of Iniquity from them. 2. By performing Divine Service in an
unknown Tongue. 3. By an implicit Faith. To which the Representer answers. 1.
That they give encouragement to Learning; and he instances in their
Universities and Conventual Libraries; But what is all this to the common
People? But their Indices Expurgatorii, and prohibiting Books so severely,
which are not for their turn, (as we have lately seen in the new one of Paris)
argues no great confidence of their Cause, nor any hearty love to Learning: And
if it could be rooted out of the World, their Church would fare the better in
it; but if it cannot, they must have some to be able to deal with others in it.
2. As to the common People he says, They have Books enough to instruct them.
Is it so in Spain or Italy? But where they live among Heret^cks, as we are
called, the People must be a little better instructed to defend themselves, and
to gain upon others. 3. If the People did know their Church Offices and
Service, etc. they would not find such faults, since the Learned approve them
Let them then try the Experiment, and put the Bible and their Church-Offices
every where into the Vulgar Tongues: But their severe Prohibitions show how
much they are of another Opinion: What made all that Rage in France against
Voisins Translation of the Missal? Such Proceedings of the Assembly of the
Clergy against it; such Complaints both to the King and the Pope against it, as
tho all were lost if that were suffered? Such an Edict from the King, such a
Prohibit^on from the Pope in such a tragical Style about it? Such a Collectio
Authorum Vulg. Versionis damnantium Jussu. ac Mandato Cleri G^llicani edita
Lutet. Paris. 1661.
Collection of Authors to be printed on purpose against it? Do th^se things
show, even in a Nation of so free a temper, in Comparison, as the French, any
mighty Inclination toward the encouraging this Knowledge in the People? And
since that, what stirs have there been about the Mons Testament; What
Prohibitions by Bishops? besides a Bull from this very Pope against it. What
vehement Opposition by others? So that many Volumes have already been written
on the occasion of that Translation. And yet our Author would persuade us, That
if we look abroad, we shall find wonderful care taken to keep the People from
Ignorance; but we can discern much greater to keep them in it.

XXXV. Of the Uncharitableness of the Papists.
HIs Church teaches him to be very uncharitable; it being her constant
Doctrine, that none out of her Communion can be saved. So that let a man be
never so honest in his Dealing, never so just to his Neighbor, never so
charitable to the Poor, and constant in his Devotion to his Maker; yet all this
shall avail him nothing, if he be not a Member of his Church. It Is not enough
for him to believe in Jesus Christ, to confess him his Redeemer, to believe
that he died for our Sins, that he rose again, and ascended into Heaven; unless
he believes and assents to every Article and Tenet declared by any of his
General Councils; for that obstinately to deny any one of these, does as
certainly place him at the Left Hand of the Judge, as if he perversely stood out
against the truth of Christianity, and denied Jesus Christ to be God. And by
this means, as many as by his Church are marked out for Schismatics or
Heretics, are to expect nothing but Damnation; or rather are condemned already.

HIs Church teaches him no uncharitableness at all, and the Doctrine she
delivers concerning the desperate Estate of Heretics and Schismatics, is
nothing but what she has learnt from the mouth of Christ and his Apostles.
Among the last advices, recommended by our Savior at his Ascension, is found
the Sentence of Doom pronounced against all such as would not receive the
Doctrine preached by the Apostles, Preach the Gospel (says Christ, Mark 16.16.)
to every Creature: he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: but he
that believes not, shall be damned. And this is all his Church delivers in
this point, repeating the same Sentence of condemnation against all such, as
will not receive and believe the Doctrine left by Christ, and preached by his
Apostles. And if among those that believe not, she comprehends not only
Infidels and Heathens, but also all Heretics and Schismatics; it is nothing
but what she has received from the Apostles; who did not only shake the dust
off their Feets in witness against those who denied them entrance, and refused
to believe in Jesus, but also denounced such of the Brethren to stand guilty of
damnation, who notwithstanding their belief in Jesus, that he died for the
Red^mption of Man, and that rising again he Ascended into Heaven; did make
Divisions amongst the Faithful, or Preached any new Doctrine contrary to what
they had delivered. St. Paul is very express in this, who foretelling Timothy
(1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.) of some, who in latter times would come and Preach a
Doctrine, Forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God
has created to be received: brands them with the infamous Title of Men that
depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of
Devils. In these words plainly letting him understand, that though these Men
would not deny Christ, yat that their false Doctrine in those two other Points,
were enough to make them Seducers, Deserters of Christ, and Leaders to the
Devil. And does not he as expressly in his 2 d Epistle to Timothy, (c. 2. v. 16,
17, 18.) condemn Hymeneus and Philetus, for profane and vain bablers,
increasers of Ungodliness, and overthrowers of the Faith, who concerning the
Truth erred only in one Point, saying that the Resurrection is past already? By
which '^is manifest to him, that the Doctrine now taught him by his Church, is
nothing but what she has learnt from St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles; it
being delivered by them that he is a Liar who denies that Jesus is the Christ,
(1 Ioh. 2.22.) And that every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ, is
come in the flesh, is not of God, (ib. c. 4. v. 3.) And not only this, but
likewise A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject; knowing that he that is such is subverted and sins, being condemned
of himself, (Tit. 3.10, 11.) With this weighty advice to the Brethren, in which
they are commanded in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to speak all the same
thing, that there be no divisions among them, but thet they be perfectly joined
together in the same mind and in the same judgment, (1 Cor. 1.10.) For that
having strife and divisions among them, they will show themselves to be Carnal,
and to walk as Men, (ib. c. 3. v. 3.) That therefore, there being but one Body,
and one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, they should endeavor to
keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace, and not be tossed to and
fro like Children, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine, by the slight
of men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, (Ephesians c.
4. v 3, 4, 5, 14.) Who transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, are
false Apostles, deceitful Workers, (2 Cor. 11.13.) But certainly accursed, for
that troubling the Faithful, they would pervert the Gospel of Christ. and
preach another Gospel, than that which had him preached by the Apostles (Gal.
1.7.8.) And this is the Sum of the Doctrine of his Church, which believing that
Faith is necessary to Salvation, it being impossible without Faith to please
God, (Heb. 11.6.) teaches likewise, that the Faithful ought to hold fast the
profession of their Faith without wavering, for that not only they lose it; who
deny Jesus Christ to be God, as some have done: but also all those, who
endeavor to pervert the Gospel of Christ, and in any point of Faith obstinately
deny, or teach otherwise than was taught by Christ, and his Apostles, as
Hymeneus and Philetus did: so that, that Christian makes but a very imperfect
and lame profession of his Faith, who can only say, I believe that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, and that he is God and Man, the Redeemer of the World:
unless he can with truth add this likewise, I also believe the whole Gospel
that he preached, and every point of Faith, that he has taught and delivered to
us by his Apostles: there being the same Obligation to obey his Precepts, and
hearken to his Words, as to acknowledge the Divinity of his Person; and it being
a sin of the same blackness, obstinately to oppose any point of his Doctrine,
as to deny the truth of his Pers^n. It Is not therefore any uncharitableness in
his Church, to declare plainly this miserable unhappy state of all such, who
wilfully oppose and separate from the Doctrine of Christ, delivered by the
Apostles, and continued in the Catholic Church; and of such who disobey and
separate from the Government of the same Church, which Christ has Commanded all
to hear and obey: But it is her Zeal so to do, and the same solicitude for the
salvation of Souls, which moved the Apostles heretofore, to Preach the like
Doctrine to their Flock; as also the Primitive Christians to expel their
Communion, and Anathematize all such, who by broaching erroneous Tenets,
contrary to any point of Received Doctrine, or by disobedience, did wilfully
divide themselves from the Belief or Discipline of the Catholic Church: Such
as were Marcion, Basilides and Bardesanes, who were Condemned in the First Age,
for opposing that Article of our Faith, in which we believe the Resurrection of
the Dead; such the Archonticks, Condemned likewise for denying the necessity of
Baptism: Such Tatianus etc. for Preaching Marriage to be unlawful. Such the
Millenarians, for maintaining a thousand Years Reign of Christ upon Earth, with
his Saints in sensual pleasures. And so in all Ages others were condemned upon
the like account. It having been always, a received Custom, even in the purest
time of the Gospel, for the Elders and Prelates, to whose charge Christ
committed the care of his Flock, to oppose all those that by new Doctrine. or
by making Schisms and Divisious, did disturb its peace: and not to permit any
that by such like means d^d endeavor to destroy his Unity, so much desired and
recommended by the Apostles. So that they were equally declared Enemies of
Christianity, who denied Christ, and they, who confessing Christ, did yet
contradict and reject any part of his Doctrine. And this upon the Principle,
that Christian Faith ought to be entire. For that every Article, Mystery and
Point of it being delivered by the same hands, and recommended by the same
Authority; whosoever did oppose any one Point of it, was immediately judged
guilty of all, in discrediting the Authority, on which the whole stood equally
grounded. And this is that great Truth proclaimed above thirteen hundred years
ago, and now every where read in St. Athanasius's Creed. Whosoever will be
saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith.
Which Faith, except every one do keep Whole and undefiled, without doubt, he
shall perish everlastingly. By which words was made known to the Christian
World* the Sense and Doctrine of the then pure and unspotted Church, as
received from Christ and his Apostles. That it is vain for any one to hope for
Salvation, unless he first believe the Catholic Faith; and that whosoever does
not believe it Whole and undefiled, shall certainly perish everlastingly. Which
is a Doctrine like that delivered by the Apostle, conce^ning the observance of
the Laws of God; that as whosoever fails in one, is made guilty of all; so
also, whosoever disbelieves one Article of the Catholic Faith, does in a
manner disbelieve all. There being no more hopes of Salvation for one that
denies obstinately any one Point of the Catholic Faith, tho he believes all
the rest; then there is for one, who keeps Nine of the Commandments, with the
Breach of the Tenth. An obstinate opposition against one Point of Faith, and a
sin against one Commandment being as certainly damnable, as if 'twere against
all. There being the same reason, and an equal necessity that the Observance of
God'^ Law, and the Assent to the Catholic Faith be alike entire and Whole. And
now being convinced, that none can believe to Salvation, but he that embraces
the Catholic Faith thus wholly and entirely, by an equal submission to all the
Mysteries contained in it, without opposition to any. And being likewise
convinced, that no one can arrive to the true knowledge of this Faith, with an
assurance of its Integrity, but by receiving it as proposed and believed by the
Church of Christ: Which Church was founded by the Son of God, watered with his
Blood, and by an infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost (by which it was to be
taught all Truth to the end of the World) was secured from the danger of being
deceived or deceiving others, to the consummation of things: He does not doubt,
but as in the Apostles time, so also ever since, and at present, God adds to
his Church daily such as shall be saved, (Acts 2.47) there being no entire
faith necessary to Salvation, to be found out of this Church; and no
possibility, as St. Cyprian says, that God shall be a Father to any, who own
not this Church for his Mother. But now, where and which this Church is, and
what Society of Men are Members of it, among such variety of Pretenders; though
it may seem a great difficulty to some to distinguish; yet to him it is none at
all; for since there is no other Church, besides the Roman Catholic, which has
had a continued and visible Succession of Bishops and Pastors in all Ages since
the Apostles; no other that has converted Infidel Nations to Christianity; no
other that has always preserved Peace and Unity amongst its Members, all of
them speaking the same thing, and being perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and the same judgment; no other that by assembling the Elders and
Prelates, has opposed in all Ages Heresies and Schisms, and condemned all
those, who not sparing the Flock, have spoken perverse things, endeavoring to
draw away Disciples after them; no other, that has, in obedience to the command
of Christ, send Apostles amongst Infidels and Unbelievers, for the preaching to
them the Gospel, and instructing them in Christianity; and by this way, without
Arms or Blood, have spread their Faith throughout the World; no other, that by
evident and undeniable Miracles, have proved the truth of her Doctrine; no
other, but what has begun by Separation, whose first Preachers have gone out
from this; the time of their first Preaching and showing themselves to the
World, being upon Record, and their new Doctrine censured and condemned by that
Church, from whence they separated. Since, I say, there is no other Society or
Christian Congregation in the World, to which these certain Marks of the Church
of Christ does agree; it is evident to him, that this is the only true Church;
that whosoever denies any Article of her Faith, denies so much of Christ's
Doctrine; that whosoever hears her, hears Christ; and whosoever obstinately and
wilfully is separated from her, is in the same distance separated from Christ
himself; and finally, that God adds to this Church daily such as shall be
saved, (Acts 2.47.)

XXXV. Of the Incharitableness of the Papists.
THE Missrepresenter, (as he is called) charges this Point home. Because they
deny Salvation to those who believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith in
the Apostles Creed, and lead virtuous and good Lives, if they be not of their
Communion.

To this the Representer answers in plain terms, That this is nothing but what
they have learned from the Mouth of Christ and his Apostles. And to this end he
musters up all their Sayings against I^fidels, false Prophets, Gnostics,
Corinthians, as tho they were point blank levelled against all that live out of
Communion of the Church of Rome.

But this is no Uncharitableness, but pure zeal, and the same the Primitive
Church showed against Heretics, such as Marcion, Basilides, and Bardesanes,
who were condemned in the first Age for denying the Resurrection of the dead,
etc. What in the first Age! Methinks the Second had been early enough for them:
But this is to let us see what Learning there is among you. But do we deny the
Resurrection of the Dead? or hold any one of the Heresies condemned by the
Primitive Church? What then is our Fault, which can merit so severe a Sentence?
We oppose the Church: What Church? The Primitive Apostolical Church? The Church
in the time of the four General Councils? I do not think that will be said, but
I am sure it can never be proved: What Church then? The present Church? Is it
then damnable to oppose the present Church? But I pray let us know what ye mean
by it; The Universal Body of Christians in the World? No, No, abundance of them
are Heretics and Schismatics as well as we: i. e. All the Christians in the
Eastern and Southern parts, who are not in Communion with the Church of Rome:
So that two parts in three of Christians are sent to Hell by this Principle;
and yet it is no Uncharitableness. But suppose the Church of Rome be the only
true Church, must men be damned presently for opposing its Doctrines? I pray
think a little better on it, and you will change your Minds. Suppose a man do
not submit to the Guides of this Church in a matter of Doctrine declared by
them, Must he be Damned? What if it be the Deposing Power? Yet his Principle
is, If a Man do not hold the Faith entire, he is gone. But Popes and Councils
have declared this to be a point of Faith; therefore if he does not hold it, he
must be damned. There is no way of answering this, but he must abate the
severity of his Sentence against us. For upon the same Reason he questions
that, we may question many more. And all his Arguments against us, will hold
against himself; For, says he, he that disbelieves one Article of Catholic
Faith, does in a manner disbelieve all. Let him therefore look to it, as well
as we. But he endeavors to prove the Roman Catholic Church to be the true
Church, by the ordinary Notes and Marks of the Church. Although he is far enough
from doing it; yet this will not do his business. For he must prove, that we
are convinced that it is the true Church, and then indeed he may charge us with
Obstinate Opposition, but not before. And it is a very strange thing to me,
that when their Divines say, that Infidels shall not be damned for their
Infidelity, where the Gospel has not been sufficiently proposed to them; and
no Christian for not believing any Article of Faith till it be so proposed;
that we must be damned for not believing the Articles of the Roman Faith, which
never have been, and never can be sufficiently proposed to us. Methinks such
men should study a little better their own Doctrine about the sufficient
Proposal of matters of Faith, before they pass such uncharitable and unlearned
Censures.

XXXVI. Of Ceremonies and Ordinances.
HIS Church, upon the presumption of being Apostolical and Commissioned by
Christ, has brought in such an infinite number of unnecessary superstitious
Ceremonies, that the whole exercise of her Religion consists in nothing but a
vain Pomp and empty Show. And whereas Christians are commanded by the Apostle
to serve the Lord in Spirit and Truth; She has made void this Precept; and
neglecting both Spirit and Truth, has restored the heavy Yoke of Jewish Rites,
without the least Authority of the Word of God: but rather, in express
opposition to it, has made these her humane Inventions take place of the Divine
Law. And then besides her Ceremonies, what an endless account is there of other
Ordinances. Institutions, Precepts, to which she obliges all in her Communion.
How many are her Fast-days, Rogation and Ember-days? How many her Festival and
Holy Days? How many her Injunctions on several degrees of People? That Priests
shall not Marry, that whosoever is in Orders shall be obliged to the reciting
or singing such and such Offices. That Marriage shall not be permitted, but at
some set times: and a multitude of other such respective Commands, which have
no grounds in Scripture, and no other Authority for them, besides the decrees
of some Popes, who for some private Ends, and the making themselves great,
thought fit to lay these burdens upon the People. Some being first instituted
by Pope Telesporus, as the Fast of Lent: Some by Cal^xtus, as the Ember-days,
Some by Pope Nicholas, as the Prohibition of Marriage: And so all the rest. And
yet, forsooth, all these must be observed under pain of eternal Damnation, as
if God and the Pope commanding were but all one, and had Heaven and Hell
equally at their disposure.

HIS Church has appointed a great number and variety of Ceremonies to be used
in the Celebrating Divine Service, in the Offices and the Administration of the
Sacraments. She has likewise many Observances, Ordinances, Constitutions,
appertaining to Discipline and the Government of the Flock. And all these are
received, approved, or instituted by her, every one in her Communion does
embrace, admit, and willingly submit to, without opposition, exception, or
calling any into question: because, although the Particulars thus appointed or
commanded be not to be found in Scripture; yet there being in the Scripture an
express and absolute Command given to the whole Flock of Christ, of following
and being obedient to those that have thus ordered these things; in virtue of
that Command, they voluntarily, and without constraint, accept all that is of
their Appointment; without excepting against any thing, unless it be manifestly
sinful. And this they look on as a Christian Duty belonging to all such that
are, by God's Pleasure, in subjection to the H^gher Powers, or under charge.
And therefore, as a Servant, having received a Command from his Master, is
obliged to comply with it, in case it be not sinful, although he cannot find the
thing then particularly commanded, in Scripture; the general Precept of
Servants being obedient to Masters being sufficient to let him know his
Obligation, and to remove all scruple. And as Ch^ldren are in Duty obliged to
perform the Will of their Parents, upon the Command, Obey thy Father and thy
Mother, whether the thing particularly willed be in Scripture or no; so they
judge it the Duty of all Christian People to submit without contention to the
Ordinances and Constitutions of their Pastors and Prelates, although the things
particularly ordered by them be not expressed in Scripture; it being a
sufficient ground for this their Submission and Obedience, that God has given
them a General Command; Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves; for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, (Hebrews
13.17.) Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken to you the
Word of God, whose Faith follow, (Hebrews 13 7.) So that to them it seems a
very fallacious rule, leading to all Confusion and unchristian Comentions, viz.
That the Higher Powers, our Superiors, Pastors and Prelates, are not to be
obeyed, but only in such things as are expressed in Scripture; and as for any
other Particulars, whosoever upon Examination cannot find what is commanded by
them in Holy Writ, may lawfully refuse Submission; nay, he is obliged to
resist. For however this seems to bear much of the Word of God in the face of
it, yet certainly it is wholly destructive to it; and under pretense of adhering
close to the Scripture, undermines the very Author of it. This the Primitive
Christians understood so well, that they detested all such Maxims, and
following the Advice of the Apostle, chose rather to trust their Souls in the
hands of those, whom God had placed over them, by an humble Submission to the
Government, and a peaceable Obedience to their Decrees; than by a presumptuous
questioning of every thing, and raising vain disputes, to take the Rule of the
Flock out of the hands of those, to whom God had providentially delivered it,
and place themselves Judges over the Church, their Elders, Prelates and
Pastors, whom God had commanded them to hear, and be in Subjection to. So that
we never read, that they ever pretended to weigh the Ordinances of their
Superiors by their own reasoning, or to bring them to the Test of the Word of
God, before the acceptance; but always judged it conform to the Word of God,
that their Governors should Rule, and they Obey. Thus when the Apostles
observed the Sunday instead of the Sabbath; and met together at Pentecost; we
don't read that the Faithful then began to turn over their Bibles, to find a
Command for these particulars, but with a prompt Obedience readily followed
them in the Observance. So when Abstinence from Blood and strangled Meats was
ordered by the Elders assembled at Jerusalem; (Acts 15.) the multitude of
Believers having heard the Decree, never murmured at it, or called it into
question, however seemingly contrary to the intention of Christ, who in
abrogating the Law of Moses was thought to have cut off all these Obligations;
but they all rejoiced for the Consolation, (ib. v. 31.) So when St. Paul gave
orders to the Corinthians, (1 Cor. 11.) in what manner and posture they were to
behave themselves at Prayers in their Assemblies, both Men and Women; we don't
hear that he was challenged by any to show by what authority of Scripture he
thus reproved and prescribed in these Particulars, or by what they were ob^ig'd
to receive his Prescriptions; but with a prompt submission accepted his Orders,
not doubting, but since it was God's Will to place Rulers and Governors over
them, it must be God's Will that they should be obedient to them, in following
their Decrees, and observing their Constitutions. And with this Doctrine of
Obedience, Humility, and Submission, all the Primitive Christians were trained
up by the Apostles, who zealously labored by this means to preserve them in
Peace and Unity; that so they might think all the same thing, and be of one
mind and one judgment, and without Divisions; insomuch, that there is not any
one thing so often repeated in their Writings, as Exhortations to this
Obedience and Submission: See, how, going through the Cities they delivered to
them (the Faithful) the decrees for to keep, that were ordained by the Apostles
and Elders which were at Jerusalem, (Acts ^6 4.) See how St. Paul commands the
Thessalonians, to hold fast the Traditions they had been taught by word or by
Epistle, (2 Thessalonians. 2.15.) See how he commands the Hebrews; Obey them that have
the rule over you. Remember them which have the Rule over you, (Heb. 13.7.17.)
See with what earnestness St. John urges this; He that knows God hears us,
he that is not of God hears us not, (1 John 4.6.) hereby know we the Spirit
of Truth and the Spirit of Error. And then again, does not St. Paul commend the
Corinthians for their Obedience; Now I praise you, Brethren, that you remember
me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you, (1 Cor.
11.2.) And then, having given them directions as to their Behavior in their
Assemblies, he adds; But if any man seem to be contentious, We have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God, (1 Cor. 11.16.) And now it being thus
evident, that the Church of Christ in the Apostles time was founded, and
preserved by a Submission and Obedience of the Flock to their Pastors; the
Papists teach and believe, that what was taught and commanded by the Apostles
to the Faithful then living, ought to be received as a Doctrine necessary for
all succeeding Ages, and that Submission and Obedience ought to have been as
much the Duty of Believers ever since as it was then; the Commands and Practice
of that time being undoubtedly the best and only Pattern for the Faithful for
all times, even to the end of the World. And they do not only teach this
Doctrine of Submission in their Books and Sermons, but also observe it in their
Lives, having in all Ages depended on their Elders and Prelates in all matters
touching the Discipline and Government of the Church; leaving Rule to those
whose Charge and Office it is to Rule; and never believing, that they, who are
under Charge and Command expressly by St. Paul to Remember and Obey those who
have the Rule over them, can upon any pretense whatsoever, nay, tho an Angel
from Heaven should come and Preach otherwise, be discharged from this Christian
Obligation, and be exempted from Remembering and Obeying, whom thus by God,
speaking by his Apostle, they are Commanded to Remember and Obey. And upon this
ground it is, that in things concerning the Order to be observed in the Divine
Service, in all Ceremonies; Holy Rites, Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and
Ordinances, they have neither Nill nor Will of their own; but always receive,
and think that the best, which is Ordered and Appointed by those, to whom, by
Divine Law, they owe this Submission and Obedience, and to whom the Ordering
and Appointing these things appertains. And therefore, if these appoint a Day
of Humiliation for imploring God's Mercy, or averting his Judgments, they never
scruple to observe it; if a day of Thanksgiving, in memory of some signal
Benefit, they likewise Obey. If these judge it fit, that on every Friday should
be commemorated the Death and Passion of our Redeemer in Fasting; and command
Lent to be observed, in remembrance and imitation of our Lord's 40 days Fast in
the Desert, they think it their obligation to do so. If these order such and
such days to be set apart, and kept holy in Remembrance and Thanksgiving for
the Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ,
and for other such like Intentions, they esteem it sinful to oppose it. If
these judge it decent, that the Faithful should bow at the Name of Jesus, stand
at the reading of the Gospel, prostrate, or incline themselves at the
Confession: If they appoint Tapers and Lamps to be used in Churches, to
represent our Savior who came to enlighten the World; and Incense to be used,
to mind the People, that their Hearts and Prayers should, l^ke the Smoke,
ascend d^rectly toward Heaven: If in the Administration of the Sacraments, in
Exorcisms, in the Offices, and the Celebration of the Mass, these determine
several Rites and Ceremonies to be observed, for more Decency, greater
Solemnity, and that by such exterior helps the minds of the Faithful may be
moved to the contemplation of the Sacred Mysteries, and raised more sensibly to
the Apprehension of the Majesty of God, in whose Honor all is pe^form'd; they
look upon themselves bound to allow and embrace all these things, without
Reluctance or Opposition; always thinking that to be most proper which is
instituted by such who have the Rule over them. And if any endeavor to raise
Disputes, and be contentious concerning the Necessity of these Institutions,
they have no such Custom, neither the Churches of God. One thing they know to
be necessary, that is, that they should be Obedient; and that in the Service of
God they must not honor him as the Jews did, Isa. 58.13. by doing their own
ways, finding their own Pleasure, and speaking their own words; but as
Christians are commanded, in a true Self-denial, a sincere Humility and
Obedience, submitting to those whom God has left to rule and govern the Flock.
Neither is there any danger of falling back into the Jewish Law, by approving
the allowed Ceremonies of the Church; it being certain, that in the Abrogation
of the Old Law, all Ceremonies were not at the same time extinct; but only such
as were mere Types and Figures of things to come in the New Law, which are now
fulfilled: Whilst others (fit for the raising Devotion, and expressing the
affections of the Soul, and other such ends,) are still commendably retained as
lawful, and equally necessary now, as heretofore: such are, Kneeling, Fasting,
lifting Hands and Eyes to Heaven, Sighing, knocking the Breast, days of
Humiliation, Thanksgiving, Watching, Hair-cloth, Singing, Impositions of Hands,
Benedictions, using Oil, Spittle, Breathing, etc. all which ^re as lawful,
convenient, and necess^ry for Christians, as they were for Jews; and no more to
be neglected, because they were used in the Old Law, than praying, meeting,
Reading the Law, Singing Psalms, Humility, and Obedience, etc. are to be laid
by, and disowned by Christians because they were observed by the Jews:
especially since these, with many others, have been recommended to us by the
practice of Christ and his Apostles, and of all Primitive Christianity. Neither
has the use of Holy Ceremonies been wholly disapproved by those of the
Reformation. The English Profession of Faith, published in the year 1562.
allows them in the 34 th. Article. The Bohemick Confession in the 15 th.
Article, Anno 1537. The Augustine, Tit. de Miss Anno 1530. as it was penned by
Melancthon. So that since Ceremonies are generally looked on as commendable and
lawful amongst Christians; the Papists judge it proper to those who have the
Rule, to Order and Dispose of them, and declare to the Flock, how, when, and
where they are to be observed. And if they who govern judge fit to oblige the
Faithful to the observance of any in particular, they teach that it is the Duty
of the Flock to Obey. Things indifferent, after such Commands, being no longer
of choice but necessary; and no less obliging than the Commands of a Father to
his Child; where, in case the thing be not apparently sinful, it is no
Persw^sion of the thing being superfluous, can excuse an obstinate denial from
Disobedience. It being more safe and Christian like for all that are under any
Government, whether Natural, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, to perform and comply
with such things as they judge in their own private Sentiments Unnecessary,
m^rely upon the account of being Commanded, than upon such considerations, to
disturb the Order of Government, and fly in the Face of Lawful Authority; than
which nothing is more opposite to the Principles of Christianity, and
destructive of all Humane Society. And upon these grounds it is, that the
Papists founding themselves upon the sure Foundation of Huminity and Obedience,
have in all Ages acknowledged Overseers and Rulers over them to watch and feed
the Flock, to whom God has given Power; there being no Power but of God, and
that whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, Romans 13.1, 2.

XXXVI. Of Ceremonies and Ordinances.
HIS Discourse on this Head is against those who refuse to obey their
Superiors in things not expressed in Scripture, which is no part of our
Controversy with them. But yet there are several things about their Ceremonies
we are not satisfied in: As, 1. The mighty number of them which have so much
muffled up the Sacraments, that their true face cannot be discerned. 2. The
Efficacy attributed to them, without any promise from God; whereas we own no
more but decency and significancy. 3. The Doctrine that goes along with them,
not only of Obedience, but of Merit; and some have asserted the Opus Operatum
of Ceremonies as well as Sacraments, when the Power of the Keys goes along with
them; i. e. when there has been some Act of the Church exercised about the
matter of them; as in the Consecration of Oil, Salt, Bread, Ashes, Water, etc.

XXXVII. Of Innovations in Matters of Faith.
HIS Church has made several Innovations in matters of Faith, and howsoever she
lays claim to Antiquity, with a pretense of having preserved the Doctrine of
the Apostles inviolable and entire; yet it is evident to any serious Observer,
that the greatest part of her Belief is mere Novelties; that bearing date from
Christ or his Apostles, but only from some of her own more modern Synods. There
scarce having passed any Age yet, wherein there has not, in these
Ecclesiastical Mints, been coined New Articles, which, with the counterfeit
stamp of Christ and his Apostles, are made to pass for Good and Current,
amongst his credulous and undiscerning Retainers: And besides these, what a
great number of Errors have been introduced at other times; how many did Pope
Gregory bring in, and how many the Ignorance of the Tenth Age? So that if we
compare the Church of Rome now, with the Primitive times of the first three or
four hundred years, there are no two things so unlike; she is a Garden now, but
quite overgrown with Weeds; she is a Field, but where the Tares have perfectly
choked up the Wheat, and has little in her of Apostolical, besides the Name.

HIS Church has never made any Innovation in Matters of Faith; what she
believes and teaches now being the same that the Catholic Church believed and
taught in the first three or four Centuries after the Apostles. And though in
most of her General Councils there has been several Decisions touching Points
of Faith; yet can no one, without an injury to truth, say, that in any of these
has been coined new Articles, or Christians forced to the acceptance of
Novelties, contrary to the Scripture, or ancient Tradition. These have only
trodden in the Apostles steps, as often as they have been in the like
circumstances with them; doing exactly according to the Form and Example left
to the Church by those perfect Masters of Christianity. And therefore as the
Apostles in their Assembly, Acts 15. determined the Controversy concerning the
Circumcision; and proposed to the Faithful what was the Doctrine of Christ in
that point, of necessity to be believed; of which till that Decision there had
been raised several Questions and Doubts; but now no longer to be questioned,
without the Shipwreck of Faith. So in all succeeding Ages the Elders of the
Church, to whom the Apostles left their Commission of watching over the Flock,
in their Councils have never scrupled to determine all such Points which had
been controverted amongst the Brethren, and to propose to them what of
necessity they were to believe for the future, with Anathema pronounced against
all such as should presume to preach the contrary. Thus in the year 325. the
first Nicene Council declared the Son of God to be Consubstantial to his
Father, against the Arians; with an Obligation on all to assent to this
Doctrine, though never till then proposed or declared in that Form. Thus in the
year 381. the Holy Ghost was declared to be God; against Macedonius and his
Followers, in the first Constantinopolitan Council. And in the first Ephesin,
Anno 431. Nestorius was condemned, who maintained two Persons in Christ, and
that the blessed Virgin was the Mother of God; with a Declaration, That both
these Tenets were contrary to the Catholic Faith. In the second Nicene
Council, Anno 787. Image-breakers were Anathematized. And so others at other
times; and at last, in the Council of Trent, was declared the Real Presence,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the lawfulness of the Invocation of Saints, of
keeping Holy Images, etc. against Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. And now, tho in
all these and the other General Councils the Persons condemned took occasion,
from these New Declarations, to cry out, Novelties, Novelties, to fright the
People with the noise of new coined Articles, and that the inventions of Men
were imposed on them, for Faith. Yet it is evident, that these New Declarations
contained nothing but the Ancient Faith; and that there had never been any such
Declarations made, had not the Doctrine proposed in them, being opposed and
contradicted by some seducing Spirits, who going out from the Flock,
endeavored by making Divisions, to draw numbers after them. So that the new
Proposal of a Tenet, is but a fallacious proof of the Doctrine being lately
invented, but a good Argument of its being lately opposed. It Is certain from
Scripture, Acts 15. that the Apostles had never declared the non-necessity of
Circumcision, had not certain men come down from Judea and taught the Brethren
the contrary. And that the Consubstantiality of the Son, had never been defined
by the Nicene Fathers. had not Arius, with his Followers, opposed this
Catholic Doctrine. And as certain it is, that the Council of Trent had been
altogether silent as to Transubstantiation, Praying to Saints, Purgatory, etc.
had not Luther, Calvin, and their Disciples, once professors of this Doctrine,
gone out from the Flock, and upon the presumption of a New Light, e^deavour'd
to persuade the Faithful, that these Tenets, then believed by the whole
Christian World, were no longer to be owned, but to be quite thrown by, as
Antichristian and Diabolical. 'Twas this obliged the Pastors to watch and take
care of their Flock, and therefore not flying away, as the Hireling does, when
the Wolf catches, and scatters the Sheep, they assembled together in a Body,
and declared to all under their charge, that they ought not to follow
strangers; that howsoever they came pretending to the Shepherd's voice; yet
since they came not by the door into the Sheepfold, but climbing up some other
way, they were no Shepherds, but Thieves and Robbers; such whose business was
not to feed, but to steal, kill and destroy. 'Twas this made them encourage all
under their care, not to waver; but to stand fast, and hold the profession of
their Faith, and notwithstanding all pretenses, by no means to suffer
themselves to be deluded, and led away with strange Doctrine; and that they
might the better secure them from falling into Errors, they gave them a Draught
of their Christian Doctrine; especially of all those points, which these modern
self commissionated Apostles did preach against, and endeavor to undermine;
particularly declaring to them, the Faith they had been bred up in, which they
had received from their Forefathers, and been derived even from the Apostles.
Securing them, that whatsoever was contrary to this, was Novelty and Error. And
now in the Pastors declaring this to the Faithful, where was the Innovation?
The Council did nothing but propose fully and explicately, what, before their
meeting, was the Doctrine of all Christendom, and had been so amongst the
Primitive Fathers. 'Twas they made Innovation, who preached contrary to the
Doctrine thus believed and received; which Luther was not ashamed to own
himself guilty of; plainly acknowledging, that He separated from the whole
World.

But it seems that the whole World was then corrupted, and the Religion then
every where professed, was overgrown with Superstitions, Errors and
Abominations; such as had crept into the Church, some five Hundred Years
before, some nine Hundred, and some a Thousand; and 'twas from these Luther
separated, intending to Reform Christianity, and bring it to the purity of the
Primitive times, of the first three Hundred Years. And was it not very strange
now, that so many gross Fooleries, idle Superstitions, and even downright
Idolatry, should c^eep into a Church, and spreading it self through all
Nations, infect the whole World, becoming the public profession of Christendom
for so many hundred Years, and be confirmed and established by the Laws of
every Kingdom; and that no body should take notice of any such thing, either at
its first Rise, or in all its progress of so many Years: Insomuch, that had not
Luther made the Discovery, it is likely we should never have come to the
knowledge of these Thousand Years Errors and Corruptions: No thinking Man
certainly, but judges it impossible, that the very Fundamentals of Christianity
should be shaken, and the Religion planted by the Apostles turned into
Idolatry; and yet that no Leaned Man should any where appear to contradict
these Abominations, no Zealous Pastors to withstand them, no pious Princes to
oppose them: History sufficiently satisfies any Curious Reader, that from the
first planting of the Church, there has been in no Age, any Man yet that has
preached any Heterodox and Erroneous Tenets, and by introducing Novelties, has
endeavored to infect the minds of the Faithful with Heresy and Superstition,
but immediately have stood up Virtuous and Learned Men, in defense of the
Truth, in their Writings and Sermons publicly confuting and condemning the
Errors, and giving an Alarm to the World, to beware of such Deceivers, and
their wicked Doctrine; and withal, never omitting, to Record their Names to
Posterity; with an account of the Year when they began to Preach, under what
Emperors, and what was the occasion of their Revolt. Was not all this, and
even more done against Arius? How many appeared against the Manichees? How many
against the Donatists; against the Novatians, against the Macedonians, the
Nestorians, the Eutychians, the Pelagians, the Berengarians, etc. So that never
any thing has made so much noise in the World, so many commotions, so many
disturbances; nothing as been so impossible to be carried on with secrecy and
silence, as the broaching any new Heresy, the making a Schism, the alteration
of Religion, the starting up of some new Society and Pretenders to Reformation.
What Tumults did all the forementioned Apostles raise; disturbed at the
Doctrine of Mahomet, and the crying up the Alcoran? What Stirs and Commotions
at the Reformation of Church and Faith, pretended by Luther, Zwinglius and
Calvin? How then can it be judged in the least probable, that great variety of
erroneous Tenets and Antichristian Doctrine should be introduced by the
Papists, contrary to the sense and belief of all Christianity, either in the
fourth, fifth, sixth or tenth Century; and yet that there should not be the
least d^sturbance occasioned by it, not tumults or opposition; but all done
with so much quietness, in such a profound Peace and Silence, that had it not
been for the News brought, some Ages after, we had never suspected the
Alteration? And is this possib^e? Is it possible, that the whole C^ristian
World should change their Religion, both as to the Internal Belief, and
external Profession and exercise of it; and no body be sensible of the change,
so as to withstand the Abomination, or to transmit to Posterity, even so much
as the least word of its beginning or propogation? Let any man upon some
consideration, tell me, whether it be possible, that this one little Kingdom of
England should fall from this pure Apostolical Doctrine it now professes, into
down right Popery, (or any other way alter the whole Scheme of its Religion)
and have the Alteration confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, and continue
in the public Exercise of it for a thousand, five hundred, or even one hundred
years, and yet no one in this Kingdom, or out of it, should be sensible of the
Alteration; but also to be managed with such Policy and Craft, that the whole
business should be a Secret for many Age? And if this be scarce to be thought
possible of this one Kingdom; what can be imagined, when it is affirmed of many
Nations of the whole Christian World; Can any thing look more like a Fable or
Romance? Or can any rational man, barely upon such a Report, condemn the Faith
and Religion of his Ancestors, for Novelty and Humane Inventions; and quite
laying aside this, take him for the Rule of his Reformation, who thus, without
Reason, Justice or Truth, has thrown such an Infamy upon all the Christians
preceding him for a thousand years?

But not to insist upon these reasonings, for the wiping off the scandal of
Novelty from the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; 'twould not be amiss here, to
look beyond the Tenth Century, as also beyond the time of Pope Gregory. And if
in those earlier Christians, nothing can be found of that Faith and Profession,
which is charged as Novelty and Error against the Church of Rome, all the
Papists in the World shall join with their Adversaries, and condemning Pope
Gregory for a Seducer, and all of the Tenth Age for so many Ignoramus's, shall
in one voice with them cry out against all such Doctrine, Novelty, Novelty,
Error, Error. But if, on the contrary, every Point thus challenged of
Novelty, shall appear to have been the Profession of the Faithful in the time
of the Purity of the Gospel; if before Pope Gregory we find that Invocation of
Saints, the real Presence, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead,
the use of Holy Images, Relics, the Sign of the Cross, Procession, etc. were a
received Doctrine, and common Practice of Christians in those Primitive times;
Then shall the Papists remain as they are, as being of the same Faith and
Religion, with those Ancient Believers, without any Additions and Alterations;
and all their Adversaries ought in justice to return again to their Communion,
and making up one Q^ite, cry out with them; Blessed are they who believe as our
Forefathers believed, who received their Faith from the Apostles and their
Successors; and Accursed be they, who separate from this Faith, and upon the
Noise of Novelty and Error, make Divisions in the Church, and fall from her
Communion, believing Lies rather than Truth.

In order to this, I intended in this place to have given the Reader a fair
prospect of the Doctrine and Belief of the Fathers, at the first five hundred
years after Christ; but finding the matter to increase so much beyond
expectation upon my hands, I have reserved them for another occasion. But
however, upon confidence of what I am able to produce in that point, I cannot
omit to assure the Reader, that the chief, and most material Points charged
upon the Church of Rome for Novelty, the Primitive Fathers do so plainly own to
have been the Faith and Profession of the Church in their days; and to have
been delivered down, and taught as the Doctrine of the Apostles; that an
impartial Considerer need not take much time to conclude, whether are the
greater Innovators, those that now Believe and Profess these Tenets and
Practices; or they that disown or rej^ct them. It Is evident, that every Point
of that Doctrine, which is now decry'd for Popery, and basely stigmatized with
the note of Errors introduced of late, and of a modern invention, is by many
Ages older than those, who are reputed to be the Authors; that every particular
Article laid to the Ignorance of the Tenth Century, and to the contrivance of
Pope Gregory, are as expressly and clearly owned, and taught some Ages before,
as it is now at this day. That those Great Men were as downright Papists in
these Points, as we are now. And that any disturber of Christianity might have
as well def^n'd them for believers of Novelties and Errors, as we are now at
this present. The Faith that they professed then, we profess now; and if any of
our Doctrine be Novelty, it is a Novelty of above twelve hundred years standing:
And who can question it not to be of an older date? If it was the public
belief of the Christian World, in the fourth Century, who can be better
Witnesses of what was beli^v'd before them, even in the third Age, than They?
They tell us, that the Doctrine they maintain and deliver, is the Faith of the
Catholic Church, received from their Forefathers, and as it was taught by the
Apostles, and we don't find, that in any of these Points, they were challenged
by any Authority, or opposed by the Pastors of the Church, or any Writers,
either then living, or succeeding them, but received always with great
veneration; And upon what grounds can any challenge them now (Is it possible,
that any living now, can give a better account of what was believed and
practiced in the third Age, than They that immediately followed them: Which
will be more credible Witnesses of what was done in Forty Eight; those that
shall be alive fifty years hence; or they that are not yet to come these
thousand years? If therefore these Holy Men declare to us the Doctrine they
b^liev'd; with an assurance, that it was the Faith of the Catholic Church, so
believed by their Ancestors, and as they had received it from the Apostles and
their Successors; do not they deserve better credit, than others, who coming a
thousand years after, cry out against all these several Points, that they are
nothing but Novelty and Error? It Is evident therefore to him, that this noise
of Novelty, was nothing but a stratagem for the introducing of Novelties; and
that those that brought an Infamy upon these Points, by this aspersion, might
with as great applause every, and as easily have laid a scandal upon other
Articles of the Christian Faith, which they thought sit to retain, and have had
them all exploded for Novelty. And this has been so far done already, that even
three parts of that Doctrine, picked out by the first Reformers, for
Apostolical, and conform to the Word of God, we have seen in our days clamem'd
against for Novelty, and thrown by with as general Approbation, and as clear
Evidence of the charge, as ever they laid by Transubstantiation and the
Primacy. The first Reformers cast off the Authority of the first Bishop as
being a Novelty; Others soon alter cried down the Authority of all Bishops, for
a Novelty. The First disowned a great part of the Priestly Function, as being
lately crept in; the Others disowned all the rest, and even Ordination it self,
as having all crept in together. The First threw out a great number of
Ceremonies, as being not Apostolical, but of a modern Institution: The Others
threw out even what they had retained, for being no more an Ordination of the
Apostles, than the former. The First laid by five of the Sacraments; the Others
laid by the other two. And thus Novelty was the Word, whenever any received
Doctrine of Christianity was to be outed, and may to be made for a Novelty: And
he does not doubt, but, that if the noise of Novelty continue long, so
unhappily successful as of late, and the liberty be permitted to every
presuming Spirit, to fix this scandal upon whatsoever Doctrine or Institution
they shall think fit; that all Christianity is in a fai^ way of being thrown
out of doors: And the Bible, Preaching, Catechizing Christ's Incarnation and
Passion, etc. is as likely to b^ cast off for a Novelty, as all the rest have
been. Those that will but show to the People, that even these things have been
all received from Rome, and that the Papists by their Missionaries, spread
these Doctrines over the World, may soon persuade them, they are nothing but
Popish Inventions, mere Novelties; that those that began the Reformation, did
their business by halves, and that the World will never be thoroughly Reformed,
till all these Romish Superstitions, are laid by with the rest; they being of
the same date. He takes no notice thereof of all the clamours raised against
several points of the received Doctrine of his Church; his Faith is founded on
better Principles, than to be shaken with such a Vulgar Engine. Novelty,
Novelty, is a cry, that may fright unthinking Men from their Religion; but
every serious Man will require better Motives than a Noise, before he forsake
any point of his Faith; and it is impossible he should join with any in
condemning such things for Novelties, which he finds the Profession of all
Antiquity.

XXXVII. Of Innovation in matters of Faith.
THE Substance of his Discourse on this Head may be reduced to these things. 1.
That the Church in every Age has Power to declare what is necessary to be
believed, with Anathema to those who Preach the Contrary; and so the Council of
Trent, in declaring Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. to be necessary
Articles, did no more than the Church had done before on like Occasions. 2.
That if the Doctrines then defined had been Innovations, they must have met
with great Opposition when they were introduced. 3. That those who charged
those points to be Innovations, might as well have laid the scandal on any
other Article of Faith which they retained.

These are things necessary to be examined, in order to the making good the
charge of Innovation in matters of Faith, which we believe does stand on very
good Grounds.

1. We are to consider, Whether the Council of Trent had equal Reason to define
the necessity of these points, as the Council of Nice and Constantinople had to
determine the point of the Trinity; or those of Ephesus and Chalcedon, the Truth
of Christ's Incarnation. He does not assert it to be in the Churches Power to
make new Articles of Faith, as they do imply new Doctrines revealed; but he
contends earnestly, That the Church has a Power to declare the necessity of
believing some points which were not so declared before. And if the Necessity
of believing does depend upon the Churches Declaration, then he must assert,
that it is in the Churches Power to make points necessary to be believed which
were not so; and consequently to make common Opinions to become Articles of
Faith. But I hope we may have leave to enquire in this Case, since the Church
pretends to no new Revelation of matters of Doctrine, therefore it can declare
no more than it receives, and no otherwise than it receives. And so nothing can
be made necessary to Salvation but what God himself has made so by his
Revelation. So that they must go in their Declaration either upon Scripture, or
Universal Tradition; but if they define any Doctrine to be necessary without
these Grounds, they exceed their Commission, and there is no Reason to submit
to their Decrees, or to believe their Declarations. To make this more plain by
a known Instance: It is most certain that several Popes and Councils have
declared the Desposing Doctrine, and yet our Author says, It is no Article of
Faith with him. Why not, since the Popes and Councils have as evidently
delivered it, as the Council of Trent has done Purgatory, or
Transubstantiation? But he may say, There is no Anathema joined to it. Suppose
there be not; But why may it not be, as well as in the other Cases? And if it
were, I wou^d know, whether in his Conscience he would then believe it to be a
necessary Article of Faith, tho he believed that it wanted Scripture and
Tradition? If not, then he seees what this matter is brought to, viz. That
although the Council of Trent declare these new Doctrines to be necessary to be
believed; yet if their Declaration be not built on Scripture and Universal
Tradition, we are not bound to receive it.

2. As to the impossibility of Innovations coming in without notorious
opposition, I see no ground at all for it, where the alteration is not made at
once, but proceeds gradually. He may as well prove it impossible for a Man to
fall into a Dropsy or a Hectick-Fever, unless he can tell the punctual time
when it begun. And he may as well argue thus, Such a Man fell into a Fever upon
a great Debauch, and the Physicians were presently sent for to advise about
him; therefore the other Man has no Chronical Distemper, because he had no
Physicians when he was first sick; as because Councils were called against some
Heresies, and great Opposition made to them, therefore where there is not the
like, there can be no Innovation. But I see no Reason why we should decline
giving an Account, by what D^grees, and Steps, and upon what Occasions, and
with what Opposition several of the Doctrines defined at Trent were brought in.
For the matter is not so obscure as you would make it, as to most of the Points
in difference between us. But that is too large a Task to be here undertaken.

3. There is no color for calling in Question the Articles of Faith received
by us on the same Grounds that we reject those defined by the Council of Trent;
for we have the Universal Consent of the Christian World for the Apostles
Creed; and of the 4 General Councils for the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation; who never pretended to determine any Point to be necessary which
was not revea^ed in Scripture; whose sense was delivered down by the Testimony
of the Christian Church from the Apostles times But the Council of Trent
proceeded by a very different Rule; Sess. Quarta.
for it first set up an Unwritten Word to be a Rule of Faith, as well as the
Written; which although it were necessary in order to their Decrees, was one of
the greatest Innovations in the World; and the Foundation of all the rest, as
they were there established.

The CONCLUSION.
THese are the Characters of the Papist, as he is Misrepresented, and as
Represented. And as different as the One is from the Other, so different is the
P^pist, as reputed by his Maligners, from the Papist, as to what he is in
himself. The One is so absurd and monstrous, that it is impossible for any one
to be of that Profession, without first laying by all thoughts of Christianity,
and his Reason. The Other is just contradictory to this; and without any
farther Apology, may be exposed to the perusal of all prudent and unpassionate
Considerers, to examine if there be any thing in it that deserves the hatred of
any Christian: and if it be not in every Point wholly conform to the Doctrine
of Christ, and not in the least contrary to Reason. The Former is a Papist, as
he is generally apprehended by those who have a Protestant Education; such, as
whenever reflected on, is conceived to be a perverse, malicious sort of
Creature, Superstitious, Idolatrous, Atheistical, Cruel, Bloody-minded,
Barbarous, Treacherous, and so Profane, and every way Inhumane, that it is in
some manner doubted, whether he be Man or no. The Other is a Papist, whose
Faith is according to the Proposal of the Catholic Church; which by Christ's
Command he is obliged to believe and hear, and whose whole design in this World
is for obtaining Salvation in the next. And is it not strange, that these two
Characters so directly opposite, so wholly unlike one the other, that Heaven
and Hell is not more, should agree to the same person: It Is certainly a strange
piece of Injustice, and yet not at all strange to those who know, that they
that follow Christ shall be hated by the World, that those who study the Wisdom
of Heaven shall have the repute of Fools; and that as many as attend the Lamb,
shall be painted in the Livery of Satan. Our Forefathers were so before us;
all the Primitive Christians, the Apostles, and even the Lamb himself, our
Redeemer. Calumny ever followed them, Mis representation waited upon them; and
what wonder that Infamy was their constant Attendance? And now if the Orthodox
Christians have thus in all Ages had their double Character, one of Justice,
exactly drawn from what they really believed and practiced; the other of
Malice, copied from them, as Misrepresented; it is not at all strange to find
it so now in our days, when Calumny, Malice, Ignorance, etc. are as powerful as
ever; who, though from the beginning of the World, that is above five thousand
Years, they have made it their chief business to Paint, Copy, and Represent
Things and Persons; yet they never did it with so much injury, so altogether
unlikely, as they do now to the Papists; there being scarce any one Point of
their Faith and Profession which they do not blindly mistake, or basely
disguise. The Papists believe it is convenient to pray before Holy Images, and
give them an inferior or relative Respect. These describe the Papists Praying
to Images, and Worshipping them as Idols. The Papists believe it is good to
desire the Prayers of the Saints, and Honor them as the Friends of God These
paint out the Papists as believing Saints to be their Redeemers, and Adoring
them as Gods. The Papists believe, that Christ left a Power in the Priests of
his Church, to absolve all truly Penitent Sinners from their Offenses. These
Representing the Papists as believing, That the Priests can infallibly forgive
all such as come to Confession, whether they Repent or no. The Papists believe
there is Power in the Supreme Pastor, upon due Motives, of granting Indulgences;
that is, of releasing to the Faithful such Temporal Penalties as remain due to
their past Sins, already remitted as to their guilt, on condition they perform
such Christian Duties as shall be assigned them, i. e. humble themselves by
Fasting, confess their Sins with a hearty Repentance, receive worthily, and
give Alms to the Poor, etc. These make the Papists believe, That the Pope, for
a sum of Money, can give them leave to commit what Sins they shall think ^it,
with a certain Pardon for all Crimes already incurred; and that there can be no
danger of Damnation to any that can but make a large Present to Rome at his
death. The Papists believe, That by the Merits of Christ, the good Works of a
just Man are acceptable to God, and through his Goodness and Promise
meritorious of eternal Happiness. These report, That the Papists believe they
can merit Heaven by their own Works, without any dependence on the work of our
Redemption. The P^p^sts worship Christ really present in the Sacrament, true
God and Man. These say they fall down to, and worship a piece of Bread. Some
Papists maintain the Deposing Power: These will have it to be an Article of
their Faith; and that they are obliged to it by their Religion. Some Papists
have been Traitors, Rebels, Conspirators etc. These make these Villainies to be
Meritorious among the Papists, and that it is the Doctrine of their Church. And
thus there is scarce any one thing belonging to their Faith and Exercise of
their Religion, which is not wronged in the describing it, and injuriously
Misrepresented. And if any be so curious, as to desire to be satisfied how
this comes about, let him but stand by any of the Undertakers, while they are
taking the Copy of Popery, and observe their Method, and he may soon come to
the bottom of the Mystery. He may see them seriously viewing some of her
Tenets, and upon a short Consideration, immediately to fall to the making
Inferences, and deducing Consequences, then down go these for so many Articles
of Popery. They go on, and see other of her Tenets, and these containing
Mysteries, such as Reason cannot reach to, when Faith is not an Assistant, they
are presently followed with variety of Absurdities, and seeming Contradictions:
And down go these to the former, for so many Articles of Popery. They p^ss^on
to others, and these being not conform to the Principles of their Education,
several Misconstructions are presently raised upon them, and down go these for
so many Articles of Popery. They look forward, and seeing others, in the
practice of which many Abuses have been committed; then down go the Abuses for
so many Articles of Pop^ry. Hence they turn to the Court of Rome, and as many
D^sorders and Extravagances as they find there, so many Articles of Popery.
They enquire into the Actions and Lives of her Pastors and Prelates, and as
many Vices, as many wicked Designs they discover there, so many Articles of
Popery. They examine the Behavior of her Professors, and whatsoever Villainies,
whatsoever Treasons and Inhumanities, they find committed by any that own
themselves Members of that Communion, down they all go for so many Articles of
Popery. They hear the Reports of such as have deserted her Authority, and tho
through th^^r Extravagancies and rashness they deserve not credit even in a
trifle, yet their whole Narrative shall be accepted, and all their idle Stor^es
be summed up for so many Ar^icles of Popery. They peruse every scurrilous
Pamphlet and abusive Libel, and such ridiculous F^bles as are only sit for a
Chimney-corner, they borrow thence, and set them down for so many Articles of
Popery. They turn over every P^pish Author, and whatsoever light, loose, or
extravagant Opinions, whatsoever Discourses carried on either through Flattery,
Disgust, or Faction, appear in any of them, they are all marked out for so many
Articles of Popery. And by these and such like means is finished at last a
complete D^aught of Popery, in which she is rendered so foul, monstrous, and
abominable, that there can be nothing raked from the very Sinks of Turcism,
nothing borrowed from the wild Africans, or barbarous Americans, that can make
her more odious, or add to her deformity. Why, and is not Popery then such as
it is thus generally painted? No, it is no more like it, than Monarchy is to that
which turbulent Republican Spirits show for it; when displaying to the
multitude some Miscarriages of State, Frailties in Persons in Dignities, Abuses
of Government, etc. they cry out. Behold this is Monarchy. By this means making
it infamous among the People, that they may more easily overthrow it. And are
not the Papists such as they are commonly Represented? No: They are no more
alike than the Christians were of old under the Persecuting Emperors, to what
they appeared when clothed with Lions and Bears Skins they were exposed in the
Amphi-theatre to Wild Beasts; under those borrowed Shapes to provoke their
Savage Opposites to greater fury; and that they might infallibly, and with more
rage, be torn in pieces, Let Monarchy be shown in its own colors, and the
Christians be exposed in their own form, and one will have but few Maligners,
and the others will meet with a more tame Behavior, even from the wildest
Beasts. Let any but search into the C^uncils of the Church of Rome, even that
of Trent, than which none can be more Popish; let them peruse her Catechisms,
that, ad Parochos, or others set forth for Pastors to instruct their Flock, and
for Children, Youth, and others to learn their Christian Doctrine, of which
there is extant great variety in English: let them examine Vernon's Rule of
Faith, and that set forth by the Bishop of Condan: let them look into the
Spiritual Books of Direction, Those of Bish^p Sales, the Following of Christ,
the Christian Rules, the Spiritual Combat, Granado's Works, and infinite others
of this sort, which Papists generally keep by them for their Instruction: And
then let them freely declare whether the Papists are so ill principled, either
as to their Faith or Morals, as they are generally made appear. A little
diligence in this kind, with a serious inquiry into their conversation, their
manner of Living and Dying, will easily discover, that that of Beast, with
which they are commonly exposed to public, is not theirs, but only of the
skin, that is thrown over them. The Papists own, that there are amongst them
Men of very ill Lives, and that if every corner be narrowly sifted, there may
be found great abuses, even of the most sacred things; that some in great
Dignities have been highly vilious, and carried on wicked Designs; That some
Authors maintain and publish very absurd Opinions, and of ill consequence. But
these things are nothing of their Religion, they are Imperfections indeed, the
Crimes, the Scandals of some in their Communion; but such they are so far from
being obliged to approve, maintain or imitate, that they wish with all their
heart, there had been never any such thing, and desire in these Points a
thorough Reformation. Tho the Imprudences therefore, the Failings, the
Extravagancies, the Vices, that may be picked up, throughout the whole Society
of Papists, are very numerous and great, and too too sufficient, if drawn
together, for the composing a most Deformed Antichristia^-Monster; yet the
Popery of the Roman Catholics is no such Monster, as it is painted. Those
things which are commonly brought against them, being as much detested by them,
as by the Pers^ns that lay the charge of their dis-favour; and having no more
relation to them, than Weeds and Tares to the Corn amongst which it grows; or
Ch^ff to the Wheat, with which it lies mixed in one heap. A Papists therefore
is no more than he is above Represented; and whosoever enters that Communion,
has no obligation of believing otherwise, then as there specified. And tho in
each Particular, I have cited no Authorities, yet for the truth and exactness
of the Character, I Appeal to the Council of Trent. And if in any Point it
shall be found to disagree, I again promise, upon notice, publicly to own it.
And as for the other Part, of the Papist Misrepresented, it contains such
Tenets as are wrongfully charged upon the Papists; and in at many respects, as
it is contrary to the other Character; in so many, it is contrary to the Faith
of their Church: And so far, they are ready to disown them, and subscribe to
their Condemnation. And though any serious enquirer may be easily satisfied as
to the truth of this; yet for a public satisfaction, to show that those
Abominable Unchristian Doctr^nes are no part of their Belief, (however
extravagant some men may be in their Opinions;) the Papists acknowledge that a
Faith assenting to such Tenets, is wholly opposite to the Honor of God, and
Destructive to the Gospel of Christ, and do publicly invoke God Almighty's
Judgments upon that Church, which teaches either publicly or privately such a
Faith. And since it is lawful for any Christian to answer Amen, to such
Anathema', as are pronounced against things apparently sinful; the Papists, to
show to the World that they disown the following Tenets, commonly laid at their
door; do here oblige themselves, that if the ensuing Curses be added to those
appointed to be read on the first day of Lent; They will seriously and heartily
answer Amen to them all.

I. Cursed is he that commits Idolatry; that prays to Images or Relics, or
Worships them for God. R. Amen.

II. Cursed is every Goddess Worshiper, that believes the Virgin Mary to be any
more than a creature; that Honor her, Worship her, or puts his Trust in her
more than in God; that believes her above her Son, or that she can in any thing
command him. R. Amen.

III. Cursed is he that believes the Saints in Heaven to be his Redeemers, that
prays to them as such, or that gives God's Honor to them, or to any creature
whatsoever. R. Amen.

IV. Cursed is he that Worships any Breaden God, or makes Gods of the empty
Elements of Bread and Wine. R. Amen.

V. Cursed is he that believes that Priests can forgive Sins whether the Sinner
repent or no: Or that there is any Power in Earth or Heaven that can forgive
sins, without a hearty repentance and serious purpose of amendment. R. Amen.

VI. Cursed is he that believes there is Authority in the Pope or any others,
that can give leave to commit sins; Or that can forgive him his sins for a sum
of Money. R. Amen.

VII. Cursed is he that believes (that Independent of the Merits and P^ssion of
Christ) he c^n Merit Salvation by his own good Works; or make condign
satisfaction for the guilt of his sins, or the pains Eternal due to them. R.
Amen.

VIII. Cursed is he that contemns the Word of God, or hides it from the People,
on design to keep them from the knowledge of their Duty, and to preserve them
in Ignorance and Error. R. Amen.

IX. Cursed is he that undervalues the Word of God, or that forsaking Scripture
chooses rather to follow Humane Traditions than it. R. Amen.

X. Cursed is he that leaves the Commandments of God, to observe the
constitutions of Men. R. Amen.

XI. Cursed is he that omits any of the Ten Commandments, or keeps the people
from the knowledge of any one of them, to the end they may not have occasion of
discovering the Truth. R. Amen.

XII. Cursed is he that Preaches to the People in unknown Tongues, such as they
understand not; or uses any other means to keep them in Ignorance. R. Amen.

XIII. Cursed is he that believes that the Pope can give to any, upon any
account whatsoever, Dispensation to lie or swear falsely; or that it is lawful
for any, at the last hour to protest himself Innocent in case he be Guilty. R.
Amen.

XIV. Cursed is he that encourages sins, or teaches Men to defer the amendment
of their Lives, or presumption of their Death-bed-Repentance. R. Amen.

XV. Cursed is he that teaches Men that they may be lawfully drunk on a Friday
or any other Fasting-day, tho they must not taste the least bit of Flesh. R.
Amen.

XVI. Cursed is he who places Religion in nothing but a pompous show consisting
only in Ceremonies; and which teaches not the People to serve God in Spirit and
Truth. R. Amen.

XVII. Cursed is he who loves or promotes Cruelty, that teaches People to be
bloody-minded, and to lay aside the meekness of Jesus Christ. R. Amen.

XVIII. Cursed is he who teaches it lawful to do any wicked thing, tho it be
for the Interest and Good of Mother Church: or that any Evil Action may be done
that Good may come on it. R. Amen.

XIX. Cursed are we, if amongst all those wicked Principles and damnable
Doctrines commonly laid at our doors, any one of them be the Faith of our
Church: And cursed are we, if we do not as heartily detest all those hellish
Pract^ces as they that so vehemently urge them against us. R. Amen.

XX. Cursed are we, if in an answering, and saying Amen to any of these Curses,
we use any Equivocations, Mental Reservations; or do not ass^nt to them in the
common and obvious Sense of the Words. R. Amen.

And can the Papists then, thus seriously, and without check of Conscience, say
Amen to all these Curses? Yes they can, and are ready to it whenever, and and
as often as it shall be required of them. And what then is to be said of those
who either by Word or Writing, charge these Doctrines upon the Faith of the
Church of Rome. Is a lying Spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets? Are they
all gone aside? Do they b^ck b^te with their Tongue, do Evil to their
Neighbor, and take up Reproach against their Neighbor? I Will say no such
thing, but leave the impartial Considerer to judge. One thing I can safely
affirm, That the Papists are foully Mis represented, and show in public as
much unlike what they are, as the Christians were of old by the Gentiles; that
they lie under a great Calumny, and severely smart in good Name, Persons, and
Estates, for such things which they as much and as heartily detest as those who
accuse them. But the Comfort is, Christ has said to his Followers, Ye shall be
hated of all men, (Matthew. 10.22.) and Saint Paul, We are made a Spectacle unto
the World; and we don't doubt, that who bears this with Patience, shall for
every loss here, and content, receive a hundred fold in Heaven: For base things
of the World, and things which are despi^ed, has God chosen, ^ Corinth. 1.28.

An Answer to the Conclusion.
HAving thus gone through the several Heads which our Author complains have
been so much Mirsrepresented; it is now fit to consider what he says in his
Conclusion, which he makes to answer his Introduction, by renewing therein his
doleful Complaints of their being Misrepresented just as Christ and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians were. I hope the former Discourse has
showed their Doctrines and Practices are not so very like those of Christ and
his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, that their Cases should be made so
parallel: but as in his Conclusion he has summed up the substance of his
Representations, so I shall therein follow his Method, only with this
difference, that I shall in one Column set down his own Representations of
Popery, and in the other the Reasons, in short, why we cannot embrace them.

Wherein Popery consists as represented by this Author.
1. IN using all external Acts of Adoration before Images, as Kneeling,
Praying, lifting up the Eyes, burning Candles, Incense. etc. Not merely to
worship the Objects before them, but to worship the Images themselves on the
account of the Objects represented by them: or in his own Words, Because the
Honor that is exhibited to them, is referred to the Prototypes which they
represent.

2. In joining the Saints in Heaven together with Christ in Intercession for
us, and making Prayers on Earth to them on that Account.

3. In allowing more Supplications to be used to the Blessed Virgin, than to
Christ; For he denies it to be an idle Superstition, to repeat Ten Ave Maria's
for one Paternoster.

4. In giving religious Honor and Respect to Relics. Such as placing them
upon Altars, burning Wax Candles before them, carrying them in Processions, to
be seen, touched, or humbly kissed by the People: which are the known and
allowed Practices in the Church of Rome.

5. In adoring Christ as present in the Eucharist on the account of the
Substance of Bread and Wine being changed into that Body of Christ which
suffered on the Cross.

6. In believing the Substance of Bread and Wine, by the Words of Consecration,
to be changed into his own Body and Blood, the Species only or Accidents of
Bread and Wine remaining as before.

7. In making good Works to be truly meritorious of Eternal Life.

8. In making Confession of our Sins to a Priest in order to Absolution.

9. In the use of Indulgences for taking away the Temporal Punishments of sin
remaining due after the Guilt is remitted.

10. In supposing the Penitent Sinner may in some measure satisfy by Prayer,
Fasting, Alms, etc. for the Temporal Pain, which by order of God's Justice
sometimes remains due, after the Guilt and the Eternal Pain are remitted.

11. In thinking the Scripture not fit to be read generally by all, without
License, or in the Vulgar Tongue.

12. In allowing the Books of Tobit, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Maccabees,
to be Canonical.

13. In preferring the Vulgar Latin Edition of the Bible before any other, and
not allowing any Translations into a Mother Tongue to be ordinarily read.

14. In believing that the Scripture alone can be no Rule of Faith to any
private or particular Person.

15. In relying upon the Authority of the present Church for the sense of
Scripture.

16. In receiving and believing the Churches Traditions as the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, and assenting to them with Divine Faith, just as he
does to the B^ble.

17. In believing that the present Guides of the Church being assembled in
Councils for preserving the Unity of the Church, have an Infallible Assistance
in their Decrees.

18. In believing the Pope to be the Supreme Head of the Church under Christ,
being Successor to S. Peter to whom he committed the care of his Flock.

19. In believing that Communion in both Kinds is an indifferent thing; and was
so held for the first four hundred years after Christ, and that the first
Precept for Receiving under both Kinds, was given to the Faithful by Pope Leo
I. and confirmed by Pope Gelasius.

20. In believing that the Doctrine of Purgatory is founded on Scripture,
Authority, and Reason.

21. In believing that to the saying of Prayers well and devoutly, it is not
necessary to have attention on the Words, or on the Sense of Prayers.

22. In believing that none out of the Communion of the Church of Rome can be
saved; and that it is no Uncharitableness to think so.

23. In believing that the Church of Rome, in all the new Articles defined at
Trent has made no Innovation in mat ters of Faith.

Our Reasons against it in the several Particulars.
1. THou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing in Heaven, or Earth, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them. Which being the plain, clear, and express Words of the Divine Law, we
dare not worship any Images, or Representations, lest we be found Transgressors
of this Law. Especially since God herein has declared himself a Jealous God;
and annexed so severe a Sanction to it. And since he that made the Law is only
to interpret it, all the Dictinctions in the World can never satisfy a Man's
Conscience, unless it appear that God himself did either make or approve them.
And if God allow the Worship of the thing Represented by the Representation, he
would never have forbidden that Worship absolutely, which is unlawful only in a
certain respect.

2. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John
2.1. And one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
For Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the Presence of God
for us, Heb. 9* 24. And therefore we dare not make other Intercessors in Heaven
besides him: and the distance between Heaven and us, breaks off all
Communication between the Saints there, and us upon Earth; so that all
Addresses to them now for their Prayers, are in a way very different from
desiring others on Earth to pray for us: and if such Addresses are made in the
solemn Offices of Divine Worship, they join the Creatures with the Creator in
the Acts and Signs of Worship, which are due to God alone.

3. Call upon me in the day of Trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. When we pray to Our Father in Heaven, as our Savior
commanded us, we do b^t what both Natural and Christian Religion require us to
do: But when men pray to the Blessed Virgin for Help and Protection now, and at
the hour of Death, they attribute that to her, which belongs only to God, who
is our Helper and Defender: And although Christ knew the Dignity of his Mother
above all others, he never gives the least Encouragement to make such Address^s
to her: And to suppose her to have a share now in the Kingdom of Christ in
Heaven, as a Copartner with him is to advance a Creature to Divine Honor, and
to overthrow the true Ground of Christ's Exaltation to his Kingdom in Heaven,
which was, His suffering on the Cross for us.

4. And no man knows of the Sepulcher of Moses unto this day, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Why
should God hide the Body of Moses from the People, if h^ allowed giving
religious Honor and Respect to Relics? Why should Hezekiah break in pieces
the Brazen Serpent, because the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it? 2
Kings 18.4. especially when it was a Type or Representation of Christ himself,
and God had wrought many Miracles by it.

5. Whom the Heaven must receive until the times of the Restitution of all
things, Acts 3.21. And therefore in the Eucharist we adore him, as sitting on
the right hand of God; but we dare not direct our Adoration to the Consecrated
Host, which we believe to be the Substance of Bread and Wine, (tho consecrated
to a Divine Mystery) and therefore not a fit Object for our Adoration.

6. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1
Cor. 10.16. This is spoken of the Bread after Consecration, and yet the Apostle
supposes it to be Bread still, and the Communion of his Body is interpreted by
the next Words, For we being many are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all
Partakers of that one Bread, v. 17. Which is very different from the Bread
being changed into the very Body of Christ; which is an Opinion that has no
Foundation in Scripture, and is repugnant to the common Principles of Reason,
which God has given us, and exposes Christian Religion to the Reproach and
Contempt of Jews, Turks and Infidels.

7. When you shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our Duty to do. St. Luke
17.10. And therefore in no sense can our best Works be truly meritorious of
Eternal Life: Which consisting in the enjoyment of God, it is impossible there
should be any just Proportion or due Commensuration between our best Actions
and such a Reward.

8. And the Son said to him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
sight, S. Luke 15.21.

Where Confession to God is required because the Offense is against him, but it
is impossible for any Man upon Earth to forgive those whom God does not
forgive: And he alone can appoint the necess^ry conditions of Pardon, among
which true Contrition and Repentance is fully declared, but Confession to a
Priest, tho it may be useful for the ease of the Penitent, is no where in
Scripture made necessary for the Forgiveness of Sin.

9. I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32.5.

If God does fully forgive the Guilt of sin, there remains no Obligation to
Punishment; for wherever that is, the guilt remains: It is true, God may not
sometimes fully pardon; but he may reserve some temporal Punishment here for
his own Honor, or the Chastisement of a penitent Sinner: But then what have
any men to do, to pretend that they can take off what God thinks fit to lay on?
Can any Indulgences prevent Pain or Sickness, or sudden Death? But if
Indulgences be understood only with respect to Canonical Penances, they are a
most notorious and inexcusable corruption of the Discipline of the Ancient
Church.

10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5.10.
And therefore no Satisfaction to the Justice of God is now required from us,
for the Expiation of any Remainder of Guilt. For if Christ's Satisfaction were
in it self sufficient for a total Remission, and was so accepted by God, what
Account then remains for the Sinner to discharge, if he perform the Conditions
on his part? But we do not take away hereby the Duties of Mortification,
Prayer, Fasting, and Alms, etc. but there is a difference to be made between
the Acts of Christian Duties, and Satisfaction to Divine Justice for the Gu^lt
of Sin, either in whole or in part. And to think to join any Satisfactions of
ours together with Christ's, is like joining our hand with God's in Creating or
Governing the World.

11. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one anot^er, etc. Col. 3.16.

How could that dwell richly in them, which was not to be communicated to them,
but with great Caution? How could they teach and admonish one another in a
Language not understood by them? The Scriptures of the New Testament were very
early perverted; and if this Reason were sufficient to keep them out of the
hands of the People, certainly they would never have been published for common
use, but as prudently dispensed then, as some think it necessary they should be
now. But we esteem it a part of our Duty, not to think our selves wiser than
Christ or his Apostles, nor to deprive them of that unvaluable Treasure which
our Savior has left to their use.

12. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Therefore, where there is no Evidence of Divine Inspiration, those Books
cannot be made Canonical. But the Jewish Church, To whom the Oracles of God
were committed, never delivered these Books as any part of them, being written
when Inspiration was ceased among them. And it is impossible for any Church in
the World to make that to be divinely inspired, which was not so from the
beginning.

13. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the
Earth, and their Words unto the ends of the World, Romans 10.18.

Therefore the Intention of God was, that the Gospel should be understood by
all Mankind; which it could never be, unless it were translated into their
several Languages. But still the difference is to be observed between the
Originals and Translations; and no Church can make a Translation equal to the
Original. But among Translations, those deserve the greatest esteem which are
done with the greatest Fidelity and Exactness. On which account, our last
Translation deserves a more particular Regard by us; as being far more useful
to our People, than the Vulgar Latin, or any Translation made only from it.

14. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Path, Psalm 119.105.

Which it could never be, unless it were sufficient for necessary direction in
our way to Heaven. But we suppose Persons to make use of the best means for
understanding it, and to be duly qualified for following its Directions:
without which, the best Rule in the World can never attain its End. And if the
Scripture have all the due Properties of a Rule of Faith, it is unconceivable
why it should be denied to be so; unless men find they cannot justify their
Doctrines and Practices by it, and therefore are forced to make Tradition equal
in Authority with it.

15. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge; ye entered
not in your selves, and them that were entering in ye hindered. S. Luke 11.52.

From whence it follows, that the present Guides of the Church may be so far
from giving the true Sense of Scripture, that they may be the chief Means to
hinder Men from right understanding it. Which argument is of greater force,
because those who plead for the Infallibility of the Guides of the present
Church, do urge the promises made to the Jewish Church at that time; as our
Author does from those who sat in the Chair of Moses, and from Cal^phas his
Prophesying.

16. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed. 2 Pet. 1.19.

And yet here the Apostle speaks of something delivered by the Testimony of
those who were with Christ in the Holy Mount. From whence we infer, that it was
not the Design of Christ to l^ave us to any Vocal Testimony, bu^ to refer us to
the Written Word, as the most certain Found^tion of Faith. And it is not any
P^^sons assum^ng the Title of the Cathol^ck Church to themselves, can give them
Authority to impose any Traditions on the Faith of Christians; or require them
to be believed equally with the Written Word. For before any Traditions can be
assented to with Divine Faith, the Churches Authority must be proved to be
Divine and Infallible, either by a written or unwritten Word; but it can be
done by neither, without overthrowing the necessity of such an Infallibility in
order to Divine Faith; because the Testimony on which the Churches
Infallibility is proved, must be received only in a way of Credibility.

17. Also of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse things to draw
away Disciples after them, Acts 20.30.

Which being spoken of the Guides of the Christian Church, without Limitation
of Number, a possibility of Error is implied in any Assembly of them; unless
there were some other Promises which did assure us, That in all great
Assemblies the Spirit of God shall always go with the casting Voice, or the
greater Number.

18. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers -- for the edifying of the Body of Christ -- till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. Ephesians. 4.13, 14, 15.

Now here being an account given of the Officers Christ appointed in his
Church, in order to the Unity and Edification of it, it had been unfaithfulness
in the Apostle to have left out the H^ad of it, in case Christ had appointed
any. Because this were of more consequence than all the rest, being declared
necessary to Salvation to be in subjection to him. But neither this Apostle,
nor St. Peter himself, give the least intimation of it. Which it is impossible
to conceive should have been left out in the Apostolical Writings upon so many
occasions of mentioning it, if ever Christ had instituted a Headship in the
Church, and g^ven it to S. Peter and his Successors in the Sea of Rome.

19. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's death till he come, 1 Cor. 15.26.

The Apostle speaking to all Communicants, plainly shows, that the Institution
of Christ was, That all should partake of both Kinds, and so to continue to do
as long as this Sacrament was to show forth the Death of Christ, viz. till his
Second coming. And there is no color for asserting the Christian Church ever
looked on observing Christ's Institution in this matter as an indifferent thing;
no not for a thousand years after Christ. Although the Practice and the Obligation
are two things, yet when the Practice was so agreeable to the Institut^on, and
continued so long in the Church, it is hardly possible for us to prove the
sense of the Obligation, by a better way than by the continuance of the
Practice. And if some Traditions must be thought binding, and far from being
indifferent, which want all that Evidence which this practice carries along
with it, How unreasonable is it in this Case to allow the Practice, and to deny
the Obligation?

20. And whom he justified them he also glorified, Romans 8.30.

But whom God justifies, they have the Remission of their Sins as to Eternal
Punishment. And if those who are thus justified, must be glorified, what place
is there for Purgatory? For there is not the least intimation of any other
state of Punishment that any who are justified must pass through before they
are admitted to Glory. We grant they may, notwithstanding* pass through many
intermed^a^e trials in this World; but we say, where there is Justification,
there is no Condemnation; but where any part of guilt remains unremitted, there
is a Condemnation remaining so far as the punishm^nt extends. And so this
distinction as to Eternal and Temporal Pains, as it is made the Foundation of
Purgatory, is wholly groundless; and therefore the Doctrine built upon it can
have no Foundation in Scripture or Reason.

21. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also,
1 Cor. 14.15.

What need this Praying with the Understanding, if there were no necessity of
attending to the sense of Prayers? For then praying with the Spirit were all
that was required; for that supposes an attention of the Mind upon God. And I
can hardly believe any Man that thinks with Understanding, can justify praying
without it; especially when there are Exhortations and Invitations to the
People to join in those Prayers, as it is plain there are in the Roman Offices.

22. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is
no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that fears God and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.34, 35.

Whereby we perceive, that God does not limit the possibility of Salvation
under the Gospel to Communion with the Sea of Rome; for if S. Peter may be
believed, the capacity of Salvation depends upon Men's fearing God and working
Righteousness; and it is horrible Uncharitableness to exclude those from a
possibility of Salvation, whom God does not exclude from it.

23. That ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, Jude v. 3.

Therefore all necessary Doctrines of Faith were at first delivered; and
whatever Articles cannot be proved to have been delivered by the Apostles, can
never be made necessary to be believed in order to Salvation. Which overthrows
the addit^onal Creed of Pius IV. after the Council of Trent; and puts them upon
the necessity of proving the Universal Tradition of those Doctrines from the
Apostolical Times: and when they do that, we may think better of them than at
present we do; for as yet we can see neither Scripture, nor Reason, nor
Antiquity for them.

THus I have Represented that kind of Popery which our Author, (who complains
so much of Misrepresenting) allows; and I have in short set down how little
ground we have to be fond of it; nay, to speak more plainly, it is that we can
never yield to, without betraying the Truth, renouncing our Senses and Reason,
wounding our Consciences, dishonouring God and his Holy Word and Sacraments,
perverting the Doctrine of the Gospel as to Christ's Satisfaction,
Intercession, and Remission of Sins; depriving the People of the Means of
Salvation which God himself has appointed, and the Primitive Church observed,
and damning those for whom Christ died.

We do now in the sincerity of our Hearts appeal to God and the World, That we
have no design to Mis-represent them, or to make their Doctrines and Pract^ses
appear worse than they are: But take them with all the Advantages even this
Author has set them out with, we dare appeal to the Judgments and Consciences
of any impartial men, whether (the Scripture being allowed on both sides) our
Doctrines be not far more agreeable thereto than the New Articles of Trent,
which are the very Life and Soul of Popery? Whether our Worship of God be not
more suitable to the Divine Nature and Perfections, and the Manifestations of
his Will, than the Worship of Images, and Invocation of Fellow Creatures?
Whether the plain Doctrine of the necessity of Repentance and sincere Obedience
to the Commands of Christ, do not tend more to promote Holiness in the World,
than the Sacrament of Penance, as it is delivered and allowed to be practiced
in the Church of Rome, i. e. with the easiness and efficacy of Absolution, and
getting off the Remainders by Indulgences, Satisfactions of others, and Prayers
for the Dead? Whether it be not more according to the Institution of Christ to
have the Communion in both Kinds, and to have Prayers and the Scriptures in a
Language which the People understand? And lastly, whether there be not more of
Christian Charity in believing and hoping the best of those vast Bodies of
Christians who live out of the Communion of the Church of Rome, in the Eastern,
Southern, Western; and Northern Parts, than to pronounce them all incapable of
Salvation on that Account? And therefore out of regard to God and the Holy
Religion of our Blessed Savior; out of regard to the Salvation of our own and
other Souls, we cannot but very much prefer the Communion of our own Church
before that of the Church of Rome.

But before I conclude all, I must take some notice of his Anathema's: And here
I am as much unsatisfied as in any other part of his Book, and that for these
Reasons.

1. Because he has no manner of Authority to make them, suppose they were
meant never so sincerely: And if we should ever object them to any others of
that Church, they would presently say, What had he to do to make Anathema's* It
belongs only to the Church and the General Councils to pronounce Anathema's,
and not to any private Person whatsoever. So that if he would have published
Anathema's with Authority, he ought to have printed those of the Council of
Trent; viz. such as these,

Cursed is he that does not allow the Worship of Images.

Cursed is he that says Saints are not to be Invocated.

Cursed is he that does not believe Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc.

2. Because he leaves out an Anathema in a very material point, viz. As to the
Deposing Doctrine. We do freely, and from our Hearts Anathematize all such
Doctrines as tend to dissolve the Bonds of Allegiance to our Sovereign, on any
pretense whatsoever. Why was this past over by him, without any kind of
Anathema? Since he seems to approve the Oxford Censures. Why did he not here
show his zeal against all such dangerous Doctrines? If the Deposing Doctrine be
falsely charged upon their Church, let us but once see it Anathematized by
public Authority of their Church, and we have done: But instead thereof, we
find in a Book very lately published with great Approbations, by a present
Professor at Lovain Fr. D'Enghien, all the Censures on the other side censured
and despised, and the holding the Negative as to the Deposing Doctrine,
Auctoritas Sedis Apostolicae in Reges. p. 374 408. ad 430.
is declared by him to be Heresy, or next to Heresy: The Censure of the
Sorban against Sanctarellus, he says, was only done by a Faction; and that of
Sixty Eight Doctors there were but Eighteen present; and the late Censure of
the Sorban, P. 549.
he says, was condemned by the Inquisition at Toledo, J^n. 10. 1683. as
erroneous and schismatical; and so by the Clergy of Hungary, Oct. 24. 1682.

We do not question but there are Divines that oppose it; but we fear there are
too many who do not; and we find they boast of their own numbers, and despise
the rest as an inconsiderable Party: This we do not Misrepresent them in, for
their most approved Books do show it.

However, we do not question, but there are several Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen
of that Religion, of different Principles and Practices; and it is pity such be
not distinguished from those who will not renounce a Doctrine so dangerous in
the Consequences of it.

3. Because the Anathema's he has set down, are not Penned so plainly and
clearly as to give any real Satisfaction; but with so much Art and Sophistry,
as if they were intended to beguile weak and unwary Readers, who see not into
the depth of these things, and therefore may think he has done great matters
in his Anathema's, when if they be strictly examined, they come to little or
nothing; as,

1. Cursed is he that commits Idolatry. An unwary Reader would think herein he
disowned all that he accuses of Idolatry; but he does not curse any thing as
Idolatry, but what himself thinks to be so. So again, Cursed is he (not that
gives Divine Worship to Images, but) that prays to Images or Relics as Gods,
or Worships them for Gods. So that if he does not take the Images themselves
for Gods, he is safe enough from his own Anathema.

2. Cursed is every Goddess worshiper, i. e. That believes the Blessed Virgin
not to be a Creature. And so they escape all the force of this Anathema. Cursed
is he that Honors her, or puts his Trust in her more than in God. So that if
they H^nour her and trust in her but just as much as in God, they are safe
enough; Or that believes her to be above her Son: But no Anathema to such as
suppose her to be equal to him.

3. Cursed is he that believes the Saints in Heaven to be his Redeemers, that
prays to them as such. What if men pray to them as their Spiritual Guardians
and Protectors? Is not this giving God's Honor to them? Does this deserve no
Anathema?

4. Cursed is he that worships any Breaden God, or makes Gods of the empty
Elements of Bread and Wine: viz. That supposes them to be nothing but Bread and
Wine, and yet supposes them to be Gods too. Does not this look like nonsense?
And yet I am afraid our Author would think it a severe Anathema in this matter,
to say, Cursed is he who believes Nonsense and Contradictions.

It will be needless to set down more, since I have endeavored by clear
stating the several Controversies to prevent the Readers being imposed upon by
deceitful Anathema's. And yet after all he says,

Cursed are we, if in answering and saying Amen to any of these Curses, we use
any Equivocations or Mental Reservations, or do not assent to them in the
common and obvious use of the Words.

But there may be no Equivocation in the very Words, and yet there may be a
great one in the intention and design of them: There may be none in saying Amen
to the Curses so worded: but if he would have prevented all suspicion of
Equivocation, he ought to have put it thus;

Cursed are we if we have not fairly and ingenuously expressed the whole
meaning of our Church as to the Points condemned in these Anathema's; or if we
have by them designed to deceive the People: And then I doubt he would not so
readily have said Amen.

The CONTENTS.
Papist. Protestant. Page. Page. THE Introduction and Answer. 1 10 Of Praying
to Images. 19 20 Of Worshipping Saints. 28 29 Of Addressing more Supplications
to the Virgin Mary than to Christ. 36 37 Of Paying Divine Worship to Relics.
42 43 Of the Eucharist. 46 47 Of Merits and Good Works. 57 57 Of Confession. 61
62 Of Indulgences. 65 66 Of Satisfaction. 68 69 Of Reading the Holy Scriptures.
70 71 Of Apochryphal Books. 74 75 Of the Vulgar Edition of the Bible. 77 79 Of
the Scripture as a Rule of Faith. 80 81 Of the Interpretation of Scripture. 82
83 Of Tradition. 85 86 Of Councils. 87 89 Of Infallibility in the Church. 90 93
Of the Pope. 95 97 Of Dispensations. 100 102 Of the Deposing Power. 105 107 Of
Communion in one Kind. 111 113 Of the Mass. 116 118 Of Purgatory. 119 122 Of
Praying in an unknown Tongue. 127 129 Of the Second Commandment. 132 133 Of
Mental Reservations. 134 136 Of a Deathbed Repentance. 137 138 Of Fasting. 139
140 Of Divisions and Schisms in the Church. 142 143 Of Friars and Nuns. 145 147
Of Wicked Principles and Practices. 148 151 Of Miracles. 153 154 Of Holy Water.
156 158 Of Breeding up People in Ignorance. 159 161 Of the Incharitableness of
the Papists. 162 166 Of Ceremonies and Ordinances. 168 173 Of Innovations in
Matters of Faith. 173 180 The Conclusion and Answer to it. 182 188

FINIS.

