A LETTER FROM A DISSENTER TO THE DIVINES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN ORDER TO
AN UNION

Reprinted at Holy-Rood-House, 1687.

THIS is to let you know, Reverend Sirs, how sensible I and our Brethren are of
the great Change we perceive in your Pulpits: that whereas sometime since,
nothing was heard from thence but Thunder against Dissenters, with the terrible
Noise of their Spirit of Obstinacy and Disobedience, of Rebellion the Sin of
Witchcraft, of their being Schismatics against the True Church; and that
nothing was so proper to reduce them in a Christian Temper and within the Pale,
as the severe Execution of the Laws, as Summoning to the Commons, Seizing and
Imprisoning, etc. Now all the Storm is cleared up into a perfect Calm, and
instead of Force and Rigor, we hear nothing now but of Fair Invitations, and
most Obliging Calls to a Peaceable Union; there being now no Difference to be
heard of betwixt us, but only of a Few Indifferant Cermonies, and that
otherwise We are all Joint- Members with You of the same Church, This Change, I
say; We are all very Sensible of, And as for a Union and a good Correspondence,
you may be assured, we are so in love with Union and Peace, that we could
heartily wish, to see all Christians at this day, as they were in the time of
the Apostles, of One Spirit, and of One Mind. But you know what has hindr'd us
hitherto from Joining with Your Church; We have always suspected You for
Papists in Masquerade; The many Ceremonies You have retained, Your Crosses, and
Altars, and Tapers, and Surplices, and Bowings; Your Confessions and
Absolutions, and Mass Forms of Prayer, etc. have obliged us to these Thoughts;
and that though you pretend to have left Babylon, yet by the Rags and Livery you
brought along with you we could not but still suspect of her Retinue.

Of late indeed you have given us some Reason to change our Opinion; whilst
Popery making some approaches to you, and even standing at your Doors, you have
given her such Sour Entertainment and treated with so much Severity, as if in
reality you had no Kindness for her. This, I say, is some Motive to us, to
change our former Opinion of you, And yet on the other hand, I see so many
Deceits in Villainous Man, that I cannot tell how, but to be Jeallous still. I
fear Your Religion, may, like the Weather, have its different Seasons and
Returns. And as sometimes the Dissenters from the Influence of your Church, he
under a severe and nipping Winter, and at other times again enjoy a warm and
inviting Sunshine so you may be as changeable in respect of the Papists too,
sometimes for 'em and sometimes against 'em; and yet be the same old Church of
England still, like the Sun, which makes different Seasons and Changes in the
Year, yet never changes it self. And this Consideration does not leave me
without some Fears and Jealousies. I apprehend you have a way of promoting
Popery, and yet being against the Papists; and that if we join with you, we may
be instructed in real Popery, whilst we are taught to hate the Papists; and if
so, I do not see, but it would be the same thing to join with the Papists, as
with you.

This Jealousy of mine has been strengthened of late by some of your Writings,
and most especially by one, which appeared lately, Entitled, An answer to the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium, wherein the Author, whilst he severly lets fly
against the Papists, does at the same time maintain and propagate such
Doctrines, as I have ever looked upon, as the very Essence and Groundwork of
Popery. You Will give me leave to make a short List of such as I have observed in
the perusing that Book; and then if you will give me your Opinion and let me
know, whether really they are conformable to the Doctrine of your Church,
'twill serve as a Light to direct us, what to do, whilst you invite us to join
Communion with you.

First then he says, (p. 8.) That he can grant, that the Bishop of Rome is the
Successor of St. Peter. 2. That that See is the Center of the Catholic
Communion, while possessed by an Orthodox Bishop. 3. That whosoever Separates
himself from it professing the true Faith, and possessed by a Catholic Bishop,
is guilty of Schism, (p. 37.) 4. He doubts whether there be really any
controversy about Tradition, betwixt the Church of Rome and the Church of
England 5. That the Tradition of the Catholic Church is to be received. 6.
That by Tradition we receive the Holy Scriptures. and know how to separate the
Scriptures from Apocryphal or Suppositious Writings. 7. That he is willing and
ready to receive any Doctrine not Written, that has as perpetual, unanimous,
and certain a Tradition as the Scripture; and that he only waits for the
proving this, and then he is to embrace all the Doctrins of Popery, ( p 38,) 8.
That there is no necessity of express Scripture for the Constitutions and
Practices, which his Church enjoins, in order to the more regular and decent
service of God, ( p. 41.) 9. That the Tradition of Antiquity is highly useful
and necessary for the Interpretation of Points of Faith, (p. 48,) 10. That he
honors the Saints, in observing Days in honor of them: And seems to grant all
that is produced in Nubes Testium upon that Subject, viz. In visiting Churches
in honor of the Saints, whose-Memory is there preserved; in assembling
together in honor of the Saints, and Celebrating their Memory with a Religious
Solemnity, so to be partakers of their Merits. 11. That it is generally piously
believed, that the glorified Saints do Intercede for the Church Militant, (p.
49.) 12. That the honor which in the Primative Times was paid to the Memories
of Saints, and nothing but what was highly just, and that herein they are
Imitated by us, says he, as well as by any other Christians, (p. 50.) 13. That
the Fathers kept the Relics of Saints with Respect and Veneration, and
believed that God often wrought Miracles by them and they might do it too, says
this Author, ( p. 51.) 14. That the Fathers practiced praying for the Dead; and
owned it as as advantageous to the Souls departed: Every word of which we
freely grant, says this Author, ( p. 53.) That the Fathers in the first Ages
used Oblations and Prayers for the Dead, no body denies, says he, We do confess
withal, that these Prayers were offered up also for pardon of Sins, (p. 65.)
15. That it is the Opinion of his Church, that Christ's Body is really present
in the Eucharist, (p. 66.) 16. That that consecrated Food is the Flesh and
Blood of Jesus Christ.

These are some of the Points, which I observed in reading that Book; and here
for a better understanding, I desire to know of you, Whether these are truly
and really your Doctrine. The Book I see, has the Standard Mark; it is Licensed
by the Archbishop of Canterbury's Chaplain; and so must be supposed to contain
nothing, but what is agreeable to your Church. And if so, how can we choose but
be Jealous of your Calls to Union, and fair Invitations, whilst we see you
holding our Reformation in one Hand, and so much Popery in the other? What
means your so good Opinion of the Pope, of Tradition, of honoring the Saints;
of their Intercession for us; of honoring their Memories or Monuments; of
owing a Respect and Veneration due to the Relics; of allowing Prayers for the
Souls departed, as advantageous to them, and for the Pardon of their Sins; of
believing Christ's Body to be really present in the Sacrament, and that it is
his Flesh and Blood? What means, I say, all this? is this the Doctrine of your
Church, to which you invite us to join? If it be, I must tell you plainly, You
are the Men, I always took you to be, if not Papists altogether; at the best,
but like those imperfect Animals of Egypt, which beginning to leave out of
Mother-dirt, are left unfinished, and in Color, and Scent and the greatest
part are nothing but Mother-dirt still; and into it do naturally return. For my
part if I could come so near Popery as this; I should make no difficulty of
taking the other Step. For it is thither all this does naturally tend.

What we desire therefore is, That in all your Exhortations to Union, you would
suppose us to be rational Men, and not willing to do any thing; till we see and
know what it is we are to do, If you would have us Unite, let us know, to what
we are to unite; give us a Scheme of your Doctrines, of your Practices, to
which you expect our Submission and Assent. And when we have this before us,
upon Consideration, we shall be better able to know what to do. And
particularly, as to the points above, if they be according to your Church, tell
us so: if they be not, be plain with us, and condemn them. Who knows but the
Author of these Positions may be some Jesuit in Disguise, who under a Feigned
Show of defeating Popery, designs nothing more than to promote it?

One other Point I desire you to add to these, which is that mentioned by Dr.
Tillot son, in his Sermon at Whitehal, April 4. 1679. p. 17. Where he says,
That Private Persons in understanding obscure Texts of Scripture, and the more
difficult points in Religion, must rely upon their Guides: Because in these
Cases, says he, every Man is not capable of judging himself, and therefore he
must necessarily trust others: and likewise submit to what is determined and
established by public consent and Authority, unless upon clear Evidence of the
Falsehood or Unlawfulness of it: And in Case Men be perverse and Disobedient,
Authority is Judge, and may restrain and punish them. To this Point I desire
you to speak clear and plain, that so if we come to you, we may know, whether
in any Points of Religion, we must necessarily go blindfold, and rely upon
others And that if we cannot submit to all that is determined by your
Authority, we must be unavoidably restrained and punished. This point is of
some concern, because this trusting to others Judgment in Matters of Doctrine,
joined with that of Tradition abovementioned, which authorizes Constitutions
and Practices without any Authority of the written Word; we can easily foresee,
whither they lead; what is there that may not be imposed upon us, upon these
Principles; Whilst we in the mean time, must be obliged either to submit, or
else be punished as perverse and disobedient? Be positive in laying open these
things to us: Let us know, which are the Difficult Points, which we must
necessarily trust to others, and how many they are; that so we may know the End
of our Belief.

We desire Satisfaction in these Particulars, and when that is done, we shall
know better how to follow your Calls. You Will pardon this Importunity, and in a
Friendly Answer consider our Circumstances; make things as favorable as you
can; and above all things remember, That to hear little of Trusting, and less
of Punishing, will be most acceptable to,

Reverend Sirs, Yours.

FINIS.

