GOD's CALL TO ENGLAND, For Thankfulness after gracious DELIVERANCES: Wherein
is showed, That our DELIVERANCES, Not answered with Reformation, Will be
followed with Sorest Destruction.

By Thomas Gouge.

JOSH. 20. If ye forsake the Lord -- he will turn and do you hurt, after the
good he has done you.

Gratiarum ^essat discursus, ubi recursus non fuerit. Nec modo nil augetur
ingrato, sed and quod ascipit vertitur ei in perniciem.

Bern. Sermon. 1. cap. Jejunii. LONDON: Printed for John Hancock, at the three
Bibles in Cornhill, entering into Popes-head-alley. 1680.

A PREFACE, Pressing to the great Duty of Thankfulness for Mercies.
THE eminent Appearances of a Divine Hand delivering this sinful Nation in its
plunges of woeful Distresses, have been such remarkable Testimonies of Infinite
Goodness and Patience, as are s^^rce to be parall^^^ in any Age of the World,
in any Nation under Heaven. So numerous are the Expressions of Mercy to a
People daring Heaven with their Impieties, that whoever shall review the
Catalogue of them, will be amazed to see one more superadded to the former so
abused and slighted, as wickedly they have been by many of us. Yet Prerogative
Mercy, which acts beyond expectation and desert, conquering all Difficulties
and Discouragements, has not stepped aside to give way to Justice, but has
continued its progress toward us: Had it not been for this, we had certainly
seen more direful Effects of our Enemies Projects, than yet we have beheld. Had
it not been for this, we had been as deeply involved in Misery, as we are in
Sin. Hence in our great extremity, after all his forgotten favors, he has
spoken in his Love, as in Ierem. 16.21. I will this once ca^^^ them to know, I
will cause them to know (...) hand and my might, and they shall know my Name is
the Lord. This once will I cause them to know my Mercy, to understand my
unwillingness to destroy them: and hence it is, that England has not been
forsaken of the Lord, although it is full of sin against the Holy One of
Israel, Ier. 51.5.

Now what has encouraged, what has induced the Lord to express thus much
favor to such, as so provoke the eyes of his Glory? It is only because He will
have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, Romans 9. Be it known, O People of
England, it is not for your Righteousness that the Lord has done this, for ye
are a stiffnecked People, Deuteronomy. 9.6. Our works and ways deserve nothing but
utter ruin, and perpetual desolation. For his Names sake has be done all this,
and that he might make his mighty Power to be known, Psalm. 106.8. his
super-transcendent Goodness has wrought out these sweet Deliverances for us.
And for this end has he done it, that we might remember our evil ways, and our
doings that were not good, and might loath our selves in our own sight, for our
iniquities and abominations, Ezech. 36.31. And now shall we be a happy People,
if Mercies shall so prevail upon us, as to effect this blessed frame and
disposition in us. For this end has the Almighty tried us with another
Deliverance, because he has said, It may be they will present every one their
Supplications, and return from their evil ways, Ier. 36.7.

Oh, what expectations has God to see a repenting, reforming, holy, obedient
carriage, upon our receipts of such wonderful favors from him! He looks that
we will appear another manner of People than we have been, after these eminent,
frequent, seasonable, and Miraculous appearances for us. Oh therefore, since
the Lord has not forsaken us a sinful People, but stood by us, and redeemed
us, when appointed to Death, Let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant that shall never be forgotten, Ierem. 50.5. Let us offer up our selves
to the Lord as a whole-burnt-offering, in the ascending flames of purest
Affections. Let us not occasion the cessation of Heavenly Kindnesses, by a
wicked regardlesness of them. Let it be our employment, to applaud and improve
the Infinite Love of God in all his Mercies.

Come, let us view the sudden and sweet Dispensations of God's heavenly and
holy Providence, and fix our thoughts on his surprising Benefits, till our
hearts are enamored with the Author of them, and transformed into the
likeness of that loving God that gives them: let us trace him in his ways of
Mercy, till we are sweetly brought into the ways of Duty: Let our Souls be
drawn up to the Center of Heaven, by the Golden Chains of Mercies let down from
thence unto us. Let us continue a leisurely Meditation on our gracious
Deliverances, till our Affections are sublimated, our hearts inflamed, and a
Thankful frame produced. Let us behold our most precious Lives preserved, our
inestimable Liberties secured, the conspicuous and glorious Light of the Gospel
continued, the Life of his Sacred Majesty defended: I say, let us contemplate
these things, till our health shall sound Melodious Praises to that Almighty
Power that has done all this.

Now, Courteous Reader, what does the Lord require for all this Kindness, but a
truly thankful Heart and Life? And what less can thou give to God than this?
Thou can present the Almighty with no such pleasing Offering, as a grateful
Heart: For God has sufficiently expressed his esteem of such Presents, by
appointing the Altar of Incense, which was for Thank-Offerings, to be
encompassed with a Crown of purest Gold: for though the most odoriferous
Incense is nothing in his account, the thank-ful heart that presents it as a
Testimonial of unfeigned Gratitude, is highly esteemed by him. Neither is there
any thing more consonant to the Dictates of Reason, than that we express all
manner of kindness to those that oblige us by their large Munificence: for,
Quisquis magna dedit, voluit sibi magna rependi. The Donors of great favors,
expect answerable requitals. And however we may forget what we give, we must
not forget what we receive: And therefore I may say as Bernard, Cum amat Deus,
nil aliud vult quam amari; when the Lord expresses love, he designs to be
loved. And verily, a grateful reflection of honor to God is (...), our highest
and lowest Divinity, the highest pitch of seize, is but Love; the lowest
return can be nothing beneath it, if any thing at all. The only (...), or
Requitals we can render to God for his richest Favors, are only Testimonials
of Thankfulness, by extolling his holy Name with unfeigned Praises, and
reflecting Honor on his blessed Majesty by cheerful Obedience to his sacred
Commandments. Now therefore as the piercing Rays of the glorious Sun, though
passing through the transfluent Air with an imperceptible motion, yet meeting
with a Solid Body rebound with an increasing luster; so should our Hearts and
Lives reflect the honor of all our Mercies on our Heavenly Benefactor. And
unless the Bounty of Heaven gains so far upon our obstinate Hearts, as to
effect this work, we shall gain little by the greatest Mercies: the sense of
which caused a holy man to pray, Domine, da Gratitudinem cum Misericordia; nolo
Misericordiam sine Gratitudine. Oh Lord, give me a thankful heart with thy
Mercies; Lord, I desire not Mercies without a grateful heart to improve them.
And we shall find it true, that Mercy unregarded, Deliverance not improved,
will render our condition more desperate and dangerous, and our end more
miserable. But, Oh! How much is it to be lamented, that a Virtue so applauded
for surpassing excellency, a Duty enjoined with such indispensable Necessity,
is so much unseen in all, and unpractised by most! How are the Mites of Men's
Bounty more regarded than the Mountains of Gods Mercy! Of the Ten Lepers that
our Savior healed, but one returned to glorify God, Luke 17.17, 18. How few
of a whole Nation delivered from the barbarous hands of bloody-minded men, from
the complicated Contrivances of Romish Agents, have returned deserved Praises
to our blessed Redeemer? How are both private and public Mercies buried in the
Grave of Unthankfulness? which is the reason of that Unprofitableness which
lays us under the greatest Curse.

Yet an Ungrateful temper is extremely odious in the thoughts of all men. It
receives a black doom even from such as may justly be condemned for it.
Ingratitude is that sin which Lycurgus a Heathen-Lawgiver accounted so
prodigious, in humane, and abominable, that he thought it was so impossible for
reasonable men to be guilty of it, that it would be superfluous to enact a Law
to condemn it: And it is reported of the Egyptians, that those among them that
wanted Humanity to return Kindness to Benefactors, underwent no lesser Penalty
than to be disabled from having a Posterity to survive them, that the world
might not be pestered with an ungrateful Progeny. But if the contempt of humane
kindnesses gives such offense to mortal men, and receives such Punishments;
What punishment does it merit, what hatred does it deserve, when the guilt is
infinitely raised, by the consideration of that infinite Glory that is
affronted by it! The just Threats of the Eternal God against such Offenders,
express its provoking nature, Deuteronomy. 8.19. If ye at all forget the Lord, -- I
testify against you, ye shall surely perish. If such Severity be to those that
at all forget, what will be the portion of such as altogether forget the
Mercies of God? But oh! which of us has not suffered Divine Favors to slip
out of our minds? What less in our thoughts than how much God has done for us?
Will not Vengeance fall upon us with a witness, if we proceed in such
ungrateful courses?

Now therefore, to use the words of Jude, I will put you in remembrance, how
that the Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not, Jude 5. Such will be the portion of all
those, we may fear, who will neither love nor obey the Lord, after all the
great things He has done for us: but accounting them small things, deny those
respects they ought to show to him that did them, Who is wise in Counsel, and
excellent in working. But shall we be worse than the Ox or Ass, that know their
Masters, and serve them? Shall we be more ungrateful to God than we are to Men?
The People of Israel told Gideon, Judge. 8.22. Thou shall rule over us, seeing
thou have delivered us from the hands of the Midianites. Shall we not say to
God, O Lord, since in thy infinite Mercy thou have delivered us from the hands
of our enemies, we will now submit unto thee, and thou shall rule over us? Oh
how pleasing would this be to God? How happy should we be under such
acknowledgments of God's Deliverances? But to persist in sin is very
unreasonable: Mic. 6.3. Oh my people, testify against me: What have I done to
thee? -- verse. 4. I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants, etc. Oh, my people, says God, remember what great
Deliverances I have wrought, what Miracles my arm has performed for you; and
will ye sin after all this? Oh England! Remember what God has done, what
Deliverance from a heathenish condition, what an escape from Popish darkness,
what Redemptions from Romish Conspiracies, God has bestowed; and then let
Conscience speak, whether you do well or no to sin against such a God as this.
This will never be tolerated long by a Holy God. This will make him say, as
Ezekiel. 21.3. Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of its
sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked. The Sword of
Justice sheathed by Divine Patience, will be drawn out to avenge the abuse of
Mercies. Will not contempt of Goodness bring the fulfilling of that Threat upon
us, Ezekiel. 44.25. I will not watch over you for good, but for harm? Providence
has hitherto been watchful over us to secure us from ruin; but miserable
shall we be, when God shall watch opportunities to ruin and destroy us.

Now I must tell you, whatever our apprehensions of things may be, there is
nothing will prevent our destruction after Deliverance, but a serious
Repentance, and hearty Reformation. It Is not our Policy or Power, it is not our
Courage or Undauntedness can possibly secure us; but except we repent, we shall
surely perish. Our Profession and Privileges are insufficient to give us
safety. Jerusalem, the holy City, is now a ruina^ted heap: a place of strength,
so that the Kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the world would not
have believed that the enemy and adversary should enter its gates, Lam. 4.12.
and yet it is made a perpetual desolation by the fire of God's wrath kindled
against it.

Neither may the Greatest in our Land, if living in sin, think to escape by or
in wickedness. The hand of God will find out his enemy, though never so
potent, though guarded with all humane securities. And certainly, if God shall
at last for our sins suffer our enemies to prevail, Prince and Peasant shall
suffer alike; Royal, as base blood, will be a Drink Offering. And if in Policy
they spare a while, yet in Cruelty they will slay at last. The dainty Dish is
reserved for last. The best blood and the best wine are brought forth at last;
the courser blood runs out before that pure blood that flows from the heart is
drawn forth. Let none therefore flatter themselves in sin, because exalted to
eminent degrees of Honor in a sinful Land.

But if in sincerity we turn from our sins, the Lord shall be our Security, and
appoint Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks. This shall be a sign, we shall still
escape when we shall be mourning for, and leaving off those sins, that have
brought us into danger. Ezra 7.16. Those that have escaped shall escape, for
they shall be on the Mountains as Doves in the Valleys, mourning every one for
their own Iniquity. Were there such an universal Mourning for our particular
sins, we should soon ^ee Providence scattering the ^hreatning Clouds that hang
over ^ur heads, and raising a founda^ion for our further hopes of ^scape. Oh
then that Charity to ^ ruining State, that Compassion ^o the languishing Church
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that our Gra^itude to a gracious God for his Mercies,
or that our dread of a ^onfounding Majesty, and haste^ing Misery, may make us
break off ^n! God calls, as Ier. 14.17. I ^ave seen thy abominations; Woe unto
thee, oh Jerusalem, will thou ^ot be made clean? when shall it ^nce be? Oh when
shall we leave ^ur sins, after so many years of Patience - tiring,
Iustice-daring Provocations? When shall it once ^e, after so many lesser
Judgments ^ounding warnings to us to prevent ^ur ruin? Oh when shall it be,
after all the miraculous engaging Deliverances God has given? Oh let this be
the time.

Now to this end I have presented thee with those Considerations, that may be
Inducements to all, to learn to live more holily, after such rich enjoyments of
Mercies; and prevent the abusing of them to sin. For as Hermes after Wine was
wont to take a grain of Mastick, to prevent its Coagulation into destructive
Tartar; so should we wisely fortify our selves by weighty Considerations, so
to prevent those sins we are naturally pron^ to commit after the receipt o^
Mercies. And especially, because when Satan by his Instruments hat^ attempted
our destruction, and ou^ gracious God has prevented their designs by
delivering, not sufferin^ the gates of Hell to prevail against us; our vigilant
Adversary, seein^ he cannot destroy us, will exercis^ all his wyles to deprive
us of the benefit of Deliverances given t^ us, by endeavoring to divert our
mind from considering them, and ^ent^cing us to a wrong Improvement of them.
Let us also believe our future condition is like to be according to our
carriage under Gods present gracious Dispensations. And I may say of Mercy, as
the Heathens of Fortune, Nec cultores praeterit, nec haeret contemptoribus. It
slights not its Worshippers, neither will it stay with its Contemners. So those
that are grateful for Mercies shall never want them, those that are abusers
shall not long enjoy them. Continuance in son will be so great discouragement
to God in ways of Mercies, that we shall have just Cause to despair of future
relief from him. It Is reported of Alphonsus King of Spain, that a Noble
beggered by his wickedness, seeking relief, was denied, with this Answer, If
thou had ^pent thy estate in my Service, there were reason to provide for
thee; but since you have foolishly wasted it, thou shall live i^ thy wants
without my relief. S^ although God will deliver thos^ whose dangers arise from
serving of him, yet he may justly deny deliverance to those that involv^
themselves in miseries by sinning against him.

Now, Reader, if thou wonderes^ so important a Subject as this, i^ undertaken
by so weak a hand a^ mine; know, that gratitude raise^ the price of the meanest
present^ And this is certain, God does no^ choose means because effectual, bu^
means are effectual, because God chooses them. Young Samuel was chosen to carry
a message to Ol^ Eli, who did not contemn him for his youth, but received the
messag^ the Lord sent by him. And (...) though I am the meanest of Saints my
weak endeavors may be prosperous with the blessing of an Almighty God.

There is such a pruritus scribendi in this diseased Age, that would force me
to make some plea for exposing this small Treatise to public view. But
Apologies commence so low, that they are rather believed to be flatteries than
truths; and (as one says) should the highest Protestations of my humble
intentions be entered, I know men will take the liberty to believe or question
at pleasure. Therefore all I shall say is only this; The subject and Treatise
is peaceable, not mingling with the intemperate and preternatural heats of the
Christian, or rather unchristian Gladiatours of these days. The Treatise is
also practical, designed to reduce the lives of persons to better order; and
not stuffed with nice speculations, to gratify men's itching ears and wild
fancies. I believe also you will say it is plain, if not too uncouth. But I
shall not affect the vain Pedantry of plausible ostentation; for I reckon the
simplicity of sober well-meaning hearts, need no such curious embellishments:
And I shall be willing to be judged by any, whether it be not seasonable; and
so I shall depend upon the Lord to accompany it with his blessing to the Souls
of those who shall vouchsafe to peruse it; whose Prayers I shall desire, that I
may spend my days to the glory of God, and in promoting the public welfare;
and so remain,

Chelmsford, October. 8. 79. An unfeigned Well-wisher to the public good, THOMAS
GOVGE.

God's Controversy WITH ENGLAND, FOR Contemning Deliverances.
Ezra 9. 13, 14. -- Seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such a deliverance as this: Should we
again break thy Commandments?

-- Would not thou be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that
there should be no remnant nor escaping?


SInce one effectual means to promote the deserved honor and transcending
glory of the Sovereign Governor of Humane Affairs, is by a suitable
Improvement of his various Providence to us; an industrious inquiry into the
blessed designs of his providential dispensations, in order thereto, will be
accounted no unnecessary work to such as intend that Religious improvement of
them. Of these providential occurrences, which may not be pretermitted without
some serious Meditations on them, some are of that sort which we call common,
from the frequent enjoyment of them, (of which kind is our daily Preservation,
Provision, Gubernation) although they are special, considering our unspeakable
misery without them; and these (I say) cannot be slighted and dis-regarded,
without an unworthy disparagement of infinite mercy, and contempt of Sovereign
Majesty.

But besides these ordinary works of Providence, there are oftentimes
extra-ordinary works presented to our view, attended with special displays, and
bearing some eminent impressions of Mercy or Justice; which are not to be
overlooked in a cursory way, or dispatch with a single glance, but require a
deliberate Meditation, a fixed inspection, and a singular improvement. Such
unusual dispensations from the Almighties hand, have frequently been known,
both in ways of Mercy and Justice in our sinful Nation, which has been a
Theater for the mixed displays of these Glorious Attributes for many years; and
especially of late, our long-suffering God has stamped most illustrious
impressions of mercy on many of his eminent Providence to us; of which our
Miraculous Deliverance in part vouchsafed to us, is an apparent testimony; and
requires the most faithful improvement, that finite creatures can make of the
doings of an infinite God.

The Deliverance I mean was that, when the supreme Overseer of created beings
in all their operations, cast an unmerited eye of pity on our sinful Nation,
languishing with undiscerned distempers: when the boundless goodness of the
Eternal God, made a timely stop to our hastening ruin: when the heavenly
witness that is conscious to the secret actions of unmindful Mortals, detected
the vaulted contrivances of the undermining Moles of our Commonwealth; when
the Almighty God, who places bounds to the roaring waves, and says to the
raging sea, Hitherto and no farther, took off the Chariot-wheels of our furious
Enemies: when he unto whom belongs the issues from death, as by a glorious
Resurrection, rescued us from the jaws of destruction, who bore the Image of
death upon us: when the faithful God discovered the unfaithful dealings of
perfidious Plotters; and by a glorious ray of infinite goodness shining on our
clouded Land, has made us a Land of Goshen, who were near to be made a
miserable Golgotha. This is the Deliverance never to be forgotten, the
wonderful work with such impressions of mercy, which is to be beheld with most
fixed intention.

Now can we cast our eye on this magnificent masterpiece of mercy, but our eye
must needs affect our hearts, and ingenerate such motions as were in the heart
of thankful David, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
mercy?

Can we pass by this Heavenly favor, without a pious inquiry into the gracious
designs of our blessed God in bestowing of it? Has this unexpected deliverance
continued the choicest of blessings to us, and shall we dis-appoint the
expectations of God, who is looking for signal requitals of it? Surely such a
glorious work as this, wherein has appeared the immediate hand of Almighty
God, the most wonderful goodness of his sweetest nature, the highest
testimonies of his enduring patience, can never be over-looked by us; unless we
design to affront his mercy, disdain his kindness, and dare his justice.

But oh miserable Nation! oh ungrateful people! Where are the tokens of
thankful respects for unmerited favors? What notice is there taken that such a
work has been done amongst us? Who lays to heart the operations of his hands?
Where are the lips that praise him, the lives that honor him for it? The
Idolatrous Philistines could assemble and sacrifice to their Dagon, for
delivering Sampson their Enemy into their hands, Judge. 16.23, 24. But when have
we assembled to offer the sacrifice of praise to our God, for delivering us
from the hands of our Enemies? Oh regardless people! if talking of Deliverance
be recompense enough, we have paid it; if cursing our foes be sufficient
reward, we have given it: but if repentance of disobedience be the only
return, we have yet omitted it: if reformation can only be regarded as a
suitable requital, we are without it. What have we seen but unchanged
conversations in our changed condition? What have we given to the Lord, but a
doubled measure of Impieties, for his doubled mercies? What have we done, but
endeavored to revenge our selves on the mercy of God that has spared us?

Oh undeserving Generation that we are! how do we enjoy mercies, and never
improve them? How do we comfortably reap the profit of Deliverance, and
unfaithfully rob the Lord of the glory of it? How do we bless our selves in
escapes, and forget the Almighty that gives them to us? We are sollicitous
wanters, but careless enjoyers. How are we joyful when getting out of danger;
but how little careful then are we to be getting out of sin? Methinks the Moon
that is often changing and still keeps its old spots, is a plain Emblem of our
wicked Nation: when all things are ruining, sin remains unruined; when enjoying
escapes from ruin, still sin remains to be again a cause of ruin. Oh what
unchangeable Ethiopians are we in our sins? How like are we to the hardened
Mariners, who escaping the fatal dangers of a threatening storm, remain secure
till another Tempest hangs over their heads? What succession of mercies do we
promise our selves, in the vilest continuance in destroying iniquities!

But is there no hope^ that the consideration of delivering Mercies may
overpower us from going on in our wicked courses? Were they pressed upon our
Consciences, would they not prevail to effect some reformation? It may be a
word that will suit to the works of the Lord amongst us, may make some
impression, effect some conviction, and produce some amendment. Behold then a
Word enough to melt our hearts with the reading of it; to dissolve us into
tears by meditating on it; to make us reform by applying of it. -- Seeing thou
have given us such a deliverance as this, should we again break thy
commandment? -- Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us?
etc.

In these words are contained, 1. A thankful acknowledgment of the undeserved
mercy their gracious God had exercised toward them; consisting in these two
things. 1. He had punished them less than their sins deserved. They admire the
Clemency of Almighty God, that when their iniquities were wonderfully great,
their punishments should be mitigated with so much mercy. The Hebrew Verb (...)
here used, signifies (1.) Cohibere se, to withold ones self. And so the sense
is elegant, Thou have withheld thy self from doing what our iniquities
deserved from thee. Thou would not suffer thy direful anger to break out
against us to the utmost, but did refrain thy self from making an irreparable
ruin amongst us. Had thou proportioned thy destroying judgment, to our
daring provocations, and thy wrathful dealings to our vast deserts, we had not
been a people at this very day: but thy mercy detained the hands of thy
Justice; and thou did not so much design to consume us, but only to correct
us. The like acknowledgment have we cause to make, having had experiences of
the same clemency: for when our provoked God has come out against us with
wasting Wars, destroying Plagues, devouring Flames; yet he restrained his
wrath, and suspended the greatest part of the judgments we deserved from him;
and although when he began, there was cause enough to make a full end of us
all, yet in the midst of Justice he remembered mercy, and graciously desisted
from ruining of us. 2. The word signifies Cohibere aliquid, to restrain any
thing else. So the sense is, Thou have restrained, kept down our sins from
rising up in judgment against us; for had they appeared against us, we had
utterly been ruined.
2. This Mercy was expressed to them, by the working out for them so great a
deliverance; Since thou have given us such a deliverance; implying how
merciful, how seasonable, how undeserved a deliverance that was they received;
and such is ours, that the Almighty God has vouchsafed to us. 2. You have here
the deep sense of duty that was upon his heart; which duty was to break off
sin, which only can be a just return to God for his goodness. 3. You have his
sense of danger, if sin was persisted in after such a deliverance; Would thou
not consume us? etc. 4. You have the aggravation of that destruction under such
heinous sinning, Till there were no remnant nor escaping.


The general Heads I shall insist upon, which are immediately contained in, or
may serve to explain this Text, are these.

1. That the great design of God in bestowing merciful deliverances on a people
is to reclaim them from sin. 2. That such is that wickedness that is in the
most of men, that they are prone to wax worse after deliverances. 3. That
sinning after Deliverance, is the most heinous sinning. 4. That sinning after
Deliverance, has a peculiar influence to hasten destruction. 5. That
Destruction for sins after Deliverance, will be the most dreadful destruction.
Now I shall endeavor, Deo juvante, to speak something to each of these in
order.
PROPOSITION I.
The design of God in delivering a people from eminent dangers of ruin, is to
oblige them to forsake all sinful and wicked practices. The intent of
delivering mercies, is to cause us to repent of our destroying iniquities. The
main end of Gods exercising goodness toward us, is only to effect some
goodness in us. The design of special mercies, is to make us a special people.
The Almighty God delights not to reduce a people from sinful courses, by laying
them under such heavy judgments as may render them incapable of committing
those sins, which otherwise their wills incline them to; but the way of his
pleasure is to confer such mercies upon them, as may sweetly conquer their
stubborn hearts, and gain their averse minds to himself. Hence when the sin and
folly of an obstinate people has reduced them to inextricable straits, the
eternal God does not suffer his destroying wrath to break forth against them,
saying, I see them helpless and past recovery, now therefore will I ease me of
my adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies; but compassion being kindled in
his merciful breast, Now says the Lord I will lend a helping hand, and give
them that experience, and those evidences of my goodness, that shall for ever
oblige them to me, and win them from proceeding in ways of rebellion against
me. Thus all our deliverances lay us under perpetual obligations to devote our
selves to the blessed work and service of our delivering God.

Our mercies are not beautiful Tombs in our way, wherewith we may delight our
eyes; but Chariots to carry us on with more pleasure and cheerfulness in the
ways of our gracious God. The end of deliverances is plainly seen, Luke 1.74,
75. That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, may serve him
without fear, in Righteousness and Holiness all the days of our lives. We are
not delivered from enemies, to continue enemies to God; but an escape is given
us from the hands of enemies, that we may resign up our selves into the hands
of our God.

When God prevents our becoming miserable preys to unmerciful foes, it is to
oblige us ever to praise him with thankful Hearts and obedient lives, Psalm.
105.37. He brought forth that people with silver and gold; spread a cloud for a
covering, and fire to give light in the night, v. 39. He brought quails, and
satisfied them with bread from heaven; he brought forth his people with joy,
and his chosen with gladness, v. 43. And what was the design of all this
favor? v. 45. That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.
Although our mercies are Gods gifts, yet they greatly raise our debts. The
favors we receive from our gracious God, are not as payments given to servants
to discharge from work, but like the encouragements tender Parents give to
Children, to increase their dutiful service and obedience. It Is promised. H^s.
3. u^. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness; or, ob tantam D^i
beneficentiam, Grot. they shall serve and obey him for his goodnesses, in
returning and restoring of them: that wonderful kindness was for this end, to
ingenerate obedient love, and induce to constant loyalty to so blessed a Redeemer.

Now had not these blessed intentions and gracious designs been in the heart of
our God, he had never exercised his Almighty power for our help and relief, as
of late he has done: but he designing to reclaim us from sin, has restrained
his wrath, and revealed our danger; that so by giving us the advantage of such
a mercy, we might render to him the glory of it. And what can be more
reasonable, than to give God the glory of that, whereof we have the profit?
What more unjust, than to cross such gracious designs as these? And therefore
unless we design to debar our selves from future mercies, it concerns us
greatly to answer Gods design in these; unless we intend by our
incorrigibleness to bring irreparable ruins upon our selves, it highly
concerns us by this goodness of God, to be led to that Repentance and
Reformation intended by it. For to what end has this grace of God appeared,
but to teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we might
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world?

I shall now propose some few Reasons, why the glorious God condescends to
strive with Man with thus much goodness, rather than reduce him by forcible
coactions, and destroying judgments; why he does not ease him of his Enemies by
his Almighty power, but endeavor to make them friends by obliging favors.

REASON I.
Because this way and method is most suitable to his gracious nature. Rough
spirited men in reducing offenders, will use nothing but harsh severity: but
such whose nature is tempered with amiable meekness, abhor such wrathful means;
and will make experiment what clemency and kindness will do, before they
proceed to powerful compulsions. Thus the great God having declared himself to
be most gracious, will experience how far he can prevail by the exercise of
goodness, before he proceeds to the displays of his justice and greatness. So
good is our God, that he is ready to make proof of the efficacy of a thousand
smiles of mercy, rather than of a single stroke of Justice. The titles of
honor which discover his nature, do mostly set out his abounding goodness,
Exodus 34.5, 6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in truth and goodness. The whole world is embroidered with
infinite impressions of goodness. Among his blessed Attributes, his grace is
uppermost; and though he be equally just as good, yet he exercises his goodness
more than his justice. This is the fairest flower in the garland of Majesty;
the brightest ray that issues from that un-approachable light; the height of
his immensurable and Imperial glory. Now if we consider his readiness to mercy,
and his slowness to anger; his frequency in displays of goodness, and the
rarity of amazing judgments; his resolvedness in ways of grace, and
reservedness in ways of justice; we may easily see it is most agreeable to his
nature, to accomplish his designs by clemency.

REASON 2.
Because this merciful method is most agreeable to the nature of man. The most
powerful Engine to attract the will of man, is the good will and mercy of God.
Man being of a generous spirit, is more easily drawn than driven, persuaded
than forced. Murdering severity may force a slavish fear, but never produce any
loving obedience. Dipping in the sweetest oil of mercy, is most effectual to
soften the hardened hearts of men. Parisiensis relates a History of a stubborn
sinner, that nothing would reclaim; but God heaping up favors upon him, at
last he cries out, Vicisti benignissime Deus indefatigabili bonitate: Oh
kindest God, thou have conquered me with thy unwearied goodness. Were a man to
relieve an inveterate enemy in a perishing condition, it could not but effect a
change, and make him become an intimate and constant friend. Sullen,
peremptory, and imperious commands, have little influence to sway obdurate
Enemies. The kindness of conscientious David in sparing Saul his mortal Enemy,
melted his stony heart, and made him promise eternal friendship, 1 Samuel 26.21.
I have sinned, says Saul, I will do thee no more harm, seeing my life was
precious in thy sight. And will not the most refractory sinner be ready to come
to terms of peace, at the receiving such kindness from the hand of God? will he
not say, Ah Lord, I have been an ungodly Enemy, and impudent Rebel against
thee; thou had me in thy hand, and might have suffered my bloody Enemies
to have cut me off; thou might have dispatched me to eternal Torments: but
since thou have been so gracious to spare and deliver me thy Enemy, henceforth
I shall ever be thy friend, and never offer to rebel any more.

REASON 3.
God proceeds in these gracious methods, because of the experienced
ineffectualness of destroying judgments to effect a sincere Repentance, and
produce an unfeigned obedience. Mercy has ever prevailed more with sinners
than wrath. Severity in exercising judgments, may curb a headstrong sinner
from outward enormities; but the bent of his will, and the inclination of his
heart still remains to commit it. These usually have no farther influence, than
to render men like roaring Lions confined by Iron grates; like ravenous dogs
restrained by heavy chains; only making an impediment from acting, not an
amendment as to the will to act. A lock may stop a Thief, yet it alters not his
mind.

This ineffectualness of judgments, has often been evidenced in the devilish
behavior that has appeared in many under them. How many in blasphemous
enraged passions, have belched out most execrable Oaths and reproachful
speeches against Heaven, and the instruments of Divine vengeance, Et quem
oderunt perire cupiunt; wishing the destruction of the God that destroyed them?
As the Cilicians made War against Mount A^tna, spitting out sulphurous flames
upon them: with such madness do rebellious wretches contend with the Almighty,
consuming them by the fire of deserved vengeance.

How often do men bid defiance to God heaping up plagues upon them! and stopped
in their sinful courses as Balaam by the Angel, still will spur on in despite
of God himself.

Zeph. 3.5. Every morning be brings his ^udgments to light, but the wicked know
no ^hame. Sins were continued under continual judgments; so Ier. 5.3. They were
smitten, and did not grieve.

And if at any time judgments have affected a sinful people, by reason of the
extremity of them: yet all those appearances of Devotion under them, have been
mostly delusions; being only the workings of nature, expressing a sense of
suffering, not the effects of grace, declaring a sorrow for sinning: hence
hardened Pharaoh un^er the distress of miraculous judgments, is seemingly moved
with Repentance. Thus thousands are beautiful in pangs, but it is only the
operations of judgments on the body, not their impression on the heart. But
this ^neffectualness of destroying judgments, ^s declared abundantly by the
following carriage of the sufferers by them. For how many have we known, after
the wea^ing off the smarting sense of vengeance, have proved the grandees and
Imperialists in provoking wickednesses? and the storm of judgments being a
little over, have rid on with a full carreer, and un^ridled chase, in their
unlicensed courses. Since then this way effects so little, God will rather make
use of mercies: since horrid desolations will make no mere impression, God will
make experiment what deliverance will do. So then, to conclude this head, God
uses these means, because as Sola misericordia deducit Deum ad homines, so Sola
misericordia reducit homines ad Deum: As mercy only brings down God to man, so
mercy only brings back man to God.

PROPOSITION 2.
Such is the wickedness of our corrupted hearts, that we are prone to proceed
in sin, notwithstanding the Lord is using these means with us to reclaim us. We
are apt to make use of our deliverances to further our sins, rather than
improve them to the forsaking of them. For as the red Sea drinks in the River
Jordan yet is never the sweeter; and the vas^ Ocean all other Rivers, yet is
not the fresher: so we receive the most excellent mercies, and yet are but
little the better. So entire is our cursed affection to ou^ espoused Lusts,
that whoever be dis-engaged, and whoever be displeased, we ar^ too much
resolved to continue in them. Hence the mercies God gives for encouragements to
serve him, we turn to be instruments of sinning against him. When God does most
for us in ways of mercy, we are prone to do most against him in ways of sin.
It Is reported of the Leopard, that it is most savage to those that do most for
it. Too true it is of us; we are wretchedly most unkind, to those that show
most kindness to us. Felicitate corrumpimur, outward felicity makes us abound
in iniquity. After the receipt of special favors, we often loosen the reins to
Impiety, and run more extravagantly after our own inventions. How many become
more nimble in the feats of iniquity, by being anointed with the oil of mercy?
Men nurse the hateful brats of their devilish lusts, at the breast of Divine
bounty. Our envenomed natures extract food for the nourishment of abominable
sins, from the singular favors of a gracious God.

As when the season grows warm, by fructifying rays of the Sun, the weeds
spring up; so by the increase of mercies, there is often the abounding of
iniquity, Hos 10.1. Israel is an empty vine: or, (...), vitis luxurians; a wild
vine: according to the multitudes of his fruits, he has increased the altars,
i. e. Quo res habuit pr^speriores, eo magis indulsit Idololatriae, Gro^ The
more prosperity, the more Idolatry. It Is observed of the Spleen, the greater it
grows, the less the body is: the more Temporal mercies, the less heavenly
spirits and holy obedience. Hos. 4.7. As they increased, they sinned against
me. Heb. (...) Sicut multiplicari eis, as I multiplied to them; or, as I
increased deliverances, honor, riches; so they sinned against me. As judgments
will not bridle us, so mercies will not break us off our sinning. Isa. 26.10.
Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness. In the
former verses the Prophet shows, that the people of God would serve him even
under afflictions; but as for the wicked, neither mercies nor afflictions work
upon them. Mercies are messengers to instruct us our duty; but although for
many years we have been called upon by them, yet how little have we learnt to
love, serve, and obey our God by them? Noah miraculously delivered, is
abominably drawn into sin. He that had the highest proofs of the mercy and
justice of God, mercy to himself, justice to the world, lies drunk in his Tent;
preserved from waters, overcome by wine: behold, you may see him guilty of the
sin for which he saw the world condemned; you may see him to be rebuked for the
sin he so often had reproved: and he that was so holy before, now becomes a
pattern of uncleanness, and example for future wickedness: thus prone are the
best to sin after deliverance. Thus holy Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.24, 25. God
delivered him from death, but he rendered not to the Lord according to the
benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up, not with thankfulness, but
haughtiness; not in praises, but with pride. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Ieshurun waxed fat
and kicked, then be forsook the God that made him, and lightly esteemed the
Rock of his salvation. Deliverance had made way for his promotion; and he being
promoted, God was rejected. Righteous Lot by distinguishing favor escaping the
flames of Sodom, fell into the fire of sin. The ashes of Sodom, the pillar of
salt, made him not wise enough to shun the drunken bed of Incest. Who could
have thought Lot should fall into such Impieties, upon the receipt of such
mercies? but thus prone are we to abuse goodness, and ready to slight the
greatest kindness: how often do we turn our Physic to poison?

How often do we make our Mercies Commeatus peccandi, Inlets to sin? It Is said
concerning Eve, that God designed her an helper to Adam, and made her of his
rib; but the devil (...), took his rib, and made it a fatal dart. So God gives
Mercies with good intentions, but Satan siding with our corrupt inclinations,
makes use of them to our great disadvantage.

I shall now consider how it comes to pass, that Deliverances have no more
Influence upon us, and how we become so prone to sin after them.

(1.) It arises from the mighty Power that accustomed sins have upon the heart.
When highest Reasons are obliging to leave sin, the force of Custom prevents
their operation. When men are soaked in Sensuality, flesht in Villainy,
thoroughpaced in Rebellious courses, what is able to change them? Hereby the
heart is so direfully hardened, the Devil's Kingdom so invincibly fortified, and
sin itself so much endeared, that there is unspeakable difficulty in conquering
of it. Ezekiel. 16.4. When delivered from Egypt it is said, Their Navil was not
cut. The Navil is that whereby the Child is supplied with nourishment in the
Mothers Womb. So this expression means, Israel was still drawing in Egyptian
Manners and Superstitions; being accustomed to them, they still hankered after
them, notwithstanding their great deliverance.

And although for a while a deliverance may seem to make some impression, yet
as the water heated, redit ad ingenium, grows cold again: so affections to God
wear off, and men are hankering after their former Lusts. So Ezekiel. 23.8.
Neither ^eft she her whoredoms brought from Egypt. Difficile est ab usitatis
desinere: Accustomed ^ins are hardly deserted: sins often renew^d, are hardly
reformed; sudden mercies, though never so great, will hardly wear ^ut continued
sins.

2. The reason why our Deliverances work no greater Reformation, is, because ^e
fix our Eyes too much upon second ^auses, and inferior Instruments, without a
due acknowledgment of the hand ^f God. Hence we are prone to con^eive our
selves more obliged to Men than (...) God himself. How wickedly do ma(...)
ascribe more to Humane Policy, and Heathenish Fortune, than to infinite power
and Heavenly favor? Hos. 11.3. They knew not that I healed them. Nescire
dicitur qui gratiam non refert: He is ignorant who neither observes nor answers
the merciful hand of God.

Attributing Deliverances to man, hinders the performance of duty to God. The
reason why mercies are not seconded with obedience to God, is, because we look
too much to second causes; so those Hab. 1.16. Their portion was fat, and they
sacrificed to their nets, and burnt incense to their drags. Thus the Assyrian
proudly ascribed all to himself, Isa. 10.14. By the strength of my hand have I
done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent. How can the mercy of God be
answered, if it be not owned? How can we requite God for delivering, if we deny
the receipts of deliverance from him? If we look not upon our mercies as given
by God, we shall give God nothing for his mercies.

3. Deliverances are no more influentia to reclaim from sin, because of our
unreasonable oblivion of them. Our greatest mercies are but nine days wonders
present impressions made by deliverance are soon worn off by neglect of future
consideration. The sense of our Engagements to Obedience wearing off, our
inclinations to sin make head. When mercies are new, how frequent is our
remembrance of them? Whilst employed in our daily labors, our minds are
admiring delivering love: When waking in the night, these are the objects of
Meditation; when conversing with friends, these are the Theams we discourse of.
Now somewhat must be done to requite this kindness; but too sudden a
forgetfulness anticipates and prevents the performance of our acknowledged
obedience. Deuteronomy. 32.17, 18. they are charged with abominable sins; and it
stands as a reason, because they forgot the God that formed them, and the rock
that begat them. Did we not forget our mercies, our Consciences would force us
to forsake our sins. Were our hearts more but Repositories for Gods favors, so
much Iniquity would not be lodged in them. Forgetting Gods mercies, is not
only a base unworthy sin, but a breeding sin: many desperate sins arise from
despising the kindness of our God. And oh, how unspeakably strange is it, that
we can forget him, who does so much to be remembered? That we can suffer his
mercies to pass out of our mind, whose mercies are new every moment? How
impossible would it be to live in unlamented sin, did we live in the sense of
undeserved mercies! Hence it is we are so prone to sin after deliverances,
because we are so apt to suffer them to slip out of our labile memories.

4. This continuance in sin after deliverances, arises from persons bolstring
up themselves with sinful presumptions that the dangers of destruction are
past. When men begin to apprehend all things are well, they are apt to take
occasion to do ill. When men are conceiving the bitterness of death is past,
they little mind to reform the baseness of their lives. They care not how
little they live to God, when they presume they shall live long. Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons of
men are fully set in themselves to do evil, (...) Sir. roboratur: their hearts
are strengthened, emboldned in them to go on in evil. (...), etc. Because of
this delaying judgments, they go on with a full confidence, they sin with
courage. This is as wind to their sayls, that drives them on briskly in sinful
courses. With this did the wicked Jews under Divine comminations hearten
themselves in their ways, Ezekiel. 11.3. saying, It is not near. Gods abstinence
from judgments, was made an encouragement for continuance in sin. So Ezekiel.
12.21, 22. The days are prolonged. Carnal persons are willing to go on in sin
as long as they can: and when dangers are a little gone off, they more boldly
go on in desperate sinning.

5. This proneness to sin after such mercy, arises from flattering
expectations, that in renewed returns of Distress, they shall ever meet with
the same deliverance. How do men argue from their present safety, to their
future security? How fondly do men conceive that God will be ever merciful,
because of his present mercies? Did men wisely consider after deliverance, how
soon they may stand in need of the same helping arm, how soon they may want the
same mercy, they could not be so audacious as to slight and contemn it, left
the next time they be deprived of it. Gods present deliverances are evidences
of his power to deliver us again, but not assurances of his Will to do it. It Is
a groundless Supposition men go upon, who think Mercies are entailed upon them,
and inseparably annexed to them. We shall experience, if we do not leave off
sinning, God can leave off delivering. If we can still forsake God, he can at
last forsake us.

6. We are thus inclined to sin against God after deliverance, as we being
delivered, our hearts are brought off from their dependence on God, and we are
magnifying our selves instead of God. When God has given us our precious lives
from the hands of devouring Enemies, we imagine we can live of our selves, and
thence are regardless of living to God. Hos. 13.6. They were filled, and their
heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. Their outward fruitfulness
caused their sinful forgetfulness. Our hearts are apt to be set upon
enjoyments, and not on the God that gives them. Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine
take away the heart. The Hebr. word (...) signifies auferre, to take away by
force; so did those things take away their heart from God by force; or
occupare, to occupy. They occupy and take up that room in the heart God should
have. Thus we having worldly enjoyments continued by deliverances, our hearts
are detained by them, that we mind not God, care not how we go on in sin
against him; mind not how little obedience we yield to him, as if we could live
well enough without him.

7. This proceeding in sin is partly caused by persons apprehending themselves
to be innocent, and their courses to be harmless, from the deliverances God
gives to them. Carnal persons are apt to reckon their ways to be lawful,
because they are spared and unpunished in them. Hos. 12.8. Ephraim said, I am
become rich, I have found me out riches; in all my labors they shall find no
iniquity in me, that were sin. As much as to say, Were my courses unrighteous,
they would not be prosperous; whatever the Prophets charge me with, it appears
by the dealings of God with me, that my doings are good; if I were so sinful, I
should not be succesful. Thus corrupted persons will vainly argue from Gods
delivering; were I so wicked, were my actions so displeasing, God would not
have spared me, but delivered me to destruction. But oh how vain are these
reasonings! God bears with long-suffering the vessels of wrath prepared for
destruction; out of his mercy he gives a space to repent of thy sins. And who
so wicked to conclude, that because God exercises patience, therefore they are
no offenders? This is a sign of Gods goodness, but not of thine.

PROPOSITION 3.
Sinning after Deliverance, is the most heinous sinning. It renders sin
exceeding great, to commit it after great mercies. It is a great sin, to count
any sin small, that is committed against a great God: yet sin has its
aggravations, and admits of degrees, according to the circumstances under which
it is committed. There are two things which render a sin most abominable; when
sin is committed against light, and against love. They are no little nor light
sins, that are aggravated with convictions by light: nor are sins against love
of an inferior nature; nothing more intolerable to Man or God, than to have
ill will for good deeds. It Is sinful to render evil for evil to man, much more
to render evil for good to God. What more provoking sight can be beheld, than a
man impudent in evil under judgment, and barren in good under mercies? Affronts
to love, are more unsufferable than Rebellion under displays of wrath. The
highest unkindness, is the highest sinfulness. The sin of David is aggravated
by the recording Gods kindness to him, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. I delivered thee out
of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy masters house -- And if that had been
too little, I would moreover have given thee such and such things. Wherefore
then have thou despised the command of the Lord, to do this evil in his sight?
To sin in the face of God when smiling upon us with unmerited mercy, is one of
the greatest contempts can be cast upon God. To manifest our sinfulness, when
we enjoy the greatest testimonies of goodness, is the height of madness. To
withdraw our necks from an uneasy galling yoke, to rebel under the severities
of a cruel Tyrant, to cast off the service of an imperious Master, may admit
some excuse; but to wax wanton under mercies, to despise the clemency of
Heaven, to deny obedience to a loving Father, is an offense indefendible, a
crime unpardonable. When God would lay a people under a conviction of the
hainousness of their crimes, he repeats his gracious dealings to them. Ierem.
2.20. Of old time I have broken thy yoke, i.e. When thou were in Egyptian
bondage under intolerable slavery, I set thee free: And thou said thou
would not transgress, yet thou have slighted my favors, and broken thy vows;
and under every green tree thou wandrest playing the harlot. And v. 22. this is
noted for an indelible sin; such sins as these are not (...), not written, but
engraven: they are of the deepest die, and most permanent stain: Hos. 7.15.
Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine mischief
against me. It has an allusion to men with broken bones; Oh what would they
give for a healing Surgeon? what price would they give to be free from pain?
so these in distress would promise any thing to God for deliverance: but, says
the Lord, though I bound them up and cased them, though I strengthened them
against the destructive assaults of their enemies, yet still with the highest
wickedness and unkindness they imagine mischief against me: the more I did to
engage them, the more they have done to dishonor me.

The people of Israel were charged with their sinning at Gilgal above all other
places, Hos. 9.15. All their iniquity is in Gilgal. The Hebr. word (...) which
we render all, signifies summum, praecipuum, i.e. their highest, chiefest, most
notorious si^ was at Gilgal; why there? because there it was they received
abundance of mercies. Here was the great circumcision, when the reproach was
rolled away, after they had past over Jordan, and arrived to the Land of
Canaan, Josh. 5.7. here Joshua pitched the twelve stones, the everlasting
memorial of their wonderful deliverance out of Jordan, Josh. 4.20. here was the
beginning of the rest promised to them in the Land of Canaan. Now to be
involved in sin, when encompast with so many mercies; to be forsaking God after
such late experience of his goodness, this was the highest crime imaginable.

Now I shall lay down some particular aggravations of sins after deliverances,
that so you may lament those you have committed, and labor to prevent them for
the future.

1. Such sins most wretchedly cast a blot upon the most Holy God, as if he were
a countenancer of sin, and a patron to persons Impieties, rather than a severe
avenger of them. Christ was accounted a friend to Publicans and sinners, for
showing kindness unto them: and will not Atheistical wretches be ready to
asperse the glorious God as a friend to sin, for improving his power to deliver
such persons as improve his deliverance only for sin? It Is reported of one
profane Dionysius, that when by his covetous pilfering he had preyed on a
Temples glory, and enricht himself with its Sacred Treasure, and after
transporting his Treasures, escaping a fatal Shipwreck of which he was in
danger, with the greatest impudence cries out, How do the Gods love Sacrilege!
Because he presumed they delivered him a Robber, he imagined they loved
Robbery: Psalm. 50.21. Because I kept silence, thou thoughtst me altogether such
an one as thy self, i. e. Quod tuis maleficiis delector, Muis. Gods patient
forbearance, made him reckon God unrighteous as himself. To go on in sin when
delivered from ruin, is practically to say, I am delivered to sin. Such an
Impiety was charged on the Jews, Ierem. 7.10. Will ye steal, and murder, and
say, We are delivered to do all these abominations? They were not come to that
height of profaneness, to declare it in so many words; but by their ungodly
courses after his gracious deliverances, they did as much as say it. What is
this but to make God an unholy God? What greater aggravations of our sins can
there be, than to cast dirt on the holiness of God, which is the aggravation of
all his glory? Certainly, if God suffers dishonor by his exercising goodness
to us, we shall suffer destruction for our abusing of it. God will show no
favor to those, who make him a favourer of sin.

2. Such sinning is so abominable, because it is a justification of all our
former sins. This is in effect to say, We have done well enough in sinning; God
is not angry with us, therefore we will still go on in our former courses, and
follow our old wickednesses. How provoking must this needs be to God? when
instead of a humiliation for sins, he sees a justification of them: instead of
a contrite lamentation for our evils, he finds an audacious approbation of
them. How can a holy God bear this at our hands? We cannot justify the best of
our actions before the Lord, how abominable then to justify those that are
apparent evils? It was very displeasing to God for Jonah to say, I do well to
be angry. And shall we say, We did well to be proud and profane, to be
drunkards and swearers? and what else is our persistence in sin, but a
testimony of our allowance of it?

3. Such sinning, implies a daring provocation of God to destroy us. To despise
God sparing and delivering, is to dare him to smite and destroy us. Not to care
for deliverance, is as much as to say, we do not fear destruction, Isa. 5.19.
Let him hasten his work that we may see it. This impudent expression either
respects Gods power, q. d. let him do his worst, we fear not, as men that had
overgrown Divine Justice, and become too big and too strong for the Almighties
arm; or it may be spoken in respect of the Truths and threatenings declared by
the Prophets challenging God to the accomplishment o^ them. But will God suffer
himself to b^ dared by worms? can you daunt his unalterable courage? can you
hold the Almighties hands, or lay bonds on his judgments, that they shall not
destroy you Will God suffer his creatures to insult ove^ him? are we out of his
reach, that we fea^ no ruin? can we match him with equa^ forces? sure we are
nothing to him. How then can he endure a challenge from us How can he suffer
our sins after mercies? By these sins we are like those, Job 15.25, 26. Who
stretch out their hands against God, and strengthen themselves against the
Almighty, etc. But who ever contended with him, and prospered? It will be
dreadful to fall into the hands of a living God. And this will certainly be the
portion of those that affront him with such daring provocations.

4. These sins are so heinous, as by them the delivering mercy of God is
horribly undervalued. What is our Rebellion after the reception of such
mercies, but to declare we account not our selves obliged to God for them? What
is this but to disown the greatness of the favors God bestows upon us? What
greater dis-ingenuity can be expressed, than to diminish the greatest favors of
God, in love to our devilish lusts? Every mercy that comes from so great a
God, must needs be great: but to undervalue the choicest blessings and highest
mercies, must needs be a point of the highest wickedness. Was it a small
mercy, that by our late deliverance so many thousand lives have been continued,
such multitudes of Souls have been kept out of Hell? Is it nothing in your eyes
to be delivered from Popish slavery? to have the glorious Gospel continued
amongst us? Is the security of Church and State, the miraculous preservation of
Privileges and Liberties a contemptible kindness? shall all these things have
no notice taken of them? shall they all be dis-regarded? will you say it is not
worth while to leave sinning for these? dare you declare they deserve no
obedience? let your Conscience speak, would not this be horrid Blasphemy? could
you bear such undervaluing of kindness from Fellow Creatures? how then can God
from you?

5. Those Sins are the testimonies of the highest Ingratitude conceivable.
Ingratitude is the worst of Sins; and sinning after Deliverance is the worst
Ingratitude. This is unkindness that pierces the heart of God, to rebel against
him, dealing with us as the dearly beloved of his Soul. How ungrateful is it to
assassinate a Prince, to whose care we owe our Lives and Fortunes? To rip open
the bowels of her, to whom we owe our being? So is it to dishonor a God, that
is both our Protector and Benefactor, our Preserver and Deliverer. David was
greatly incensed at the Ingratitude of churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21. Surely in
vain have I kept all this fellow had in the wilderness, and he requites me evil
for good. Will not the Almighty thus complain of an ungrateful people; Surely
in vain have I kept them from the hands of their bloody Enemies, in vain I have
delayed the execution of Judgment, since all my return is Dishonor for
Deliverance, sinning for saving of them? May not God speak to us, after the
manner our blessed Savior spoke to the Jews? For which of my good works do you
stone me? For which of my good Works do you sin against me? Will you oppose me,
because I appear so often for you? Will you hate me, because I help you? Will
you rebel, because I relieve you? Is this the fruit of my Goodness? The Lord
was greatly offended with his Vineyard, Isai. 5. because after all his care to
make it fruitful, it brought forth wild grapes. I looked it should bring forth
grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. When God bestows any Mercies upon us,
his eye is upon us to see what improvement we are making of them: He looks to
see what ^hou do with thy Time, thy Talent; His eye is upon thee, to see what
use thou make of Means, Deliverances, and all thy Enjoyments: And when he
uses good means, he looks for good fruit; and if we ungratefully bring forth
wild Grapes, we shall highly provoke him, and to our disadvantage displease
him. How intolerable a Sin must it needs be, to fight against God with his
Goodness? to mischief his Honor with his Mercies? Should you be an instrument
of raising a decayed Friend, and he turn your Enemy, and use the estate
procured by you, to manage mischievous designs against you, would you not count
it intolerable baseness? Now what less, yea how infinitely more is your abusing
the Mercies of God, to the disadvantage of his Glory, and dishonor of his
Name? Should a^ neighbourly Physician freely endeavor the relief of a helpless
Beggar, and after his cost and care, when this man is restored, he should make
it his work to study the death of this worthy Friend, how intolerable
Ingratitude would this be accounted? What else is our sinning against God, on
his sparing of us? What is it but the destroying the Honor of him, who saved
us from destruction? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people
and unwise? When ungrateful Brutus was among those that came to destroy Caesar,
he pathetically cried out, Etiam tu Brute! What, thou my Son Brutus! Will thou
stab me? May not God cry out upon us, What ye, oh People of England, will ye
still be enemies? You whom I have so delivered? You whom I have so often
preserved, shall I meet with these dealings from you? Of all people you are
obliged to love and serve me, and will you improve all my Mercies against me?

6. By sinning after Deliverance, we most unjustly deny to Go^ that which is
^is Right and due for ^^livering of us. Deliverance is the price of God for our
Lives and Services. God redeeming of us, we remain no longer our own, but are
especially obliged to be his. What can we give to God for preserving our Lives,
less than (...) and that is an unanswerabl^ (...) for the exercise of ^is
Wisdom and Power (...) delivering of us. Can we then rob God of his due,
without (...) height of Injustice? Is not this the most ^^tolerable Sacrilege?
The Mercies of God are to hire us to Obedience. Will a Master suffer a Servant
to be engaged in the work of another, when he has hired him for his own? Is it
not a provoking sin, for you to be employed in the service of the Devil, when
God has hired you into his? The Apostle pressing the Corinthians to Obedience
tells them, They are not their own, but are bought with a price. Thus may we be
persuaded to Obedience, by considering, God has bought our Lives, by saving us
from Death.

7. Sinning now is so heinous, as hereby God is frustrated of his designs in
granting such favors. What may God expect, when stretching out his hand to
help us, but tha^ then we will inclin^ our hearts to honor him? What are the
designs of God in displays of Mercy, bu^ to raise up Glory to himself? He
exercises Goodness to promote his own Interest in the world, not the Devils.
Wi^ God exercis^ Mercy to his own disadvantage? Will a ^ational man put Weapons
into the hands of those would slay him with them? Would you deliver ^ man to
destroy you? Surely the Lord may justly expect Love for his Kindness Duty for
his Mercy, Obedience for hi^ Deliverance. Isai. 63.8, 9, 10. He said, Surely,
they are my people, children that will not lie; so he became their Savior.
This verse contains a kind of Expostulation that might be in God; Why should I
save such a people as this? I have enough against them to destroy them. I have
found their unfaithfulness to their promises, their unanswerableness to my
gracious Providence, why should I deliver them? Then God comes to a
Resolution, Mercy turns the scale, Goodness prevails; I will try them once
more; they are my people, children that will not lie; I hope they will not
frustrate me any more: I may take this opportunity to cut them off, but I will
make experiment once more. But proving unfaithful, he became their enemy, and
fought against them. How heinous a sin ^s it to cross Gods ends, to walk
contrary to him!

8. Sinning now is so heinous, as it is not only a neglecting Duty, but
despising Remedy. There are Peccata contra officia, and contra remedia; Sins
against Duties in omitting things commanded, and sins against remedy, slighting
and opposing ^he means which are designed for recovery from former evils. And
now what sin can be greater, than to despise the means that are used to cure
our bleeding wounds? what aggravates the sin of unbelief, and makes it the
destroying sin, but because it is the contemning of that blessed Remedy which is
provided for miserable sinners? Hence this sin binds on the sinners guilt with
an eternal bond, and makes Salvation impossible. Thus also slighting
deliverance is the highest sin, as thereby we bid open defiance to all means of
recovering of us from sin and destruction. Neglecting Salvation has a most
provoking influence on the wrath of God: Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation? Will the Lord bear this affront to his mercy, that
when he is willing to save, we declare we regard no Salvation? This will be an
unpardonable crime, there will be no escaping for us. To sin with deliverance,
is no less than to throw away the healing balm that mercy provides, and resolve
to make our wounds incurable.

PROPOSITION 4.
Sins after deliverance have a peculiar influence to procure and hasten
destruction. Our present safety is no security against future Judgments:
destruction deferred by Gods deliverances, will be hastened by our sinning after
them: those whom undeserved mercies cannot reclaim, incensed justice will
speedily ruin. The Monuments of greatest mercies, have been made examples to
declare the severity of Justice for the abuses of them. Such have experienced
the most direful suffering, to whom the Almighty has been most long-suffering.
VVitness the deplorable state of the hardened Jews, to whom the most singular
favor was extended of any people on earth; yet now who more miserable than
those rejected wretches, for their abusing favors? Justice will frown most
sharply upon the disdainful affronters of mercy. No people are nearer an utter
desolation, than those who heap up sin, when God is heaping up mercies.
Although the Lord be most willing to smite, yet he knows not how to spare when
provoked in this manner. Ier. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this. -- When I
had fed them to the full, then they committed Adultery, v. 9. Shall I not visit
for these things, says the Lord? shall I not be avenged on such a Nation as
this? These sins put God to a stand; he knows not how to go about a pardoning
act, although he delights so greatly in it: how shall I pardon, Heb. (...)
parcam: how shall I spare thee any longer? I cannot withhold the hands of my
justice, I cannot defer the punishment of these transgressions. Thence, v. 10.
God gives a Commission to enemies, Go upon the Walls and destroy, etc. delay no
longer: let those feel the smarting impressions of Justice, that despise the
sweetest expressions of mercy.

This wrath of God against despisers of goodness, appears, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25.
Consider how great things the Lord has done: but if ye still continue to do
wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King. When once a people rise
to that height of Impiety, that the most obliging kindness Heaven can show,
cannot win their hearts to obedience; what can be expected from Heaven, but the
severest vengeance an Almighty arm can bring upon them? Will not the Lord soon
rush out upon a people with wonderful plagues, when they are knocking at the
door of justice by such impenitent courses? The most gracious Prince would
dispatch that man, who should impudently persist in traitorous designs against
him, after a deliverance from death by his pardoning of him. Thus will the King
of Heaven miserably destroy delivered sinners rebelling against him. Divine
patience sheathing the sword of Justice, will at last desist its pleading for
the abusers of it; and impatient justice by its revengeful arm will avenge the
quarrel of despised mercy: Ezekiel. 16.43. Because thou have not remembered the
days of thy youth: q. d. the kindness and favor I then extended to thee; the
deliverances thou had from me: Behold, I will recompense thy ways upon thy
^ead. Thou have grieved me with sin, I will grind thee to pieces with
judgments; thou have recompensed me with hatred for love, I will recompense
hatred for your ^atred. Thus will God deprive those of mercies, that deprive
him of the glory of them. 2 Kings 21.13. God there threa^ens to wipe Jerusalem
as a man wipes a ^ish, q. d. He would take away all their ^elicate enjoyments,
as meat is thrown ^ut of a dish. They shall feed on judgments, who were wanton
when fed with ^ercies: but the Hebrew signifies, Delebo Jerusalem sicut deleri
solent tabulae. As impressions on tables are wont to be wiped out, so shall my
impressions of goodness upon them: the former inscriptions of honor and
prosperity shall no more be seen, but the prints of destroying judgments shall
be found upon them. It shall no more be written, These are a people delivered,
but, These are a people destroyed for abusing deliverance. This fatal
consequence of despising favors, may be illustrated from the words of God,
Hos. 6.4. Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a
morning cloud, and as the early dew it passes away. Many interpret your
goodness, the goodness bestowed on you, or your mercies. So the sense is, My
goodness that I bestow upon you, is but like a morning cloud, that is
dissipated and scattered, and does no good to you, you are not the better for
it. And as the early dew it passes away, i. e. Gratiam and misericordiam meam
malitia vestra absorbetis: You soon wear off the impressions of my mercy, as
the moistnings of the early dew are soon dried up by the earth; therefore v. 7.
I have hewed them by the Prophets, my judgments are broken out upon them: or
otherwise, The tokens of my mercy make but short impression on you; your
goodness fades away, you soon return to sin: what now shall I do to you? I am
resolved to try no more mercies; I have made you grow with my kindness like
flourishing Trees, now will I hew you down; because you are so unprofitable, I
will be unmerciful to you.

Here it will not be amiss to consider, how this persistence in sin after
deliverance, promotes and hastens the destruction of a people.

1. Hereby that peculiar respect that God has for one people above another, is
made to cease; and they are looked upon no otherwise, than the vilest of people
in the world. In Gods providen^ial dispensations, he bears some singular favor
to some, beyond what he does to others, although these may be nothing more
deserving than other Nations; and from this favor he confers singular Temporal
Blessings upon them; and these he ^alls his people, as especially cared for,
^reserved and provided for by him. But (...) these despise his kindness, and
con^^mn his goodness, he then un-peoples ^^em, and casts them out of his
favor; and then they become as liable to judg^ents, as the greatest abjects in
the world. Thus was it with the people of the Jews, the Lord separated them
from all the world for his care and charge: hence he did mighty things for
them; but continuing long in their sins, notwithstanding his mercies, Hos. 2.9.
he bids the Prophet tell them, Ye are not my people, I will not be your God;
and this rejection made way for that ruin now upon them. In the 9th of Amos,
the Prophet is threatening judgment against that sinful people, against which
they fortified themselves with presumptuous boastings of their being Gods
people, chosen by him, and so often owned by deliverances; but for their
abusing mercies, God tells them, v. 7. Are ye not as the children of the
AEthiopians unto me? says the Lord, i.e. Non pluri^ vos facio quam AEthiopes,
Grot. You are now no more to me than the vilest people.

You have been under my care, and now ye are under my curse: ye remain
unchangeable in your sins, as the AEthiopians in their color, and therefore ye
shall b^ of no more account with me than they^ What though we have been more
to God than any people on earth, and received more blessings then any Nation^
near us, insomuch that we might be called his chosen people for his care over
us? Will not despising mercies, sinning after deliverances, make him say, as
Hos. 9.15. I will love you no more? What shall we be more to him than the
AEthiopians, if we be like them in sin? Ezekiel. 15.2. What is the Vine-tree more
than another? i.e. If the Vine bring forth no fruit, what is it more than
another tree? why should it not be burnt? Whatever we have been, if we be
fruitless and ungrateful, why should we not be punished? If we be not bearing
trees, may not God make us burning trees? If we be not bettered by deliverance,
why may we not be destroyed?

2. Hereby the Lord is made in a manner to repent of delivering a people: when
men have gratified their fellow creatures with signal favors, and after such
expressions of respect have nothing but ungrateful returns; it makes them wish
they had never bestowed their love on such unworthy persons. Thus the Almighty
God, unjustly requited for mercies, is said to repent him of his conferring
kindness on a people. But we must observe that golden rule; Quae (...) Deo
tribuuntur, (...) debent intelligi: Those things which are attributed to God
after the manner of men, must be understood as become the Majesty of God. So
Gods repenting is an improper allusive term, expressing not a change in Gods
mind, but in his action: not implying such an affection in God as repentance,
but alluding to the effect of such an affection in man, Genesis 6.6. It repented
God that he made man, and it grieved him to the heart. This implies Gods
wrathful indignation at man's miscarriage, but no disturbing alteration in the
mind of God, who is ever the same. But to speak after the manner of Men, when a
people continue in sins after deliverance, God may say, Oh! it repents me that
I have delivered a people thus to dishonor me; it repents me to do so much for
a people, to do thus much against me. Oh! how near are such a people to
destruction, of whose deliverance God repents him! How soon will they be
involved in ruin, of whom God may be provoked to say, as David of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21. In vain have I kept all this man has in the wilderness; In vain
have I preserved the lives and liberties of this people, since the fruit of all
is only to be rebelled against and dishonored by them. If we thus make the
Lord grieved at the heart for bestowing mercies, God will grieve us to the
heart by destroying judgments.

3. Hereby God is provoked to stop all proceedings in way of deliverance, and
leave a people to successless shiftings for themselves: Judges 10.12, 13. Did I
not deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites? yet ye have forsaken
me; I will deliver you no more. Sinning after deliverance, dis-engages God from
appearing any more for us. And what can be more dreadful, than to hear God say
in his wrath, Oh ye ungrateful people! I have once and again improved my wisdom
and power on your behalf, to prevent your ruin; but since ye go on still to
provoke me, whatever your condition is hereafter, you must never look for help
from me; whoever be your enemy, you must not look for me to be your friend: I
will never stand up for such Rebels, nor dishonor my Name in delivering you to
sin against me. We cannot want comfort whilst under promises of Divine
assistance, and help from Heaven in our dangers; but if God stands off, we must
inevitably fall into the hands of our enemies, and become preys to their greedy
lusts. If God says I will add no more deliverance, there is none can promise
deliverance to us. Oh miserable people, whom God thus forsakes in anger! we
shall never see another deliverance, if the Lord should resolve I will add no
more. We shall never outlive the dangers we daily live in, if God should
determine to leave us to them.

Corruption in our ways under mercies, will cause a cessation of them. So it
was with the people of the Jews, Hos. 1.6. Call her name Lo-ruchamah, for I
will not add any more to the house of Israel, but I will utterly take away. I
will add no more days of prosperity, years of plenty; no more gracious
deliverances, or pledges of mercy, but I will utterly take away: I have been
filling, but now will I empty you; the Hebr. (...) signifies obliviscendo,
obliviscor, in forgetting I will forget them. I will no more be favorable to
them, but forgetful of them; though they perish, I will not remember them; they
have not minded my mercies, I will not mind their miseries. Thus God puts a
stop to the streams of mercy, locks up the storehouse of blessings, and adds no
more. David prays, Psalm. 36.10. Oh continue thy loving kindness, etc. Hebr.
signifies, Pertraha, draw out, lengthen out the tokens of thy love; but this
will be only to those that are drawn to God by them. They may call every mercy
a Ios^ph, which signifies, God will add more. But it is not so with ungrateful
sinners, God will make an end of bestowing mercies, unless they make an end of
abusing of them: God will cease deliverances, unless we cease dishonouring him
with them.

Yea, although a deliverance may be begun to a people, whereby they appear in a
happy way to escape; yet persisting in sin, God will carry on the work no
farther, but leave them to ruin. Hence then, what especial care should be used
to reform our lives, and renew our repentance, lest our deliverance should be
left unperfected? we are in no better capacity to finish it now begun, than we
were to begin it, if God stands off. Our proceeding in sin, will hinder our God
from proceeding in mercy. Indulging our provoking lusts, will endanger our
precious lives. These merciful buddings of Providence may easily be knipt. This
small glimmering light may soon be over-clouded; our door of hope may soon be
shut. Shall we provoke a gracious God to say, I will add no more? Shall we make
him complain of being weary of delivering? What makes a stop to our
deliverance, but our continuance in sin? This makes God in the posture we read
of, Ier. 14.9. As a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save. Hebr. (...)
Pavidus, as one afraid of us, astonished at our iniquities. A man astonished
does walk up and down this way and that way, knows not what course to take; so
our sinning whilst God is delivering, makes God at a loss what to do. Sometimes
he goes forward with deliverance, sometimes it seems to stand still, another
while it looks as if it were set back; and all this, because we amaze God with
our daring sins. God told the people of Israel, admiring he went not on with
deliverance, Isa. 59.1, 2. My hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor my
ear deafned that it cannot hear; but your iniquities separate between you and
your God, etc. We drive God from us by our sins; and how then can our Salvation
be carried on? Shall we make God go back and repent of the good he has seemed
to design for us? our sinning will do it: Ier. 18.10. If it does evil in my
sight, I will repent of the good wherewith I said I will benefit it. Shall we
not repent of sinning, rather than provoke God thus to repent of his purpose to
deliver? Why will you blast all your hopes of escape, and wither that flower
that is springing up? Oh then, if you desire a farther deliverance, desert your
former sins! or else God will resolve to add no more. By this most abominable
persistence in sin, the Lord is provoked not only to stop deliverances, but to
step into ways of judgments, and that with unalterable resolutions to destroy.
Instead of enabling people against enemies, he enables enemies against them.
Instead of delivering from cruel adversaries, he justly delivers them up unto
them. Hereby his saving arm becomes a smiting hand, and mercy it self is made
an enemy. Hereby our greatest friend becomes an implacable foe; and whereas
oftentimes before he had graciously sent Commissions from Heaven for
deliverance, now in his wrath he dispenses commands, and issues out Writs to
destroy.

This severity to a sinful people you may see, Isa. 63.9, 10. In his love and
in his pity he redeemed them; but they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit,
therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. Now how can
they hope to escape, that have a victorious God to oppose them! How miserably
will those be ruined, that by despising Gods helping pity, convert it to
destroying enmity? Oh, that the terror of Divine displeasure for such
transgressions, thus exemplified in others, might have that suitable influence
on our hearts, as to prevent them in us! let others corrections be our
admonitions; let Gods vindictive judgments on others, be instructive warnings
to us: Rev. 15.4. Who will not fear thee, thy judgments are made manifest! Let
others confusion be a subject of our consideration; and know, if we continue
Enemies to God, after his friendly, fatherly dealings, he will soon become our
enemy, and fight against us; then the deepest policy, the highest power can be
no security to us.

But that which is the most direful consequence of this horrid sinning, is,
that it brings the Eternal God to unmovable resolutions, to accomplish the
destruction of such a people. He will not be prevailed with to deliver those,
whom his mercies could not prevail with to desist from sin. If we grow
incorrigible under mercies, God will grow inexorable when under judgments. If a
deaf ear be turned to God, when by mercies he calls for duty; he will turn a
deaf ear to us, when we in misery invocate his mercy: whatever hopes we may
flatter our selves withal, we shall meet with no help from God, when thus
provoked. Although such is the goodness of God, that he often repents before he
destroys; yet such provocations will make him weary of repenting, and resolve
to ruin: Ier. 15.6, 7. Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord, thou have gone
away backward; therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, I am weary of
repenting. I have long indulged you, but I will now spare no longer, but avenge
your sins: Some render it, Laboravi rogans, etc. I have taken pains entreating
you to repent, till I am weary; but now ye that have wearyed me with your sins,
shall be wearied with judgments: So v. 7. I will fan them with a fan in the
gates: that is, I will scatter them about as the chaff is scattered with a fan;
I will bereave them of children, and destroy my people, since they return not
from their ways. Thus impenitent sinning brings unavoidable judgments: and
Divine vengeance will infallibly pursue such as persist in these heinous sins.
No Sanctuary shall shelter these ungrateful wretches from the hands of justice;
nor shall flattering entreaties prevent the ruin of such unrepenting sinners.

The deserved judgments that belong to these inhumane offenders of mercy, will
be threatened with unalterable certainty. Thus you may see them denounced
against an incorrigible people, Ezech. 24.13, 14. Because I have purged thee
and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged till I have caused my fury
to rest upon you. Because I have purged thee, q. d. I have endeavored to
persuade thee, and oblige thee to leave thy filthy sins: Verba quae effectum
notant, saepe de conatu intelliguntur: Estius. So God is said to do what he
requires, desires, permits, or persuades to be done. Thus God had been inducing
of them to obedience, reducing of them from sin; but under all, they were
unspeakably obstinate; which caused these desperate resolutions in God against
them. He would make his fury rest upon them: and their doom is confirmed with
the highest asseverations conceivable, v. 14. I the Lord have spoken, i. e. I
that am of undoubted faithfulness, and cannot lie; of infinite power, and can
execute my pleasure; I have spoken it, and it shall come to pass; whatever
evasions you think to make, however secure and careless you are, it shall come
to pass, and I will do it. I will undertake the ruin of such as rebel against
my mercies, and abuse the greatest instrument of raising my honor, viz. my
patience; I will not go back, neither will I spare or repent. When I begin, I
will carry on my work; I will not break off my judgments, since ye will not
break off your sins; the sentence is irrevocable, you must expect no reversion
of it, nor deliverance from it. Now surely vengeance threatened with thus much
certainty, will fall upon a people with intolerable severity. When judgments
are thus punctually determined, it cannot be expected they should be a long
while delayed. What hopes now can we have, if persisting in sin after our many
merciful escapes? Will not this gravestone be laid upon us? Will not a
consumption be decreed from the Lord of Hosts against us? What though we are
spared this once, after all our former evasions? Are we now out of danger? Are
there no instances to be found of a people preserved, delivered, as often as
we, and at last the Writs of destruction were issued forth? What think you of
that example, Amos 7. In the vision of the Prophet, the judgments of God on
that people were shadowed by various destructive things: v. 1. by
Grass-hoppers, meaning the Army of the Assyrians, which were ready to invade
them; but God from his infinite clemency prevented their ruin by them: v. 3.
The Lord repented for this, and said, It shall not be: V. 4. this people are
threatened with another consuming judgment expressed by fire: whereby was
signified either a drought, or the devastations of their Cities, by that
unmerciful enemy and Element; or the ruining calamities which they were near
involved in by Teglathphalasar; yet now again he delivers them: v. 6. This also
shall not be. But this Language is too good to hold always to unbettered
sinners: now therefore, v. 7. God will wink no longer at their ungrateful
sinning, he now is weary of repenting. The Lord stood upon a wall with a
plumb-line in his hand: A Metaphor from those that build walls, they use a line
to proceed exactly. Thus the Lord declares he would no longer tolerate their
abuses, nor use his clemency to deliver, but would exercise strictest justice
till they were ruined: Hence v. 8, 9. a miserable destruction is threatened, I
will pass by them no more, etc. Enemies shall now prevail, judgments shall
effectually take place; I will use nothing but strictness and severity. Now
this leads me to the fifth Proposition.

PROPOSITION 5.
Destruction for sinning after deliverance, will be the most dreadful
destruction: what can be more clear than this, from the words of my Text?
Should we again break thy commands, would thou not be angry with us till thou
had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? That is, no
common calamity would then fall upon us; no ordinary punishment would be our
portion; but we exceeding the common measure and degree of sin, thou would
exceed the common degree of judgment: E dulcissimo vino acerrimum fit acetum;
The sweetest wines make sowrest vinegar; the strongest perfumes are fatal as
poisons; abused mercy will be avenged with unusual miseries. No mercy is to be
expected in judgment, when mercies are despised that kept off judgments.
Kindness not effecting an answerable reformation, will abundantly aggravate
revengeful destruction: Isaiah 29.1, 2. God threatens Ariel, sc. Jerusalem,
that wonderful distress should fall upon it; and it should be to him as Ariel.
Ariel was the Altar for wholeburnt offerings, Ezech. 43.15. Now to avenge their
abuses of mercies there, God would make their City, once the richest of their
mercies, an Altar on which their blood should be offered as a sacrifice to
justice. Thus our mercies abused, may become knives to open our throats; our
Cities and Towns so often delivered, may be as Altars, about which our lifeless
bodies may be heaped as sacrifices about the Altar. The quintessence of all
judgments, the substance of all Plagues, shall be mingled in one cup, with all
the dregs of wrath, for the despisers of clemency and mercy. Mercy is sweet
that is extended to us in midst of judgments; and judgments severe, when
executed on a people abounding with mercies. A deliverance cannot bring so
great mercies, but sinning after it will usher in as dreadful judgments. By how
much the greater the deliverance is we receive, so much the greater will be the
destruction for sinning after it. A thick cloud has been over our heads, and
the favorable gale of mercy has partly dispersed it; but the ascending of
sinful vapors will cause the Lord to return our sins upon our heads, with
overwhelming inundations of judgments; slighting the gales of mercy, preventing
ruin, will bring most dreadful storms of vengeance. Our float of goodness may
be turned into floods of misery. Our sun may set at noonday; and our cisterns,
now filled from the boundless ocean of unmerited benignity, may soon be filled
from the vials of wrath, with the waters of Marah. Our destruction adjourned a
while, may return with unexemplify'd terror. The Lord threatened the
backsliding Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.25, 26. That if after his kindness in conducting them
from Egyptian slavery, with infinite mercies through a tiresome wilderness, to
the blessed land of Canaan; (I say) if then they should sin against him,
although they had remained a long time there, they should not prolong their
days upon it, but utterly be destroyed from off it. Thus notwithstanding our
sinful Nation has many years been like an Eden, a Palace of Royal glory, a
Canaan flowing with milk and honey, a Theater of mercies, an unparalleld
monument of many deliverances; yet continuing in sin, will deface its envyed
glory, and render it a stage for destroying judgments, and lay it waste with
storms of successive plagues; and then it shall be said, This is the Nation
that would never leave sinning, till it forced the Almighty to make it a
ruinous heap, a Land desolate and not inhabited. What high time is it then to
depart from sin, left an Ichabod be wrote upon us! which signifies, Their glory
is departed.

With what terror may we look on those words? Psalm 68.20, 21. Unto God
belongs salvation, but he will wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes on
in sin: Though he will multiply salvations to such as serve him the more for
them, yet will he glorify his justice in destroying such as go on in sin after
them. The Hebr. word (...) signifies alte imprimere; God will make a deep
impression of the hands of justice on all such incorrigible persons. The
heaviest judgments will fall on the contemners of the highest mercies. Judgment
will be with most amazing terror, on the contemners of the Almighties favor.
As Gods resolutions against such sins will make destruction irrevocable, so his
wrath backed with unlimited power, will make them intolerable.

Now here I shall endeavor to show you for what reasons destroying judgments
will be thus heightened by provoking sins after deliverance.

1. Because the longer judgments are coming, the greater severity they are
attended with, when falling upon us. The longer a blow is fetching, the deeper
impression is made by its force. If God tarries long before he punishes, the
greater terror will be in his punishment. The destruction of the old world was
delayed for many years, but at last it was accomplished with the greater
severity. Deus tardus est ad iram, sed tarditatem vindictae gravitate
compensat. Whilst sinners ruin is deferred, God is putting himself into
postures of judgment, whetting his glittering sword, sharpning his terrible
arrows feathered with our sins, that so he may make the more sharp and sudden
destruction. There is Crudelitas parcens, sparing cruelty, as well as
misericordia puniens, punishing mercy.

The longer the cloud is gathering, the more dripping shower is expected when
it falls. So the greater provocations are treasured up in the days of Gods
patience, the more miserable destruction will be in the days of his vengeance:
Isa. 42.14. A long time have I held my peace; I have been still and refrained
my self; now will I cry like a travailing woman, I will destroy and devour at
once. You shall know I have not lost my power, though I have exercised my
patience; though yo^ have shared so much in my mercy, I will at length
proportion the severity of my justice, to the clemency of my mercy. I will
destroy you at once; I Will give no more alaruming warnings, awakening calls, or
monitory afflictions; but now will I bring ruin on a sudden, with unavoidable
calamities: Job 21.31. The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; there
will be a murdering day for rebellious malignants, they shall be brought forth
to the day of wrath. The Hebr. (...) we Translate brought forth, signifies, Cum
mora and pompa deducere, Mer. To lead them to it with delay, to bring them to
it by degrees, and also with some pomp and splendor: but what is it they shall
be brought forth to? What are they going to with their pomp and glory? oh it is
but to a day of wrath; ad diem furorum, a day of wraths and fury; a day majorum
poenarum, of greater punishment. When the wrath of God for every sin shall
consume them, and increase their deferred torments. Sinners are brisk because
judgment is delayed; but alas, sinners, though you go on with security, yet far
from safety, the day of wraths will come. Ier. 12.1. we read the wicked
prosper; why are they not stopped in their courses? They take root, Hebr.
pergunt, they go on: Non posuit Deus prohibitionem: Vatab. God does not hinder
them; are they happy therefore? will this always continue? No, v. 3. They shall
be pulled out like sheep to the slaughter, they are set apart for the day of
destruction. When a day is set apart, some eminent thing is intended in it.
When a day is set apart for destruction, an eminent destruction is employed by
it: a day is coming when sinners shall feel the smart of Divine vengeance for
abuses of patience. This is called their day, as deserved by them, as peculiar
to them: Psalm. 37.10. The Lord knows their day is coming: Chald. dies
calamitatis ejus: The day of his signal and dreadful calamity is approaching;
and the longer this day is coming, the more horrible it will be. As eternal
condemnation will be nothing the less for a present reprieve upon earth; so
temporal destruction will be nothing the more tolerable, for a patient
toleration and continued delay before it comes. We are little aware what is
coming upon us, now our dangers are a little over; but whilst we are insensibly
sinning after the expressions of unmerited favor, the bottles of wrath are
filling, and the clouds of vengeance gathering; and who knows but suddenly they
may ease and unburden themselves in a deluge of ruin upon us an undaunted
people? Will not the punishment of sins continued against light and love,
distress and deliverance, so many years as we have enjoyed them, be of that
nature that might make our hearts tremble to conceive it? will not the vials of
wrath be unspeakably full, and the storm of vengeance most horrible, which has
been so long in gathering? Sinning after deliverance, renders the destruction
dreadful, as they make it in a peculiar manner our own. Now destruction lies at
our own door, and our selves only are to bear the blame of it. In mercy God
begins first, but in miseries we make the beginning. And what can be a more
dreadful aggravation, than to have cause to say, Mercies are gone, God is
departed, Enemies prevail? and what may we thank but our pride and profaneness,
our ingratitude and ungodliness, after obliging mercies? what makes up the
endless and intolerable torments of damned Souls, for ever banished from the
comfortable presence of the excellent glory, but this, that all that misery was
procured by themselves? It Is observed of some Birds, that the lime is made of
their own dung that is used to destroy them: The lime-twigs of Gods judgments,
are made of the dung of our own sins. Our sins are the feathers, whereby ^he
fatal darts of judgments fly unto us. Propriis conficimur alis, wounded with
our own weapons, with Arrows made from our selves: we do ill unjustly, and then
suffer ill deservedly. All the judgments that spring up, are but from seeds of
our own sowing. The Garment is ruined by the Moth bred in ^t, and we by enemies
of our own breeding. It was great aggravation to the misery of the Jews, that
God told them, Ier. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things
unto thee. I have delivered you, rescued you from miseries, and these now
coming on you, you pull down upon your selves. This is thy wickedness; lay it
not to enemies power, think not me unrighteous; this is all thy own. How
miserable a condition is this, to have no other comfort in calamities than
this, to have God tell us this is our own? How sad when distressed to think,
this is my slighting of mercy, my abusing patience, my persistence in
drunke^ness, Sabbath-breaking, when I was delivered! Oh that I should be such
an enemy to God and my self! Oh that I should bring such miseries on my self,
by despising mercies! Nothing makes the condition of a people more hopeless,
than their bringing themselves into a helpless condition. Hos. 13.9. Oh Israel,
thou have destroyed thy self: Thou wondrest at thy destruction, when it is from
thy self. But in me is thy help. Learned Drusius translates the Hebr. ^
alioquin; that is, otherwise thou had bad help from me. Had enemies ruined
thee, I would have relieved thee; but since thou have involved thy self in
misery, thou may expect no mercy from me. I will not be the author of
deliverance to them, that are so wilfully authors of destruction to themselves:
you shall perish in the evils of your own procuring.

3. Destruction now will be greatly aggravated, because a people thus sinning,
deserve to be exposed to the naked fury of incensed justice, without the least
mitigation of their miseries by the interposing of abused mercy. If we with
ungrateful carriages contemn the help of mercy, we justly deserve to be utterly
forsaken and cast off by it. And now, oh how dreadful will it be to drink the
cup of Gods destroying fury, without any mixtures of relieving mercy! If mercy
it self delivers us up to the cruel hands of inexorable justice, what then
shall we experience, but vengeance without clemency, punishment without pity,
and destruction without delay? Oh how sad will it be for helpless creatures to
lie under the displays of vengeance, and none to cover them? to have
innumerable iniquities crying for judgments, and none to plead for them? to
have invincible enemies opposing of them, and none to assist them? If mercy be
dis-engaged, however fiercely the storms of wrath may be poured out upon us,
there can be no shelter from it. Whatever wounds are made, there will be no
salve to cure them. If merciful deliverances cannot prevail upon us to reform
us, will not mercy cease pleading for us? will it not say as Christ, John 17.9.
I pray not for them? I will put in no more entreaties for their salvation:
Justice, take them, destroy them, ruin them, I have nothing to plead for them.
How often does mercy plead, as the merciful Vine-dresser did for the
cumber-ground fig tree, Luke 13.7, 8. Lord, let it alone this year also: let
not thy wrath yet break out, let not thy fury ruin them, but spare them this
time; try what they will do with one deliverance more? but when nothing is
successful, mercy gives over; and what but intolerable vengeance will then lie
upon us?

But who can speak the dread of destruction, that unmixed anger involves a
people in? How dreadful will it be to fall into the hands of God, when armed
with nothing but destroying indignation? How can our hearts endure, or our
hands be strong, when all the Attributes of his glorious Majesty shall conspire
together to make us miserable? When infinite wisdom shall be exercised in
contriving, and infinite power shall be engaged in executing the miserable
destruction of a sinful people, it must needs be intolerable.

Here I shall take occasion to show you the misery of a people, when mercy is
dis-engaged from relieving of them; that so we may be fearful of depriving our
selves of that blessed succor we have hitherto enjoyed by it.

1. Mercy dis-engaged, all miseries endured are pure wrath. Such miseries are
much of the nature of the Torments of the damned in Hell, whose plagues are a
cup of vengeance without mixture. The happiness of Saints in all their
sufferings, consists in enjoying ingredients of love in the bitterest cup that
is mixed out to them: when outward distresses are most unpleasing to sense,
they refresh themselves with delightful objects, then visible to the eye of
faith: Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts, thy comforts delight my
Soul. But mercy dis-engag'd, there is no cordial to support us, no sugar to
sweeten the bitterest cup enforced upon us: Ezekiel. 7.5. Behold, an evil, an
only evil comes. God never sends judgments alone to such as he favors; but
designing the utter destruction of a people, he mixes a potion of only fatal
poisons for them: then he sends an only evil.

2. Mercy being dis-engaged, the lowdest cries, and most importunate prayers
that a people can put up, will be denied and rejected. God will admit no
Prayers from such as contemned his former returns of them. The ears of justice
will only hear the cries of our sins, to avenge them; it is mercy hears the
voice of our prayers, to answer them; or all the answer we shall have, will be
by terrible things in righteousness. But mercy dis-engaged, we are deprived of
that unspeakable privliedge of Audience with God; and then we may swelter in
our miseries, roll in our blood, despair in our torments, without a redress.

Should we by our impudent continuance in sin, make mercy our enemy, our most
urgent cries would prove unsuccesful; and though joined with floods of tears,
would be unprofitable: for this will bring us under the doom of those, Zech.
7.13. Because when I called you would not hearken, therefore also when you cry
unto me I will not hear. How just a retaliation was this from God, although a
most dreadful affliction! not to have the merciful ear of God in affliction, is
the worst of afflictions. It is dismal now to find our hearts so strangely shut
up, as not be able to pour out prayers: but how miserable then shall we be, if
when involved in sinking troubles, God should shut out our prayers, and not be
prevailed with by them? Oh ruining state, when we in distress shall be crying,
Save Lord, or we perish, and then receive no other return, but, Perish you may,
and perish you shall, for all the help you shall have from me. These sins so
much overcome his mercy, that our prayers will never overcome his anger. And as
it is an argument of the greatest sinfulness in man, not to pray; so of the
greatest anger in God, not to hear prayers. These iniquities are so intolerable
a slighting of him, that he will unmercifully slight all we do. Oh what will
become of a Nation, when that key which was wont to unlock the Treasuries of
bounty, the storehouse of blessings, can do nothing? when that Ambassador that
was wont to prevail for a gracious Treaty, shall be denied? when that
successful friend shall be denied admittance to the Court of Heaven? when that
omnipotent engine can attract no compassions? Whither now shall we go, when
access is denied to God? where shall we have supplies, if our former
storehouse be shut up? whither can we turn, when he turns away our prayers?
Will not our furious enemies prevail over us, when our most fervent prayers
cannot prevail with God? What a shaking commination was that, Ier. 11.11. I
will bring an evil upon them, they shall not escape; and though they cry, I
will not hearken. God will take no notice of their cries, who would take no
notice of his kindness. What can be said worse to a people than this, I will
not hear? If he will not hear, he will not help; if he gives no audience, he
will give no assistance. This speaks the sum of all evils in one. The root of
all miseries lies here, in Gods not hearing. This effectually seals men up for
destruction. Ezech. 8.18. I will deal with them in my fury; and though they cry
in my ears with a loud voice, I will not hear. As lazy prayers will not prevail
now, so the loudest Prayer shall not prevail then. Thou may then spend thy
breath, that now thou spendest worse, and not speed. Thou may stretch out thy
hands, and yet receive nothing: but disengaging Mercy may suffer like those,
Isai. 1. When ye stretch out your hands, I will hide my eyes; and when ye make
many Prayers, I will not hear. Audire Dei est concedere, i. e. I will not grant
what you ask. In the days of my Grace ye might have prevailed, and did not
pray, or did it formally; and now in the day of my fury ye may pray, but shall
not prevail.

Neither can the Prayers of the greatest Favorites in the Court of Heaven
prevail for a people under such circumstances. Should the dearest Servants
plead with greatest fervency, they must be denied when Mercy is disengaged,
Ier. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my heart could not be
toward this people. Standing is the Posture of Praying. Though these should
endeavor to draw out my Affections to them by their importunate cries, yet
they should never gain my heart: I cannot love them, I cannot yield it to them.
Tantum mediocriter malis ob pios interdum parcitur, non ita contumaciter
flagitiosis. God only spares those that are indifferently wicked for the sake
of the godly, not those that are obstinately flagitious and ungodly. Ezech. 14.
Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were here, etc. they should prevail only for their
own Souls. Oh, says God, you think the cries of your Prayer shall drown the
voice of your Sins; you imagine your earnest calls will make my bowels yearn to
you; or if you cannot prevail alone, you will engage others: but I tell you,
neither ye, nor my greatest friends that can most prevail, shall persuade me to
spare so ungodly a people as you; they and you shall not effect your desires
with me so.

3. Mercy disengaged, the wrathful blows of Divine Vengeance will be (to speak
after the manner of men) inflicted in a careless manner on a Mercy-contemning
people. The Vine-dresser is most exact and curious in abscinding the luxuriant
branches of a fruitful Vine, but hacks and hews the unfruitful tree in a
careless manner. Thus the Almighty God measures out and limits the Judgments
that are out of Mercy to a fruitful people, to increase their fruit; but
regards not how he strikes a barren generation, that are only to be hewed down
as cumber-ground trees. Whilst tender Affections remain in the heart of God to
a people, he limits the proceeding of enemies, he restrains the rage of their
foes; he afflicts pondere and mensura, with weight and measure: But when
Justice only is exercised in Judgment, the worst of times, the most fierce
enemies, the most astonishing manner is chosen in afflicting. When we are
regardless of a man's life, we say, Let him eat, drink, do what he will, I will
be no hinderance to him: Thus Mercy disobliged says, Let enemies wound,
massacre, slay whom and how they will, I shall not help, I will not hinder. God
permits enemies to do their worst, to go as far as they can, when he designs
the ruin of a people. The Prophet prays, Jer. 10.24. Lord, correct me, but
with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. In thy
correction use moderation, for the anguish of thy anger is intolerable; the
blows of thy wrath alone will bring us to nothing. The fatherly Anger of God is
dreadful, but the fierceness of his Anger is fatal. If God does not moderate
his anger, we can never sustain the dreadful terror of it.

4. Mercy disengaged, we become under a total impossibility of receiving help
from any means. If Mercy that should stop miseries be taken away, miseries must
needs flow in. Whither shall the poor creature go, if Mercy be gone? If we
resort to creatures for help, they all say, It is not in me: If God affords you
no help, I cannot; if God withdraws his merciful influence, I have no efficacy.
Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs to God. It Is the honor of God, that he can easily
save without any else, and that none else can save without him. However
suitable means may be to relieve us, unless there be the harmonious conjunction
of God with them, they prove ineffectual. Creatures can never help us in
distress, if Mercy stands off. There is a counterpoising power to the ability
of created agents, that may obstruct their success: there are unseen
circumstances that may invalidate their attempts: there are intercurrent
Causes, and unprovided-for Accidents, that may be unconquerable hindrances to
their endeavors. The most suitable instruments voluntatem habent, non
potestatem, have only an impotent Velleity or Will, but no effectual Ability to
help us. A Nation deserted by Mercy, is like a diseased, dying man, Head a
king, Heart fainting, Wits confounded, Spirits consumed, given over by
Physicians, Friends stand behind the Curtains sobbing and sighing, weeping and
bewailing; willing to relieve, not able. Thus it is with a Nation when Mercy is
disengaged, it is bleeding to Death, gasping for Life, its Friends dejected,
their Hearts melted; but dye it must, dye it will, none can help it. Let men be
never so sollicitous, most unspeakably industrious to help a perishing Nation,
they will be successless without mercy, for they are but media deferentia, non
operantia, means of conveyance, not of efficience.

Mercy disengaged, there can be no binding the hands of Justice, no obstructing
its fatal Blows, no stopping the floods of Vengeance, no persuading to spare,
no prevailing to stay, no hindering its arrests, no opposing its violence; but
destruction will be unavoidable. The highest profession, the richest
possessions, the strongest fortifications; will be no security; no shelter on
earth, can secure from the vengeance of Heaven. The united forces of all
Creatures, can no ways impede the actings of their Sovereign Creator. Job 9.12,
13. He takes away, and none can hinder him. If God will not withhold his
anger, the proud helpers must stoop under. However great the Patrons of our
Cause may be, whatever Allies may consociate with us, whatever Assistants shall
appear for us, yet they can never prosper to protect us, or succeed to deliver
us from the hands of resolved Justice. Our helpers must have the assistance of
God, or they cannot procure deliverance for us. Had we thousands as strong as
that world-bearing Atlas, they could never uphold us: had we a world of
Confederates, they could never preserve us, if Justice designs our ruin. The
most potent Friends can never deliver those, who have the Omnipotent God to be
their enemy. If Mercy will not help us, we must needs be helpless. Job 27.22.
God shall cast upon him, and not spare; he would flee out of his hands. ^ugere
cona^itur, sed non effugiet. He shall strive to get out of his hands, but shall
not escape. Neither Policy, Power, or Prayer, can prevail with, or succeed
against God, when not seconded with the aid of Mercy. Dan. 4.35. There is none
can stay his hand. None can deliver from the destroying hands of Justice, but
victorious Mercy. What need then is there to be careful, that we disoblige not
Mercy? What grateful carriage should we have under Mercies, lest we make them
our enemies? And if Mercy be once against us, all things will work against us.

5. Destruction after Deliverance will be exceedingly aggravated by that
self-confounding desperation that will be in our Souls, when God shall come out
against us to vindicate the quarrel of abused mercies, to avenge the contempt
of former deliverances. Then we shall not only have God against us, but
Conscience also will direfully torment us: the reflecting on former
deliverances, will cause as great terror as present dangers. The very thoughts
of contemned deliverances, will damp and destroy the confidence of the Soul in
renewed Miseries. How can a man lift up his face before God to desire a mercy,
that has turned his back upon God when he obtained a mercy? How can he go to
God for fresh supplies of Mercy, who getting a mercy, has gone away from God?
When God has lifted thee up from a low condition, and thou have gone on in a
wicked life, with what face can thou look upon God again? Can expect a good
look, when thou look to him? What can expect but a denial from him, when
thou have denied obedience to him? Oh how will Conscience fly on thy face, and
check thy Soul! Remember when you were in distress before, thou did cry to
God, and he delivered thee; but thou never did love him the more, serve him
the better for it. Then will thou imagine with thy self, Oh how can I go to God
again! How can I think he will try me with further Mercies, who have been so
unfaithful under those I received? How can I expect he will be prevailed with
to prolong my Life, when I have heapt up provocations, after his former
prolongations of it? Oh what heart-faintings and failings will a sense of
despised Mercy produce! What a Hell of Misery will this be to all thy Torments,
that thou durst not approach to God? Will not inward troubles be a dreadful
increase of distress in times of Judgment? And what inward trouble more heavy
than this, to find our hearts condemning of us, and to be clogged with the
sense of abused Mercies? Will thou not fear God will tell thee, thy Prayer is
an abomination? Wilt not dread lest he say, as Iephthah to the Elders of
Gilead, after they had expelled him, Judge. 11.7. Are ye now come unto me, when
ye are in distress? What, are you so impudent after all your unkindness to me,
to seek kindness from me? What, do ye think I will shelter such enemies as you?
Will not God say thus to us, when fleeing to him in distress? What, do ye that
have forsaken me so long, flee to me now? Do ye that despised my former
Deliverance, come to me for another? Will not God say, Be gone, I Will admit you
no more, I Will hearken neither to your Prayers nor Promises? And then we may cry
out as Salv. Quid dignius, quid justius? non audivimus, non audimur; non
respeximus, non respicimur. What more merited, what more just? We have not
heard God, and we are not heard; we have not regarded, and we are not regarded.
What confusion will this fill our faces withal? What a Calamity will this be to
all our Misery? Oh take heed then of incurring any further displeasure from
God, by abusing deliverance; lest when renewed dangers come upon you, thy mouth
should be stopped, thy confidence dampt, and thy conscience thus checking of
thee. But put Iniquity far from thee, and then shall thou lift up thy face
without spot; then shall thou have access to the Lord in thy troubles: and if
destruction should come, thou may cry for deliverance, and have gracious
returns. Destruction for sinning under these circumstances, will be aggravated
by that pitiless frame that shall be not only in God, but in man, to those that
are involved in such deserved destruction. God will not pity, but be strangely
hard-hearted to such hardened Sinners. Misery calls for pity; but there can be
no pity, where there is no mercy, or where Mercy is disengaged: Ezech. 5.11.
Neither shall my eye spare, neither will I have pity. He laid aside his tender
compassions; his bowels of mercy were shut up, and now he has no tender
affections to them.

Thus men also that may be preserved from our calamities, will have just cause
to be pitiless to us. It was said of Vitellius, when going to Execution, with
his Hands bound, divested on Robes, that men had no pity of him, Nam deformitas
vitae misericordiam abstulerat, Tacitus. The impiety of his Life, had taken
away men's pity for his Death. Will not our sinning after Deliverance give such
cause of abstaining from pitying of us? Will not men say, They deserve to be
miserable, that will not desist from being sinful. Oh dreadful aggravation of
misery, to have all bowels shut against us! Extrema est miseria, cum nemo
miseri vices dolet. It Is extreme misery, the height of distress, when we are
not only destitute of Help, but destitute of Pity. Jer. 22.18. Shall not say,
Ah, my brother, or ah, my sister: They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah,
Lord, ^^ ah, his glory.

I shall now endeavor to make some particular Uses of what has been spoken.

Uses from the 1. Propos. Use I.
Is it the great design of God in delivering a people from imminent dangers,
to oblige them to break off sin? Let then the remarkable Deliverance that the
Almighty God in abounding goodness has lately bestowed upon us, effect this
blessed change in our lives and conversations. With what face can we trample on
the just and sacred Commands of our merciful God, whilst he smiles upon us with
such unmerited favors? Can our Hearts be so damnably obdurate, so insensibly
hardened, as not to be melted by such an unexpected Deliverance as this? Should
we again break his Commandments? What pretense can favor such Impieties? What
profession can cloak such Wickedness? What Allurements can entice us against
Conscience, Reason, and Religion, to obviate and oppose the righteous requests
and demands of such a patient God?

Should we again return to our Fleshpleasing security in sin, the Fountain and
Spring of our greatest misery? What but our belluine and besotting stupidity
involved us in our direful dangers? and shall we return to our former posture,
not regarding the rousing alarums the late discoveries of misery have sounded
to us, nor minding the awakening calls to prepare for Judgments, or turn from
the Impieties that deserve them? Would not this be an unpardonable crime, and a
means most infallibly to ruin us? Should we again dishonor this delivering
God, by profane, licentious courses? filling our Land with the hateful noise of
our crying Iniquities, when God has filled it with the blessed sounds of
unspeakable Mercies? What an unworthy, ungrateful, unanswerable carriage would
this be deemed by all that bear the title of Christians?

Would Heathens offer to do such things to their feigned Gods, or offer such
affronts unto them, could they but do such favors for them? And shall we, to
affront the Majesty of Heaven, belch out abominable Oaths, and account them as
pleasing Ornaments of Language? Shall we show our despite to our God, by
blasphemous Expressions against inviolable Truths concerning the nature and
being of God? Shall we, to express how little we value his kindness, provoke
the eyes of his Glory by Noonday Drunkenness, Rioting, and Debaucheries? Shall
we witness a cursed contemning of him by impudent profanations of his holy
Sabbaths, as before we have done? Shall not his Kindness courting us to
amendment, prevail? Shall not his Goodness endeavoring our betterment, operate
upon us? Is it not impossible to be so wicked, after such wonderful expressions
of Love?

Should we again with greedy minds pursue the perishing enjoyments of this
alluring world, neglecting the profitable exercises of Religion, and required
Devotion? Did the Almighty prolong our expiring Lives, to spend them thus? With
what conscience can we allow our selves those large dispensations from holy
Duties, for the sake of our worldly employments, after we are purposely
delivered, to augment and increase our deserved Obedience? Will not our days be
yet shortened, if we remain so straightened in Duties still? And if we cannot spare
a little of our strength to work for God, can we think that God will improve
his mighty strength, to work out any further Salvation for us? If our houses
that might have been without People, still remain without Prayer, may we not
expect an angry God will soon unpeople them? If now we shall cast off Duty,
will he not suddenly cast off us?

Should we again be rending and tearing one another by ravenous Oppression? and
ruining one another by unhappy Divisions? Should not this wonderful Love excite
such bowels in our softened hearts to one another, that we should no longer be
maintaining with unreasonable rigidness one another assumed Opinions, to the
unspeakable prejudice of Church and State? But rather be sodering together into
a perpetual Harmony, by mutual condescensions and compliances; thereby ending
our unprofitable janglings in indissolvible Unity. Shall not we, who have
partaken of this favor together, live always together in the beauty and glory
of undissembled Friendship, and unfeigned Love? And if this effect shall not
follow our being delivered together, it is to be feared, the effect of such
disorders will be no other than to be destroyed and cut off together. Oh then
let the Kindness of God to us, sweeten our tempers to one another; and let us
be so fully united together, that all our Affections may make but one channel
of Love, that so the God of Love may dwell among us. For as this sincere
adherence to one another by Love, would be most effectual to prevent the
designs of enemies against us; (who delight to see and sow our Divisions) so it
would be so grateful an improvement of d^liverance, that God would more readily
continue it to us. What then remains? But that we should lay aside Pride and
Prejudice, and Selfdesignings; and standing to the complete and unalterable
Rules of Worship, and Principles of Religion, laid down in the blessed Word,
henceforth (I say we should) dwell in most beautiful Unity, and worship our God
as far as can be, in a most desirable Uniformity.

Should we again become formal and hypocritical in our solemn Worship of the
great God? Were this a suitable return for Gods delivering, to mock him with
dissembling Services, and weary him with heartless Offerings? Are Ordinances
continued, and the glorious Sun^^ine of the blessed Gospel preserved un^louded;
and shall we requite the Lord ^o otherwise, than by profaning and busing of
them?

Oh the price we should set, the value we should have of our Ordinances! What
are these but the Wells of Salvation, the Conduits of Grace, the Ensigns of
eternal Glory, the Food of immortal Souls, the Pledges and Models of eternal
Loves, the blessed Mounts of Glory; in which are the clearest Resemblances of
Heaven, the sweetest Refreshments on Earth, the most lively stamps of Divine
Majesty, and the most blessed Appearances and comfortable Visits of Christ? And
can we contemn such Enjoyments, without abominable Ingratitude? Are they given
to us by a new deliverance? let us show our esteem by a new improvement. Never
be so backward to attend them, so careless under them, so unanswerable to them
hereafter. Let God see that his kindness is not lost, his cost is not in vain,
but that you endeavor a faithful return to what he does for you.

But into what a large Field am I entering? Let all sins be reformed, let all
holiness be embraced; be universal in reformation of known sins, though I
cannot be particular in the enumeration of them; mind every particular duty,
though I can name them but universally; let the love of God in delivering,
constrain you: And that the deliverance may have greater influence upon you, I
shall lay down before you in a few particulars the greatness of it.

1. The greatness of our deliverance is manifest and apparent from the
consideration of the Enemies from whose hands an Almighty power has rescued
us. The managers of the designs for our ruins, are the Race of murdering Cain,
the bloody Offspring of devouring Cannibals; whose monstrous cruelties are
divulged in every corner of the world, recorded in innumerable Histories;
experienced in many Nations, known in Germany, felt in Paris, found in Ireland;
and we are woefully acquainted with them in England.

The most barbarous Inhabitants of the world cannot parallel their inhumane
Massacres: the most desperate wretches in Hell cannot exceed their practiced
Cruelties. These Hell-bred Salamanders delight only in ruining fires; these
patrisating Children of the grand Murderer, love no drink like the fulsome
liquor of Innocents blood; these Apostates from humane nature, can solace
themselves with no pleasures like the tormenting butcherings of harmless
Saints. How cruel are their tender mercies! how savage is their sweetest
carriage to those that submit not to that burdensome yoke that neither we nor
our Fathers could bear! What love can answer the kindness of our God in giving
escapes from these merciless Lions, from these pictures of malicious Satan, and
fire-breathing Dragons of the infernal Pit? Can we do less than make our selves
complete Holocausts by the flames of ascending affections, to our gracious God,
who has delivered us from being Sacrifices to these most cruel beasts of prey?
Had not these men been thus degenerated from merciful Humanity into belluine
Ferocity, they could never have attempted the confusion and ruin of such
innocent unmeriting a People as we.

But these empty Pretenders to Christianity could never have accomplished their
sincere designs of destroying us, had they not impudently laid the ground of
all this wickedness with the Orient color of specious Religion; and so
preserved deluded Souls from the disturbing flashes of unstupifi'd Conscience.
But the Principles of their avowed Religion warranting its Patrons in such
Impieties, and defending such damnable Courses, has animated their cruel minds
with mighty expectations of renowning Merit by such bloody Exploits.

Thus they transforming themselves into Angels of Light, have seduced a blinded
Multitude, and by this powerful Engine have gained innumerable Allies to
promote a Design most diametrically opposite to Reason and true Religion. Thus
Religion is used to destroy the Religious; and Policy clothing it self with
the title of Piety, insinuates unspeakable Vigor into infatuated Mortals in
the pursuit of gainful designs through greatest difficulties. And had not the
Almighty discountenanced such Religion by blasting designs promoted by it,
their Religion had brought our ruin, and the shadow of Religion had consumed
the substance of it. Now what favor have we found with God, that he should
disappoint a Contrivance managed by those who had gained in so many
Confederates by the deluding Pretenses of Religion? which is also to make its
seduced Zelots do more than the greatest Allurements imaginable.

Hence were the wonderful incitements to that unwearied Industry now visible
among them, to confound and destroy us. Some drops of their Blood they could
undauntedly part with, that they might drink some draughts of ours. What
Charges could seem too burdensome to them, to discharge the world of such
Heretics as we are accounted by them? How were their Breasts like threatening
Thunder-clouds, whose Vapors never leave working till they vent themselves
with amasing Terror to the trembling world? How have their Heads, Hearts, and
Hands, been willing, contriving, preparing for many years? How have they been,
as is said of the Princes of Israel, Ezekiel. 22.6. Every one to their power to
shed blood? No Harmony, no Help, no Hearts, no Hands, no Power, no Purse was a
long while wanting in attempting this Murdering Achievement. What greater
Deliverance was ever bestowed on a People than this, when all the Forces of
Hell and Ro^e with its Allies, are defeated?

How might I make this appear from the wonderful height of Power they were by
all their endeavors arrived at: From the greatness of the danger, as most
wickedly kept secret by means of inviolable Obligations and Oaths, which laid
those that were conscious to it, under the greatest incapacity of revealing of
it: From the familiar Converse our fatal Enemies had among us: From the
abominable Engagings of rotten Members to destroy the body they belonged to,
and cut off the Head that was over them: From Assistances foreign Enemies
provided and promised against us! But what has been spoken, sufficiently
speaks the greatn^ss of our Deliverance, with respect to the persons contriving
our Destruction.

2. It appears from the consideration of that miserable Destruction we were
appointed unto, all these subtle heads and bloody hands are not at work to
accomplish a petty Destruction. Their Throats, enlarged as Hell, would never be
satisfied with Personal Revenge; no less than a Nation, yea, Nations of
Protestants, can make up a single Meal for these savage Bloud-hounds. These
tyrannical Nero's are for the cutting off the Necks of all Christians at a
blow. No less Bonefire would serve their turns, than the horrid Conflagration
of a whole Nation. A Dioclesian Persecution was nothing to this hellish
Enterprise and attempted Destruction. How fain would Antichrist have waded to
an usurped Throne to the neck in the blood of opposing Martyrs!

Had it not been a Destruction none like unto it? Had not Rome outdone its
former Cruelties? Had not this dreadful day been a Nonesuch? Come, and see.
What should you have seen? Had this Design been perfected, you had seen or
heard, if alive, innumerable Troops of frightful Warriors, fierce in
Countenance, more in Carriage, breaking forth, like the Plunderers of Troy from
that fatal Horse, from the Bowels of our Land: You had seen the disguising
Vizards of dissembling Friends thrown off, and the distinguishing Mark of the
Beasts company, worn by thousands of our unsuspected Inhabitants: You might
have seen the multitude of profane ones turn Popish, and the Neutralists become
absolute Papists: You might have seen an astonishing Force of foreign
Idolaters admitted to enter our English Coasts by the treacherous hands of
mercenary Subjects: You might have seen the horrid Instruments of undreaded
Death brought from their unsearched hoards, ready to be proved on thy own body.
Ah, dreadful day, none like it! When those unthought-of Enemies had shown
themselves in warlike postures, armed with invincible Power, winged with speedy
Fury, resolved with undaunted Courage, assisted with large Auxiliaries; what
then had been the Work? Come and see. Then had the Streets been died with a Sea
of Crimson-bloud, the Channels ran down with the Lives of massacred Christians:
Then had our bolted doors in nocturnal silence been forcibly opened, and our
sleepy Bodies dragged from their resting Beds, and butchered by cruel hands:
Then had our mangled Carcasses been strewn in our peaceless Streets, to be
trampled on like dirt by our Foes: Then had our Weapons, prepared for our
defense, been murdering pieces for our Enemies service: Then had there been
some fleeing in amaze, some fighting in confusion, some turning out of fear,
some tortured for not turning. Oh, black and gloomy day! Then had our stately
Buildings become a Prey to the fiercest of Elements, as well as we to the
fiercest of Men: Then had the desire of our eyes been taken away with a blow,
we our selves not escaping: Then had the noise of bitter Lamentation, though
nothing prevailing, been heard in our Streets; the Shrieks of the wounded
piercing our hearts, the sight of the Dead amazing our spirits. Oh, what had
they done? Come and see. How had the places of shelter been places of greatest
dangers! how had it been in vain for unarmed men to oppose a furious Crew of
well-equipag'd Soldiers! How fruitless had it been to flee, when dangers were
unknown! How sad had it been to behold tender Infants rent from the bodies of
their rifled Mothers, and cast into their Flames! Who could have endured the
sight of Sucking-babes snatched from their Mothers breasts and dashed against
destroying stones? Who could have seen them sprawling on the tops of Pikes and
hurled into cruel Flames, without bleeding hearts? Oh the ghastly visages of the
once most beautiful Objects, that then had been marred with deforming wounds! Oh
what a deliverance is this, to be thus far freed, to be thus long delivered
from such a Destruction! Oh let this Mercy obtain its design, lest the things
we have feared should come upon us.

3. The greatness of this Deliverance will appear on the consideration of the
condition we were in, who were designed to be destroyed. Consider we but the
daring provocations we have given the Almighty to forsake us, it appears a
Mirror of Mercy that he should spare us. Might he not justly have said, Now
will I ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me on my Enemies: Now will I make
known the dread of my unregarded wrath, for their impenitent sinning: Now will
I show how bitter a thing it is to abuse my patience by rebellion, and my
goodness by offending? But now behold, his bowels wrought in him; he delivered
us rebels, rescued us sinful wretches: and who can but lay to heart this mercy?

How helpless had we been in such a dismal Surprizal? the mighty men would not
have found their hands, the valiant would have lost their courageous hearts,
and we should have been but Magor missabibs, terror round about.

But the misery of our condition had lain in our unreadiness to have encoun^^ed
the King of Terrors, to have followed that amazing Messenger to the dreadful
Tribunal of the Eternal God. How unfit had we been to die at a moments warning?
How miserable had thousands been to whom all space of repenting had been ended,
whose present misery had been the beginning of eternal torments, whose
unprepared Souls had been sent to the place prepared for the devil and his
angels? Oh then that now we could lay to heart these Riches of Grace that
continues a preparing space: Patientia poenitentiae expectatrix: His Patience
expects Repentance. Let not our prolonged days be spent in provoking him any
longer; let us not now be treasuring up wrath to the day of wrath.

I might show you the greatness of this Deliverance, by the nearness of the
Destruction; it was in articulo mortis, all was almost concluded, our
Passing Bell rung, the day was presumed to be their own, and now delivered, as
Daniel, e faucibus perditionis, from the very jaws of Destruction, from the
very mouths of our Enemies. Oh wonderful goodness!

And most fitly might I mention the means of our Deliverance.

Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque feret.
How did this sweetest Honey come from the Lions carcass? Men of their own
Party must impart it to us; those of their own Conclave are means, under God,
to deliver us from their own Counsels. Oh the wonderful Authority of God, that
wrought on their Consciences so long benumbed! Oh the Wisdom of God, that works
by contrary means! No Violence constrained them, but what the Almighty used
with them; no Policy induced them, so much as Divine Power.

Use 2.
Is it the design of God in delivering, to reduce from sin, and oblige to
Holiness? Let us then examine our selves, whether we have answered these holy
designs of our gracious God. Oh Reader, faithfully ask thine own heart, Have I
not been as loose and profane, as vile and vain, as carnal and formal as ever I
was before? What inducement has this gracious preservation been to the
reformation of my Life? What Sin have I faithfully forsaken? what displeasing
Lust have I unfeignedly left? what spiritual Obedience have I closed withal,
since I enjoyed this unspeakable Mercy? Does not thy Conscience accuse thee of
thy regardlesness of it? Does not thy heart smite thee, for not observing the
Duties thou art obliged to by it? Abasuerus would know what was done to
Mordecai, for the good deed he had done for the Kingdom. Ask thy self, What
good has been done to God for all the good deeds he has done for thee? What
has been done to him for his delivering of thee? Have thou not sinned the more
against him, and turned his Grace into wantonness? Is that a meet requital for
his kindness? Are Pride, Drunkenness, Sensuality, fit Votive Tables for our
merciful escapes? Oh let not this Mercy be lost for want of improvement, lest
you never enjoy such another. Remember, exoneratio supplicii est oneratio
officii; the laying off and freeing thee from punishment, lays obligations upon
thee for dutiful Obedience. Mercies are to be like showers on Valleys, making
them fruitful; as a grain of corn sown in the tilled earth, bringing forth a
plentiful crop of expected fruit. God has sown the seeds of his Mercies, let
not the Devil reap a crop of Sin. Oh how might I plead with you, as loving
Jonathan with hard-hearted Saul, 1 Samuel 19.4. Let not the King sin against
David, for he has not sinned against thee; and because his works are good. Oh
let not us sin against God; let us not rebel against him; he never dealt
unjustly with us, but his deeds are good. He is ever working for us. He is ever
heaping up Mercies, shall we sin against him? It will be better not to receive
a Mercy, than not to be bettered by it. Oh come now and consider with your
selves, say with thy self, Has God in his Providence made me a freeman from
Popish Slavery, and shall I make my self a Slave to Lusts, and a Vassal to the
Devil? Shall God continue my Life, and shall I cast it away as worth nothing?
Oh examine your selves how you have acted. Plato, seeing any disorderly, would
say, Number ego talis? Am I such an one? Thou see many go on in sin, ask thy
self, Am not I such an one? Do not I go on in sin? What a folly is it in us,
that we utimur perspicillis plusquam speculis, use spectables to see other
faults, more than looking-glasses to see our own? Learn the Art of
Self-reflection, and that is the way to Self-reformation.

Use 3.
Is it Gods design and desire to reduce us from sin by these merciful methods?
Then let us not foolishly cause the Lord to use more forcible and fearful
means, to effect this in us. Let us not force a gracious God out of his
delightful ways of Mercy. Why should we make him be doing his works of
Judgment, since he declares his unwillingness to it? Shall we turn his Scepter
into a Rod? Shall we drive away those precious Mercies by sinful courses,
which, with mournful hearts and wringing hands, we shall be glad to be
recalling? Shall we make our Showers of Mercy end in Floods of Vengeance? Shall
we wrest the Sword of Justice out of the Sheath of Patience, and violently pull
down Vengeance on our own heads? Will you tell the Lord, you are weary of his
Mercies, and will never regard them? Will you declare in the presence of God,
that if he will not power out his Vengeance, and display his Justice, and make
your Plagues wonderful, that you will not fear him, nor break off sins? Is your
strength so great to stand before his Anger, that you are resolute in provoking
of him? Will nothing serve your turn but destruction, and desolation, and
undoing judgments? You must either cease sinning, or God will cease waiting,
and give over favoring of you. God speaks, Ezech. 6.9. how the Jews had broken
him with their whorish heart; that is, he tells them, they should remember Eum
quasi objecta quadam violentia a proposite abductum, and invitum plane adductum
esse eorum persidia ut interrumperetur cursus misericordiae, Calv. That he was
turned from his gracious purposes, with the violence their sins offered to him;
and that it was by their perfidiousness he was brought to break off the course
of his mercies. Thus God is broken off from ways of mercy, by our not breaking
off our ways of sin.

The holy God is resolved to make us leave off sinning one way or other: if his
goodness cannot gain us, if his mercies cannot induce us, his justice will come
out against us, and by his mighty power he will rule us. Ezekiel. 20.33. As I
live, says the Lord, surely with a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm, and
with fury poured out, will I rule over you. God will bring us into subjection
by mercies or judgments; his fury shall do that his favor will not. But why
should we cause the Lord to be so severe unto us? we weary man, but will ye
weary God also? Let us be constrained to amendment by his love, or else he must
curb us by tormenting punishments. It was said of Israel, Psalm. 81.11. Israel
would have none of me. Shall it be so said of England, that we refused and
slighted what God gives, and what he does in way of mercy? Shall it be said we
will have none of his mercies, none of his deliverances? shall we not then have
his judgments, and feel his vengeance?

Use 4.
Is this the design of God in delivering? then wisely make use of this as an
Argument to invalidate all future temptations to sin. When sinful occasions
offer themselves unto you, damp the hurtful influence of them by objecting to
thy self the unreasonableness of sinning, after such mercies conferred upon
thee. Thus Joseph did invalidate the eager assaults of his wicked Mistress,
Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? He did not
rashly admit the temptation, but consulted Conscience, and repel'd it with this
weighty Argument: How can I sin against a God that has of late been so
favorable to me, has delivered me from death, and advanced me to honor? Oh I
cannot slight so much kindness, to please a sinful humor: I will never do it.
When then thou meetest with allurements to sin, take to thy self this
corroborating disswasive from it, and courageously oppose all unworthy motions
to Rebellion by pondering on it.

Inferences from the second Proposition concerning our proneness to sin after
Deliverances.
1. Hence we see the absolute Necessity that there is of Divine Power, to
render any means effectual to bring us from sin. However probable means may be
to effect this end, they are not powerful enough without the cooperation of an
Almighty arm superadded to them. If rational Arguments were sufficient, such as
are drawn from infinite Mercy might be enough to charm our Wills to a loyal
Obedience to our God; but we see that outward Mercies, not conferring inward
Grace, cannot accomplish such difficult work. The chiefest engine that draws
the heart of man from sin, is Mercy; but it is the arm of God must fasten it to
the heart of man, and Divine Power that can only attract him by it. Mercies are
only cords, which Divine Power uses to draw men from sin. If Moral Persuasions
were so wonderfully effectual in converting Sinners, as some would have them,
it is strange men cannot overcome themselves to forsake their sins, by the
consideration of the merciful Preservations, and gracious Deliverances the
Almighty bestows upon them: Strange it is men cannot be persuaded to cease
provoking God to Judgments, by the declaring his unwillingness to them by the
experiences of deliverances from them. But how do we experience the
ineffectualness of outward Mercies, whatever valid motives may be drawn from
them! What need then is there to apply our selves most frequently to the Throne
of Grace, for heavenly Influences on earthly Blessings?

How should we earnestly crave the concurrence of God's Omnipotency, for the
bettering of us by the confluence of Mercies bestowed upon us? Isai. 48.17. The
Lord teaches to profit. In the greatest abundance of Means and Mercies, we
shall have no profit, without the aids and assistance of God; He must teach us
to improve Deliverances, to gain by his Goodness. When cords of Mercy are put
into our hands, let us lift up out hearts to the Father of Mercies, and cry,
Draw us, and we will follow thee. When Mercies are sown like precious seeds
most plentifully amongst us, let us implore the showers of Divine Blessing to
make us fruitful by them. When such invaluable Talents are put into our hands,
let us seek to the Almighty for strength to work with them. Plead with the Lord
to deliver thee from sin, by his Deliverances; to give thee the incomes of his
Grace, to improve thy Life miraculously continued to thee. Leave not the Throne
of Grace, till Grace is given thee to leave thy sins: Cease not to importune
the Almighties help against thy sins, till he has delivered thee from them, as
he has done from thine enemies. Acknowledge thine own weakness, and so thou will engage the strength of God: Tell him with holy boldness, that now he has
given thee his Mercies, thou can not be content without his Blessing with
them. Let temporal Deliverance edge thy appetite after spiritual and eternal.
Thou have but half a Mercy, till thy Soul is bettered by a Deliverance, whether
it be from Enemies, or Sickness, or any other distress or danger.

2. Are we so prone to sin after Deliverance? Then hence be warned to be very
watchful upon the enjoyment of such a Mercy. Oh that we, who enjoy so eminent
escapes from danger, might use our greatest industry to prevent our proceeding
in sin! Let us fortify our selves against such an evil practice. Make
conscience of what you do in a delivered condition. Let us no longer carelessly
run on in our sins, but seriously consider the inducements we have to a holy
Life.

Now in order to prevent our proceeding in sin, admit this serious counsel, and
observe these Directions:

1. Make frequent Reflections on the great Deliverance in part bestowed upon
us. When the Creator of the ends of the Earth surveyed his glorious Works, he
saw they were good, and delighted in them; and he greatly delights that we
should be frquent in Meditations of his glorious Works of Creation and
Providence, and live in perpetual admirings of them, applauding the shines of
his Power, Wisdom, and Mercy in them. The least of Gods Works deserve the
admiration of the greatest Angel in Heaven. Inconsiderate Persons gain little
advantage by the most considerable Mercies. Were our hearts more thankful, we
should make a particular Computation and exact Chronology of daily and yearly
Mercies. The forgetfulness of Mercy is the ground of our forsaking God after
them. It Is mighty effectual to ballast our hearts against our impetuous
inclinations to sin, to be much in considering what God has done for us.
Hence the people of Israel were admonished to be frequent in reviewing their
sad condition in Egyptian bondage, with the blessed escape given them from it.
Deuteronomy. 26.1, 2.5, etc. When thou art come into the land -- thou shall speak and
say, A Syrian ready to p^rish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and
became there a great nation, -- and the Egyptians entreated us ill, -- and the
Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and outstretched arm,
and with great terribleness, etc. Thus they were to make a frequent
commemoration of their miserable state, and merciful escape. In like manner it
were necessary for us to look back on what we lately were, and say, A little
while since I was at the gates of Death, by the subtle contrivances of Popish
Enemies; a little time past I had near been devoured by the jaws of those
preying Lions: Some few months are past since the Nation was in danger of being
involved in incomparable Miseries; it has almost been made a Stage for the
acting a bloody Tragedy, an Altar on which had been sacrificed innumerable
precious Lives, a Prey to Roman Fury; and now behold (blessed be the Lord) the
Scene is changed, the Curtains of Secrecy that covered the nasty vault of
Popish Conspirators, is happily drawn aside; the God of our lives, by his
over-awing Majesty, has influenced the hearts of Enemies to detect the Snare
they once did endeavor to lay. Should we not then argue, Should I that was so
lately in such danger of losing my precious life, now squander it away as a
contemptible thing? Should I thus lately experiencing mercy from God, manifest
my self by wicked courses to be a rebellious Enemy to him? Should not the
thoughts of the death, danger, and miserable calamity God has brought me from,
bring me unfeignedly to love him, and constantly to yield obedience to him?

Let us therefore, to prevent proceeding in sin, reflect on the kindness of
God: Seriously think how miserable thou had been without the Deliverance. Oh
miserable state, had it not come! Enemies raging, if not reigning; Gospel
corrupted, if not removed; Lives endangered, if not destroyed. How had we been
fleeing on Mountains, hiding in Dens, or burning in Flames, tortured with
Racks! How had we been without Bread to eat, Houses to lodge in, or else all
robbed by those pilf^ring Papists, if not burnt by their horrid malice, which
is enough to put the whole Universe into miserable Conflagrations! How should
we meditate how seasonably Deliverance came! we helpless, careless, and
ignorant, then was it that his mighty arm brought a blessed Salvation to us.
Behold, how unworthy we were of such a Mercy, of such a Deliverance! A sinful
rebellious people, for us to partake of so much favor, is the greatest Mirror
in the world. Now can we forget this goodness? If we have no memories to retain
Mercies, we soon may have no Mercies to retain in memory. Or can we sin in the
sight of such kindness? We shall never see such a glorious Deliverance, if we
sin in the face of this. Oh let us often say as those, Numb. 23.22. What has
the Lord wrought among us! Oh what a glorious Work was this, embroidered with
Mercy, set forth with the shines of Wisdom, and illustrious by the impressions
of infinite Power! Oh forget not this Work! If we forget Deliverances, God may
forget to deliver: Isai. 17.10, 11, They were made desolate for forgetting the
God of their Salvation. It Is known that the breasts that afford the sweetest
Milk, will dry up, if not drawn; the breasts of Mercy will be certainly dried
up, if no benefit be drawn from them by a serious remembrance, and faithful
improving of them. Prayers and Tears are the best means to obtain Mercies, and
a thankful remembrance will be the best way to have them continued to us.

2. To prevent thy proceeding in sin, think with thy self what Promises and
Obligations, what Pleas and Arguments you would have made to the Lord, and
urged him with, to have induced him to have given such a Deliverance as this.
Would you not have promised, that if it should please him to exercise his Power
in saving of you, you would engage, that to the utmost of your power you would
serve him? Oh what great obligations would you willingly have laid your selves
under, to be freed from so dreadful a Destruction as you were appointed to?
What obedience, service, love, and respects, do sinners vow to God on a Bed of
sickness, languishing to death? What would we have promised then, when no less
than a whole Nation was languishing, and every Enjoyment ready to give up the
Ghost? Oh what solemn engagements to all possible obedience would then have
been made! Would you have promised these things, and will you not perform them?
Let the readiness of God to do it without these engagements, make you more
ready to do those things than if you had engaged to do them.

Consider also what pleas thou would have used with God to spare thee; think
what arguments might have prevailed with him to deliver thee; and let them
prevail with thee to forsake sin. Thou would not have said, Lord* spare me to
go on a while longer in rebellion against thee; cut me not off till I have
dishonored thy glorious Name a little more; give me my life to be a Drunkard,
Swearer, Liar, Sabbath-breaker, yet a while longer. Thou could never have the
impudence to plead thus, thou could never imagine these Arguments could
prevail; therefore use the considerations of Arguments which thou think
would prevail to curb thy heart from sin, as thou think would have been
proper to prevail with God to deliver thee. And what are those? Oh spare me,
that I may prepare for death! Oh give me space, that I may repent of my sins,
and reform! And let thy carriage be such now in part delivered, as may answer
such motives as these, which would have been used with God to deliver thee.

3. Consider how thou would carry to man, if receiving a thousand times
smaller kindnesses from him. Oh the thanks that shall be returned to man for a
small favor! What readiness to do for man, when doing for us? Should a man but
save us from perishing, how grateful, how serviceable should we become unto
him? And shall kindness from sinful creatures make such impressions on our
hearts, and the abounding goodness of the glorious God be disregarded? We love
man loving of us, and shall we not love a loving God? We devote our selves to
the service of our earthly Benefactors, and shall we be so devilish as to deny
obedience to the great God, under all his benignity to us? Shall God have worse
dealings from us than men? Would thou not offend an earthly Friend, and will thou offend a heavenly Friend? Wilt make nothing of displeasing God, when he
gives thee such Mercies as all the men on Earth cannot bestow upon thee? Oh let
but this be considered, and surely thou can not persist in sin.

Use 5.
See here the unconquerable stubbornness of man's heart. Oh how do our hearts
stand out against God under all his dealings with us! We are (...), an
unperswadable generation. Oh wonderful obstinacy, that the sweetest Melody of
mercy cannot charm us! Oh what hardened souls are in us, when the pleasant
distillations of showers of mercy upon us, cannot soften us! Oh what (...),
strong holds, have sin, that the cords of mercy cannot draw us from them! Oh how
hard is it to gain a Victory over corrupted nature and accustomed sins! Oh
strange affections that we have to sin, that the strongest engagements cannot
bring us from it! Such is the stubbornness of unchanged souls, that whether God
walks in ways of Mercy, or paths of Judgment, they will go contrary to him. Oh
the hardness to be lamented, that appears among us! Though the Almighty has
done thus much for us, we have not to this day been duly affected with what he
has done. We have gone on frowardly, when God has dealt most kindly by us: we
go on to provoke the eyes of his glory, when he has made so much of his
glorious goodness pass before us. Oh stubborn souls, that will not regard the
melting kindness of God! but do as it were resolve, whatever God does, they
will sin against him. Though he seek reconciliation, they will follow
rebellion: though he strives to outdo their Rebellion with mercy, they will
not lay down their Arms, but be avenged on his many mercies.

Inferences from the third Proposition concerning the hainousness of sin after
deliverance.
1. Is sinning after deliverance such heinous sinning? Behold then what crying
sins are to be seen amongst us! Have we not sins of the greatest magnitude, who
have mercies of the highest nature? Are not our sins worse than Sodoms, when
our mercies are abundantly more than that enjoyed? Sins in England, are greater
than sins in other Nations, that have not partaken of such signal favors as
we. We wonder God bears with Antichristian Rome, with foreign Idolaters; Alas,
their sins are not of that nature that ours are. Our sins it may be are minoris
infamiae, of lesser infamy, but majoris reatus, of greater guilt than theirs.
Our sins are double; and the more our mercies increase, the more abundant
aggravations belong to our sins. Are we not sinners above all, that have
favors beyond any? Our sins that are small in abstracto, considered
abstractly, are great in concreto, considering the circumstances of them. If
small sins will not startle us, here are great sins then to amaze us. Oh let
our sins that we have committed be more before us, that so the sense of their
greatness may prevent our proceeding in them!

2. Hence see what need we have of great Repentance; an ordinary sorrow will
not answer our extraordinary sins. Gravissima peccata gravissimis lamentis
indigent. Greatest provocations call for greatest lamentations. Oh what tears
and lamentations can be great enough for our horrid sins? What sighs can be
deep enough for a Nation so deeply involved in sin? Should not our mourning be
as in the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the Valley of Megiddon, every family
apart, every person apart? Should not Ninive be our president? Should not our
England become a Bokim, and our Island be overflown with tears? Oh what floods
of tears is there need of, to wash away our abominable pollutions! Oh what
wailing and weeping should be in a Nation living and wallowing in such
iniquities? Aut poenitendum vel pereundum. Repentance only can prevent our
ruin; Repentance only can make justice to retreat; Repentance only can
deliver us now delivered: But where shall we find it? Where are the weeping
eyes, the mourning hearts? Oh that repentance might appear among us, lest
judgments appear against us! Oh that we could lay our selves down at the feet
of mercy by humiliation, that we may not be laid down in a dreadful desolation,
by the hands of justice! Oh that a hearty repentance might prevent our
hastening ruin! Oh that we might lie in breathing sweats of Godly sorrow, that
we may not lie sweltring in our blood! Our sins reach up to Heaven, let our
sorrow reach to heart. Oh that each part of unfeigned repentance might be
really acted by us!

Let us make a strict inquiry into our fins, commune with our hearts; let us go
the Circuit of our hearts and lives, and see the abominable sins to be
condemned there. Let us read the Book of Conscience, and see what sins we there
stand indicted for. As Letters wrote with the juice of Oranges, are not to be
read but by the fire; Thus some have their sins written, and will not read them
now; but shall at last read them by the fire of Hell. Lam. 3.40. Let us search
and try our ways. Oh we are senseless of our sins; but aeger non sentiens
periculosius laborat; a senseless sick man is most in danger. Oh open your eyes
then, and see what disorders in heart, what wickedness in life! refuse not a
sight of thy sins now; one day God will set them before thy eyes.

Disown not the Charges that are against thee, without reason. Let us no longer
sew Fig Leaves on our sins. The impartial Judge of Heaven and Earth knows our
crimes. Let us therefore return and say, Father I have sinned. Thus did those,
Lam. 5.16. Woe be to us, we have sinned. David yielded the case to Nathan, I am
the man: may thou not justly say, I am the man that have been nothing the
better for deliverance; I am the man or woman have gone on in Pride,
Sensuality, without repentance, reformation? Defend not thy sins by excuses,
but own them; be convinced without further demur, and condemn thy self as a
guilty malefactor. Then let us pour out our tears, and open the Floodgates of
Godly sorrow; and if we would escape, let us be like those, Ezekiel. 7.16. Who
were like Doves in the Valleys, mourning every one for their own iniquity. Oh
that our proud hearts might yield to this work! Our dry eyes be filled with
tears. Let us fill Gods bottle with our tears! What is weeping good for, but to
testify our sorrow for sin? it cannot recover a dying friend, it may a dying
Nation: it cannot stop the course of death, it may the coming of judgments.
Open then the windows of Heaven, and break up the deeps, and let us make us a
hearty weeping, as may prevent the heavy judgments our great sins are calling
for.

Then let us make a holy resolution, in the strength of the Almighty, to cease
from our sins. Say as holy Job, Job 34.32. If I have done evil I will, do it no
more. With holy indignation reject thy former villainies. Oh let our souls be
raised to a deserved hatred of these great iniquities, and let nothing content
us, but the utter ruin of our ruining sins. Let us not be dismayed at the
difficulty attending that blessed work: It Is hard to destroy sin, but will it
not be harder to be damned for it? If it be hard to bear the launching of those
ranker'd wounds, what will it be to bear the smart of the envenomed arrows of
divine justice for ever? Know also, thou may do all things through Christ
that strengthens thee; then carry thy sins with the solemnity of penitential
tears, to their eternal funeral. And unless this reformaon shall attend thy
repentance, thou repentest with an absurd contradiction. Optima poenitentia est
nova vita: The best repentance is a new life. This is the repentance our
heinous sins require; and all this is to be done in a more than ordinary way,
because of the greatness of our sins.

3. If sins after deliverance are so great, hence* see how near judgments may
be unto us, because the measure of our iniquities will be so suddenly ^illed.
The patience of H^aven will soon be worn out with these daring provocations. As
we are heaping up Sin, the Almighty is heaping up Wrath; and the greater sins,
the sooner the treasures of wrath will be full. The more fuel we bring, the
sooner the fire will be kindled to consume us. The Lord in his mercy is waiting
to be gracious, backward to judgment; but such iniquities will soon waste his
patience, and provoke his wrath.

We read, Genesis 15.16. that the Lord delayed punishment, because the iniquity of
the Amorites was not yet full. The measure of sin and wrath are often filling
many years; and according as sins are aggravated, judgments approach faster or
slower. Thus Joel 3.13. God calls for Sickles to be put in, because the harvest
was ripe, the presses were full, and the fats did overflow. God will suffer
sinners to stand till they are come to their full stature in sin, and then he
cuts them down, and makes an end of them. Thus Christ speaks to the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers. i. e. Ye will be
filling up the measure of their sins, till the Lord comes and measures out
judgment to you, according to the measure of your sins. Oh then what cause have
we to fear, lest the Vials of wrath should suddenly be poured out upon us! Is
not the harvest of sin almost ripe? or will not these showers of mercy suddenly
ripen it? And then the sickle must be put in; a bloody enemy let in among us,
that shall cut us down as the reapers do the corn. Oh let us dread the
approaches of vengeance under the increases of sin and wickedness! The measures
of wrath have been long a filling; the iniquities of our fathers are laid up
for us, and may be rewarded on our heads when the measure is full. We ripen
apace for judgments now; destruction may be at the door ere we know.

Inferences from the fourth and fifth Propositions concerning the destructive
nature of Sinning after deliverance. Use I.
May destruction come after deliverance? Then hence we may learn, that present
impunity can be no evidence of our future safety. Mercies are not so
inseparably entailed upon us, that justice cannot deprive us of them. Present
prosperity may have a mournful ending in dismal adversity. National, as
personal salvation from present dangers, may end in destruction. The wings of
our feathery confidence had need be clipped, when we fondly presume the Almighty
to be ever bound to deliver such a people as we, because he has once more
graciously done it. 2 Pet. 2.9. God reserves the unjust to judgment. The bird
that escapes the fowlers net for once, may be afterward caught: we that are
wonderfully preserved from the snares of hellish Plotters, may at last be made
a prey, if we grow no more watchful. Our cloudy Heavens threaten new storms.
The world is very full of great and unexpected mutations: The turnings of the
wheels of Providence are very swift and various. We may now as suddenly be
destroyed, as we have often been delivered. Iud. 5. After delivered, God
destroyed those that believed not. The ship that evades the dangers of the Sea
more than once, may be swallowed up in its Sands, or shattered by its Rocks at
last.

The reprieved malefactor may justly expect his deserved execution, after a
little space afforded for preparation. And in truth, the relief our offended
God has given us, seems more like a Reprieve, than a Deliverance; and cause we
have most seriously to fear, that ere long we shall experience that Justice can
destroy, as Mercy can deliver. Our impunity is not from Gods impotency, but
patience; and that may soon be expired. We have cause to dread that awakening
word, Josh. 24.20. If ye forsake the Lord, then will he turn and do you hurt,
after all the good he has done you. Our not returning under good, will make
him turn to do us harm. Proceeding in sin will interrupt the course of mercies,
and introduce successions of judgments. You may be surprised with sudden
miseries, in the midst of your feigned safety. God will not always draw with
cords of love. Hos. 11.3.4, 5. I drew them with cords of a man, with bonds of
love; that is, I dealt with them in the most gracious manners, striving to draw
their rebellious hearts into subjection; but since I cannot prevail, v. 5 They
shall not go down to Egypt, they shall have no shelter there, but the Assyrian
shall be their King, and the sword shall abide in their cities, and devour his
branches. Thus may the dealings of God be changed, and cords of love be turned
to chastising rods, to lash the backs of stubborn fools. We cannot ensure the
continuance of mercies, but by our compliance with the designs of God by them.
That which was spoken to Ephraim, may fall upon us, Hos. 9.11. As for Ephraim,
his glory shall flee away like a bird. We imagine we have mercies sure as a
bird in the cage: but as the door being opened the bird flies away, so mercies
will take their wings, and be gone from a sinful people. Trust not then to your
present freedom, you may be enslaved; flatter not your selves in hopes of
perpetual deliverance, destruction may come at last.

3. Will this persistence in sin hasten such certain and miserable ruin! Then
see what reason there is to shake off our pleasing but hurtful security,
admitting some fearful thoughts, and affecting our hearts with apprehensions of
our eminent danger. Unwilling we are to admit of such Truths near our decoying
hearts, which may affect us with fear or grief: But it is far from the nature of
wisdom to flatter our selves into ruin; or to fancy our selves secure in a
glorious Paradise, till we be miserable in a desolate wilderness. Three things,
says Luther, will undo a Nation; Oblivion of Mercies, Politic contrivances,
and Carnal Security. Well will it be, if these prove not our ruin at last.

Oh what a fearless Age do we live in? we sleep on pillows stuffed with the fire
of divine vengeance: We cry, Peace, Peace, and destruction is coming. How do we
stupifie our Senses, fear our Consciences, lock up our Understandings, to keep
out all fears in the midst of most dreadful dangers? What stupifying Opiums
has the Devil persuaded us to swallow, that makes us so mindless of
approaching miseries? How do we fortify our selves with most fond presumptions
against the threats of vengeance denounced from Heaven? Can fancyed safety
deliver our Nation from Enemies, when we have nothing else to secure us? Can
empty boastings of conceited ability to defend our selves, prevent the assaults
of Enemies, or deliver our Land from the ruin designed? Will security in sin
be sufficient guard to preserve us from all Conspiracies? can neither God nor
man do us any harm, whilst we imagine our selves out of danger? Oh nos
miserrimos! Oh miserable England! how do we surfeit with mercies, and wax sick
with the kindness of Heaven, and yet say, It shall be well with us? How do we
wound our selves, when the Lord is healing; and destroy our selves, when the
Lord is delivering, and yet say. The Lord will go on to deliver? What
Prosperity do we promise our selves, whilst God is threatening our ruin? What
Halcyon-days do we vainly expect, though Miseries are ready to seize us? Oh the
dreadful Dooms that are threatened to so stupid a people in the Word of the
Lord! Oh the sad Calamities have come upon a people in this condition!

Is not this the posture our Enemies so greatly desire to find us in? What is
their work, but to lull us asleep, and then to be butchering of us? What is the
great contrivance at this day of the Papists, and such as affect them, but to
suppress our fears by cheating devices? knowing our deepest security will be
their greatest advantage. They know, our Throats will lie open to be cut by
their cruel hands, when once we have emptied our hearts of sollicitous thoughts
of destruction. Hence, hence it is, instruments are active to inform us
deceitfully, that we are sufficiently provided against them: for this they
instruct theirs and the Devils Martyrs to obtrude on the world the highest
Protestations of Innocence: For this they strain their throats to swallow
renouncing Oaths, which they will as certainly keep as ever they intended,
which I fear was not at all. Hence they force themselves to a Parish Church,
that we may certainly think they cannot belong to the Romish Mother; and that
we may fancy, they cannot go thence to contrive our miserable ruin. Oh then if
this be their plot, how have they got us by it? How do we please our enemies,
and promote their designs, by our sinful Security? But shall we not fear the
Hammer and Nail will cleave our Pates, when Sisera-like we are droll'd into
sleep with a Lordly Dish of Butter and Honey? You may certainly believe this
stupifying Opium will be like the poison of Asps at last.

Is not this the Posture most have been in, when Judgments came upon them? What
was there but careless and senseless doings, when that dreadful Deluge
surpised the world of old? Mat. 24.37, 38. How unexpected was the ruin of
Sodom and Gomorrha? How incredulous were the Jews of their sad Captivities,
and of their utter Desolation at last? Observe we but the frame of persons when
Judgments have been rained from Heaven upon them, and we shall find they were
fearless of any storms, and conceitedly secure from any miseries. When the
Massacre broke forth in Paris, the cruel butchering was acted in Ireland, the
ruining Persecutions and Distresses fell upon Germany, they were all involved
in Lethargical Distempers, besotted with fatal Security. This is the time the
beasts of prey have ever gone out to glut themselves with fatning blood. This
has been the season ever selected to manage the overthrow of Kingdoms. Yet
examples do not warn us, but we foolishly seem resolved to gratify our enemies
with a suitable season to ruin us. Is not this the posture that God has
severely threatened in his Word, to which he will ever be faithful? Isai. 22.13,
14. In that day the Lord of Hosts called to mourning and weeping, and behold
joy and gladness: and it was revealed in my ears -- Surely this Iniquity shall
not be purged from you till you die. Nothing urges Justice more to confound a
people with floods of Vengeance, than Epicurean stupidity under awakening
Alarums. Has not the Lord threatened, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved,
and still hardens his neck, shall be destroyed suddenly, and that without
remedy? Why then do we flatter our selves, and cry Peace, peace? Shall we say
as those? Zeph. 1.12. The Lord will do neither good nor evil. Will not God then
say, as v.13. Therefore your goods shall become a booty, and your houses a
desolation? Whatever may be the foundation our Security is builded upon, so
long as provoking Sins are heaping up Wrath, Security does but hasten our
Misery. It Is possible we are incredulous that Judgments can ever destroy a
People renowned in Profession as we; but since our Profession is but as
Samuel's mantle, under which are shrouded most devilish sins, or as a carpet
cast over the mouth of Hell, it can never be a shelter for us, but stirs up the
Lord to vengeance. Outside-Holiness and mocking Formality renders our condition
the worse. Micah 3.11, 12. They leaned upon God in ways of sin, and said, Is
not the Lord among us? do we not profess him, and worship him? Therefore shall
Zion for your sakes be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and
the mountains of the House of the Lord, as the high places of the forest. The
Ark of the Lord could not save the Israelites sinning; Zion will be no shelter
for Hypocrites. It Is in vain to flatter our selves with conceits of safety in
an outward show of Godliness; that hay and straw can be no fence from the
ruining flames of Divine Vengeance.

Awake then from brutish security, and fall to work to prevent the threatened
ruin, by repentance and amendment. Fancy not your selves beyond the reach of
judgments, but tremble in your selves, that you may have rest in the day of
trouble. Make the Almighty your friend, that he may not be a terror in the day
of Evil. Be afraid of all his judgments, For if you will not learn to fear that
great and dreadful Name, the Lord thy God, then will he make thy plagues
wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.38. Is not destruction coming after deliverance? Are not
dreadful days approaching to us? Consider these few particulars following, and
you will see what cause we have to shake off security, and prepare our selves
to meet the Lord in ways of judgments, who have so long enjoyed the shines of
mercy.

1. May we not justly fear our ungrateful carriage toward God, will hasten his
formidable departure from us? Unkindness shown to friends coming to us, will
certainly discourage them from abiding with us. The happiness of a Nation
consists above all, in the fruition of the favorable presence of God; and if
by a regardless carriage, or displeasing behavior, we provoke him to depart,
our sudden ruin will be the consequence of his deserting of us. Hos. 9.12. Woe
also to them when I depart from them. There is that absolute necessity of the
presence of the Lord with a people, to conduct them by his Counsel, to protect
them by his Power, to succeed them by his blessing in use of saving means, to
deliver them in unconquerable dangers, that if he withdraws it from them, none
of these things can be done by another hand. Hence the Lord, unwilling to ruin
Jerusalem, with bowels of compassion cries out, Ier. 6.8. Be instructed, O
Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, and thy land becomes desolate and not
inhabited. The soul of a man is the vivisick principle, on the separation of
which from the body, there ensues a death; all strength, counsel, beauty,
leaves the body. Thus when the Lord departs, the soul of a Nation is gone, and
then the Nation is only a mouldring heap, and as a liveless carcass. We
certainly loose all good, when the presence of God is withdrawn from us. If we
by our sins make the Almighty go away, he for our sins will take away all kind
of Mercies from us. Deuteronomy. 3.1.17. I will forsake them. The regardless Ath^ists
of our age will say, Let him go, and what then? Oh, says the Lord. Then shall
ye be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall come upon you; so that they
shall say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because the Lord is
not amongst us?

Now may we not fear God will depart from a people that behave themselves so
unkindly as we at this day? We slight his presence, abuse his kindness; can we
think to be blessed with his presence long? We read, Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast
off the thing that is good. The Hebr. is only, (...) repulit a se bonum, i. e.
(...), beneficium, or (...), Praeter quem non est bonum. So Rivet, Grotius, and
others: that is, Israel has driven from it God the only good, has made its
kind Benefactor go away. Oh have we not done thus? have we not been driving God
away from us; as weary of his Ordinances, tired with Gospel-proffers,
nauseating Mercies, and despising Deliverances? How can we think God, can walk
with us any longer, when we walk so frowardly and contrary to him? Amos 3.3.
How can two walk together, unless they be agreed? thereby God shows them how
impossible it was for him to continue in ways of mercy to them, since they
refused to walk with him in ways of duty; which is the sweet harmony God
expected from them: says the Lord, You would have me to walk with you, and
bless you, yet ye depart from me, and blaspheme my Name. How can I longer walk
with you? Thus the Lord threatens a people, Lev. 26.21. If ye walk contrary to
me, I will walk contrary to you. v. 24. I will bring seven times more Plagues
upon you, according to your sins. Oh how perversely have we walked! How
contrary is Disobedience to Deliverance, Sinning to Salvation, Cursing to
Blessing! and may not God justly leave us to ruin, and suffer our destruction
who deal thus unanswerably with him?

2. May we not justly fear that our provoked God in justice will set the wicked
over us, who have despised his righteous and blessed Government? August. says,
God sets up wicked oppressors, cum judicat res humanas talibus dignas dominis;
when he judges a people meriting such masters. When Religion is co^nted an
intolerable yoke, under a Government that decrees the observance of it, we may
with terror expect a yoke to be laid upon our necks that shall be so heavy,
that we shall see our unspeakable folly in accounting the service of God a
slavery to him. Have we not cause to fear that dreadful word? Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness and gladness of
heart in the abundance of all things: Therefore shall thou serve thine enemies
which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and thirst, and nakedness,
and in want of al^ things; and they shall put a yoke upon thy neck, until they
have destroyed thee. Our wanton spirits under sometimes-a-prosperous Rule, may
be humbled by the severities of either foreign Princes prevailing or
home-enemies reigning. God punishing the iniquity of a people, is said, Hos.
13.11. To give them a king in his wrath. When God sets the wicked over a
people, it is a manifest indication of his anger. God often sets the worst of
Governors over the worst of people. As a holy man pleading with God about one
Phocas made an Emperor, Cur Domine Phocam Imperatorem constituisti? responsum
datum accepit, Quia non inveni pejorem. Why Lord have thou made Phocas an
Emperor? he was answered, Because I could not find a worse.

May not our hearts then dread the fatal effects of removing our present King?
(whom God preserve.) Should God in anger do it, what bloody confusion may
follow in this nation? and will not our sins in the abundance of mercies, make
him destroy both us and our King? Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a Land,
many are the Princes thereof: that is, the continuance of Kings on this account
is stortned, and for the punishment of their villainies the lives of their Kings
are abbreviated, and one is set up after another; which great mutations are
often attended with great confusions, and innumerable calamities.

3. May we not justly fear, the Lord may suspend his divine influence from the
Councels of this Nation, that since we have little regarded what he has done
for us, the ablest Advisers, the most politic Counselors, may be disabled
from doing those things which may be profitable for us? How often have the
Councillors of a Nation deserted by God, been unprosperous in their
enterprises and undertakings for a people? Notwithstanding the care our
vigilant Sovereign has taken or may take to suppress the growing power of
Popery by his Royal Proclamations; and although the hearts of our Parliament
may be filled with sincerest intentions, to act for the advantage of the
Nation, yet they may fail in the means, and be disappointed of the end, if God
should desist from concurring with them.

What if their Counsels shall not have acceptance? What if their advice may
seem unsafe, and others must needs be chosen? Will not the Enemies of our
Nation be working all this while? Will not our Foes be contriving and hastening
our ruin, ere we have counsel to prevent it? Would not this be a heavy
Judgment? And may not this be feared by us, who have seen how hard it is to
give acceptable counsel in these difficult and dangerous times?

What if the Lord should do to us, as to the Counselors of a people of old,
Isai. 19.14. He mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst of them: Hence
they became as a drunken man that staggereth in his vomit. They staggered
about, were always unfixed, ever unstable, but reeled this way and that way,
not knowing what to do, or where to go. Should this Spirit of division be
mingled with ours, what shall we find but the breach made wider, the distress
made greater? Private animosities would be the destruction of public
advantages: The Blessing that has been promised to the godly, has been
wanting to Counselors in our age, Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper.
But has not a miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts, been the Curse of the Lord
upon us?

What if the Lord should suffer them to mistake the means of our recovery, or
fall short in what they do? Sometimes it has been known that Governors have
been too sparing to the wicked, to their own ruin. The King of Israel lost his
life, for sparing Benhadad that should have died, 1 Kings 20.41. Thus says the
Lord, Because thou have let go out of thine hand a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for
his people. It seems Ahab had too great a kindness for Benhadad, who deserved
to dye, being an implacable enemy to them: And are there not such enemies to be
destroyed at this day? He also held by Tyranny places belonging to the
Israelites, and therefore deserved death: And are there not those who are
seeking to possess what belongs unto us, that ought to be cut off for their
malicious enterprises? He was also one that God did manifest his displeasure
against, by destroying 100000 Footmen of them, whereby he might understand Gods
displeasure against him. Now for him to spare this enemy, to entreat so
honorably this public Adversary, when given into his hands, brought him under
this threatening. Should our enemies be even spared like him, should we not
suffer after this manner? And will not this be a bad exchange, to give our
lives for theirs? Will this be a worthy deed, to spare a thief from the gallows
to cut our throats? See 1 Samuel 14.21, 23. There is little trusting such
enemies, whatever pretenses they make. Iudaeo baptizato, and lupo domestico,
non est credendum. We must not trust a baptized Jew, being an inward enemy to a
Christian; nor a house-wolf, that will still make murder among the sheep.

Sometimes in the world it has been known, that as men have been too sparing
to the wicked, so too cruel to the godly. The rod has been laid on the wrong
back, as the Poet said,

Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas. The innocent Doves are censured,
whilst the ravenous Crows are pardoned. The Christians in former days have been
clothed with Bears-skins, and then baited. Some persons are misrepresented,
and then more severely reprehended than those a thousand times more guilty. We
read in Scripture how Ahasuerus, that mighty Prince, was brought to decree the
ruin of the Jews, by the aspersions Haman cast upon them, as if they were a
people not fit to live, and that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer
them; and by this means this innocent people had utterly been destroyed, had
not a wonderful Providence prevented. Hence sometimes it has been experienced,
that a poor afflicted people have born the punishments designed for and
deserved by others, only from the misprisions of prejudiced persons. Should it
then be ever thus with us, how soon would our ruin come upon us? How would the
hands of enemies be strengthened, and the Nation disabled from helping it self?

4. May we not justly fear our enemies have now set forward, by their doubled
diligence, that design which was set back by the discovery of their accursed
Plot? Our enemies may be like the Devil, qui surgit armis quibus dejicitur,
rises by the weapons by which he is cast down: So these politic Wretches may
improve the discovery of their designs, to make for the advancing of them, by
laying their Plots more cunningly. We have often heard of repulsed Armies
gaining force, and at last become triumphing Conquerours. Our enemies may yet
be rallying upon us, and that with a more invincible fury. The Fowler often
removes his snares, understanding the birds perception of it; our enemies may
change or remove their snares, and yet be as nea to slay and undo us as before.
And when we are most secure from it, we are nearest to it. The dreadful battle
was against Gibeah, when he knew not such an evil was near him, Judge. 20.34.
Those Serpents will not dye because their tails are cut off. Those grand
Politicians can contrive more ways than one. It Is possible their fainting
hearts have had some Cordials from Rome to revive them. France can help them at
a dead lift: and their Ghostly Father will prevent the ruin of his cursed
brats, if all he can do can ruin us. May we not fear things are brought to be
statu quo, as they were before, or rather worse, if that be possible? I fear
every gap is not yet stopped, whereby our enemies may possibly invade us. I think
it may be feared our enemies are not yet so much impaired, but that they are
able to recover their loss of some Arms they had to spare, and some men they
will not miss amongst their thousands. Do they not cry in the stoutness of
their hearts and pride of spirit, as Isa. 9.10. The bricks are fallen down, we
will build with stones; the sycomores are cut down, we will build with cedars?
We have been too remiss this once, but now we will be more invincible. The
water cast upon their fire, may make it burn the more fiercely, and vexatious
disappointments will make them more diligent.

5. May we not justly fear the relief that we have, may be no other than a
faint chearing before a miserable death? How often do we see men laboring
under deadly diseases, revive a little, and give up the Ghost? How often do we
know a whist calm, before a raging storm? A people may get a little heart
immediately before their ruin. 2 Kings 17.4. compared with Hos. 1.8. When
Lo-ammi was born, the ten tribes that before were dispirited, and by presents
did homage to the King of Assyria year by year, begin to be jolly, and hope to
cast off the yoke of bondage, and bring presents no longer; but joined in
confederacy with Egypt, which was immediately before their rejection. God
begins to save with a little escape, but it may be but a little lightning
before death. The Dolphin sports much before a storm. Men in jolly and fearless
condition, is a dreadful presage of a ruining storm. So true it is in maxima
fortuna minima licentia. In the greatest prosperity, we are not allowed the
least sinful liberty. God threatening to bring down judgments upon Israel, says,
he will feed him as a lamb in a large place, Hos. 4.16. To enlarge a peoples
bounds, is in Scripture taken to free them from troubles; so God designing
great distress, would a while free them from troubles. It Is a metaphor taken
from Butchers, who about to slay their Cattle, first put them into large
pastures to fatten them; so God about to destroy a people, often gives them a
freedom from distress, and leaves them to fill up apace the measures of their
sins, and then brings them out to slaughter: Hence Merc. on the place; Nunc
Israelitas copiose pascet, ut mox saginati hostibus dedantur trucidandi. He
feeds the Isralites most plentifully with mercies, that being fatted up, they
may become a prey to their butchering enemies. Oh how fast do we fatten! How
soon shall we be ready to be sacrifices to our enemies?

6. May we not justly fear, that as God in his wrath has dealt with others, he
may deal with us? When Judgments on others are not made use of as warnings,
they become but examples and patterns of our own destruction. Luke 13.3. Except
ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. The Sword of Justice is not so blunted by
wounding others, but it can wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes on in
sin. The Arrows of Divine Vengeance are not yet spent, there may be many in
reserve to pierce our obstinate, hardened hearts. God is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever; the same to love, protect and secure his obsequious people;
the same to ruin and destroy rebellious sinners. Ezekiel. 20.36. Like as I have
pleaded with your Fathers, so will I plead with you. The punishments of sin
other Nations have experienced, may at last be inflicted on us. The Vengeance
of God on others, is a sign to us, Jer. 7.12-14. Go ye now to my place which
was in Shiloh, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people
Israel; and now because ye have done all these works, says the Lord, therefore
will I do so to this house, etc. May not the dealings of God with others,
prognosticate his dealings with us? May not the sore Desolations in Germany,
the distresses of Protestants in France, the ruins of the Churches we read of
in John's Revelations, cause us to fear we at last shall experience the same
Miseries, and drink of the same cup of Astonishment that has been given to
them? 2 Pet. 2.5, 6. If God spared not the old world, shall thou escape his
judgment? What have we more to secure us? Why should we not be made as Sodom
by judgments, that parallel it in sins? Let us take the caution God gave to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 24.9. Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way,
when he brought thee from Egypt. Mind what God has been doing to other
Nations. The Inscription on Senacherib's Statue may be written on all ruined
Nations, (...). Beholding me, learn to be godly. But especially when distresses
fall on a people near us, we are greatly to regard them. The Protestants in
France are already involved in unspeakable trouble, and as the Poet said,

-- Tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. Thou art greatly concerned when
thy Neighbors house is in flames. The Cup passes from one to another.

7. To conclude, Although we may have an escape from final Ruin, and glorious
Times may succeed our unhappy days, may we not justly fear, that our Mercies
may be ushered in with a great deal of Misery, and that a black Storm will
precede our glorious Sunshine? The approaches of Mercies may be attended with
amazing Terror. Great distresses may justly be expected, before our great
Deliverance.

The shorter the time of enemies reigning is, the greater will be their rage. A
Cloud ushered in the presence of God to the Tabernacle; Christ's coming to
redeem his people, appears in a cloud. The darkest hour is a little before the
dawning of the glorious day. The sorest conflicts Israel had, was on their
entrance into their blessed and promised Canaan. Mercies of greatest
excellencies, have proportioned difficulties. Joseph's pearled Crown, and Chains
of honor, had answerable links of trouble. We have just cause from Gods
promises to expect some glorious days, but certainly a gloomy day will be
first. The earth will be shaken when Babylon shall fall. Before we can be
happy, the filth of England must be washed away with the spirit of judgment and
burning. We may be dealt with as is spoken of the Jews, Zech. 13.8, 9 Two parts
may be cut off, and the third refined. I may confidently assert, God will bring
more glorious days than yet the world enjoyed; but as Balaam said, Alas, who
shall live when the Lord does this? Numb. 24.24. Thou or I may be cut off, with
millions more; and seeing this time is at hand, be not secure. The only way to
secure any future deliverance, is by improving this. The way to have future
salvation, is to make use of this you enjoy, to mortify sins. For the Redeemer
shall come to Zion, and to those that turn from iniquity in Jacob, Isa. 59.20.
So then let us no longer abuse the patience of God; but since he is an
indulgent Father, let us become obedient Children; that so we may hope, that he
that has delivered, and can deliver, will still be continuing deliverances to
us.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PREFACE. Page 6. line 14. for health read hearts.

BOOK. Page 21. line ult. read (...) p. 22 l. 10. r. multiplicavi. p. 47. l.
24. for willing, r. unwilling. p. 59. note, that at the twelfth line begins a
fourth head. p. 73. note, l. 5. begins a second head. p. 90. note, l. 13.
begins a fourth head. p. 100. l. 26. for also, r. able. p. 103. l. 3. for
usurped, r. envied.

Books Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the Sign of the Three
Bibles in Pope's Head Alley in Cornhil.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New-Fish-street.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores: being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ.

2. Heaven on Earth: Or a serious Discourse touching a Well grounded Assurance
of Man's Everlasting Happiness.

3. The unsearchable Riches of Christ held forth in 22 Sermons.

4. Apples of Gold for young Men and Women, or the happiness of being good
betimes.

5. A String of Pearls: or the best things reserved till last.

6. The Mute Christian under the smarting Rod, with Sovereign Antidotes against
the most miserable Engines.

7. An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy Day.

8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity, in 48 Sermons on Heb. 12.14.

9. The Privy Key of Heaven: or a Discourse of Closet-Prayer.

10. An heavenly Cordial for such as have had or escaped the Plague.

11. A Cabinet of choice Jewels, or a Box of percious Ointment: containing
special Maxims, Rules and Directions, in order to the clearing up of a man's
Interest in Christ, and his Title to all the glory of another World.

12. Londons Lamentations.

The Godly Man's Ark, in several Sermons. To which is added Mrs. Moors Evidences
for Heaven: By Edmund Calamy, B.D. at Aldermanbury.

Christ's Communion with his Church Militant: by Nicolas Lockyer.

Sin the Plague of Plagues: by Ralph Venning.

A true Narrative of those two never to be forgotten Deliverances. One from
the* Spanish Invasion in 88, the other from the Hellish Powder Plot, Nov. 5,
1605: by Mr. Sam. Clark. To which is newly added a brief account of the late
Horrid Plot, discovered 1678, with a Relation of other Popish Cruelties, hear
and beyond seas.

The Accurate Accomptant, or London Merchant: being Instructions for keeping
Merchants Accounts: by Thomas Brown Accomptant.

Short Writing, the most Easy, Exact, Lineal and Speedy Method that has ever
yet been obtained, as thousands in the City and elsewhere, can from their own
Experience testify: by Theophilus Metcalf.

Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining all the Rules thereof.

A Word of Advice to Saints; or a choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ.

A Coppy-book of the Newest and most useful Hands, with Directions for Spelling
and Cyphering.

Bridges Remains, being Eight choice Sermons: by the late Reverend Mr. William
Bridge of Yarmouth.

A Disswasive from Conformity to the World: also Gods severity against
Impenitent Sinners: by Henry Stubbes Minlster of the Gospel.

Vennings Remains, belng the substance of many Sermons: by Mr. Ralph Venning,
prepared by himself for the Press a little before his death.

The Poor man's Family-book: by Richard Baxter.

Luthers 34 special and choice Sermons.

Comae Berenicis, or the hairy Comet: being a Prognostic of malignant
Influences from the many blazing Stars wandering in our Horizon.

Gospel love, Heart purity, and the flourishing of the Righteous; being the
last Sermons of that late Eminent Divine Mr. Iosept Caryl.

The Young man's Guide to Blessedness, or seasonable Directions for Youth in
their unconverted estate: by R. Mayhew, Minister of the Gospel.

Causa Dei, or an Apology for God: wherein the perpetuity of Infernal Torments
is evidenced, and both his Goodness and Justice defended: Also the Nature of
Punishments in general, and of Infernal ones in particular displayed: by R.
Burthogge.

The Legacy of a dying Mother to her mourning Children, being the Experiences
of Mrs. Susanna Bell: published by Thomas Brooks.

King James his Counterblast to Tobacco: To which is added a learned Discourse
touching Tobacco, by Dr. Maynwaring: wherein men may see whether Tobacco be
good for them or no.

Strength in Weakness: being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Martha
Brooks, late Wife to Mr. Thomas Brooks, Minister of the Gospel: to which is
added some Experiences of the Grace and dealing of God, observed and gathered
by a near relation of the said Mrs. Brooks.

An Excellent Catechism by the late Reverend Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs.

A Discourse of Christ's coming, and the Influence which the expectation thereof
has on all manner of Holy Conversation and Godliness, By Theophilus Gale.

The Shepherds Legacy, or forty years experience of the Weather.

The Young Man's conflict with and Victory ovea the Devil by Faith; Or a true
and perfect Relation of the Experiences of Thomas Powel, begun in the
fifteenth, and continued till the seventeenth year of his Age.

Christ's certain and sudden appearance to Judgment, By Sam. Malbon.

A brief Dlscription of New York, and the places thereto adjoining; with
Directions and Advice to such as shall go thither, By Dan. Denton.

A Cry for Lahourers in Gods Harvest, being a Sermon preaceed at the Funeral of
Mr. Ralph Venning, By R. Brag, Minister of the Gospel.

Christian Directions, showing how to walk with God all the day long, By Tho.
Gouge.

Conscience the best Friend upon Earth, or the happy effects of keeping a good
Conscience, By Henry Stubbes.

Mr. Stubb's Directions for making peace with God, and his true last Speeches.

Patience and its perfect work under sudden and fore Trials, by Tho. Goodwin,
D.D.

Orthodox Paradoxes Theoretical and Experimental, or a Believer clearing Truth
by seeming Contradictions. With an Appendix of the Triumph of Assurance over
the Law, Sin, World, Wants, etc. To which is added, The New Command Renewed, or
Love one another. With 10 Rules for the Right understanding of Scripture, by R.
Venning, A.M.

An Awakening Call from the Eternal God to the Unconverted, with seasonable
Advice to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
Conversion, by Samuel Corbin, A.M.

The Triumgh of Mercy in the Chariot of Praise: a Treatise of preventing secret
and unexpected Mercies, with some mixed Reflections, by S. Lee.

The best Friend standing at the Door, or Christ's awakening and affectionate
Call, both to Professors and secure Sinners, for Entrance into the House, in
several Sermons, by John Ryther.

Israel Redux: Or, the Restoration of Israel; An Essay upon probable Grounds
that the Tartars are the Ten Tribes of Israel, by G.F. With some Scriptue
Evidences of their future Corversion and Establishment in their own Land;
together with two Discourses on the mournful state of the Church, with a
Prospect of her Dawning Glory, by Samuel Lee.

Beams of the Spirit Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul, Imp. Ios.
Caryl.

The absolute Accomptant, or London-Merchant, containing Instructions and
Directions for a methodical keeping of Merchants Accounts, after the most exact
and concise way of Debtor and Creditor. Also the Memorial, vulgarly called a
Wast-book, and a Cash-book, with a Journal and a Leager; and at the end of the
Leager a Balance. Likewise Accounts of the Rents and Profits of several
Estates mentioned to be mortgaged, with the Deductions for Taxes respectively.
As also a transaction and carrying on of a Trade Foreign and Domestic, for
above one whole Year; with many Varieties of Demonstrations, to please, profit,
and delight those that desire to learn, and will take the pains to examine the
said Account; very plain and easy to be nnderstood by any of an indifferent
capacity; and expedient for all Schoolmasters that teach, and all thae desire
to learn to keep Merchants Accounts, by Thomas Brown Accomptant.

An English and Nether Dutch Dictionary, composed out of the best Authors.

An English and Nether-Dutch Grammar, easy to be understood.

The Sole and Sovereign way of England's being saved, humbly proposed by Robert
Perrot, Minister of the Gospel, in London, from Psalm. 80.19. With an Epistle
to the Reader, by Mr. Joseph Caryl and Dr. Manton.

Theological Treatises; being Eight Theses of Divinity; viz. 1. Production of
Man's Soul. 2. Divine Predestination. 3. The true Church-Regiment. 4.
Predictions of Messiah. 5. Christ's two Geneologies. 6. The Revelation Revealed.
7. Christ's Millenar Reign. 8. The Worlds Dissolution, by Rob. Vilvain.

The Poetical History, being a complete Collection of all the Stories necessary
for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other ancient
Authors, by Mareus d' Assigny, B.D.

Memoires of Mr. Des Ecotais, formerly styled in the Church of Rome, The most
Venerable Father Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher, of the Order of the
Capucines, or the Motives of his Conversion; in two Parts. I. That the Doctrine
of the now Roman-Church is not grounded upon the Scripture. 2. That the Church
of Rome is not the true Church. In French and Euglish. In Octavo.

A Description of the Nature of Four-footed Beasts, with fourscore large
Figures engraven in Copper. Written in Latin by Dr. John Iohnston; translated
into English by I. P.

The Complete Clerk; containing the best Forms of all sorts of Presidents for
Conveyances, and Assurances, and other Instruments now in Use and Practice;
with the Forms of Bills, Pleadings, and Answers in Chancery, as they were
penned and perfected by eminent Lawyers and great Conveyances, both Ancient and
Modern.

The true Intellectual Systeme of the Universe; wherein all the Reason and
Philosophy of Atheism is Confuted, and its Impossibility Demonstrated, by R.
Cudworth, D. D.

The History of the Church and State of Scotland, beginning the year of our
Lord 203, and continued to the end of King James the Sixth of blessed Memory,
in seven Books, by I. Spotswood.

The Memoires of the Lives and Actions of James and William Dukes of Hamilton
and Castleheruld, etc. in which an account is given of the Rise and Progress of
the Civil Wars of Scotland; with many Letters, Injunctions, and other Papers
written by King Charles the First, never before published, by Gilber Burnet.

An Epitome of Essays, containing Six Classes of 1. Theologicals, 2.
Historicals. 3. Heterogeneals. 4. Bruto-Anglicals. 5. Miscellaneals. 6.
Mutuatitials; besides a fardel of seventy six Fragments, by Robert Volvain.

The true and only way of Concord of all the Christian Churches, the
Desirableness of it, and the Detection of false dividing terms opened, by
Richard Baxter.

A true Believers Choice and Pleasure, instanced in the Exemplary Life of Mrs.
Mary Coxe, the late Wife of Dr. Thomas Coxe: Preached for her Funeral, by
Richard Baxter.

A Narrative, and Impartial Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot; carried on for
the burning and destroying the Cities of London and Westminster, with their
Suburbs, etc. Setting forth the several Consults, Orders, and Resolutions of
the Jesuits concerning the same. And diverse Depositions and Informations
relating thereunto, never before printed. By Capt. William Bedloe, lately
engaged in that horrid Design, and one of the Popish Committee for carrying on
such Fires.

A Narrative of unheard of Popish Cruelties toward Protestants beyond Seas:
or, a new Account of the Bloody Spanish Inquisition. Published as a Caveat to
Protestants. By Mr. Dugdale.

FINIS.

