REFLECTIONS Upon the ANSWER To the PAPIST Misrepresented, etc. Directed to
the ANSWERER.
SIR, I have perused your Answer, and am glad to find it so moderate and calm:
You make here and there some Personal reflections indeed; but this being done
soberly, without heat and passion, I am still bound to thank you, if not on my
particular, yet on the Public score; For having by this convinced the world,
that men of different judgments may now treat of matters of Controversy,
without making use of Satyr and Scurrility, or letting Cavil fill up the place
of Judgment and Reason. This method I cannot but approve as most agreeable to
Christianity; And if I pursue the same, in giving a farther explication of some
most material Points, you have been pleased to question in my small Treatise,
as also in letting you know my farther sense of Yours; I hope it may be done
without offense, and that the shortness I shall use, will be easily pardoned,
if it be but to the purpose.

Sir, You let me know, my First Character of a Papist Misrepresented is not
satisfactory, as not founded on the sense of a Party, and the quotations of
Authors, but being rather my own False Apprehensions, my ignorant, my childish,
or wilful mistakes. Indeed had I been bred up in a Wood, and jumpt forth into
the world, with this Character in my head, I should have had reason to
subscribe to you: Answer page 10, 11.
But because, upon examination, I find I was educated in a well-peopled Town,
at the foot of the Pulpit, and lived always in Company and Conversation, I
cannot imagine this Character so my own, as you seem to understand it, but
rather my own, as I received it. And you need not wonder that I did not
heretofore, by the help of Books or Friends, receive better information, and
correct my false Apprehensions of Popery. For indeed, were I even at this time
to be ruled by the greatest number of these, the Character of a Papist would be
with me much blacker yet, page 11.
than I have there drawn it. There would be, but few strokes of reason or
Christianity in it, but Beast and Barbarous all over. And pray do you see Sir,
what weighty proofs are urged against me, to show how foul and monstrous a
Religion I have chosen. They show me the Book of Homilies laying a good
foundation, Mr. Fox's Book of Martyrs, Bishop Ridley's Writings, The Public
Test, A Manual of three small Treatises, by John late Archbishop of York, for
the use of a Lady, To. 2. p. 46. 54. 213. etc. Vol. 3. p. 515.
to preserve her from the danger of Popery. Printed London 1672. Then a large
Description given by Mr. Sutcliffe in his Survey of Popery, where he undertakes
to draw its several features; as ( chap. 10.) That Popery is a sink of
Heathenish Idolatry. (chap. 27.) That it is a most absurd and foolish Religion.
(chap. 32.) That it is a Doctrine of Devils. (chap. 47.) That in many points
it is more absurd and abominable than the Doctrine of Mahomet. Then the Anatomy
of Popery printed at London 1673. page 181.
in which an Agreement is shown between Paganism and Popery in six and twenty
Points; and with the Jews and Pharisees in other ten. Then Mr. Julian Johnson
who has again set forth This Comparison of Popery and Paganism, page 99.
especially as to Politheism and Idolatry; With the approbation of his Answerer
Jovian, who assures him that He, with all the rest that have so thundered of
late with the Thebean Legion, like it well, and are as well satisfied with it,
Jov. Introd. page 4.
as he himself is, bating some irreverent Phrases. Now Sir, amidst these
Authentic proofs, besides a great number of other Authors, who undertake to
draw Popery in its own Colors; what convenience or even possibility had I, of
framing any better apprehension of this Religion, than was here laid before me:
Especially since my Friends were not wanting to vouch the truth of all this,
and to assure me; they had heard all this over and over from Men of Character,
and in Places, which gave it reputation beyond all question? Neither does it
appear to me, had it been my fortune to have consulted you in this affair, that
I should have been much rectified as to these my Childish or Wilful Mistakes
concerning Popery; as is evident from the Character you give of it throughout
your Answer, and especially at the end ( page 161.) viz. That it is that you
can never yield to, without betraying the truth, renouncing your senses and
Reason, wounding your Conscience, dishonouring God, and his Holy Word and
Sacraments; perverting the doctrine of the Gospel, as to Christ's satisfaction,
Intercession and Remission of sins; depriving the People of the means of
Salvation, which God himself has appointed, and the Primitive Church observed,
and damning those for whom Christ died.

But however I will not insist upon this point; He rather yield, than be
contentious: And because you say, that my Character of a Papist
Misrepresented, is made up of False Apprehensions, Ignorant, Childish and
Wilful Mistakes, He own it to be no better: But then, Sir, you must give me
leave to make use of your Authority with my Friends and Acquaintance, in
assuring them, that wheresoever they shall for the future either hear, or read
such things charged upon the Papists, they must give it no credit, and esteem
it no better, than the False Apprehensions, Ignorant, Childish and Wilful
Mistakes of the Relatours. Upon this condition I close this point; only adding,
that in laying down the Colors of a Papist Misrepresented, I never thought of
declaring the Articles of your Church; or by Mis-representing the Papist, to
represent you; page 9.
as you seem to mistake me: But only to show the many Mistakes and Errors to
be found amongst Protestants of what kind soever, concerning the notion of
Popery, for Debtor sum sapientibus and Insipientibus. And tho you seem willing
in your Introduction, that your Reader should esteem this our complaint of
being basely Misrepresented, (...)
no better than a mere Pretense, or a Design of such who go about to deceive,
by comparing it with the Complaints of the Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, etc,
Yet we are beholding to you soon after; page 9.
when finding some of the dirt thrown at us, to fall upon your own Face, by
your standing so near us, you then own it to be grounded, and Real, pitying the
Weakness and Folly of those who Cast it page 10. And therefore I believe you
will close with me in this Point, that Mis-representing is Mis-representing,
tho from those who dissent from your Church. But we go on to the other
Character of the Papist represented.

And this too, it seems, affords you as little satisfaction, as the former, on
several accounts. And First you move a Scruple by the by, ( page 9.) by your
having no mind to ask, How the Council of Trent should come to be the Rule and
Measure of Doctrine to any here, where it was never received? As if in this
Character I had observed a Rule, which ought to be none Here, nor is owned as
Such. And as to this, I need only Inform you; that the Council of Trent is
received here and all the Catholic World over, as to all its Definitions of
Faith; although it be not wholly received in some places, as to its other Decrees,
which relate only to Discpline. And therefore in appealing to this Council, for
the vindicating all I have there asserted, to be the Doctrine of Catholics, I
have done nothing but what I was obliged, and is justifiable before the whole
World: and on the truth of what I have said concerning the Councils being
universally received as to Doctrines of Faith, I Will allow the whole Cause
between us to depend. But this only as to your mistake.

Now supposing this to be the Rule of such Points of Faith, as are there set
down for the Belief of the Papists, you raise your Difficulty ( page 11.)
because I show no Authority I have to Interpret that Rule in my own sense: it
being a thing expressly forbidden by Pius 4th. And because several of my
Representations depend upon my own private Sense and Opinion. Truly Sir, had I,
in undertaking to state the Belief of our Church, Interpreted the Council of
Trent in my own private Sense, or Obtruded any Opinion of mine for an Article
of our Faith, you might justly have Arraigned me at that Bar. But you must
give me leave here to tell you, that you Wrong me, and Impose upon your Reader.
For so far was I from committing this Fault of Interpreting the Council of
Trent in my own Sense: That I have only delivered it, as it is Interpreted to
me and to all our Church, in the Catechism ad Parochos, composed and set forth
by Order of the said Council and Pius 5th. for the Instruction of the Faithful
in their Christian Duty touching Faith and Good Manners, in conformity to the
Sense of the Council. And for this reason in my Conclusion, page 172.
I appealed to this Catechism, for the justifying of what I have represented to
be the Faith of the Papists, to be really so. And that you may see, how vainly
you have charged me with the Transgression of Pope Pius's Bull: page 10.
remember I appealed again in my Conclusion to Veron 's Rule of Faith, and to
that set forth by the Bishop of Condom, for maintaining the Character of the
Papist Represented, to be just. Now you must know the Latter of these, drew up
a like Character in Paris, of the Belief of a Papist, and it being conform to
the Principles of Piety and Christianity, it quite overthrew the foul charge of
its Adversaries There, from their Books and Pulpits; and this so home, that
they had no other way of preserving their Credit with their Flock, than to
declare to them, that the Character set forth by the Bishop was not Exact and
True; but only vampt up by him into that Form for the benefit of the Public
cause. Upon which he Published another Edition with several distinct
attestations of many Bishops and Cardinals, and of the present Pope himself,
wherein they at large approve the Doctrine contained in that Treatise, for the
Faith and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and conform to the Council of Trent.
And now Sir, in proposing the Faith of our Church, as I found it delivered by
this Reverend Prelate, and supported by such Authentic approbations, wherein
have I Entrenched upon the Privilege of the Apostolic See, of Interpreting
the Council of Trent? Or what necessity of relying upon a private Man's
Judgment, as you Phrase it, of no Name, and no Authority, instead of that of
the Pope and Council? The Faith of a Papist I have delivered according to the
Catechism Published by Order of the Council, or as Explicated by a Prelate, who
brings along with him the Authority of the Sea Apostolic; and which part of
all this is my private Sense or Opinion?

But you offer to make good this charge in some Instances. page 27.
As in the Invocation of Saints, I seem to limit their Power of helping us to
Prayers only, which Limitation is not to be found in the Council of Trent. I
cannot but acknowledge Sir, that the Council mentions their Aid and Assistance,
which we may reasonably expect. But there being no other means, of their Aiding
and Assisting us expressed in the Council, or in the Catechism ad Parochos,
besides that of their Prayers to God to obtain benefits for us, through our
only Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ. And it being thus limited by the Bishop
of Condom on this Subject (page 33. Edit. Pa. 1681.) with the Pope and
Cardinal's approbation; I think I need no farther vindication to show, that in
the proposal of that Point, I followed not my own private sense or Opinion, as
you endeavor to prove.

In the Point of Merit you urge this again (page 56.) as if I had qualified
this Doctrine with the dependence on Grace, on God's goodness and Promise,
without the Authority of the Council; there being no such qualification
expressed in Can. 32. read and cited by you. It Is true, it is not in this Canon.
But if you please to look back to Can. 26. Sex. 6. you will find it there clear
enough to aquit me from the scandal of publishing my own private sense or
Opinion.

You instance again (page 11.) in the Point of the Popes personal
Infallibility, which I represent to be no matter of Faith: (page 42.) and what
reason have you, you say, to adhere to my representation, rather than to that
of many others, who assert the contrary? But this difficulty is nothing but
your mistake: for I do not in the least deliver here my own private sentiment
or opinion touching this point, in opposition to other Authors: But I only by
way of Narative relate, that whereas some Divines endeavor in their School
debates to prove and maintain this Personal Infallibility, yet it is not
received amongst Catholics as any matter of Faith, because not positively
determined by any General Council, and proposed to the Faithful to be embraced
as such. And this Sir again is not my private sense or Opinion, but a bare
Narative of matter of Fact.

But I am now to encounter your Goliath-Argument, which shows it self
throughout your Answer, and seems to defy all the Hosts of Israel. If I can
find never a Stone to fling at it, I must even lie at its mercy. And it appears
thus. page 12. 143.
In my Character of a Papist Represented I pretend to declare the Faith of a
Roman Catholic, as it is defined and delivered in allowed General Councils; and
yet tho the Deposing Doctrine has been as evidently declared in such Councils,
as ever Purgatory and Transubstantiation were in that of Trent, yet still with
me it is no Article of our Faith. This is the main strength of it, as urged by
you on several occasions.

I answer it in short; that tho all Doctrinal Points defined in any approved
General Council, and proposed to the Faithful to be received under an Anathema,
are with us so many Articles of Faith, and are obligatory to all of our
Communion: Yet not so of every other matter declared in such a Council: There
being many things treated of, and resolved on in such an Assembly, which
concern not the Faith of the Church, but only some matter of Discipline,
Government, or other more particular Affair. And these Constitutions or Decrees
are not absolutely Obligatory, as is evident even in the Council of Trent, as
is before hinted; whose Decrees of Doctrine are as much acknowledged here by
Catholics in England and Germany, as within the Walls of Rome it self, or the
Vatican: And yet it is other Constitutions and Decrees are not universally
received, and it may be never will. Now Sir, although we allow some Councils have
made decrees for deposing in particular Cases, yet the Power it self not being
declared as a Doctrinal Point; and the Decrees relating only to matter of
Discipline and Government, it comes short of being an Article of our Faith, and
all that in your Answer depends on it, falls to the Ground. I have no place
here to give you a distinct account of the several matters treated of in
Councils, and of the difference between Decrees of Faith, and others which are
not so; yet because you seem to require some satisfaction in these Points, I
remit you to such Authors, who treat of them at large and most particularly the
Considerations upon the Council of Trent, Canus, Bellarmine and others. This
that I have here said may be sufficient to evince, that in my declaring the
deposing Power to be no Article of Faith, I have not followed my own Private
Opinion or merely the number of Authors, but rather the sense of the whole
Church, Councils, and Popes themselves, who plainly enough own this, in letting
so many open and Positive Assertors of the no-deposing Power, to pass without
any Censure of Heresy: It being certain that, were this Doctrine any Article
of our Faith, as likewise that mentioned in the preceding Paragraph, of the
Popes Personal Infallibility, the obstinate Opposers of them would no more
escape without that brand, than those that deny other Articles of our Faith, as
Purgatory and Transubstantiation.

These Instances I look upon as the most Principal throughout your whole Reply,
because in them you have made use of a Medium directly opposite to the Intent of
my Book, and which if it had been effectual, would have showed, that I have not
Represented the Faith of the Papist according to the Rule of approved General
Councils, as I pretend; but rather according to my own private apprehension or
Opinion; which I confess would have been a full Answer to it as to such
particulars. But how far you have failed of your endeavors even in this Point,
I leave now to the Prudent Considerer to judge. But the way you take in all
other Parts of your Book, seems to me not to answer your design, nor to agree
with the Title of it. For whereas I undertake to propose the Faith of a Roman
Catholic, as he is really taught to believe in Conformity to the Definitions
of Ecumenical Councils: Bating those Points I have already spoke to, in your
Answer,

You either own the Doctrine, to be the established Belief of your Church, as
in part that of the Power of Priestly Absolution, Confession, of due veneration
to the Relics of Saints, of Merit, of Satisfaction, of the Authority of the
Church, of General Councils, etc.

Or you show the Doctrine I have delivered, not to be the Faith of our Church,
by appealing from the Definitions of our Councils, page 34, 35.
and sense of our Church, to some expressions found in Old Mass books, Rituals
etc. as if this were a serious way of truly Representing the Doctrines of the
Church of Rome. Can any Religion stand this Test? Will not many Expressions in
all sorts of Prayers, Preaching, and Devotions, if separated from the sense of
the Church, prove unjustifiable and Ridiculous? Let but an Atheist take this
liberty even with the Scripture it self, and thus separate infinite number of
expressions there, and see what will be presently the color of all Religion,
and whether Christianity will be better than Turcism: And especially whether
the allowed Psalms in Meeter will prove the devotion of men of sense and
reason; tho all may be reconcilable to Piety and Religion, if taken in the
sense of the Church.

Or you appeal again from the Declarations of our Councils, and sense of our
Church to some external Action, as in case of respect shown to Images and
Saints, page 21.
upon which from our external Adoration, by construction of the Fact, viz
kneeling, bowing, etc. you are willing to conclude us guilty of Idolatry: As if
a true judgment could be made of these Actions, without respect to the
Intention of the Church, that directs them, and of the Person, that does them.
As if they were not in themselves Indifferent, and capable of being paid to
God, or to Men. Or as if your measures being followed, Abigail ought not to
come in, and share with us in our constructive Idolatry, because she fell
before David on her face, 1 Samuel 25. 24.
and bowed her self to the ground, and fell at his feet. Joshua likewise,
because he fell on his face to the earth, Jos. 5. 14.
and did worship the Angel. And as many who on their knees pay their respects
to the King and bow before him: As likewise all the Beggars in Lincoln's Inn
fields, who on their knees, with their hands lifted up, ask an alms of
Passers-by: Must not all these by construction of Fact come into the list of
your Idolaters?

Or finally, not being willing the Doctrine should pass for ours, in the form I
have stated it, you appeal again from our Councils and Sense of the Church,
which I follow, to the Sentimetns of some of our own Private Authors, and so
you come often with, this French Author says this, Vives says that, Wicelius
says another thing, and Lessius another; by this method endeavoring to
convince your Reader, that the Belief of a Papist, is much different from what
I ahve represented it. But Sir, this way may do well enough with the unwary;
but it ill suits with what you pretend. The Frontis piece of your Book puts us
upon expecting The Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly
Represented. And when we come to peruse it, we find several Doctrines proposed,
but without any Authority of Church or Councils, but this Author says this, and
that Author says that; as if the Sense of every Author, were immediately the
Doctrine; of our Church. The Church speaks to us in her approved General
Councils, and from them you might have truly Represented her Belief and
Doctrine but from particular Authors, some of which may Write upon a Pique,
others upon a Passion, others upon some other Biass, nothing more can be
Collected besides their own Opinion, and with understanding Men it passes for
no more. So that nothing can be more unjustifiable, than to make a Collection
of private Men's sentiments, and obtrude them for the truly Representing the
Doctrine of the Church in whose Communion they are. And this is not the Case of
our Church alone, there is no Church or Congregation in the World will stand
this Test. And if it come a little home to you, it may be you will be more
sensible of this truth. For although you seem to maintain in your Answer, p, 57.
that good works of justified Persons are not Free; yet it is not just, this
Doctrine should be immediately charged for the Belief of your Church. Although Mr.
Thorndike seems to allow Prayers for the Dead, yet neither from him are we to
take a true representation of the Doctrine of his Church. Tho a worthy Divine
declares, page 152.
that in case a Popish Julian indeed should Reign over us, he should Believe
him incapable of Repentance, and upon that supposition should be tempted to
pray for his Destruction; yet would it not be honest hence to blacken his
Church with this Dis-loyal Principle, as if she allowed her Members, tho not to
Fight against, yet to Pray for the Destruction of such a Prince. The like may
be said of King James the First his holding Christ to be truly present in the
Sacrament, and there also to be truly adored, maintaining in his Epistle to
Cardinal Perron the Doctrine of the Real Presence to be the Doctrine of the
Church of England: and again what the aforesaid Mr. Thorndike delivers of the
same Real Presence and Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, Epil. 1. 3. c. 5.
practiced in the Ancient Church from the beginning; and thereupon owning the
Eucharistical Sacrifice to be truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in
as much as the Body and Blood of Christ are contained in them; and then farther
adding, that the Sacrifice of the Cross being necessarily Propitiatory and
Impetratory both, it cannot be denied, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in
as much as it is the same Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, is also both
Propitiatory and Impetratory. Will you give me leave from hence to infer; that
because these are the sentiments of such Eminent Persons in the Communion of
the Church of England, that therefore they are the Doctrine of that Church, I
suppose you will not; and therefore in the true Representation of the Doctrine
of yours or our Church, I suppose, you will easily grant, that no appeal ought
to be made to such Private Authors; but the Undertaker is obliged to keep close
to the sense of either Church, declared in their Councils and Decrees, and as
explicated by their Authority: And as far as you have effectually proved this
against what I have represented for the Faith of a Papist, so so far will I
allow you have given me a just Answer; And as much as you fail of this, so much
you come short of what you undertake, which I recommend to your own perusal to
examine.

But for any of these ways they are insignificant to your design, and deserve
not to stand under the Title of an Answer. For how does your acknowledging our
Doctrine to be yours: your producing some broken Expressions out of Mass-Books,
your putting Objections from external Actions, from private Authors, or your
own Opinion, any ways prove, that the Faith of a Papist, as I have represented
it, is not according to the Council of Trent, and what really he is bound, as a
Papist, to Believe? And yet this is the thing you ought to have proved, to make
good your Title. But instead of this, you generally let your Reader understand,
that I have indeed stated the matter aright, and only tell him, that you have
something to say against the Doctrine, and do not like it. But your saying I
hope (or if it could be proving) that Catholics do not do well to Believe, as
I Represent, is no Argument to prove that I do not Represent well. This as to
the Representing the Doctrine of our Church.

I should say something to your concluding Argument which comes so home ( p.
14.) I allow it seems, the Orders of the Supreme Pastor are to be obeyed,
whether he be Infallible or no. I confess likewise in another place, that some
Popes have owned the Deposing Doctrine, and Acted according to it. And here you
infer, Therefore the Papists are bound by the Doctrine of their Church to Act,
when the Popes shall require it, according to the Deposing Power. And does this
bring the matter home? Why then Sir, you must even give me leave to make
another inference: That, What brings the matter home is nothing but an ordinary
piece of Sophistry, and let the Reader judge. The Representer ( p. 42.)
speaking of the Popes Authority, says, that as in any Civil Government, the
Sentence of the Supreme Judge or Highest Tribunal is to be Obeyed, tho there be
no assurance of Infallibility or Divine Protection from Error or Mistake: So is
he taught should be done to the Orders of the Supreme Pastor, whether he be
Infallible or no.

Where a Parallel is made between the Orders of Popes and Civil Powers, as to
the Obedience due to them from their Subjects. Now Sir, if it be your Opinion
that this Authority and Power in these Supreme Governors is so Absolute and
Vnconfin'd, that like to God himself there can be no just exception made to any
of their Actions or Decrees, whatsoever they be: then indeed your reasoning
Answers your intent. But if the Case be possible, that these may so Act or
Command, that the not-following or not-obeying in Inferiors may be no Crime;
then you come but short of home, and prove just nothing. Now change but the
matter of your Argument, and see how far it goes. The Orders of a Prince, being
Supreme Governor, are to be Obeyed, whether he be Infallible or no: But some
Princes have done thus and thus; therefore the People by the Law are bound to
Act so and so: Does this hold in every Action or Order of a Prince, without
Limit or Exception? Tho a Prince be to be obeyed, yet it follows uot that his
Word is the Law? So that whosoever takes this for a concluding Argument, must
neither understand Law nor Logic.

I need not put the Reader in mind, how often you make your digressions amongst
the Schoolmen, and leave not scouting among them, till you have lost the
matter in hand: And dispute about their Opinions, instead of matter of Faith;
how in the Point of dispensations, where we speak of the Moral Law; and assert
the Pope cannot dispense with it, as give leave to break the Commandments, to
lie or for-swear: You show your learning, in proving he can dispense with other
Laws and Positive Institutions, a thing scarce to be doubted of, and nothing to
our purpose. I Will say nothing of the admirable close of Your Chapter of
Dispensations, in which tho you have not produced one proof of Dispensations,
for lying or for swearing being allowed in our Church on any account
whatsoever, you yet give this assurance to your Reader; We know this Dispensing
Power is to be kept up as a great Mystery, and not to be made use of, but upon
weighty and urgent Causes -- as their Doctrines declare. Where certainly one
proof of the Who, the Where and the When, had been much more Satisfactory, than
the Positive We know, and Their Doctrines declare: For tho many are willing to
take this upon trust, yet it would have gone farther, page 117.
if you had proved it down right, without taking Sanctuary in a Mystery. I Will
pass by your dexterity wherewith you have managed the History of St. Perpetua
in the Chap. of Purgatory: Where after you have disguised it to your purpose in
the Relation, and drol'd the Vision of a Martyr, and so esteemed by St.
Augustine, into a young Ladies Dream, you at last set it forth for the
Foundation of our Churches Doctrine, and would persuade your Reader, that Our
Tenent of Purgatory is built upon it; when it is used by me for no more, than a
Marginal Citation, amongst several others: And yet this is our Foundation, and
our Doctrine is built on it: Here I fear, you had forgot your promise made in
the beginning of being sincere, page 9.
and using no Tricks. But I forbear,

And will only conclude, that if you have truly represented the Doctrines of
the Church of Rome, I would as soon be a Turk as your Papist; whose character
you have drawn at large throughout your Book, and in little in page 161. which,
however you may call truly Representing, I can look upon no better than truly
Mis-representing. And by what I see, I think I might with as good reason go to
a Pharisee, to be informed of Christ, and receive the Character of a Christian
from a Mohammedan; as come to you, to know what a Papist is, what his Belief and
Doctrine. Neither do I wonder, that you come thus wide of what you pretend to:
The method you take, would bring a Scandal even upon the Apostles themselves,
and render the Church of those purer times, of the same color with ours.
Observe but the same, in drawing the Features of your own Chuch, and then tell
me whether this be the way of truly representing. If a man were but to bring
into public your Schooldebates, the differing Opinions of your own Authors,
concerning the Scriptures, Predestination, Freewill, the Authority of the
Church, the Reformation, Traditions, etc. all expressions of Sermons, Prayers,
etc. and out of these, and all others of this kind, pick out and patch up a
Religion according to the best contrivance of the Undertaker, and then show it
forth to the world, do you think, this would be yours truly represented? Why
then must such another Jumble as this be exposed to the World for ours? If
you will let your Flock see what our Religion is, send them to the Council of
Trent, the Catechism ad Parochos, this we will own and stand by: But for you to
pick here a bit and there a bit, to patch as you please, to make your
Inferences and Applications at pleasure, and then to tell your Reader, these
are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome truly Represented; this is to abuse the
World and your selves, and to render us Infamous for principles which are
nothing of our Religion. And in Case you do not judge what I have here said
sufficient to convince you, that the Faith, as I have Represented it, is really
the Faith of a Papist, I Will be content all these Reasons at present pass for
naught; and that the decision of this whole affair depend upon an Experience.
Do but you, or any Friend for you) give your Assent to those Articles of Faith,
in the very form and manner, as I have stated them, in the Character of the
Papist Represented; and if upon request, you are not admitted into the
Communion of the Roman Catholics, and owned to Believe aright in all those
Points, I Will then Confess, that I have abused the World, that my Representing
is Mis-representing the Faith of a Papist, and that my design has been not to
undeceive, but to deceive the People. But if on the contrary it shall appear,
that the Faith, as I have Represented it, is the approved Doctrine of that
Church, and sufficient for any one to be received a Member of it, I may then
justly renew my Complaint of its being Misrepresented, that the Religion of
the Papist is nothing like what it is commonly rendered; and that it is a hard
fate, that the Professors of it should be so injured in their Reputation, and
by this means become so Odious, that even amongst Fellow Christians, Atheists,
and Jews, shall be tolerated with less regret than they.

FINIS.

