A REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF THE Amicable Accommodation. BEING A Fourth
Vindication of the Papist Misrepresented and Represented: IN Which are more
particularly laid open some of the Principal Methods, by which the Papists are
Misrepresented by Protestants in their Books and Sermons.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

A REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF THE Amicable Accommodation.
THE Answerer in his last seems to take his leave of me; And thus (says he, p.
30.) I take a fair leave of the Representer. But methinks, if he be not gone
too far, I would fain have a word or two with him before we part. And it is
chiefly in civility to ask him, How he does? For throughout his last Reply, he
seems sick of Answering, having said but very little throughout the whole; and
yet assuring his Reader, he has driven the matter as far as it will go, (p.
ib.) Well, and is there no more then to be said, to that manifold Charge summed
up against the Church of England in my last Discourse? Is that matter driven as
far as it will go? I there drew out a Character of the Church of England, as
lying under the same Charge of Scandals, Innovation, and Idolatry from a
Dissenter, as the Church of Rome does generally from Protestants: And almost
every Point urged with the same Proofs of Scripture and Reasons, which
Protestants produce against the Papists. And all this he passes over with a
light touch, and the most artificial way of Answering with saying nothing, as
can possibly be met with.

And first, though amongst the many Divisions of Dissenters, there are several,
from whom the whole Charge might forcibly be urged, as the Rigid Anabaptists,
the Quakers, etc. yet because this would oblige him to answer all the
Arguments, and to show, they are not of equal force against the Church of
England, as against the Papists; he upon good consideration, takes it as spoken
from such a kind of Dissenter, which agreeing in many of the Points with the
Church of England, cannot reasonably be thought to urge them against her. And
so instead of giving them any farther Answer, he comes off with, The Dissenters
did never charge the Church of England with this. The Dissenters do the same
themselves. There is no Dispute between the Dissenters and Us about that. Did
ever the Dissenters charge us with this? And so lets them drop without any
farther Reply, though still standing in their full force against the Church of
England, from most other Dissenters, excepting those he has picked out for
better Expedition.

Thus he gives the goe-by to the greatest part of the Instances. And for such
other Arguments, as are there pressed against the Church of England, and that
equally from all sorts of Dissenters, those he prudently says nothing to; Answ.
to Pap. protest. page 131.
In observance I suppose of a Rule he had laid down before in a former
Discourse, viz. The Greatest Wits can do no more than the Cause will bear; though
a little Prudence would teach ME to say NOTHING in such a Cause, as will admit
of no better a Defense. And therefore he says not one Word in Vindication of
his Popish Prelates, of their Mitres and Crosiers, not a Word of praying to be
defended by the Angels: Nothing of their calling upon the Birds, the Beasts and
Fishes; of their crying out to Dead Men, in their most Solemn Devotions; of
inserting the Apocrypha into their Liturgy; of their not wearing the Rochet,
the Albe and Tunicle; of their prescribing Fasts, and not keeping them; of
their formerly Praying for the Dead, etc. Not one word to all his own Reasons,
which in his Discourses against me he has formerly advanced to prove us
Superstitious and Idolaters; and yet there pressing with the same weight
against himself and his own Church. And yet he is taking his leave on me,
because the matter is driven as far as it will go.

And is it possible then, that the Disputing Humor is so soon off? We have
heard of nothing hitherto so much, as of Disputing, and Defending, and
Justifying your Reasonings; of these repeated Challenges to the Representer,
We'll Dispute it when you will: And now, as far as I see, when the Answerer is
put to defend his own Church, and justify his own Reasonings, he is as cool,
and as unwilling dispute as the Representer. Answ. to Am. Accom. p. 16.
No, We are not, say he, for pursuing every new Game, but will keep to our old
Scent. Could any thing possibly be said, more cooly than this? Here Is not a
word now of Disputing or Justifying; if his Reasonings be shown to fly in his
own face, as much as against his Adversary, he is well enough content to hear
it, with scarce a word of Reply; because he is resolved to keep to his old
Scent. And is not this something strange now, that He that should draw me out
to dispute over the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, and run over the whole body
of Controversy, as to matter of Right, or de Jure, when I undertook for no
more than to declare what our Church holds as to Matter of Fact; and would not
take my waving it without many a Flurt and a Jeer: Now when it comes to his own
turn of Disputing and Defending his own Reasonings, in a Case directly
appertaining to our main Point of Representing, lets the matter fall very
cautiously, and will scarce touch at it forsooth, because he will keep to his old
Scent. So that though he is for beating up for me, as many new Games as he can
possibly find, for my diversion; for his part, he will not follow the old one,
unless the scent be very agreeable, which truly it is not when it comes to press
him to the standing his Ground, and justifying his own Cause. I must pardon him
therefore, it seems, as to this.

But however, though he will not offer any defense against a Character, which
seems to reflect upon his own Church, yet he will endeavor to prevent all
misunderstanding betwixt Her and the Dissenters, that might possibly be
occasioned by such a Character. And because he finds it much easier to work
upon their Affections by Fawning, than to convince their Judgments by
Reasoning; He first tells them how Wise they are, Answ. to Am. Accom. p. 16.
and how Cautious; nay, how much Wiser they are grown now of late; and he
hopes, they will grow wiser and wiser every day: Especially so as not to
suspect Them or their Church of any Inclinations to Popery. Ib.
For whatever they have formerly suspected -- I believe (says he) they will
call it Popish and Antichristian no longer. And here he gives them a Reason or
two, with which if they are not moved, they are much to blame. For he tells
them, in how many things the Church of England agrees with the Dissenters. And
first, as for their calling their Churches by Saints Names, that is much the
same with what the Dissenters did themselves; and though they give them the
Titles of Saints, Page 17.
yet he hopes the Dissenters are not so silly, as to think this to be any more
than for Distinction. Then as to the Power of Absolution, there is no dispute
between Us and the Dissenters: They and We agree, Page 19.
says he; so that whatsoever the Common Prayer Book delivers, of the Priest
absolving the Sinner, yet he assures them, there is nothing meant by this, but
only what the Dissenters teach themselves, that is, to give Relief to afflicted
Consciences, Page 21.
etc. So again as to a vow of Chastity; he and the Dissenters agree, that it is
lawful to repent of it, and marry; it is presently a rash Vow, if the Temptation
be but urging. But then as to the business of Pictures in Bibles, and Images of
Moses and Aaron, etc. in Churches, Page 18.
there he curries with them closely, and assures them, that however these
Pictures are in their Bibles, Printed by Authority, Printed at the University;
though Moses and Aaron stand in most of the Churches, have Place next to the
Commandments, are above the Communion Table; yet that all this is nothing but
the Extravagancy of Painters and Printers, a very late Invention, and a secret
design of Papists, to reconcile the People by degrees to the use of Pictures
and Images.

Now I defy any man to bid fairer for the good Opinion of the Dissenters, than
my Adversary has here done; who, for fear they should receive any ill
impression in relation to his Church, from my Character, which is little more
than in jest, throws these scandals upon her in good earnest; being resolved,
that if his Church be to be scandalized, he will have the doing it himself.

But for the winning of the Dissenters, he goes on, and tells them; Although they
have been Persecuted, that still they are not to complain of his Church: For
that it is not so much the Church has done this, as the State, to secure it self
from their Restless Humor, which has threatened the Public Peace. Page 21.
Now, how far this will agree with them I cannot tell: But I am apt to believe,
that if the Dissenters once reflect, how much more quiet they have enjoyed,
since his Church's Power have been something checked, than before, they will have
some Reason to suspect, that in their former Sufferings, the Church has had the
greatest share; especially since at this present the State is as secure without
those Persecutions as ever, which is an Argument, it does not stand much in
need of 'em. But I dispute not this matter, let them agree as well as they can;
the business only is, to put the Saddle upon the right Horse.

Another Reason he lays down before, Page 16.
by way of Prevention: And it is that however the Church of England, as it is
represented in my Character, may bear some resemblance with Antichrist; yet
he is confident the Dissenters will hence receive no prejudice, nor entertain
any worse opinion of Her upon this score; because They are too Wise and
Cautious to take Characters from open and professed Enemies. Now if this be
true, and sufficient reason for his presumption, that the Dissenters are so
Wise; I would fain know, how Wise he thinks his own Congregations to be, that
is, such as go to Church; who have been receiving Characters of Popery these
hundred and Fifty years, from the Open and Professed Enemies of the Papists;
it is a Mercy they are not so Wise and Cautious as his Dissenters, otherwise the
Pulpits might even have been silent, as to any thing touching Popery; since
holding forth against such as they have Protested against, and owned themselves
Professed Enemies to, they could have deserved no credit in their Characters.
But it is well the Dissenters are so Wise; and from henceforward it is to be
remembered, that whosoever undertakes to give a Character of his declared and
open Enemies, and expects to be credited by his Flock, must needs think them
not so Wise as they should be.

But here again he comes over me with the Whip in hand, Page 17.
and having assured his Dissenters, that I have abused them, in Fathering upon
them so soul a Character of the Church of England; he tells his Reader, that
the Run of the Character is exactly to the tune of the Quakers, whose Cant the
Author (as he says) is as well acquainted with, as if he had been either their
Master or Scholar. And if this be so, I must confess it a very strange
Providence, as having never heard twenty words from them in my Life, as I can
remember.

All the Harangues and Pulpits, I have been ever acquainted with here in
England, (excepting some few of the Catholics of late) have been those of the
Church of England; and if I have learned any Canting, it must have been, not
from the Quakers, but from them. The truth often is, in the drawing up that
Character, I took no other model, but that of the Church of England against the
Papists. There is scarce an Argument in the Character, but exactly Parallel to
what the Church of England uses in her Defense against Popery; the grounds of
the Arguments are the same; the manner of urging them the same, the Maxims; on
which they stand, the same; and then then Reasons, which press them home, are
they not the very same, which the Answerer himself in his former Discourses
urges against me? I wonder then, how this comes to be a Quakers Cant? It Is
strange men should know their own Picture no better; and that when they see a
Copy of what they do, and say themselves, in the most serious concern, it
should appear to them so unlike the Original: that what in themselves they deem
Reasonable and Just, being shown them in a Reflection or Emblem, should seem
nothing but Spiteful and Silly; as the Answerer says this does, ( p. 17.) This
is just as it happens with little Children, who when they are shown what Wry
Faces they make, and how Scowling looks, will not easily believe they make so
Ugly.

Well, but now the Answerer had considered the whole Character, and begins to
think at last, that in it I have ridiculed the Church of England. And thus
(says he) this hopeful design of Representing and Misrepresenting, ends only in
ridiculing the Church of England; Page 24.
a Liberty, which if we needed it, is not mannerly for us to use at THIS TIME.
But wherein have I ridiculed the Church of England? I have done no more in my
Character against Her, than what they have been doing these Hundred and Fifty
Years against the Church of Rome; only what I have done in a kind of Jest, and
without endeavoring to delude any body with such kind of Sophistry, They have
been doing in the greatest earnest, and by it making good their Cause. And as
for the mannerly and at this time, were there any ridiculing in my Case; is it
not still as little manners to ridicule at this time the Religion of the
Prince, as the Religion of the Subject? But I leave to the Ingenious and
Impartial Reader to examine this affair of the Mannerly and This Time; I Will not
judge, neither for my self, nor him.

But however, notwithstanding this little displeasure of my Answerer, Page 24.
it clears up again with him, he pardons all frankly, and we are contented (says
he) they should ridicule our Church, if they will permit us truly to Represent
theirs. Here now we have a liberty granted of Ridiculing, which I resolve never
to make use of, unless it be to show, how They ridicule the Church of Rome: But
instead of returning my thanks for this favor, I am e'n resolved to beg
another; and it is, that the Answerer will be pleased not to take that for
Ridiculing in us, which in them he calls truly Representing: This would be a
very Signal Favor indeed, if it could be obtained; but I almost despair. For
by all that I can discover in their truly Representing, it is so unlike what he
calls it, that nothing can be more underserving that Name. For let but an exact
Copy be taken of what they do to the Papists, when they truly Represent them,
as they call it, with all its methods and circumstances; let the same measures
they use to them, be applied to any other Body or Society, even to their own
Church of England, and if it does not appear to be down right Misrepresenting
and Ridiculing instead of truly Representing, I Will even throw up the Cause, and
grant the Papists to be as Black as they make them. This appears something
already in the Character now examined, which he owns to be Ridiculing, though it
be nothing but what they do to the Church of Rome, and there call it Truly
Representing. But this I shall more clearly evince afterward, when I have
examined some other Parts of the Answer, where I shall have occasion of playing
him the same Tune over again, a little more distinctly, without any Ridiculing,
but in very good earnest.

But first I must consider how he receives the Courtesy I did him in my last
Reply. I must confess, I could not but be concerned, to see my Answerer turning
and winding it, first through tedious Ten Sheets, and soon after through other
Nine, and all to prove that the Word Misrepresented in the Title of my Book,
was not to be taken in its Proper Sense. This to me was an Object of
Compassion; and therefore to save him any farther Sweat, I thought fit to yield
to his Pretensions, and give into his hands the full grasp of all that he had
just before so earnestly contended for. And see now, how ill use he makes of
this favor.

For having so far complied with him, that the Word Misrepresented in the Title
of my Book, is not to be taken in its Strict and Proper Sense; he would now
willingly impose upon his Reader and Me, and persuade the World, as if I own
the Protestants not to charge falsely any Doctrins or Practices on the Church of
Rome, which she disowns: and that they do not teach their Flock, that the
Church of Rome believes or practices, otherwise than She does.

This, Answ. p. 4. 7. 8. 30. and alib. Amic. Accom. p. 6.
says he, at last, if I understand him, he confesses. Is not this stretching a
Courtesy with a witness, and Misrepresenting the Representer.

I yielded to him indeed, for Peace sake, that the Title of a Papist
Misrepresented is not to be taken in its strict and proper Sense, as
Misrepresenting signifies ONLY downright Lying or falsely charging matter of
Fact, the WHOLE Character being not of that nature. And this with our Answerer
is the same as to confess, That Protestants do not charge the Church of Rome
with any Doctrins or Practices, which She does not own. So that it seems,
because the Character of a Papist Misrepresented is not wholly made up of
matters of Doctrine and Practices falsely charged upon the Papists; Therefore,
(as our Answerer will have it) it contains nothing at all, wrongfully charged
upon them; and Protestants do not in any thing Misrepresent the Church of Rome.
Ans. p. 5.
And this he would have me plainly confess.

But I must beg his pardon for this; I do not see he has made so good use of
the last favor I did him, as to accomodate away my Senses and Reason, to do
him another. No, Transubstantiation is not half so disagreeable to
Protestant-Senses, as this is to mine. I could as easily confess, that
Protestants do not at all Write or Preach against Papists, as that they do not
Misrepresent them. And for the truth of this Cause, I dare stand to the Verdict
even of a Protestant Jury. I Will give the Answerer choice-room enough; Let him
pick out of all England, Twelve such Men who understand the Belief and Doctrine
of Papists, all Good Men and True; and if they shall, upon examination, give
in; That they know all to be true, which they have heard from Protestant
Pulpits and Books concerning the Papists; I Will then yield up the Cause, and sit
down contented with the brand of a Misrepresenter. Nay, I dare put it to a
farther issue; If they do not own, they have heard and read several things
charged upon the Papists, which they know to be false, I Will submit to the
Answerer; and be obliged never more to disturb him with the Talk of
Misrepresenting.

But before we advance too far in this matter, let us see first, how it stands
with the Character of a Papist Misrepresented; and examine, whether there be
nothing there falsely laid at the Papist's door, enough for the Book to deserve
such a Title: And whether the fathering on them such Doctrins as are there
contained, and found in Protestant Authors, be not affirming more than is True,
and charging on them Doctrins and Practices, such as they and the Church of
Rome disown.

And first, what does he think of Praying to Images, asserted as a Practice of
the Papists, in the first Chap. of the Papist Misrepresented? Is not this
imputing more to the Papists, than they either teach, practice, or maintain? Do
they believe their Sins to be infallibly remitted upon Absolution, whether they
resolve upon amendment or no? And yet this is laid to them Chap. 7. Do they
believe the Pope can give them leave for a Sum of Money, to commit what Sins
they please? And yet this is reported as their Doctrine, Chap. 8. Is it
absolutely true, that they are never permitted to know their Commandments but
by halves? Is it their Doctrine, presumptuously to rely on a Deathbed
Repentance? Are their Sermons in Latin; or do they teach in Unknown Tongues? Is
it true, that they Fired the City? Is he sure they Killed Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey? Or will he put in for an Evidence, to Swear the Truth of the Damnable,
Hellish Popish-Plot? And yet all these things, and more stand charged upon the
Papists, in the Character of a Papist Misrepresented. Why then should the
Answerer thus quarrel with this Title, as if the Papists had no wrong done them
in such a Description? I know it is the Interest of such ill men, as have run
down the Papists with these Charges and Accusations, and passed them upon the
People for Gospel, to have them still reputed as Truths; lest the falsity of
them being once confessed, they themselves should appear the Deceivers. But
however they may be willing to pursue such Unchristian methods, to save their
own Reputation; it is not for us to own the Belief of such Doctrins, which we
acknowledge to be Injurious to Christ, nor to maintain such Practices, which
would be a Scandal even amongst those, who know not God. And therefore because
the Character of a Papist Misrepresented, contains such Doctrins and Practices,
which Catholics neither own, teach nor believe; nay such as they abominate and
detest, and are ready to lay down their lives, rather than embrace or approve;
such a Character of a Papist, is nothing less than a False Character, a
Misrepresenting Character, and fit only for the use of those, who have a mind
to dispose their Followers into a temper of giving a better welcome to Turks,
Atheists and Jews, than to Papists.

I know it is thought necessary for the Establishment and Security of the
Protestant Religion, that the People should be Preached into a dread of Popery:
but let it be so; is it a Christian method to make use of Artifices to increase
the horror? Why should every thing the Papists do, be stretched and strained,
and forced, to make ti ugly? Why should the worst be made of all that belongs
to them? It Is true, this is proper enough to win upon the Mobile, who make no
distinction between Real and Artificial Monsters; it is well enough, where the
interest is best maintained by the Madness of the People. But where is the
Christianity all the while, where is Truth and Charity? Why should Praying to
Images, Leave to Sin for Money, Forgiveness without Repentance, Trusting in a
Deathbed Lord-have-mercy, etc. Why should seign'd Crimes, and Imaginary
Contrivances, etc. be urged against them, to make them the Object of hatred,
and the Subject of a Popular fury? Why should it be pretended, that where these
things stand charged against the Papists, they are not Misrepresented? I am
sure where Protestantism is either grounded or confirmed by thus bug-bearing of
Popery, it is not built upon the Gospel, nor is its strength from the power of
Truth; and the using such unwarrantable methods, and taking so much pains for
the dressing it into a Monster, is argument enough with Considering Men, to
suspect something of the Undertakers.

The Answerer therefore is mightily out, when he supposes it confessed by me,
that there is no proper Misrepresenting, or false charge of Matter of Fact upon
the Papists, in the Character of the Papist Misrepresented. I only yield to
him, that the Character is not wholly made up indeed of these forged
Accusations, but that it is a mixed Character, describing the Papists, as they
lie under the false Charges, the Calumnies, Reproaches, Misconstructions, and
Mistaken Judgments of their both Malicious, and Ignorant Adversaries. And
therefore I informed him, that the Title of the Papist Misrepresented was not
to be taken in its strict and proper sense, Am. Accom. p. 6.
as Misrepresenting signifies only downright lying, or falsely charging matter
of Fact: But in its larger, or less proper sense, as it comprehends both Lying,
Calumniating, Mis-interpreting, Reproaching, Misconstruing, Mis-judging, and
whatever else of this kind. But this condescendence, which would have obliged
an Ingenuous Adversary, has made my Answerer something peevish. And therefore
now instead of his old Complementing Humor, he is grown very four, he is full of
grudges, and something seems to grate upon his Stomach. Well, and what is the
matter now? What reason of this so sudden Change? Why, it seems the Representer
said, that the Papists are strangely Misrepresented; that many matters of Fact
are falsely charged upon them; that they are calumniated, reproached, their
Doctrine and Practices mis-interpreted, misconstrued, misunderstood, etc. as was
shown in his Character of the Papist Misrepresented: And all this the Answerer
unhappily takes to himself, as if He were the Man accused for doing all this
against the Papists, as if He and His were Arraigned of Lying, Calumniating,
etc. Whenas the Representer spoke only in general, without so much as hinting
upon any Party or Person in particular; and if I may vouch any thing for him,
never thought of reflecting upon the Answerer, much less of giving him the Lie.
It Is true, the Representer says, for the running down the Papists, and
Misrepresenting them, besides their being Calumniated, and their Doctrins
mis-interpreted, many Falsities and Lies have been raised against them. But
what does this concern the Answerer? Is this Complaint any Accusation against
him? Suppose the Representer had gone a step farther, and had said, that the
Papists have been injured by Perjury, Forgery, and Subornation too; would the
Answerer have thought himself touched in this, and labored to clear himself?
It Is true, for a Man to be over-eager in quitting himself, when the Accusation
is only General, is not the best Argument of his Innocence: But for my part, I
never designed to accuse the Answerer, for I knew not the Man; neither have I
any thing now to say against him, as to this Point; only that his
over-solicitude to prove his Innocence, before he was accused, will be likely
with some to breed a suspicion of Guilt.

The Answerer therefore must remember, that the Character of the Papist
Misrepresented contains several unjust Charges of Doctrine and Practices, (though
it be not wholly made up of these) such as the Papists neither own, nor
believe. And that he is overhasty in persuading his Reader, that this Point is
gained, and confessed by me. No, he must pardon me for this; I Will go as far as
any Man for an Accommodation, but never so, as to subscribe to a falsity in a
Complement.

Hitherto as to what concerns the Character: Now we are to consider, how true
that is, which he so often repeats, of the fair dealing of WE in relation to
the Papists. For some it seems there are, if he says true, that are so just and
kind to the Papists, as not to Misrepresent them. For throughout the Answer we
meet with nothing oftener, than WE are not Misrepresenters in a strict and
proper notion of Misrepresenting: WE do not charge the Church of Rome with any
matter of Fact, with any Doctrins or Practices, which she does not own. WE
charge them with nothing that is false. WE do not mis-report the Doctrins of
their Church. WE do not charge men with saying or doing, what they never said
or did. WE are no Misrepresenters. And truly I should be glad to know, who
these WE are, to return them my thanks for this so kind Office; for really, as
the World goes, it is no small favor done to the Papists, to say no more of
them, than they own and believe themselves. For my part, did I know the Men, I
would never permit them to lie obscured, under the General name of WE; no, I
would particularize them to the World, and have their Names blazoned in every
Street, upon Pillars erected to their Memory. For why? Are not such Men
Prodigies of Virtue, of Truth, Honesty, and Justice? Men that never charged the
Church of Rome with any matter of Fact, with any Doctrine or Practice, which she
does not own: Men that never said the Church of Rome teaches, what she does not
teach; that never condemned the Papists for believing, what they do not
believe; nor accused them of saying or doing, what they never said or did; Men
that never Misrepresented the Papists! Why, these are Admirable Men indeed, and
not to be heard of every day. Were I assured of the being of such Men, I should
begin to think Astrea was returned again, and that our Nation would in all
likelihood recover her Credit, lost in the unhappy times of our late Credulous
Madness.

But I wish there be no mistake in this, it being so hard to imagine who these
We should be. For now if he should mean by his We, We Protestants; We never
accused the Papists of any Doctrine, or Practices, which they do not own; never
charged them with any thing that is false; who could believe it? Would not this
look like a Paradox, which if the Answerer will affirm, I believe he will scarce
find more than one to swear to? For is it possible that We Protestants never
said any thing of the Papists, but what is exactly true; We never said they
believe, what they do not believe; that they teach, what they do not teach; or
that they did, what they never did? Is it possible this should be true? I would
willingly give something for the sight of the Man that thinks so. For my part,
I think it very hard to be believed: And if this be the meaning of the
Answerer, and what he endeavors to persuade his Reader, I think of all the
Mis-representations of the Papists, that ever I met with, this of affirming all
to be true, that has been said of the Papists, is the greatest; and I wish the
Answerer much Joy for the Improvement. For this is nothing else, than to vouch
for the truth of all, that has been ever alleged against them; and in three
lines to assert and approve all that has been invented against them these
hundred and fifty Years.

But I think, upon consideration, I may take it for granted, that his WE that
charge the Papists with nothing that is false, and are no Misrepresenters, are
WE Protestants: for it is these he seems to vindicate, throughout his Books, and
endeavors to wipe off from them the imputation of being Misrepresenters. And
besides, if he speaks properly, the Answerer himself must come in, and make one
of the WE; and for him, one may swear he is a stanch True Protestant, as never
scrupling at any thing that is for running down the Papists, though it be currying
favor with, and colloguing the Phanaticks; as he seems plainly to do, in his
last Answer (p. 16. 18.) And more particularly, because being to speak against
Popery, he is as large, as loud, as long-winded as you please, and is ready to
Dispute against it without end, could he but find any, that would think it
worth their while to try him. But being to speak in defense of the Principles
and Practices of his own Religion (as he had occasion sufficient from the
Accommodating Sermon in my last Answer) he is as Flat, as Short, and as willing
to wave the disputing for it, as any Adversary can desire, which is as plain an
Argument to me of his Persuasion, as if 'twas writ in his Forehead; there being
only one Persuasion as I know of amongst Christians, which has its Name, Being
and Support, not from what it is in it self; but from what it is not, in
defying and Protesting against their Neighbors.

We must suppose therefore now that his WE which are pretended so clear
throughout his Answer, from being Misrepresenters of the Papists, are WE
Protestants: but because he disclaims all Title to Infallibility, there is no
need of taking his word for the truth of what he asserts; nor danger of
affronting him, though we call in question the verity of what, he says, he has
proved. And really, as my Case stands, I am obliged to question it: For if it
be confessed true, what he says, that the Protestants are no Misrepresenters of
the Papists, Then, I must needs own, I have highly injured the Protestants in
complaining against them as Mis-reporters of the Doctrine and Practices of the
Church of Rome, and holding out against them so long the charge of
Misrepresenting. Why should I injure any body, especially so considerable a
Number, as challenge that Name? No, I will do them no such wrong, and
therefore, however Innocent our Answerer may pretend he has proved them; I Will
here show the Papists have been always Misrepresented; and that ever since they
have had Protestant Adversaries, their greatest Suffering has been, not so much
from the force of Truth and Reason, as from Calumny and Slander, and all sorts
of Misrepresentations.

For the clearing of this, we must take along with us the true Notion of
Misrepresenting, as it is now agreed on by our Adversary, who owns in his last
Answer, That whosoever undertakes to declare any Action, Page 10, 11, 13.
Doctrine, or Practice of Papists, and does not deliver it as clothed with all
its Circumstances, with the right Motives, due End and Intention, is in a
proper and strict sense a Misrepresenter. Again, in his former Anser he has
this laid down as a Principle. Answ. to Papist Pro. p. 17.
If we (says he, speaking of We Protestants) put our own Opinions of the
Papists Faith and Practice into his Character, this is Misrepresenting; because
a Papist has not the same Opinion of these things, which we have, and this
makes it a False Character. So that here it is now to be supposed, that
whatsover Protestant in any thing relating to the Papists, either leaves out,
or alters any material Circumstance, the Motive, Intention, End, puts any false
Construction, or thrusts in his own Opinion into what he relates, is forthwith
a Misrepresenter.

And now to discover, how much the Papists have been always Sufferers from this
Unchristian Artifice of Misrepresenting, we can take no better way, than to
make enquiry into the several Methods used in Misrepresenting; and this not
only in relation to Points of Doctrine and Belief, but likewise in matters of
Fact and History: and though it be impossible to give an exact Catalogue of
These, they being as Numberless, as the Ways are of Ignorance to mistake, of
Envy to make false Constructions, of Malice to deceive; yet to touch at some
few, will be sufficient to evince, whether the WE of the Answerer are as clear
from misrepresenting and wronging the Papists, as he pretends. Or Whether the
Papists are really, what they pretend to show them.

And first, one way of Misrepresenting the Papists is by charging their Doctrine
with Blasphemy and Profaneness, not otherwise due to it, but only through the
Ignorance or Malice of him that draws the Consequence. This is the admirable
Gift of Mr. Sutcliff in his Survey of Popery, where he lays upon the Papists
the most Infamous Positions of the Heathens, and then gives his Reasons for it,
such as are more for his own Confusion, with understanding Men, than to the
prejudice of those he writes against. Thus he says the Papists Blasphemously
make Christ not only a Desperate Man, without Hope, but also an Infidel without
Faith. And Why all this Only, because Aquinas, (p. 3. q. 7. art. 4.) says, that
Christ seeing and enjoying God from the first instant of his Conception, could
not possibly have Faith or Hope in him, which always suppose the Absence of the
Object, that is, respect the Divine Essence not seen and not enjoyed. And this
is reason enough for Sutcliff to cry out against the Papists, as Blasphemously
making Christ, both a Desperate Man, and an Infidel. Certainly such a Piece of
Divinity was never heard of before out of a Country Church. Answ. to Pap.
protest. page 11.
And yet such as it is, My Answerer is not ashamed to Print it over again;
making this profound Reason of Sutcliffs, a sufficient discharge of him from
being a Misrepresenter; quarrelling with me, for curtailing the Author, in
setting down this his charge against the Papists, without his Reason that
backed it.

Another way of Misrepresenting the Papists, A Catech. truly representing the
Doctrins of the Church of Rome. Page 56.
is in pretending to deliver their Doctrine, and then to insert something, which
is notoriously false, and absolutely detested by them; this is what is done by
the Author of a Catechism lately Published, who undertakes to give a Systeme of
Popish Doctrins truly Represented, according to their own most received
Authors, and Councils, and coming to speak of IMAGES, he says the Papists PRAY
TO THEM; which is so foul a Misrepresentation, Page 17.
the the Author of the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented plainly Condemns me,
for making it a part of my Misrepresentations, as if 'twere never Charged
against the Papists. This, says he, would insinuate, as though WE did directly
charge them with PRAYING TO their Images, Ib.
without any farther respect: Which we are so far from charging them with, that
I do not know of any People in the World liable to that Charge. Thus what one
Protestant asserts positively, as the Doctrine and Practice of the Papists,
another Protestant rejects as a Misrepresentation so foul, as not to be imputed
to the worst of Infidels.

But however, foul as it is, it is not only found thus in a Grave Catechism, but
something like it in a Sermon too, viz. of J. Thomas Rect. of St. Nicholas;
Preached at Cardiffe, before the Baylifs and Aldermen, Page 21.
1679, where amongst other Gospel Truths, he gives his Auditory to understand,
that the Papists do not only Worship Martin's Boots, Georg's Scabbard, Crispins
Paring-knife, Thomases her Shoe, and Joseph's Breeches, but do likewise CALL
UPON THEM too. Which is to make them again more stupid Idolaters, than the worst
of Heathens; but it is by a Misrepresentation, however agreeing with that Year
of Oats's blessed Discovery, yet much better suiting with some other Place,
than the Pulpit.

Another like this, is that of the Answer to Catholics no Idolaters, who says,
it is the common Answer of Catholics, that their Adoration of the Eucharist
cannot be Idolatry, because they Believe the Bread to be God, just as the
Worshippers of the Sun believed the Sun to be God. Which is so absolutely false
of the Catholics, that on the contrary they believe, that whosoever believes
the Bread to be God, as the Heathens did the Sun, and adores it upon that
consideration, must of necessity be an Idolater in adoring it.

Another way is in framing some heathenish Absurdity, and then laying it on the
Papists, as their Doctrine and Belief, when it is only a Malicious Inference drawn
from some abuse, or from an obscure expression in some petty Author; and this
we find in the Archbishop of York so often quoted, who Represents the Papists
as believing Christ to be Savior of Men only, but no Women; that Whoredom is
allowed by them all the year long; and several other such abominable Positions,
which are no better than the Doctrine of Devils.

Such Deductive Absurdities, are those which Dr. St. according to what the
general Current of his Discourse Represents, endeavors to persuade his
Credulous Reader, to be Doctrins of the Roman Church, viz. That it holds no
necessity of Repentance, but only once in ones Life. That the Roman Repentance
obliges none to the forsaking their sins, or a Reformation of Life. That the
Sacraments confer Grace, on any Receiver of them, though never so unprepared.
That Indulgences discharge Catholics from doing the best part of their
Religion. Which may be seen related and confuted in a Discourse entitled, The
Roman Doctrine of Repentance and of Indulgences, vindicated from Dr. Sts.
Misrepresentations. The like is to be seen in John Fox's Acts and Monuments,
where (besides the infinite mistakes and abuses in relation to his Martyrs) in
considering some chief Points of the Catholic Doctrine, in less than three
leaves, he has falsified them in above one Hundred and twenty Instances; that
is, as his Answerer words it in his plain Language, has uttered more than a
Hundred and fifty Lies: as is made appear in the Examen of John Fox's Calendar,
p. 3. p. 412.

Another way is in Falsifying Authors for the Proof of some Extravagant Doctrine
upon the Church of Rome. And this is done several ways: As first by the
Archbishop of York, who reports it a Tenet of the Papists, That the Pope can
make that Righteous, which is unrighteous. And then quotes L. 1. Decret. Greg.
Titulus 7. Chapter the Fifth, which Titulus of the Decretals consists only of
Four Chapters, and nothing mentioned in them all, besides what concerns the
Translation of Bishops. Other Tenets of the like stamp he imputes to the Belief
of the Church of Rome, and then quotes St. Thomas and Bellarmine, etc. in such
Places, where either the Matter or Place is not to be found, nor any thing like
it.

This is done another way, by endeavoring to prove some Folly upon the Papists,
out of their own Authors; and then bringing in the Authors quite contrary to
their own Sense and Words: This is exemplified in a Sermon several times
Printed, Last Edit. 1686.
and now lately with Dr. Tillotson's name to it, where p. 2. he says, Learned
Persons of the Church of Rome do acknowledge that Purgatory cannot be concluded
from the Text (1 Cor. 3. 15.) And then affirms, Nay ALL that Estius contends
for from this Place is, that it cannot be concluded from hence, that there is
no Purgatory. Which yet, though preached at White Hall, and before His late
Majesty, is not ALL that Estius contends for. For Estius in his Explication
upon that Place of St. Paul, speaking of Purgatory concludes with these plain
words, Itaque hac ratione poena Purgatoria animarum, ex hoc Pauli loco been and
solid colligitur. Wherefore, says he, upon this consideration from this place
of St. Paul the Punishment of Souls in Purgatory is well and solidly gathered.
Which is little less than a Contradiction to what the Dr. asserts of him. Dr.
Cumber is something good at this too, who in his Advice to Catholics,
endeavors to make appear that St. Gregory condemns the Doctrine of Catholics
concerning the not marrying of Priests, maintaining as he says, that it is
lawful for such of the Clergy, as cannot contain, to Marry: And yet whosoever
consults the place, will find St. Gregory, to speak only of such of the Clergy,
as are extra Sacros Ordines constituti, Not yet in Holy Orders; which is not at
all contrary to the received Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as the Dr. is
willing to represent it, but what at this day they teach and practice; so that
in this he evidently falsifies the Father. Something after the same manner, he
in another place treats Bellarmine; endeavoring to prove him a Blasphemer, for
saying, that a Man may be his own Redeemer: whereas Bellarmine in the place
cited, does not say so of himself, as the Dr. represents him; but only sets
down the words of Scripture, in which Man is so called; and by explicating in
what Sense they may be understood, without any injury to Christ, defends the H.
Scripture from the imputation of Blasphemy. Which, methinks, is not so ill an
Office, as to deserve the Title of Blasphemer, for doing it.

The Old Dr. Willet amongst many others, has an excellent one of this kind, who
in his Synop. Papism. will needs prove the Pope to be Antichrist out of St.
Bernard, in these words, Their own Witnesses shall speak; Bernard says, Bestia
de Apocalypsi, cui datum est os loquens Blasphenias Petri Cathedram occupat.
The Beast in the Apocalypse, to which a Mouth was given speaking Blasphemies,
possesses the Chair of Peter. By which he will persuade his Reader, that the
Bishop of Rome, according to the plain words of St. Bernard, is the Beast in
the Apocalypse and Antechrist. Ep. 125.
Whenas it is contrary to St. Bernard, who in that Epistle, speaks very
honorably of Pope Innocentius, animating him to the performance of his Duty
with Courage; and in the words mentioned reflects only upon a certain Usuper,
who by violence invaded the Chair of Peter, and banished Innocentius the true
Bishop out of Rome. The late Discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church
of Rome plays upon this String too, where p. 52. speaking of the Papist's, They
tell us, says he, there is a vast number of Sins in their own nature Venial --
for the pardon of which there is no need, or occasion for the Mercy of God.
Which is a Doctrine they neither own nor profess; but absolutely contrary to
their Belief. And though he quotes here Escobar for this Absurdity, there is not
one word of this to be found in him, in the place cited: But above all in this
kind, Escob. trac. 2. exam. 1. c. 4.
I think Dr. Tailor bears away the Bell in his Disswasive from Popery, in which
he shows an excellent Talent of forging strange Doctrins, and Fathering them on
Catholic Authors: And then for his quotations which he pretends to lay down
out of Fathers and Catholic Writers, the greatest part of them are either
strangely wrested to a sinister sense, or not found at all in the Original, or
else unpardonably corrupted: As his Answerer makes appear, who Examined them
with his own Eyes, as he professes, in the Original Authors.

Another way mightily in fashion for the Misrepresenting the Papists, is by
putting them upon the same File with Infidels and Pagans, and by such
comparisons to imprint in the Vulgar a Notion of the Papists being no better
than Infidels. This is a great Topic with the Bishop of Kilmore, in his Sermon
Preached at St. Warbroughs in Dublin a year ago, The Pagans (says he p. 12) had
their several Titular Gods for several places; for Delphos Worshipped Apollo,
Crete Jupiter, and Ephesus Diana: And so in Popery, England Worshipped St.
George, Scotland St. Andrew, Ireland St. Patrick, etc. Again, In Paganism they
had several Gods to pray to -- and so in Popery. In Paganism several
Professions had several Gods -- So in Popery. Lastly, to these, says he, both
Pagans and Papists build Churches, erect Altars, etc. This is the way this
Prelate has of setting forth the Papists. And one reason why he deals so
civilly with them, as to render the Papists no worse than Heathens, he gives in
his Preface to the said Sermon, because we have the Word of the King (says he)
to defend our Religion. An admirable return of this Royal Favor, to persuade
his Majesty's Subjects, that the Papists and Infidels are much of a Piece. And
yet This Sermon, is deemed by this Good Prelate a Defense of the truth, Pref.
and a very seasonable Intimation of our (Protestant) Resolution of being True
and Steady to our Laws, Oaths and Duties. -- And let the Romanists take it as
they please, they must expect a great many such. And really as to this, I think
his Lordship is much in the right; for a great many such we have met with. But
I must take the liberty to tell his Lordship, that if this be the method of
defending his Religion, and an argument of his being True and Steady to his
Duty; that (besides a great deal more that might be said to it) it is only done
by Misrepresenting; and that though he is obliged to Preach against Popery, as he
says, to the utmost of his Wit and Learning, Pref.
that here is no more Wit or Learning in this, than what every petty Sophister
might find without much ado, to make the Protestant, Turk, and Jew all one,
because they all agree, in maligning and defaming the Papists.

However this way of calumniating, his Lordship has not the honor of inventing,
'twas first devised by those Divines the Compilers of the Book of Homilies, who
besides this almost word for word, have variety of other Scurrilous ways, as
comparing the Papists with the Horse and the Ass, and such like, exactly
calculated for the Rabble. 'Twas afterward taken up by the Psalm-makers, who
finding David to have never a True-Protestant Hymn, added that of From Turk and
Pope defend us Lord. And because this seemed to some of too soft a strain, It Is
since raised a Note or two higher, and I think even to Ela in a good hearty
Family Prayer to be said Morning and Evening, added to the end of the singing
Psalms in a Common Prayer Book, Printed at Oxford, in the year 1683, in
Twelves, wherein it is said O Lord raise up faithful Distributers of thy
Mysteries -- contrarily, confound Satan, Antichrist with all Hirelings and
Papists. Which seems the effort of a True-Protestant Charity, not only to link
Satan, Antichrist, and the Papists together, but to wish them all overtaken
with the same Confusion.

Another way there is, in pretending to declare the Devotions of Catholics,
and then to insert something that is absolutely false as to the End or
Intention, for which they perform them: This the Discourse of the Devotions of
the Church of Rome, is admirable good at; as p. 56. where speaking of the
frequent Repetition of the Names of Jesus and Mary, in the Jesus Psalter, etc.
he thus gives the reasons: Now their saying the same thing so often over (says
he) is not contrived to help and assist Devotion, or prevent Distraction, or as
a Repetition of what is more than ordinarily important, or for any other good
or prudent Reason; BUT OVT OF PVRE VANITY AND OSTENTATION, OR AS IT WERE EVEN
TO FLATTER OUR BLESSED SAVIOR OR THE SAINT WHICH THEY PRAY TO. This is his
reason he gives of our Devotion, and it is as Heroic a way of defending the
Truth, by Calumniating with a Magisterial Confidence, and throwing dirt
blindfold, as ever I met with. I am sure it is so unbecoming, that if he should
with the like positiveness, interpret any thing belonging to the State or Civil
Government, 't would not be called a bare Misrepresenting, without a -- at the
end often.

But the Bishop of Kilmore will not give way to any in this kind of dawbing,
and if the Papists be not black enough, it shall be none of his fault: What he
does, is upon Oath and Duty, and therefore he is the more hearty: And his talent
being in Similitudes, as he before compared the Papists with the Heathens; so
now he honors them with the Comparison of Esop's Dog; and then soon finds a
staf to beat them. Somethere are (says the Prelate in the same Sermon, p. 10.)
Who with Esop 's Dog, snatch at the shadow and lose the substance; that is,
place the WHOLE Worship of God in Bodily Exercise, and External Adoration; as
howing before a Crucifix, in creeping to a Cross, in running a bare-leg'd
Pilgrimage, -- in hanging down the head for a day like a Bulrush, -- in Pixes
and Paxes and such like fripperies. Thus he truly Represents the Devotions of
the Papists, as he is bound by Oath, and yet without Truth, or Conscience. For
is it true, that their WHOLE Worship of God consists in these bodily Exercises,
as his Lordship calls them? Do they not teach their Followers to Worship God by
internal Acts of Love, of Fear, of Reverence, of Honor, of Resignation, by an
hearty Oblation of all they have, or are, and that no external Action is
acceptable to God, without the Heart and Soul going along with it? How comes it
then, that their WHOLE Worship of God is in these Bodily Exercises? But I must
not urge too far; spreading of these Calumnies his Lordship takes for his Duty;
and as long as he pretends to His Majesty's Word, for his abusing us, I must be
silent; though I have great reason to think, his Lordship's mistaken, and that he
stretches His Majesty's Word farther than 'twill go.

Another way there is, in laying on the Colors with so much craft on the
Papists Tenets, that though they are the very same with what the most Learned
Protestants hold themselves; yet they shall appear so Foul and Monstrous, as if
nothing less than a certain Damnation attended their Abettors. This is done in
several Instances: As when the Incharitableness of the Papists is to be the
Theme, and the Alarm to keep the drowsy Flock from nodding; how Unchristian
are they rendered, for not allowing Salvation to any out of their Church, for
giving the Protestants no better portion, but with those on the Left hand of
the Judge! Dr. Tillotson, plays this Tune roundly in his before mentioned
Sermon, p. 22. Where inveighing against the Incharitableness of the Papists, he
labors Heartily to create a good Charitable Aversion in his Hearers toward
them. And after he has spent some pages in this; he at last in a Rapture of
Charity concludes, p. 27. I have so much Charity (and I desire always to have
it) as to hope, that a great many among them, who live Piously, and have been
almost Enevitably detained in that Church by the prejudice of Education and an
invincible Ignorance, will upon a general Repentance find mercy with God. One
would have expected, by his earnest condemning the Papists, and the Preamble of
this Conclusion, to have met with some extraordinary Piece of Charity, both for
the Reformation and example of the Papists; and yet after all the outcry and
bustle, he wont allow one more grain of mercy to the Papists, than the Papists
do to them; that is, only to such, who having lived piously, and truly Repented
of their sins, have an Invincible Ignorance to atone for all other errors of
the Understanding; which is the very Doctrine of the Papists in respect of such,
who die out of the Communion of their Church. But now whether Dr. Stillingfleet
has even so much Charity as this for the Papists, it is not easy to tell. For
he declares positively, that all those who embrace Popery, must, by the terms
of Communion with that Church, be guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry;
either of which are sins inconsistent with Salvation. Now if the Doctor were
Judge, what are become of the poor Papists? Are not they all damned in the
Lump? And yet this is the Protestant Charity, which condemns the Papists for
Incharitableness. To say the Papists must be guilty of sins inconsistent with
Salvation, is but to say they are Damned in another Phrase. And if the Doctor
can find any expedient to save them after this, he must make Heaven gate as
wide as the Portico to the Turkish Paradise, where there is passage for the Dog,
the Camel and the Whale. Thus when Protestants and Papists say the same thing
of each other, it is strange how Antichristianly-black the Papists are made,
when the Protestants have the laying on the Colors.

Another way yet there is, in undertaking to declare the Tenets of Catholics;
and after having raked together some odd and extravagant Opinions of some
Authors, to set them down for the received Doctrine of the Church; and it is
presently true Representing, if there be but an Author's Name to support the
pretense; and most especially if the said Author be allowed and not condemned
after the publishing. This is a most fashionable way, trodden hard in Books and
Pulpits. The Archbishop of York approves it mightily. And so if he can but
cite Bulgradus, Vessel. Grovingens. or Did. 96. that is enough to make any
Extravagancy to pass for an Article of Faith: And then if the thing happen to
be disproved and shown a Misrepresentation, it is at least a Popish
Misrepresentation; and this serves still to promote the Cause, to make the
Papists odious. This is a Method so unwarrantable, that if followed by all
Parties alike, in exposing their Adversaries, 'twould soon make all
Christendom, only so many Divisions of Infidels. One little Example will clear
this. For suppose now any Popish Preacher in his Pulpit beyond Sea, in a
Country where his Auditory understands but little what Protestants are, should
let slip his Text, and following our Mooish way, should be so unjust to his
Flock, as not to spend his Glass in instructing them in their Duty, or
reforming their Lives; but making use of some little Arts, should place his
main endeavor in provoking them to a good hearty aversion against Protestants;
and should thus expose them: My Dear Christians, stick fast to the Truth of the
Gospel, preached by Christ and his Apostles, and delivered down to you by a
continual Succession of Pastors and Teachers, and the Practice of the Faithful
in all Ages: But above all, beware of such, who make Divisions and Schisms in
the Church of God, such as cry out, Christ, Christ, and Reformation, but are
nothing but the Forerunners of Antichrist. These call themselves Protestants;
the Name you have scarce heard of, as being no where in Scripture, Fathers, nor
Antiquity; but their wicked Principles and Practices have filled the whole
Earth. They have outdone even the Heathens, and those that know not God, in
all sorts of Wickedness and Impiety: And this the few Good Men that are amongst
them own themselves: One Eminent for his Writings, and known by the Author of
the Whole Duty of Man, confesses it to them and the World, Deeay of Christian
Piety.
that they have broken down not only the banks of RELIGION, but of CIVILITY
too: And so universal a depravation is there, says he, amongst us, that we have
scarce any thing left, to distinguish us from the most Barbarous People, but a
better Name, and worse Vices. Do you see how under the pretense of Reforming,
they have brought Corruption into the World, that even they themselves own it,
and yet go on, under an empty Title, of being the Chosen People of God? This
same thing is confessed and owned almost in the same words, by another Good Man
now of late, who before his Prelate in a Visitation Sermon, delivers it for
Gospel, that they are so wicked, that they cannot be thought the Servants of
God: We can never (says he) make them (our Enemies) believe that we are the
Servants of the Living God, Sermon at the Visitation of the Bishop of Norwich,
by Sam. Crisp. 1686. p. 25
or have a just sense of Devotion, while they see that we have nothing to
distinguish us from the Worshippers of a False God, but a Better Name and Worse
Vices. But then, that you may neither doubt of the truth of this, nor yet
wonder at it, he gives a sufficient Reason in the same Sermon, where he says,
that their Guides and Ministers, who should lead and direct them to Good, do
instead of this, encourage them to Vice and Faction. When the Clergy themselves
(says he, p. 14.) have given EXAMPLE and ENCOURAGEMENT to Men, to break the
Churches Laws, and contemn her Authority, no wonder that VICE and FACTION
appear insolent and daring. You see then, they have not the Fear of God in
their Hearts nor Actions, and you see the Reason of it. This is all hitherto in
respect chiefly of God; but now in respect of their Neighbor, they have no
Charity for any, that are not of their mind; but for their own Brethren, they
think themselves bound to help and assist them, though engaged in the foulest of
Villainies and Crimes.

Thus when the Scots, under pretext of Reforming Religion, had invaded their
Prince's Authority, and by the Preaching of John Knox and other headstrong
Ministers, says their own Author, had been persuaded, that it pertain'd to them
to reduce by force their Prince to the prescript of Laws; and wanting some
assistance to effect it, they sent to Queen Elizabeth for Aid. And here what
says Sir Rich. Baker, Sir Rich. Baker, p. 475. Printed An. 1653.
a Protestant Historian? Amongst other Considerations, It seemed no less, says
he, than an IMPIETY not to give aid to the Protestants of the same Religion. So
that though they are confessed by him, to have pretended only a Reformation, not
by chance; but rather plotted of purpose, according to the Suggestion of
Headstrong Ministers, to incroach upon the Prerogative of the Crown; and to
demand aid from abroad, by violence to reduce their Prince, (which is to be as
great Traitors as can be) yet it is an Impiety (says he) not to help them in
their Rebellion, since they are Brethren of the same Persuasion: Holy Brethren
believe me, thus to deem it a Duty to join hands in Rebellion, and to be
Traitors for Religionsake!

You see what their Doctrine is in regard of Foreign Princes. And do you think
they have any better respect for their own? Yes, if He be of their Religion,
and thinks as they think. Otherwise they will beg his Pardon: as now if he should
be a Popish one, for Example; what deference would they have for him? You may
learn it from one of their own Leaders in the Gospel, who with a very
Remarkable NOVERINT, Jovian, p. 96.
or BE IT KNOWN, delivers a Doctrine of a most rare piece of Gallantry, with a
most admirable Resolution of confronting such a Prince to his face, and making
the contempt of him a Duty. And that none may question in the least this their
Respectful Divinity, this Author delives it yet plainer in another Place ( p.
80.) Where making a Discourse with some prospect of a Popish Successor; He thus
openly speaks their common sense: So far (says he) are all those, who are so
tender of the Succession, from having any tenderness for a Popish Successor,
that they dread him like the PLAGVE, and therefore would have had Provisional
Laws made, to bind up such an One, and put him under very CLOSE LEGAL
CONFINEMENT, in case he should be King. This is what the better and most Loyal
Part of them, were willing to afford such a Prince; but for the others; Nothing
would serve (says he) the other Protestants, but an Act of EXCLVSION, backed
with another for an ASSOCIATION. Do you see, my Dear Flock, what new sort of
Christians these are, what their Charity, what their Loyalty; what they look
upon their Duty; How far the Best of them can go, how far the Worst.

Well might that One Good Man confess, that they have broken down the Banks not
only of RELIGION, but of CIVILITY too; and that their Vices are more heinous
than those of the most Barbarous People. And what he confessed, you your selves
have now seen proved, to the scandal of the Christian Name, out of their own
Authors; and those not obscure ones, or raked out of the Dust; but of the most
Eminent amongst them, to be found in all hands, read every where, and never
reproved or condemned by any; so that you have all the reason in the World to
conclude, that it is the sense of their Church, whatsoever some of the more
subtle of them may pretend to the contrary.

But I must not harangue too long, I know it will not please; and really it
even nauseates me even in this manner to carry on a piece of Sophistry, which I
have seen and heard so often practiced in earnest, in the weightiest concern,
by the Soberest Men, and in the most Sacred Places. This will suffice, to let
any considering Man see, what use may be made of Authors; how easy it is to
make any Party Odious to the Multitude, and however Christian it may be, yet
with how little difficulty it may be Painted as Black as Hell, if a Man will be
so unjust, as to pass these kind of Misrepresenting Arguments upon the People
for the Gospel.

These are some of the Methods, by which the Papists have been Misrepresented,
in relation to their Tenets of Doctrine and Belief; now I must take another
short turn, and examine, how many ways, the Papists have been Misrepresented,
in relation to some matters of Fact and History; and by that time, I hope, the
Reader will discover, whether it be without reason, that the Papists complain
of being Misrepresented.

One way there is in letting Avarice, Envy, or Malice give ill Names to things,
and then passing them upon the Crowd for no better, than they are thus stamped
by these Passions. This was a method very serviceable in the time of the
Reformation; when there was no need of more, than nick-naming the most Sacred
things, and presently they became Unhallowed. Thus we find related by Dr.
Heylyn; The Grandees of the Court, casting many an envious Eye upon the Rich
Hangings, the Massy Plate, and other things, which adorned the Altars in those
times, did no more than call them Corruptions, and presently they were no
longer fit for Churches, but only for Private use, and seized them. The
Candlesticks, Crucifixes and Shrines had Superstition stamped on them, and
forthwith were made a spoil. The Protector Somerset did no more than pitch upon
Three Episcopal Houses, Four or Five Churches, a Chapel and Charnel house of
St. Paul's, and calls them Superfluous; and they are immediately blown up, and
make proper Materials for his New Palace Somerset House. St.
Margarets-Westminster too was condemned to the same fate, upon the sentence of
Unnecessary: But the Workmen that were sent to demolish it, being disturbed by
the Clubs and Staves of the Parishioners, 'twas again judged Convenient for
their use. This was the Method in those Reforming times, when, as we may read
in Heylyn, Covetousness, Ambition, and Envy set up for removing Corruptions out
of the Church; when Profit and Interest was to give Orders, and Violence to
Execute; when Sacrilege and Rapine were the best means for the bringing in the
Purity of the Gospel. But because this may be all seen at large in some
Historical Collections gathered out of Protestant Authors, lately Published,
I Will remit the Reader to them, where he will easily discover how considerably the
Art of Misrepresenting contributed to the outing of Popery.

This same method it was that King Henry the Eighth, Luther, etc. made use of,
when by Luxury and Rapine they began to reform the Extravagancies of their
times, and make way apace for Protestantism to enter into the World. If the
Pope will not consent to the Irregular Passions of that Prince, and permit him
to take a second Wife, while his first is alive; the Power, that is the Curb to
his Lust, is forthwith Antichristian, it is a Usurpation and Foreign Power; and
with such hard names, it is rendered as odious to the People, as 'twas to him; who
by this means throwing it off, passes for a Good Christian amidst his Vile
Extravagancies. If Luther has a mind to Marry, and his Vow of Chastity stands
in his way, he does no more than nickname it a little, calling it a Rash and
Inconsiderate Vow, and he is as free to Marry as the best of them; his Vow is no
farther a Let to him, and he now contracts according to the Prescript of the
Gospel. And if he thinks a Nun will make the best Wife; he does no more than
make her Vow as Foolish as his, and the business is effected without any more
ado, no farther Scruple; they forthwith become a most Evangelical couple. This
same way we have seen trod over of late by Honest Sir William, who by the Name
of Popish Trinckets and Trumpery, made a spoil of Chalices, Crosses, the Images
of Christ and his Saints; and by a rare knack of turning Guineas into Medals;
Pearl-Necklaces into Beads; and Watches into Relick-Cases, made them fit for
Seizure according to Law, to the great benefit of the Practicioner, and much
edifying of his Brethren, who could not but have a holy envy for his Zeal.

Another way there is in telling a Story to the advantage of the Cause, in
putting that side outward as will serve turn best, and keeping under-board
whatsoever is not for the purpose; and sometimes it is only the turn of the hand,
the winding of the breath, a pat Phrase, and presently a Devil's made of any
thing. Thus when Sir Rich. Baker in the beginning of Queen Mary.
Baker has a mind to Paint Queen Mary deep in Blood, he thus Tragically begins:
Hitherto Queen Mary's Reign had been without Blood: but now the Cataracts of
Severity will be opened, that will make it rain Blood. Thus he draws the lines
of Antichrist in her Face: And see upon what score; For now, says he, on the
Eighth of August the Duke of Northumberland, Marquess of Northampton, and Earl
of Warwick, were Arraigned at Westminster Hall Condemned and Executed for High
Treason, for Proclaiming the Lady Jane Gray Queen of England, in opposition to
the true Heiress. And this, which in a Protestant Prince, on the like occasion,
is termed the executing of Justice, giving deserved punishment to Traitors,
etc. in Queen Mary is nothing less than the opening Cataracts of Severity, and
the raining of Blood. This same Misrepresenting Artifice is made use of on all
occasions, in every thing relating to Queen Mary. Nothing can be heard of, when
her Reign is made the proof of the Text, but Cruelty, Blood, Fire, Faggots,
Stakes, Smithfield; nothing can serve to parallel those times, but the
persecutions of Decius and Dioclesian, and she is so in all things set out, as
if little better than a Heathen, and swimming in the Blood of of the Martyrs.
This is her Picture. But if we should view it a little, and consider, whether
she has no wrong done her; might not we ask; What, and how much this Blood was,
what the occasion of its being spilt, and what the Provocation given? And here
we shall have an account of some Protestant behavior: of Praying for the death
of their Queen in Meetings, that God would shorten her days; of a Gun shot at
her Preacher in the Pulpit, of Cats hung on Gallows, with their Heads shorn,
and something like Vestments, in derision of her Priests; of a Dog held up in
the Church by the Legs, in derision of the Elevation of the Host; a gallantry
of one of Fox's Martyrs; of several other provocations by Tumults, Seditions,
and Rebellions: And that after this, for the security of her Crown, She put in
execution Laws not made by Her, but enacted long before by her Ancestors Rich.
2. Hen. 4, and 5. Now one would think to be just to Crowned Heads, the Blood
should not be exposed alone to the People; but likewise the occasions and
provocations given, even according to Law, and then let things go as far as
they will: but to Misrepresent the Papists, Stories must be Told and Preached
by halves; otherwise they will turn to no account with the People, and serve
nothing to the Interest of the Cause.

But to see now how much there go's in the telling a Story: Queen Elizabeth put
to death Two hundred persons upon the score of Conscience, without any actual
Crime or Misdemeanor against the Ancient Statutes of the Land, but only against
the Law of her own contriving; a Law so cruel, that the like is scarce to be
found even among the Mahometans, who though they have conquered many Christian
Nations, yet never, as I have heard of, made it Treason for the Natives, to
profess their own Religion, or maintain their Pastors. And though this and much
more was done by this Princess, yet she is set forth with that advantage, that
she is a Meek, Merciful, Tenderhearted, Saintlike, true-Protestant Queen:
While her Sister, who put to death not Three hundred, of which number, those of
the greatest Note were Traitors in the highest Degree, others Guilty of the
most intolerable abuses both to Church and State, and liable to death by the
Ancient, and known Laws of the Nation; such as Dr. Heylyn and Dr. Pocklington
both Protestants, in their Book Licensed and set forth by Authority style
Schismatical Heretics, Factious Fellows, Traitors and Rebels, and She is no
better than a Cruel, Bloody, Hard-hearted, Popish Tyrant. Thus according to
this Reformed Method, there needs no more for the making a Protestant Saint or
a Popish Fiend, than a little turn of the breath, and the mere knack of making
the Narrative: And if there be not Misrepresenting in this, I never heard of
any.

Another way there is in spreading the guilt of some few Papists upon the whole
of that Communion; so that if any of them are caught in a Villainy, it is
immediately suggested, that what These did, was according to the Principles of
their Religion, and not so much to be charged on them in particular, as on
their Church, which encourages them to such wicked undertakings. After this
manner the Powder. Plot is managed, which though it was in all likelihood a
contrivance of the good Lord Cecil (as Osborne a Protestant Historian plainly
confesses,) K. J. p. 36.
yet because a few Papists were proved Actors in it, the guilt is forthwith
thrown upon the whole body of them, their Religion Calumniated, and they
Condemned as Destructive to Monarchy, and unfit to live under a Protestant
Prince. Now however it may be nothing but truth, that Digby, Faux and their
accomplices were as black with this Treason, as they are commonly Painted; yet
hence to spread the Scandal upon the Papists without distinction, to cry out
against the Bloody Papists, the Barbarous Papists, and by such innuendos to
incense the Multitude, and lead them into false conceits, that this was a
design of the Catholics in general, according to their professed Principles
and Doctrine, is an unwarrantable proceeding, unbecoming the Desk, and nothing
better than a Misrepresentation: Yes as unjust a Misrepresentation, as it would
be in any one at this day, who to drive on a Faction, should get up into the
Pulpit, with the Bible in hand; and after having given a large display of the
Traiterous, Bloody, and Inhumane doings of the late Rebels in the West, should
at last throw it upon the Church of England; crying out against the Bloody
Church of England- men, the Cruel Church of England- men, their Rebellious
Principles, abominable Doctrins, and Practices of Men not to be tolerated in a
Monarchical Government; and this because he proves the Duke that Headed that
Rebellion, to have been a Member of that Church, with some others that joined
hands with him. For be it never so true, that some were thus really chargeable
with this Rebellion, nay, that at their deaths they never owned it as a Crime;
(which yet the Powder Plotters did) yet still to charge the guilt upon the
whole of that Communion, can be done no otherwise, than by the fashionable
Artifice of Misrepresenting.

Another way there is in putting malicious Constructions upon indifferent
things, and running down a Party upon false surmises. This was the Case of the
Papists some years since; When they enjoying a little rest by the merciful
Indulgence of the late King of Blessed Memory; behold on a Sudden they are
rendered obnoxious to the Government, as abusing the Royal Favor, and Plotting
against his Majesty's Subjects. A great quantity of long divelish Knives are
discovered, made on purpose by the Papists, for the cutting all the Protestants
Throats; this was the Protestant cry, and thus was the matter fairly
Represented by them. Upon this the Papists, the Cruel Bloody Papists are to be
no longer suffered, their Priests are ordered into Banishment, and so the point
was gained. When the whole truth of the Story, was only some parcels of Knives
made publicly, to be transported for the use of the Plantations. But this
served the Protestant Interest; and the Peoples heads by this are full of the
Bloody-minded Papists.

Another way is by making a Plot of every thing. Thus in the year 1666. In the
Plates of Common Prayer Book Printed at Oxford, An. 1680.
was that dreadful Judgment of the Fire improved into a Plot of the Papists.
How many Papists were taken with Fireballs in their Pockets? How many
apprehended in the very Act of throwing Fireballs into Windows? How many
Thousand Papists were in Arms at Temple Bar, and the Country alarmed to
suppress them? And at the latter end, not one word of all this true; but only a
true Protestant Representation of a thing that never was: And yet very much to
the purpose of enraging the multitude against the Cruel, Bloody Papists. For by
the frequent buzzing of these kind of Gospel Truths, the Vulgar within a while
became so thoroughly convinced of the damnable industry of the Papists in
throwing Fireballs, that they began to think, that Heaven it self could not
now consume a Protestant Sodom, without making use of a Jesuits hand to throw
the Fire and Brimstone.

No Fire therefore happens after this, but the Papists have a hand in it: If
Southwark be Fired, it is the damnable Papists do it; if the Temple be Burnt,
it is the Devilish Papists are blowing the Coals. And thus these repeated
Misrepresentations are made use of, to create an aversion in the Peoples hearts
against Popery; and are the Evangelical proofs to convince the Multitude, that
its Doctrine and Practices come all out of the School of Antichrist.

Another Text out of the same Gospel, was that Anniversary Misrepresentation,
of the Papists contriving the Death of King Charles the First. This was an
unparalled Barbarity Acted in the face of the Sun: the Actors and Contrivers
are as public as the noon-light, and yet those who at other times are
Scrupulous of distrusting their Senses in a Case where God himself speaks; here
in defiance to all their Senses, in contradiction to all that was seen and
heard, give credit to a Monsieur's Invention, who comes out of France with a
Tale, and lays this Royal Blood at the Papists doors. But this still serves the
purpose, the deeper the Papists are Painted in Blood, the more the People are
convinced of the truth of the Reformation.

Another way is by making a Plot of nothing: Thus it happened in the year 1679,
When the People having been by these and a Thousand other such like
Gospel-policies, most Apostolically satisfied of the Principles of the
Seditious, Traiterous, Barberous, Cruel, Bloody-minded Papists: And being now
so molded and disposed, that nothing could seem incredible concerning Those,
that were thus detestable and odious, outcomes the Garagantua Misrepresentation
of them all, that is the Divine Oats, with his Popish Plot. And here the
Papists are overwhelmed with that fury, that never were poor People in greater
distress. The Plot was as dark and confused as the Chaos, its monstrosities
were beyond all the Fables of the Talmud or Alcoran; that it is impossible even
to be related, without a touch of that madness, that then possessed the Nation.
And yet the whole was received with that welcome and credit, that what would
have been questioned in the very Scripture, was entertained without any
Scruple: The Dr. having a grant of that Power, which is denied even to Heaven
it self, that is, of verifying contradictions. It Is strange to consider, how
easy it was then to swallow Screwed Guns, Handkerchiefs and Pillowbers; with
how little difficulty Troops of Pilgrims, and whole Armies with their
Black-bills went down. And why all this welcome to Fictions and Nonsense? Only
to defeat Antichrist, and to root out Popery. A rare new way, I confess, of
fighting against the Devil (as 'twas pretended) with his own Weapons. But
Misrepresenting does always the best Execution against the Papists; and
therefore the Plot is carried on with all possible Vigor and Zeal. But hitherto
only of the least part of these Plots and Misrepresentations, the chief is yet
to come, and that is the carrying up of these Inventions of Wicked men into the
Pulpit, and thence with the Finger in the Bible, and a Preamble of Hearken to
the Word of the Lord, dispensing them to the People for Truths. These are the
Misrepresentations above all justly to be complained of, that into That Place,
which ought to be set apart as Sacred, for instructing the People to Salvation,
and sowing the Seed of Gods Holy Word, such things should be preferred, as had
nothing of truth in them: Nay, that what Ungodly men reported, vouched and
swore to, to the evident Peril of their Souls Damnation, should take place with
the holy Text, should be insinuated into the People for Truths, nay be
confirmed by proofs of the Gospel, and be delivered out, as something relating
to the way to Heaven: So that what was Damnation at the Bar, became Salvation
from the Pulpit. And all this not in any indifferent matter, but in a concern
of Credit, Reputation, Honesty, and Life; and this not of one Man (which yet
would have been a great impiety thus to have defamed from the Pulpit) but of
many Families of many Thousands.

I will not enlarge upon a matter so Odious, so Unchristian as this. I hope
this hint will be enough for the Answerer to consider, that 'twas none of the
greatest Modesty in him to brag, how clear WE were from charging the Papists
with saying or doing, what they never said or did. When these Innocent WE have
done all this against the Papists, and Fifty times more into the bargain. For
this is only a Taste of what may be done at large, if it be required, for our
Justification; it being no great Task instead of so many Sheets upon this
Subject, to furnish out so many Volumes.

But I forbear at present, and will only call upon the Reader to consider; That
if Misrepresenting, be, what it is agreed upon above, viz. to set false
Constructions, to alter or change the Motives, End, Intention or Circumstances
of Things; Whether the Papists have not some Reason to cry out against this
Unchristian Dealing; when (as it has been made appear) there is scarce any
thing belonging to them, either as to their Faith or Practice, wherein they
have not been wronged by Adversaries, and which has not been injuriously set
forth to the People, under some of these Disguises.

For my part, the whole matter is so clear to me, that I do not at all wonder
at the Temper of our People at this day in respect of Popery, who have a notion
of it in their heads so Foul and Monstrous; that to be a Papist with them, is
the same thing as to be Cruel, and Bloody, to be without Soul or Conscience,
and to be given over to all sorts of vice and Extravagancy. And that Papist,
who is thought by them only a Fool or an Hypocrite, is highly in their Favor.
Some indeed have not yet concluded, which is worse, the Turk or the Papist; and
are not resolved which side shall have their Good Wishes; whilst others at
first sight prefer the Mahometans, and think Them of the Two, the nearer allied
to Christendom. Then for the Jews, they are still more agreeable than the
Papists; and for a Man to turn Atheist, is tolerable enough; A
Green-Ribband-Man is much more suitable: Yes any thing, Good Lord, but a Papist.

Thus it stands with the People, and amongst them may take place as to this,
many a Grave and Sober Face. But that they are of this Temper, I do not (I say)
at all wonder. For when I consider the manner how the Papists have been
treated; that Ten thousand Pulpits have been for many years declaiming against
them; where every Man has had a liberty of exposing them as he pleased, as was
most taking with his Auditory, and best suiting with the Times: Where every Man
has represented Their Doctrine, as he pleased; has charged it with what
Consequences and Interpretations, he pleased; has exposed their Practices, as
he pleased; has put on them what Constructions he pleased; has expounded their
Authors, as he pleased; has made Narratives of them, as he pleased; has made
them as Guilty, as he pleased; has made Truth, and Gospel of any thing against
them, as he pleased. That besides this, infinite numbers of Pamphlets and other
Books have been constantly and carefully Published, for the promoting the same
Cause, for increasing Fears and Jealousies, advancing Suspicions, and obliging
the People to a Conscientious Hatred of Popery: When I consider, I say, this,
and reflect upon the many other ways, by which the Papists have been handled,
left to the Mercy of every Pretender, and made to be that, which every Weak,
Idle, Passionate or Malicious Brain thought fit to make them; it is no strange
thing at all to find the People to have a less aversion against the Turks and
Jews, than against the Papists; and that all the most horrid Sins against the
Twelve Commandments together, are not half so Foul and Damning with them, as
that one of Popery (as they conceive it) is by it self. For these Means that
have been taken to effect this, are so well proportioned to this end, and do so
naturally work People into this Aversion and Hatred; that were Christianity it
self treated and exposed to the People for some years, in the same manner and
method only, as Popery already has been, I am confident, 'twould be the same
crime within a while with them, to become a Christian, as now it is to turn
Papist.

But in the mean time this Method is so Unjust and so unbecoming all true
Christian Candor, under which, the Papists have been suffering these so many
years, that I cannot in Charity wish it to befall the Worst of Enemies. And did
Charity allow me to seek any expedient for the ruin of any ones Credit and
Reputation, and rendering him the Object of a Popular Hatred, I would consult no
farther, but only desire he might take his portion with the Papists, and be
treated no worse than they have been all along, by their adversaries. After
what manner this has been, I hope the Considering Reader, who has perused what
has been already said in this Discourse, does by this time comprehend. I gave
some hint of it before in a former Answer, called the Amicable Accommodation,
in which under the Person of a Dissenter arguing against and Defaming the
Church of England, I discovered in what manner the Papists are handled, by the
Protestants.

But this is taken by some by the wrong handle, and therefore can afford it no
better a Title than of Light, Scurrilous, and Jesting, and are willing to
persuade their Readers, Def. of the Expos. of the Doct. of the Chapter of Eng, p.
85, 86.
that the Character of the Church of England, as it is there drawn, is nothing
better than a Controversial Lampoon; and that since every Idle word is to be
given account of, what apprehensions ought the Author of it to be seized with,
who instead of having any True Zeal for Truth, has made a Droll of Religion,
widens the Divisions of the Church, and finds a harmony in her groans! This is
a very severe Charge; but the Comfort is, I am in good Company; for it is not
only the Amicable Accommodation stands thus endited, but the Vindication of the
Bishop of Meaux, and the Defense of the Late Kings Papers, which (if any one
will be so Civil, as to take this Authors word for'r) does not Vindicate, but
Ridicule; and is both void of Charity to his Adversaries, and of respect to the
Persons and Church He defends.

Besides this, he has urged the charge against them all, in the bitterest
expressions imaginable: Nothing is heard of in Two whole pages, but of their
art of Palliating, want of Fairness and Civility, laying aside Moderation,
falling into a vein of Lightness and Scurrility, forgetting that Religion is
the Subject, and Christians and Scholars their Antagonists. Their Mean
Reflections and Trivial jestings, their Ridiculing, their want of Charity and
Respect, their Writings Accommodated to the Genius of Skeptics, who divert
themselves at the expense of all Religion; and being not designed to satisfy
the Sober and Conscientious of either Side, etc.

Now what This Author seems here at first sight to require, being nothing but
Moderation, Candidness, and Civility in Answerers of all sides, I cannot but
highly commend; but then again, when I look farther into him, and see him
wishing for Moderation in the deepest Satyr, condemning the want of Civility in
Others, with the most Exasperating Reflections of his One, writing against the
Passion of his Adversaries, with his own Pen steept in Gall; when I hear him
desirous of laying down his Dearest Blood for the redressing the Evils of the
Divided Church, and at the same time most Uncharitably exposing Antagonists,
even such as nothing belonged to his Province, under the most Odious Characters
imaginable, I cannot tell how to take him in earnest; he seems but to make a
serious Droll, and brings into my mind, what I have heard of one, who Preaching
on Shipboard to correct the extravagant Swearing of the Mariners, after many
arguments to convince them of their Profaneness, at length to press the matter
home to them, Swore Bloodily, They would be all Damned if they did not leave
off Swearing.

But however it be, I Will Answer for my self, and do here assure this Zealous
Author, notwithstanding all his hard words, that there is no more of jesting in
my last Papers, than he may find in any Parable or Emblem, in which though the
Persons may be feigned, as in that of the Trees choosing a King; yet the thing
signified or intended, is real and serious. So that though, it may be, never any
Dissenter pressed all those things against the Church of England in the manner
I have there urged them; yet that there is shown the Exact Method how the
Church of Rome is struck at by Protestants, is what is intended most Seriously
and without any drolling in the least. And therefore if he finds any Ridiculing
in the Arguments, Mean Reflections or Trivial Jestings in the urging them, I
can only tell him, that the Copy must be like the Original; and that he that
undertakes to show, how Protestants Ridicule the Church of Rome, does not Jest,
when he does it in something that looks Ridiculous. And if he is sensible that
this way of handling Controversies, does rather exasperate, than heal our
Divisions, I am sincerely of his mind. But then think, that for the preventing
it, he ought rather spend his Zeal upon such of his Brethren, who by thus
Ridiculing play the Controvertists in good earnest, with their Bibles in hand;
than upon Adversaries, who only detect the Sophistry, and by Emblem show how
it is done.

If he has therefore so much esteem for the Salvation of Men's Souls, and the
Truth of Religion, as he pretends, let him show himself so in a most Christian
Action. Let him but turn to such of his own Communion, who have given this bad
Example, and win so far upon them, as Publicly to make Restitution to such
Innocent Persons, of the Credit and Good Name, which They have Publicly helped
to take away: To remove that Uncharitable Opinion, they have Imprinted in the
very Souls of their Hearers, against their Neihgbors, by vain Rumors, and
groundless Surmises; let him prevail upon them never more to Preach to Peoples
Passion, instead of their Reason: never more to inflame the multitude by
Preaching to them Dreams and Visions; nor to advance every un-soul'd Informer
to the Authority of an Evangelist. Let him see, that they play not with their
Neighbors Reputation, and Religion, and run them both down with idle Stories,
such as are Authentic enough for a Plot-Catechism, but not for a Pulpit. Let
him endeavor that their Arguments and Methods for the defeating of Popery, be
not such as any Jew may take up to strike a^ Christianity, and every Atheist to
make a sham of all Religion. Let him advise them with a late Preacher, That
their Zeal against Popery betray them not into some of the worst Principles,
that are charged upon that Church. Crisp. ^isit. Ser. p. 23.
That while they are Zealous for their Church, They continu^ Loyal to their
King. That whilst they Preach up the principles and Loyalty of their Church,
they have a care of proving themselves no Members of it, by their instilling
Suspicions and Jealousies; by their telling their Flock of a Cloud hanging over
their Heads, and at the same ti^^ Prognosticating its Dissipation. Let him
employ his best endeavors o^ this side a while, to redress these evils; and I
dare engage, (notwithstanding) all the complaints he has against his
Adversaries) The Nation will enjoy more Peace, His Church will have less
Divisions, and the King better Subjects.

FINIS.

