PRINCIPLES AND RULES OF THE GOSPEL, OFFERED For the Help of all who desire to
live Disciples of Jesus Christ.

Printed in the Year 1700.

THE PREFACE.
I Offer not the following Collection, as any thing new; it has a much better
commendation from the Prinpal Contents, which being a part of the Sacred Text,
stands in need of no other Title, from which to raise its value. It is the word
of God; that is enough. And as far as it contains this. I can boldly recommend
it, I press, I importune all, who have a true Faith in Christ, to the Reading
and Study of it; because it is that, which the Spirit of God speaks to Man, and
Man can have no hopes of Life Eternal, but by hearing and following this Word
of Life. But are not all provided with this, in a more Authentic Form in their
Bibles, which they have by them? It is true; but while all are thus provided,
and generally well-read in this Sacred volume; yet when I look upon the Method
of the Christian World, and consider the common Practice of Believers, I see
such a Universal Departing from what the Word of God teaches, that I cannot but
fear, they either are not serious in what they profess, or do not take it for
their Rule, or observe not what it enjoins, or at least do not remember what
belongs to them.

This fear (which I could wish, it were not so reasonable as it seems to me)
has prevailed on me to lay this short Collection before them, wherein I not
only put them in mind of the Gospel being their Rule, and of the necessity of
observing it; but likewise, by reducing the Texts under particular Heads, have
provided against all the Objections of Giddy Vnthinking Tempers, of Sloth and
Ill Memory, in the opportunity of seeing at one glance, the Principal
Directions which the Gospel gives them, according to their several Duties and
different Circumstances of Life. And though something of this has been already
done by another hand; yet observing still such a general corruption among
Christians, that they as boldly live on in the practice of what the Gospel
condemns, as if they knew of no such Rule, I cannot but think there is Reason
enough for this Repetition, in again laying their Rule before them, and putting
them in mind of the necessity of their making it a Practical Rule to them.

It is a revealed Truth, That there is no Salvation but through Christ; and it is
another Truth upon the same Foundation, That there can be no Hope through Christ,
but by keeping his Words and observing his Law. His Words and his Law are the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; the Gospel then must be the Rule to all those who hope
in Christ; and such as follow it not, observe not the condition he has proposed
for having a part in his Promises. Is this true? Then what an unhappy World,
what a wretched Age are we in, where the Gospel is so far from being the Rule,
even to those that believe it; that it is as generally transgressed or
neglected, as if there was no dependence on it: Where what it strictly
commands, is no more regarded, and what it condemns, no more avoided, than if
its Doctrine was fabulous, its Heaven was a Fiction, and its Hell no more than
a Dream? Is not this true in all the ways of Pride, Intemperance, Prodigality,
Covetousness, Love of the World and our selves? Is not this true in all kinds
of Frauds, Overreaching, Injustice, Animosities, Detraction, Dissension,
Malice? etc. Is not this too generally true in all that belongs to Eating,
Drinking, Clothing and Conversing? Have not all, in these Particulars,
departed from their Rule? Are not these Evils as industriously promoted and
encouraged among Christians, as by any unbelieving Nation whatever? What People
in the World are more Vain, Proud, Fraudulent, Malicious, and greater Lovers of
themselves than they? Where does it appear, that Humility, Charity, Meekness,
Self-denial, Moderation and Forsaking the World, are the Christian Law, and the
conditions for obtaining everlasting Hapiness? Who can say in these and
infinite other Points, that Christian Practice has any regard to the Gospel?
And yet at the same time our common Profession is, That the Gospel is our Rule,
it teaches the way of Life, and we can have no hopes of Life, but by doing what
it teaches.

And have not Christians then great reason, with their most serious
application, to study this Rule, and see what it recommends as necessary, and
what it disapproves, that so they may no longer be false to their Profession,
in departing from the Gospel, which they acknowledge to be the Guide to Bliss;
that they may walk in all the ways of the Lord, keep his Ordinances and observe
his Statutes, that they may have no confidence or peace, but in such Practices
only as are approved by the Word, and therefore most agreeable to the Will of
God? This is certainly, as a general* so the greatest interest of all, and
ought therefore to be their principal business. For clearness and expedition I
offer this summary of Gospel Rules; which being ranked under several Heads, may
be easily consulted by all Capacities, and will possitively declare to them,
what is the Will of God, and in all circumstances of Life discover how far the
Gospel approves or disapproves. This can be the only sure way of standing
against ill Customs, and not being carried away by the authority and number of
offenders, nor letting the World take place, where God only ought to be heard.
If there appears any thing difficult in the following Rules, I am not to answer
for that; I propose the Gospel, as I find it; and having put all Christians in
mind, that this is the Rule which they profess, I here with all Charity conjure
them not to despise it, but to take their Directions from thence of all that is
Lawful, Just, Holy, and Well-pleasing to God; for if the Gospel be Life to
those, that follow it, it must be their Condemnation, who observe it not.

PRINCIPLES AND RULES OF THE GOSPEL.
CHAP. I. Of the Christian's Rule.
Q. WHAT is a Christian?

A. A Christian is one, that believes in Christ, and professes to live
according to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Q. What then is the general Duty of a Christian?

A. To do what he professes; that is, to consider in every thing that the
Gospel is his Rule; to examine diligently, what it teaches, and make it the
general Endeavor of his whole Life, to do in all things, as this directs.

Q. Is this a strict Obligation upon all, or may it be omitted without a Fault?

A. It is such an Obligation, that it cannot be omitted wilfully, without Sin;
and to live in the general Neglect of it, is to be out of the way of Salvation.

Q. Why so?

A. Because the Gospel is the new Law, which Christ has left for all to keep,
that believe in him; and to neglect this, is to neglect Christ; to despise it,
is to despise him.

Q. And is there not Salvation for such, as do thus?

A. They are certainly out of the way of Salvation.

Q. How so?

A. Because Christ is the only Mediator of the new Testament, through whom alone
we can hope for Mercy; and how then can they be in the way of Salvation, who
live in the Neglect and Contempt of him? 2dly, Christ is the Light of the
World, and by his Gospel he communicates his Light to Men; they then, who
neglect and despise this Light, walk in Darkness, and this Darkness cannot lead
to Life everlasting. 3dly, Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life; and in
his Gospel is manifested this Way, this Truth and this Life; they then, who
neglect and despise the Doctrine of the Gospel, cannot be in the way; they
follow a Lie, instead of Truth, and must meet with Death, instead of Life.
4thly, It is by the Spirit of Christ every one must live, that belongs to
Christ, and expects everlasting Happiness; and without this Spirit, all Hopes
are vain; If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.
9. He that says, he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he
walked, 1 John 2. 6. Now if this Spirit of Christ be necessary; how can they be
supposed to have it, who walk not by the Gospel, in which this Spirit is
taught; but by despising or neglecting it, give Demonstration of the Spirit of
Christ being not in them?

Q. What does this prove?

A. It proves, that no Salvation can be expected, but through Christ; that none
can have a part in Christ, but such only, as observe his Law; that his Law
being delivered in the Gospel, there can be no Salvation, but for those, who
sincerely make it their Endeavor to live, as Christ has prescribed in the
Gospel.

Q. Then the Gospel must be observed; but what is it to observe or follow the
Gospel?

A. It is to make the Gospel our Rule, for discerning the Will of God, and
knowing what is pleasing or displeasing to him. It is to take Direction from
that, What we are to desire, and what to fear; what we are to value, and what
to despise. It is to consult that, in all we propose or do. It is to take from
thence the Determination, of Right and Wrong; of what we are carefully to
perform, or with Solicitude to avoid.

Q. Then they, who do not thus, do not follow the Gospel?

A. No, they do not: They may have a Faith in what the Gospel teaches; but if
they do not the Works of the Gospel, their Faith is dead, Jam. 2. 26. It is
such Faith as is in Hell, and even the Devils have, Ib. v. 19. These may know
the Will of God; but they do it not; these may honor God with their Lips; but
their Heart is far from him: And what will this avail; or how is this following
the Gospel, when the Gospel teaches, That the Servant who knows his Lord's
Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes, Luke 12. 47. And not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he, that does the Will of my Father, who is in Heaven, Mat. 7. 21?

Q. Then there is to be no Confidence of Salvation, upon a Faith in Christ
only, or in being a Member of his Church?

A. Faith is necessary to Salvation; for without Faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11. 6. But a Faith in what God teaches, without doing the Will
of God, can never bring any to the Possession of God. Bliss is promised to such
only, as Hear the Word of God, and keep it, Luke 11. 28. It is not enough
therefore to be called by Faith; for many are called, but few chosen, Matthew.
20. 16. It is not enough to be planted in Christ's Vineyard: For every Tree,
that brings not forth good Fruit, is cut down, and cast into the Fire, Mat. 7.
19.

Q. Then you think, many of those, who have a Faith in Christ, and believe all
that he teaches, are lost eternally?

A. As many of these, as do not the Will of God, in following the Gospel, but
depart from it, and live in a general Disobedience to his Law. Such as these
must expect no Favor in Consideration of their Faith; but rather a deeper
Damnation for their Ingratitude and Abuse of God's Blessings, for knowing
(through Mercy) the Will of God, and not doing it.

Q. What now is this Chapter in short?

A. That the only Means of Salvation, is to Believe and Do, as Christ teaches
in his holy Gospel. All his Disciples are to hear him, Ipsum audite, Hear ye
him; as the Voice from Heaven published it on the Mount, Mat. 17. 5. All of his
Flock hear his Voice; My sheep hear my Voice, and follow me, Jo. 10. 27. As
many, as do thus, are in the way to Salvation, having Christ their Teacher, and
the Shepherd of their Souls. And they, who do not thus, cannot have their hopes
in him.

CHAP. II. Of our own Inclinations.
Q. MAY we not follow our own Inclinations?

A. Christ is to be the Christian's Rule; if then our Inclinations are
according to what Christ teaches, we may safely follow them; but if they are
contrary to what Christ teaches, then to follow them, is to forsake our Rule,
who is Christ.

Q. And what are our natural Inclinations?

A. They arise from a corrupt Nature, and therefore are generally corrupt; they
are the Effect of Sin, and therefore are generally either sinful, or leading to
Sin.

Q. Then a Christian is not to follow them?

A. No; he is to be so far from following, that it must be his daily Care to
stand against them.

Q. Why so?

A. Because being corrupt and sinful, if they are not resisted, they draw
Persons from Christ, and that is to forsake their Rule.

Q. Is it the evident Duty of a Christian to stand against these Inclinations?

A. It is; for so Christ himself teaches, in requiring Self-denial, as a
necessary Condition for becoming his Disciple: If any Man will come after me,
let him deny himself, Luke 9. 23.

Q. Is not this pressed more particularly in holy Scripture?

A. Yes; by St. Paul, who stiling these Inclinations, the Old Man,
Concupiscence, the Carnal Man, the Desires of the Flesh, etc. positively
declares the necessity of resisting them, and that, otherwise, it is not
possible to please God.

Q. As where?

A. Put off the old man, which is corrupt, Ephesians. 4. 22. We are debtors, not to
the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall
die: But if you, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall
live, Romans 8. 12, 13. To be carnally minded is Death; because the carnal Man is
Enmity against God, ib. v. 6, 7. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary to one another. -- They that
are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.
17, 24. With the mind, I my self serve the Law of God; but with the Flesh, the
Law of Sin. But I keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection, lest that
by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway,
1 Cor. 9. 27.

Q. What does all this show?

A. It shows, that through the Corruption of our Nature, we have many
Inclinations, which are contrary to the Law of God; that if we follow them,
they lead to Death; that therefore every one, who professes himself a Follower
of Christ and his Gospel, is absolutely obliged to stand against them; to
mortify, crucify, and bring them into Subjection; for that otherwise he
cannot be a Disciple of Christ. Christians then, whose Profession it is, to
make Christ their Rule, must not indulge their natural Inclinations, much less,
make them their Rule.

CHAP III. Of the World.
Q. MAY it be allowed a Christian to follow the World?

A. The Ways of the World are so generally contrary to the Gospel, that a
Christian must forget his Profession, if he follows the World; if taking that
for his Rule, he walks in the Ways of the World.

Q. What do you mean here by the World?

A. I mean the Lovers of the World, and their general Practice of seeking to
please themselves and the World.

Q. Why does this lie under such an ill name with you?

A. Because in this Practice there is no regard had to the Gospel; but the
great business is to comply with that Corruption, which Man brings with him
into the World; it is all in Favor of Vanity, Ambition, Sloth, Idleness,
Intemperance, Sensuality, Concupiscence, Covetousness, Envy, Passion, Revenge,
etc. And these being the very Evils, which the Christian is strictly obliged,
by the Gospel, to overcome, how can the World have a better Name with him,
which by many arguments recommends these, as the only things, that are to be
valued, as the only Satisfactions and Comforts of Human Life.

Q. If this be so, it must be confessed, that it is not a Christian's Part to
Follow the World. But what if some are not willing to believe so ill of the
World, as this?

A. If they are not willing to believe it; let them but open their Eyes, and
they cannot help seeing it. The World indeed endeavors to conceal some
scandalous Extravagancies; but as for all these, it Publicly owns them.

Q. But the Gospel being the Christian's Rule, would it not make a more
convincing Impression, if this would give him the Character of the World? And
then too, those would be left without excuse, whose Passion makes them
unwilling to believe it.

A. Nothing is more fully delivered in Scripture than this. Hear what Christ's
says of the World; Me it hates, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are evil, Joh. 7. 7. The Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, Jo. 14. 17. I have
manifested thy Name unto the Men, which thou gave me out of the World. -- I
pray not for the World, but for them, which thou have given me, for they are
thine, Joh. 17. 6, 9. I have given them (the Apostles) thy word; and the World
has hated them, because they are not of the World, even as I am not of the
World, Ib. v. 14. If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me, before it
hated you. If ye were of the World, the World would love his own: But because
ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the
World hates you, Joh. 15. 18, 19. Here you see Christ declares the works of
the World to be evil; that the World knows not the Spirit of Truth: That those,
whom Christ has chosen, are not the World; that He himself is not of the World;
that the World hates both them and him; and is not this enough to convince any
one, who believes in Jesus Christ, that the World is not to be followed; since
he here shows, that such as God has chosen, and those who are of the World, are
like Two extremes contrary to one another; so that they, who are of the One, do
not belong to the Other?

Q. Does the Scripture speak farther upon this Subject.

A. Yes, the Apostles preach the same Doctrine with their Master: Hear what they
say: Be not conformed to this World; but be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind, Romans 12. 2. Christ, who gave himself for our Sins, that he might
deliver us from this present Evil world, according to the Will of God, Gal. 1.
4. Know ye not, that the friendship of the World is enmity with God? Whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God, Jam. 4. 4. The
whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. Love not the World, neither the
things, that are in the World. If any man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him. For all that is in the World, the lust of the Flesh, and
the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of
the World, 1 Jo. 2. 15, 16. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World, 1
Jo. 5. 4.

Q. Add no more; for this must be owned Evident from Scripture, that the World
is contrary to God, and that whoever loves the World and its ways, in this
gives demonstration of the Love of God being not in him. But tell me now; how
must all this be applied, that has been hitherto said in this and the foregoing
Chapters?

CHAP. IV. Application of the Foregoing Chapters.
A. THE Application of what has been hitherto said, is very Plain. For if it be
the Essential or Necessary part of a Christian, to Believe in and Follow
Christ; then he must not Follow that which is contrary to Christ. And it being
evident from the Gospel it self, that both our Natural Inclinations and the
World are contrary to Christ; hence it becomes certain, that whoever designs in
earnest to be a Christian, as he Professes, must neither follow his own Natural
Inclinations, nor the World; and whoever follows them, is so far false to his
Profession.

Q. I see the necessity of owning this; but what a strange Christian World then
is ours, which Professing Christ and a zeal for the Truth of his Gospel, so as
even to devour one another, upon the account of its Speculative Doctrines; do
yet all so generally agree in forsaking the Practice of it, as if they had no
Faith in Christ or his Gospel.

A. There is too much ground for your surprise: For certainly, whoever looks
upon the general Practice of Christians, will have much ado to distinguish them
from Heathens; since they are as strongly bent upon following their own
Inclinations and the World, as if they had no caution against them, nor any Law
to forbid them.

Q. Instead of enlarging Complaints, rather tell me, what a Christian is to do,
that desires in earnest to satisfy the Duties of his Profession, and have no
part in this general Corruption?

A. I have already told you: He must follow the Gospel, which is the Rule,
Christ has given him; he must study what the Spirit of the Gospel is, and with
all solicitude endeavor to live according to this Spirit. Whatever is there
commanded, he must observe: Whatever is there forbid, he must avoid: Whatever
is there approved, he must approve: Whatever is there declared the Character of
things, whether as Good or Evil, as Honorable or Dishonorable, as Edifying or
Scandalous, as Profitable or Dangerous, accordingly he must esteem them, and
hence taking the true Measures of all things, by these Measures he must govern
his Life.

Q. But if Inclination or the World put in their Plea, and give very different
notions of things, from what is delivered in the Gospel?

A. As often as they do so, they are not to be Regarded, and much less
Followed. The Christian is to be True to his Profession; and all such
Suggestions are to be looked upon as Trials of his Fidelity, and as
Temptations, which he is bound to resist. And this he must do with resolution.

Q. But if Custom and Example be pleaded?

A. If they be; What Authority can there be in these against the manifest Will
of God? These cannot make void what God has said, or evacuate his Law. Let the
Gospel then be consulted, and as this determines, so it must stand good,
whatever it be, that appears against it. If we could suppose it to be an Angel
from Heaven, yet in this case, he is not to be regarded; how much less
therefore the Custom or Example of Weak and Sinful Men?

Q. If Company undertakes to Persuade?

A. Whatever Power there be in this; yet no Christian can think it reasonable,
to hearken to Man, rather than God. In a Case, where God has spoke, there can
be no Appeal to Man. All such Persuasions therefore, as far as they are
disagreeable to the Gospel, are to be looked upon as Snares, such as the
Christian is bound with all Diligence to avoid.

Q. Then you will allow of nothing to prevail in this Case?

A. No, of nothing: There is no Authority here in Number; the Reputation of
Learning, Exemplarity or Piety can authorize nothing, which the Gospel condemns
or reproves. All must stand, as it is there delivered, and to set up for other
Notions, is to attempt against God.

Q. And now for the Practice of this Doctrine, how must this be?

A. For Practice, a Christian must seriously examine all the General Concerns of
Human Life, and having discovered how far the Gospel encourages or allows in
each, and how far it disapproves, he must take this for his Standard, and
endeavor to come as near it, as he can, without taking notice of whatever is
pleaded by the World or Inclination to the contrary. A Life thus regulated will
certainly be a Christian Life, such as I heartily recommend, and will certainly
at our Dying hour be the greatest of all Comforts. But now to offer some help
in it, I must make an Essay of bringing all things to the Balance, and seeing
how they weigh by the Weights of the Sanctuary; so to discover, how far the
Christian walks by this Rule, and in what Particulars departs from it.

CHAP. V. Of Clothes.
Q. WHAT direction does the Gospel (the Christian's Rule) give concerning
Clothing?

A. Several Particulars are there mentioned, which give sufficient light in
this Point, for all such, as truly desire to walk by its Spirit.

Q. What are these?

A. First, in the Commendation of S. John Baptist, who being set above all,
that are born of Women, has this particularly remarked of him, That he had his
raiment of camels hair, and a leathern Girdle about his loins, Mat. 3. 4. And
this very thing is taken notice of by Christ himself, who in his Praises of him
to the multitude, observes, that he was not clothed in soft raiment, Mat. 11.
8.

2dly, In the Particular of the Disorders found in the Rich Glutton, who was
tormented in Hell: Amongst which this is distinctly observed; That he was
clothed in Purple and Fine linen, Luke 16. 19.

3dly, In S. Paul's Epistle: Where he gives in this Advice; We brought nothing
with us into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out: Having
food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8. I will therefore
-- that women adorn themselves in Modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and
sobriety: Not with broider'd hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly Array; but
(which becomes women professing Godliness) with good works, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.

4thly, In the charge given by S. Peter to Wives; Whose adorning, says he, let
it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of Gold,
or of putting on of Apparel: but let it the hidden man of the heart, in that,
which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet.
3. 3, 4.

Here you see, in a few words, what the Gospel approves, and what it
disapproves in this Point; so that whatever constructions are put upon the
Words, yet still it is evident, what method they are to follow, who resolve,
that, not the World, but the Gospel shall be their Rule.

Q. This must be confessed even by the World and Vanity it self, though they
cannot follow it. But is there any thing more upon this Subject?

A. The same may be still farther pressed from other Heads; as,

First, Vanity, Pride, Ambition and Envy, are contrary to the Gospel; therefore
such Christians, as desire to live by the Gospel, must not permit these to have
any part in buying their Clothes, or putting them on; but, instead of
Following, must not Follow what these suggest; and such as do otherwise, have
not the Gospel for their Rule.

Secondly, All, that falls under the Heads of Excess, Immoderateness,
Prodigality or Wasting what should be the Provision of Family, is reproved by
the Gospel: Therefore all such expensive Clothing, as falls under any of these
Heads, is departing from the Spirit of the Gospel.

Thirdly, The Gospel prescribes seeking First the Kingdom of God, Redeeming the
time, Giving alms, not Seeking to please the World: Therefore all that must be
condemned as disagreeable to the Gospel, where the solicitude is greater for
complying with a vain World, or a vain Humor, than for seeking Heaven; where
the Time and Money, which are Blessings given for better uses, are wasted in
setting forth a rotten and sinful Carcass.

Lastly, Justice is absolutely required by the Gospel; therefore all that Care,
Solicitude and Expense, must be contrary to the Gospel, which is in the service
of Injustice. And is not all that so, which is applied to the Gratifying,
Flattering and Exalting the Body, which for its Unworthiness and manifold Sins
against God, deserves nothing but Contempt and Punishment?

Here now having Considered all, that belongs to Clothing, by the Gospel, you
see, what is approved, and what is disapproved. Clothing for necessity is
approved; coarse Apparel is commended in the Baptist; a Modest Dress is
recommended to Women, accompanied with Shamefacedness, Sobriety, and a Meek
Spirit: Outward Adorning with Gold, Pearls or Costly Apparel is reproved;
Inward Adorning with Virtue is required. All that is suggested, in Dressing, by
Vanity, Pride, Envy, or for pleasing the World, is forbid. All that is
Immoderate, whether as to the Expense of Time or Money, is not allowed. In
this, it is very easy to discern, what is the Spirit of the Gospel: And if it
be discerned, then all those, who desire in Truth to be the Followers of
Christ, know what they are to do. They must approve only that, which their Rule
approves; and as for all, whatever Inclination or the World recommends beyond
that, they must shut their hearts against it, and say; the Gospel is our Rule,
and this only we must follow.

CHAP. VI. Of Eating and Drinking.
Q. WHAT direction does the Gospel give as to Eating and Drinking?

A. There is enough mentioned, to serve for a Christian's Rule.

First, Gluttony and Drunkenness are positively Forbid; Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, Luke 21. 34. Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in Rioting
and Drunkenness, Romans 13. 13. Woe unto you, that are full; for ye shall hunger,
Luke 6. 25. Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. The
Works of the Flesh are manifest -- Drunkenness -- Revellings -- of the which I
tell you, that they, which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
God, Gal. 5. 19, 21. Be not Drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled
with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18.

Secondly, It is particularly observed in the Rich Glutton, that he Fared
sumptuously every day, Luke 16. 19. It is a good thing, that the heart be
established with Grace, not with Meats, which have not profitted them, that
have been occupied therein, Heb. 13. 9. The Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink; but righteousness and peace, Romans 14. 17. Many walk, of whom I have told
you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the
Cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose
Glory is their Shame, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

Thirdly, Temperance and Sobriety are recommended; Teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. Wherefore gird up your loins, be sober, and
hope to the end, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Be sober, be vigilant, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Let your
Moderation be known to all men, Phil. 4. 5. He shall be great in the sight of
the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink, Luke 1. 15. His Meat
was Locusts and wild Honey, Mat. 3. 4. Let us not sleep, as do others; but let
us watch, and be sober. Let us, who are of the day, be sober, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6, 8.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31. Having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6. 8.

Fourthly, Fasting is commanded: Jesus Fasted Forty Days and Forty Nights, Mat.
4. 2. Anna departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and
Prayer, Night and Day, Luke 2. 37. This kind (of Devil) can come forth by
nothing but by Prayer and Fasting, Mar. 19. 29. The Days will come, when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those
Days, Luke ^. 35. They administered to the Lord, and fasted. And when they had
fasted, and prayed, and laid their Hands on them, they sent them away, Acts 13.
2, 3. When they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had prayed with
fasting, they commended them to the Lord, Act. 14. 23.

In this may be discerned the Spirit of the Gospel in this Point; that while it
approves Eating and Drinking for the Support of Nature, it requires, that this
be done Soberly, and with Moderation, and to the Glory of God. It commends
Abstinence and Fasting. It reproves Faring Sumptuously. It condemns the
Solicitude of pleasing the Appetite, and making the Belly a God. It declares
Surfeiting, Rioting, Revelling and Drunkenness, to be such Crimes, that their
Guilt excludes from Heaven.

If these be the Dictates of the Christian's Rule, then it is very easy to
observe, how far the Gospel allows, as to Eating and Drinking, and how far it
disapproves. And hence it is obvious, what they are to do, who follow the
Gospel. They are to think nothing allowable, but as it is here approved; and
must not, by deceitful Constructions, pretend to justify that, which is here
condemned. Especially where the Sentence is so positive, and the Guilt (...)
shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 13, 14. Put off concerning the former Conversation, the old Man,
which is corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. I beseech you,
as Strangers and Pilgrims; abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against the
Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his Life, shall lose
it; and whosoever will lose his Life, for my sake, shall find it. For what is a
Man profitted, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? Or what
shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? Mat. 16. 24, 25, 26. He that loves
his Life, shall lose it: and he, that hates his Life in this World, shall keep
it unto Life eternal. If any Man serve me, let him follow me, Jo. 12. 25, 26.

By this shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another, Jo. 13. 35. I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them, that curse
you, do good to them, that hate you, and pray for them, which despitely use
you, and persecute you, Mat. 5. 44. Love not the world, neither the things,
that are in the world, 1 Jo. 2. 15. Put on (as the elect of God holy and
beloved) Bowels of mercies, Kindnesses, Humbleness of mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering; Forbearing one another, and Forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And
above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness; and let the
peace of God rule in your hearts: And be ye thankful. Let the Word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; and whatever ye do in word or deed, do all
in the name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. What things were
gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ: Yea doubtless, and I do count all
things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord:
For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung,
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that, which is through the Faith of Christ, the
righteousness, which is of God by Faith; that I may know him, and the power of
his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable
unto his death, Phil. 3. 7. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall tribulation or distress --? I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
-- nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 35, 38. For me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain, Phil. 1. 21. I have learned, in whatever state I am,
therewith to be content, Phil. 4. 11. Seek those things, which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above,
not on things on the earth: For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.

These are some, amongst infinite other Directions, which the Gospel gives for
regulating of the Inward Man. Were they prescribed to the Apostles only, or to
some Particular Persons or States, there might be a just excuse for such as
observe them not; but being writ to the Faithful of all States and Conditions,
they are to be observed by all, that believe in Christ: And in this may
Christians make the truest Judgment of the state of their Souls. For if this be
prescribed to all, all are bound to labor, in bringing their Souls to this
happy disposition; and they, who are not solicitous in this, whatever their
Faith be, have not the Spirit of a true Disciple.

CHAP. IX. Of loving our Neighbor.
Q. WHAT directions does the Gospel give, as to the Love of our Neighbor?

A. Such as are very particular and strict in the Charge. Hear some of them.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart -- Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 22. 37, 39, 40. A new Commandment, I give unto you, That ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall
all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another, Jo. 13.
34, 35. These things I command you, that ye love one another, Jo. 15. 17. This
is my commandment; that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Ye are my
Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, Jo. 15. 12, 14. Let love be without
dissimulation. Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another, Romans 12. 9, 10. By love serve one another; for
all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed, that ye
be not consumed one of another, Gal. 5. 13, 14, 15. Owe no man any thing, but
to love one another: For he that loves another has fulfilled the Law. For
this, thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if there be
any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his Neighbor;
therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. As touching
brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye your selves are
taught of God, to love one another. And indeed ye do it toward all the
brethren, which are in Macedonia: But we beseech you, brethren, that ye
increase more and more; and that ye study to be quiet, 1 These. 4. 9, 10, 11.
Above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: For Charity shall
cover the multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. He that loves his brother, abides
in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. But he that
hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, 1 Jo. 2. 10.
Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he, that loves not
his brother, 1 Jo. 3. 10. We know, that we have passed from death unto life,
because we love the brethren; he that loves not his brother abides in death.
Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer; and ye know, that no murderer
has eternal life abiding in him, 1 Jo. 3. 14, 15. If we love one another, God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. If a man say, I love God, and
hates his brother, he is a liar. This Commandment have we from him, that he,
who loves God, love his brother also, 1 Jo. 4. 12, 20, 21. Though I have the
gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I
have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my
Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profitteth me nothing. Charity
suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in
the truth, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3, 4, etc.

Thus the Christian's Rule directs as to this Point. Whoever expects Salvation
through Christ, must hear his Word, and make it his daily business to observe it.
Christ himself has said it: Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command
you, Jo. 15. 14.

CHAP. X. Of loving our Enemies.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to the love of our Enemies?

A. It speaks positively, in this Point.

I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them, that curse you, do good to
them, that hate you, and pray for them, which despitefully use you, and
persecute you: That ye may be the Children of your Father, which is in Heaven;
for he makes the Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and sends Rain on
the Just, and on the Unjust. For if ye love them, which love you, what reward
have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your Brethren
only, what do you more than others? Do not even the Publicaus so? Be ye
therefore Perfect, even as your Father, which is in Heaven, is Perfect, Mat. 5.
44, etc. I say unto you, which hear, love your Enemies, do good to them, which
hate you: Bless them, that curse you, and pray for them, which despitefully use
you. And unto him, that smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the other;
and him that takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also. As you
would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. For if ye love
them, which love you, what thank have ye? For Sinners also love those, that
love them. And if ye do good to them, which do good to you, what thank have ye?
For Sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them, of whom ye hope to
receive, what thank have ye? For Sinners lend to Sinners, to receive as much
again. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Children of the
Highest; for he is kind unto the Unthankful, and to the Evil. Be ye therefore
Merciful, as your Father also is Merciful, Luke 6. 27, 28, etc. Then said
Jesus, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34.
Stephen kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice; Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge, Act. 7. 60. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather
give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it,
says the Lord. Therefore if thine Enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give
him drink: For in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12. 19, 20, 21. Bless them,
which persecute you; bless, and curse not. Recompense no Man evil for evil,
Romans 12. 14, 17. See that none render evil for evil unto any man, but ever
follow that, which is good, both among your selves, and to all men, 1 These. 5.
15. Be Pitiful, be Courteous; not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing; but contrariwise, blessing; knowing, that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.

Here is the Rule, and it must be followed: To dispense with it, is to break
it; to hearken to Inclination, is to forsake it. The Difficulty of its Practice
must be owned, and this more particularly in some Tempers; but Difficulties
must not carry us against the Commands of God; in our undertaking to serve him,
there was no Proviso made for our Ease or Inclination; but our Profession was
Absolute; how then can we pretend to follow Nature, when God's Will is known to
us? If the Lord be our God, it is mockery, if we do not follow him.

CHAP. XI. Of Forgiving Injuries.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to Forgiving Injuries?

A. It speaks plainly to the Point: Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
Debtors, Mat. 6. 12. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my
Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times? Jesus said unto
him; I say not unto thee, until seven times: But until seventy times seven,
Mat. 18. 21, 22. Then his Lord said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave
thee all that debt, because thou desired'st me: Should not thou also have
had compassion on thy Fellow Servants, even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord
was wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters, till he should pay all that was
due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye,
from your hearts, forgive not every one his brother their trespasses, Mat. 18.
32, etc. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent,
forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him;
Luke 17. 3, 4. Let all Bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you, with all malice: And be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has
forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Colos.
3. 12, 13. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6. 14. 15. And when ye stand praying,
Forgive, if ye have ought against any; that your Father also, which is in
heaven, may forgive you your trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither will
your Father, which is in heaven, forgive your trespasses Mar. 11. 25, 26.
Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: -- for with the same measure, that ye mete
withal, it shall be measured to you again, Luke 6. 37. He shall have Judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. Charity suffers long,
-- is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, -- bears all things, -- endures
all things, 1 Cor. 13. 4, etc.

Thus says the Christian's Rule, and there are no Promises, but what requires
the Observance of it. Let then all degrees of Malice, Revenge, Hatred,
Ill Will, Animosities, Resentments, Provocations, Grudgings, Want of Neighborly
Correspondence, with all the train of such like Interior Disorders, be examined
by the Gospel; and, upon the evidence of their being not allowed upon any
account, but absolutely condemned, the Christian must conclude, that either he
must make this his Rule, or else have no part in the Promises of the Gospel.
What then, O God, must I fear of my self, who am so easy in admitting, and so
careless in overcoming, what is thus contrary to my Profession! I profess the
Gospel, but follow Inclination; and is this to be a Christian?

CHAP. XII. Of making and keeping Peace.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to avoiding Contention and keeping
Peace?

A. It speaks so plain in this Point, that no Christian can be ignorant of his
Obligation.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Children of God,
Mat. 5. 9. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest, that thy
Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy Gift,
Mat. 5. 23, 24. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another. By
this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another, Jo. 13. 34, 35. Have salt in your selves, and have Peace one with
another, Mar. 9. 50. Be of the same mind one toward another. If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved,
avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, Romans 12. 16, 18. I beseech
to walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith ye are called: With all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to
keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3. For God is
not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, 1 Cor. 14. 33. He that will love
life and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, -- let him seek
Peace, and ensue it: Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another;
love, as Brethren, be Pitiful, be Courteous; not rendering Evil for Evil, or
Railing for Railing, but contrariwise, Blessing, knowing, that ye are thereunto
called, that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 8, 9. Follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: Looking
diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of God; lest any root of bitterness
springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb. 12. 14, 15. Let us
walk honestly as in the day, -- not in strife and envying; but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. 13. Let nothing be done through strife. -- Do all
things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, Phil.
2. 3, 14. By love serve one another; for all the Law is fulfilled in one word,
even in this; Thou shall thy Neighbor, as thy self: But if ye bite and devour
one another, take heed, that ye be not consumed one of another. The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit: Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are
these; -- Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders -- and such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have
also told you in time past, that they, which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. But the Fruit of the Spirit, is, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness: -- against such there is no
Law. And they, that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh. -- Let us not be
desirous of Vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another, Gal. 5. 13,
etc. Bear ye one another's Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.
2. If ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly,
Sensual, Devilish: For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and
every evil Work. But the Wisdom, that is from above, is first, Pure, then
Peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be Entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits,
without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy: And the Fruit of Righteousness is
sown in Peace of them, that make Peace, Jam. 3. 14, etc. Be y^ also patient,
stablish your Hearts; -- Grudge not one against another, Brethren, lest ye be
condemned, Jam. 5. 8, 9. The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, For he, that in these
things, serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men. Let us
therefore follow after the things, which make for Peace, and things, wherewith
one may edify another, Romans 14. 17, etc. Wherefore laying aside all Malice,
and all Guile, and Hypocrisies, and Envies, and all evil Speakings; as newborn
Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 1. If any Man seem to be
contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Thus the Rule, and this, Christians say, they follow; and if so, then who
would not expect to find Christians all living in a free Correspondence of
Charity and Peace, exempt from the Confusions of Passion, Provocation,
Contention and Revenge; all mutually bearing with one another, and forgiving
one another, according to the Example Christ has given them, and for the
securing their Eternal Peace? Thus certainly it ought to be; and those, who
live not according to this Method, it is certain, they transgress their Rule.
See then what thy Practice is, and learn to follow Christ. Remember, that the
Gospel forbids all Contentions, Quarrelling, Uncharitable Debates, Reproaching,
Grudging, and all the other Effects of Passion, Malice, Ill Will, or Dislike:
It commands thee to study Peace, and keep it with all Men, as much as is
possible; and that for this end, thou art to be Gentle, Patient, Compassionate,
forbearing all Provocations, and receiving all that are given thee, with
Mildness, without returning Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing; but
overcoming Evil with Good. Thus thou art commanded; labor daily to bring thy
self to this Temper of the Gospel, and then thou may hope for the Rewards of
the Gospel.

CHAP. XIII. Of Anger and Mildness.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to these Points?

A. These have been already mentioned in the foregoing Chapters. But hear again
how expressly they are spoke to.

I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a Cause,
shall be in danger of the Judgment: and whosoever shall say to his Brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the Council: But whosoever shall say, Thou Fool,
shall be in danger of Hellfire, Mat. 5. 22. Be ye angry, and sin not; let not
the Sun go down upon your Wrath, neither give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 26.
But now you also put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy
Communication, out of your Mouth: Lie not to one another; seeing that ye have
put off the Old Man with his Deeds, Col. 3. 8. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath,
and Anger, and Clamor, and evil Speaking, be put away from you, with all
Malice: And be ye kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. My beloved
Brethren, let every Man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to Wrath; for the
Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 19, 20. I say unto
you, that ye resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right
Cheek, turn to him the other also, Matthew. 5. 39. Beloved, avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto Wrath: For it is written, Vengeance is mine,
I will repay it, says the Lord. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil
with Good, Romans 12. 19, 21. See that none render Evil for Evil unto any Man;
but ever follow that, which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15. Be at Peace among your
selves, -- warn them, that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the
weak, be patient toward all Men, Ib. 14. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, -- Meekness; against such there is no Law,
Gal. 5. 22. I beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith ye
are called; with all Lowliness and Meekness, with Long-suffering, forbearing
one another in Love, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. Thou, O Man of God, flee these things, and
follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, 1 Timothy
6. 11. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth, Mat. 5. 5. Take
my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart; and ye
shall find rest unto your Souls: for my Yoke is easy, and my Burden light,
Mat. 11. 29, 30. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved)
Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering;
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any Man have a Quarrel
against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Col. 3. 12, 13. Put
them in mind -- to speak evil of no Man, to be no Brawler, but Gentle, showing
all Meekness unto all Men, Tit. 3. 2. And the Servant of the Lord must not
strive; but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach, patient, in Meekness
instructing those, that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 24.

Thus speaks the Rule, and by it are commended to us Gentleness, Meekness,
Moderation, Patience; and by the same are forbid all Passion, undue Anger,
Roughness, Quarrelling, Impatience with our Neighbor, etc. These are Evils; the
former are to be our Ornaments. What then must be judged of all such, as take
Exceptions at every accident, who easily Fret, fall into Passion, use
reproachful Language, will bear nothing, excuse nothing, but let every trifling
Occasion be enough to disturb their own Peace and their Neighbors? Do these
follow the Gospel? It is too evident, they do not, and therefore are under a
strict Obligation of daily laboring to bring themselves to a more Christian
Temper. If Nature be difficult, yet Grace is more powerful, and by this all
Difficulties may be overcome; and those, who strive not to gain this Victory,
are without Excuse.

CHAP. XIV. Of Humility and Pride.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to Humility and Pride?

A. It declares the great Value of the one, and the Mischiefs of the other; so
that whatever be the Judgment of the World, yet it is plain, what is the
Judgment of the Gospel; and there can be no Excuse for those, who do not follow
it.

Blessed are the Poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.
3. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in Heart;
and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. Whosoever shall humble
himself as this little Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 18. 4. They, which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise
Lordship over them; and their great Ones exercise Authority upon them: But so
it shall not be among you: But whosoever will be great among you, shall be your
Minister: And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be Servant of all.
For even the Son of Man came not to be minister'd unto, but to minister, and to
give his Life a Ransom for many, Mar. 10. 42, etc. All their Works they (the
Pharisees) do, for to be seen of Men: They make broad their Phylacteries, and
enlarge the Borders of their Garments; and love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts,
and the chief Seats in the Synagogues; and Greetings in the Markets; and to be
called of Men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your
Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Neither be ye called Masters; for
one is your Master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you, shall be
your Servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted, Mat. 23. 5, etc. He has regarded the
low Estate of his Handmaiden: for behold, from henceforth all Generations shall
call me blessed. -- He has scattered the Proud, in the Imagination of their
Hearts; he has put down the Mighty from their Seats, and exalted them of low
Degree, Luke 1. 48, 51. The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself; God,
I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers,
or even as this Publican: I fast twice in the Week, I give Tithes of all that I
possess. And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his
Eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a
Sinner. I tell you, This Man went down to his House justified, rather than the
other; for every one, that exalts himself, shall be abased; and he, that
humbles himself, shall be exalted, Luke 18. 11. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted to Heaven, shall be thrust down to Hell, Luke 10. 15. Be not high
minded, but fear: for if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed, lest
he also spare not thee, Romans 11. 20. Mind not high things, but condescend to
Men of low Estate: be not wise in your own Conceits, Romans 12. 16. That ye might
learn in us not to think of Men, above that, which is written, that no one of
you be puffed up for one against another. For who makes thee to differ from
another? And what have thou, that thou did not receive? Now, if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? -- We are
made a Spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men. We are Fools for
Christ's sake; but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye
are honorable, but we are despised: -- We are made as the Filth of the World,
and are the Offscouring of all things unto this Day, 1 Cor. 4. 6, etc. Let
nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory, but in Lowliness of Mind let each
esteem other better than themselves. -- Let this Mind be in you, which was also
in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God; but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form
of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men; and being found in fashion
as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name,
which is above every Name, Phil. 2. 3, 5, etc. Now, that he ascended, what is
it, but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the Earth? Ephesians. 4.
9. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) Bowels of Mercies,
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Col. 3. 12. Yea, all of
you be subject one to another, and be clothed with Humility: for God resists
the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. Humble your selves therefore under
the mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, Jam. 4.
10. In the last Days perilous times shall come; for Men shall be Lovers of
their own selves -- Boasters, Proud, -- Unthankful, -- Fierce, Despisers of
those, that are Good, -- Heady, High-minded, 2 Timothy 3. 1, etc. I beseech you to
walk worthy of the Vocation, wherewith ye are called: with all Lowliness and
Meekness, with Long-suffering, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. God has chosen the foolish things
of the World, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the
World, to confound the things, which are mighty; and base things of the World,
and things, which are despised, has God chosen -- that no Flesh should glory
in his Presence: -- He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
For not he, that commends himself, is approved, but whom the Lord commends,
2 Cor. 10. 18. Ye are they, which justify your selves before Men; but God
knows your Hearts: for that, which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is
Abomination in the Sight of God, Luke 16. 15. How can ye believe, which receive
Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor, that comes from God only? Joh.
5. 44. For they loved the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God, Jo. 12.
43. Let us not be desirous of vain Glory, provoking one another, envying one
another, Gal. 5. 26. Though I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
profitteth me nothing; -- Charity envieth not, Charity vaunteth not it self, is
not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, 1 Cor.
13. 3, etc.

Thus plainly speaks the Rule: And now, if upon a serious weighing of these
Particulars, it does appear, that a Universal Humility is most pressingly
recommended, and Pride is condemned in all its Branches; then it must be owned,
that in whatever way we seek Glory with Men, and desire to be raised in the
Opinion of the World; in whatever way we labor to magnify this unworthy Clay,
give our selves the Preference to others, and, in our Hearts, despise our
Neighbor; so often we forsake our Rule, and by a just Judgment upon Pride, are
rendering our selves eternally contemptible by the very ways, in which we unduly
seek Esteem.

If this be so, then, I think, Christians have Reason to consider, and reform
the general Method of their Lives. For, if looking upon themselves, they see
the great Business of their Thoughts, their Study, their Contrivance, their
Expenses, is in the Service of Pride; that in this they place their Happiness,
for this they deny themselves, suffer many Inconveniences, hazard their
Health, exhaust their Estates, etc. must not they, in this, see, they make
Idols of themselves, and for this self-worship, despise all the Instructions
Christ has given them, and forsake his Gospel? And can this way, this Martyrdom
of Self-love ever bring them to Heaven? What then do they do? Believe in Christ
and his Promises, and yet live in Contradiction to both! This is, in Fact, to
renounce both our Reason and Faith; Heaven can never be the Reward of such
insolent and wilful Madness: They must either follow the Ways of the Gospel, or
lay by the Hopes of its Promises. Christians are a People, that make Profession
of following the Law of Christ: And yet in this Point, all are striving to
outdo one another in departing from it; in forsaking the Ways of Humility, and
following those of Pride.

CHAP. XV. Of Detraction, Reviling, or Speaking Evil of our Neighbor.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to these Points?

A. They are all forbid: For since the Gospel commands us to love our Neighbors
as our selves, and to do to all Men, as we would, that Men should do to us; it
is evident, what Judgment we are to make of Detraction or speaking Evil of our
Neighbors, which is so contrary to these Two great Precepts of the new Law.
Detraction then is the Transgression of all, that it is so positively commanded
us in the Love of our Neighbor, abovementioned, c. 9. and is yet more expressly
forbid.

God gave them over to a reprobate Mind, to do those things, which are not
convenient; being filled with -- Maliciousness; full of Envy, -- Debate,
Deceit, Malignity; Whisperers, Backbiters, -- Despiteful, Proud, Boasters,
Inventers of evil things, -- Covenant-Breakers: -- Who knowing the Judgment of
God, (that they, which commit such things, are worthy of Death) not only do the
same, but have Pleasure in them, that do them, Romans 1. 28, etc. I fear, lest
when I come, I shall not find you such, as I would; -- lest there be Debates,
Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults, 2 Cor.
12. 20. Wherefore laying aside all Malice, and all Guile, and Hypocrisies, and
Envyings, and all Evil-speakings, 1 Pet. 2. 1. Speak not Evil one of another,
Brethren. He that speaks Evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother,
speaks Evil of the Law, and judges the Law: But, if thou judge the Law, thou
art not a Doer of the Law, but a Judge. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy; who art thou, that judge another? Jam. 4. 11. Nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Not to keep Company; if any Man, that
is called a Brother, be -- a Railer, -- with such an one, no, not to eat, 1
Cor. 5. 11. Put them in mind -- to speak Evil of no Man, to be no Brawler, but
Gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men, Tit. 3. 2.

Thus speaks the Rule; and while it sets Detraction, or Backbiting, and
Reviling, and Whispering, among those Sins, which exclude from the Possession
of God; what must be said, but that they, who do these things, either know not
their Rule, or think that by Custom it is made void? If something of this were
not, how should those, who profess to believe and follow the Gospel, live on in
the open Breach of it, and make that their general Entertainment, which is here
declared a Forfeiture of Happiness? This seems a strange Blindness or Delusion;
and so much the greater, that it is not the Practice only of such, who, by
their Wickedness, live at Defiance with Heaven; but even of those, who by their
pious Endeavors, and stricter Discipline, seem in earnest in what they profess.
Here Is the Surprise. And to these I make it my Petition, that they would take
more Pains in knowing, what their Rule teaches; and since this declares
Backbiting and Whispering to be so criminal, that they would remember it, and
no more make these their Sport. For that Piety cannot be true, which has not
this Regard to the Will of God, and the Observance of his Law.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Watchfulness and Industry of a Christian Life, in Reproof of
a slothful and idle Life.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give as to the Points of Watchfulness and
Idleness?

A. It speaks plain enough.

Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation, Matthew. 26. 41. Let your
Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning; and ye your selves like unto
Men, that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the Wedding, that when
he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those
Servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find watching. -- And if he
shall come in the second Watch, or come in the third Watch, and find them so,
blessed are those Servants. And this know, that if the good Man of the House
had known what Hour the Thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his House to be broken through. Be ye therefore ready also; for the
Son of Man comes at an Hour, when ye think not. -- Blessed is that Servant,
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing: of a Truth I say unto you,
that he will make him Ruler over all that he has. But, and if that Servant say
in his Heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the
Menservants and Maidens, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken: the Lord of
that Servant will come in a Day, when he looks not for him, and at an Hour,
when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
Portion with the Unbelievers, Luke 12. 35, etc. Take heed to your selves, lest
at any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and
Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares. For as a Snare
shall it come on all them, that dwell on the Face of the whole Earth: Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these
things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21.
34. Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not when the time is. For the Son
of Man is as a Man taking a far Journey, who left his House, and gave Authority
to his Servants, and to every Man his Work, and commanded the Porter to watch.
Watch ye therefore (for ye know not, when the Master of the House comes; at
Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning) lest coming
suddenly he find you sleeping: and what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch,
Mar. 13. 33, etc. Watch therefore, for ye know, neither the Day nor the Hour,
wherein the Son of Man comes. For the Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man traveling
into a far Country, who called his own Servants, and delivered unto them his
Goods. -- Then he, that had received the Five Talents, went and traded with the
same, and made them other Five Talents. -- But he, that had received one, went
and dug in the Earth, and hid his Lord's Money. After a long time, the Lord
of those Servants comes, and reckons with them. And so he that had received
Five Talents, came and brought other five Talents, saying, Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me Five Talents; behold I have gained besides them Five
Talents more. His Lord said unto him; Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant: thou have been faithful over a few things; I will make thee Ruler over
many things; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. -- Then he, which had
received the one Talent, came. -- His Lord said unto him; Thou wicked and
slothful Servant; -- Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him,
which has Ten Talents, -- and cast ye the unprofitable Servant into outer
Darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 25. 13. And now
also the Ax is laid unto the Root of the Trees: therefore every Tree, which
brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire, Mat. 3.
10. A certain Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came and
sought Fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he unto the Dresser of his
Vineyard; Behold, these Three Years I come seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree, and
find none; Cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? And he answering, said unto
him, Lord, let it alone this Year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it;
and if it bear Fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down,
Luke 13. 6. Not every one, that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven,
Mat. 7. 21. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24. Enter ye in at the
strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way, that leads to
Destruction, and many there be, which go in thereat: because strait is the
Gate, and narrow is the Way, which leads unto Life, and few there are, that
find it, Mat. 7. 13. Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you, Mat. 7. 7. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
Mat. 6. 33. The Kingdom af Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent take it
by force, Mat. 11. 12. If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross daily, and follow me. For whosoever will save his Life, shall
lose it, but whosoever will lose his Life, for my sake, the same shall save it,
Luke 9. 23. If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and
Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple. -- Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all,
that he has, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26, 33. A certain Man made a
great Supper, and bade many; and sent his Servant at Supper-time, to say to
them, that were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready. And they all with
one consent began to make excuse. Then the Master of the House being angry,
said; -- I say unto you, that none of those Men, that were bidden, shall taste
of my Supper, Luke 13. 16, etc.

Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16.
13. Let him, that thinks he stands, take heed, lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Awake to Righteousness, and sin not, 1 Cor. 15. 34. Be Sober, be Vigilant;
because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking
whom he may devour: Whom resist, steadfast in Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 8. My Brethren,
be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; put on the whole Armor
of God, that ye may be able to stand against the Wills of the Devil: For we
wrestle not against Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities, against
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World. -- Wherefore take
unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil
Day, and having done all to stand. Stand therefore, having your Loins girt
about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness; and your
Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; above all, taking the
Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of
the Wicked. And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God: Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in
the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all Perseverance, Ephesians. 6. 10. Let us
not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. If
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee, as a Thief; and thou shall
not know, what Hour I will come upon thee, Rev. 3. 3. Therefore, my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
58. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: For whatsoever a Man sows, that shall
he also reap. For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting: And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due Season we shall
reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6. 7. Brethren, be not weary in well-doing, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 13. God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of Love,
which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye have minister'd to the Saints,
and do minister. And we desire, that every one of you do show the same
Diligence, to the full Assurance of Hope unto the end: That ye be not Slothful,
but Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, Heb.
6. 10. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Know
ye not, that they, which run in a Race, run all, but one receives the Prize?
So run, that ye may obtain. And every Man, that striveth for the Mastery, is
temperate in all things: Now they do it, to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we
an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: So fight I, not as
one, that beats the Air: But I keep under my Body, and bring it into
Subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 24, etc. Many are called, but few are chosen,
Mat. 22. 14. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give Diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 19. See, that ye walk circumspectly, not
as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the time, because the Days are Evil, Ephesians. 5.
15. She, that lives in Pleasure (or delicately) is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. The time past of our Life may suffice us to have wrought the Will of
the Gentiles, when we walked in Laciviousness, Lusts, Excess, of Wine,
Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries: Wherein they think it
strange, that you run not with them to the same Excess of Riot, speaking evil
of you, 1 Pet. 4. 3. They shall receive the Reward of Unrighteousness, as they,
that count it Pleasure to riot in the Daytime: Spots they are, and blemishes,
sporting themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you, 2
Pet. 13. How much she has glorified her self; and lived deliciously, so much
Torment and Sorrow give her, Rev. 18. 7.

Thus speaks the Rule, and so Positive and Large it is, in pressing all to be
Watchful, and to take Pains in working out their Salvation, that there must be
owned a Necessity of a Christian Life being an Industrious and Laborious Life.
Let but these Heads be duly reflected on; First, The Life of Christ and the
Example he has given us, both in what he did and what he suffered. 2dly, The
Great Perfection of those Virtues, which God demands of us. 3dly, The
Corruption of our Nature, which renders us averse to all these, and strongly
inclines us to Evil. 4thly, The Variety of Temptations, which draw us out of
the way. 5thly, The great Encouragement to Evil from Authority and Custom.
6thly, The industrious Subtilty of the Devil. 7thly, The Uncertainty of the
time granted us for doing this great Work. 8thly, The irrecoverable Ruin,
attending a Miscarriage. Lastly, The variety of Delusions, to which we are
exposed, through the Violence and Contrivance of our Passions. Let but these
Heads, I say, be duly reflected on, and it must be confessed, that Salvation is
a Work of Difficulty, such as requires a constant Watchfulness, persevering
Endeavors, and the best of our Care; and that, as for those, who live on, as if
they had nothing to do, but to contrive, how to drink, sleep and play away
their Time, and leave Salvation to the Chance, follow not the Directions so
often pressed to them in the Gospel; and therefore, whatever their supposed
Innocence may be, are not in a way of of doing the Work of the Gospel. What
hopes then can they have from hence, where they see unprofitable Servants, not
rewarded, but condemned: Where they see great Crimes charged upon them, and
eternal Wo's prepared in Punishment of their reputed Innocence? It must then be
remembered, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ requires of all his Followers a
Watchful Life, and that Idleness, Sloth, and a constant Dissipation of Mind are
contrary to it, and therefore to be avoided.

CHAP. XVII. Of Immodesty.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to this point.

A. It shows it to be very displeasing to God, and strictly cautions all
against it.

Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman, to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. And if thy right
Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for
thee, that one of thy Members should perish, and not thy whole Body should be
cast into Hell, Mat. 5. 27. Let not Sin therefore Reign in your mortal Body,
that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof, Romans 6. 12. When they knew God,
they glorified him not as God; -- wherefore God also gave them up to
Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts, to dishonor their own Bodies.
-- For this Cause God gave them up unto vile Affections, Romans 1. 21, 24, 26. I
beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service;
and be not conformed to this World, Romans 12. 1. To be carnally minded, is
Death; -- because the carnal Man is Enmity against God. -- We are Debtors, not
to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall
die: But if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall
live, Romans 8. 6, 7, etc. They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with
the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. This I say therefore and testify in the
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not, as other Gentiles walk, in the Vanity of
their Mind, having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of
God; -- who being past feeling have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness,
to work all Uncleanness with greediness: But ye have not so learned Christ; if
so be that ye have heard him; -- that ye put off, concerning the former
Conversation, the Old Man, which is Corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts.
-- Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, Ephesians. 4. 17, etc. But
Fornication and all Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints; neither Filthiness nor foolish Talking, nor
Jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of Thanks: For this ye
know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, nor Covetous Man, who is an
Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. -- Have no
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them; for
it is a shame even to speak of those things, which are done of them in Secret,
Ephesians. 5. 3, etc. Mortify therefore your Members, which are upon the Earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry: For which things sake, the Wrath of God comes
on the Children of Disobedience: -- But now you also put off all these; Anger,
Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy Communication out of your Mouth, Col. 3. 5,
etc. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye should
abstain from Fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his
Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; not in the Lust of Concupiscence, even as
the Gentiles, which know not God. -- For God has not called us unto
Uncleanness, but unto Holiness, 1 These. 4. 3, etc. Walk in the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh. -- Now the Works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these; Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Laciviousness --
and such like; of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
past, that they, which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
Gal. 5. 16, 19. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly Lusts, which War against the Soul: Having your
Conversation honest among the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Let us live honestly, as
in the Day; not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness,
not in Strife and Envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13. 13. Dearly
Beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. If any Man love the World,
the Love of the Father is not in him. For all, that is in the World, the Lust
of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the
Father, but is of the World: And the World passes away, and the Lust thereof,
but he, that does the Will of God, abides for ever, 1 John 2. 15, etc. Every
Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed: Then, when
Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin, when it is finished,
brings forth Death, Jam. 1. 14. Now I have written unto you, not to keep
Company, if any Man, that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or
an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one,
no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, -- shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Marriage is
honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: But Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge, Heb. 13. 4. As you have yielded your Members Servants to
Uncleanness and to Iniquity, unto Iniquity; even so now yield your Members
Servants to Righteousness, unto Holiness. -- What Fruit had ye then in those
things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is Death, Romans
6. 19, 21.

Thus speaks the Rule: And is not here expressly declared, how criminal all kind
of Impurity is in the sight of God, whether it be in the Heart only or Desire,
or by Inordinate Affections, or in the Eyes, or in the Tongue, or in Actions?
All kind of Sensuality and Uncleanness, both of Mind and Body, are here forbid,
and marked with the Infamous Character, of being the Sins of the Gentiles or
Heathens, who knew not God, who for their unworthiness were given up to a
Reprobate Sense. It is evident then, that all such Offenses are an Absolute
transgression of the Christian's Rule; and that to live in the Practice of
them, is to live as a Heathen. What then must be done? The Christian must
remember, that the Promise of seeing God, is made to the Pure and Clean of
heart; that without this, he can have no part in this Promise: That therefore
he must dailyl labor to bring his Heart to this happy disposition: He must
resist evil, avoid Ill company, keep a watch upon his Eyes, upon his Tongue,
and upon his Heart; he must put a restraint upon himself as to all kind of
dangerous liberties; and avoid all, that can defile, if he truly desires, that
his Heart should be Clean. And is this the Gospel? How few then are Chosen?
Examine thy self by what the Apostle has said; The Lust of the flesh, the Lust
of the eyes, the Pride of life, are not of the Father, 1 Jo. 2. 15. Do thou
belong to him?

CHAP. XVIII. Of Self-denial.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as in this Point?

A. The Gospel declares it to be absolutely necessary for all Christians.

Jesus said to his Disciples; if any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it: And whosoever will lose his life, for my sake, shall find it,
Mat. 16. 24. Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, Mar. 8. 34. If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily,
and follow me, Luke 9. 23. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and
Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own
Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and
come after me, cannot be my Disciple. For which of you intending to build a
Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost, whether he have
sufficient to finish it? -- So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes
not all, that he has, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26, 33. If thy right
hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for
thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should
be cast into Hell, Mat. 5. 30. He, that loves his life, shall lose it; and he,
that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal, Jo. 12.
25. Reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto Sin; but alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body,
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness, unto sin, Romans 6. 11. I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man, that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! Romans 7. 23. Brethren, we are debtors,
not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die: But if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live: For as many, as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 12. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution? -- Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerors, through him that loved us, Romans 8. 35. If we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our Old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. --
Now, if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live with him,
Romans 6. 5, 8. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service: and be not conformed to this world: But be ye transformed
by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove, what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 1. Every man, that striveth for
the mastery, is temperate in all things: Now they do it, to obtain a
corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as
uncertainly; so fight I, not as one, that beats the air: But I keep unto my
body, and bring it under subjection; lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 25. Always
bearing about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the life
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body, 2 Cor. 4. 10. He died for
all, that they, which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him, which died for them, and rose again. -- Therefore, if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature; old things are past away, behold, all things are
become new, 2 Cor. 5. 15, 17. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless, I live;
yet not I, but Christ lives in me: And the life, which I now live in the
Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me, Gal. 2. 20. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
flesh: For the flesh lusts against the Spirit; and the Spirit against the
flesh. -- If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. They that
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.
16, 24. Henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. 17. I do count all things but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ: -- That I may
know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death, if by any means I might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 8. Put off, concerning the
former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful
lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22.
The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. Mortify therefore
your members, which are upon the earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, -- in the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them: But
now you also put off all these -- and have put on the new man, which is renewed
in knowledge, after the image of him, that created him, Col. 3. 5. Flee also
youthful lusts: But follow righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

Thus speaks the Rule; whence it is plain above all dispute, that those, who
follow their Inclinations, do not follow this Rule. We have all an inheritance
of Corruption, which bends us to sin; this is entailed on us from Adam* and is
called the Old Man; this the Gospel commands us to put off; all such then, as
strictly examine their Inclinations, Affections and Desires, and resolutely
stand against those, which they perceive to be sinful, or can suspect as
leading to sin, are the Persons, who live by the Rule, which they profess; and
if they study to improve those better Impressions, which are the effects of
Grace, it cannot be questioned, but they will be clothed with the New Man,
and, while in the Flesh, even live by the Spirit. But this cannot be their
Character, who being subject to great variety of Worldly and Sensual
Inclinations, who finding no Relish in their Souls, but of what is in favor of
their Pride, Vanity, Idleness and of Self-love in all its Shapes, are so far
from using due means for suppressing them, that their whole Life is an
Obedience to their demands; for certainly these have no regard to what the
Gospel prescribes; their Life is a Contradiction to its Rules; they indulge
their Corruption, which God commands them to resist; and therefore being found
under the Subjecti- of the old Man, can never expect, while under this Slavery,
to come to the Liberty of the Children of God. Either do what the Gospel
requires, or else look for no other Portion, but with Unbelievers.

CHAP. XIX. Of Suffering, Affliction or Persecution.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to these Points?

A. It speaks very largely of them, and shows, with what Spirit a Christian
ought to submit.

Blessed are they, which are persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake: Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward in Heaven: For so persecuted
they the Prophets, which were before you, Mat. 5. 10. Ye have heard, that it
has been said; an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but I say unto you,
that ye resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right Cheek,
turn him the other also, Mat. 5. 38. He, that takes not his Cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. He, that finds his Life, shall lose
it; and he, that loses his Life for my sake, shall find it. Fear not them,
which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him,
which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Are not two Sparrows Sold
for a Farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the Ground, without your
Father: But the very Hairs of your Head are all numbered: Fear ye not
therefore, ye are of more Value, than many Sparrows. Whosoever therefore shall
confess me before Men, him will I confess also before my Father, which is in
Heaven. -- Think not, that I am come to send Peace on Earth, I came not to send
Peace, but a Sword, Mat. 10. 38, 28. Behold, I send you forth as Sheep in the
midst of Wolves. -- But beware of Men, for they will deliver you up to the
Counsels, and they will Scourge you in their Synagogues; and ye shall be
brought before Governors and Kings, for my sake. -- And the Brother shall
deliver up the Brother to Death, and the Father the Child: And the Children
shall rise up against their Parents, and cause them to be put to Death. And ye
shall be hated of all Men, for my names sake: But he, that endures to the end
shall be saved. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his
Lord. It is enough for the Disciple, that be be, as his Master, and the
Servant, as his Lord: If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub;
how much more shall they call them of his Household, Mat. 10. 16. Then shall
they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated
of all Nations, for my names sake, Mat. 24. 9. They shall put you out of the
Synagogues; yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think, that
he does God Service. -- Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall Weep and
Lament; but the World shall rejoice and ye shall be sorrowful; but your Sorrow
shall be turned into Joy. -- And ye now therefore have Sorrow; but I will see
you again; and your Heart shall rejoice, and your Joy no Man takes from you,
Jo. 16. 2, 20. If the World hate you, ye know, that it hated me, before it
hated you, Jo. 15. 18.

Every Branch, that bears Fruit, he (my Father) purges it, that it may bring
forth more Fruit, Jo. 15. 2. Master, who did sin, this Man, or his Parents,
that he was born Blind? Jesus answered; neither has this Man sinned, nor his
Parents: But that the Works of God should be made manifest in him. Jo. 9. 2.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory?
Luke 24. 26. And when they had called the Apostles, and beaten them, they
commanded, that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus, and let them go:
And they departed from the presence of the Counsel, rejoicing, that they were
counted worthy to suffer Shame for his Name, Act. 5. 40. We rejoice in Hope of
the Glory of God; and not only so; but we Glory in Tribulations also, knowing
that Tribulation works Patience, Romans 5. 2. Heirs God, and Joint-heirs with
Christ; if so be, that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. For I reckon, that the Sufferings of this present Time, are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory, which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.
17. For we know, that the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in Pain
together, until now. -- What shall we then say to these things? If God be for
us, who can be against us? -- Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ?
Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or
Peril, or Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day
long; we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter:) Nay, in all these things,
we are more than Conquerors, through him, that loved us. For I am persuaded, that
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Romans 8. 22, 31, 35.

I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to
Death: For we are made a Spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men.
We are Fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: We are weak, but ye
are strong: Ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present Hour,
we both Hunger and Thirst, and are Naked, and are Buffeted, and have no certain
Dewlling Place; and labor, working with our own Hands: Being reviled, we
bless; being persecuted, we suffer it: Being defamed, we entreat: We are made
as the Filth of the World, and are the offscouring of all things unto this
Day, 1 Cor. 4. 9. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort; who comfort us in all our
Tribulations; -- for as the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
Consolation also abounds by Christ. -- For we would not, Brethren, have you
ignorant of our Trouble, which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of
Measure, above Strength, insomuch that we despaired even of Life: But we had
the Sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves,
but in God, which raises the Dead, who delivered us from so great a Death, and
does deliver; in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 8.
And our Hope of you is steadfast, knowing, that as you are Partakers of the
Sufferings; so shall ye be also of the Consolation, Ib. v. 7. We have this
Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God,
and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed; always bearing about in the Body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that
the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body. For we, which live,
are always delivered unto Death for Jesus sake, that the Life also of Jesus
might be made manifest in our mortal Flesh. So then Death works in us, but
Life in you. -- For which cause we faint not; but though our outward Man perish,
yet the inward Man is renewed day by day. For our light Affliction, which is
but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory; while we look not at the things, which are seen, but at the things,
which are not seen: for the things, which are seen, are Temporal; but the
things, which are not seen, are Eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 7, 16.

I am filled with Comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our Tribulation. For
when we were come into Macedonia, our Flesh had no rest, but we were troubled
on every side; without were Fightings, within were Fears. Nevertheless, God
that comfort those, that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus,
2 Cor. 7. 4. Ye suffer, if a Man bring you into Bondage, if a Man devour you,
if a Man take of you, if a Man exalt himself, if a Man simite you on the Face.
-- Are they Ministers of Christ? I am more: In Labors more abundant, in
Stripes above measure, in Prisons more frequent, in Deaths often. Of the Jews,
five times received I forty Stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with Rods,
once was I Stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck; a Night and a Day I have been
in the Deep: In Journeying often, in Perils of Waters* in Perils of Robbers, in
Perils by my own Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils in the City,
in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false
Brethren. -- In Damascus the Governor under Aretas the King, kept the City of
the Damascens with a Garrison, desirous to apprehend me; and through a Window in a
Basket was I let down by the Wall, and escaped his Hands, 2 Cor. 11. 20, 23.
Lest I should be exalted above Measure through the abundance of the Revelations,
there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet
me, lest I should be exalted above Measure. For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, my Grace is
sufficient for thee: For my Strength is made perfect in Weakness. Most gladly
therefore will I rather glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may
rest upon me. Therefore I take Pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's sake: For when I am
weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 7. What things were Gain to me, those I
counted Loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I do count all things but Loss,
for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: For whom I have
suffered the Loss of all things, and do count them but Dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, Phil. 3. 7. I have learned, in whatever State I
am, therewith to be content: I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound: Everywhere and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. I can do all things through
Christ, which strengthens me, Phil. 4. 11. Whereof (of the Gospel) I Paul am
made a Minister; who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that,
which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh, for his Body's sake,
which is the Church, Col. 1. 23.

We our selves glory in you in the Churches of God, for your Patience and Faith
in all your Persecutions and Tribulations, that ye endure: which is a manifest
Token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer; seeing it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense Tribulation to them, that trouble you; and to you, who are
troubled, rest with us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4. I suffer Trouble, as an evil Doer, even
unto Bonds; but the Word of God is not bound. Therefore I endure all things,
for the Elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the Salvation, which is in
Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory. It is a faithful Saying: for if we be dead
with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with
him; if we deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2. 9. Thou have fully known
my Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience,
Persecutions, Afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at
Lystra, what Persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered me:
yea, and all, that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 10. We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor; that he, by the Grace of
God, should taste Death for every Man. For it became him, for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make
the Captain of their Salvation perfect through Sufferings, Heb. 2. 9. Though he
were a Son, yet learned he Obedience, by the things which he suffered: and
being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them,
that obey him, Heb. 5. 8. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the
living God, but call to Remembrance the former Days, in which, after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of Afflictions: partly, whilst ye were
made a gazing-stock, both by Reproaches and Afflictions; and partly, whilst ye
became Companions of them, that were so used. For ye had Compassion of me in my
Bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves,
that ye have in Heaven a better, and an enduring Substance. Cast not away
therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward. For ye have
need of Patience; that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the
Promise. For yet a little while, and he, that shall come, will come, and will
not tarry. Now the just shall live by Faith: but if any Man draw back, my Soul
shall have no Pleasure in him. But we are not of them, who draw back unto
Perdition; but of them, that believe, to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10. 31.
By Faith, Moses, when he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharoah's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season; esteeming the Reproach of
Christ, greater Riches, than the Treasures of Egypt; for he had Respect unto
the Recompense of the Reward -- What shall I more say -- of the Prophets, who,
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped
the Mouths of Lions, quenched the Violence of Fire? -- Others were tortured,
not accepting Deliverance; that they might obtain a better Resurrection. And
others had Trial of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and
Imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented: (of whom the World was not worthy) they
wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth, Heb.
11. 23, 32. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a Cloud
of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the Sin, which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with Patience the Race, that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who, for the Joy that was set
before him, endured tbe Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the
Right Hand of the Throne of God. For consider him, that endured such
Contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your
Minds. Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin. And ye have
forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks unto you, as unto Children; My Son,
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint, when thou art rebuked
of him: for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son, whom
he receives. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with Sons: for
what Son is he, whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without
Chastisement, whereof all are Partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons.
Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave
them Reverence: shall we not much rather be in Subjection unto the Father of
Spirits and live? For they verily for a few Days chastened us, after their own
Pleasure; but he for our Profit, that we might be Partakers of his Holiness.
Now, no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous:
nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness unto
them, which are exercised thereby. Wherefore, lift up the Hands, which hang
down, and the feeble Knees, and make straight Paths for your Feet, lest that,
which is lame, be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed, Heb. 12.
1.

Paul and Barnabas preached the Gospel -- confirming the Souls of the
Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the Faith, and that we must, through
much Tribulation, enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14. 22. And now, behold,
I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall
befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that
Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count
I my Life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the
Ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20. 22. Then Paul
answered; What mean ye to weep, and to break my Heart? For I am ready, not to
be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 21. 13. My Brethren, count it all Joy, when ye fall into diverse
Temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your Faith works Patience. But
let Patience have her perfect Work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing. -- Blessed is the Man, that endures Temptation; for when he is tried,
he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them, that
love him, Jam. 1. 2, 12. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in
the Name of the Lord, for an Example of suffering Affliction, and of Patience.
Behold, we count them happy, which endure. Ye have heard of the Patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy, Jam. 5. 10. This is thank-worthy, if a Man, for Conscience toward
God, endure Grief, suffering wrongfully. For what Glory is it, if when ye be
buffetted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently? But, if, when ye do
well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently; this is acceptable with God. For
even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an Example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no Sin, neither was Guile
found in his Mouth: who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him, that judges
righteously: who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that
we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes ye were
healed, 1 Pet. 2. 19.

Who is he, that will harm you, if ye be followers of that, which is good? But,
and if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye: and be not afraid of
their Terror, neither be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts:
-- for it is better, if the Will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing,
than for evil-doing. For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the just for
the unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in the Flesh,
but quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 13, 17. Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as though same strange thing
happened unto you: but rejoice, in as much as ye are Partakers of Christ's
Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding Joy. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for
the Spirit of Glory, and of God, rests upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. But let none of you suffer as a
Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil Doer, or as a Busie-body in other Men's
Matters. Yet if any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let
him glorify God on this behalf. For the time is come, that Judgment must begin
at the House of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of
them, that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved;
where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear? Wherefore, let them, that suffer
according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 12. What are these, which are
arrayed in white Robes? And whence came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou
know. And he said to me; These are they, which came out of great
Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of
the Lamb. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and
Night in his Temple: -- and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, Rev.
7. 13.

Thus speaks the Rule; so full and plain, that a Christian must hence see, what
Judgment he is to frame of all the Afflictions of this Life, and what use he is
to make of them. He is to consider them as the Effect of the Divine Will, as
the Trial and Improvement of Virtue, as the Exercise of Patience, as the
Portion, which Christ chose for himself, and for his best Servants; and hence,
that by a due Submission to them, they may be very serviceable in the gaining
an eternal Crown. Therefore in practice, he is neither to murmur, nor sink in
Spirit under them, as under Misfortunes; but first endeavor to submit with
Resolution, as to the certain Ordinance of the Divine Will, and then even to
receive with Comfort, what God knows to be best for him, and may be very
advantageous to him for obtaining Mercy and Glory. Thus the Gospel directs.
Such then, as sincerely desire to be Followers of it, must labor to compose
their Spirits in this manner, under all kind of Afflictions; that is, with
Meekness, Patience, Humility, Submission and Comfort, for this is the Spirit of
the Gospel; and they, who take no Pains, or very little, to come into this
Method, but yield to the Inclinations of Nature, in grieving, fretting,
murmuring, etc. it is plain, as far, as they wilfully or affectedly follow
Nature in this Point, so far they depart from the Gospel.

CHAP. XX. Of Temptations.
Q. Does the Gospel give any Directions in this Point?

A. It does; and such, as ought to be observed.

The Devil takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them; and says unto him; All these
things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Then says
Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan; for it is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Then the Devil leaves him, and
behold, Angels came and minister'd unto him, Mat. 4. 8. Be sober, be vigilant;
because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking,
whom he may devour: Whom resist, steadfast in Faith, knowing that the same
Afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren, that are in the World. But the
God of all Grace, who has called us unto his eternal Glory by Christ Jesus,
after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you, 1 Pet. (...) Devil, and he will flee from you* Draw nigh to God;
and he will draw nigh to you. -- Humble your selves in the Sight of the Lord,
and he shall lift you up, Jam. 4. 7, 10. Peter said; Ananias, why has Satan
filled thine Heart, to lie to the Holy Ghost, and keep back part of the Price
of the Land? Act. 5. 3. Let him, that thinks he stands, take heed, lest he
fall. There has no Temptation taken you, but such, as is common to Man: But
God is Faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able;
but will, with the Temptation also make a Way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Lest I should be exalted above Measure, through the
abundance of the Revelations, there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above Measure. For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he
said unto me; my Grace is sufficient for thee: For my Strength is made perfect
in Weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my Infirmities, that
the Power of Christ may rest upon me. -- For when I am weak, then am I strong,
2 Cor. 12. 7. We glory in Tribulations also, knowing that Tribulation works
Patience, and Patience, Experience; and Experience, Hope, Romans 5. 3. My
Brethren, count all Joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations; knowing this,
that the trying of your Faith work the Patience; but let Patience have her
perfect Work, that ye may be Perfect and Entire, wanting nothing. -- Blessed is
the Man, that endures Temptation; for* when he is tried, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them, that love him. Let no Man
say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with
Evil, neither tempts he any Man. But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own Lust, and enticed. Then when Lust has conceived, it brings
forth Sin: And Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death, Jam. 1. 2, 12.
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a Season (if need be) ye are in
Heaviness, through manifold Temptations: That the Trial of your Faith, being much
more precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with Fire, might be
found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ; whom
having not seen ye love, 1 Pet. 1. 6. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of Temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the Day of Judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer: Behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried: And ye shall have
Tribulation Ten Days: Be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown
of Life, Rev. 2. 10.

Thus speaks the Rule: Whence many Particulars are made evident: First, That
Good and Holy Persons are not exempt from Temptations; but that even these may
be assaulted by the worst and most abominable of all Temptations, as appears in
the Person of Christ and his Apostle. 2dly, That God tries his best Servants
with many and great Difficulties, which Trials are often called Temptations;
not Temptations to Sin, but for the Trial of Fidelity and greater Improvement
in Virtue. 3dly, That a Christian ought not to grieve, when under such
Temptations or Trials, but rather rejoice, because he knows this is the Effect
of God's Love, and that an eternal Crown is promised the Reward of his
Patience. 4thly, That therefore, under all such Trials he ought to have his
Hope fixed on God with an entire Confidence of being ever supported by his
Grace, that he will give him Strength proportioned to his Trials, and either
continue or take them away, as he knows to be best for him. 5thly, That the
Devil, taking the Advantage of his natural Corruption, lays many Temptations
before him, and by these provokes him to Sin; and in this Way. God tempts no
Man, it being wholly Inconsistent with his Goodness. Lastly, That with great
Watchfulness he is to observe these Designs of his Enemy, and with Resolution
stand against them; and that upon so doing he cannot fail of being Conqueror
through God's assisting Grace.

These being Truths delivered in the Christian's Rule, he must carefully
observe them. He must receive all Trials, which come from the Hand of God, with
great Patience, Courage and Fidelity, and daily endeavor in Spirit to rejoice
under them. He must not be dejected at the most malicious Assaults of the
Devil, but either despise or resist them. He must bear such Temptations as are
common to our Nature, with Humility; and never Wilfully, Carlesly or
Presumptuously put himself into Temptation. They, who do thus, may confide in
the Grace of God, which will be sufficient for them. And they who do otherwise,
forsake their Rule, and there can be no Surprise, if they are forsaken by him,
who has given it them, for their Direction and Security.

CHAP. XXI. Of Virgins.
Q. HAving seen, what the Gospel directs in these General Duties, which belong
to all, that profess the Name of Christ; let me now hear, what it says to the
Particular States of Christians; that so, having this drawn under several
Heads, every one may have the Opportunity of seeing, what is the Will of God in
regard of them, and what Instructions Christ has laid upon them. And First,
What does the Gospel say of Virgins?

A. It speaks very particularly of them.

There are some Eunuchs, which were so born from their Mothers Womb: And there
are some Eunuchs, which were made Eunuchs of Men: And there be Eunuchs which
have made themselves Eunuchs, for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He that is able
to receive it, let him receive it, Mat. 19. 12. The Kingdom of Heaven shall be
likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom. And Five of them were Wise, and Five were Foolish. They, that were
Foolish, took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them: But the Wise took Oil in
their Vessels, with their Lamps. -- The Bridegroom came, and they that were
ready, went in with him to the Marriage, and the Door was shut. Afterward came
also the other Virgins* saying, Lord, Lord, open to us: But he answered and
said; Verily, I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the Day nor the Hour, Mat. 25. 1. It is good for a Man not to touch a
Woman. Nevertheless, to avoid Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and
let every Woman have her own Husband. -- But I speak this by Permission, and
not of Commandment. For I would that all Men were even as I my self: But every
Man has his proper Gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.
I say therefore to the Unmarried and Widows, it is good for them, if they abide
even as I. But if they cannot contain, let them Marry: For it is better to
Marry than to Burn. -- But, as God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord
has called every one, so let him walk; and so ordain I in all the Churches. --
Now concerning Virgins, I have no Commandment of the Lord: Yet I give my
Judgment, as one, that has obtained Mercy of the Lord to be faithful. I
suppose therefore, that this is good for the present distress, I say, that it
is good for a Man so to be. Art thou bound unto a Wife? Seek not to be loosed.
Art thou loosed from a Wife? Seek not a Wife. -- But I would have you without
Carefulness. He, that is Unmarried cares for the things, that belong to the
Lord, how he may please the Lord: But he, that is Married, cares for the
things that are of the World, how he may please his Wife. Thee is difference
also between a Wife and a Virgin: The unmarried Woman cares for the things of
the Lord, that she may be holy, both in Body and Spirit: But she, that is
Married, cares for the things of the World, how she may please her Husband.
And this I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a Snare upon you, but
for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord without
Distraction. But if any Man think, that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his
Virgin, if she pass the Flower of her Age, and need so require, let him do what
he will, he sins not: Let them Marry. Nevertheless, he that stands
steadfast in his Heart, having no Necessity, but has Power over his own will,
and has so decreed in his Heart, that he will keep his Virgin, does well. So
then, he that gives her in Marriage, does well: but he, that gives her not in
Marriage, does better, 1 Cor 7. 1, 6, 17, 25. I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on
the Mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his
Father's Name written in their Foreheads. -- And they sung as it were a new
Song before the Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders: And no Man
could learn that Song, but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were
redeemed from the Earth. These are they, which were not defiled with Women; for
they are Virgins: These are they, which follow the Lamb, whithersoever he
goes: These were redeemed from among Men, being the First Fruits unto God, and
to the Lamb. And in their Mouth was found no Guile: For they are without Fault
before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 1, 3.

Thus the Rule: In which these Particulars are declared: First, That it is
lawful and good to Marry; but that it is better to remain Unmarried: 2dly, That
the Unmarried State has much the Advantage of the other, for tending upon the
Lord with less Distraction. 3dly, That there are Persons, which remain
Unmarried for gaining the Kingdom of Heaven. Lastly, That if such are not duly
watchful in preparing for the coming of the Spouse, they are not Wise, and will
be shut out with Unbelievers.

CHAP. XXII. Of Married Persons, Husband and Wife.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to the State of Marriage, and to
those, which are engaged in it?

A. It speaks very particularly upon this Subject, and what ought to be well
considered by all concerned. First, That it is not to be dissolved.

The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him: Is it
lawful for a Man to put away his Wife for every Cause? And he answered and said
unto them; have you not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made
them Male and Female? And said, for this Cause shall a Man leave Father and
Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh.
Wherefore they are no more twain, but one Flesh. What therefore God has joined
together, let not Man put asunder. -- Moses, because of the Hardness of your
Hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives; but from the beginning it was not
so. And I say unto you; whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall Marry another, commits Adultery; and whosoever marries
her, which is put away, does commit Adultery, Mat. 19. 3. Unto the Married I
command, yet not I, but the Lord, let not the Wife depart from her Husband: But
and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her Husband:
And let not the Husband put away his Wife, 1 Cor. 7. 10. The Woman, which has
an Husband, is bound by the Law to her Husband, so long as he lives: But if
the Husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of her Husband. So then, if
while her Husband lives, she be Married to another Man, she shall be called an
Adulteress: But if her Husband be dead, she is free from that Law; so that, she
is no Adulteress, though she be Married to another Man, Romans 7. 2. The Wife is
bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives: But if her Husband he dead,
she is at Liberty to be Married to whom she will; only in the Lord. But she is
happier, if she so abide, after my Judgment: And I think also, that I have the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 39.

2dly, As to difference of Religion in Man and Wife, S. Paul thus gives his
Judgment. To the rest speak I, not the Lord, if any Brother has a Wife, that
believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
And the Woman, which has an Husband, that believes not, and if he be pleased
to dwell with her, let her not leave him. For the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband:
Else were your Children unclean; but now they are holy. But if the unbelieving
depart, let him depart. A Brother or a Sister is not under Bondage in such
Cases: But God has called us to Peace. For what know thou, O Wife, whether
thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou, O Man, whether thou shall
save thy Wife? But as God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has
called every one, so let him walk: And so ordain I in all the Churches, 1 Cor.
7. 12.

3dly, As to one part of their mutual Obligation: Let the Husband render unto
the Wife due Benevolence: And likewise also the Wife unto the Husband. The Wife
has not Power of her own Body, but the Husband: And likewise also the Husband
has not Power of his own Body, but the Wife. Defraud you not one the other,
except it be with consent for a Time, that ye may give your selves to Fasting
and Prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your
Incontinency. But I speak this by Permission, and not of Commandment, 1 Cor. 7.
3.

4thly, That they may and ought to live holily: There was in the Days of Herod
the King of Judea, a certain Priest, named Zacharias, of the Course of Abia:
And his Wife was of the Daughters of Aaron, and her Name was Elizabeth. And
they were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, blameless, and they had no Child, because that
Elizabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in years, Luke 1. 5.
This I say, Brethren, the time is short. It remains, that both they, that
have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept
not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
though they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing it: For
the fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29. We beseech you, Brethren,
and exhort you, by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought
to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more. For ye know, what
Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For this is the Will of God, even
your Sanctification, that ye should abstain from Fornication: That every one of
you should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; not in
the Lust of Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 1. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: But Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness: and
be content with such things, as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 4.

5thly, That there are great Duties of mutual Love and Support belonging to
them; and that Order is to be observed, which God has appointed between them. I
would have you know, that the Head of every Man is Christ; and the Head of the
Woman is the Man; and the Head of Christ is God. -- A Man indeed ought not to
cover his Head, (praying) for as much as he is the Image and Glory of God: But
the Woman is the Glory of the Man. For the Man is not of the Woman; but the
Woman of the Man. Neither was the Man created for the Woman; but the Woman for
the Man. For this Cause ought the Woman to have Power on her Head, because of
the Angels. Nevertheless, neither is the Man without the Woman, neither the
Woman without the Man in the Lord. For as the Woman is of the Man, even so is
the Man also by the Woman; but all things of God, 1 Cor. 11. 3, 7. Submitting
your selves one to another in the Fear of God.

Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord. For the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is Head of the Church: And he
is the Savior of the Body. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so
let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing.

Husbands love your Wives even as Christ loved the Church, and also gave
himself for it: That he might sanctify and cleanse it. -- So ought Men to love
their Wives, as their own Bodies: He that loves his Wife, loves himself. For
no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as
the Lord the Church: For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones. For this Cause shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall be
joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This is a great Mystery:
But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Nevertheless,

Let every one of you in particular, so love his Wife, even as himself; and the
Wife see, that she reverence her Husband, Ephesians. 5. 21, 28.

Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.

Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter against them, Col. 3. 18.

Ye Wives, be in Subjection to your own Husbands; that if any obey not the
word, they also may without the word be won by the Conversation of the Wives,
while they behold your chaste Conversation coupled with Fear. Whose adorning,
let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of
Gold, or of putting on of Apparel: but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart,
in that, which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet
Spirit, which is in the Sight of God of great Price. For after this manner in
the Old Time, the holy Women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves,
being in Subjection unto their own Husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham,
calling him Lord: Whose Daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not
afraid with any Amazement, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

Likewise ye Husbands, dwell with them according to Knowledge, giving Honor
unto the Wife, as unto the weaker Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the
Grace of Life; that your Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

Teach the young Women to be sober, to love their Husbands, to love their
Children, to be Discreet, Chaste, keepers at Home, good, obedient to their own
Husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed, Tit. 2. 4.

Young Men likewise exhort to be Sober-minded, Tit. 2. 6.

That the aged Men be Sober, Grave, Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in
Patience, Tit. 2. 2.

The aged Women likewise, that they be in Behavior, as becomes Holiness, not
false Accusers, not given to much Wine, Teachers of good things, Tit. 2. 3.

I will that Men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath and
Doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8.

In like manner also, that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
Shamefacedness and Sobriety: Not broider'd Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly
Array; but (which becomes Women professing Godliness) with good Works. Let the
Women learn in silence with all Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to teach,
nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first
formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was
in the Transgression. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing, if
they continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety, 1 Timothy 2. 9.

Let your Women keep silence in the Churches: For it is not permitted unto them
to speak; but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says the Law.
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at Home: For it
is a Shame for Women to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34.

Thus speaks the Rule, and so particularly, that there can be no need of
repeating it. Let all then, who engage in this State, remember the Charge here
given, and distinguish themselves from Heathens, by endeavoring to be punctual
in it. The State is what God has ordained for the Propagation of Mankind, and
filling up the Number of the Elect. Thus it becomes sanctified to the Faithful,
and ought to be undertaken, not in the Spirit of Brutes, or of the World, but
in the Fear of God, and the Spirit of true Holiness; so as to hope for the
Blessing of a manifold Grace, such as may be necessary for satisfying all the
Obligations belonging to their State. For a help in this, I wish they would
often read, what the Word of God here speaks to them, that so being frequently
reminded of their Duty, they may be solicitous, in complying with it. In
undertaking this State, they have undertaken these Obligations; and if they are
not careful in satisfying them, they are faithless and unjust; and what then
will it avail them to be just in other Duties, if they are unjust in these,
which are annexed to their State? Custom may seem to lessen the Guilt; but this
is a Snare for such, as are willing to be deceived; for certainly it cannot be
a Lessening, but an Aggravation of Sin, to live always in it.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Widows.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give, as to this State?

A. It speaks very particularly of it.

There was one Anna a Prophetess, the Daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe of
Aser; she was of a great age, and had lived with an Husband seven Years from
her Virginity. And she was a Widow of about fourscore and four Years; which
departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayer Night and
Day, Luke 2. 36.

I say to the Unmarried and Widows, (...) for them, if they abide, even as I.
But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry, than to
burn. -- But, as God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called
every one, so let him walk: and so ordain I in all the Churches, 1 Cor. 7. 8,
17.

The unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
both in Body and in Spirit: but she, that is married, cares for the things of
the World, how she may please her Husband. And this I speak for your own
Profit, not that I may cast a Snare upon you; but for that, which is comely,
and that you may attend upon the Lord without Distraction. -- The Wife is bound
by the Law, as long as her Husband lives: but if her Husband be dead, she is
at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the Lord. But she is
happier, if she so abide, after my Judgment: and I think also, that I have the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 34, 39.

Honor Widows, that are Widows indeed. But if any Widow have Children or
Nephews, let them learn first to show Piety at home, and to requite their
Parents: for that is good and acceptable before God. Now she, that is a Widow
indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in Supplications and
Prayers night and day. But she, that lives in pleasure, is dead, while she
lives. And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless. But if any
provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Let not a Widow be taken into
the number, under Threescore Years old, having been the Wife of one Man, well
reported of for good Works; if she have brought up Children, if she have lodged
Strangers, if she have washed the Saints Feet, if she have relieved the
Afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good Work. But the younger
Widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will
marry, having Damnation, because they have cast off their first Faith. And
withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from House to House; and not only
idle, but Tattlers also, and Busybodies, speaking things, which they ought
not. I will therefore that the younger Women marry, bear Children, guide the
House, give none Occasion to the Adversary to speak reproachfully, for some are
already turned aside after Satan. If any Man or Woman, that believes, have
Widows, let them relieve them, and let not the Church be charged; that it may
relieve them, that are Widows indeed, 1 Timothy 5. 3.

Thus speaks the Rule to Persons of this State, plainly showing, what are the
Advantages to be made of it, and what the Exercises, by which they may
recommend themselves to the Favor of Heaven. Such then, as desire the Comforts
of his Protection, who reckons Widows a particular part of his Care, may here
see how they may be of this number, since they have him for their Informer, who
offers his Help. Thus then they may be Happy, and even Gainers by their Loss,
in the tender Offers of a Heavenly Father. But if they look not for this
Privilege; but still have their Hearts full of the World, and still follow its
Ways, they have the Name of Widows, but are not Widows indeed; they seek
Earthly Comforts, and such they may have.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Parents.
Q. WHAT Direction does the Gospel give to Parents?

A. He that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me, Matthew.
10. 37. Their Love then ought to be prudent and moderate.

Then came to him the Mother of Zebedee's Children, with her Sons, worshipping
him, and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said unto her, What will thou?
She says unto him; Grant that th^se my two Sons may sit, the one on thy Right
Hand, and the other on the Left, in thy Kingdom. But Jesus answered and said,
Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the Cup, that I shall drink
of? Mat. 20. 20. Ambition is to be avoided in the disposing of Children, and in
seeking Preferment for them: Due Care is to be used, in teaching them to do the
Will of God, and embrace his Appointments.

When the Days of her Purification, according to the Law of Moses, were
accomplished, they brought him (the Infant Jesus) to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord, Luke 1. 22. A good Practice of Parents to offer their Children
daily to God, for obtaining his Grace and Protection upon them.

And they sought him among their Kinsfolk and Acquaintance. And when they found
him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him, Luke 2. 44. It is
the Parents Care, to seek their Children, and to omit no Industry in regaining
them, when they are lost. How often is it necessary to follow them amongst
their Relations and Acquaintance, and to observe their ways!

He arose, and came to his Father. But when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him, and had Compassion, and ran, and fell on his Neck, and kissed
him. And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in
thy Sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. But the Father said to
his Servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on him, and put a Ring on
his Hand, and Shoes on his Feet; and bring hither the fatted Calf, and kill
it; and let us eat and be merry: For this my Son was dead, and is alive again;
he was lost, and is found, Luke 15. 20. Parents are to receive their Children
with Tenderness and Love, when they return from their ill Ways.

Ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to Wrath: but bring them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers, provoke not your
Children to Anger, lest they be discouraged, Col. 3. 21. Parents are to treat
their Children with Mildness, avoiding all that causes Dejection and
Discouragement, and yet bringing them up in the Knowledge and Fear of God.

These are some principal Duties belonging to Parents; which, if duly observed,
will bring Peace of Conscience, and cannot fail of good Effects. But however,
in this important Concern, it cannot be amiss to add something out of the
Old Testament.

Abraham said unto his eldest Servant of his House, that ruled over all that he
had, Put, I pray thee, thy Hand under my Thigh, and I will make thee swear by
the Lord, the God of Heaven, and the God of the Earth, that thou shall not take
a Wife unto my Son of the Daughters of the Canaanites, amongst whom I dwell:
but thou shall go to my Country, and to my Kindred, and take a Wife unto my Son
Isaac, Genesis 24. 2. It ought to be the Solicitude of Parents, to see that their
Children be well married; the Choice of the Person is of great Concern.

And they (the Parents of Rebekah) said, we will call the Damsel, and enquire
at her mouth. And they called Rebekah, and they said unto her, will thou go
with this Man? And she said, I will go, Genesis 24. 57. Children ought not to be
disposed of in Marriage by their Parents, but with their own free consent.

Isaac called Jacob, and Blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou
shall not take a Wife of the Daughters of Canaan, Genesis 28. 1. And Joseph said
to his Father, they are my Sons, whom God has given me in this place. And he
said, bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them. -- And he
blessed Joseph, Genesis 48. 9, 15. It belongs to Parents to be very careful in the
choice of Persons for the Marriage of their Children; and likewise to give them
their Blessing.

These Words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine Heart. And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and thou shall talk of them,
when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Good Instructions to be
given by Parents, and to be often repeated to their Children.

In that Day I will perform against Eli, all things, which I have spoken
concerning his House: when I begin, I will also make an end. For I have told
him, that I will judge his House for ever, for the Iniquity, which he knows:
because his Sons have made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, 1 Samuel
3. 12. Children are to be corrected for the Evil they do. If Reproofs are not
regarded, some other Expedients must be resolved upon; for an Indulgence in
case of Crimes is the Provocation of Judgments.

And the King commanded Joab, and Abishai, and Ittai, saying, Deal gently, for
my sake, with the young Man, even with Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 5. Parents ought to
retain the Bowels of Parents toward their Children, even when they are wicked.

And his Sons went and feasted in their Houses, every one his Day, and sent and
called for their three Sisters, to eat* and to drink with them. And it was so,
when the Days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent, and sanctified
them, and rose up early in the Morning, and offered Burnt-Offerings, according
to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be, that my Sons have sinned,
and cursed God in their Hearts. Thus did Job continually, Job 1. 4. An
excellent Example of Parents, to be watchful over the Conduct of their
Children, and to be solicitous in preventing their falling under God's
Displeasure, and daily praying for them.

My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother. -- My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come
with us; -- My Son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy Foot from
their Path, for their Feet run to Evil, Prove. 1. 8, 15. Parents are to be very
careful in preventing their Childrens falling into ill Company, and industrious
i^ withdrawing them from it, if once engaged.

He that spares his Rod, hates hi^ Son: but he that loves him, chasteneth
him betimes, Prove. 13. 24.

Chasten thy Son, while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his
crying, Prove. 19. 18.

The just Man walks in his Integrity: his Children are blessed after him,
Prove. 20. 7.

Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it, Prove. 22. 6.

Foolishness is bound in the Heart o^ a Child; but the Rod of Correction shall
drive it far from him, Prove. 22. 15.

Withhold not Correction from the Child: For if thou beatest him with the Rod,
he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul
from Hell, Prove. 23. 13, 14.

The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom; but a Child left to himself brings his
Mother to Shame. -- Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest: Yea, he shall
give delight unto thy Soul, Prove. 29. 15, 17.

From these Instructions may Christian Parents know, what is the Will of God,
and how to satisfy those Duties, which God has imposed on them, in regard of
their Children. These Duties are great, and on the due discharge of them
depends no less, than (as Solomon says) delivering their Childrens Souls from
Hell. Nature therefore is not to be a Rule to those, who have undertaken to be
directed by the Will of God. To consult Nature then, either in the Indulging or
Punishing of Children, is to forsake the Rule. Both are to be regulated as God
has prescribed.

CHAP. XXV. Of Children to Parents.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give in this Point?

A. I am come to set a Man at Variance against his Father, and the Daughter
against her Mother, and the Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-law. And a
Man's Foes shall be they of his own Household. He that loves Father or Mother
more than me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 35. Parents are to be loved,
honored, and obeyed in all that is lawful; but not in things contrary to the
known Will of God.

He answered and said unto them; why do ye also transgress the Commandment of
God by your Tradition? For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother:
And he that curses Father or Mother, let him die the Death. But ye say,
whosoever shall say to his Father or his Mother, it is a Gift by whatsoever
thou might be profited by me, and honor not his Father or his Mother, he
shall be free: Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none Effect by your
Tradition, Mat. 15. 3. The Precept of God commanding all to Honor Father and
Mother is not to be transgressed under the Cover of pretended Piety. Such
Glosses are a Violence to the Law of God.

His Mother said unto him, Son, why have thou thus dealt with us? Behold thy
Father and I have sought thee sorrowing. And he said unto them, how is it, that
ye sought me? Wist ye not, that I must be about my Father's Business? Luke 2.
48. God is the first Father, and to be obeyed in the first place. All that is
created must give place to his Will; whatever is not consistent with this, must
yield. He said unto another, follow me: But he said, Lord, suffer me first to
go and bury my Father. Jesus said unto him, Let the Dead bury their Dead; but
go thou and preach the Kingdom of God. And another also said, Lord, I will
follow thee: But let me first go bid them farewell, which are at Home at my
House. And Jesus said unto him, no Man having put his Hand to the Plough, and
looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 59. Domestic Duties are to
give place to greater.

And he (Jesus) went down with them (his Parents) and came to Nazareth, and was
subject unto them, Luke 2. A good Example of Obedience.

And when he came to himself, he said, -- I will arise and go to my Father, and
will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, Luke
15. 17. Children sensible of their undue Ways ought to have recourse to their
Parents, with Confidence and Humility, according to the Example of the Prodigal
Son.

When therefore Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom he
loved, he says unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son. Then says he to the
Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that Hour, that Disciple took her unto
his own Home, Jo. 19. 26. Children ought to be mindful of their Parents,
especially at the Hour of Death, with a Recommendation to their best Friends.

Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: For this is right. Honor thy Father
and Mother, (which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may be well
with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth, Ephesians. 6. 1. A general Duty of
Children to obey and honor their Parents in all that is not Sin: With a
Blessing annexed to it.

Children, obey your Parents in all things: For this is well-pleasing unto the
Lord, Col. 3. 20.

If ye endure chastening, God deals with you, as with Sons: For what Son is
he, whom the Father chasteneth not? -- We have had Fathers of our Flesh, which
corrected us, and we gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in
Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live? For they verily for a few Days
chastened us after their own Pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be
Partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12. 7, 9. Children, even when Chastized by
Parents after their own Pleasure, ought not to lose the Reverence due to them,
but submit with respect.

If any Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them learn first to show Piety at
Home, and to requite their Parents: For that is good and acceptable before God,
1 Timothy 5. 4. An express Duty of Children to be Respectful and Dutiful at Home,
and by such Arguments of Gratitude to make some acknowledgment of the great
Obligation to their Parents. This cannot be expected from little Ones, who are
not capable of these Sentiments, and therefore this must be spoke to Children,
when now grown up and at an Age of giving this Comfort to their Parents.

Here it cannot be unseasonable to make some Additions out of the Old
Testament.

Honor thy Father and thy Mother: That thy Days may be long upon the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee, Exodus 20. 12.

He that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put to Death, Exodus
21. 15.

Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, and his Father, and keep my Sabbaths: I am
the Lord your God, Levit. 19. 3.

Every one, that curses his Father, or his Mother, shall be surely put to
Death: He has cursed his Father or his Mother; his Blood shall be upon him,
Levit. 20. 9.

Honor thy Father and thy Mother, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee; that
thy Days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee, Deuteronomy. 5. 16.

And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the Men of Israel with a loud
Voice; -- cursed be he, that sets Light by his Father or his Mother: And all
the People shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27. 14, 16.

Notwithstanding, they, (the Sons of Eli) hearkened not unto the Voice of their
Father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 25.

Bathsheba therefore went unto King Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah?
And the King rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on
his Throne, and caused a Seat to be set for the King's Mother; and she sat on
his right Hand, 1 Kin. 2. 19.

Esther had not yet showed her Kindred, nor her People, as Modecai had charged
her: For Esther did the Commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought
up with him, Esth. 2. 20.

A wise Son makes a glad Father; but a foolish Son is the Heaviness of his
Mother, Prove. 10. 1.

A Fool despises his Father's Instruction: But he, that regards Reproof, is
Prudent, Prove. 15. 5.

A foolish Son is a Grief to his Father, and Bitterness to her, that bare him,
Prove. 17. 25.

He, that wastes his Father, and chaseth away his Mother, is a Son, that
causes Shame, and brings Reproach. Cease, my Son, to hear the Instruction,
that causes to err from the Words of Knowledge, Prove. 19. 26.

Hearken unto thy Father, that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother, when she
is old, Prove. 23. 22.

Whosoever robs his Father or his Mother, and says, it is no Transgression; the
same is the Companion of a Destroyer, Prove. 28. 24.

The Eye, that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagle shall eat it, Prove.
30. 17.

Jeremiah said unto the House of the Rechabites, thus says the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel, because ye have obeyed the Commandment of Jonadab your
Father, and kept all his Precepts, and done according unto all, that he has
commanded you: Therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
Jonadab the Son of Rechab shall not want a Man to stand before me for ever,
Jer. 35. 18.

Thus speaks the Rule; the Will of God is manifest in it, and the doing his
Will, being the only Secure Way, wherein a Christian is to walk; Children have
no other Means of coming to their Heavenly Father, but by doing his Will here
on Earth, and with a particular Care observing whatever charge he has given
them in Relation to their Parents. The Precept is repeated so often, that there
can be no dispute of it. And yet to see with how little Respect some Parents
are treated; how much others are slighted and neglected; and that many have no
greater affliction in the World, than what is given them by the Children of
their own Bowels; and this at an Age, when Parents stand most in need of
Comfort, and Children being at years of Discretion, cannot be Ignorant of their
Duty: To see this, I say one would think, God had never spoke in the Case, or
not manifested his Will. What then must be said but that Christians have a
Rule, but have little concern in following it, and that, upon this account,
they cannot rationally expect the Blessings God has promised to the Observers
of it? This is the First Commandment, as the Apostle says, with Promise, and it
cannot be questioned, but as the Observance of it is so particularly enforced
with a Promise of God's Favor; so the Contempt of it must be the Forfeiture of
all such Expectation, must provoke God's Displeasure, and be followed with
Judgment.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Youth.
Q. HAving now spoken of the Duties of Children to their Parents: Pray tell me,
are there not some Instructions particularly directed to Persons while yet in
their Youth; for such seem very much to want them?

A. Yes, there are such.

Behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do,
that I may have eternal Life? And he said unto him, why call thou me Good?
There is none Good, but one, that is, God: But if thou will enter into Life,
keep the Commandments. He says unto him, which? Jesus said, Thou shall do no
Murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, Thou shall not
bear false Witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and, thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. The young Man says unto him, all these things have I
kept from my Youth up: What lack I yet? Jesus said unto him, if thou will be
perfect, go and Sell what thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have
Treasure in Heaven; and come and follow me. But when the Young Man heard that
Saying, he went away Sorrowful; for he had great Possessions, Mat. 19. 16. The
Commandments are to be kept by all Persons in their Youth; and even then they
are to consider which is the Way to eternal Life, and whether they walk in it,
and what is yet wanting to them. It is said of this Young Man, that Jesus,
beholding him, loved him, Mar. 10. 21. And thus only can Youth expect the Love
of Jesus. If this be true; then what is the unhappy State of those great
Numbers, who have their Thoughts, Desires, Affections, so confined to
Self-love, and the Love of the World, that they scarce think of another Life!
Grant them, O God, a better Spirit.

And the Child grew, and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with Wisdom; and the
Grace of God was upon him. -- And when he was twelve years Old, they went up to
Jerusalem -- after three Days they found him in the Temple, sitting in the
midst of the Doctors, both bearing them, and asking them questions, Luke 2. 40,
42, 46. And Jesus increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in favor with God and
Man, v. 52. Youth ought to seek the best Company, by whose Conversation, they
may be advanced in Virtue and all true Wisdom. How wretchedly then do they go
out of the Way, who avoiding these, seek and love none but those, from whom
they can learn nothing, but Folly or Vice!

Young Men likewise exhort to be Sober-minded, Tit. 2. 6.

Likewise ye Younger, submit your selves unto the Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

I here add something out of the Old Testament.

Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and honor the Face of the old Man,
and fear thy God: I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 32.

My Son, forget not my Law; but let thine Heart keep my Commandments, Prove. 3.
1. Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee, 3. Trust in the Lord with all thine
Heart, and lean not on own thine own Understanding, 5. Be not wise in thine own
Eyes; fear the Lord and depart from Evil, 7. Get Wisdom, get Understanding:
Forget it not, neither decline from the Woods of my Mouth. Forsake her not, and
she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee, Wisdom is the
principal thing, therefore get Wisdom: And with all thy getting get
Understanding, Pro. 4. 5. Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go; keep
her, for she is thy Life. Enter not into the Path of the Wicked, and go not
into the Way of evil Men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away, v. 13.

He is in the Way of Life, that keeps Instruction: But he, that refuses
Reproof, erreth, Prove. 10. 17.

Whoso loves Instruction, loves Knowledge, but he, that hates Reproof, is
brutish, Prove. 12. 1.

A Man shall be commended acording to his Wisdom, but he, that is of a
perverse Heart, shall be despised, Prove. 12. 8. The way of a Fool is right in
his own Eyes; but he, that hearkeneth unto Counsel, is wise, v. 15. Lying Lips
are Abomination to the Lord; but they, that deal truly, are his delight, v. 22.

A wise Son hears his Father's Instruction: But a Scorner hears not Rebuke,
Prove. 13. 1. He that keeps his Mouth, keeps his Life: But he that opens
wide his Lips, shall have Destruction, v. 3. Poverty and Shame shall be to him,
that refuses Instruction: But he, that regards Reproof, shall be honored, v.
18. He, that walks with wise Men, shall be Wise: But a Companion of Fools
shall be destroyed, v. 20.

He that walks in his Vprightness, fears the Lord; but he, that is perverse
in his Ways, despises him, Prove. 14. 2. Go from the Presence of a foolish Man,
when thou perceivest not in him the Lips of Knowledge, v. 7. Fools Mock at Sin,
v. 9. There is a Way, which seems right unto a Man, but the end thereof are
the Ways of Death, v. 12. He that is slow to Wrath, is of great Understanding;
but he that is hasty of Spirit, exalts Folly, v. 29.

The Way of the Wicked is an Abomination unto the Lord, but he loves him, that
follows after Righteousness, Prove. 15. 9. A Scorner loves not one, that
reproves him; neither will he go unto the Wise, v. 12. The Lord will destroy
the House of the Proud, v. 25. The Thoughts of the Wicked are an Abomination to
the Lord, v. 26. He that refuses Instruction hates his own Soul; but he, that
hears Reproof, gets Understanding, 32. The Fear of the Lord is the
Instruction of Wisdom; and before Honor is Humility, 33.

Every one, that is Proud in Heart, is an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16. 5.
The Highway of the Upright is to depart from Evil: He that keeps his Way,
preserves his Soul, v. 17. Pride goes before Destruction: And a haughty
Spirit before a fall, v. 18. A froward Man sows Strife, and a Whisperer
separateth chief Friends, 28.

A Reproof enters more into a wise Man, than an hundred Stripes into a Fool,
Prove. 17. 10. The beginning of Strife is as when one lets out Water:
Therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with, 14. He, that has
Knowledge spares his Words: -- Even a Fool, when he holds his Peace, is
counted Wise, 27, 28.

A Fool's Lips enter into Contention. -- The words of a Talebearer are as
wounds, Prove. 18. 6, 8. Before Destruction the Heart of Man is haughty, 12.
Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue, 21.

The Discretion of a Man differs his Anger, and it is his Glory to pass over
a Transgression, Prove. 19. 11. Slothfulness casts into a deep Sleep; and an
Idle Soul shall suffer Hunger, 15. He, that has pity upon the Poor, lends
unto the Lord; and that, which he has given, will he pay him again, 17. Hear
Counsel, and receive Instruction, that thou may be wise in thy latter End,
20. Reprove one, that has Understanding, and he will understand Knowledge, 25.

Wine is a Mocker, strong Drink is Raging: And whosoever is deceived thereby
is not wise, Prove. 20. 1. It is an Honor for a Man to cease from Strife: But
every Fool will be meddling, 3. Love not Sleep, lest thou come to Poverty, 13.
He, that goes about as a Talebearer, reveals Secrets, 19.

An high Look, and a proud Heart, and the plowing of the Wicked is Sin, Prove.
21. 4. He, that loves Pleasure, shall be a poor Man, 17.

The Mouth of a strange Women is a deep Pit; he, that is abhorred of the Lord,
shall fall therein, Prove. 22. 14.

Hear thou my Son, and be wise, and guide thine Heart in the Way. Be not
amongst Wine-bibbers; amongst Rioters, Eaters of Flesh: For the Drunkard and
the Glutton shall come to Poverty: and Drowsiness shall Cloth a Man with Rags,
Prove. 23. 19. Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who has
Babbling? Who has Wounds without Cause? Who has Redness of Eyes? They that
tarry long at the Wine; -- at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth
like an Adder. Thine Eyes shall behold strange Women, and thine Heart shall
utter perverse Things. Yea, thou shall be as he, that lies down in the midst
of the Sea, or as he, that lies upon the top of a Mast, 23, 29.

Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days
of thy Youth, and walk in the Ways of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine
Eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee unto
Judgment. -- Childhood and Youth are Vanity, Eccl. 11. 9.

Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the evil Days come
not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them,
Eccl. 12. 1.

It is good for a Man, that he bear the Yoke in his Youth, Lam. 3. 27.

These are Instructions given by the Spirit of God, and particularly directed
to Youth; which, if followed, will lead to true Wisdom; but, if neglected, the
Fruit must be Destruction. The Difficulties of youthful Years are generally
very great; for when the Strength of Passions carries them on, and there is
neither Experience or Apprehension to Stem the Violence of them, they run as
naturally into Mischief, as a Boat adrift down the Stream. Upon this
Consideration is here often pressed, the Necessity of their heark'ning to
Instruction, taking Counsel, admitting of Reproof, as the most effectual Means
for their Security. This Advice is given them by the Spirit of God himself, who
best knows what is necessary for them. Here they have his own Words, and such
particular Directions, as their State requires; if they read them often, and
are Solicitous to make them their Rule, they will with them find Life; but if
they despise them, they despise their own Souls, and the Effects of his
Goodness, who has thus mercifully taken Care of them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Masters and Mistresses of Families.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to these?

A. Such, as they ought carefully to observe, and are as follows.

Behold the Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a Dream, saying, Arise, and
take the young Child and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, Mat. 2. 13. They are
to be watchful against all Dangers, that threaten their Families.

The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man, which sowed good Seed in his
Field: But while Men slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares among the Wheat. --
The Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them up? But
he said, nay, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat
with them, Mat. 13. 24, 28. If they are not very Watchful, variety of Disorders
will insensibly creep into their Families, both as to themselves, their
Children and Servants: And it is their Sloth, Sleeping and Neglect is the
general Occasion of it. For reforming such, great Discretion is necessary, and
this they must earnestly beg of him, who is the Father of Light, and Fountain
of all Wisdom.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Man that is an Householder, which went out
early in the Morning to hire Laborers into his Vineyard. And when he had
agreed with the Laborers; -- when Even was come, the Lord of the Vineyard
says unto his Steward, Call the Laborers, and give them their Hire, Mat. 20.
1, 1. Three Points proper for this State. 1. To be Watchful and Early. 2. To
consider and look into the Business they have to do, and prudently prepare for
the effecting it. 3. To make just Payments, according to Agreement, and without
delay. This last is often of so great Concern, that the Neglect of it is
attended with so many Inconveniences, as to deserve no better Name than of
Injustice and Oppression.

If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8. How great the
Obligation is of providing for Family, may be understood from the frightful
Character, here given; of those, who neglect to do it. O God, how unhappy is
their Condition, who lie under this Guilt! I wish all Heads of Families would
seriously consider it; that, terrified with it, they might be afraid (...)
what should be the Comfort and Provision of their Family. Does not this want
considering, when it is scarce looked upon as a Fault, to throw away Sums upon
Humor and Sport, and to let Idleness and Intemperance eat out Estates? This is
no less, in the Apostle's account, than renouncing Christianity and turning
Heathen; and yet how common is this among those, who esteem themselves
Christians?

The Book of Proverbs describing the virtuous and industrious Woman in her
Family, I here and some part of it:

Who can find a virtuous Woman? For her Price is far above Rubies. The Heart of
her Husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil,
she will do him good, and not evil, all the Days of her Life. She seeks Wool
and Flax, and works willingly with her Hands. She is like the Merchant's
Ship, she brings her Food from afar, she rises also while it is yet Night,
and gives Meat to her Household, and a Portion to her Maidens. -- She lays
her Hands to the Spindle, and her Hands hold the Distaff. She stretches out
her Hand to the Poor, yea, she reaches forth her Hands to the Needy. -- She
makes fine Linen, and sells it, and delivers Girdles unto the Merchant.
Strength and Honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to come.
She opens her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongue is the Law of Kindness.
She looks well to the Ways of her Household, and eats not the Bread of
Idleness. Her Children arise up and call her Blessed, her Husband also, and he
praises her -- Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: But a Woman, that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised, Prove. 31. 10. An excellent Copy! I wish
all would set it before them, and endeavor to come as near it, as their
Circumstances will allow. Resolution and Virtue will make many things very
Practicable, which Sloth and Niceness will not allow to be Possible.

As to Servants.
When Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion,
beseeching him, and saying, Lord, my Servant lies at Home Sick of the Palsy,
grievously tormented. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him, Mat.
8. 5. It is a very commendable Charity in them, to be careful of their
Servants, especially in time of Sickness.

Servants, be Obedient to your Masters, -- with good Will doing Service, as to
the Lord, and not to Men; knowing, that whatsoever good thing any Man does,
the same shall be receive of the Lord, whether he be Bond or Free. And ye
Masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening, knowing, that
your Master also is in Heaven; neither is there respect of Persons with him,
Ephesians. 6. 5, 7.

Masters, give unto your Servants that, which is just and equal; knowing, that
ye also have a Master in Heaven, Col. 4. 1.

I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus, -- which in time past was to thee
unprofitable; but now profitable to thee and to me; whom I have sent again:
Thou therefore receive him, that is mine own Bowels. -- For perhaps he
therefore departed for a Season, that thou should receive him for ever; not
now as a Servant, but above a Servant, a Brother beloved, especially to me, but
how much more unto thee, both in the Flesh, and in the Lord. If thou count me
therefore a Partner, receive him, as my self. If he has wronged thee, or owes
thee Ought, put that on mine Account. I Paul have written it with mine own
Hand, I will repay it, Phil. 10. See, how S. Paul shows favor to a poor
Servant, and pleads for him.

Behold the Hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your Fields, which is
of you kept back by Fraud, cries; and the Cries of them, which have reaped,
are entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath, Jam. 5. 4.

I add something from the Old Testament.

The Hebrew Servant, which thou have brought unto us, come in unto me, to mock
me, Genesis 39. 17. This was a false Accusation of Potipher 's Wife, and ought to
be a Caution against laying Faults upon Servants which are not theirs.

They did set over them Taskmasters, to afflict them with their Burdens. --
And the Egyptians made the Children of Israel to serve with Rigor. And they
made their Lives bitter, with hard Bondage, Exodus 1. 11, 13. To insult over
Servants, to overcharge them with Labor, to give them a perpetual Uneasiness,
is not a Christian, but the Egyptian Method.

Thus says the Lord God of Israel, let my People go, that they may hold a
Feast unto me in the Wilderness, Exodus 5. 1. To hinder Servants from the
Worship of God, and to think all that time lost, which, for this end, is taken
from their Work, is to follow Pharaoh 's Copy.

The Wages of him, that is hired, shall not abide with thee all Night until the
Morning, Lev. 19. 13.

Six Days shall thou Labor, and do all thy Work: But the Seventh Day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thine Ox,
nor thine Ass, nor any of thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger, that is within thy
Gates, that thy Manservant and thy Maidservant may rest, as well thou, Deuteronomy.
5. 13. To keep the Sabbath is the Duty of Servants, as well as Masters.

Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant, that is Poor and Needy, whether he be
of thy Brethren, or of thy Strangers, that are in thy Land within thy Gates. At
this Day, thou shall give him his Hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it,
for he is Poor, and sets his Heart upon it; lest he cry against thee unto
the Lord, and it be Sin unto thee, Deuteronomy. 24. 14.

If I did despise the Cause of my Manservant, or of my Maidservant, when they
contended with me; what then shall I do, when God rises up; and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he, that made me in the Womb, make
him? And did not one fashion us in the Womb? Job 31. 13. The just Complaints of
Servants to be heard with Patience, and Justice to be done them.

Here are Instructions for all, that have the Care of Families and Servants,
enough to let them see, what God expects from them. Those, who are Solicitous
to please God, will endeavor to make these their Rule; and this is the Duty of
all, who profess themselves Christians: But to follow the Inclinations of
Nature, and to govern by Passion, in cases, where God has manifested his Will,
is not the part of a Disciple of Christ.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Servants.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to Christians of this State?

A. It speaks directly to them, and in such a manner, that it is their great
Concern to know and remember it.

Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over
his Household, to give them Meat in due Season? Blessed is that Servant, whom
his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. Verily, I say unto you, that he
shall make him Ruler over all his Goods. But and if that evil Servant shall say
in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his Coming, and shall begin to smite his
Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the Drunken: The Lord of that
Servant shall come in a Day, when he looks not for him, and in an Hour, that
he is not ware of; and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his Portion with
the Hypocrites: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 24. 45.
Fidelity, Prudence and Moderation, is here commended to Servants; and their
Guilt is here declared, who are Imperious over their Fellow Servants, deal
harshly with them, or wast what belongs to those, whom they serve.

Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. -- And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: There shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25. 21, 30. A Reward is here promised to
the faithful and industrious Servant, who is truly Zealous in his Master's
Interest: And Punishment declared against the Slothful and Faithless, who are
not Solicitous for their Master's Advantage.

Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find
watching, Luke 12. 37. Their Fidelity is rewarded, who, in the Master's
Absence, are Solicitous to discharge their Duty well.

That servant, which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom
Men have committed much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12. 47. The
Servant's Rule is the Will of the Master in all, that is not Sin. He is the
best Servant, who not only does according to his Master's Orders, but also
according to his Desires. But he, that knows his Master's Will, and yet does it
not, is not true to what he has undertaken.

I am resolved what to do, that when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may
receive me into their houses, Luke 16. 4. So said this Steward, and
accordingly, raised himself Friends at his Master's Cost: But this being the
unjust Steward, it is a thing, which Servants are not to imitate, but avoid as
an Injustice.

He, that is faithful in that, which is least, is faithful also in much: And
he, that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10. To be
Faithful in little things is an Argument of true Fidelity.

Servants, be obedient to them, that are your Masters according to the flesh,
with Fear and Trembling, in singleness of your heart; as unto Christ: Not with
eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart; with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to
Men: Knowing, that whatsoever good thing, any Man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be Bond or Free, Ephesians. 6. 5. Servants, obey in
all things your Masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as
Men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: And whatsoever ye do, do
it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto Men; knowing, that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance: For ye serve the Lord Christ. But
he, that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong, which he has done: And
there is no respect of Persons, Col. 3. 22. This Lesson thus repeated by S.
Paul, ought to be considered Word by Word; if it were read every Day by
Servants, this would not be too often.

Let as many servants, as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. And they,
that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are
brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved,
partakers of the benefit, 1 Timothy 6. 1.

Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them well
in all things; not answering again; not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things,
Tit. 2. 9.

Servants, be subject to your Masters with all Fear, not only to the Good and
Gentle, but also to the Froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a Man for
Conscience toward God endure grief; suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it,
if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But, if
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God. For even hereunto were ye called: Because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his steps; who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth: Who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him, that
judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 18.

Thus speaks the Rule, both to the Instruction and Comfort of Servants: It
requires them to be Careful and Faithful in their Duty, not with Eye-service,
but as serving God, is always Present, and Witness whether of their Fidelity or
Sloth. It requires them to give Respect and be Obedient to their Masters, and
this not only if they are Gentle and Mild, but even if they are Froward and
Uneasy. It requires them to suffer with Patience, not only the Labor of their
State, but likewise all Trials, as are frequent in their Circumstances, such as
are Reproofs, Reproaches, or even Blows; and these, not only, when they are
deserved, by their Faults, but even when they have done well, and therefore
deserved them not. For their Encouragement, the Apostle lays before them the
Example of Christ; and lets them know, that God is not a Respecter of Persons,
and therefore, that if they serve faithfully, as to the Lord, and suffer
patiently, according to the Example of Christ, they may confide in God, as
their faithful Rewarder. Such, as do thus, are Christian Servants, and in as
good a Way of being Great in the Kingdom of Heaven, as those, whom they serve.
But then, if they follow not this Advice, are Eye-servants, are neither Careful
in what they are to do, nor Patient in what they suffer, how unhappy are they!
A kind of Slaves here, and little Hopes of being better hereafter.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Merchants, Shopkeepers, and all Dealers.
WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to Persons of this Profession?

A. It lays down some Principles, which it is their Duty to observe.

As ye would, that Men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke 6.
31.

All things, whatsoever ye would, that Men should do to you, do ye even so to
them: For this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7. 12.

This is the Will of God, -- that no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in
any matter; because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we also have
forewarned you, and testified, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 6.

He, that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong, which he has done; and
there is no Respect of Persons, Col. 3. 25.

Thou know the Commandments, do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not
steal, do not bear false witness, defraud not, honor thy Father and Mother,
Mar. 10. 19.

Nay, you do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren: Know ye not, that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, -- nor Thieves -- shall inherit the Kingdom of God,
1 Cor. 6. 8.

God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things, which are not
convenient: Being filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, --
Covetousness, Maliciousness; full of Envy, -- Debate, Deceit, Malignity, --
Despiteful, Proud, Boasters, -- Covenant-breakers, Romans 1. 28, 29.

Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor; for we
are members one of another. -- Neither give place to the Devil; let him, that
stole, steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with the hands the
thing, which is good, Ephesians. 4. 25, 27.

Behold the hire of the Laborers which have reaped down your Fields, which is
of you kept back by Fraud, cries: And the Cries of them, which have reaped,
are entered into the ears of the Lord, Jam. 5. 4.

Neither is he, that planteth, any thing, neither he, that waters; but God,
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 7.

Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 33. No Man can serve two Masters: -- Ye cannot
serve God and Mamon, v. 24.

What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his soul? Mar. 8. 36.

Take heed and beware of Covetousness: For a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things, which he possesses, Luke 12. 15.

They, that will be rich, fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. For
the Love of Money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

This I say, Brethren, the time is short. It remains, that -- they that buy
(be) as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing
it; for the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30.

With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2.

I here add something out of the Old Testament.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in Mete-yard, in Weight or in
Measure. Just Balances, just Weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall ye
have, I am the Lord your God. -- Therefore shall ye observe all my Statutes,
and all my Judgments, and do them; I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 35.

Thou shall not have in thy Bag diverse Weights, a great and a small. Thou
shall not have in thine House diverse Measures, a great and a small. But thou
shall have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou
have: That thy Days may be lengthened in the Land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. For all, that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an Abomination unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 25. 13.

A false Balance is Abomination to the Lord: But a just Weight is his
Delight, Prove. 11. 1. He, that withholdeth Corn, the People shall Curse him:
But Blessing shall be upon the Head of him, that sells it, v. 26.

Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both of them are alike Abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 20. 10.

Hear this, O ye, that swallow up the Needy, even to make the Poor of the Land
to fail; saying, when will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn, and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Sheckel
great, and falsifying the Balances by Deceit? That we may buy the Poor for
Silver, and the Needy for a pair of Shoes, yea, and sell the Refuse of the
Wheat? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will never
forget any of their works. Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one
mourn, that dwells therein? Amos 8. 4.

The Lord's Voice cries unto the City, and the Men of Wisdom shall see thy
Name; hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. Are there yet the Treasures
of Wickedness in the House of the Wicked, and the scant measure, that is
abominable? Shall I count them pure with the wicked Balances, and with the Bag
of deceitful Weights? For the rich Men thereof are full of Violence, and the
Inhabitants thereof have spoken Lies, and their Tongue is deceitful in their
Mouth. Therefore also will I make thee Sick in smiting thee, in making thee
desolate, because of thy Sins, Mic. 6. 9.

Thus speaks the Rule, and in such plain and positive Terms has God here
manifested his Will, that there can be no doubt in such, as desire to follow
it. He expressly forbids all kind of Fraud, or Overreaching, or doing any Wrong
to our Neighbor in buying or selling. He expressly forbids all kinds of false
Weights and Measures. He expressly forbids all such Monopoly, as raises the
price of Necessaries, and oppresses the Poor. He expressly forbids all kinds of
Lying and Covetousness. Those, who in earnest hope for Salvation of God, must
be Solicitous to do his Will; and since he himself has declared, that those,
who do otherwise in these Particulars, do what is an Abomination to him, they
cannot doubt of their being in an ill Way, even in the displeasure of God. Now
examine the general Practice of Christians in all manner of Dealing with one
another, and thence guess, whether God has Forbid all Fraud and Overreaching
amongst them: And if he has, whether they believe him, or have any regard to
his Precepts.

CHAP. XXX. Of Magistrates and Officers of Justice.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to Persons in this Station?

A. There are several Particulars proper for their Instruction.

Now the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Counsel sought false witness
against Jesus, to put him to Death, Mat. 26. 59. Then the High Priest rent his
Clothes, saying, He has spoken Blasphemy, what farther need have we of
witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his Blasphemy, What think ye? v. 65.
Innocence is not to be oppressed by Calumny or false Witnesses; neither is
Caiphas to be imitated, who, being Judge, made himself a Party.

The chief Priests and Elders persuaded the Multitude, that they should ask
Barabbas, and destroy Jesus, Mat. 27. 20. When Pilate saw, that he could
prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took Water and washed
his Hands before the Multitude, saying, I am Innocent of the Blood of this just
Person: See ye to it. -- Then released he Barabbas unto them: And when he had
scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified, v. 24, 26. No Party to be
made against the Innocent. Passion and Violence carry away the Multitude to
Injustice. The Innocent is not to be condemned in compliance with them.

Then cried they all again, saying, not this Man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas
was a Robber. Jo. 18. 40. The Multitude blinded with Passion. Their Affection
or Judgment is no direction for doing Justice.

Jesus answered, thou could have no Power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above, Jo. 19. 11. The Power of Judges is from God.

From thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: But the Jews cried out, saying,
if thou let this Man go, thou art not Cesar's Friend: Whosoever makes himself
a King, speaks against Caesar. When Pilate therefore heard that Saying, he
brought Jesus forth. -- Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be
crucified, Jo. 19. 12. To condemn the Innocent for fear of displeasing the
Prince, is not Just, but a Weakness.

There was in a City a Judge, which feared not God, neither regarded Men. And
there was a Widow in that City, and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of
mine Adversary; and he would not for a while, Luke 18. 2. To neglect the Cause
of the Widow, is part of his Character, who feared not God, nor regarded Man.

One of the Company said unto him, Master, speak to my Brother, that he divide
the Inheritance with me. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a Judge or a
Divider over you? Luke 12. 13. The Commission or Power is not to be exceeded.

Paul said unto him (the High Priest) God shall smite thee, thou whited Wall:
For sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to be smitten
contrary to the Law? And they, that stood by, said, revilest thou God's
High Priest? Then said Paul, I wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest:
For it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People, Acts
23. 3. Magistrates not to be reviled, even when they act contrary to Justice.
No Punishment just before Sentence.

We have found this Man a pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all
the Jews throughout the World, and a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes:
Who also has gone about to profane the Temple: Whom we took, and would have
judged according to Law. -- And the Jews also assented, saying, that these
things were so. Then Paul, after that the Governor had beckened unto him to
speak, answered, Acts 24. 5. A severe Charge is drawn up against Innocence,
when Malice or false Zeal influence the Informers. But a just Judge is not made
a Party, but hears with Patience, and judges according to Equity.

Felix trembled and answered, Go thy Way for this time, when I have a
convenient Season, I will call for thee. He hoped also, that Money should have
been given him of Paul, that he might loose him: Wherefore he sent for him the
oftener, and communed with him. But after two years, Porcius Festus came into
Felix room: And Felix willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound,
Acts 24. 25. To prolong a Cause for Interest, is not just; to wait for Money,
where Innocence pleads for a Discharge, is not just: To gratify a People by
the Oppression of Innocence, is not just.

When Felix heard these things (the Plea made by the Apostle) having more
perfect Knowledge of that Way, he deferred them, Acts 24. 22. The Clamor and
Violence of Accusers prevail nothing with a Judge, who has a true Knowledge of
the Cause: He will not let an ill Name be enough for punishing the Innocent.

Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous Judgment, Jo. 7. 24.

Do ye not know, that the Saints shall judge the World? And if the World shall
be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 1 Cor. 6. 2.
Holiness an excellent Preparation for judging according to Justice.

When Gallio was Deputy of Achaia, the Jews made Insurrection with one accord
against Paul, and brought him to the Judgment Seat, saying, This Fellow
persuades Men to worship God contrary to the Law. And when Paul was now about
to open his Mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If it were a matter of Wrong, or
wicked Lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would, that I should bear with you: But if
it be a question of Words and Names, and of your Law, look ye to it, for I will
be no Judge of such Matters. And he drove them from the Judgment Seat, Acts 18.
12. Violence brings some to the Bar, who are no Criminals; the Justice of the
Bench is to distinguish. Against Law, is in some Cases to be in the right. The
Bench judges not of Causes, which belong to another Court.

Something may be here inserted out of the Old Testament.

When Moses Father in-law, saw all that he did to the People, he said, what is
this thing, that thou do to the People? Why sit thou thy self alone, and
all the People stand by thee from Morning unto Even? Exodus 18. 14. To make the
People wait one Day is here reproved; what would have been the Censure of
Causes delayed, with endless Expense?

Thou shall provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of
Truth, hating Covetousness, and place such over them, Exodus 18. 21. Good
Directions for the Choice of Magistrates.

Thou shall not raise (or receive) a false Report: Put not thine Hand with the
Wicked to be an unrighteous Witness. Thou shall not follow a Multitude, to do
Evil: Neither shall thou speak in a Cause, to incline after many, to wrest
Judgment. Neither shall thou countenance a poor Man in his Cause. -- Thou shall
not wrest the Judgment of thy Poor in his Cause. Keep thee far from a false
Matter; and the Innocent and Righteous slay thou not: For I will not justify
the Wicked. And thou shall take no Gift; for the Gift blinds the Wise, and
perverteth the Words of the Righteous. Also thou shall not oppress a Stranger,
Exodus 23. 1, 6.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment; thou shall not respect the Person
of the Poor, nor honor the Person of the Mighty: But in Righteousness shall
thou judge thy Neighbor, Levit. 19. 15.

I charged your Judges at that time, saying, hear the Causes between your
Brethren, and judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the
Stranger, that is with him. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but you
shall hear the Small, as well as the Great; you shall not be afraid of the
Face of Man, for the Judgment is God's, Deuteronomy. 1. 16.

Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the Lord thy
God gives thee, throughout the Tribes; and they shall judge the People with
just Judgment. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall respect Persons,
neither take a Gift: For a Gift does blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert
the Words of the Righteous. That which is altogether Just, shall thou follow,
that thou may live and inherit the Land, Deuteronomy. 16. 18.

One VVitness shall not rise up against a Man, for any Iniquity, or for any
Sin, in any Sin, that he sins: At the mouth of two VVitnesses, or at the
mouth of three VVitnesses shall the matter be established, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.

If there be a Controversy between Men, and they come unto Judgment, that the
Judges may judge them, then they shall justify the Righteous, and condemn the
Wicked, Deuteronomy. 25. 1.

Cursed be he, that perverteth the Judgment of the Stranger, Fatherless and
VVidow: And all the People shall say, Amen. Cursed be he, that takes reward,
to slay an innocent Person, Deuteronomy. 27. 19, 25.

And it came to pass, when Samuel was Old, that he made his Sons Judges over
Israel. -- And his Sons walked not in his VVays, but turned aside after Lucre,
and took Bribes, and persuaded Judgment, 1 Samuel 8. 1, 3.

And Samuel said unto all Israel, -- Behold, here I am, VVitness against me
before the Lord, and before his Anointed: Whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass
have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Or of whose
Hand have I received any Bribe to blind mine Eyes therewith? And I will restore
it. And they said, thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have
thou taken ought of any Man's Hand, 1 Samuel 12. 1, 3.

And he (Jehoshaphat) set Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced Cities
of Judah, City by City; and he said to the Judges, take heed what ye do; for ye
judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment.
Wherefore now let the Fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: For
there is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking
of Gifts. -- And he charged them, saying, thus shall ye do in the fear of the
Lord, faithfully and with a perfect Heart. -- Deal courageously, and the Lord
shall be with the Good, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 9, 11.

Whoso rewards Evil for Good, Evil shall not depart from his House, Prove.
17. 13. He, that justifies the Wicked, and he, that condemns the Just; even
they both are Abomination to the Lord, v. 15. A wicked Man takes a Gift out of
the Bosom, to pervert the Ways of Judgment, v. 23.

Rob not the poor, because he is poor: Neither oppress the afflicted in the
Gate. For the Lord will plead their Cause, and spoil the Soul of those, that
spoiled them, Prove. 22. 22.

To have respect of Persons, is not good: For, for a piece of Bread, that Man
will transgress, Prove. 28. 21.

Learn to do Well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless,
plead for the Widow, Isa. 1. 17.

How is the faithful City become an Harlot! It was full of Judgment,
Righteousness lodged in it; but now Murderers. -- Thy Princes are Rebellious,
and Companions of Thieves: Every one loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards:
They judge not the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow come unto
them. Therefore says the Lord -- I will turn my Hand upon thee, Isa. 1. 21.

Woe unto them, that call evil good, and good evil: -- Which justify the
Wicked for Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him:
-- Because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, -- therefore is
the Anger of the Lord kindled against his People, Isa. 5. 20, 23.

VVo unto them, that decree unrighteous Decrees, and that write Grievousness,
which they have prescribed: To turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and to take
away the Right from the Poor of my People, that Widows may be their prey, and
that they may rob the Fatherless. And what will you do in the Day of
Visitation, and in the Desolation, which shall come? Isa. 10. 1.

I know your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty Sins: They afflict the
Just, they take a Bribe, and they turn aside tbe Poor in the Gate from their
Right. -- Hate the Evil, and love the Good, and establish Judgment in the Gate:
It may be, that the Lord of Hosts will be gracious unto the Remnant of Joseph,
Amos 5. 12.

The Good Man is perished out of the Earth: And there is none Upright among
Men: They all lie in wait for Blood: They hunt every Man his Brother with a
Net. That they may do Evil with both Hands earnestly; the Prince asks, and
the Judge asks for a Reward: And the great Man he utters his mischievous
Desire, Mic. 7. 2.

Why do thou show me Iniquity, and cause me to behold Grievance: For Spoiling
and Violence are before me, and there are, that raise up Strife and Contention.
Therefore the Law is slacked, and Judgment does never go forth: For the Wicked
does compass about the Righteous: Therefore wrong Judgment proceeds. Behold
ye among the Heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously; for I will work a
Work in your Days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you, Hab. 1. 3.

These are the things, that ye shall do; speak ye every Man the Truth to his
Neighbor: Execute the Judgment of Truth and Peace in your Gates. And let none
of you imagine evil in your Hearts against his Neighbor, and love no false Oath,
for all these are things, that I hate, says the Lord, Zech. 8. 16.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Subjects.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to Persons in this Station?

A. It expressly mentions several Duties belonging to them, and gives the Charge
with great Strictness.

When they were come to Capernaum, they that received Tribute-money, came to
Peter, and said, does not your Master pay Tribute? He says, Yes, Mat. 17. 24.

Render therefore unto Caesar, the things, which are Cesar's; and unto God, the
things, that are God's, Mat. 22. 21.

And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the
Name of Jesus. But Peter and John answered and said unto them; whether it be
right in the Sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye,
Acts 4. 18.

They, that stood by, said, revilest thou God's High Priest? Then said Paul, I
wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest; for it is written, thou shall
not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People, Acts 23. 4.

Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; for there is no Power, but
of God: The Powers, that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: And they, that resist, shall receive
to themselves Damnation. For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the
Evil. Will thou then not he afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same: For he is the Minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that, which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon
him, that does Evil. Wherefore, ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience sake. For, for this Cause pay you Tribute also: For
they are God's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their Dues: Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13. 1.

I exhort therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and giving of Thanks be made for all Men: For Kings, and for all, that are in
Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work, to speak evil of no Man, to be no
Brawlers, but Gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men, Tit. 3. 1.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: Whether it
be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them, that do
well. For so is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
Ignorance of Foolish Men: As free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak of
Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor all Men. Love the Brotherhood.
Fear God. Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 13.

The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve
the unjust unto the Day of Judgment to be punished: But chiefly them, that walk
after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, and despise Government:
Presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak Evil of
Dignities; whereas Angels, which are greater in Power and Might, bring not
railing Accusation against them before the Lord, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and
speak evil of Dignities, Jude 8.

Something may be here not unseasonably added out of the Old Testament.

They answered Joshua, saying, All, that thou command us, we will do; and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go. According as we hearkened unto Moses
in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: Only the Lord thy God be with
thee, as he was with Moses. Whosoever he be, that does rebel against thy
Commandment, and will not hearken unto thy Words, in all, that thou command
him, he shall be put to Death, Josh. 1. 16.

Then Samuel told the People the manner of the Kingdom, and wrote it in a Book,
and laid it up before the Lord: And Samuel sent all the People away every Man
to his House. And Saul also, went Home to Gibeah, and there went with him a
Band of Men, whose Hearts God had touched. But the Children of Belial said, how
shall this Man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no Presents: But
he held his peace, 1 Samuel 10. 25.

The Men of David said unto him, behold, the Day of which the Lord said unto
thee, Behold, I will deliver thine Enemy into thine Hand, that thou may do
to him, as it shall seem good unto thee. -- And he said unto his Men, the Lord
forbid, that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lord's Anointed, to
stretch forth mine Hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord. So
David stayed his Servants with these Words, and suffered them not to rise
against Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 6.

Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered thine Enemy into thine Hand
this Day: Now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the Spear, even to
the Earth at once, -- and David said to Abishai, destroy him not: For who can
stretch forth his Hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless? David
said furthermore, as the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his Day
shall come to Die, or he shall descend into Battle and perish. The Lord forbid,
that I should stretch forth mine Hand against the Lord's Anointed, 1 Samuel 26. 8.

David said unto him, (the Amalekite) How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine Hand, to destroy the Lord's Anointed? And David called one of the
young Men and said, go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him, that he died,
2 Samuel 1. 14.

In those Days (while Mordecai sat in the King's Gate) two of the King's
Chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those, which kept the Door, were wroth,
and sought to lay Hand on the King Ahasuerus: And the thing was known to
Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the Queen, and Esther certified the King
thereof, in Mordecai's Name, Esth. 2. 21.

The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, whosoever provokes him to Anger,
sins against his own Soul, Prove. 20. 2.

My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them, that are
given to change. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
Ruin of them both? Prove. 24. 21.

Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought, Eccl. 10. 20.

The Nation and Kingdom, which will not serve the same Nebechadnezzar the King
of Babylon, and that will not put their Neck under the Yoke of the King of
Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the Sword, and with
the Famine, and with the Pestilence, until I have consumed them by his Hand.
Therefore hearken not ye to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your
Dreamers, nor to your Enchanters, nor to your Sorcerers, which speak unto you,
saying, ye shall not serve the King of Babylon. For they prophecy a Lie unto
you, to remove you far from your Land, and that I should drive you out, and ye
should perish. -- I spoke also to Zedekiah King of Judah according to all these
Words, saying, bring your Necks under the Yoke of the King of Babylon, and
serve him and his People, and live; why will ye die, thou and thy People, by
the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence, as the Lord has spoken
against the Nation, that will not serve the King of Babylon? Jer. 27. 8, 12.

The Duty of Subjects is published by the Spirit of God: First, That they are
to acknowledge the Power, that is over them, to be of God. 2dly, That they, who
are vested with Sovereign Power, acting by the Authority of God, and being
therefore his Ministers, Honor, Obedience, and Tribute is due to them. 3dly,
That there may be an Exception in the Obedience; that is, when they enjoin what
is contrary to the known Will of God; since it cannot be reasonable to obey in
such things, when they command contrary to his Orders, whose Ministers they
are. 4thly, That as the Orders of those in Power are to be received with
Obedience, so their Punishment with a peaceable Submission: And this so far,
that, whether they prosecute justly or unjustly, yet no Resistance can be made
against them; all that Subjects can do in this case, is either to suffer with
patience, or peaceably to withdraw; but as for lifting up hand against Power,
it is resisting the Ordinance of God, and the fruit of this, as the Apostle has
declared, is Damnation.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Persons of Quality.
Q. ARE there any Directions in the Gospel for Persons of this Rank?

A. Some Instructions there are, which it may not be improper for these to
consider, which I will set down here; but they being likewise concerned in the
next Chapter, I must recommend that to their perusal.

Ye see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the Flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble, are called. But God has chosen the foolish things
of the World, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
World, to confound the things, which are mighty; and base things of the World,
and things, which are despised, has God chosen, yea, and things, which are
not, to bring to naught things that are: That no Flesh should glory in his
presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption: That, according as it is
written, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 26. God makes
not choice of Persons from their Greatness, Wisdom or Nobility; he chose the
contemptible things of this World, to confound all Confidence and Glory, except
that, which is in God alone.

My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory,
with respect of Persons. For if there come unto your Assembly a Man with a gold
Ring, in goodly Apparel, and there come in also a poor Man in vile Raiment; and
ye have respect to him, that wears the gay Clothing, and say unto him, sit
thou here in a good place; and say to the Poor, stand thou there, or sit here
under my Footstool: Are ye not then Partial in your selves, and are become
Judges of evil Thoughts? Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the
Poor of this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them, that love him? But ye have despised the Poor. Do not rich Men
oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment-seats? Do not they blaspheme the
worthy Name, by the which ye are called? Jam. 2. 1. To be Partial in the
Respect of Persons, the Spirit of God disapproves. Humane Greatness has no
Preference with God. To be Honorable, in the Gospel-scheme, is to do that,
which the Gospel most recommends, and for which a Soul shall find Honor with
God. They, who do this, are truly Honorable.

Some additions may be here made out of the Old Testament.

David went out, whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely, 1 Samuel 18. 5. A virtuous and prudent Conduct is a sure Step to Honor; this cannot
fail of being valued. But great Titles, Retinue and Riches joined with a light
Head and Indiscretion, help to make a Person more remarkably Contemptible.

The King (David) said; and where is thy Master's Son? And Ziba said unto the
King, behold, he abides at Jerusalem: For he said, to Day shall the House of
Israel restore me the Kingdom of my Father. Then said the King to Ziba, behold,
thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16. 3. A Servant thus
made his Court to the King, by falsely accusing his Master, and disgracing him
with his Prince. Such a Step to Honor is base, only fit for a treacherous
Servant; and cannot be attempted without Infamy.

And Barzillai said unto the King, how long have I to live, that I should go up
with the King unto Jerusalem? 2 Samuel 19. 34. To retire from Court and public
Business, for making a Preparation for Death, is Christian Discretion.
Solicitude of Business and Variety of Engagements are not a Help for dying
well. Persons so taken up do not leave the World, but are torn from it.

Why boastest thou thy self, in Mischief, O mighty Man? The Goodness of God
endures continually. Thy Tongue devises Mischiefs; like a sharp Razor,
working deceitfully. Thou love Evil more than Good; and Lying, rather than to
speak Righteousness. Thou love all devouring, O thou deceitful Tongue. God
shall likewise destroy thee for ever, Psalm. 52. 1. There is Meanness in
Boasting, in Malice, in Detraction and Lying, which is not consistent with true
Honor. Where there is Quality, there ought to be an Abhorrence of all that is
thus Base; and nothing can be more degrading, than to be familiar with it. What
are then Titles, State and Birth, where there is a Familiarity with Lying,
Detraction, Malice and Vanity? Such may make a Show at a Distance, but more
nearly examined, they are certainly Contemptible. Without Repentance, their
Fate must be to be despised and trampled on by Devils.

See thou a Man diligent in his Business? He shall stand before Kings, he
shall not stand before mean Men, Prove. 22. 29. Sloth is unbecoming all States;
and where is the Honor of being a Drone? Industry with a low Birth, is more
Honorable than useless Quality. Is he Idle and Lazy? Say no more; whatever his
Blood be, he is Infamous.

Daniel purposed in his Heart, that he would not defile himself with the
Portion of the King's Meat, nor with the Wine which he drank: Therefore he
requested of the Prince of the Eunuchs, that he might not defile himself, Dan.
1. 8. True Greatness of Mind; not to transgress the Law of God, in Compliance
with the King! Such Fidelity, proof against Interest and Flattery, is truly
Honorable. But what degree then of contemptible Meanness is in all those, who
knowing their Duty to God, and the Honor of their Nature, have not Strength of
Mind to withstand ordinary Attempts, but surrender upon every Breath of
Flattery or Reproach!

They make the King glad with their Wickedness, and the Princes with their
Lies: They are all Adulterers, Hos. 7. 3. This was the Provocation of Israel.

Hear this word, ye Kine of Bashan, that are in the Mountain of Samaria, which
oppress the Poor, which crush the Needy, which say to their Masters, bring and
let us drink, Amos 4. 1. This was the Crime of the great Ones of Israel,
Oppression and Excess.

Woe to them, that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the Mountain of Samaria, --
ye that put far away the evil Day, and cause the Seat of Violence to come near,
that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat
the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall; that
chant to the Sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music,
like David, that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments, but they are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph: Therefore now
shall they go Captive, with the first, that go Captive, and the Banquet of
them, that stretched themselves, shall be removed: The Lord God has sworn by
himself, says the Lord the God of Hosts, I abhor the Excellency of Jacob, and
hate his Palaces: Therefore will I deliver up the City, with all that is
therein, Amos 6. 1, 3. The Prophet reckons up the Provocations of Israel; their
Life of Ease, of Oppression, of expensive Ambition, Gluttony, Wantonness,
Divertisements, Intemperance, effeminate Nicety and Softness. And was it thus,
O Israel, thou did draw upon thy self the hatred of God and Desolation? Then
unhappy all they, who walk on in these Steps.

Quality is Honorable, and has many Advantages both as to this World and the
next, in the Plenty of Blessings annexed to it. But then, must not this be
received, as a Christian Maxim, that nothing is truly Honorable, which God
despises? And what is the Consequence of this, but, that if Persons of Quality,
by their Irregularities and Sins, forsake God, they forfeit their Dignity, and
though still saluted with Honor by Men, are not really Honorable? For though Man
may be so unjust, as to despise what is truly Valuable; yet, not so in God;
what he despises, is most certainly despicable. By this Rule, may Persons of
this Degree, see the only Expedient of maintaining the Dignity of their Rank,
that is, by the Practice of solid Virtue, and being Faithful in the service of
that sovereign and infinite Majesty, which we confess and adore: If they
forsake this Way, there is so much of Falseness, Baseness and Treachery
Inseparable from a Life of Folly and Vice, that there can be no claim to Honor,
where there is nothing but what deserves Contempt.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Rich.
Q. WHAT Directions does the the Gospel give to these?

A. It speaks directly to them; showing the Danger and Abuse of Riches, as
likewise the good Use, that may be made of them in order to eternal Life.

I. Of the Danger and Abuse of Riches, and of Covetousness.
Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, Verily, I say unto you, that a rich Man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of God. And again I say unto you, It is
easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of God. When his Disciples heard it, they were
exceedingly amazed, saying, who then can be saved? But Jesus beheld them, and
said unto them, with Men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible, Mat. 19. 23.

Woe unto you, that are rich; for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto
you, that are full: For ye shall hunger. Woe unto you, that laugh now, for ye
shall mourn and weep, Luke 6. 24.

And he said unto them, take heed and beware of Covetousness; for a Man's Life
consists not in the Abundance of the things, which he possesses. And he
spoke a Parable unto them, saying, the Ground of a certain rich Man brought
forth plentifully. And he thought within himself, saying, what shall I do,
because I have no room, where to bestow my Fruits? And he said, this will I do,
I will pull down my Barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my
Fruits and my Goods. And I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods laid
up for many Years; take thine Ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God said unto
him, thou Fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Then, whose
shall those things be, which thou have provided? So is he, that lays up
Treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God, Luke 12. 15.

There was a certain rich Man, which was clothed in Purple, and fine Linen,
and fared sumptuously every Day. And there was a certain Beggar, named Lazarus,
which was laid at his Gate full of Sores. And desiring to be fed with the
Crumbs, which fell from the rich Man's Table: Moreover the Dogs came and licked
his Sores. And it came to pass, that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom: The rich Man also died, and was buried. And in
Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his Bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus that he may dip the Tip of his Finger in Water and cool my
Tongue; for I am tormented in this Flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember, that
thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things: But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented, Luke 16. 19.

Go to now ye rich Men, weep and howl for your Miseries, that shall come upon
you. Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments are moth-eaten. Your Gold and
Silver is cankered; and the Rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your Flesh, as it were Fire: Ye have heaped Treasure together for the
last Days. Behold, the Hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your
Fields, which is of you kept back by Fraud, cries, and the Cries of them,
which have reaped, are entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have
lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts,
as in a Day of Slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the Just; and he does
not resist you, Jam. 5. 1.

Thou say, I am Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing;
and know not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that thou may
be Rich; and white Raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the Shame of
thy Nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine Eyes with Eye Salve, that thou
may see, Revel. 3. 17.

Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

They, that will be rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many
hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. For the Love of
Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred
from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Let your Conversation be without Covetousness; and be content with such
things, as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee,
Heb. 13. 5.

Mortify therefore your Members, which are upon the Earth, evil Concupiscence,
and Covetousness, which is Idolatry: For which things sake, the Wrath of God
comes on the Children of Disobedience, Col. 3. 5.

Some additions out of the Old Testament.

He has swallowed down Riches, and he shall vomit them again: God shall cast
them out of his Belly. -- That which he labored for, shall he restore, and
shall not swallow it down: According to his Substance shall the Restitution be,
and he shall not rejoice therein. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken
the Poor; because he has violently taken away an House, which he builded not.
-- In the fullness of his Sufficiency, he shall be in Straits: Every Hand of the
Wicked shall come upon him, Job 20. 15.

Is not thy Wickedness great, and thine Iniquities infinite? For thou have
taken a Pledge from thy Brother for naught, and stripped the Naked of their
Clothing. Thou have not given Water to the Weary to drink, and thou have
withholden Bread from the Hungry. -- Thou have sent Widows away empty, and the
Arms of the Fatherless have been broken. Therefore Snares are round about thee,
and sudden Fear troubles thee, Job 22. 5.

Some remove the Landmarks: They violently take away Flocks, and feed thereof.
They drive away the Ass of the Fatherless, they take the Widows Ox for a
Pledge. -- They turn the Needy out of the Way: The Poor of the Earth hide
themselves together. -- They pluck the Fatherless from the Breast, and take a
Pledge of the Poor. -- They are of those, that rebel against the Light; they
know not the Paths thereof, Job 24. 2.

Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the Glory of his House is
increased. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: His Glory shall not
descend after him. Though whilst he lived, he blessed his Soul: And Men will
praise thee, when thou do well to thy self. He shall go to the Generation of
his Fathers; they shall never see Light. Man, that is in Honor, and
understands not, is like the Beast that perish, Psalm. 49. 16.

God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dewlling place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living.
The Righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him. Lo this is the
Man, that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his
Riches, and strengthened himself in his Wickedness, Psalm. 52. 5.

Trust not in Oppression, and become not vain in Robbery: If Riches increase,
set not your Heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10.

Wealth gottten by Vanity shall be diminished; but he, that gathers by Labor,
shall increase, Prove. 13. 11.

He, that oppresses the Poor, reproacheth his Maker: But he, that honoreth
him, has Mercy on the Poor, Prove. 14. 31.

Whosoever stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, but
shall not be heard, Prove. 31. 13.

Remove not the Old Landmark; and enter not into the Fields of the Fatherless:
For their Redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their Cause with thee, Prove. 23.
10.

He, that by Usury and unjust Gain increases his Substance, he shall gather it
for him, that will pity the Poor, Prove. 28. 8. He, that hastes to be rich,
has an evil Eye, and considers not, that Poverty shall come upon him, v. 22.

Woe unto them, that join House to House, that lay Field to Field, till there be
no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth, Isa. 5. 8.

I the Lord love Judgment; I hate Robbery for Burnt-offering, Isa. 61. 8.

They abhor him, that speaks uprightly. Forasmuch therefore as your treading
is upon the poor, and ye take from him Burdens of Wheat; ye have built Houses
of hewn Stones; but ye shall not dwell in them. -- For I know your manifold
Transgressions, and your mighty Sins: they afflict the just, they take a Bribe,
and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their Right, Amos 5. 10.

Woe to them, that devise Iniquity, and work Evil upon their Beds: when the
Morning is light they practice it, because it is the Power of their Hand. And
they covet Fields, and take them by Violence; and Houses, and take them away;
so they oppress a Man and his House, even a Man and his Heritage: Therefore
thus says the Lord, Behold, against this Family do I devise an Evil, from
which ye shall not remove your Necks, Mic. 2. 1.

Whoever gives ear to what the Spirit of God here speaks, must be convinced:
First, That the Love of Riches is a great Obstacle to Salvation. 2dly, That
it is an Abuse of Plenty, to prostitute it in the Service of our own Corruption,
in gratifying Pride, Inclination and Appetite. 3dly, That the desire of growing
rich is a great Snare, attended with many violent and deceitful Temptations.
4thly, That to get Riches by Fraud, Oppression, or any kind of Injustice,
highly provokes the Anger of God. Lastly, That to take the Advantage of Riches,
for doing wrong to the Poor, or to any Neighbor, is a Crime, which obliges God
to be the just Revenger of it. If these Truths be evident, then the Rich must
see, what they are to be afraid of and avoid. And those, who follow not this
Rule, let them put their Hands upon their Consciences, and examine, Whether they
in earnest believe God, and fear him.

. II. Of the good use of Riches, or of Almsgiving.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. 7.

When thou do Alms, let not thy left Hand know, what thy right Hand does:
that thine Alms may be in secret, and thy Father, which sees in secret,
himself shall reward thee openly, Mat. 6. 3.

Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does
corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your selves
Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where
Thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your Treasure is, there will
your Heart be also, Mat. 6. 19.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right Hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink:
I was a Stranger, and ye took me in. -- Verily, I say unto you, inasmuch as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto
me, Mat. 25. 34.

Whosoever shall give you a Cup of Water to drink, in my Name, because ye
belong to Christ; verily, I say unto you, he shall not lose his Reward, Mar. 9.
41.

Sell that you have, and give Alms: provide your selves Bags, which wax not
old, a Treasure in the Heavens, that fails not, where no Thief approaches,
neither Moth corrupts. For where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be
also, Luke 12. 33.

When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and
a Recompense be made thee. But when thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the
Maimed, the Lame, the Blind, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just,
Luke 14. 12.

Verily I say unto you, there is no Man, that has left House, or Parents, or
Brethren, or Wife, or Children, for the Kingdom of God's sake, who shall not
receive manifold more in this present time, and in the World to come, Life
everlasting, Luke 18. 29.

Give Alms of such things, as you have; and behold, all things are clean unto
you, Luke 11. 41.

Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness; that when ye
fail, they may receive you into everlasting Habitations. He, that is faithful
in that, which is least, is faithful also in much: and he, that is unjust in
the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful in
the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your Trust the true Riches? Luke 16.
9.

Zacheus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my Goods I
give to the Poor; and if I have taken any thing from any Man by false
Accusation, I restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This Day is
Salvation come to this House, Luke 19. 8.

There was a certain Man in Cesarea, called Cornelius, a Centurion of the Band,
called the Italian Band; a devout Man, and one, that feared God, with all his
House, which gave much Alms to the People, and prayed to God always. He saw in a
Vision -- an Angel of God, -- and he said unto him, Thy Prayers and thine Alms
are come up for a memorial before God. And now send Men to Joppa, and call for
one Simon, whose Surname is Peter; -- He shall tell thee, what thou ought to
do, Act. 10. 1.

There was at Joppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha, which by Interpretation
is called Dorcas: This Woman was full of good Works and Almsdeeds, which she
did. And it came to pass in those Days, that she was sick and died. -- Then
Peter arose, and went with them. When he was come, they brought him unto the
upper Chamber: and all the Widows stood by him, weeping, and showing the Coats
and Garments, which Dorcas made, while she was with them. But Peter put them
all forth, and kneeled down and prayed, and turning him to the Body, said,
Tabitha, arise. And she opened her Eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up,
Act. 9. 36.

Neither was there any among them, that lacked: for as many, as were Possessors
of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the Prices of the things, that were
sold, and laid them down at the Apostle's Feet; and distribution was made unto
every Man, according as he had need, Act. 4. 34.

Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first Day of the Week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come, 1 Cor. 16. 1.

To their power (I bear record) yea, and beyond their power, they were willing
of themselves; praying us with much Entreaty, that we would receive the Gift,
and take upon us the Fellowship of the ministering to the Saints. -- Therefore
as ye abound in every thing, -- see that ye abound in this Grace also. I speak
not by Commandment, but by the Occasion of the Forwardness of others, and to
prove the Sincerity of your Love, 2 Cor. 8. 3.

I thought it necessary to exhort the Brethren, that they would go before unto
you, and make up beforehand your bounty, and not as of Covetousness. But this
I say, he, which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, and he, which
sows bountifully, shall reap also bountifully. Every Man, according as he
purposes in his Heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: For
God loves a cheerful Giver, 2 Cor. 9. 5.

Charge them, that are rich in this World, that they be not High-minded, nor
trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in Scorn for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is
well-pleased, Heb. 13. 16.

Let the Brother of low Degree, rejoice in that he is exalted; but the rich, in
that he is made low: Because as the Flower of the Grass he shall pass away. For
the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning Heat, but it withers the Grass, and
the Flower thereof falls, and the Grace of the fashion of it perishes: So
also shall the rich Man fade away in his Ways, Jam. 1. 9.

Whosoever has this World's good, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up
his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? My
little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in
Truth: And hereby we know, that we are of the Truth, 1 Jo. 3. 17.

Though nothing can be said more fully; yet it cannot be amiss to insert
something out of the Old Testament, that the Will of God may be yet more
manifest in this point, which is subject to so many Abuses.

When ye reap the Harvest of your Land, thou shall not wholly reap the Corners
of thy Field, neither shall thou gather the Gleanings of thy Harvest. And thou
shall not glean thy Vineyard, neither shall thou gather every Grape of thy
Vineyard, thou shall leave them for the Poor and Stranger: I am the Lord your
God, Levit. 19. 9.

If thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall
relieve him; yea, though he be a Stranger, or a Sojourner, that he may live with
thee. Take thou no Usury of him, or Increase; but fear thy God; that thy
Brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy Money upon Usury, nor
lend him thy Victuals for Increase, Lev. 25. 35.

If there be among you a poor Man of one of thy Brethren, within any of thy
Gates, in thy Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden
thy Heart, nor shut thine Hand from thy poor Brother. But thou shall open thine
Hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him Sufficient for his Need, in that
which he wants. -- Thou shall surely give him, and thine Heart shall not be
grieved, when thou give unto him: Because that for this thing the Lord thy
God shall bless thee in all thy Works, and in all that thou put thine Hand
unto. For the Poor shall never cease out of the Land: Therefore I command thee,
saying, thou shall open thine Hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy Poor, and to
thy Needy in thy Land, Deuteronomy. 15. 7.

When thou cuttest down thine Harvest in thy Field, and have forgot a Sheaf in
the Field, thou shall not go again to fetch it; it shall be for the Stranger,
for the Fatherless, and for the Widow; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the Work of thine Hands, Deuteronomy. 24. 19.

When the Ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the Eye saw me, it gave
witness to me: Because I delivered the Poor, that cried, and the Fatherless,
and him, that had none to help him. The Blessing of him, that was ready to
perish, came upon me, and I caused the Widow's Heart to sing for Joy. -- I was
Eyes to the Blind, and Feet was I to the Lame. I was a Father to the Poor, and
the Cause, which I knew not, I searched out, Job 29. 11.

If I have withheld the Poor from their desire, or have caused the Eyes of the
Widow to fail; or have eaten my Morsel my self alone, and the Fatherless has
not eaten thereof: -- If I have seen any perish for want of Clothing, or any
Poor without Covering: If his Loins have not blessed me, and if he were not
warmed with the Fleece of my Sheep: If I have lift up my Hand against the
Fatherless, when I saw my help in the Gate: Then let mine Arm fall from my
Shoulder Blade, and mine Arm be broken from the Bone, Job 31. 16.

Blessed is he, that considers the Poor; the Lord will deliver him in the
time of Trouble. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be
blessed upon the Earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the Will of his
Enemies: The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing; thou will
make all his Bed in his Sickness, Psalm. 41. 1.

Is not this the Fast, that I have chosen? To loose the Bonds of Wickedness, to
undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and that ye break
every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the
Poor, that are cast out, to thy House? When thou see the Naked, that thou
cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh? Then shall thy
Light break forth, as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth
speedily; and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord
shall be thy Reward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am: If thou take away from the midst of
thee the Yoke, the putting forth of the Finger, and speaking Vanity: And if
thou draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; then
shall thy Light rise in Obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noonday. And the
Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make
fat thy Bones: And thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of
Water, whose Waters fail not, Isa. 58. 6.

God having spoke so at large to those, who possess the Riches of this World;
having made so many Promises to them of everlasting Blessings, if they let the
Plenty, he has given them, be the Relief of the Poor: It must be here
acknowledged, that such as have Wealth, have in this a great Opportunity put
into their Hands, of engaging God to them, by making that good use of it, as he
has directed. 2dly, That such, as, instead of this good Use, Hoard up their
Money, either for the Love of it, or for the unreasonable Apprehensions of
Want, are more Solicitous for this World, than the next, and choose to take
their Chance for Hell, rather then venture the Imaginary Dangers, suggested by
their immoderate Love of the Earth and themselves. 3dly, That such, as turn
their Plenty to the Service of Vanity, Self-love, and seeking human Greatness,
abuse the Gifts of God, and give Demonstration of their Concern being more for
this World, than the next, and that Salvation is not the thing they seek.
Lastly, That such, as prostitute their Plenty to vicious Extravagancies, have
in Fact renounced their Faith, since they have no regard either to the Promises
of God's Mercy, or to the Threats of his Justice, and hence have too much
Reason to apprehend the Lot, of being cast out with Unbelievers. Riches in the
right Use of them, are a certain Blessing, but abused, are a Curse.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Poor.
Q. Does the Gospel take notice of these?

A. It does, and instructs them for their Comfort.

Blessed are the Poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 3.

Take no Thought, saying, what shall we eat? Or what shall we drink? Or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the Gentiles
seek) for your heavenly Father knows, that ye have need of all these things.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 31.

Jesus answered and said unto them, go and show John again those things, which
ye do hear and see: The Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the
Lepers are Cleansed, and the Deaf Hear, the Dead are raised up, and the Poor
have the Gospel preached to them, Mat. 11. 4.

A certain Scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee,
whithersoever thou go. And Jesus says unto him, the Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests: But the Son of Man has not where to lay his
Head, Mat. 8. 19.

Peter began to say unto him, lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. And
Jesus answered and said, verily, I say unto you, there is no Man, that has
left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or Lands for my sake and the Gospel's, but he shall receive an
hundredfold now in this time, -- and in the World to come, eternal Life. But
many, that are first, shall be last: And and the last, first, Mar. 10. 28.

And there came a certain poor Widow, and she threw in two Mites, which make a
Farthing. And he called unto him his Disciples, and says unto them, Verily, I
say unto you, that this poor Widow has cast more in, than all they, which have
cast into the Treasury. For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of
her want, did cast in all, that she had, even all her Living, Mar. 12. 42.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted, to preach
Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of Sight to the Blind, to set at
Liberty them, that are bruised, to preach the acceptable Year of the Lord. --
And he began to say unto them, this Day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
Ears, Luke 4. 18, 21.

He lifted up his Eyes on his Disciples, and said, Blessed be ye Poor, for
yours is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are ye, that hunger now; for ye shall be
filled. Blessed are ye, that weep now; for ye shall laugh, Luke 6. 20.

Then the Master of the House being Angry, said to his Servant, Go out quickly
into the Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in hither the Poor, and the
Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind. And the Servant said, Lord, it is done, as
thou have commanded, and yet there is room. And the Lord said unto the Servant,
Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House
may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those Men, which were bidden,
shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14. 21.

There was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of
Sores; and desiring to be fed with the Crumbs, which fell from the rich Man's
Table; moreover the Dogs came and licked his Sores. And it came to pass, that
the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.
20.

Ye see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not
many Mighty, not many Noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish things
of the World, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the
World, to confound the things, which are mighty: and base things of the World,
and things, which are despised, has God chosen, 1 Cor. 1. 26.

Moreover Brethren, we do you to wit of the Grace of God bestowed on the
Churches of Macedonia: How that in a great Trial of Affliction, the Abundance
of their Joy, and their deep Poverty abounded unto the riches of their
Liberality. For to their Power (I bear record) yea, and beyond their Power,
they were willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would
receive the Gift. -- Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was Rich, yet for your sakes he became Poor, that ye, through his Poverty, might
be Rich, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 9.

Let this mind be in you, which was also in Jesus Christ; who being in the form
of God, thought it not Robbery, to be equal with God: But made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of Men: And being found in fashion as a Man, he Humbled himself and
became Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, Phil. 2. 5.

Godliness with Contentment is great Gain: For we brought nothing into this
World, and it is certain, we can carry nothing out. And having Food and
Raiment, let us be therewith content. But they that will be Rich fall into
Temptation, 1 Timothy 6. 6.

Let your Conversation be without Covetousness; and be content with such
things, as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. So that, we may boldly say, the Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear,
what Man shall do unto me, Heb. 13. 5.

Humble your selves therefore under the mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time: casting all your Care upon him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet.
5. 6.

Let the Brother of low Degree rejoice in that he is exalted: -- Blessed is the
Man, that endures Temptation: For when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown
of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him, Jam. 1. 9, 12.

Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of this World, Rich
in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them, that love
him? Jam. 2. 5.

Not that I speak in respect of Want; for I have learned, in whatsoever State I
am, therewith to be content. I know, both how to be abased; and I know how to
abound: Everywhere and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need. I can do all things through
Christ, which strengthens me. Notwithstanding, ye have well done, that ye did
communicate with my Affliction, Phil. 4. 11.

These things says the First and the Last, which was dead, and is alive; I
know thy Works, and Tribulation, and Poverty, but thou art Rich. -- Fear none
of these things, which thou shall suffer: Behold, the Devil shall cast some of
you into Prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have Tribulation ten Days:
Be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 8.

Some additions out of the Old Testament.

I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my Cause. -- He saves the
Poor from the Sword, from their Mouth, and from the Hand of the Mighty. So the
Poor has Hope, and Iniquity stops her Mouth, Job 5. 15.

The Lord also will be a Refuge for the Oppressed; a Refuge in times of
Trouble. And they, that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee: For thou,
Lord, have not forsaken them, that seek thee, Psalm. 9. 9, 10. The Needy shall
not always be forgotten; the Expectation of the Poor shall not perish for ever,
v. 18.

Why stand thou afar off, O Lord? Why hidest thou thy self in times of
Trouble? The Wicked in his Pride does persecute the Poor: Let them be taken in
the Devices, that they have imagined. -- Arise, O Lord, O God, lift up thine
Hand; forget not the Humble. Wherefore does the Wicked contemn God? He has
said in his Heart; thou will not require it. Thou have seen it; for thou
beholdest Mischief and Spite, to requite it with thy Hand: The Poor commits
himself unto thee, thou art the Helper of the Fatherless. -- Lord, thou have
heard the Desire of the Humble: Thou will prepare their Heart, thou will cause
thine Ear to hear: To judge the Fatherless and the Oppressed, that the Man of
the Earth may no more oppress, Psalm. 10. 1, 12, 17.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my Fears. --
This Poor Man cried and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
Troubles. The Angel of our Lord encampeth round about them, that fear him, and
delivers them. O taste and see, that the Lord is good; blessed is the Man,
that trusts in him. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: For there is no want to
them, that fear him. -- The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears and delivers
them out of all their Troubles. The Lord is nigh unto them, that are of a
broken Heart; and saves such, as be of a contrite Spirit. Many are the
Afflictions of the Righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them all. He
keeps all his Bones; not one of them is broken. -- The Lord redeemeth the
Soul of his Servants; and none of them, that trust in him, shall be desolate,
Psalm. 34. 4, 6, 17.

Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily
thou shall be fed. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the Desires of thine Heart. Commit thy Way unto the Lord, and he shall bring it
to pass. -- Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently: Fret not thy self, because of
him, who prospers in his Way; -- for evil Doers shall be cut off, but those,
that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Earth. -- A little, that a
righteous Man has, is better than the Riches of many Wicked. -- The Lord
knows the Days of the Upright; and their Inheritance shall be for ever: They
shall not be ashamed in the evil Time; and in the Days of Famine they shall be
satisfied. -- The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord; and he
delights in his Way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the
Lord upholdeth him with his Hand. I have been young, and now am old: Yet have I
not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread, Psalm. 37. 3, 7,
16, 18, 23.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the Health of my Countenance, and my
God, Psalm. 43. 5.

Thou make us a Reproach to our Neighbors, a Scorn and a Derision to them,
that are round about us. Thou make us a Byword among the Heathen, a shaking
of the Head among the People. -- All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Our Heart is not
turned back, neither have our Steps declined from thy Ways, Psalm. 44. 13, 17.

I am Poor and Sorrowful; let thy Salvation, O God, set me upon High. -- For
the Lord hears the Poor, and despises not his Prisoners, Psalm. 69. 29, 33.

He shall judge thy People with Righteousness, and thy Poor with Judgment. --
He shall judge the Poor of the People, he shall save the Children of the Needy,
and shall break in pieces the Oppressor. -- He shall deliver the Needy, when he
cries; the Poor also, and him, that has no Helper. He shall spare the Poor
and Needy; and shall save the Souls of the Needy. He shall redeem their Soul
from Deceit and Violence; and precious shall their Blood be in his Sight. Psalm.
72. 2, 12.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on High? -- He raises up the
Poor out of the Dust, and lifts the Needy out of the Dunghill: That he may set
him with Princes, even with the Princes of his People, Psalm. 113. 5, 7.

I know, that the Lord will maintain the Cause of the Afflicted, and the Right
of the Poor, Psalm. 140. 12.

Better is a Little with the Fear of the Lord, than great Treasure and Trouble
therewith, Prove. 15. 16.

Better is a Little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right,
Prove. 16. 8.

Better is a dry Morsel, and Quietness therewith, than a Housefull of
Sacrifices with Strife, Prove. 17. 1.

Better is the Poor, that walks in his Integrity, than he, that is perverse
in his Lips, and is a Fool, Prove. 19. 1.

Thou have been a Strength to the Poor, a Strength to the Needy in his
Distress, a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from the Heat, when the Blast of
the terrible Ones is as a Storm against the Wall, Isa. 25. 4.

Yea, in the Way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire
of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee. With my Soul have I
desired thee in the Night, yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek thee
early: For when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World
will learn Righteousness. -- Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee, they
poured out a Prayer, when thy chastening was upon them, Isa. 26. 8.

It is of the Lord's Mercies, that we are not consumed, because his Compassions
fail not: They are New every Morning; great is thy Faithfulness. The Lord is my
Portion, says my Soul, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto
them, that wait for him, to the Soul, that seeks him. It is good, that a Man
should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. It is good
for a Man, that he bear the Yoke in his Youth. He sits alone, and keeps
silence, because he has born it upon him. He puts his Mouth in the Dust, if
so be there may be Hope. -- For the Lord will not cast off for ever. But though
he cause Grief, yet will he have Compassion; according to the Multitude of his
Mercies. For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. --
Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins? Let
us search and try our Ways, and turn again to the Lord. Let us lift up our
Heart with our Hands unto God in the Heavens, Lam. 3. 22.

Thus does the Spirit of God speak in the Case of the Poor, and Distressed;
evidently discovering, that however by this World they are esteemed unhappy,
yet that God has a particular Regard to them, undertakes their Protection, and
makes so many Promises to them, that it cannot be questioned, but, as to the
next World, they have much the Advantage above those, who enjoy themselves in
plenty. But then they must observe the Conditions, which God proposes to them;
of accepting the Inconveniences of their State, as from the Hand of God; of
being content with what they have; of casting their Care upon God; of waiting
upon the Lord with Patience; of retaining a firm Confidence in his Promises; of
living in the Fear of God, and banishing with their best Endeavors all
Inclinations to Impatience, Murmuring and Distrust. If in this Spirit they
live, I think, they have more solid Grounds for true Comfort, than the
Enjoyment of all worldly Possessions can afford, and may have a great Assurance
of God's Promises to be accomplished in them, in the Blessings of a happy
Eternity.

CHAP. XXXV. Of those, who have the Care of the Flock.
Q. WHAT Directions does the Gospel give to Persons of this Character?

A. It speaks very particularly to them, and is very full both in the
Instructions and Charge it gives them.

Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but if the Salt have lost his Savor, wherewith
shall it be Salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and
to be trodden under Foot of Men. Ye are the Light of the World: A City, that is
set on a Hill, cannot be hid. Neither do Men light a Candle, and put it under a
Bushel; but on a Candlestick, and it gives Light to all, that are in the
House. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 13. They are to be
Exemplar.

If a Man have an hundred Sheep, and one of them be gone astray, does he not
leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the Mountains, and seeks that,
which is gone astray? Mat. 18. 12. They are to be solicitous in seeking the
lost Sheep.

There was also a Strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest. And he said unto them. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them; and they, that exercise Authority upon them, are called.
Benefactors. But ye shall not be so: But he, that is greatest among you, let
him be, as the Younger; and he, that is Chief, as he, that does serve. For
whether is greater, he that sits at Meat, or he that serves? Is not he,
that sits at Meat? But I am among you, as he that serves, Luke 22. 24. They
are to be Humble in Preferment.

Verily, verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the Door, into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other Way, the same is a Thief and a Robber.
But he, that enters in by the Door, is the Shepherd of the Sheep. To him the
Porter opens; and the Sheep hear his Voice: And he calls his own Sheep by
Name, and leads them out. And when he puts forth his own Sheep, he goes
before them, and the Sheep follow him; for they know his Voice, Jo. 10. 1. They
are to consider their Vocation.

I am the good Shepherd: The good Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep. But
he, that is an Hireling, and not the Shepherd, whose own the Sheep are not,
sees the Wolf coming, and leaves the Sheep, and flees: And the Wolf catches
them, and scatters the Sheep. The Hireling flees, because he is an Hireling,
and cares not for the Sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and am
known of mine, Jo. 10. 11. They are to employ and give their Life, for the good
of their Flock.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should
go and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain, Jo. 15. 16. They
are to remember the end of their being called.

Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me more than
these? He says unto him, yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee; he says
unto him, Feed my Lambs. He says to him again the second time, Simon, Son of
Jonas, love thou me? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know, that I love
thee. He says unto him, Feed my Sheep, Jo. 21. 15. The Love of Jesus the
necessary Preparation for taking charge of their Flock.

As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the Work whereunto I have called them. And when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their Hands on them, they sent them away, Acts 13.
2. Good Dispositions for undertaking the Care of the Flock.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. For I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Also of your own
selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after
them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three Years, I ceased
not to warn every one Night and Day with Tears, Acts 20. 28. Vigilance and
Fidelity necessary for Pastors.

This is a true Saying, if a Man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a
good Work. A Bishop then must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, Vigilant,
Sober, of good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach; not given to Wine,
no Striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but Patient, not a Brawler, not
Covetous; one, that rules well his own House, having his Children in
Subjection with all Gravity; (for if a Man know not how to rule his own House,
how shall he take Care of the Church of God?) Not a Novice, lest being lifted
up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. Moreover he must
have a good Report of them, which are without, lest he fall into Reproach, and
the Snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 1. Necessary Qualifications of Pastors.

If thou put the Brethren in Remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the Words of Faith, and of good
Doctrine, whereunto thou have attained. But refuse profane and old Wives Fables,
and exercise thy self rather unto Godliness: For Bodily Exercise profits
little; but Godliness is profitable unto all things, having Promise of the
Life, that now is, and of that, which is to come. -- Let no Man despise thy
Youth; but be thou an Example of the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. Till I come, give attendance to
Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine. Neglect not the Gift, that is in thee,
which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them; that thy
profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine;
continue in them: For in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them,
that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4. 6, 12. Excellent Instructions; 1. To be nourished by
Faith. 2. To avoid Fables. 3. To follow Piety. 4. To give good Example. 5. To
Read and Teach. 6. Not to neglect Grace. 7. To Meditate. 8. To be watchful over
themselves and their Flock. Lastly, To persevere in Duty.

Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the younger Men as
Brethren; the elder Women as Mothers, the Younger as Sisters, with all Purity,
1 Timothy 5. 1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another,
doing nothing by Partiality. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man, neither be Partaker
of other Men's Sins: Keep thy self pure, v. 21. How strict a charge against all
kind of Partiality! Them that Sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear,
v. 20. Public Sin to be reproved in Public.

O Timothy, keep that, which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding profane and
vain Bablings, and Oppositions of Science falsely so called: Which some
professing, have erred concerning the Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 20. They are faithfully
to keep what is delivered, avoid unprofitable Disputes.

Hold fast the form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing, which was committed unto thee,
keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us, 2 Timothy 1. 13.

Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace, that is in Christ Jesus. And
the things, that thou have heard of me among many Witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore
endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. No Man, that warreth,
entangleth himself with the affairs of this Life; that he may please him, who
has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2. 1. They are to be strong in Grace:
Faithful Deliverers of the Truths received: Courageous in all the Difficulties
of their Ministry: Not engaged in worldly Affairs.

Of these things put them in Remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that
they strive not about Words, to no profit, but to the subverting of the
Hearers. Study to show thy self approved unto God; a Workman that needs not
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. But shun profane and vain
Bablings; for they will increase unto more Ungodliness. -- Flee also youthful
Lusts; but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with them, that call on
the Lord out of a pure Heart. But foolish and unlearned Questions avoid,
knowing that they do gender Strifes. And the Servant of the Lord must not
strive; but be Gentle unto all Men, apt to Teach, Patient; in Meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; if God Peradventure will give them
Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him, at his
Will, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 22. They are to banish Disputes of Words. 2. Be
Irreproachable in their Lives. 3. Dispense worthily the Word of God. 4.
Suppress corrupt Discourse. 5. Subdue their own Passions, and follow the Spirit
of the new Man. 6. Decline impertinent Contentions. 7. Be Meek to all, and
ready to give their Help. 8. Be moderate in Reproving and Arguing.

Continue thou in the things, which thou have learned, and have been assured
of, knowing of whom thou have learned them; and that from a Child thou have
known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee Wise unto Salvation,
through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 14. They are to be steadfast in Faith,
knowing in the Holy Scriptures, make use of these for the Conduct of
themselves, for instructing, correcting and leading others in Ways of Piety and
Justice.

I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the Quick and the Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be
instant in Season, out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
Long-suffering, and Doctrine. For the time will come, when they will not endure
sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves
Teachers, having itching Ears. And they shall turn away their Ears from the
Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables. But watch thou in all things, endure
Afflictions, do the Work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 1. They are to employ their Preaching, Reproof, Prayer, Threats and
Patience, for the Salvation of their Flock. They are to be Watchful, bear
patiently the Troubles of their Ministry, and by discharging all Duties fully
satisfy it.

For this Cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in Order the
things, that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee. If any be Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, having faithful Children,
not accused of Riot, or Unruly. For a Bishop must be Blameless, as the Steward
of God; not Self-willed, not soon Angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not
given to filthy Lucre; but a Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of good Men, Sober,
Just, Holy, Temperate; holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught,
that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the
Gainsayers, Tit. 1. 5. Qualifications of such as undertake this Charge.

These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. Let no Man
despise thee, Tit. 2. 15. They are to exhort and reprove, as having Authority:
Their Conduct ought to be such, as to be despised by none.

Avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and Strivings about
the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain. A Man, that is an Heretic, after
the first and second Admonition, reject: Knowing, that he, that is such, is
subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself, Tit. 3. 9. They are to
decline unprofitable Disputes, and declared Heretics.

The Elders, which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness
of the Sufferings of Christ, and also a Partaker of the Glory, that shall be
revealed. Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready
Mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the
Flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall reeeive a Crown of
Glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 1. The true Shepherds, not for their own
Interest, but for the Good of the Flock, watch over it; they lead it without
lording it, and are themselves an Example to it.

Be watchful, and strengthen the things, which remain, that are ready to die:
For I have not found thy Works perfect before God. Remember therefore how thou
have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shall not
watch, I will come on thee, as a Thief, Revel. 3. 2.

Thus speaks the chief Shepherd to all those, who, under him, have taken upon
them the Care of his Flock; and from whom should they learn the Obligations of
their Charge, but from him? Happy they, who give ear to him.

. II. As to Teaching the Flock.
Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe
all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 19. The Commission for teaching and
preaching Christ must be from Christ, and no other Confidence of teaching
Truth, but from him.

As ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of heaven is at Hand. Heal the Sick,
cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils: freely ye have received,
freely give, Mat. 10. 7. They are to be dis-interessed: Do all good, and not
look for a Reward from Man, but from God.

He, that hears you, hears me: And he, that despises you, despises me:
And he, that despises me, despises him, that sent me, Luke 10. 16. Christ
speaks to his Flock, by those, whom he has set over it, and appointed to teach.
Christ is injured in the contempt of them.

In the daytime, he was teaching in the Temple, and at night he went out, and
abode in the Mount, that is called the Mount of Olives, Luke 21. 37. They, who
teach others, are to have their time of frequent Retreat from the World.

I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot
receive, Jo. 14. 16. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth, Jo. 16. 13. No Security of Truth from Learning, but from the Spirit
of God. What Gratitude due from the Flock to God, whilst those, who were to
Teach it, were to be led by this Spirit!

Then the Twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It
is not reason, that we should leave the Word of God, and serve Tables, Act. 6.
2. To be engaged in temporal Affairs is a hindrance to those, who are to Teach.

When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small Dissension and Disputation with
them, they determined, that Paul, and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question,
Act. 15. 2. And the Apostles and Elders came together, for to consider of this
matter, V. 6. When Questions arise, they are not determined by Paul and
Barnabas; but are referred to the Apostles and Elders of the Church, who
assemble and consider of it.

Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen
Men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas; -- and wrote
Letters by them, after this manner; The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren,
send greeting unto the Brethren, which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and
Syria, and Cilicia. Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain, which went out
from us, have troubled you with Words, subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must
be Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom we gave no such Commandment: It
seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen Men unto
you. -- For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden, than these necessary things, Act. 15. 22. The Apostles and
Elders assembled having determined the Question proposed to them, send their
Resolution to the Faithful, and recommend it upon the Authority of the Holy
Ghost and of themselves.

When they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: And when they had gathered the
multitude together, they delivered the Epistle; which when they had read, they
rejoiced for the consolation, Act. 15. 30. The Resolutions of the Apostles
assembled are received by the Faithful, and this with joy and comfort.

And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to
keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, which were at Jerusalem.
And so were the Churches established in the Faith, and increased in number
daily, Act. 16. 4. The Decrees of the Apostles and Elders of the Church were
delivered to the Faithful; so were the Churches established.

Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. For I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after
them. Therefore watch, Act. 20. 28. The Pastors of the Church, by the Ordinance
of the H. Ghost, are the Overseers of the Flock, and are to Feed it, and by
their watchfulness is it to be secured from the Errors of perverse Men.

Ye know, from the first day, that I came into Asia, after what manner I have
been with you, at all Seasons; serving the Lord with all Humility of Mind, and
with many Tears, and Temptations, which befell me, by the lying in wait of the
Jews. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed
you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house, Act. 20. 18. They
that teach the Flock, are to persevere in their Duty with Patience and
Humility, amidst the Difficulties of their Charge. They are not to dissemble
the Truth; but give Instructions in Families, as well as in Public. Wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the Blood of all Men: For I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God, v. 26. The guilt
of their Blood, is upon Pastors, who perish, because they have not been put in
mind of their Duty.

And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them, which
are sanctified. I have coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel. Yea, you
your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to
them, that were with me, Act. 20. 32. They, who Teach, ought to Pray for the
Flock, and be as little a Burden to them as they possible can.

I am Debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both to the wise, and to
the unwise, Romans 1. 14. They who Teach, do well in offering their Labor to all,
Partiality ought not to be mixed with their Charity. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one, that
believes, v. 16. They ought not to be ashamed of the Truth.

Christ sent me, not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: not with wisdom of
words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Simplicity more becoming the Gospel, than humane Eloquence. And I, Brethren,
when I came to you, came not with excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, declaring
unto you the Testimony of God. For I determined not to know any thing among
you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. -- And my Speech and my Preaching
was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in Demonstration of the
Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2. 1.

We are Laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Let a Man so account of us, as
of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Moreover it
is required in Stewards, that a Man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The Dignity
of Preachers is very great: their Fidelity ought to be so too.

But with me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, of Man's
judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. They are not to be Solicitous, what Men say of them.

Who goes to warfare any time, at his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard,
and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of
the Milk of the Flock? Say I these things as a Man? or says not the Law the
same also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? or
says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written:
That he that ploweth should plow in Hope; and that he, that thresheth in Hope,
should be Partaker of his Hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? If others be Partakers
of this Power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this
Power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye
not know, that they, which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the Temple? And they, which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar?
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they, which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. But I have used none of these things, 1 Cor. 9. 7. It is allowed
Preachers to live by their Function, but not to make a Trade of it. S. Paul
however made no use of this Allowance, and this is more Perfect.

Though I be free from all Men, yet have I made my self Servant unto all, that
I might gain the more. -- To the Weak become I as Weak, that I might gain the
Weak: I am made all things to all Men, that I might by all means save some, 1
Cor. 9. 19, 22. A Condescendence of Charity proper for those that teach.

Now, Brethren, if I come unto you speaking with Tongues, what shall I profit
you? 1 Cor. 14. 6. Preaching or Teaching in an unknown Tongue can do no good to
the Hearers. The Word of God ought to be delivered in such a manner, as to be
understood by the Hearers.

Thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes
manifest the Savor of his Knowledge by us in every Place. For we are unto God,
a sweet Savor of Christ, in them, that are saved, and in them that perish. To
the one we are the Savor of Death unto Death; and to the other, the Savor of
Life unto Life. -- For we are not as many, which corrupt the Word of God: But
as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the Sight of God speak we in Christ, 2 Cor.
2. 14, 17. The Gospel ought to be preached by Word and by good Example. To
Falsify or Change the Word of God is Sacrilegious. Where there is not true
Sincerity, there is not the Spirit of the Gospel.

Seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received Mercy, we faint not: But
have renounced the hidden things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness, nor
handling the Word of God Deceitfully, but by Manifestation of the Truth,
commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in the Sight of God. But if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them, that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 1. To such Abuses
are the most holy Things subject; but how many Wo's to them, that incurr this
Guilt!

We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves your
Servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 5. What Profanation! What Prostitution of
the Gospel, in those, who undertake to preach Jesus Christ, and under this
Cover seek themselves!

We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may
be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we
are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed; always bearing about in the Body, the Dying of the Lord Jesus,
that the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
The Glory of Preachers is to be in God, from whom is every good Gift. In all
Troubles, their Confidence is to be in him, whom they preach. They ought every
Way to be so Religious, that the Life of Christ may be manifested in all they
suffer, and in all they do.

God has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation; -- and has committed
unto us the Word of Reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
to God, 2 Cor. 5. 18. We then, as Workers together with him, beseech you also,
that ye receive not the Grace of God in vain. -- Giving no Offense in any
thing, that the Ministry be not blamed: But in all things approving our selves,
as the Ministers of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings,
in Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the
Holy Ghost, by Love Unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by
the Armor of Righteousness, on the right Hand, and on the left; by Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report: As Deceivers, and yet True; as
Unknown, and yet well Known; as Dying, and behold we Live; as Chastened, and
not Killed; as Sorrowful, yet always Rejoicing; as Poor, yet making many Rich;
as having Nothing, and yet possessing all Things, 2 Cor. 6. 1. How great is the
Dignity of those, who succeed in the Apostolic Function! And what ought to be
their Sanctity, who are no others than Vicars of Christ! Their Model is here
described by the Apostle, and ought to be seriously considered in every Point.

Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be Burdensome
to you; for I seek not yours, but you: For the Children ought not to lay up for
the Parents, but the Parents for the Children. And I will very gladly spend,
and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the l^ss I be loved.
But be it so, 2 Cor. 12. 14. The Character of true Zeal, to seek nothing, but
the good of the Flock. An Hypocrite may pretend this for a time; but none, but
the true Shepherds can persevere in this Practice. To do otherwise is to be a
Trader, and not a Pastor.

Do I seek to please Men? For if I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant
of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. Hence is the Corruption of the Gospel; they, who should
seek nothing but Jesus, endeavor to please the World, and to gain Esteem.
Preferment weighs more with them than Truth.

When it pleased God, who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called me by
his Grace: To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen;
immediately I conferred not with Flesh and Blood, Gal. 1. 15. Flesh and Blood
are not to be Counselors in the Cause of the Gospel and the Delivery of its
Truths.

He gave some, Apostles: And some, Prophets: And some, Evangelists: And some,
Pastors and Teachers; for the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ: 'Till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man,
unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ: That we henceforth be
no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive: But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. The Ministers of the Divine
Institution: Their Charge is not a State of Idleness, but of Work. The end of
this Ordinance, was for establishing the Flock in the Unity of Truth: And in
all Holiness in this they ought to labor.

Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication -- for all the Saints; and for
me, that Utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my Mouth boldly, to
make known the Mystery of the Gospel: For which I am an Ambassador in Bonds,
that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak, Ephesians. 6. 18. They are to
desire the Prayers of the Flock; they are to use a holy Liberty in preaching
the Truth of the Gospel, without being awed by Shame, Fear, or Expectation:
They are to do nothing unworthy of him, whose Person they represent.

Some indeed preach Christ even of Envy and Strife; and some also of good Will.
The one preach Christ of Contention, not sincerely, supposing to add Affliction
to my Bonds, Phil. 1. 15. Strange Motives for preaching Christ. Unhappy they,
whose Passions serve them for Steps, whereby to ascend to the Chair of Truth;
which ought to have no Entrance, but by the Love of Jesus.

If ye continue in the Faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away from
the Hope of the Gospel; -- whereof I Paul am made a Minister; who now rejoice
in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions
of Christ in my Flesh, for his Body's sake, which is the Church, Col. 1. 23. To
suffer for the Truth, ought to be the Joy and Comfort of him, that has
undertaken to be the Minister of Truth. How much then do they forget their
Vocation, who, upon meeting with Discouragements, lose all Comfort, and repent
of their Labor.

Whom we preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom; that
we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. The only design
of an Apostolic Teacher is to form Jesus in every one of his Flock, and to make
all perfect in him.

Say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry, which, thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. They, who consider not well the Duties
of their Charge, will soon neglect them. Fulfill the Duties of the Ministry of
Jesus Christ: What Pastor does not tremble at this Word!

Your selves, Brethren, know our Entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain.
But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as
ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the Gospel of
God with much Contention. For our Exhortation was not of Deceit, nor of
Uncleanness, nor in Guile: But as we were allowed of God to be put in Trust
with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries
our Hearts. For neither at any time used we flattering Words, as ye know, nor a
Cloak of Covetousness, God is Witness: Nor of Men sought we Glory, neither of
you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome, as the Apostles of
Christ. But we were Gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children:
So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto
you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own Souls, because ye were dear
unto us. For ye remember, Brethren, our Labor and Travel: For laboring Night
and Day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto
you the Gospel of God. Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly,
and unblameably we behaved our selves among you, that believe; as you know, how
we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a Father does his
Children) that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Every Word a Lesson to Preachers. What a
Mercy to the World, if they would study and follow this Spirit!

Be not thou therefore ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his
Prisoner; but be thou Partaker of the Afflictions of the Gospel, according to
the Power of God, 2 Timothy 1. 8. Great Courage is necessary for standing by the
Truth and the Ministers of it.

Hold fast the form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing, which was committed unto thee,
keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Great Fidelity
required of the Pastors of God's Church. The Holy Ghost promised to them for
this end.

Thou therefore endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. No Man,
that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this Life, 2 Timothy 2. 3. I
suffer trouble, as an evil Doer, even unto Bonds; but the Word of God is not
bound. Therefore I endure all things, for the Elects sake, v. 9. To suffer with
Courage all Difficulties, is the Obligation of a Pastor: And if he suffer as a
Criminal, as this is most humbling, so it brings him nearer to the Resemblance
of Jesus Christ.

They are of the World; therefore speak they of the World, and the World
hears them, 1 Jo. 4. 5. Unhappy Teachers, whose Character this is.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Flock.
Q. WHat Directions does the Gospel give to the Flock, in Regard of those, whom
God has put over them?

A. It speaks very particularly to them; but that I may end this last Chapter
with such Instructions, as the Gospel gives, I will first set down some
Injunctions of God in the Old Law, which, as it was a Figure of the New, so it
may lead us to such Duties, as God expects from the Flock, in this better
Constitution, which is the Church of Christ.

And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, because of the Ethiopian Woman, whom
he had married. -- And they said, has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses?
Has he not spoken also by us! And the Lord heard it. -- Wherefore then were
not ye afraid to speak against my Servant Moses? And the Anger of the Lord was
kindled against them, and he departed, Number. 12. 1, 8. God shows his displeasure
against those, who murmur at such as he has set over them.

And all the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron. --
And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this People provoke me? -- Surely,
they shall not see the Land, which I swear unto their Fathers, neither shall
any of them, that provoked me, see it, Number. 14. 2, 11, 23. Great are the
Judgments of God upon those, who murmur against such as are over them.

Now Korah, -- and Dathan, and Abiram, -- took men, and they rose up before
Moses with certain of the Children of Israel, two hundred and fifty Princes of
the assembly, famous in the Congregation, Men of renown. And they gathered
themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them; Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them: Wherefore then lift you up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord? And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his Face.
-- And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from tbe
Tents of these wicked Men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in
all their Sins. -- And the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and
their Houses, and all the Men, that appertained unto Korah, and all their
goods. -- And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred
and fifty Men, that offered Incense, Number. 16. 1, 26, 32, 35. The Congregation
being holy, Exempts them not from their Obedience enjoined. The Authority of
Princes of the Congregation, Men Famous and of Renown, is not enough for
questioning the Authority of Moses and Aaron, whom God had commanded all to
hear and obey. Their offering Incense to God is not accepted, while divided
from Moses and Aaron, they are under the guilt of Disobedience.

Thou shall come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge, that shall
be in those days, and enquire; and they shall show thee the Sentence of
Judgment. And thou shall do according to the Sentence, which they of that place
(which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee; and thou shall observe to do,
according to all, that they inform thee: according to the Sentence of the Law,
which they shall teach thee; and according to the Judgment, which they shall
tell thee, thou shall do; thou shall not decline from the Sentence, which they
shall show thee, to the Right Hand, nor to the Left. And the Man, that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest (that stands to Minister
there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that Man shall die: And
thou shall put away the evil from Israel. And all the people shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17. 9. How strict is the Discipline
enjoined by God in Common Cases! How severe the Punishment of Disobedience!

And Samuel says, Has the Lord as great delight in Burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices, as in obeying the Voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey, is better
than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the Fat of Rams. For rebellion is as the
Sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry: Because thou
have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being King,
1 Samuel 15. 22. Obedience to the Command of God the best Sacrifice. Sacrifice
without Obedience is Rebellion, and Idolatry.

The Priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth: For he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. The Minister of
God is to deliver the Law of God.

The New Law.
Then spoke Jesus to the Multitude, and to his Disciples, saying, The Scribes
and the Pharisees sit in Moses Seat: All therefore, whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their Works: For they say,
and do not, Mat. 23. 1. Those, who are in Authority, are to be obeyed, though
they give not good Example.

These twelve Jesus sent forth; -- as ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. -- Provide neither Gold nor Silver: -- For the workman is
worthy of his meat. -- And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your
words: When ye depart out of that House or City, shake off the dust of your
feet. Verily, I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrha in the Day of Judgment, than for that City, Mat. 10. 5, 9, 14.
Christ gives Authority to teach: The Flock is to feed their Pastors. The
Obligation of hearing those, whom Christ has put over the Flock, is from the
Command of Christ. How strict this obligation is, may be seen in the rigor of
their punishment, who refuse to hear them.

He, that receives you, receives me; and he, that receives me, receives
him, that sent me, Mat. 10. 40. How great encouragement to hear those, whom
Christ has appointed to teach the Flock! To receive them, to submit to them, is
to receive and submit to God.

If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: But if he neglect
to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an Heathen Man and a Publican.
Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven: And whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, Mat.
18. 17. See, what is the Authority of the Church in common cases: Not to Submit
to her Determination, is the Crime of a Heathen, of one, who believes not in
God. And is not this Authority confirmed while Heaven is declared to join with
her in the Sentence she pronounces? There can be no Appeal then from the Church
to God: And while both concur, one cannot be questioned, without arraigning the
other.

Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven
and in Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them -- Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the World. Amen. Mat. 28. 18. The Command of
Hearing those, whom Christ has made the Pastors of his Flock, is to all
Nations. But, What need of a Command, when the Promise of a Divine Assistance
always attending them to the end of the World, is obligation enough upon all
those, who desire to be taught the Truth?

And he said unto them; Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature. He, that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he,
that believes not, shall be damned, Mar. 16. 15. Christ sends to the whole
World, and commands the whole World to believe those, whom he sends to teach
them. What must their Authority and Commission be, when Damnation is the
Punishment of such as refuse to believe!

He that hears you, hears me: and he, that despises you, despises me: And
he, that despises me, despises him, that sent me, Luke 10. 16. What more
powerful Argument could Christ use, for obliging the World to hear those, whom
he has sent? In them, God is heard or despised. Pastoral Authority (and Truth)
is originally in God; it is communicated to the Son, by the Mission of the
Father; to the Apostles, by the Mission of the Son; to the following Pastors,
by their Succession to the Apostles.

I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, Jo. 14. 16. Howbeit,
when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, Jo. 16. 13.
Great Mercy of God to the Flock, to deliver them from all Uncertainty of Truth,
by appointing the Spirit of Truth to teach them in their Pastors!

Verily, verily I say unto you, He, that receives whomsoever I send, receives
me: And he, that receives me, receives him, that sent me, Jo. 13. 20. They
whom Christ sends, are associated in his Mission; being deputed by him, their
Authority is his. How terrible their mistake, in rejecting Jesus Christ, when
they think they reject nothing but Man! No true Mission, but what was given by
Jesus Christ to his Apostles, and by a Succession from them, is communicated to
others. If any other be pretended, it is Extraordinary, and ought to be
authorized by Miracle to give it Credit.

Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you; as my Father has sent me,
even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and says
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are retained, Jo. 20.
21. What Authority in this Mission? As my Father has sent me, even so send I
you. The Holy Ghost being Communicated, Man is only the Minister, and the Power
is of God. Can such Authority, such Power be questioned by Man?

Now send Men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose Surname is Peter: -- he
shall tell thee, what thou ought to do, Act. 10. 5. An Angel from Heaven is
sent to Cornelius, to direct him to Peter; though God inspires, yet the Pastors
of his Church are to teach. This is the Ordinance of Christ, and the Practice
is confirmed from Heaven.

And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And
the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee,
what thou must do, Act. 9. 6. Christ calls upon Saul, stops him in his evil
way; but for his Instruction, he sends him to a Disciple. If this be the Will
of God, who can pretend to serve God, and yet make exceptions against doing his
Will?

When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small Dissension and Disputation with
them, they determined, that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders, about this question,
Act. 15. 2. And the Apostles and Elders came together, for to consider of this
matter, v. 6. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, 22. Questions of Faith
are referred to the Pastors of the Church. S. Paul and Barnabas, though great
Apostles, and particularly inspired, pronounce not in this case; but help to
publish what the Pastors assembled had determined.

And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to
keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, which were at Jerusalem:
And so were the Churches established in the Faith, and increased in number
daily, Act. 16. 4. The Faithful receive the Decrees of their Pastors, and thus
was the Faith established, and they perserv'd from the dangers of Novelty and
Error.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood, Act. 20. 28. It is the Ordinance of God, that the
Flock be under the care of the Pastors; by these it is to be fed, and preserved
from Error. This Charge is given them by the Holy Ghost: Who dare alter the
Method?

They, that stood by, said, Revilest thou God's High Priest? Then said Paul, I
wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest: For it is written; Thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, Act. 23. 5. Respect is due from the
Flock to their Pastor; they are not to revile him.

And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the Word of
the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed, Act. 13. 48.
Those, who are ordained to Salvation, hear and believe the Apostles. This was
the way to Life.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. Have the
Pastors of the Church Power from God?

He gave some, Apostles: -- And some Pastors and Teachers: For the perfecting
the Saints, -- for the edifying of the Body of Christ: -- That we henceforth be
no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 11. If thus God has declared the design of his Goodness, in
the Ordinance of Pastors, then it must be the greatest duty and interest of the
Flock, to adhere to the Pastors of the Church: For thus has God appointed, for
preserving it in Unity and Truth.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.
10. Thus is strictly enjoined the Flock; then they must be careful in observing
the Means, which God has ordained for Unity.

He therefore, that despises, despises not Man, but God, who has also given
unto us his holy Spirit, 1 These. 4. 8. If the Flock despise the Doctrine of
those, whom God has appointed to teach it, they despise not Man, but God.

We beseech you, Brethren, to know them, which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in love, for
their works sake, 1 These. 5. 12. If these are to be esteemed and loved; this
must be chiefly in their Instructions and Admonitions: then no Contentions, no
setting up against them.

Let him, that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him, that teaches in
all good things, Gal. 6. 6. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they, which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Let the Elders,
that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they, who labor
in the Word and Doctrine: for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the
Ox, that treads out the Corn: and the labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Remember them, which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word
of God: Whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation. Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 7. Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves: For they watch for your Souls,
as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief; for that is unprofitable for you, v. 17. What Charge given by God to the
Flock! Remember, Submit, Obey, Follow the Faith of those, who have the Rule
over you; for these must g^ve account of your Souls. But can they be any part
in this account, who refuse to obey?

He, that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears not us.
Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error, 1 Jo. 4. 6. Are
these thus discerned? Then the Flock must here see the necessity of hearing
those, whom God has appointed to feed the Flock.

And now, having gone through the Principal Duties of a Christian Life, as
likewise the Particular States, in some of which every Christian must have a
part; and having seen in all these, what is the Will of God, as it is delivered
in holy Writ; what better Conclusion can I make, than earnestly to recommend to
all, that they would frequently read, seriously consider, and with exactness
attend to what the Spirit of God says to them? It is the effect of an infinite
Mercy, that God has thus left his holy Will manifested to us, that in this we
might have a sure Guide: And there is no other Way to Salvation, but this
alone, of doing the Will of God. Thus Christ has declared; and what greater
Interest then can a Christian have, than in knowing the Will of God? This is
the best Study; this the best Learning: All other, without this, are vain and
useless Ornaments; but this alone, without all others, will make a Man Wise to
Salvation. If the World sets up for other Ways; if it has Number and Custom to
give Authority to them; yet all this makes them not warrantable to the
Christian; he must consult his Rule, and whatever he finds not allowed there,
he must renounce, as Antichristian; for it is Christ, and not the World, is his
Guide to Salvation. How perversely blind then are all those Christians, who make
it their Business to study the World, and esteeming this the best Education,
are at a great Expense in training up their Children to an early Knowledge of
whatever it admires? And when this is done; what is the Effect, but only to be
skilled in Vanity; to be learned in those things, which lead them out of the
Way? And in the mean time the only thing Necessary is neglected, and they are
Strangers to that Knowledge, which can be their only Guide to that Life, for
which they were born: Whereas the great Business of all that believe, is to
know the Will of God, and by doing it to work out their Salvation.

If this be the Error of such as are blind Lovers of themselves and the World,
instead of God; then such as follow the Light of Faith, must follow another
Business: They must make it their general Study, to know the Will of God, they
must strictly inform themselves, what he commands, what he forbids, what he
approves and disapproves; and this being most expressly delivered in holy Writ,
they ought to esteem the particular Knowledge of this their only solid
Accomplishment, and not think they have any thing valuable in them, whatever
their natural or acquired Abilities be, as long as they are Ignorant of this.
By this Method Christians will soon be qualified for making a true Judgment of
all Things and Circumstances of human Life; they will judge the World, and all
its Ways, and not be in danger of being deluded by its Specious and most
Authentic Snares. This is the true Christian Wisdom; and whosoever takes
another Way, though he may come to an eminent Degree of admired Knowledge, yet he
will never be Wise to Salvation.

FINIS.

