THE Divine History OF THE GENESIS OF THE WORLD Explicated and Illustrated.

Juven. Sat. 14. Tradidit arcano quodcunque volumine Moses.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. and A. C. for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at
his Shop under the Crown in West-Smithfield, next Duck-Lane, 1670.

Premonition to the Reader.
HE who included Homer's Ilias in a Nutshell, made a very good Kernel for it,
if the Brevity in Writing was not compensated with as great Obscurity, and
difficulty in Reading. Whereas in this Divine History, we have the Genesis, and
System of the whole World, in one Leaf, yea one Page, delineated as in a Mapp;
not without sufficient Clearnes, as I shall show in my Explications. And as God
has left farther Inquiry into Particulars to Human Ingeny and Industry, I
accordingly expatiate in my Illustrations, still keeping as close to the Text,
as I may; for, longius a Verbo, longius a Vero. Wherein though I cannot be as
Brief as I would, yet I have studied as much Clearnes as I could, without
Diagramm or Sculpture; and purposely repeat some more difficult Conceptions,
that others may better understand them: which yet I do not expect they should
presently embrace, because I know that I could not so suddenly satisfy myself
concerning them: and whosoever would so satisfy himself, must thoroughly read,
and as thoroughly consider the whole Series. The Manuscript has suffered many
Expunctions and Interlineations, which rendered it not so Legible; and my
absence from the Press permitted some fa^lts to escape in Printing. However I
expose it, such as it is, among my own Countrymen, from whom I willingly expect
many Learned Observations, and Critical Reflections, which shall help me to
perfect, and prepare it for another Language. The exquisite Poets in the time
of Augustus (as I find in Ovid) used first to recite privately one to another:
and I remember Mr. Seldom told me, that he and Heinsius used to communicate
Notes toward some of their Works. Schola Salerni, Collegium Conimbricense, and
others, wrote in Common: which certainly is a very great advantage; where many
collect the Materials, and one is the Composer and Architect of the Work, and
then all review and rectify it. But I, who live alone in the Country far from
Athens, must proceed otherwise, and as Inferior Animals, first excl^de an
Embryonical Ovum, which may be afterward hatched into a more perfect Foetus. In
the mean time, because Errata are not observed until they be printed, nor
usualy rectified until the Book be read; and then it is too late; I have here
prenoted such as are more material, that the Reader may rectify them
beforehand, by under-lining them, or by under-pointing, or pricking. Besides
which, there are many other Literal faults, especialy in Capital Letters
intended only for more Emphatical Words, Tautographys, als Interpunctions, and
the lik^, which h^ may easily correct, O^ulo currente; and be pleased to pardon
both my own, and the common Infirmitys of Printing -- aliter non fi^, Am^ce,
liber.

PAge 2. Line 33. be. Read be the. p. 4. l. 3. changing. ^. chanting. l. 28.
Affection. r. Affectation. p. 5. l. ^2. Mercurius r. Mercurys. p. 34. l. 11.
Praejudicate. r. Predicate. p. 49. l. 17. Triangle. r. Triangle, or Delta. p.
53. l. 23. all. r. also. p. 62. l. 15. of. r. a^. l. 36. Parallogramm. r.
Parallelogramm. p. 64. l. 35. ^ever. r. never be. p. 71. l. 3. all Ma^erial. r.
Elementary. p. 76. l. 8 m^re. r. more or. p. 82. l. 10. one. r. own. p. 86. l.
39. at. dele. p. 87. l. 18. clear. r. clear-it. p. 88. l. 38. mid. r. mid be.
p. 96. l. 30. Notion. r. Motion. p. 99. l. 24. B^dy. r. Body be. p. 103. l. 2.
such. r. such as. p. 106. l. 8. Ex^^. r. Exuct. l. 13. as. r. as to. p. 123. l.
6. w^atsoeve^. r. whatsoever, which. p. 132. l. 36. Meditately. r. Mediately.
p. 143. l. 25. Spirits. r. Species. p. 148. l. 7. as we have. dele. l. 14.
Maturely. r. Mutualy. p. 149. l. 28. Introduction. r. Introsuction p. 153. l.
26. were. r. were made. p. 167. l. 32. it. r. it being. p. 17^. l. 29. Night
then by Day. r. Day then by Night. p. 174. l. 19. Bar. r. Burr. l. 24. at. r.
as. p. 177. l. 21. of. r. by. p. 191. l. 34. somewhat. r. so not. p. 192. l.
13.37. somewhat. r. so not. p. 201. l. 10. See^. r. even. p. 202. l. 32. a^. r.
a^. p. 215. l. 5. which. r. which is. p. 238. l. 22. Various. r. Variations. p.
239. l. 10. from. r. upon. l. 35. thither. r, hither. p. 245. l. 16. therefore.
r. therefore called. p. 248. l. 20. amitt. r. emitt. p. 250. l. 11, 17, 26.
Vapid r. Vappid. p. 257. l. 10. and. r. and as. p. 313. l. 18. or therabout.
dele. p. 315. l. 27. not. r. not only. p. 322. l. 15. but dele. p. 324. l. 28.
as. dele. p. 340. l. 14. not. r. not so. p. 337. l. 10. Stars. r. Stars more.
l. 27. more Ra^e. r. common. p. 339. l. 35. Angels. r. Angels or God. p. 344.
l. 13. whereby. r. thereby. p. 346. l. 37. leap. r. s^irr. p. 351. l. 16. Act.
r. A^t. p. 357. l. 32. when. r. whence. p. 372. l. 33. whereas. dele.

TO THE WORLD.
THe Title bespeaks the Dedication of this discourse of the World to the World;
which if it were Animal, as Plato fansied, would most freely acknowledge and
subscribe to the Divine History of its own Creation: But I write to the Animate
and Intelligent World of Mankind, both present and future; and more specially
to the Christian World, (which is now almost the whole World of Learning) but
most particularly to the British World, whose Language I therefore speak. Now
though Men in these latter Ages of the World seem to forget the Original
Creation thereof so many Thousand Years past, certainly Adam the first Man, who
was immediately Created by God, was very Conscious of his own Creation; nor
could he by his Fall lose this Natural Knowledge, more than of being a Man: and
most probably he delivered this great Tradition to his Posterity; who also
retained it, while they could reckon themselves in succession, as Enoch the
Seventh, and Noah the Tenth from Adam. But afterward in or about the Fourteenth
Generation; when Nimrod the Mighty Hunter and his Impious faction began to
build the Tower of Babel, (whereupon ensued the Confusion of Languages) this
Knowledge also began to be Confounded; and thenceforth remained with the
Primitive Language only in the family of Heber, the Father of the Hebrews (in
whose days the Earth was divided when his eldest Son Peleg was born) and in his
Sacred Seed after him. And from the Hebrews living in Chaldaea the Chaldaeans
first derived their Philosophy; and so after them the Egyptians, and
Phoenicians; and from them the Graecians; mingling it with their several
Superstitions and Idolatries. And as Josephus observes, Nimrod first taught
his Babylonians to contemn Gods Power and Providence; which he could not do
without a denial of the Creation. Whence the Chaldaeans began to worship the
Creature, or Created Nature, instead of God the Creator: but principally the
Sun, and Fire, as the Supreme and most Beneficial Element. The Egyptians who
would also have their National Deity, did Idolize Water rather than Fire;
induced thereunto by a Gratitude to their Great Benefactor the River Nilus. The
P^oenicians, Graecians, Romans, and generaly all the more Western Nations, have
worshipped all the Elements, under several Names, and in the several Forms and
Images wherewith they pleased to Invest them; deducing them all from Coelum and
Terra, or Heaven and Earth, (which the Chinese still worship) But Pan and
Proteus, whereby they represented Matter and Motion, were by all esteemed Dii
Minorum Gentium. This Ancient Theogony is also Recorded and Celebrated by the
Poets. Which though afterward the Athenian Philosophers did more strictly
examine, yet the Tradition of a Chaos and Creation did very long continue among
them: but they supposed the Creation of the World by one Chief God to have been
Eternal like himself, with certain Revolu^ions of Time, and Transmigrations of
Spirits, Eternally Circulating and Changing by Perpetual Generation and
Corruption; believing the Lying Records of Egyptian Antiquity, from whom also
Pythagoras learned his Philosophy, and fansied I know not what Harmony of the
Spheres: with many such Fictions, which he by his own Ipse Dixit pleased to
Affirm, and Impose as Credenda on his Disciples. And Plato, being partly a
Follower of his Sect, and partly a Master of another, generally retained and
refined this Philosophy. But Aristotle rejecting all Matters of Faith, both
Divine, and Human, and examning all things only by Reason, descended lower even
to a first Matter, affirming it, and the Potentia thereof, to be Common
Principle of all Material things. Upon which false Foundation, and also his
Compliance with popular Idolatry, almost all his other Errors are grounded;
though otherwise I esteem him the greatest Master of Reason among all Pagan
Philosophers: and his Errors are not Dangerous being now so well known to all.
But as Moses is the only Divine and true Philosopher; so of them all I
acknowledge Aristotle to be his best Commentator. Epicurus departed from both
these ways of Knowledge, regarding Sens more than either Reason or Faith.
Whereas these three, being all, and the only Ways of Human Knowledge a
Philosopher should accordingly make use of them all: and therefore all Heathen
Philosophy, wanting the Divine Light of Faith, could never yet produce any
Complete System of the World, nor give any true and satisfactory Account
thereof. And this Universal Dissatisfaction begat the last of Sects which was
Skepticism, or a professed Denying or Doubting all things whatsoever: admitting
no Testimony or Evidence either of Faith, Reason, or Sens. But though Doubting
may be a good Disciple, yet certainly it can be no Master of Philosophy; and if
it be Affected and Resolved is the very Contradiction thereof, and Oppugner of
all Knowledge, both Divine, and Human, Speculative, and Practical: and however
some may esteem it Caution in Philosophy, it is plainly Libertinism in
Morality, and Infidelity in Theology: and any Dogmatical Error or Inconvenience
can hardly be greater than Total Skepticism, which is as Utter Darkness, and
the State of Desperation, the Bottomless pit, and Vorago of all Knowledge and
Practice. Now as this was formerly the Progress of Heathenish Philosophy, so
since Christianity Illuminated the World, yet through the Natural Darkness and
Corruption of Human Understanding, it has again had the same Revolutions. For
so first Platonical Philosophy, which Porphyrius, Plotinus, Iamblichus, and
others very much rectified and refined by the Spiritual Light of Christianity,
was by them opposed against it. Also Philo Iudaeus, and Origin, and some of the
Christian Fathers seem to have some Savor thereof. Afterward the Schoolmen
generally referring Matters of Faith to Scripture, and examining Nature by
Reason, rather embraced the Peripatetical Philosophy, which has long
continued, until in this last Age, some others, though they can discover
nothing which the Athenian Wits had not Invented before them, yet reviving and
renewing old Errors, like Fashions, relaps again to Epicurism, in one kind or
other, of Atoms, or Corpuscles, or the like, And when this Humor has lasted as
long as it did formerly, we may expect Skepticism to succeed: and indeed I
suspect that we are already in the very Confines thereof. Now though Wanton Wits
think they may thus dally with Opinions as they please; yet, as it is most
truly said, Studia abeunt in Mores: and so Virgil very aptly introduces
Drunken Silenus changing the Epicurean Opinion, but Grave Anchises more soberly
Platonising. Certainly their Novell Doctrine of Matter and Motion does much
Embase the Immaterial Spirit of Man, and render it more Gross and Sensual, and
unfit for Spiritual and Divine Contemplations. And though I believ some of the
Assertors thereof to be as far from Atheism as my self, yet I must freely
profess that the Assertion tends toward it, and was by Heathens Improved to
the Denial of a Creation; and I appeal to every Reader whether it does not
Induce some Suspicion thereof in himself; yea I suppose this to be chiefly that
which renders i^ so acceptable and agreeable to the Corrupt Minds of Men; and
the Writers thereof themselves seem to be somewhat Conscious herein, while they
make their usual Apologies, and need to tell the World they are no Atheists.
Thus also by affirming Accidents and Qualities to be no Real things, they make
both Virtue and Piety to be only Notions.

O Virtus colui te ut Rem, at tu Nomen inane es! And if they could also prove
the Reward thereof, and Punishment of Impiety and Vice (which all must
accordingly perceiv and feel) to be only Notional, and not Real; they should
thereby deliver up all Mankind to a Reprobate sens, or rather Insensibility and
Indistinction of any Good or Evil. And their Opinion of Universal Nature is
like that of Caesar: Respublica Inane Nomen. Besides how prejudicial such
Contempt of Antiquity, and of all Authority, and the Affection of Novelty and
Innovation, may be to Church or State, I leav to wise Politicians, Certainly
all Christian Academies and Schools of Literature should deeply resent such
Novell Attempts, which Professedly subvert all the Ancient foundations of
Learning; (...) formerly the Barbarous World was taught both Arts (...) and a
ready way prepared for Christian Religion (...) whereupon so fair a
Superstructure has been raised ((...) these Novellists ow their Education and
Instruction) and a farther Progress might still have been made, if it were not
Obstructed by themselves; and Young Wits led away into an Inextricable Labyrinth
of Matter and Motion; and the Magnum Inane of Vacuity, and at last plunged into
the Abyss of Perpetual Skepticism. I have no Petulant Humor, yet it may exceed
the Meekness and Patience of my Great Master Moses, to hear some Christians
affirm the very Essences and Formalities of all Elementary, Vegetative, yea
even sensitive Natures, to be only Matter and Motion: as Aaron said of his
Materials; I cast them into the fire, and there came out this Calf: and so to
set up several Figures of things, as the Jews did the Figures which they had
made; and Heathenish Idolaters their Idols and Images. Whereas indeed it is
rather the Art of a Statuary, than of a Philosopher, thus to make Mercurius Ex
quolibet ligno: or as he who having only an Hercules of Wax in his shop, when
one came to buy of him a Mercury, could presently turn his Beard into a
Galerus, his Club into a Caduceus, and his Buskins into Talaria; and so he
might as well have made thereof a Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Man, Beast, or Tree, or
as we say Quidlibet ex quolibet: Which yet should be only Wax varied. Thus our
new Philosophers, not acknowledging all those several Primitive Natures which
God in his Infinite Wisdom pleased to Create, like Etymologists, can derive
one thing from another so far as scarcely to leav any Primitives. Cartacean
Philosophy, which describes the World in Paper otherwise then God has made it
to be in Nature, beginning, Cogito, Ergo Sum, and so proceeding, Cogito, Ergo
Est: as though because the Operation does indeed prove the Essence of the
Cogitant, it did therefore also prove the Real Entity of any thing Cogitated:
and yet this is all the Argument it can afford us to prove that First and
Fundamental Truth, That there is a God, Cogito esse Deum, Ergo Est. Whereas the
most Judicious and Ingenious Father, long before had Invented the first
Argument, when disputing with a Sceptike, he first proves that he Is, because
he doubts whether he Is or not; and because he is a Creature, thereby also
proves that there is a God the Creator: whom I shall rather chose to follow
than any such Neophytes; who, when God says in the Beginning he made Heaven
and Earth, say he made only Matter and Motion; and professing that they had
deliberated and tried to deduce all this Spectable World from a Chaos, or from
Matter only diversified by its own Motion, Figure, and the like; have asserted
it to be Matter; whereas God expressly declares that he Produced it out of a
Chaos in the Six Days Works: and who make Sol and the Planets, and the Stars
to be the Centers and Foundations of all the Vortices of Matter and Corpuscles
about them; whereas the whole Ether, Air, Water, Earth, and Vegetatives, were
made in the Three first days before them. Whereupon I may very truly and safely
pronounce; Aut haec non est Scriptura, aut i^ta non est Philosophia. For mine
own part I must here profess, that having long since studied Philosophy in the
University, and read over several Philosophers, both Ancient, and Modern, I
could never find a satisfaction in any of them: and if I had not reflected on
this Divine History, should have been tempted, as others, to Invent some new
Philosophy suitable to mine own Fansy: For now he is no Philosopher who willnot
attempt to make a new Philosophical World, and produce his Module thereof;
showing how it might be best made, and with least Charges: but certainly it is
most Ridiculous and Impious thus to presume that God must therefore have made
the World according to our Module, because we judge it best; rather than
acknowledge that to be best which he has made, because he who made it is
Infinitely Wiser than us. Wherefore to find out how God made the World, I had
recours to his Word, reading over this first Chapter of Genesis again and
again; and also many Commentators, in whom generaly (besides the first Article
of our Creed concerning God the Maker of Heaven and Earth) I found more of
Aristotle than of Moses; (yea even Translators seem to incline that way) but
the Cabalistical Rabbis, and Scholastical Philosophers, by their Jewish, and
Heathenish Interpretations, have so Confounded and Obnubilated this Divine
Light, that almost all Christians fear to approach it; and seem rather to dread
and adore it at a distance as some Inscrutable Mystery: and some think they
greatly favor Scripture by restraining it to Theology and Morality, and not
intitling it to Natural Philosophy; and so, as it were going backward, cover it
with the Mantle of their Indulgence, that the Philosophical Nakedness thereof
may not appear to themselves or others. Whereas considering for what end this
Divine History of Created Nature was writ, and being sufficiently confident of
the Intrinsecal Verity, and Extrinsecal Evidence thereof, I adventured to look
into the Naked Simplicity of the Text, and endeavored first to discover the
plain and true System of the World, which God the Creator has described
therein, and thereby reveled unto us. Which I have accordingly expressed in my
Explications; being only a brief Philosophical Paraphrase upon the Text: and
yet while I thus Explicate the Text by my Paraphrase, I still submit my
Paraphrase to be judged by the Text: and I therefore set these Explications, as
a Partition, or Cancelli, between the Divine Word and my Human Illustrations
thereof: which I have also deduced from the Created Nature, as the Counterpart
of Scripture; and have hearkened to the Voice thereof, as to the Echo of the
Creating Voice of God. Nor do I dissent from Pagan Philosophy Animo
Contradicendi, or to flatter Christianity (which is far above it) but shall
also retein any thing of Truth that I have found therein; and all advantages
thereof, either Platonical Speculations, Peripatetical Ratiocinations, or
Epicurean Sensations, yea even Skeptical Caution it self: and am Dogmatical
only in such Theses which according to the Law that I impose on my self, I
shall first prove by the Concurrence of Divine Authority, Human Argument, and
Sensible Experiment: and if I knew any more ways of Probation, should not
decline, but most gladly embrace them. Neither do I thus offer any thing to the
World whereof I have not first satisfied my self after so long trial and strict
examination; where in I could never yet find any thing considerable, either of
Reason, or Sens, which I could not fairly reconcile to the Divine Authority of
the Text. Also I have adventured to propound many Hypotheses; which though I
dare not so confidently Assert, yet I should not Insert them, if I did not
esteem them very Probable: for indeed it is the most proper, and a sufficient
Task for any Philosopher, to Inquire only what God has Created: and I ever
reputed it a great Vanity in any who presume to go farther, and will also offer
to show what he might have Created: not without some Insinuation of what one
most Profanely Expressed, That if he had stood at Gods elbow when he made the
World, he could have showed him how to have made it better: as though
whatsoever Hypothetical Natures, or Poetical Worlds, they please to fansy and
describe, Natura aut facit haec quae legis, aut faceret.

Possibility is Indefinite, and to pursue it Vain and Endless. It is not
Absolutely Impossible, that this, or any other Book, might be Printed by the
Casual Concurrence of Letters, Ink, and Paper, without any Composer, or
Printer; yet if any should therefore write a large Discourse thereof, or of any
other such like Hypothesis, I think it might well deserv to be placed in
Rablais his Library. But though I shall carefully exclude any such Improbable
Trifles, yet I doubt not but that among so many supposed Probabilities, I may
run into some Errors, and many Errata in Terms of Art, and such other
Peccadillos, which may prove Scandalous and Offensive to Weaker Minds, who
regard Words more than Things; and may be matter enough of Disgrace and
Disparagement to the Captious, who though they can find no fault in Venus her
self, will Carp at her Sandal, or something about her. And I am Conscious that
I may be more liable hereunto, being no Mathematician, Astronomer, Chemist, or
other Artist whatsoever; but one among the Laity of Mankind, having only two
Books which I regard, Scripture, and Nature: and though any may easily bite
through my Human Infirmity, yet he shall break his Teeth at these Bones,
Fragili quaerens illidere dentem Offendet Solido -- However I am sufficiently
secure, being already where I would be; that is, below Fame, and above Infamy:
and as I do not Superscribe my Name to gain the one, so neither do I Conceal it
to avoid the other: but either is as Indifferent to my self as it is to my Pen
to write it, only it is somewhat less not to write it. Nor will I presume to
add any thing to Divine Authority, professing it to be my chief Design to
Exalt it as the only Statera of Truth, both Natural, and Supernatural; and as
we Eminently call it Scripture and Bible, so it is indeed the Writing of all
Writings, and Book of all Books; whereby ^hey are to be Judged; and If they
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. As a
worthy Friend, laying his hand on the Bible, once truly said to me, If this
Book were not Extant in the World, there were nothing Certain and Infallible
left to Mankind: whereof we have sufficient Evidence, not only in Skepticism,
but even in all other Philosophy, of which there are so many several Sects and
Opinions, or indeed only Hypotheses; for I cannot conceiv that the Authors
thereof were ever satisfied in themselves, or could expect to satisfy others
thereby; but vented them as some things which they esteemed Possible, or the
best of them only as fair Probabilitys. Whereas this foundation laid in
Scripture is as sure as Nature it self; which both are the Work and Word of the
same Divine Creator; and every Superstructure rightly built thereupon shall
stand. Now though I may not presume to be any such Master Builder; yet I think
it a very great Work effected, if I may reduce others to this Fundamental
System, and provoke them to build upon it; as I have begun, and offered this
rude Essay: and though they shall pleas to Demolish my whole Fabrike, and
themselves to Erect any other, and lay upon it Gold, Silver, Precious Stones,
Wood, Hay, Stubble, or what they list, I have my Design; which is to Assert
this to be the only true Foundation of Natural Philosophy, as well as of
Theology, and Morality. And the Fire shall try every man's Work of what sort it
is. And so I not only Dedicate this my Work unto the World (as indeed every
Writer writes to all by making his Writing Public) but also I Appeal unto it,
and make every Reader my Judge: for I do not presume to teach the World; nor
shall I, as others, term it the People that knows not the Law of Nature; for
though it consist of many Heads, and almost as many Sentences, yet I do not
find but that the last Result, and that wherein they Acquiesce, is Truth: whose
common Fate in the World is first to be gazed on, and perhaps derided and
oppugned, and at last after farther scrutiny to be enterteined and embraced;
and the Fate of Error contrary thereunto, first to be Applauded and Admired, and
so received without any Pratike, and afterward when it is more strictly
examined, to be Rejected and Exploded. Thus Truth is the Daughter of Time; and
as Time is the best Critike, so I esteem Homer, Virgil, and such others, to
have been the best of Poets, and Plato, and Aristotle, the best of
Philosophers; because their Works have so long survived; whereas there are only
some Fragments of Epicurus now remaining, as broken and minute as his
Corpuscles or Atoms, Certainly Scripture is both most Ancient, and also most
Entire. Nor can I suppose that the Discovery of any consyderable Natural Truth,
or Profitable Good to Mankind, has been renounced, or will ever be lost by
them. Wherefore now O Christian World! who art a Collection not only of Men,
but of Christians, Judge thou according to both Capacitys, whether Scripture be
not the truest Comment that ever was made upon Nature: and that thou may
rightly discern between them, set the short System of the Divine Genesis thereof
by all or any other whatsoever. Contuleris toto cum sparsa Volumina mundo;
Illa Homines dicas, haec docuisse D^um.
And now after so many Christian Ages, let it be once Determined, whether this
be a true History of the Creation, or not; and if it be, (as most undoubtedly
it is) let us no longer be bereaved of so great a Treasure, which has hitherto
I know not how been not only hid under ground, but trampled on by the feet of
men. Nor let any Elude and Enervate it by the Imputation of Popularity, whereby
even Popular Understandings may learn Divine Philosophy; as the Psalmist
professes, that thereby he had acquired More Understanding then all his
Teachers. Nor let us resign not only our Faith, but also our own Reason to
others, because they pleas to abandon theirs, and scoffingly call it Logical, or
Metaphysical, or the like; which are the Acquests of those Noble Arts and
Sciences, whereby we excel Brutes, Barbarians, and themselves. Nor may they
justly term this a Prejudice against them; for how do they Prejudg? who Appeal
to the whole World, or the Great University of Mankind; and as good Scribes
bring forth out of their Treasure things New and Old: doing herein like
Galenists, who willingly admit and add to their Dispensatorys any Chemical
Experiments which are sound and useful (and to such Physicians all wise
Patients commit their Bodies rather then to Empirikes) Or are they prejudiced?
who affirm nothing but what they prove by all the ways of Probation, Authority,
Argument, and Experiment. For to what Judge can we Appeal but the World, or to
what Law but Faith, Reason, and Sens? and may we not rather suspect the
Prejudice to ly in Novelty and Party, and a new Sect of men, who admit only
sens, and yet will not be Judged by that, unless it speak their Sens? But as I
have not pawned the Authority of mine own Name, upon which I know I could
borrow very little; so I only beg of others; that neither any Passionate Amors
which they may have for any Man or his Opinions, nor the Inebriating Fansys of
their own Spirits, nor any pretended Monarchy or Monopoly of Knowledge, may be
by them Opposed to Truth; for Magna est Veritas and praevaelebit: and I doubt
not but that Scriptum est, and Probatum est, will by their own Intrinsecal
Value, without any Image or Superscription, pass Current through the whole
Christian World. But let us all rather Consult together the Advancement of true
Knowledge, and the Real Benefits of Mankind; both in Speculation, and Action:
Whereof the Speculative Part does properly belong to Schools and Academys, who,
if they shall make this Divine History of the Creation to be their Symbolum
Philosophicum, shall need no other Fundamentals; nor have they any better way
to preserv their Disciples from these new Philosophical Romances of Mundus
Alter, and Idem. And as it has been much wished by Wise men that Scholars
would season their Studys with more of Common Life and Civil Conversation (the
want whereof has been the Scandal and Scorn of Learning) so particularly
Academical Philosophers should hearken more to Experiments, which though it be
not fit for themselves to Practice, yet they may Inquire of Chemists and
Mechanikes, and be Informed thereof by them, to whom the Practical Part does
properly belong. And Mechanikes may be also much Assisted and Directed by
Philosophers, with many Rules and Regular Proportions; whereby they may be
Instructed, and also Cautioned from attempting Impossibilitys, or any thing
Impracticable; as the Philosophers Stone, Perpetual Motion, or Fire, and the
like; and also much Advantaged in the Attempts of Possibilitys; as if the
Doctrine of Local Motion of Bodies were more fully cleared, and all the
Variations thereof, not only according to Distances from the Center,
Multiplications of Wheels, Pulleys, Leavers, and the like, and all the several
Situations and Positions thereof; but also all the Mysterys of Increments and
Decrements of Velocity, Consistent Strength, Elasticity, Pressure and
Nonpressure, Preventions of Vacuity, and the like, were ascerteined unto them,
it might greatly help them in contriving their Machins and Engines. It has
been observed that though Speculative Philosophy has not much Advanced in
these last Ages of the World, yet there has been a great Improvement of
Mechanical Arts: but I conceiv that thus both might grow up together. Nor is a
Mechanike so mean a Title in Human Society as is commonly reputed; Certainly
the End of all these Speculations is Practice, which does most Immediately
promote the Good of Mankind. And if I should endeavor any such Profitable
Inventions, I had rather be assisted therein by a Corporation of Mechanikes,
then any College of Philosophers: and I would kiss that man's Hands, yea his
Feet, who should Collect and Publish an exact and faithful History of
Artificial Experiments, not only Chemical and Curious, but Mechanical, and of
all Trades and Artifices: which together with the History of Extraordinary
Natural Phenomenon, are very great Desiderata, and would be of very much Use
and Improvement. But Inventions, as I conceiv, are rather strange Fates and
Felicitys; and some Magnalia thereof have proved as great Treasures to the World
as the Indian Mines, which certainly the D^scovery made by Columbus did
comprehend. Yet as they are not of Ordinary Production, so neither only
Chances, as we term them; but Extraordinary Providence of God in some Ages,
wherein he designeth thereby to accomplish some greater Intendments: as when God
purposed to revele the Glorious Light of the Gospel through the whole World
before the second coming of Christ, he stirred up the Spirit of Columbus, by a
strange Dogmatical Confidence of more Earth then was before discovered, maugre
all Repulses, and Delays, Indefatigably, and Undeniably, to endeavor and
attempt the Discovery thereof: which yet he could never have effected if also
the Compass, or Seamans Card, whereof former Ages were Ignorant, had not been
then lately Invented; and so likewise the Gun, without which so few Adventurers
could never have kept Possession against Innumerable Natives. And about the
same time Printing also was Invented, to Disseminate Knowledge through both the
Worlds. But I do not esteem Additions to be Inventions; as the Telescope or
Microscope, which are only farther Improvements of the Perspective, (that was
first Invented by a Mechanike:) or as the Granado is of the Gun, and the like.
Yet we might hope for more both Inventions and Additions, if Philosophy were
made more Mechanical, and Mechanike more Philosophical. Whereof we have now the
greatest expectation from the happy Institution of the Roial Society; and that
so many Mercurial Wits, Interceding between both these Regions of Speculation
and Practice, will transmit Philosophical Instructions to Mechanikes, and
Mechanical Experiments to Philosophers: and after all their Curious
Disquisitions, and many Vibrations, like the Pendulum, setle at last in the
most Direct Line of Truth, Proving all things, and holding fast that which is
Good, and shall be for the Good of this Nation, and of all Mankind: which shall
render their Society a Solomon's House, and this Island a New Atlantis. And as
the Lord Veru^^m has well observed, that the Practical Theology of Scripture
^ath been by none better Ventilated then by English Divines; so may this Divine
History of the Genesis of the World be best Elucidated by them, who though they
superscribe Nullius in verba in defiance of any Human Magistery, yet always
except Verbum Dei, in submission to Divine Authority. And if the Active Spirits
of this Nation would freely clear and disengage themselves from the Humor of
Foreign Noveltys, they might exceed others in their happy Endeavors; though we
Tramontanes have been Judged by them better for Imitation then Invention: but I
desire them to produce any thing in this last Age equal to those two Noble
Inventions which were both of English Extraction: that is, the Inclinatory or
Dipping Needle, whereby the Latitude is discovered; whereof, as I have received
it by Tradition, the Inventor was Robert Norman our Countryman, whose Name
deserves more Heraldry; as they will easily acknowledge who shall attempt to
Invent the like Natural Instrument, whereby to discover the Longitude. The
other is the first Observation of the Circulation of the Blood, whereof our
Learned Doctor Harvey is the well known and Monumental Author. And for
Philosophical Discourses and Discoverys of Nature I may name two others; who
though Parallel one to another, yet I suppose neither of them can be Paralleled
by any other Nation: that is, the Great Chancellor Bacon whose Natural History
has made his own Name H^storical: and the truly Honorable Robert Boil; of
whom I may well say, that as Hiero made a Law in Syracuse That every one should
believ whatsoever Archimedes affirmed that he could do; so all ought to believ
whatsoever this Noble Person declares that he has done, in all those manifold
Experiments wherewith he has enriched the World. Now let this be the
Conclusion and Sum of the whole matter; That as the End of all Created Nature
is the Divine Glory of the Creator, which the whole World as a Mirror was made
to Represent to us Naturaly; so should all Spiritualy Render it unto him. And
thus we Christians being taught by God, the Author both of Scripture and
Nature, truly to know the Creation and System of the World, which Heathen
Philosophers groped to find out all their days, and have disputed in all Ages,
should with the Primitive Hebrews, and their Divine Doctors, Moses, David,
Solomon, and the rest, Glorify the Infinite Jehovah, Creator of Heaven and
Earth. And I have very much wondered that not only in Spirituals, but also in
Naturals, Seeing we should not See, and Hearing we should not Hear, and
Understand with our Hearts, the things which are writ in such large Characters,
and Proclaimed to us with so loud a Voice. Wherefore I beseech the Divine
Spirit so to Illuminate us in the true Knowledge of his Word and Works, that
henceforth they may be no longer hid from our Eyes; but that it may now be said
of Holy Scripture, and of the Nativity of the World therein, Nota Mathematicis
Genesis tua.

THE Divine History OF THE GENESIS OF THE WORLD.
SECTION I.
In the Beginning, etc.
EXPLICATION.
In the very First Being of Heaven and Earth, or of any Thing therein, or of any
Originals thereof from Absolute Not being. And in the very First Instant of
their Duration, or Time it self, then also commencing from Non-time or an
Absolute Nullity thereof.

ILLUSTRATION.
1 That the World is Finite; Proved by the Corporeal Quantity thereof. 2 By
Successive Quantity. 3 By Discrete Quantity. 4 Rejection of Impertinencys, and
what Postulations only are required. 5 Sensible Demonstration of the first
Proof. 6 Of the Second. 7 Of the Third. 8 The Possibility of the Worlds being
Ab Aeterno disproved. 9 The Possibility of being In Aeternum, or Immortality,
in what Sens granted. 10 The Sum of the whole Discourse, That there was a
Beginning of the World.

I. THat there was a Beginning of the World (besides the Divine Authority of the
Text) is as Rationaly Demonstrable, as it is Sensibly evident, That there is a
Heaven and Earth: for it is also evident, that they are Bodies, Extended by Part
beyond Part, and therefore Finite, or bounded with Extremitys of that Extension
(which we call First, or Beginning; and Last, or End; because we may begin to
measure at one, and end at the other) for that very Extension which renders
them Bodies by Extending Part beyond Part, does also Terminate them, that is,
Extend them so far, and no farther. Thus the whole Body of the World has two
great Parts; Heaven, and Earth. And whatsoever has Parts is Finite, because
every Part is Finite or Limited to a Proportion not so great as the Whole,
otherwise it should not be a Part of the Whole. And as one Part is Finite, so
are all the Parts of the Whole, because they are all Parts. And so Consequently
is the Whole; because it is equal to all the Parts; otherwise it should not be
the Whole of all the Parts thereof. And thus Heaven, which is one Part of the
whole Body of the World, is a less Whole in it self; because it is the whole
Heaven. And so likewise Earth, which is the other Part of the whole Body of the
World, is also a less Whole in it self; because it is the whole Earth. Now
either of these two less Wholes is Finite in it self; because it is only a Part
of the whole Body of the World: and because both these less Wholes are Finite,
therefore the whole Body of the World is also Finite, though it be a greater
Whole: for there is no Greater nor Less in Infinite, which is Infinitely beyond
any Proportion, and without any Parts whatsoever; because a greater Whole is
that which has greater Parts, or more equal Parts; and a less Whole is that
which has less Parts, or fewer equal Parts. And since whatsoever has Parts is
Finite, therefore whatsoever has greater or more, or less, or fewer Parts, is
also Finite, and cannot be Infinite. Again every Part is such a certain
Proportion of the Whole as it is, otherwise it should not be such a Part
thereof; and therefore has such a certain Measure of it self, whereby it is
such a certain Proportion as it is, and not greater nor less. And as all the
Proportions of all the Parts, are the Whole Proportion of the Whole; so all the
Measures of all the Parts, are the whole Measure of the Whole. And whatsoever
is Mensurable is Finite; because it is Mensurable, and not Immens. Wherefore the
whole Body of the World is Finite, as well as Heaven, and Earth, or any less
Part, or the least Particle thereof whatsoever; whereof there is the same reason:
Otherwise the Whole should be greater then all the Parts, or the Parts greater,
or more, then they are, which is Impossible. And the contrary thereof So
Mathematicaly true, and evident according to Common Sentence, (that every Part
is less then the Whole, and the Whole greater then any Part, and equal to all
the Parts thereof) that it cannot be further proved by any thing more evident
then it self. Wherefore this Conclusion is most true and evident; Omne Sectile
est Finitum.

II. Now as Corporeal Quantity, which is Consistent, and has Part beyond Part,
is therefore Finite; So also Time, which is Successive and has Part after
Part, is also Finite. And though Part beyond Part may be Inverted, and the
First become Last, or the Last First; or Circulated, and the Beginning United to
the End (and so every Consistent Quantity is Finite, because it has such Parts)
Yet Part after Part Succeed and follow one another in a most direct Line, and
by Such an Immutable Law and Order, as can neither be Inverted, nor Circulated:
otherwise there should not be Part after Part; which must necessarily be in
Temporary Succession: for Past can never be Present, nor Present Future, nor
all together. Wherefore Time cannot possibly be Circular: for in a Circle all
the Parts must Consist together; as in Circular Motion all the Parts must Move
together. Though probably the Opinion of the Eternity of the World was grounded
on some such Imaginary Circulation of Time, and Revolution of Platonical Years.
Whereas though all things measured by Time might be supposed to return again
into the same State in all other respects, yet Time it self can never return to
be the Same; because it is as Impossible to recall Past, as to anticipate
Future. So that where there is such a fixed Priority and Posteriority running
still forward in a most Direct and Immutable Succession of Part after Part,
which is Finite, there must necessarily be a Finite and Fixed First, or
Beginning; and Last, or End; according to the Fixed Order and Succession of the
Parts. And as certainly as this Present Instant is now the Last or End of all
Time Past, or Present, which has hitherto Actualy Existed, or does Exist; so
certainly there was some determinate Instant, which was the first or Beginning
thereof. And so this Conclusion also is most true and evident; Ubi Prius and
Posterius, ibi Primum et Postremum.

III. Lastly as Bodies and Time, so Number or Quantity Discrete, which has Part
Discreted and severed from Part, is also Finite in it self; and does most
Discernibly manifest the Finite Nature, both of Bodies, as in the Scale; and
also of Time, as in the Dial: whereby their Continuous Parts being
Arithmeticaly Divided into Numerable Proportions are rendered most apparently
Numerable and Finite. And so also this Conclusion is most true and evident
Nullum Multiplex est Innumerum. From all which Conclusions drawn from every
kind of Quantity, Corporeal, Successive, and Discrete, it most Necessarily
follows, That whatsoever is Quantitative is Finite* for it must be granted
under the highest pain of Contradiction, That Actualy Mensurable cannot be
Actualy Immense, nor Temporary Eternal, nor Numerable Innumerable.

IIII. Nor is this plain Probation concerned in those more Curious
Disquisitions, Whether Quantity be any Real thing in it self, or only a Mode,
or Relative Respect (or I know not what others pleas to term it) Since it is
most evidently the Geometrical, Chronical, or Arithmetical, Measure of all
Quantitative things, which are within the Virge thereof, and Measurable by it.
Nor of what Parts it does Consist, or how it is Divisible into them; since it
is most evident that it has Parts. Nor yet whether any Whole Quantity has
Physical Parts; since it is most evident that it has Mathematical Parts, and
is Divisible into them. And though I shall hereafter inquire into all these,
yet I will neither now prevent my Self, nor entangle this Probation (which as
it is most firm and solid in it self, so I desire to render it most clear and
free from all Impertinencys) with any such Curiositys. Nor do I beg any thereof
before hand; but only insist upon these most reasonable and undeniable
Postulations, That an Inch is the twelfth Part of a Foot, not more nor less;
and a Foot twelve Inches, not more nor less. That an Hour is the four and
twentieth Part of a Day, not more nor less; and a Day four and twenty Hours,
not more nor less. That an Unit is the hundredth Part of a Century, not more
nor less; and a Century an hundred Units, not more nor less. Or yet more
plainly, That an Inch is an Inch, a Foot a Foot, an Hour an Hour, a Day a Day,
an Unit an Unit, and a Century a Century. And so any greater, or less, Part, or
Whole whatsoever; which are all Identical Propositions, and neither need, nor
are indeed capable of Probation. Nor are these Sections of Continuitys only
Imaginations, or the Institutions of Reason; but Realitys in Nature. And so God
Created the Heaven and the Earth distinct Parts of the whole Body of the World,
and made the Evening and Morning a distinct Day, and consequently the Cardinal
Numerations thereof. And he made the Heaven to be above, or without, the Earth;
and the Earth to be beneath, or within, the Heaven: and the First day to be
before the Second, and the Second before the Third; and consequently the
Ordinal Numerations thereof. And heerin I suppose no Human Reason or Sens will
or can dissent from Divine Authority; because these are things also Rationaly,
and Sensibly, evident in themselves: however some may doubt or dispute what I
have evidently proved heerby, That there was a Beginning of the World. Nor do I
labor, or care to prove, when that determinate Beginning was (which I leav to
Chronologists) but only that there was such a Beginning whenever it was, which
suffices my present Intention.

V. For as in a great Wast or Common, though only the learned Artist can give
an exact account of all the Acres, Rodes, and Perches thereof; yet every Vulgar
Ey can discern that it is Measurable and Finite, and can estimate it more or
less. And as every Traveler, though he has not an Itinerary to instruct him in
the just Distances between one City, or Country, and another, yet knows that
there is a certain Space between them, otherwise such, and so many Paces, could
never bring him from one to the other: so though it be the Work of
Geometricians and Astronomers to measure Heaven and Earth; yet we all know that
the Earth on which we tread has a Surface, and a Diameter, which are Finite;
because the Surface on which we tread does end and terminate it self under our
feet; and that does also determinate the Diameter, which is Proportionable unto
it: and because the Diameter is Finite, therefore also the Circumference which
must be Proportionable thereunto is Finite. And so is every Sphere of the World,
Air, Ether, and any higher Heaven, or whatsoever we can Imagine to be the
utmost Circumference of the whole World: for to whatsoever Circumference our
Imagination can extend it self, it can only be Proportionably greater then the
Circumference of the Earth, which it encompasseth; and must also have a
Diameter proportionable to it self: both which evidently prove it to be Finite,
as well as the Earth; because there is no Greater nor Less in Infinite, as I
have already proved.

VI. And so though we may dispute the Nativity, or certain Beginning of the
World; yet it is most evident and indisputable that it had a Beginning: for none
can deny it to be this Day, or Hour, or the like, one Day, or Hour, or the
like, elder then it was the last; and so backward as far as he pleases:
therefore he must also confess, that there was some First Day, Hour, and the
like, and consequently some First Instant, and Beginning thereof: for the
Duration and Age of every thing must necessarily be computed from a Beginning or
Nativity; otherwise it should be incapable of any Addition or Succession (which
is apparently in all time) because it already exceeds all Number: for
Precedence of Part before Part without any Beginning renders the Precedent Parts
Innumerable, and consequently incapable of any Succession or Addition.

VII. So also in Number there must necessarily be a First, and no Number can
precede an Unit; though you may still add to it, and possibly multiply it to
any Sum Imaginable; which yet being once Stated will be found as Numerable as
a Single Unit; because it is only the Addition of so many Units: for as a Day,
or Hour, or any other Part of Time Actualy Past, is only a Day, or Hour, or
such Part of Time as it is, and not greater, nor less; so every Day, or Hour,
or other Part of Time whatsoever, is only One Day, or Hour, or One such Part of
Time as it is, and not more, nor fewer: and therefore so many Days, or Hours,
or other Parts of Time as are Actualy Past, are only so many Ones as they are,
and not more, nor fewer; which though never so many must necessarily be all
Numerable, by Addition of so many Ones as they are, and not more, nor fewer.
And consequently all Time Actualy Past, which may be Numbered by them, is
Numerable and Finite: and therefore had a Beginning; because the Number thereof is
Ordinal or Successive; whereof there must be a First. Thus if we should compute
the whole Age of the World according to the particular Ages, or Secula, of Men
or Brutes; or if you pleas according to the Revolutions of Platonical years;
yet there must necessarily have been a First, Second, and Third Seculum, or
Revolution, or so many as we will suppose to have been Actualy Past and
Precedent, and not more, nor fewer, nor other then Successive. All which summed
up together will be found as Finite as a single Unit, and must have a First,
and Last, as well as One and One Ordinaly and Successively. Nor indeed can we
Rationaly Imagine any Time whatsoever Actualy Past and Precedent, not to be
Actualy Finite. And if it cannot be otherwise in Imagination, much less in
Reality.

VIII. Yet the World might Possibly have Existed before it did Exist, or
Actualy was; and as long before as you pleas to Imagine; and so it may still be
continued Perpetualy in Possibility; which yet will be always Possible, and can
never be Actual: for no such Precedent, or Subsequent Perpetuity, ever was, or
shall be, nor can reasonably be Imagined to be Actual. Neither is it properly a
Possible Perpetuity, but rather a Perpetual Possibili^y of such a supposed
Precedence, or Subsequent Futurity, which can never be Actual; otherwise it
should not be Perpetualy Possible: for as Possible, while it is Possible,
cannot be Actual; otherwise it should not be Possible, but Actual: so
Perpetualy Possible can never be Actual; because then it should ceas to be
Perpetualy Possible. As it is said of Corporeal Quantity, that it is always
Divisible into always Divisibles; ever Possibly, but never Actualy: because if it
should once be Actualy Divided into all its Divisibles, then it should ceas to
be always Divisible (which is a most true and evident Ratiocination, supposing
such a Perpetual Divisibility thereof, whereof I shall hereafter discourse) But no
Possibility whatsoever, either Precedent, or Subsequent, does militate against
this present Discourse concerning the Actual Existence of the World.

IX. This Perpetual Possibility in Futurity is the Duration of Immortal
Spirits; which though it may not seem to be the same with Time in a restrained
sens (as Time may be distinguished from Duration) yet is the same with it in a
general sens. And so the Soul of Man, both in this Mortal Life, and also in his
Immortal Life hereafter, shall continue to be under the same Duration; though
his Time may be restrained to this Mortal Life, which has an End, and is
computed according to the Chronology of the Hours, Days, and Years thereof: and
so we commonly distinguish between Temporal, and Eternal or Everlasting. Thus
Plato makes all Time to be the Measure of Duration according to the Motion of
the Heavenly Bodies, which divide it into such Parts or Sections thereof: and
thereupon, I suppose, grounded his Opinion of the Circular Revolutions of Time,
like the Circular Motions of the Heavens. But as Duration was Coetaneous with
the first Chaos (for there was an Evening before any Morning, or Illumination
of the Ether; and three several Days before the Sun and Stars) so the same
Duration shall continue when they shall be dissolved, and when Time, in that
sens, shall be no more. And yet in all the Perpetual Possibility of this
Duration, so far as it shall ever hereafter become Actual, it shall likewise
be Actualy Finite, as I have already proved. Whereas Proper Eternity is neither
in any Precedent, nor Subsequent Possibility; but always Actual, and always
Present, or one Perpetual Instant: which is Divine, Infinite, and
Incomprehensible, and of another nature, Infinitely and Incomprehensibly
Different from any Finite Duration, Actual, or Possible, whatsoever; which it
does Comprehend, but not in any manner Confound, or Change the Temporary nature
thereof; as I shall show in the next Section.

X. Wherefore I Conclude upon the whole precedent matter, That every Quantity,
that has Existed or does Actualy Exist, is Actualy Finite. And so is every
Quantitative thing measured thereby. And that no Imagination, nor Possibility
it Self, can make it to be otherwise. Because all Quantity and Quantitative
things have Parts, and all Parts are Finite, and therefore whatsoever has
Parts is Finite, and whatsoever is Finite, is Terminated or bounded with
Extremitys, or First, or Beginning; and Last, or End; Respectively according to
the Parts: otherwise it should not be Finite. And particularly, that time and
Duration (which is Successive) and all Temporary and Durable things, had a
Realy Precedent and fixed First or Beginning. Now that the force of this most
Cogent Argument may not be lost or spent in so large a Dilatation, I will
briefly Sum it up in these few and short Propositions, which I shall present
to any Man of Reason most strictly to examine, and consider whether he can deny
any one of them, or the Consequence of them all, without forfeiture of his
Rationality.

I. That every Day is One Day, and of no more nor greater Number, nor Duration.

II. That Yesterday was One Day, Actualy Past, and Precedent to this Day; and
so all the Days Actualy Past and Precedent one unto another.

III. That the whole Number and Duration of all the One Days Actualy Past, and
Precedent, is as Finite (or bounded with first, or Beginning; and Last, or End)
as of any One Day.

IV. Therefore there was a First or Beginning of the whole Duration of all the
One Days, Actualy Past, and Precedent, as well as of the particular Duration of
any One Day.

Wherefore I Conclude according to that right and true Sentence, Vim inferunt
Humano Intellectui qui Mundum affirmant Infinitum ex Finitis Partibus
Constantem.

SECTION II.
God, etc.
EXPLICATION.
The Infinite Creator of Heaven and Earth.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. That God is Infinite. 2. Of Infinite. 3. That Absolute Nothing is Not
finite. 4. Of Proper and Improper Infinite. 5, Of Proper and Improper Not
finite.

I. WE have proved that Heaven and Earth, and Consequently the whole World, had
a Beginning of Being from Absolute Not being, or was Created; because it is
Finite. Wherefore the Creator of all Finites must necessarily be Infinite: for
if he were Finite, he must also be Created by another, and so Infinitely. But
there can be no such Process Infinite, because it is Successive from one to
another, and therefore must be finite, as I have already proved.

II. But because our Understanding also is Finite, and not Infinite; therefore
the proper Object thereof must be Finite, and not Infinite: and all the
knowledge we can have of Infinite is only from and by Finite. Now we have
discovered Finite to be Partial; that is, either a Part or a Whole having
Parts. And so indeed not only all Quantity, and Quantitative things, whereof we
have disc^ursed^, but also all Qualitys, and Qualitative things, are Finite,
because they have certain Degrees of themselves, which are their Respective
Parts, or Proportions. And also all Substances or Created Entitys whatsoever
either have Parts, or are themselves Parts of the Univers. And the Univers it
self is only the Whole of all those Parts whatsoever; and Consequently Finite^
Wherefore Infinite must neither be any Part, or Degree, nor any Whole having
Parts, or Degrees; otherwise it should not be Infinite, but Finite. Also
Infinite, because it has no Parts, or Degrees, in it self, is not Partialy, or
Gradualy, what it is; but Infinitely without any Parts, or Degrees, One, and
All, in i^ self, and Infinitely comprehending all Finites: for if it were more
then One, or less then All, it should be Partial, or Gradual; because More, or
Less, are Partial, or Gradual, and consequently Finite. Thus Infinite does
Transcend Finite, not Finitely, by any Parts, or Degrees whatsoever; but
Infinitely, according to its own Nature, which is Infinite. Wherefore also
Finite cannot be any the least Part, or Degree of Infinite; for then the Whole
also should be Finite. And Infinite does not only Infinitely Transcend Finite;
but is also Infinitely Different from it, without any Part, or Degree of
Difference. And so though it does Comprehend all Finites (as we say, Infinite
Being does Comprehend all Finite Beings, Infinite Immensity all Finite Bodies,
Infinite Eternity all Finite Time, and Infinite Unity all Finite Numbers) Yet
it does also Comprehend them Infinitely, according to its own Infinite Nature,
that is, Incomprehensibly as to our Finite Understanding; and Inconfusedly as
to the Finite Nature of the Things themselves: and so God is the only true
Transcendent and Eminent Cause neither Confounded, nor Compounded with them; nor
such as does Contradict, Alter, or Interfere with them, in any kind or manner
whatsoever. And whereas Infinite and Finite do thus Consist together, and yet
Infinitely Differ, we must always reserv the Notions thereof under most Different
and Distinct Considerations, and not Confound them one with another in our
Understandings, which are not Confounded in themselves; otherwise we shall
thereby also Confound our own Understandings, and disturb any right
Apprehension, either of Infinite, or Finite. Thus is Infinite both the Infinite
Affirmation of all Being, and Welbeing; and the Infinite Negation of all
Notbeing, and Ilbeing: which Negation being double, is only the Infinite
Affirmation of it self.

III. As Infinite is Infinitely Affirmative, so Absolute Nothing is
Not-finitely Negative, or the Notfinite Negation of all that is Affirmative.
And any Affirmation of it self, as that Nonentity is Nonentity, and the like,
is only the Notfinite Negation of it self. Wherefore Absolute Nothing is so
purely Null, that as Plato rightly says, it is altogether Ineffable, and
Incomprehensible, and not capable of any Name or Notion, but what is borrowed
from thing, or Being, whereof it is the Notfinite Negation: and therefore I
rather choose to term it Notfinite, to restrain it to the Negative Signification
of it self, which purely is not; then Infinite, which has also an Affirmative
Signification of what it is in it self Infinitely, and whereof Notfinite is the
adequate Negation, and ^s Notfinitely Notfinite as Infinite is Infinitely
Infinite.

IV. But Infinite is either Proper, or Improper. Properly Infinite is only God;
who as he is Infinitely One admitts only ^n Identical Predication of Himself,
or That God is God, for Quicquid est in Deo est Deus. And yet as he is
Infinitely All, and the Transcendency of all Finite Perfections which are many
and several; so there is Improperly Infinite, which may Improperly be
Predicated of him severally according to our Finite Understanding, and his
Infinite Condescension thereunto. And such are all those Partial and
Distinguishing Notions which we frame of him. As that he is Entity, Immensity,
Eternity, Unity, and the like: Whereby we render that which is Infinite, and
Infinitely One in Himself, and with Himself, Partial, and Several, and
Consequently Improperly Infinite; but not Properly Finite: for though thereby
we render that which is Infinitely One in Himself, Many in our Understanding;
Yet we also acknowledge him to be Infinite Entity, Infinite Immensity, Infinite
Eternity, and Infinite Unity, and not More, or Less. Again more Improperly
Infinite is that which is Properly Finite in it self, but Improperly Infinite
in respect of God who is Infinite; as Sin (which is committed against him) is
therefore by Divines said to be Infinite: and so indeed is every Creature in
respect of him, who is the Infinite Creating Cause, and Being of the Being
thereof. But most Improperly Infinite are such things as are only Indefinite
unto us, or exceed our Finite Understanding. So we say that the Globe of Heaven
and Earth which is Finite in it self, is Immens, and the World Eternal, and the
Dust of the Earth Innumerable, and the like: And so we term a Circle
Figuratively and Hieroglyphi^aly Infinite, and the like.

V. Also Notfinite is either Proper or Improper. Properly Notfinite is only
Absolute Nothing, whereof there can be no other Proper Predication then that it
is not; or Nothing is Nothing. Improperly Notfinite is either that in it self,
whereof we frame some Partial and Distinguishing Notions; as Nonentity, Vacuity,
Nontime, Nullity, and the like; which are only Particular and Respective
Negations of that whereof Absolute Nothing is the Absolute Negation. Also there
are other more Improper Notfinites, answerable to such Improper Infinites,
which we have before Specified.

SECTION III.
Created, etc.
EXPLICATION.
Caused the Finite Being of Heaven and Earth by his Infinite Power to Be from
Absolute Notbeing.

ILLUSTRATION.
1 Of Infinite Power. 2 What Creation is. 3 Of the Possibility of Creation by
Infinite Power. 4 Of the Impossibility thereof by Finite Power. 5 Of
Annihilation. 6 Of Proper and Improper Creation. 7 Of Proper and Improper
Annihilation.

I. HAving proved that there was Actualy such a Beginning of the Being of Heaven
and Earth, and of all things therein, from Absolute Not-being; and consequently
a Creation; I need not now to prove the Possibility thereof; because it Actualy
was. Yet farther to confirm it, I shall proceed to examine and refute the Grand
Argument against the Possibility thereof, Ex Nihilo Nihil fit. Absolute
Impossibility is that which no Power can Possibly reduce into Act or Actual
Being; Wherefore whatsoever may be so reduced is Possible to Infinite Power,
which should not be Infinite, if any Affirmative Act should be Impossible unto
it: for then it should be Limited by Something Possible which it cannot Act, and
consequently be Finite. Thus Infinite Power must Necessarily be Omnipote^t or
able to Act all things, except Contradictions, which are only the Negations of
it self, and consequently infer a Notfinite Impotence. And not to be able to
Act such Negations is a double Negation; which as I have said, is only the
Affirmation of it self. So God cannot Contradict Himself; either in Essence, as
not to be God, or not to be Infinite, which is the same; or in Operation, as to
make the same Thing to Be and Not be Absolutely; for then he should undo what
he does. And so God cannot make Absolute Nothing or Notbeing to Be; for then it
should Be and Not be Absolutely, which is an Absolute Contradiction. Neither
can he Convert Absolute Nothing into Something, or Extract Something out of
Absolute Nothing; for then it should not be Absolute Nothing, out of which
there is Nothing which may be so Converted, Extracted, or Made, in any kind or
manner whatsoever.

II. So that if to Create were any of these Operations, as the Objection does
import, then it should be confessedly Impossible. And I suppose some such
Misapprehension has been the ground of that Error. Whereas Creation rightly
understood is only a Causing Finite Being to be from Absolute Notbeing, as the
Negative Term, from which it does Commence; and not of which or out of which it
is Made in any kind or manner whatsoever. Now because Absolute Nothing or
Notbeing is only a Negative Term or pure Negation, it can neither resist
Creation, nor contribute any thing to, or toward it; because it is Absolute
Nothing.

III. And because Absolute Nothing cannot resist in the least, therefore
Creation is Infinitely Possible to Infinite Power; because there is Nothing to
resist it. And also because whatsoever is Possible to Infinite Power, is
Infinitely Possible to it; and not Partialy, or Gradualy; because Infinite has
no Parts, or Degrees. Nor does the Creation of Finite Being Contradict, or
Alter, Augment, or Diminish, Infinite Being, or Notfinite Not being. And so the
present Finite Being which is Created (as we have already showed) does not
Contradict, Alter, Augment or D^minish, either of them, which are Eternaly the
same in themselves.

IIII. But because Absolute Notbeing cannot contribute any thing to, or toward,
Creation, therefore it is Impossible to any Finite Power: for Absolute Nothing
does afford no Matter, Principle Preparation, Inclination, Capacity, or any
Something whatsoever; whereupon, or whereby, Finite Power may begin to work; and
where there is no Beginning, there cannot Possibly be any Progress, or
Perfection thereof by any Finite Power; but only by Infinite Power, which can
Create Being, and the very Beginning thereof from Absolute Notbeing. Also all
Finite Power it self before it was Created was absolutely Null; and so had no
Power in it Self to Create it self, or any other Being, from Absolute Notbeing.
Nor could God himself Delegate this Infinite Power to Angels or Demons, or any
Rabbinical or Platonical Subcreators; which must be either Totaly, or Partialy,
not Totaly; for then God should ceas to have or be Infinite Power in Himself,
and consequently to be God; which is an Infinite Contradiction, nor Partialy;
for Infinite has no Parts. Certainly no Angel, nor Man, the chief of Natural
Operators, did ever arrogate unto himself a Creating Power. Nor have we any
Instances of Creation in the whole History of Nature, among all those Monstrous
Relations, which the Writers thereof have inserted. Nor has any Poetical Fansy
ever Invented or Imagined a Metamorphosis of Being from Notbeing. Much less
has any Philosophy ascribed this Creating Power to Nature her self; but rather
denies a Creation; and yet to solv it, is forced to substitute an Impossible
Eternity of Finite Nature; and certain Fictitious Powers, Eminences, and
Equivocal Causalitys, which I shall also examine hereafter.

V. As Creation is a Causing to be from Notbeing, so Annihilation is a Causing
Not to be from Being; which is most Possible to the Infinite Creator; because it
is only the withdrawing his own Infinite Power, whereby he does continualy Cause
the Creature to Be; but Impossible to any Finite Power; because it cannot resist
the Infinite Creating Power, which does so continualy Cause the Creature to Be.
And as there can be no Annihilation by any Finite Power; So we never read of
any by Infinite Power: Nor probably will God ever Annihilate any thing which he
has Immediately Created; for he does nothing in vain, but continues and
reserveth all things, which he has made by Proper Creation, for his own
Everlasting Glory.

VI. Thus to Cause to Be or Continue to Be from Absolute Notbeing is Proper
Creation. But there are also Improper Creations, which do not produce or
preserv any Being from Absolute Notbeing: but only alter the Created Being in
such a Supernatural manner as is beyond all Natural Generation, or any other
Natural Power of the Creature: which being Finite, and no more then it is; as
it cannot Create without Infinite Power, which it has not; so neither can it
Act any thing beyond that Finite Power which it has. And thus, though it is
the Opinion of Divines that God Originaly Created nothing after the Beginning,
except Souls of Men (or Angels if they were not Originaly Created in and with
their Heaven) by Proper Creation; Yet God is said to Create in all the Six
days, and expressly in the Fifth day to Create great Whales (though it be also
said that the Waters Produced them as well as others) by Improper Creation,
which was his Immediate Ordination of the whole Frame and Course of Nature, and
Original Generation of them all: which the several Creatures in their First
Chaos (before their Active Qualitys and Mist Forms were Produced, and all other
previous and requisite Matters Powers and Instruments were prepared and adapted
by God) could not perform in or by themselves, nor Generate others, until they
were so fitted and instructed, and the Divine Blessing of Multiplication added
thereunto, as I shall show hereafter: and therefore all those Works of the Six
Days, which did Succeed the Original and Proper Creation in the Beginning, were
Improper Creations. So also all Positive Miracles, which are Preternatu^al, or
beside the Natural Course and Order, are Improper Creations.

VII. Proper Annihilation is a Causing any Being not to be Absolutely: and
improper Annihilation only a Preternatural Alteration thereof. And as God in
Positive Miracles does work beyond Natural Power, so in other Privative
Miracles he does obstruct and suspend it. As in causing Iron to swim by
suspending the Gravity thereof; or fire not to burn, by Suspending the Heat
thereof, and the like.

SECTION IIII.
The Heaven and the Earth, etc.
EXPLICATION.
The whole Body of the World, consisting of Several Heterogeneous Members,
Heaven, and Earth; which were Created together in the Beginning.

ILLUSTRATION.
I. Of Heaven and Earth. 2. Of Heaven. 3. Of Earth. 4. Philosophical
Consyderations of Entity, and the Differences thereof. 5. Of Substances and
Accidents. 6. Of Matter and Forms. 7. Of Common and Proper Accidents.

I. WE have here a brief Description and Map of the World, and of the whole
Globe of the Matter thereof, from the utmost Circumference to the inmost Center,
which was all Created in the Beginning: for neither do we read, nor can we
reasonably suppose, that any new Matter was Created afterward. Nor was it
Created in the very Beginning only Matter, or one Homogeneous Mass thereof; but
one Body, expressly distinguished into several Heterogeneous Members,
Celestial, and Terrestrial; or Heaven, and Earth. Nor was the Heaven and Earth
thus only Different in Nature, in their First Creation, but also Distinct and
separate in their Situations, and not Confounded together, but Created such
several Members of the great Body of the World. And as the Heaven is named
before the Earth, so were the Celestial Bodies above or without the Terrestrial,
incompassing them as now they do: for neither do we read, nor can we reasonably
suppose, that there was any other Separation or Disposition of the Celestial
Bodies afterward; as is expressly mentioned of the Terrestrial, or Terraqueous
Globe* whereof* and of all their several Situations, I shall further discourse
hereafter.

II. The word Heaven, Hebra^caly is Heavens, not only Grammaticaly (as the word
God in this Text) but Phisicaly, and in the nature of the thing it self. And so
generaly the Hebrews distribute Heaven into three several Heavens of three
several Natures. Whereof the highest is also called the Third Heaven; because it
is Utmost and the last above us, and encompasseth both the others; and this I
shall therefore call the Superaether. The midst, or Second, is the Ether, or
Starry Heaven. The lowest or First, is the Air which Immediately encompasseth
the Terraqueous Globe. And these are all the Celestial Spheres whereof we read,
and therefore I can acknowledge no more however Astronomers have pleased to
multiply them. These three Heavens are thus built one upon another, and all
upon the Terraqueous Globe, which is the Habitation of all Corporeal Animals:
as Amos elegantly expresses it, He that builded the Storys of the Heavens, and
founded his Troop on the Earth. Of all the three Heavens the Third, which is
the Supreme, is most Properly Heaven; and therefore also is called the Heaven
of Heavens, by way of Excellency, and so is specialy called the Temple of the
most high God; and is the Native Region and Province of Blessed Angels, or
Caelum Angelicum; and shall be the Everlasting Habitation of the Spirits of
Just Men, or Seeds Beatorum. Whereof we have no farther discover^, then only
that it was Created together with the other two Heavens; and so is Comprehended
under one Common Name with them: and probably because it was made Perfect in
the Beginning or first Instant of the Creation thereof, and so must continue for
ever, without any Elementary Mistion, Generation, or Corruption; therefore we
have no other account thereof among all the Works of the Six Days; wherein the
Elements, and whole Elementtary Nature, and the Course of Generation, and
Corrupti on therein, was Set in order. And accordingly I observe, that whereas the
other two Elementary Heavens, Ether, and Air, are called Expansa and
Firmaments, this Superaether is never so termed; but only Heaven, probably
because it is not capable of Expansion or Compression. But as the Divine Wisdom
has conceled any farther notice thereof, and also given us very little Knowledge
of the nature of Angels, the proper Inhabitants thereof, as Impertinent for us
to know in this present State; so I shall not presume farther to inquire
therinto, or discourse thereof: and indeed if the Hebraical Word Heavens be dualy
rendered, it must be intended only of Ether, and Air.

III. As the Ether and Air are Elementary, and both of them He^erogeneous from
the Superaether, and every of them one from another; So are all of them from
the Earth, and Terraqueous Globe. And as Heaven generaly Comprehends all the
three Heavens, so here also Earth Comprehends both Earth, and Water; which
were afterward formed into one Terraqueous Globe: and by that general Name in
this Text is not only to be Understood Earth particularly (which was not so
termed until the Third Day, and then also is called Dry Land) nor the
Terraqueous Globe such as it was made afterward; but the Orb of Earth and the
Water above it, which is also mentioned afterward. Thus we have a Discovery of
what was Created in the Beginning; that is, Superaether, which is also
Superelementary and Ether, Air, Water, Earth, which are the four Elements; as
God the Creator has declared, and Moses reveled them unto us, both in this
Text, and in the Context, whom I shall believ before all Athens, or any Modern
Conceptions whatsoever; and shall accordingly prove them hereafter. And now
upon this Subject Matter proceed to discourse; and first enter upon such
Philosophical Consyderations thereof as may concern them all, and all Creatures
Generaly; and so according to the order of this History of the Creation
Expatiate into more Particular Contemplations of their several Natures
afterward. The first and most Universal Consyderation of Heaven and Earth, and
of all Creatures whatsoever, is that they are Entitys; for since Creation is of
Being from Absolute Nothing, whatsoever is Created must necessarily Be;
otherwise it should not be Created. So that an Entity is any Thing that Is,
which I confess, is no more in effect, then that an Entity is Entity: whose
Subject and Praejudicate, Genu^ and Difference, is, and must necessarily be the
same; because it is the same Genus Generalissimum of all Things without any
Specifical Difference. And here I must also premise that in every Perfect and
Proper Definition of any Specifical, or more Particular Thing, the Specifical
or particular Differences thereof must be Identical; because the Specifical or
particular Essence or Entity is the only true Specifical or Particular
Difference of every thing. But because we cannot know Essences as they are in
themselves, therefore we declare things by their Propertys, which is rather
Description then Definition. As in the Common Instance, Homo est Animal
Rationale, Rationality is not the true Specifical Difference of Humanity,
though it be most Proper to Man; because it is not his Specifical Essence; and
therefore does not Define the Humanity it self. Nor does it indeed Comprehend
all the Properties thereof, as Risibility, and the like; but only Describe it by
one Proper Faculty. So that the most Proper Definitions are only Vocabularys
and Nomenclatures, which yet are of good use to explain one Term by another;
whereby we may avoid all needless Caption and Contention about Terms, and when
the Thing intended thereby is clearly understood, it shall suffice me. And I
have now made this Digressive Parenthesis, to save my Self the whole labor of
Defining, and the expectation of any who otherwise perhaps might exact it of
me: but I shall use as clear and pregnant Declarations or Descriptions as the
Thing will afford. Thus I affirm Created Entity to be a Creature, or whatsoever
is Created which is also Convertible with it. Again because the Created World
does Consist of several Heterogeneous and different Entitys and Natures (into
which Differences we must also inquire) I affirm such a Different Entity to be
whatsoever God has Created Different in Nature from another: for as whatsoever
he has Created must Necessarily Be; so whatsoever he has Created Different
must necessarily Differ. Now here we must Consider a Difference which Scholemen
have made of Entity it Self; which is, that it is either Entity Real, or Entity
of Reason: Entity Real is in the Thing it Self and Nature thereof; as Heaven,
and Earth, and all things therein; Entity of Reason is in our Reason or Mind; as
the whole Poetical World, and all things therein; Hircocervs, Hippocentaurs, and
the like; which are therefore also called Entitys; because our very Imaginations
and Fictions thereof are Creatures, and Entitative, though the Imaginary
Figments themselves are as it were our Creatures, and Objectively Nothings. And
so also there are Entitys of Sens, as all Deceptions of the Senses: for though
there be no such Objects, yet there is Realy and truly such a Sensation, as
well as when the Objects are Real and true, as I shall show hereafter. Now as
Entitys Real and of Reason are both Entitative, So there is such a Diversity of
Entity it Self, Respectively, and Improperly: But as Entitys of Reason are
Objectively Nonentitative, So also there is Absolutely and Properly no
Difference, but a plain Contradiction between them, and Real Entity; as a
Number, and a Null or Cyphar, do not Properly Differ, but Contradict one
another because one is, and the other is not. Wherefore all Real and true
Difference must be between things that are truly Real; and again whatsoever
things are Real may Realy Differ from others in the Things themselves and
Natures thereof. So that Real Difference is not only Corporeal, or of things
whereof there is or may be a Local Separation, but also of any other Thing or
Entity, though not Separated or Separable Localy: for though Entity it self be
only Generical, yet there are also Specifical and Particular Essences, and
Differences. Thus an Angel in a Body, and the Body, are Realy Different
Specificaly in the Things themselves, and Natures thereof; though not Localy
Separated, yet as truly as when they are Localy Separated. So that their
Difference is not only from their several Localitys, but from their several
Specifical Natures. So also the Soul, and Body of Man, are now Different,
though not yet Separated, but only Separable by Death; and shall be Different
after the Resurrection, when they shall be Inseparable, as well as after Death
and before the Resurrection, when they shall be Localy Separated: and So
Heaven, and Earth, also Differ, not only because they are Lo^aly Separated, but
also because they are Heaven, and Earth; that is, Several Natures Specificaly
Different. Also there may be an Individual Difference where there is no
Specifical Difference, as in a Legion of Angels, or Men; Lastly there is a
Numerical Difference where there is no Individual Difference; as all the
Members of a Body are so many as they are Numericaly, but yet do not Differ
Individualy: otherwise it should not be one Body, or Individual Composition
thereof, but so many several Individuals, as there are Members. But whatsoever
does Differ in any other kind, does also Differ Numericaly; because Number, or
Quantity Discrete, is Comprehensive of all Differences, Diversitys, or
Discretions whatsoever. And now I shall Conclude that whatsoever God has
Created, and is in Nature and Not only in our Reason or Mind, Realy is: and
whatsoever God has Created Different, and does Differ in Nature, and not only
in our Reason or Mind, is Realy Different: which I suppose None can Deny, and
according to these Undeniable Rules I shall proceed.

VI, The first Real Difference of Entity is that it is either Substance, or
Accident. And now (because I know I must fight out my way by Inches against all
Skeptical Disputers) I shall proceed as clearly and firmly as I can. And first
I shall explain my Terms. By Substance I intend an Entity Naturaly Subsisting
in it Self, and from which other Accidental Entitys do Naturaly Flow, and
Subsist therein. By Accident I intend an Entity which does Naturaly Flow from
and Subsist in a Substance. So that Substance is both the Original Fountain,
and Continual Foundation of any Accident, Cujus Esse est Inesse, which some
cavil against, because they do not Understand it; though it is very true, and
rightly said of an Accident, that it is the Accident of a Substance and in
respect of the Substance: as it may be also said of Substance in respect of
Accidents, Cujus Esse est Subesse. But as all particular Substances, Matter,
and Forms, have their own Specifical Essences or Entitys, So also have all
particular Accidents Extension, Figure, Density, Gravity, Motion, Heat, Light,
and the rest. Also though all Accidents do Originaly Subsist in their
Substances; yet Derivatively one Accident may Subsist in another; as Figure in
Extension, Gravity in Density; and (...) Im^mediately, and the others
Mediately, in Matter. (...) Several Accidents may Subsist Immediately in the
(...) as Extension and Density in Matter, which is one (...) Substance. And one
Accident does so Subsist in (...) if it be a particular Product, Property, or
Affection thereof; as Figure is of Extension, or Gravity of Density, and the
like. Now Accidents are therefore so called; because they are Adventitious to
the Substance, whereof the Specifical Essence, as I have said, is in it Self,
and does not consist in any, or all the Accidents thereof; nor is, or can be
Altered, or made More or Less, by the Variations thereof; and also because
Accidents in themselves do sometimes Actualy Exist, Appear, and Exert their
Operations; and sometimes only Subsist Potentialy, and are Latent and Quiescent
in their Substances: as may evidently appear by all the several Variations of
Accidents, the Substance remaining the same; because it does always Subsist in it
Self; and therefore always is Actualy what it is in it Self: for if it should be
Potential, then the Potentiality thereof not Actualy Subsisting in it Self,
should Subsist in another; and Consequently be an Accident, and not a
Substance. And thus every Entity which is Created, and cannot be Annihilated,
must necessarily always Subsist either in it Self, or in another Actualy, or
Potentialy; But because Accidents Affect, and indeed Perfect the Substance,
therefore they are also called Affections; Now that there are Substances, I
Suppose, none will Deny who acknowledge any Actual Entitys: and that there are
Accidents, none can deny who has the use of his Senses; whereof all Sensible
Accidents are the Proper Objects: and Objects of Intellect are only understood
by Objects of Sens. So that indeed all our Conversation is Immediately with and
by Accidents; and we neither know Essences of Accidents, nor Substances,
otherwise then by their Actual Phenomenon, or Appearances: Nor can Substances
Operate any thing without the Actual Operations, of Accidents. Where efore that
I may not fight as beating the Air, nor Contend for that which will and must be
yielded, I shall more directly oppugn that wherein I conceiv the greatest
strength of opposition to ly, and accordingly address my Self to prove that
Accidents are Realy Different from their Substances: whereby I shall also prove
that both Substances and Accidents Realy are; because any Real Difference is
only between Real Entitys. Now as I have said before God in the Beginning
Created Heaven and Earth, and all other their Primitive Entitys therein, which
yet did not then all Actualy Exist, Appear, and Operate: for it is said
expressly, that there was yet no Light in the Heaven, but Darkness was upon the
face of the Deep; and of the Earth that it was without form and void: and if
they had been otherwise Created in the Beginning, all the ensuing Works of God
in the Six Days had been needless and Superfluous. Whereas Elementary Substances
and the Essences of their Accidents in their Potentialitys being Created
together in the Beginning, the work of the Three first Days was to Produce their
Accidents out of Potentiality into Act; as I shall particularly show hereafter.
And though this was not Properly Creation of any New Entity from Nonentity; yet
as it was the Production of the Actualitys of the Accidents, and not of the
Substance^ of the Elements, it plainly Discovers a Real Difference between
Substances, and Accidents. Certainly as it was the Production of Several
Actualitys thereof in several Days, it declares the Accidents so severaly
Actuated to be several and Different in themselves; and much more all of them to
be Different from the Substances, from which they all Differ more Genericaly,
and consequently more then one from another. Again if Substances and Accidents
did not Realy Differ, then no Accidents of the same Substance should Realy
Differ one from another, but all should be one and the same with themselves, as
well as with their Substance: For as the Mathematical Rule is most true, That
if each of two Lines be Equal to a third, one of them must necessarily be Equal
to the other. So if each of two Entitys, could be one and the same with a
third, the one must Necessarily be one and the same with the other: and so if
Extension, Figure, Density, Gravity, Motion, Heat, Light, and the rest, and all
the Several Variations thereof, were one and the same with the Ethereal
Substance, then they must also be one and the same in themselves: Yea if they
were only Accidents of the Matter, as some affirm all Contrary Qualitys, Heat
and Cold, and the rest must be one and the same with the Matter; which is most
Absurd and Irrational: for then Heat should be Cold, and Cold Heat, and the
like. Also if we Consider the Continual Sensible Variations of Accidents, and
their Productions out of Potentiality into Actuality, and Reductions from
Actuality to Potentiality, whereby they so often Appear and Disappear unto us,
and their Desultory and Exile Nature (which to some scarcely seems to be Real)
we may not Imagine them to be Realy the same with their Substances, which
Subsist in themselves, and are Fixed, Solid, and Substantial Entitys; and
therefore always are Actual, and never Potential, as I shall particularly show
hereafter in all the ensuing Discourses. Wherefore I Conclude that Since there
are such Substantial, and Accidental Entitys, and that they Differ one from
another, in Nature, and not only in our Mind and Reason; that they both Realy
are; and that Accidents Realy Differ from Substances, and also one from another.

VII. Substance is either Matter, or Forms; (for I must use that Common Term
until I can substitute another) And because, as I have said, we know Substances
only Intelligibly, by their Sensible Accidents, I shall accordingly by them
declare what I intend by Matter, and what by Forms, Matter is known by
Corporeal Quantity, which is the Proper Accident thereof. And this Quantity is
either Extension, and the Products or Propertys thereof, Figure, Porosity, and
the like; or Density and the Products or Propertys thereof, Gravity, Corporeal
Motion, and the like. Also Matter has a Common Receptivity of Forms, and is
Passively apt to be Consubstantiated with them, and is as the Body thereof,
being in it Self one Homogeneous and Uniform Moles, or Mass; and is also the
Passive Subject of all its own Corporeal Variations, which are Superinduced in
it by the various Activitys of Forms. Whence it is rightly called Materia,
which the Forms, as Architects, do severaly Mold and Fashion into fit Bodies for
themselves. And therefore I Describe Matter to be One Passive Substantial Entity
or Common Body of Forms. Again Forms are known by their Qualitys, which are
Generaly Active, as Heat, Cold, Moisture, Drines, and the like; and are not
only Various, and Innumerable to us, but also many of them Contrary one to
another: whereby I know their Substantial Forms also to be Several,
Heterogeneous, and Difform: whereof some are apt to Consubstantiate themselves
Subordinately with the Passive Matter, which they as Spirits, do Actively
Inform or InSpirit, as all Inferior Forms or Spirits; and some do not
Consubstantiate but only Inform it; as the Human Spirit; and some neither
Consubstantiate nor Inform it, as Angels: and though all Exist in it, yet none
Subsist in it, as Accidents do in Substances; And so these Forms are Several
Active Substantial Entitys or Spirits. And I shall henceforth generally call
them Spirits; Whereby I do not intend Spirit Grammaticaly, that is Breath; nor
yet with Physicians, and others, those Igneous Aereous, Aqueous, and Terreous,
Natural, Vital, or Animal Spirits, which indeed are only such Qualitys of the
Elementary Spirits; but Substantial Spirits Distinct or Different from the
Matter, as I have before discoursed them. And so there are not only Angelical
Spirits which Exist Separate from the Matter Naturaly, though in it Localy, and
Human Spirits which are also Immaterial, and such as may so Exist separately,
as well as Angelical, and yet are apt to Inform or InSpirit the Human Body
wherewith they are Composited, But also Material Spirit^, which cannot so Exist
Separately, or as Separate Substances without the Matter, and therefore are
called Material, though they are in themselves neither Matter nor Homogeneous
with the Matter as I shall show hereafter. And so the Wiseman mentions The
Spirit of a Beast that goes downward to the Earth, as well as the Spirit of
Man that goes upward. And so also there are Vegetative Spirits, and the Spirit
of the Heaven (as the Author of Esdras says of the Firmament) and of all the
Elements, (which are more Properly Material because they Immediately
Consubstantiate Matter) that is, such Active Substantial Entitys, as I have
before Described. And there are also Accidental Spirits or Spiritual Activitys
Powers, and Virtues mentioned in Scripture. Which yet are no Substantial
Spirits, but Subsist in them. And I suppose this general Name Spirit does
better express all simple Substantial Activitys (which were Immediately Created
by God, as well as Matter, and can never be Annihilated or Altered as they are
in themselves, any more then Matter it Self) then Forms by which they are
commonly expressed as well as Form^ Mistorum. And therefore I do not term them
Forms, (but I rather reserv Form to express that which is otherwise called
Formae Misti, or Compositi, by which I intend only the Generative Complexion
and Compagination of those simple Created Spirits and Matter which are
Ingenerable and Incorruptible in themselves; and whereof Generation and
Corruption are only the Confabrication, or Demolition; as I shall show
hereafter: and consequently every Form^ Misti, or Compositi is Generable and
Corruptible: and so these Forms are as far Different from the others (which I
therefore term Spirits) as they are from Matter; and are called Substantial
only because they are the Complexions of the others, which are Substances as
also Material Spirits are so called only because they are so Un^ted to the
Matter, as I said before. Having thus explained my Terms, I shall proceed (as
before concerning Substances and Accidents) to prove that Matter and these
simple Created Spirits Realy Differ, whereby I shall also prove that there
Realy are both such Matter and Such Spirits. And whereas it is now generaly
granted that there are such Angelical and Human Spirits Realy Different from
Matter (for which, I suppose, we may thank Christianity) I shall accept i^; and
apply my Self only to prove the same of the rest; and then I presume no Heathen
can deny it of the others. Now in our present History of the Creation it is
said that the Water brought forth Fishes after their Kinds, and Fowls after
their Kinds, and the Earth Beasts after their Kinds, and Creeping things after
their Kinds. Whereby it appears that these Creatures were of Several Kinds, and
Heterogeneous one from another, and Consequently all of them from the Matter;
which being one Homogeneous Substance in it Self can never Produce any
Heterogeneous Substances; and therefore all this Heterogeneity must necessarily
be from some other Substantial Principles; that is, their Spirits: which were
Created thus Specificaly Heterogeneous one from another, and all of them more
Genericaly Heterogeneous from the Common Matter. And so it is also expressly
said concerning Vegetatives; and must be reasonably understood of Heaven, and
Earth, and all the Elements: for the Matter of them all being one and the same
could not Constitute and Denominate them Heaven, or Earth, neither could they
be so Denominated from their own Proper Qualitys, which were not yet Actualy
Produced, but afterward in the Three first Days. Wherefore there were such
several Heterogeneous Substantial Principles (which I call Elementary Spirits)
Created in the Beginning and then Actualy Subsisting in and with the Matter,
which did so Denominate the Heaven and Earth, and the rest. And if they
together with the Matter could not Produce their own Proper Qualitys, without
such a Supernatural, though Improper Creation; much less could the Matter of it
Self Produce any Such Substantial Spirits, and Activitys, far more excellent
then it Self. Again if Accidents of the same Substance being Several must
therefore Realy Differ from the Substance, as I have before proved, then
certainly Accidents of Several Substances, which are not only Several, but also
Contrary, do necessarily prove that they can not proceed from one and the same
Substantial Principle, such as Matter is: for then the same Nature should
destroy it self by its own Natural Contrarietys. And though in Mist Bodies which
are Composed of all the Elements there be the Substantial Principles of
Contrary Qualitys, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness, and the like Mist and
Contemperated together, or though the same thing may Produce Contrary Effects
in Several Subjects, as Motion may excite Heat in Fire and Cold in Air, or the
same Faculty may exercise Contrary Actions toward Contrary Objects; as the Will
or Appetite does Affect that which is Pleasant, and Disaffect that which is
Displeasant; Yet Matter, which is one and the same, cannot Produce Contrary
Activitys, and Exercise Contrary Operations in it Self, which destroy one
another, and so consequently should Corrupt it self by such Contrary Qualitys.
Wherefore all Generation and Corruption, and all Menstrua, and the like, do
plainly prove that there are Several Substantial Principles of Such Contrary
Qualitys, not only Realy Different from the Matter, but also Difform one from
another. And therefore, unless we affirm Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness, and all
other Contrary Qualitys, and Consequently Ae^her, Air, Water, Earth,
Vegetatives and Sensitives to be all one and the same and not Different; and
thereby Confound Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, and our own Notions
thereof, we must Necessarily grant that there are such Several Accidental
Qualitys, and also such Substantial Principles thereof, Different one from
another, and consequently all from the Matter. And this may appear most clearly
by many Sensible Distinctions and Differences between them, which I shall now
only generaly mention, and hereafter more particularly discover in the ensuing
Discourses. As that Matter has Pondus, and the Products thereof which Spirits
have not: but there are Active Potentiae of Spirits and all the various
Operations and Effects thereof, which Matter has not: And the Pondus of Matter
tends from the Circumference to the Center, but the Potentia of Spirits from
the Center to the Circumference. And Matter being only one Homogeneous Body
has only one Center; but Spirits being Many and Several have every one of them
in their Composita a several Center. Also all Matter is Continuous; because it
is one Homogeneous Body; but the Contiguity of several Bodies is only from the
several Spirits. Also Matter tends Naturaly to Rest, but Spirits intend their
Acts and Exercises to the Utmost. Also Matter has only Different Degrees of
More or Less; but Spirits have their Actively Contrary Qualitys, and the like.
Now though I cannot Sensibly Produce and Present such a Genius of things or
Spirit, as it is in it Self; not only because it is a Spirit, but also because it
is a Substance; which as I have said that it is only Intelligible (as none can
discover Pure Matter, or Materia prima, as it is in it Self, but both may be
discerned by their Sensible Accidents, whereof the Accidents of Spirits, which
are Proper Sensibles, are more Sensible then of Matter, which are only common
Sensibles and Sensed by the others) so I have proved Matter and Spirits by
their Different Accidents to be several Substantial Principles, and Realy
Different one from another. And though none can affirm that there is any Matter
Separate from Spirits; yet it is granted that there are Spirits Separate from
Matter, as Angels. Nor may it seem strange that two such Substances should be
Consubstantiated into one, since there is no Matter without some Spirit to
Diversify it; and it is also granted that there is a Spirit of Man which does
Inform or Inspirit his Body; and not only Possess it as an Angel. Wherefore
certainly Material Spirits which are Connatural may also Consubstantiate the
Matter. And we must understand that as all Created Entitys are Creatures, or
Created by God; so they are United into one Genus of their Common Entity; which
though it be Metaphysical, yet it is not only a Notional, but a Real
Universality of them all; whereby they are so Realy United and accordingly have
some Physical Communion one with another, and all Conspire together against
Nonentity. And so Matter and Spirits though very Different Entitys; yet because
they are all Entitys, either Consubstantiate one another, as all Material
Spirits, which cannot be Separate, nor Exert or Exercise their Qualitys or
Operations without the Instrumentality of their Material Bodies, or otherwise
Inform and Inspirit them, as the Immaterial Spirit of Man: which may be
Separate, or not Separate from the Body thereof, and Exert and Exercise some
Qualitys and Operations by the Instrumentality thereof, and some without it, as
I shall show hereafter; or at least as Angels, who though they be purely
Immaterial Spirits, and have no such Consubstantial nor Compositive Union with
the Matter, nor do Inform or Inspirit it, nor Operate by any Instrumentality
thereof; but are in that respect wholly Separate from it, yet have this Communion
with it, that they are Localy in it, where they are and do Move from one Part
or Place thereof to another, and more or less suddenly and easily, and can not
Move beyond the Universal Body thereof; for then they might Wander in Notfinite
and Endless Inanity, which as I have said is Pure Nonentity. And though
Extension and Local Motion be Properly of the Matter, yet Material Spirits by
their Conjunct State and Consubstantiation are Coextended with it, and all
others are Contained in it, and in this or that Part thereof, and Move from this
or that Place thereof, according to the several Spheres of their own Substantial
Activitys; whether they be more United unto it by a Conjunct Consubstantiation,
as Material Spirits; which are in the Matter like Inherent Light in the Lucid
Body, and in so much thereof as it does Inherently Illuminate, or less and
without any such Conjunct Consubstantiation, as the Human Spirit, which is in
the Matter as Light in the Diaphanous Air which it requires to Illuminate; or
otherwise as Angels, which are in it as Magnetical Emanations in any Medium.
And accordingly Material Spirits are most Powerful in their Center, but
Immaterial Entirely Equal in their whole Sphere. Now whereas some affirm that
Substantial Spirits, and all their Spiritual Qualitys, are only Various Motions
of the Matter; I shall according to my manner first endeavor to Understand,
what is or may be Intended by the Motion of the Matter; which certainly can not
be any Substantial Activity in it Self Distinct from the Matter; for then we
might agree in the Thing, and should not differ about Terms: wherefore Motion
of the Matter must be only an Accidental Affection thereof, (like Extension and
the rest whereby matter Extends it Self) and so in Effect Motion of the M^tter
is only Matter Moving it Self; Whereas it Naturaly tends to Rest, and Moves only
in order thereunto, as I shall show hereafter; and this Moving must be only
Local, because it is of the Matter from one Part or Place thereof to another. But
as I have showed, that there are other Differences of things besides Local
Separation; So there are other Motions, besides Local Motion; as every Mutation
from one State to another, in Generation, Corruption, and the like; and i^
Intellection, and Volition, there may be such Spiritual Motions, without any
Local Motion whatsoever, whereas Local Motion is only a Transition or passing
from one Part or Place of the Matter to another, as I shall also show
hereafter: And now I may safely affirm that such Local Motion is only Local
Motion, and neither more nor less, nor other: for as this Identical Proposition
is most true, That Local Motion is Local Motion: So the Predicate thereof being
Adaequate to the Subject, it can be neither more nor less, nor other then the
Subject. Now that this Local Motion which Properly belongs to the Matter is
an Instrument not only of Matter, but also of all Material Spirits (because they
are Material, or Conjunct with the Matter in their Consubstantiation, and also
in their Operation, as well as Extension, Figure, and the rest) I easily grant:
but must wholly deny that Ether, Air, Water, Earth, or any other Substantial
Spirits; Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness, Vegetation, Sensation, and innumerable
other Spiritual Qualitys are only Local Motions, one way, or other, or any way
whatsoever: for then Local Motion should not be only an Instrumental Causality
or Effect, of all those Spirits and Spiritual Qualitys, but the very Essence
and Formality, or Formal Cause thereof; which is most Uncouth and Inconceivable:
for they are Formaly every one of them Such as they are in themselves; as well
as the Matter is Matter in it Self, without any Actual Motion: and so also
Extension is Formaly Extension in it Self, and may Exist and be Such, without
any Actual Motion: and Figure is Formaly Figure in it Self, and may Exist, and
be Such, without any Actual Motion: and so any other Accidents of Matter: much
more Spirits and Spiritual Qualitys: which I shall now very plainly prove. In
the Beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth; and not only Matter and
Motion: nor could Matter by Motion Diversify it Self in the Beginning into
Heaven and Earth; that is, as I have before explained them, Superaether,
Ether, Air, Water, and Earth: for no local Motion can be in an instant; but
the Beginning was only the First Instant, otherwise it should not be the First
or Beginning: Whereas Local Motion being from Place to Place, which are several
Terms, must necessarily be in several Instants: and most Probably there was no
Local or any such Natural Motion in the first Chaos, but only the Spirit of God
Supernaturaly Moved on the face of the Waters. Also if several Local Motions
were the Formalitys or Formal Beings of all Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys,
then they should not be before nor after, nor any longer, then the Local Motion
does continue: for the Formality of any thing is the very Specifical Being
thereof; (as Wind which is indeed only Aer Motus continues no longer then the
Motion) and Nothing can be without the Specifical Being of it Self; otherwise
it should not be what it is. Wherefore I suppose I may set this down as another
Infallible Canon (according to which also I may safely proceed) that Whatsoever
Actualy Exists without something which does not then also Actualy Exist, must
Realy differ from it; otherwise the same thing should Actualy Exist, and not
Exist at the same time, which is Contradictory, and Impossible. And thus as I
have proved Substances, which did Actualy Exist in the Beginning, to differ
Realy from Accidents, which did not then Actualy Exist; So particularly
Spiritual Substances and their Qualitys, which do or may Actualy Exist without
any Actual Local Motion, must necessarily be Realy Different from it. And this
is most Sensibly Evident that they may so Exist, and be, without any Local
Motion; and when they are in Local Motion, are Commonly rather Causes thereof,
then Caused by it; and so they Cause Motion in the very Matter, which of it self
would Perpetualy Rest in the Center, and due Position of it Self, as I have
said, and shall hereafter prove, and is Disturbed and Moved by the Potentiae of
Spirits, which alter the Natural Position, Figure, Density, and Gravity thereof:
and Properly it has no Natural Motion of it Self, but only to restore it Self
unto Rest. Nor can the Matter, and Motion, and any or all the other Accidents
or Variations thereof, Formaly Cause the Spirits, or Spiritual Qualitys: but are
only Instruments, and fit Bodies thereof, which they form for themselves. Take
Wax, and Move it this Way, or that Way; or Mold it into this, or that Figure;
or Discind it into any Threads or Corpuscles, or Mechanicaly Vary the Matter
thereof how you will; yet it will still be Wax, as well as every part of Water
is Water; Unless there be also some new Generation, or Corruption, thereof by
Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys, as I shall show hereafter. Wherefore that
which some call Texture, whether Extrinsecal, as Figure, Porosity, or plain
Interweaving of Threads or Filaments, and the like; or Intrinsecal, as Density
and Rarity, (which indeed are the only true Intrinsecal Textures of Bodies and
yet are wholly denied by our Textorian Philosophers) as well as Local Motion, is
only Instrumental, and no Formal Cause, or Being, of any Spirit or Spiritual
Quality. And so take Common Water and Spirit of Wine, Vitriol, or any stronger
Spirits; and setting them in their several Vessels one by another, Inspect them
with a Microscope; and see if you can discern any such Proportionable and
Consyderable Difference of their Extension, Figure, Density, Gravity, Local
Motion, or any Corporeal Texture whatsoever, as there is of their Spirits, and
Spiritual Qualitys. Or take any Aethereous Globules, or Materia Subtilis,
Emittent, Transmittent, or Remittent (if you can tell where to find it) or the
most Subtle and Pure Air, which may be had on the Top of the highest Mountain,
and which is Common Matter as well as any other, and putting this Matter into
any Windgun, Airpump, or Expansor, or any such Torcular, or other Rack of
Nature whatsoever, or applying to it any Chemical Fire, or Heat, or Salt and
Snow, or what you will, and vex it how you will; and try if you can force it to
Confess it Self to be any other thing then Air, or Extort from it all, or any
of these Spiritual Diversifications, or such as may be Effected by the like
Experiments made of Vapor, Water, or Earth, or any parcel or part of the
Terraqueous Globe, and Cortex thereof. Which God having made to be the Native
Country, and Region of Animals, has also Impregnated with such Material
Spirits, and their Spiritual Qualitys, which he did first Produce, and still
may be Produced ou^ of them. Wherefore since Matter and Spirits do thus Differ,
not only in our Mind and Reason, but in their own Natures, I Conclude them both
Realy to Be, and Realy to Differ one from the other: and not to be only Matter
and the Motions thereof.

VIII. Accidents are either Common, or Proper; Common Accidents are such as
were Concreated, and Actualy Existed together with the Substances in the
Beginning, and without which no Substances, or any Created Entity whatsoever,
can Actualy Exist: as all Quantitys; whether discrete, as Number: for every
Creature that is whatsoever it be, must also be Numerable. Or Successive as
Duration: for every Creature that is, whatsoever must also be Durable, or
Temporary. Or Consistent, as Extension; which though is be in it Self Proper to
Matter, yet as the Matter of the whole World is a Common Matter, so as I have
showed, it does Coextend or Contein all Spirits, and every Creature that is in
Heaven or Earth must necessarily be Localy therein, that is, in the Universal
Body of the Matter, or Vbi thereof, and in some Part or Place thereof; that is,
it must be there where it is, and no where else at the same Time. Proper
Accidents are such as Originaly Flow from, and Subsist in their Proper
Substances: as Consistent Quantity, Extension, Figure, Density and the rest in
Matter; and Spiritual Qualitys in Spirits. Again these Simple Accidents may be
either Compounded together, or Several; and yet mutualy Relating one to
another, and Such Relations may also be Real; as First and Last in Successive
Quantity, or Time: for they Realy are Such in the Successive Nature thereof;
which otherwise should not be Successive; and are not only Notional, such as
First or Last in Consistent Quantity, or Extension; for they are not Realy such
in the Consistent Nature thereof; because it is Consistent altogether; and so the
First may be Last, or the Last First, according to our Notion and Institution
thereof. Also there are other more Complex Relations which may likewise be Real;
either Mathematical; as a Triangle and three several Lines are different
things, or Physical, as Beauty, which is a Relative Conformity of several
Lineaments and Colors to the Physical Law thereof. Or Moral, as Virtue; which is
a Relative Conformity of Actions, Modes and Circumstances to the Moral Law
thereof. Or Theological, as Piety; which is a Relative Conformity of Actions
Modes and Circumstances to the Theological Law thereof, and the like: which
being more Complex, are also more Curious and Excellent; and the Relative
Conformitys thereof are Not only Real, but also the Excellencys and Perfections
of those Realitys wherein they Relatively and Realy Subsist. And this Relative
Reality, though i^ does Subsist in the particular Entitys whereof they are the
Relations, yet does Consist in the very Relative Conformity thereof: for their
particular Entitys being Inverted, will vary them, as a Triangle may so be made
a Zeta or Pi, or render that which was Beautiful Deformed, and that which was
Virtuous Vicious, and that which was Pious, Impious. And here I shall Conclude
with this general Observation, That though Substances Excel in Entity, because
they Subsist in themselves; yet Accidents Excel in Bonity, because they Perfect
their Substances. For such indeed was that great Difference between the first
Chaos and the six Days Works Perfected therein.

SECTION V.
And the Earth was without form and void. And Darkness was upon the face of the
Deep.
EXPLICATION.
The Elementary Globe of Earth, Water, Air, and Ether, was first Created
Inform, and Inane; without any of those Actual Compositions, Mistions, Figures,
and Virtues, which were afterward Produced in the Six Days.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of the four Elements. 2. Of the Chaos. 3. Of Quantity. 4. Of Number. 5. Of
Time. 6. Of Extension. 7. Of Figure. 8. Of Porosity. 9. Of Density and Rarity.
10. Of Gravity and Levity. 11. Of Rest and Motion. 12. Of Place Space and
Vacuity.

I. WE have here a farther Explication in the Text itself of the Heaven and
Earth Created in the Beginning. Whereof it is again said, That there was an
Earth, Comprehending also the Water, as I have before showed. And the Water is
here called Deep; which generaly in the Hebrew Style signifys Deep Water, or
Sea (and here the Element of Water) like Altum and Profundum in the Latin. Also
the Waters are expressly mentioned in the following Sentence. But Earth and
Water were not first Created such a Terraqueons Globe as now they are, and were
afterward so Divided and Disposed in the Third Day, and then first made to be
such an Ocean of Waters and Dry Land both appearing together, and composing one
Surface and Circumference of their common Globe; for that was the very Work of
the Third Day. Whereas the Psalmist says of this first Creation of the Earth,
Thou covered'st it with the Deep as with a Garment. And the same is implied
here in these words, And Darkness was upon the face of the Deep; that is, of
the Waters, which first covered the Earth; and not Immediately upon the face of
the Earth, which was then covered with the Waters. Also the Darkness, which was
the Antecedent Privation of Light, does imply the Informity and Inanity, both
of Ether, which is the Elementary Fountain of Light, and of Air, which is the
Vehicle thereof to the Terraqueous Globe; and that as the Water was Created
above the Earth, so they above the Waters: for it is said the Darkness which
was then in them was upon, or above the Waters. And so God says to Job
concerning the Sea, When I made the Cloud (that is the Dark Air) the Garment
thereof and thick Darkness a swaddling Band for it. And so also was the Ether,
from which the Light was afterward Emitted through the Air to the Terraqueous
Globe, above the Air. And this Situation of the Elements may plainly appear by
the Order of the Succeeding Creation: wherein the Ether, which is highest and
next to the Superaether (which as I have said probably was perfected in the
Beginning) was first furnished with Light, and then the Air with Vapors, and
lastly the Terraqueous Globe with Vegetatives, in the Three first Days. And so
again the Ether with Stars, and then the Air and Water with Fowls and Fishes,
and lastly the Earth with Beasts, in the Three last Days. Also I collect from
this Original Situation of the Elements that their Several Bodies of Matter were
Proportionable and Conformable thereunto; that is, the Matter of Earth was most
Dens, and consequently most Grave, and therefore Lowest; the Matter of the
Water less Dens, and consequently less Grave, and therefore above the Earth;
the Matter of the Air more Rare, and consequently more Light, and therefore
above the Water; the Matter of the Ether more Rare, and consequently more
Light, and therefore above all the other Elements, and next to the Superaether
which is most Rare, as a fit Habitation for pure Spirits. And that as every
Element had its Proper Body of Matter, so also its Proper Elementary
Substantial Spirit Pure, and Unmist in the first Creation thereof. And it was
the Work of the Spirit of God Moving upon the face of the Waters to Prepare and
Predispose them by fit Mistion and Temperature of them all; and thereby to
Produce their Proper Qualitys out of their Potentialitys into Act, Gradualy and
Successively. And that their Potential Qualitys, and also all other Simple and
Primitive Substantial Spirits, not only Elementary, but in and with them
Vegetative and Sensitive, and all their Potential Qualitys, were Created in the
Beginning together with the Matter: that is, Vegetative Spirits, and Sensitive
Spirits of Beasts in the Earth and of Fishes in the Water: for so it is said,
Let the Earth bring forth Grass, etc. and again, Let the Earth bring forth the
Living Creature after his Kind, etc. and so also, Let the Waters bring forth
abundantly the Moving Creature that has Life, etc. which plainly implys, that
these Spirits were in them before, otherwise they could not so bring them
forth. And they were then Latent in those Elements Respectively, which are
Predominant in their Composita.

II. Thus was the Inferior Globe of these four Elements first Created, Inform,
and Inane; which is more Emphaticaly expressed in the Original Language then can
be rendered in any other. The Author of the Wisdom of Solomon calls it Matter
without Form: that is, without any Corporeal Formosity, or any Mistion or Forma
Misti as they term it. Both Greeks and Latins generaly call it Chaos; and have
preserved the Historical Tradition thereof, which they received from Antiquity.
But they seem also to Comprehend in their Chaos the Superaether as well as all
the Elements, or otherwise to have had no knowledge thereof. Also they Confound
all together in one Congeries: and thence have fansied that the four Elements
had their Actual Qualitys Existing therein in their highest Degrees, and that
there was Extreme Discord and Enmity among them. And so Empedocles and others
make Lis and Amor Original Causes of all things; which were afterward
Comtempered therein: and the Poet accordingly; Aque Chao densos divum numer abat
Amoros.
But upon the Review of our Divine History, as I find no farther mention of the
Superaether in any of the Works of the Six Days, and therefore conceiv it to
have been Perfected in the Beginning and first Creation thereof, (for so it is
said of it; Whose Builder and Maker is God, that is more Immediately and only
by a Proper Creation thereof, without any Mediate Preparation Predisposition and
Mistion, as of the Elements and Elementary Natures, and so that it was no part
of this Elementary Chaos which was afterward Perfected in the Six Days) so also
I rather conceiv that there was only Imperfection in the first Chaos; and that
all the first Elements were first Created in their several Situations in Rest
and Peace without any such Discordant Confusion, which is reserved for the last
Dissolution and Gehenna. And the Hebraical words, Inform, and Inane, seem
rather to infer such an Emptiness and Privation, then any Positive Contrariety
of Qualitys then Actualy Existing in it: and it is said expressly, that there
was Darkness, or Purae Tenebrae, therein, without any Light; and so probably no
Heat; which if it had been Actualy Existing in such Extremity thereof might have
prevailed over the rest, as it shall in the last Conflagration; or at least
would have caused the Vapors to ascend from the Waters before the Second Day;
if the Air had all been so prepared by Mistion and the Actual Qualitys thereof:
But probably there were no such other Qualitys then Actualy Existing: for if
not Heat, then consequently not Cold, which is the Contrary thereof. And the
Earth is not Denominated Dry until the Third Day; and if there were before no
Dryness, then consequently no Moisture; and so of the rest. And the Author of
Esdras says, There was Silence on every side, without any Sibilation or Tumult
of Heat and Cold or the like. And though not only Matter, but the Created
Substantial Spirits of the four Elements and others, did then so Actualy Exist
in the Beginning when they were first Created, and the Heavens or Ether, and
Air, and Earth, or Water and Earth, were thereby then so Denominated; as I have
already showed; yet their first Simple Qualitys, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Drines,
and others, which are Accidents, and Subsist in their Substances and were then
also Created first in their Potentiality; did not Actualy Exist, but were
afterward Produced out of their Potentiality into Act in the Six Days. And the
Elements, though Created Pure and Unmist severaly in themselves, and separately
in their own Spheres, yet were Miscible, and their Natural Perfection was to be
Mist; and so it was accordingly performed afterward: and by that very M^stion
and Temperature their Proper Qualitys were Produced out of Potentiality into
Act, which otherwise could not Actualy Exist severaly by reason of their own
Vehemence and Extremity. And certainly there are such Contrary Qualitys, which
are not only Degrees or More or Less of the same Mist Quality (as there are
Degrees of Corporeal Quantity) which very Contrariety by a fit Mistion and
Temperature does mutualy Qualify them, and so Produce them by Degrees out of
their Potentiality in Generation; and the Excess of either of them does again
destroy the other in Corruption; and thereby also would destroy itself if it
were not so Tempered by the Contrary. And I thus judge thereof, because otherwise
there could be no Mistion or Temperature of Contrary Qualitys in their Actual
Extremitys, which would destroy one another: but they are not so Actualy
Contrary in their Potentialitys (because then they are only Potential) whereby
they are easily Mist at first, and so proceed by degrees to be both Actuated
together in their mutual Mistion and Temperature. And this Order of Generation
and Corruption is the very Course of Nature that was ordained in the Six Days.
And as in the Beginning none of these Qualitys did Actualy Exist in their own
Vehemence and Extremity, so never since can either of such Contrary Qualitys
Actualy Exist without the other which should so Temper and Qualify it. Also all
Secondary Q^alitys which are Compounded of such first Simple Qualitys cannot
possibly Exist without such Composition and Mistion, because their Compound
Nature is to be Mist of others. But though the first Chaos was thus Inform and
Inane, without any such particular Figures of Bodies, or Spiritual Qualitys, or
any such Substantial or Accidental Mistion or Composition; yet as the Matter
and several Elementary Spirits were severaly Consubstantiated therein, whereby
they were then Actualy Heaven and Earth, though not such as afterward, and as
now they are; So also we may not conceiv them to have been without any Actual
Accidents whatsoever; for they must necessarily have those Common Accidents
which were Concreated with them, whereof I have formerly discoursed, Actualy
Existing; because no Created Substance whatsoever can Exist or Be without them,
and the matter had the general Accidents thereof Actualy Existing in it. And of
these and the Products thereof both Common and Proper to Matter, as they were
Concreated with it, or whereof it was capable, I shall now proceed to discourse.

III. And first I shall consider Quantity generaly: which though it be severaly
and Specificaly Threefold, Number, Time, and Extension; yet all of them are
Genericaly One, or that which we by one common Name call Quantity: and they are
so One, not only Nominaly or Notionaly, but Realy and Physicaly; as shall
appear by the Real and Physical Analogy and Confederacy that is between them;
which as it is most Proportionable and Regular in itself, so if it were rightly
considered in all Statike Machins or Engines, any Artist might thereby without
the trouble and charge of Experiment set down in his Mind or Paper before hand
what the Effect and Execution will be: and all particular Errors in that Art
proceed from the Universal Error or Ignorance heerof. As one says of their
various Essays of a Perpetual Motion; that they have all proved vain and
ineffectual, Non rite observatis Proportionibus: for what is gained by one
Quantity will be lost by others: as what is gained by Distances from the
Center, Multiplication of unequal Wheels, and the like, is again lost in the
Total Sum of the whole Account of Proportions, in Time, Number, longer, or
more Circumvolutions, and the like; which at last cast up together will amount
to no more then a Balance, or Aequipondium: and these several ways are only
several Variations of the Quantitys; which ^et may be very useful and
advantageous, accordingly as we have more or less Weight or Power, or more or
less Time, and the rest, to employ and lay out in the Operation. Such are the
Romana Statera, or French Beam, the Leaver, the Skrew, the P^lley, the Snake
Wheel, Cranes, and the like. And the common Culinary Jack may plainly discover
the use and advantage thereof, in Diminishing the Burden of the Weight by
Multiplication of the Distances and Revolutions; as if the Weight were divided
into so many several Parts or less Weights as it has such Proportions in the
Whole, and one of them only were to be Moved at one Distance and by one
Revolution. Or the Burden of the Weight in a contrary way may be Multiplied by
Diminishing the Distances and Revolutions. Or there may be a delivery of all at
once, as in Catapults, Balists, and the like. And of all these the whole
Account will ever be Equal, as I have said (allowing only for Frictions and
Attritions, and the like) And this wonderful Analogy of Quantity is not only
thus useful in Mechanical Practice, but also in Philosophical Contemplation;
which I shall now accordingly Improve. And because, as I have formerly observed,
Number is the Discerner of both the other Quantitys, and most Discernible in it
self, I shall here begin with it; and thereby endeavor to Explicate the most
Indiscernible Mysteries of Time and Extension: though I esteem no Quantity
Mystical, or Cabalistical, in Virtue, or Signification; but only intend such
Natural Mystery's therein as are Incomprehensible to us and our Reason.

IIII. The first Principle of Number is an Unit, which is Unity in it self, and
Disunity from others; whereof all Number does consist: but it is no Number in it
self, being only an Imperfect Principle thereof: for all Number is Quantity
Discrete, and such Discretion must necessarily be of more then One: Yet all
other Numbers are only so many Ones, but One is most Entirely and Individualy
One in it self, having both the same Root and Square. And it is Analogous to an
Instant, or Point, but Different from both, and each of them one from another.
For an Unit may either severaly Exist, as in one Instant; or Coexist, as in
many Points, but an Instant can only Exist severaly and Successively; for Past,
Present, and Future, cannot be otherwise then several and Successive; and a
Point can only Coexist, for it cannot be otherwise then in a Body which is
Consistent. Also as all Number is only so many Ones, because it is Discrete; so
it is only so many several Ones Discreted one from another: Yet as it is so
many Ones Discretely, so it may be also one Many Complexively, which yet is not
Properly One, or a Unit; for that cannot be Divided or Discreted, nor has any
Halvs, Quarters, or other Fractions whatsoever, which are indeed so many Ones
in themselves, whereof a Proper Unit is not capable, but any Number is only one
Many Complexively, which is an Improper Unit, and Properly many Ones; and may
therefore be so Divided and Discreted. So that indeed there is no Fraction or
Surd in Number rightly considered in itself, but only in Time, or Extension, or
other things Numbered thereby: as Weight, Money, and the like; whereof if any can
give the Entire Proportions, he has also the Complete Number, resulting from
the thing itself. Thus of all these three Concreated Surveiors of Nature, which
we call Quantitys, Number is the most Perfect and Regular, and therefore
Arithmetike is also most Perfect and Regular, wholly composed of Rules, and not,
like Geometry, of Innumerable Problems and Propositions, which are only as
several Accounts of so many particular Sums. And indeed it is so Regular and
Complete, that I know not what may be added to it farther, except perhaps some
more special Rules for greater facility and expedition, whereof I may hereafter
occasionaly give some other Instances, and shall now only mention for an
Example the common Instance of the Changes of any Number used in Bells,
Anagramms, or the like. Whereof there is this special Rule: Multiply the Product
of the last Number Multiplied by the next Simple Number, As Once One is One;
Two Ones are Two; Three Twos are Six; Four Sixes are Twenty four; Five Twenty
fowers are One Hundred and twenty; Six One Hundred and twentys are Seven
Hundred and twenty; and so Indefinitely: and such always will be the Changes
thereof. The Reason whereof is very plain and evident; which is, that S^x will
make Six several Fives by Changing or setting aside one every time, and so
consequently it conteins the Six several Products of Five Multiplied as
aforesaid; and so the rest one of another. Certainly Arithmetike is not only
most Regular in it self; but also most Useful in other Arts: because Number is
the Measure of all Finite things which God has Created to be Measured thereby,
even Time and Extension itself, (and so is Time of Extension, but not
contrarily) and so there is great Use thereof in Chronology and Geometry: and it
is indeed the most excellent Mathematical Science, though we have generaly
appropriated the very Name of Mathesis to Geometry; because it does more
exercise Human Wit, which is better pleased with Curious Difficultys, then that
which is more plain and facile, though no less true and evident.

V. The first Principle of Time or Duration is an Instant, which is only the
very Present while it Actualy is, and so excludes both Past and Future, which
cannot possibly Exist together with it; and yet as it passes away continualy
makes a Succession of Instants, and that Succession is Time or Duration. But
every Instant does severaly Exist in itself, and is not Successive, and
consequently no Time or Duration; as an Unit is no Number: for Succession is of
one after another, and therefore of more then One, but an Instant is only One.
And so the Beginning or First Instant did necessarily Exist severaly; for there
was none before it, otherwise it should not have been the Beginning; and the
Next Instant was after it, otherwise it should not have been the Next: and
there is the same Reason of all the Instants which have been since, or ever
shall be. Whereby we may Apprehend the Nature thereof, though we can never
Comprehend it, being swifter then any Thought which might Comprehend it. And
because Instants are of so Minute a Nature, therefore they are not only
Incomprehensible, but also Innumerable to us, and though in other respects
Analogous to Units and Points, yet therefore not so Discernible as Units; and
almost as Incomprehensible as Points, whereof I shall discourse in the next
Paragraph. And yet certainly there are such Instants severaly Existing as well
as Units, for all Time or Duration is composed of them, as well as Number of
Units. And we may not deny any thing that Realy is in Nature, and which we can
Apprehend, though we cannot Comprehend it. And indeed we may deny Time and
Duration itself as well as Instants, whereof it is apparently Composed, because
it is only the Succession of several Instants, which do and must necessarily
Exist severaly; and therefore not only Realy are, but are Realy several in
th^mselves; because only the Present Instant now Actualy is, as I have showed,
and yet what they are, or how Time or Duration is Composed of them, does f^rr
exceed all Human Reason, and the utmost Comprehension thereof.

VI. The first Principle of Extension is a Point; which is only an Indivisible
Atom, and no Extension in itself; because Extension is of Part beyond Part, but
an Indivisible has no Parts, otherwise it should be Divisible into them. And
because it is the Principle of Extension, which is Quantity Consistent,
therefore it must also Consist, or Coexist, and cannot Exist severaly. And so
though it be Analogous to Units and Instants in other respects, yet by reason
thereof it is more Incomprehensible, not only then Units, but also then
Instants; because Instants do Exist severaly, and therefore may be truly
Apprehended as several, and by themselves; but Points only Coexist, and
therefore may not be truly Apprehended as several, or by themselves, but only as
Consistent with others in Corporeal Extension, and so are wholly Indemonstrable.
Nor is a Point the only Indemonstrable thing in Mathematical Science, but the
very Cause and Ground of the Indemonstrability of all other Asymmetra or
Incommensurabilitys. And to Demonstrate this Indemonstrability I shall offer
this Proposition, To reduce three square Inches (or any Talia qualia) to a
Square, or indeed any others whereof there is no Square Root; which I suppose
can never be Squared by any Division or Subdivision whatsoever. Yet I have a
Rule whereby to reduce the Three Square Inches to a Square wanting only one
Portion still less and less Indefinitely, which is this; First I consider the
next Square to Three which is Four Inches, whereof Two is the Square Roo^; and
then I place the three Inches Rectangularly, or in the form of a Rectangular
Gnomon, so as to leav a Vacant Space which should be supplied by a Fourth Inch:
and I consider the Proportion between this Vacant Space to be supplied, and the
two Lateral Inches or Complements on each side of it from which I must borrow
to supply it, which is as One to Two; and then to make a Medium between the
Suppliers and Supplied I add Two more to those former Two, in all Four; and I
multiply Four by Four, which make Sixteen: and accordingly I divide each of
the two Lateral Inches or Complements into Sixteen Portions; that is, Four
Rows of four such Portions, in each Lateral Inch; and then borrow one of these
four Rows from each of them; that is, two Rows of four such Portions, in all
Eight such Portions, to supply the Vacant Space or Gnomon; whereby there will
remain now Three Rows, and thereof only three such Portions on either side of
the Lateral Lines of the Complements, and each of the whole Rectangular Latera
will be One Inch and Three quarters in length; according to which the Vacant
Space or Gnomon now remaining is to be supplied; and therefore I Multiply Three
by Three, which make Nine such Portions to be supplied, and I have only, as I
said, Eight such Portions to supply them; and so there will now remain a Vacant
Space or Gnomon of one such Portion, which, as I said, is the Sixteenth part of
an Inch. Again, I consider the Proportion between this second Vacant Space or
Gnomon, which is now to be supplied, and both the two upper Lateral Rows or
Complements thereof, from which I must borrow to supply it, whereof each does now
contein Six such Portions; that is, Four which were in it before, and Two
added to it, in supplying the first Vacant Space or Gnomon, and whereof the
second Vacant Space or Gnomon was to be the third: so now I have Six and Six
such Portions, in all Twelv; to which, as before, I add Two, in all Fourteen;
and I Multiply Fourteen by Fourteen, which make one hundred ninety six; and so
I divide each of these last Portions into one hundred ninety six less Portions;
that is, Fourteen Rows of fourteen such less Portions of each of the former
greater Portions; and then I borrow one whole Row thereof from each side; that
is, Six and Six, in all Twelv fourteen such Portions, which make one hundred
sixty eight, to supply this second Vacant Space or Gnomon, whereof there will now
remain Thirteen such less Portions on either side of the Lateral Lines of the
Complements; and each of the whole Rectangular Latera will be One Inch and
three quarters, wanting a fourteenth part of a quarter in length, according to
which this second Vacant Space or Gnomon is now to be supplied: and therefore I
Multiply Thirteen by Thirteen, which make one hundred sixty nine such less
Portions; and I have only, as I said, one hundred sixty eight such Portions to
supply it. And so there will now remain a third Vacant Space or Gnomon of one
such less Portion, which, as I have said, is the one hundred ninety sixth part
of of a sixteenth part of an Inch, that is the three thousand one hundred
thirty sixth part of an Inch, whereof the Square Root is Fifty six, which is
fourteen fowers; whereas the Square Root before was only one four; which is a
very great Decreas of the Vacant Space or Gnomon. And according to this Rule
the Vacant Space shall still decreas Proportionably, Toties Quoties, and yet a
less Vacant Space still remain, and the Square never be Completed. And this
Rule is grounded upon another special Rule in Arithmetike; which is, That if of
any three Successive Numbers the greatest be Multiplied by the least, it will
produce one less then the Middle Number Multiplied by itself. And here it is
made such by adding always Two to the Complements according to this Rule. As
before in these Examples, Four Multiplied by Two made Eight, which was one
less then Three Multiplied by Three, which made Nine. And so again Fourteen
Multiplied by Twelv made one hundred sixty eight, which was one less then
Thirteen Multiplied by Thirteen, which made one hundred sixty nine. And because
some may suppose that though such Squares can never be Comple^ed by this Rule,
yet it may possibly be done some other way, (which I am confident cannot be,
and that none by any other can come nearer to it then by this Rule) yet for
their farther satisfaction heerin I shall offer them several other confessed
Asymmetra. As the Proportion between any Diagonial Line and the Lateral Line of
the same Square. And I have another Rule whereby also such an Asymmetry may be
reduced to one Portion still less and less Indefinitely, and yet shall never be
Completed: which is this, First I consider of what other Square the Diagonial
Line of the Square given would be a Lateral Line. As for example; if the Square
given be Four Inches, whereof the Square Root is Two, I add that which is the
only Square Root before it, and that is One; and then I say, One and Two make
Three, which Square Root Three being Squared makes Nine Inches, and Nine is
doubly as much as Four, more One. Now I know that the L^teral Line of a Square
which conteins doubly as many Inches as the Square given is the Diagonial Line
of the Square given. And so I say, the Diagonial Line of the Square of four
Inches which was the Square given is Three Inches in length, Disquaring one
from the Square of Nine Inche^. Again I add together both the Numbers of each
of the former Square Roots which were Two and Three in all Five, which must be
the next Square Root according to this Rule: and then let the Square thereof be
given which is Twenty five. Now to find the Diagonial Line thereof I again add
to Five the first Square Root of the first Square given, which was Two, in all
Seven; which Square Root being Squared makes Forty nine; and Forty nine is
doubly as much as Twenty five, less one. And so of Five and Seven, which make
Twelv; and Five and Twelv which make Seaventeen, and the rest according to the
aforesaid Rule Indefinitely; whereof the Disproportion will be Interchangably
One more, and One less. And the Reason of this Rule is, that whereas the
Diagonial Line of any Square always makes a Lateral Line of another Square
containing doubly as much as the former, there is no such Square Root whereof
the Square does contein doubly as much of the Square of any other Square Root
whatsoever. And so the Proportion between any Line of an Equilateral Triangle
and the Perpendicular Line thereof will ever be Asymmetrous, because there is no
Square Root of three Fourths of any Square, which is the Proportion between
them. But the most known and common Instance of this kind is the Quadrature of
the Circle, which though as the rest may still be reduced to a Proportion less
and less Indefinitely, yet can never be Completed: Curtae n^scio quid semper
abest rei. Now it is most evident that though these Proportions can never be
thus Completed Mathematicaly, yet they are all Physicaly Complete in themselves,
as well as any others. And particularly that there is a Complete and Perfect
Proportion between any Circle and such a Square whereof the Diameter of the
Circle is the Lateral Line, that is of the Square Excribed; for apparently
there is a certain Proportion between the Perimeter and Diameter of the Circle,
and so consequently between the Circle and such a Diametrical Square, as I may
so call it; because the Diameter of the Circle is the Lateral Line thereof. Which
Proportion though it can never be known nor expressed in Rational Number, yet
we know according to common Rule, That if you Multiply half the Perimeter by
half the Diameter of the same Circle, that is, if you suppose a Rectangular
Parallogramm so made that the Length shall be equal to half the Perimeter of
the Circle, and the Breadth equal to half the Diameter of the same Circle, the
Product or Rectangle so made will be equal to such a Circle: and so if you
Multiply a quarter of the Perimeter by the whole Diameter, or a quarter of the
Diam^ter by the whole Porimeter, which are tantamount. And thus you may measure
the Arch Quadrant, or Semiquadrant, or more or less part of the Circle, as well
as any Triangle; for so you measure only within the Angles, and to the Angles,
and therefore the Angles which make the Excrescential Superficies beyond the
Circularity can make no difference in the one more then in the other. And from
all these consyderations of a Circle I find the Regular Proportion or Analogy
between any Circle and the Square thereof Excribed to be this; That as the
Perimeter of the Circle is in Proportion to the Perimeter of the Square, so are
the Square Inches of the Circle in Proportion to the Square Inches of the
Square. Now that all this very large and tedious Discourse may not seem
Impertinent, I shall make that Improvement thereof which I intended; and from it
draw these Consectarys. First that Mathematicaly, or according to our
Mathematical Science, Extension is and must necessarily be supposed to be
Divisible into always Divisibles; because by such Mathematical Rules, as before,
I can Divide and Subdivide it Indefinitely. Next that Physicaly, and in its own
Nature, Extension is not, nor cannot be possibly Divided into always Divisibles;
Because, if there could be any such Physical Division and Subdivision thereof
Perpetualy, then such Proportions should never be Physicaly Completed. Lastly,
that since there is Actualy such a Physical Completion, which, as I have
showed, can never be effected by Divisibles or any Extended Parts of Extension,
therefore it must necessarily be by somewhat not Divisible, but Indivisible and
not Extended in itself. And here I suppose we may a while make a Stand, and
gaze with Admiration and Amazement at these wonderful M^sterys, which have
hitherto puzzled, and will still puzle the greatest Wits of the World: neither
shall I presume to absolv them; but only offer what seems to me most
probable. Certainly, Vero nihil verius; for all Verity is one and the same in
itself, and with itself, and cannot Contradict itself. Wherefore that which is
Mathematicaly true cannot be Physicaly falls; and that which is Physicaly true
cannot be Mathematicaly falls; but one or other of these ways of Demonstration
must be fallacious. And for mine own part I shall rather believ Nature, which
is the Art and Institution of God, then any Mathematical Art or Instit^t^on of
Mankind. And I must suspect our own Mathematical Art to be fallacious heerin,
and the fallacy to ly in this; that because we can easily discern Extension
which is Divisible, but cannot discern Indivisible Points, we indifferently
apply our Mathematical Rules of Division and Subdivision both to Divisible
Extension and also to Indivisible Points, not knowing where to stop, nor being
able to discern between them; and so go on Perpetualy acco^ding to such
Mathematical Supposition, though there be no such Perpetual Process in Nature.
Which is as if we should so proceed beyond an Unit, and divide it into Halvs,
Quarters, and the like. Or as if because I can Divide four Angels into two
Twos, and again Subdivide each Two into two Ones, which I may truly do; I
should also therefore proceed to Divide each one Angel into Halvs, and
Q^arters, and the like Perpetualy, which I may not likewise do; because each
Angel is Indivisible in himself, and in his own Nature, and has no such Halvs,
or Quarters; and yet Arithmeticaly I might so go on to Divide and Number, if I
did not know the Angelical Nature to be Indivisible. And though we know a Point
to be Indivisible, yet because it is so Indiscernible that we know not where to
find it out, we go on still so to Divide and Subdivide perpetualy according to
our Mathematical Rules. And thus though it may be maintained by way of Argument
that Quantitas est Divisibilis in semper Divisibilia, yet it is Invincibly
confuted by a contrary Argument drawn from that very Perpetual Divisibility of
the Quantity, that is, the Impossibility thereof; and on this I chiefly insist;
For if there were any such Possibility of Perpetual Division thereof Physicaly
and in Nature, though I easily grant it might never be actualy Future (as many
Possibles shall never be Actualy in any future Time) yet I can never admit that
there can be any Possibility of that which yet cannot Possibly be Actual, which
they must affirm who hold the Contrary Position; and so indeed they very freely
acknowledge, that it is so always Potentialy or Possibly, but can never Actualy.
But as Futurity of that which never Actualy shall be, is a plain Contradiction;
so Possibility of that which never Actualy can be, is equaly Contradictory: for
as Future, or Shall be, and Shall not be; so Possible, or Can be, and Can not
be, are Contradictory Terms. And all Possibility is the Possibility of being
Actualy, and not of being Possibly or Possibility of Possibility, which is
Childish and Nugatory, and only a Reduplication in Terms of the same Thing in
itself. Nor is it only Contradictory in Terms, but also in the Thing itself:
For we do not now discourse of Quantity Successive, wherein there may be a
Perpetual Possibility of Succeeding Futurity; but of Quantity Consistent,
whereof all the Divisible Parts, and Indivisible Points, do and must necessarily
Consist and Coexist Actualy together in the same Present Instant, and not in
several Future and Successive Instants. Nor do we now discourse Mechanicaly, or
of any such Mechanical Division of a Body into less Wholes, or of the
Possibility of such Actual Separation of the Parts from the Whole Localy, but
of the Actual Extension of Part beyond Part, according to the Nature of
Corporeal Quantity as it is in itself, and the Mathematical Division of the
Parts in the Whole Extensively: And so whatsoever, or howsoever many the Parts
of that Extension given be, they are already and in the Present Instant Actualy
what and so many a^ they are, and cannot be greater or more then they are. And
I suppose no Mathematician does contemplate the Local Divisibility, which is
Possible, but only the Extensive Division of the Parts, which is Actual in the
Whole; wherein only they are such Mathematical Parts; whereas being Localy
Divided from the Whole they become less Wholes in themselves. And so such
Possibility is not at all to be regarded in this present Discourse, but only the
Actuality whatsoever it is; and then the Position thus rightly explained does
amount to this, That the Extensive Parts Actualy in the Whole are Actualy
Innumerable* not only to us, or by any our Mathematical Division or
Subdivision, which I have already granted; but also Physicaly, and in their own
Nature, which is Impossible. For then the least Extensive Whole should be equal
to the greatest; because both have equaly Innumerable Parts in themselves; for
Innumerable can neither be more nor less then Innumerable. Nor will it be
evaded by saying that the greater Whole has Innumerable greater Parts, and the
less Innumerable less Parts; for Innumerable Parts, though never so small will
suffice to make any Whole whatsoever, though never so great; because Innumerable
is Innumerable; and does not only afford whatsoever may be wanting, but can
never be spent or exhausted. And because every least Part has some Extension,
and Measure thereof; therefore the Whole of such Innumerable Parts must also be
Immensurable which (as Archimedes has demonstrated in his Psammites) is both
Rationaly Impossible, and Mathematicaly Falls. But whatsoever Notion
Mathematicians may have of such Divisibility into less and less Parts
Perpetualy, yet certainly none can deny the gross Whole of any Corporeal
Extension given (whatsoever the Extent thereof may be) to be Mensurable, and
Finite; otherwise it could not be given, nor indeed Actualy be, as I have
formerly Demonstrated. And I am very secure of that Argument and of the
clearnes and firmnes thereof; however men may determine concerning this other
Question, which I have also prosecuted for a farther Discovery of Truth. And I
must here observe that not only Extension, but also Time, and Number, and
whatsoever has Parts; yea all Qualitys, and whatsoever has Degrees; and all
that is in any kind susceptible of More and Less, may as well be affirmed to be
thus Divisible into always Divisibles. And so whereas Physicians make several
Degrees of the four first Qualitys, and Musicians of Musical Notes, and the
Like, I can again Divide and Subdivide them Indefinitely as well as Extension;
and Demonstrate that there are the like Imperceptible Minims therein. And here
again we may stand and admire the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, which has so
Plainly manifested unto us those Wholes, and greater Portions of Wholes, that
are of any Use and Concernment, and without which Scales, Dials, and all
Mathematical Instruments, and all Medicinal Compositions, and Gamu^hs, and the
like; and all Symmetry, Temperature, and Harmony, had been unknown and
unserviceable to Mankind: and also accuse the Vanity of our own Human Wit,
which does so Ambitiously affect to know and Curiously to pry into those very
Minute things, whose Usefulnes is as little as their Proportion; and which God,
to humble our Mathematical Pride, has purposely conceled from us; and yet
because they are so Indiscernible, therefore we more affect to Discern them.
For mine own part, as I am satisfied in knowing that there is a Circumference
of the whole Globe of the World, though I know not how large it may be; so also
in knowing that there are such Physical Points, though I know not their Minute
and most Exile Nature. Yet I do also conceiv that as Extension is Terminated by
Po^nts, so the Divisibility thereof does Terminate in Points, and that the^e are
such Physical Points as well as Physical Instants, and P^ysical Instants as
well as Physical Units, though they be not equaly Discernible by us (and that
Points are Points, and not only Notes, or Nothings, as some do affirm) And
there is no Objection against the one, which may not also be armed and intended
against the other, by such Dividing and Subdividing Perpetualy, even beyond
Points, Instants, and Units themselves, into Halvs, Quarters, and the like. And
such indeed is the common Objection, Of how many Points is the least Corpuscle
composed? It may be as well demanded. Of how many Instants is the least Minute
of Time composed? which none can tell: though we can easily tell of how many
Units, Two, which is the least Number, is composed. And I demand of such
Curious Objectors, Of how many Extensive Parts or Portions the least Corpuscle
is composed? which themselves affirm to be Innumerable; though I deny it of
Parts, and dare not affirm it of Points; because it is Impossible: but only
assert, that neither they can know of how many Parts, nor I of how many Points
any Corpuscle is composed. And this I suppose to be a sufficient Answer to such
a Question (for such it is rather then an Objection) But for farther
satisfaction, I shall consider a least Corpuscle, which must be Globular as well
as the great Body of the whole World; (because all Angles are Protuberant and
render the Superficies unnecessarily greater) and yet no Mathematician ever
did, or ever can, assign the whole Proportion in fact and consequently not all
the particular Portions of any Globe or Circle. Also every Corpuscle, though
never so little, yet is a Body, having Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity; in
all which the Points must Consist and Coexist, and they also in the whole Body,
otherwise it should not be a Body: whereas though we know that a Body is
composed of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, yet we know not of how many
Long, Late, or Profund Lines, it is composed; because though they Realy are, and
are Realy different in Nature, yet they so Corporealy Consist and Coexist that
they can not be Localy separated, but only in and with the Corpuscles or Body.
And so though Points Realy are, and are Realy Different in Nature, yet they
also so Corporealy Consist and Coexist, that they can not be Localy Separated,
but only in and with the Corpuscles or Bodies: and so though Mathematicaly we
may consider them in their several Natures, yet we may not therefore consider
them in separate Existences. Whereas generaly all the Objections are drawn from
the Supposition of Points Separate, or at least of Points Coexisting only in
Longitude, and the like, (which are only Imperfect Principles of Extension, as
well as Points.) But I have showed that Entitys may Realy Differ, though they
are not Localy Separate, or Separable: and if they grant me Points so
Coexisting, not only in Longitude, but also in Latitude and Profundity, and the
whole Corporeity of a Corpuscle or Body (as they must, because they do so Realy
Coexist, and can not otherwise Exist in Nature) I can by that one Concession
solv all their Objections, which otherwise may seem as Unanswerable, as Points
are Incomprehensible; being grounded upon the very Incomprehensible Nature
thereof. And if they will not grant me that which is Physicaly and Realy true in
itself, but argue upon falls or feigned Suppositions, I shall not much care to
Answer them; otherwise then I should him who would argue upon a Supposition of
Coexisting Instants, Past, Present, and Future; by telling him plainly, that
there is no such thing in Nature: and yet there are Physical Instants Existing
severaly; and so, though there is not any single Point in Nature Existing
severaly, yet there are Points Coexisting in a Body. And I suppose that from
this Fundamental Fallacy all the Fallacity of their Objections does arise. But
he who will rightly Philosophise, or Theologise, must be very careful that in
the Contemplation of such things as are Incomprehensible, or Infinite, though
he may frame Comprehensive or Finite Notions thereof as Scaffolds whereby to
build, yet he may not build upon them; but must again take them down, and
reduce all such Subsidiary Notions or Suppositions to the very Nature of the
thing it self, which is Incomprehensible, or Infinite.

VII. Thus though there be Realy in Nature Points, Lines, and Superficies, yet
the Supposition of any such several Existence thereof, as we may Mathematicaly
feign and frame to our selves (and as some have supposed the whole-Body of the
World to have been made by the Casual Concurrence of such Atoms or Points) is
only Notional in our Reason and Mind, and not Real or in the Nature of
Extension itself, whereof the least Minim is more then one single Point, yea it
conteins in it Points Innumerable to us. And as there is no such several Point,
so also no several Line in Nature: for the least Hair of the least Mite has
not onl^ Longitude, but also Latitude; because it has several Sides; and one
Side thereof is not the other, nor all one and the same with the Longitude. And
so there is no several Superficies in Nature, having both Longitude and
Latitude without any Profundity; for the thinest Plate of Muscovy Glass has a
double Superficies above, and beneath, and also others in the very Edges
thereof. Wherefore not only Points, but also Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity
do necessarily Consist and Coexist together; and all these make a Complete
Extension or Consistence of any Body. Now every Body, because it has Longitude
Latitude and Profundity, must have some Figure which is the particular Shape or
Module of the Extension thereof, Resulting from, and Subsisting in that
Extension (as a particular Property thereof) Immediately, and Mediately in and
by it in the Substantial Matter. Yet Figure Realy Differs from Extension;
because there may be several Figures of the Same Extension of the Matter which
(as Statuarys say of their Materia, Wood, Stone, Wax, and the like) is capable
of all Figures, Faces, or Forms whatsoever. The first and most simple Figure,
and which indeed is most Proper to the Matter, is a Globe. And therefore this
is the Universal Figure, and all other Particular Figures, as I have said, are
only the Protuberances and Enormitys thereof, though never so Symmetrical and
Conformable in themselves. And the Globular Figure is such, because it is most
Entire and Uniting, whereof all others are only some unnecessary Excesses, or
Defects; and therefore also it is most Capacious; as may plainly appear by
varying the Perimeter of any Circle (which has nothing Excrescential or
Excessive in itself) from the Circular Regularity thereof, into any Angular
Figure whatsoever, for so if you Inflect it into an Isoperimetrical Equilateral
Triangle, the Area thereof will be less then that of the Circle, as Six to
almost Ten: and if you I^flect i^ into an Isoperimetrical Square (as Carpenters
do in measuring T^m^er) it will be as Eleaven to almost Fourteen (which is
their G^^t Measure, and the true gain and advantage thereof more then of such a
a Square.) And so Proportionably if you Inflect it into any other Equilateral
Polygon, though I doubt all will be found Incommensurable as well as the
former. But yet I observe a Proportion or Analogy between the Circle and such a
Square made of the Perimeter thereof, or, as I may so call it, the
Isoperimetrical Square thereof, and the Square Excribed, which I have before
termed the Diametrical Square thereof; that is, As the Area of the
Isoperimetrical Square of the Circle is, as I have said, in Proportion to the
Area of the Circle as Eleaven to almost Fourteen, so the Area of the Circle is
in Proportion to the Area of the Diametrical Square thereof, as almost Eleaven
to Fourteen. And though I conceiv that every Regular Figure is Perfect in its
own kind, and none other so Perfect as it, in that Respect, and therefore
Asymmetrous; yet I also conceiv that the Asymmetry or Disproportion between a
Circle and a Square is rather from the Square, which is more Imperfect
Comparatively, then from the Circle, which is Absolutely the most Perfect
Figure in itself: and though we commonly, as Carpenters, and other Mechanical
Measurers, do rather Measure by the Square and Cube, then by the Circle and
Globe, yet God and Nature work by them most Perfectly and Exactly; and so have
made the World to be of the most Perfect Figure, which is Globular or Circular
in the whole Superficies th^rof, not by Molding, Carving, or Casting, or any
such Mechanical or Violent Formation thereof, but by Natural Principles Created
in itself. For the whole Body thereof being one Homogeneous and common Matter
does Naturaly Incline and Adhere to itself, having nothing Corporeal besides
itself to which it may otherwise Incline or Adhere, or which may hinder or
divert it from Uniting or flowing together into one most Entire Body in it
self; which, as I have said, must be Globular, because a Body can not possibly
be in a less Space or more United then in a Globe. And this Union does best
preserv and fortify its own Internal Entity in itself, and so against External
Nonentity. Wherefore also all Material Spirits, which are Heterogeneous
Substances, do thus Unite and fortify their own Specifical Natures against
Ambient Heterogeneous Enemies, by casting themselves, and thereby their Bodies,
which they Consubstantiate and Act, into particular Globules as much as they
can; which may appear by Bubbles in Water, Sparks of Steel, Shot of Lead
melted, Mercurial Globules, and many such Instances. And if the Universal Body
of the World be a Globe (as all men generaly suppose, and therefore call it
Orbis, or the Globe) then also probably it is a most Perfect and Exact Globe;
and not like the Terraqueous Globe, which by the Consistence of the Earth and
Heterogeneity of Earth and Water is full of Hills and Vales, Shores and Seas:
but as if the Water did again cover all the Earth, and there were no Agitation
thereof (as it was in the Chaos, as I have showed) it would certainly be a most
smooth Aequor, having a Perfectly Spherical Superficies of its own Body, because
it is Fluid; so much more we ought to conceiv that the Superaether, which is
Highest, and therefore most Rare, and probably most Fluid, is most Perfectly
Spherical, and also because it must Unite together, as I shall show hereafter.
And if there be such an Exact Circumference of the Utmost Body of the World,
then there must also be as Exact a Center corresponding to that Circumference,
which must be a Physical Point; for as the Physical Circumference must be in
every Part thereof Utmost, so the Center must be answerably Inmost, and
therefore must be a single Point, not Extended, nor having any Part beyond
Part, because any two cannot be Inmost or Midst; for that must be something
that is One, whatsoever it is: and I do not intend by this Physical Point any
such least Corpuscle, as is commonly supposed, for that also has Part beyond
Part, but a very Point as it is in Nature, not Existing severaly, and according
to Mathematical consyderation thereof, but Coexisting in a Body Physicaly, as I
have before declared: and such a Point is also the Copula of all Consistent and
Coexistent Extension, and does Terminate both the Utmost Superficies, and this
Inmost Center. And as it does thus Terminate Extension, so also Motion of
Bodies; so that Naturaly they Move not above the Utmost Circumference, or below
the Inmost Center, as I shall show hereafter. Now a Globe, as it is the Figure
of the least Corpuscle, so it is Potentialy contained in every other Figure,
and as it is the Figure of the great Body of the World, does contein in it
Actualy all other Figures; Which like Extension, from which they flow, are not
only Points, nor Lines, which have many Points, nor any Superficies having many
Lines (as a Picture which has only several Symmetrical Lineaments) but the
Complete Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity of Bodies; without which there can
not be the Figure of any Body which must be Long, Late, and Profund.

VIII. Pores are only Superficial Concavitys in the Figure of any Body:
wherefore there must be a Body, otherwise there cannot be any Co^cavitys
thereof; and there must be some Concavitys, otherwise there should be no Pores.
But whether there be any other Body to fill these Concavitys, or not; yet the
Body itself which is Porous is a Body, as well as the Body of the whole World
is a Body, having a Superficial Convexity of itself, though there be none other
Body without it. Or if it be filled with another Body, then that also which
fills it is a Body, and is not the same Body, nor Spiritualy Homogeneous with
it. Wherefore there were no Pores in the first Created Matter before the
Intermistion of Heterogeneous Elements; for if the Body filling were
Homogeneous with the Body that is filled, then both should be Continuous, and
one Entire Body without any Such Concavitys, and consequently without any
Pores. As if an empty Honycomb were all filled with Bees Wax, it should no
longer be a Comb, but an Entire Mass or Cake of Wax. Also though Pores be
Partial Discontinuitys of the Body Porous, yet it must be partly Continuous;
for if the Honycomb be cut into little pieces, and they laid asunder, the
Spaces between them all are not Properly Pores of one Body, but Intervals
betweeen several less Bodies; and so also the Interstices of a Sive, or Silk, or
the like, are no Pores, because the Parts or Threads thereof are only Contiguous,
and not Continuous. And the Porous Body must be Consistent, having such Vascula
in the Concavitys thereof as may contein the Body that fills them, which must be
Fluid: As if an Honycomb be filled with Air it is Porous, but if it were filled
with Tallow, or any thing equaly Consistent, it should not Properly be said to
be Porous, more then any Inameld Work, or the like: much less are Fluid Bodies
said to be Porous, though they have many Consistent Corpuscles in them; as
Muddy Water, and the like. And though the Porous Body be generaly more Dens,
because it must be Consistent; yet it suffices that it be Consistent, though it
be more Rare; as an Honycomb filled with Mercury. And this I suppose is that
which is intended by Porosity, and which I have more largely explained, because
there is so much discourse thereof among Philosophers, especialy such who when
they can give no better account of Nature, resort to Pores as their Latibula
and Subterfuges: whereas, as I have said, Porosity is nothing but only
particular Superficial Figure, or Concavity of the Body; whether the Pores be
greater or less, Vasa or Vascula; as Cells of an Honycomb, or the least Holes
in the Wax; and they do not in the least alter the Nature of the Porous Body
considered in itself: as Wax is not altered in its own Nature by being Molded
into any Shape or Effigies whatsoever. And indeed unless we admit a Vacuity
ther^ are no Pores in Matter considered in itself; because if they be filled
with any other Body, whatsoever that Body is, yet being also Matter there is an
Entire Continuity of both, which are one Homogeneous Body of Matter in itself.
As the Terraqueous Globe is one Entire Globe, though it be partly Earth and
partly Water, which are several Bodies as they are Earth and Water, but only one
Body as they are Matter: for all Discontinuity, and consequently all Porosity,
is from Heterogeneity; which is not of the Matter (for that is one common
Substance) but from the several Spirits. And I suppose that all Fluid Bodies are
also Imporous, because their Parts may flow together: and so some more
Consistent Bodies may also be Imporous; as Glass, Gemms, Marble, and the like.

IX. I shall next consider Density and Rarity: which, as I have said, do
Immediately flow from, and Subsist in the Substance of the Matter, and not
Mediately in and by Extension, like Figure, or Porosity: for the Matter itself
may be more Dens, or more Rare, though the Extension be the same; not only in
Extent, but also in the very Figure, and Porosity, as I shall show herea^ter.
But as all Different Extension is only More, or Less, which are the Degrees
thereof; so is D^nsi^y also More, or Less, because all Matter has some Density,
as well as Extension: and More does Comparatively Denominate a Body Dens, and
Less Rare; which yet are only Degrees of the same Positive Density; which
plainly is an Affection of the Matter, and so Density, Rarity, Gravity, and
Levity no Qualitys of Forms or Spirits, as has been supposed. Wherefore as
Matter is only Comparatively more or less Dens, so all Matter is in itself
either more o^ less Dens within the same Ex^ension; otherwise there should be
no such D^fference of the Density or Rarity thereof: for Porosity (which some as
I have said make to be a Subterfuge and Evasion heerof) is altogether
Impertinent to Density or Rarity, bec^us the Question is not concerning any
Complex Density or Rarity of Several Bodies joined together in one Complex Body;
that is, both the Body Porous, and the Body filling the Pores; but of either of
them singly and simply considered in itself: and certainly either of them has
M^tter, and all Matter, as I have said, has some Density, otherwise it should
not be Matter; and the only Question is, whether there be any such Matter which
is Comparatively more Dens or more Rare then any other Matter simply in itself?
And whereas generaly Porous Bodies that are filled are more Dens, and Bodies which
fill the Pores more Rare, as I have showed, it plainly appears by Porosity
itself, whereby they seek to solv Density and Rarity, that they also are such
in their several Simple Bodies so considered in themselves: otherwise because a
Brass or Iron Kettle set upright with the Concavity thereof above the Water will
swim in Water (the Complex Extension both of the Vessel and of the Air, which
fills that one great Pore of the Cavity, being in the whole more Rare, and
consequently more Light, then the same Proportionable Extension of Water) we
might therefore affirm that the Brass or Iron in itself is not more Dens, and
consequently more Heavy then the Water, nor the Air more Rare, and consequently
more L^ght then the Brass or Iron; nor any of them more Dens, or more Rare, and
consequently not more Heavy, or more Light, then another, simply considered in
themselves: which if they be, as certainly they are, then there is also such
Density and Rarity both of the Matter of any Porous Body, and of that which
fills the Pores* simply considered in themselves. And indeed if we should
consider Density and Rarity only Complexively and not Simply, there should be
no Density and Rarity in the World (which would take away the very Subject of
the Question) for the whole World being one Complex Body, though it consist of
many particular Bodies, more Dens, and more Rare Simply in themselves, yet is all
Equidens Complexively; because it is all one Complex Body. Wherefore either
there is no Density or Rarity in the World; or if there be, the difference
thereof must be in the different Simple Bodies, and particular Ma^ter itself.
Also to inquire farther into this Porosity, which is assigned to be the Formal
Cause of Rarity; we will again consider the Reason thereof: which must be this,
that a more Porous Body is therefore more Rare because the Pores are filled with
more Rare Matter, unles we pleas to admit a Vacuity therein (which is another
Subterfuge of this Question) but now we will consider it as filled with some
other Matter; which if it be Equidens, will make the whole Complex Body
Equidens; and therefore necessarily must be more Rare, to make the Porous Body
more Rare: and then I demand, Why is that Matter more Rare which so fills it?
and according to the same Reason it must likewise be, because that Matter is a
Body more Porous and the Pores thereof filled with another matter more Rare,
then itself, and so Infinitely; which is both Irrational, and Impossible: for
suppose the Pores of any Terreous Body to be filled with Water, and any Pores
of that with Air, and any Pores of that with Ether, and any Pores of that with
Superae^hereous Matter; yet we must at last stop somwhere, and confess, either
that the last Matter is more Rare in itself, which will destroy the Reason
assigned, or otherwise, that the Pores thereof are not filled, but that the last
Porous Body has only Interspersed Vacuitys. And so indeed whosoever does deny
Density and Rarity of the Matter in itself, if he be true to his own Reason,
must hold an Absolute Vacuum in Nature; whereof I shall discourse hereafter, not
esteeming this sufficient occasion, nor any present Discourse thereof pertinent
to the Question; which is, as I have said, concerning the Density or Rarity of
the Matter in itself, whether Porous, or not Porous, or whether the Pores
thereof be filled, or not filled. Now if there be such a different Density and
Rarity of the Matter itself, then there may be Condensation and Rarefaction of
the Matter itself. And because this is the greater Question, and does also
contein the other, I shall solemnly argue it according to my manner. Certainly
there is no such fixed Standard of Density in the Matter itself, and in the
Nature thereof, that it could not Possibly be more or less Dens, or that God
could not have Created the Matter more or less Dens, because there is no
Contradiction in it; for it should be Matter, whether more less Dens; and if
God might as he pleased have Created the whole Matter more or less Dens, then
he could also Create one part of the Matter more Dens, and another less Dens:
and so indeed he has; for he Created both Heaven and Earth; whereof the Heaven
and Heavenly Bodies are less Dens, and more Rare; and the Earth and Earthly
Bodies more Dens and less Rare. And if he could Create one Body more Dens, and
another more Rare, then he can also cause the Dens Body to become more Rare, or
the Rare to become more Dens: and so also he has; for he made the Water which
is more Dens to Ascend in Vapors, which are more Rare; otherwise they could not
so Ascend into the Air: and again the Vapors which are more Rare, to Descend in
Mi^ts and Rains, which are more Dens, otherwise they could not so Descend
through the Air. Also I prove it by the Products of Density and Rarity, which
are Gravity and Levity, and their very Motions of Descent and Ascent, according
to the Hydrostatical Rule of Archimedes, and all others since him, That more
Matter of less Extension will sink through less Matter of more Extension if it
be Fluid. And this is the very Formality of Density that it is the Affection of
more Matter being of less Extension; and of Rarity, that it is of less Matter
being of more Extension. And if there be Density and Rarity, then also
Condensation and Rarefaction of Bodies: as I have showed; and which may be
confirmed by many Sensible Experiments, whereof I shall mention only two, one of
Condensation, and the other of Rarefaction. The first is the Impregnating of
Common Water with Salt. Take a Glass Wine-bottle, and first put into it as much
Salt as the Water may Imbibe, and then fill it up with Water, and stop it with
a Cork, so as no Water may come forth; and being so stopped stir it up and down
by moving the Glass-Bottle until the Water be perfectly Impregnated with the
Salt, and so made Brine; and when you let it rest again, you shall find that
the Brine, which now conteins both the Water and the Salt, will not fill the
Bottle as before, but Subside in the Neck almost to the Belly: which does
plainly show a Consyderable Condensation, or the same Matter of less Extension
then it was before. The other shall be the common Instance of Gunpowder fired
in a Gun loaded with a Bullet; which will be violently discharged by the sudden
and great Rarefaction of so small a Body of Powder into so large a Body of
Flame, or the same Matter of more Extension then it was before, which therefore
requires a larger Place according to the enlarged Extension thereof, and
explodeth the Bullet, or breaks the Gun, to attein it; though the Flame be a
very Fluid and Corporealy Infirm Body, and has little or no Consistence in
itself; and therefore also has little or no Porosity in it self; and if it were
Porous, would rather close the Pores thereof, or return again into them by such
a strong Compression, then exclude such a Solid Body as the Bullet, or break
the Gun. Nor is it from any Spiritual or Active Power of the Fire, which
sometimes does not fire all the Powder; and a Windgun by Compression of Air,
without any Fire, does the like Execution. Much less is it from any Imaginary
Aethereous Matter penetrating the Gun; for unles We also fansy some Imaginary
Valvs, that Aethereous Matter would be far more easily forced back again, then
extrude the Bullet, or sooner break the Gun in the Entry thereof then in the
Retreat. Also Glass suddenly Heated breaks by the sudden Expansion; and so
cooled, by the Contraction. By these, and many like Experiments, it plainly
appears that there is such Condensation and Rarefaction of Matter itself, as I
have before described; which yet some obstinately deny, and either will not or
cannot understand it through a preconceived Error that Matter and Extension are
one and the same thing; which if it were true, I confess it impossible, that
there should be any such Condensation or Rarefaction of the same Matter in
itself; for then the Extension also must be the same, and consequently there
could be no such Condensation or Rarefaction, which are Variations of the
Extension of the same Matter: otherwise the Extension thereof should be the same
and not the same, which is Contradictory. Wherefore such Condensation and
Rarefaction do plainly prove it Impossible that Matter and Extension should be
one and the same thing. But, as I have before showed, so heerby it most
evidently appears, that Matter is a Substance, and Extension an Accident. And
though no Matter can be without some Actual Extension, yet that being an
Accident Subsisting in the Matter, there is a Potentiality thereof to be
sometimes Actualy more, and sometimes Actualy less, the Matter remain^ng the
same. Nor is there any Penetration of several Extensions, but only the
Extension is thereby Varied, whether it be Enlarged, or Contracted. And so I do
not affirm that there can be two Extensions of one Individual Body when the
same Matter is Contracted into itself by Condens^tion, nor yet two several
Bodies having only one Extension when it is Enlarged in itself by Rarefaction.
Nor yet do I conce^v* that though there be such a Potentiality of more or less
Extension in the same Matter that it is Boundless, or that therefore it can be
Always Extended more or less, Infinitely (for More or Less as I have said is
Finite, and can never be made Infinite) but as in all other things, so in this
God has set certain Natural Bounds and Limits, unknown to us, which Extension
itself cannot transgress. And I shall here farther observe, that these
Variations of Extension are either Condensation and Rarefaction by Natural
Generation, which do continue; because they are so caused by the Spirit
Superinducing them in the Matter, and so continuing them; as in the Accension
of Gunpowder, and the like: or Compression and Dilatation by Violent forcing of
the requisite Body of Matter and Spirit itself, which therefore do not continue
longer then the force lasts, that so contains the Matter in that Extension;
as in the Windgun, and the like: and that which we call Elasticity of the Air,
whereof I shall discourse hereafter, is only a Motion or Nisus to Restitution
from such Violent Compression or Dilatation: and such Motion may be not only of
the Figure, as in bending a Bow, or the like; but of the Extension itself, as
in the former Experiments. And so there may be a Violent Compression or
Dilatation of the Extension of a Body according to the Particular Nature
thereof, which yet may be a Natural Condensation or Rarefaction according to
Universal Nature, as when Air does Expand itself Ne detur Vacuum, as I shall
show hereafter, and when it can Expand itself no farther, it will also there
stop and not break asunder, Ne detur Vacuum.

X. Gravity and Levity are, as I have said, the Products of Density and Rarity,
in which they Immediately Subsist, and Mediately in the Matter; as Figure does
in Extension, and by it in the Matter. Wherefore also, as Rarity is only a less
Degree of Density, so is Levity of Gravity; and all Matter whether more or less
Dens, yet because it has necessarily some Density, it has also some Gravity
Proportionable thereunto. Thus it is said, that there is The Weight for the Wind
or Air as well as the Water, and not only Air, but also Ethereal and
Superaethereal Matter has Weight in itself either Actualy or Potentialy; for
if more Matter Weigh more, because it is more Matter, and less Matter Weigh
less, because it is less Matter, then all Matter must Weigh, because it is
Matter: And thus Pondus is of the Matter, and Potentia of Spirits, as I have
said: and because more Matter of less Extension is more Dens, therefore it is
also more Grave; and because less Matter of more Extension is less Dens, or
Rare, therefore it is also more Light: which plainly appears by Sinking or
Swimming, as I have showed. And more Grave Sinketh downward rather then Rises
upward through more Light, because it is more Dens, and Light more Rare: for all
Matter tends first to Union with itself, and therefore it tends to the Center
of itself, which is the Inmost Point within itself. And this Tendence we call
Downward, which is indeed rather Inward. And as more Matter of the same
Extension tends more swiftly to this Center, and therefore also is always most
forward, because it is more Dens, and consequently more strong in its kind, that
is, more Ponderous; so for the same Reason it tends most strongly, and
therefore passes through more Light, which is more Rare, and consequently more
Weak, unless it be also Consistent, which is from a Spiritual Quality, as I
shall show hereafter. And Globular Bodies of Matter though Equidens and
Equiponderous, yet because, as I have said, that Figure is most United in
itself, do therefore Move faster then Angular, or any Bodies Equiponderous, but
of more Superficial Figures, through the same Medium. And now I shall discover
the wonderful Mystery of Divine Geometry in the Proportionable Locality of all
Particular Bodies between the Center and Circumference of the Universal Body or
Globe of the World: for as the Center or Inmost Point is the least, and the
Circumference or Utmost Superficies thereof the largest; so all the Spheres
between these two as they are nearer to the Center, are less, and larger as
they are nearer to the Circumference. Wherefore it is most Proper, and
Geometricaly Proportionable, that more Matter of a less Extension, which is
more Dens, should be in a less Sphere, which does best suffice to contein it;
and less Matter of more Extension, which is more Rare, should be in a larger
Sphere which is more fit to contein it. And thus the Globe of Earth and Water,
which is most Dens, is seated in the Inmost Orb of the World, which is least;
and the Air, which is more Rare, in a Sphere next above it, which is more
large; and the Ether, which is yet more Rare, in the next above that, which is
still more large; and the Superaether, which is most Rare, in the the
uppermost, which is largest. And this most Proper and Connatural Situation of
the Terraqueous Globe, and of all the Spheres does rightly constitute both the
Circumfere^ce, and the Center, of the whole World, and the most Symmetrical
Chorus of all the Bodies thereof, as I shall show hereafter. And certainly as
there is but one Circumference of the whole Body thereof, so also but one
Center; for those two do mutualy Relate one to the other: as there can be but
one Circumference and one Center in any one Body. Now that all this Body is
Matter we all grant, and I suppose no Materialist will, or can deny it. Also it
must be granted (as I have showed of Density and Rarity) that Gravity or Pondus
is the Proper Affection of the Matter, and not of Spirits, (because it Subsists
in the Density of the Matter) and that more Dens and Grave Bodies Naturaly do
sink through more Rare and Light. And that Sinking is to this Universal Center
of all the Matter, which is Lowest, and Inmost, as the Circumference is
Highest, and Utmost. Wherefore if any Particular Body, which is and must be a
Part of this Universal Body of Matter, be more Dens, and consequently more
Grave, it must Naturaly sink through any other Bodies beneath it, which are more
Rare, and consequently more Light, toward this Universal Center of the whole
Body of Matter, which is the Center of the whole Body of the World, and
consequently of all Particular Bodies, which are only Parts thereof; and no Parts
of any such Particular Bodies, which are also Matter as well as their whole
Bodies, can sink Inwardly to any Center of Gravity in themselves, as to any such
Particular Center: for then they should Ascend in departing from the Universal
Center of Extension which is exactly Centrum Gravium, to which all tend. And
though more Dens and Heavy Bodies may sometimes Ascend to prevent Vacuity, yet
that is not as to any such Particular Center, but only to fill the Universal
Globe when more Rare cannot succeed, as I shall show hereafter: Or if they be
supported by any Consistent Body, though more Rare, that is only a Fulciment,
and Tanquam a Natural Center unto them. Wherefore as all Pondus is of the
Matter, and Matter only one Homogeneous Body in itself, so there can be but one
Center of the Pondus thereof; though as Potentiae are of the Spirits, and they
are several and Heterogeneous, so there may be several Spiritual Centers
thereof, (which are all of another Nature, and very far Different from this one
Universal Center of Matter) and though they be Radicaly most Dens and Strong in
those several Centers, yet their Motion tends Outward, every way, from the
Center to the Circumference of their Particular Sphere of Activity, and not as
the Matter Inward, or only Downward, from the Circumference to the Center of
Rest: because Spirits are Active and Energetical, but Matter Passive and Torpid,
as I have showed. And now I shall proceed to prove this Center of the Universal
Body of the Matter of the whole World, which as I have said, is also both the
Center of the Extension and of the Gravity thereof, to which all tend, or the
Universal Center, to be in the Earth, which will also comprehend that other
Question concerning the Center of the whole World. Certainly this is the
constant Language of Scripture; and so it is said, that the Waters which
covered the Earth were Beneath, and the Vapors in the Air, Above: and the Royal
Philosopher says expressly, The Heaven for High^, and the Earth for Depth: and
I suppose none can show any one Expression in the whole Bible, which may seem
in the least to color or favor the contrary Opinion. And the Reason thereof is
as apparent (which I have before sufficiently declared) that Earth being most
Dens, and consequently most Grave, and Gravity being one and the same Affection
of all Matter, and having but one principal Motion, which is Direct, must
therefore tend to one and the same Term, which cannot be Outward, or Upward;
for then Grave Bodies should Ascend; but must necessarily be Inward, or
Downward, which therefore must be to one Inmost Point or Center of that
Gravity. And I shall confirm this Motion of Descent by clearing a common
mistake concerning the Ascent of Rare or Light Bodies: for as all Dens and Heavy
Bodies do Descend, so also do Rare Proportionably; because they are only less
Heavy, as I have said. As if a Pound Weight be put into one Scale, and two
Pounds into the other, which will cause its one Scale to Descend, and thereby
the other to Ascend; yet apparently the Pound Weight is also Heavy, because it
weighs one Pound, though the two Pounds be more Heavy, and so cause that Scale
Proportionably to Descend, and the other to Ascend. Thus the Motion of Ascent
of Rare Bodies is indeed rather a being Moved, and their Ascent only a Violent
Elevation by more Dens and Heavy Bodies, which crowding more strongly or swiftly
to or toward the Center do Elevate and Extrude the more Rare and Light from it.
Also Earth only is Consistent, and cannot be prevented in the Descent thereof by
any other Bodies which might be Fulciments unto it, as it may be to others; and
all this does Sensibly appear by any Terreous Body Descending through Water,
and through Air, and so it would also through Ether, if it were in it, not
particularly as to its Proper Element, by any Potentia of the Elementary Spirit
thereof, but generaly as to the Universal Center of all Matter, by the greater
Density and Pondus thereof. For so if a Hole were made in the Earth from the
Surface thereof to the Center, Water would Descend thereby to it, as well as
Earth, and if there were neither Earth, nor Water therein, Air would Descend
likewise; and so if their were neither Earth, Water, nor Air, Ae^her or
Superaether would Descend likewise: though some pleas to phansy otherwise, and
would make all the Planetary Orbs so many Worlds of themselves having their own
Proper Centers, not respecting this Universal Center of the whole World to
which all tend, but only consider it as the Universal Center of Extension
(whereas, as I have said, the Gravity or Pondus of the Matter is an Universal
Affection of the Matter Subsisting in it, as well as Extension) which Absurdity
they have Excogitated only to defend some others, which I shall also disprove
hereafter. And though I might, if I pleas, believ a Traveller who has been in
Africa concerning any Monster; therein, yet certainly I should not much believ
him who had never been there himself. Neither can I more believ any such
Assertors concerning Ether (which being so Remote is commonly made Ampliss^^us
fingendi Campus) but shall proceed in the known and beaten Road of Scripture,
Reason, and Sens, so far as they extend, and as we can know, or judge thereby;
and leaving these fansys of vain men to themselves shall here inquire into a
more solid and true Secret of Nature, and such as deserves a more Curious
Search: which is this, That as God has placed all the Spheres in their most
Proper and Connatural Situations by such Directive Principles in themselves and
Symmetry of Nature, so in that Natural Position the whole Vast and Indefinite
Body of the World, and all the Inconceivable Weight of the whole Matter thereof
does support itself thereby, withal Facility and Suavity, without any
suspending Funicles above, or under-propping Columns beneath, and so without
any Force or Pressure whatsoever. For though when any Particular Body or Part
of the Universal Body thereof is Dislocated and removed from its Proper Station
and Natural Situation therein (which is when any more Dens Bodies are above
others more Rare) they then Move or Press toward their Proper Place by their
own Gravity and Motion of Descent, being thereby Actuated to reduce them
thereunto (as the Magnetical Virtue does Move the Body thereof being displaced
toward the Poles of the Earth) yet when they have atteined it, their Motion,
which was Actuated before for that end, being now useles and needles is again
reduced to Potentiality, and they then neither Move nor Press Actualy any more,
or any farther, nor have any Actual Nisus thereunto; but having obtained their
End are thenceforth in Peace and Rest; and their very Gravity is also
suspended, and reduced to Potentiality, as the Magnetical Needle does Rest in
the North Point: which plainly shows what I said before, that though Gravity
flow Immediately from Density, and Subsist in it, and Motion of Descent in the
Gravity, yet they are Realy Different; because though the Body continue to be
the same, and has the same Density Actualy both when it is out, and when it is
in its Proper Place, yet when it is our, it has Actual Gravity and
Gravitation, and when it is in it, only Potential. And thus neither the
Superaether does Press upon the Ether, nor that upon the Air, nor that upon
the Water, nor that upon the Earth, nor the Earth upon itself; because they are
already in their Proper Places; and therefore tend no farther: for the more
Dens Bodies are Natural Fulciments and so far Centers to the more Rare. And so
the Proper Place of any Body is when being more Rare it is above more Dens, or
being more Dens beneath more Rare, as I have said; or also being among
Equidens, whether above, or beneath any other parts thereof, yet it is in its
Proper Place; because it has such a Natural Fulciment or Center sufficient for
it, and there are none more Rare beneath it, through which it may or ought to
Move according to this Statike Law of Nature; but the other Equidens Parts
whether above, or beneath it, are also in their Proper Sphere, which is the
Proper Place of them all, and they can not otherwise be all in one and the same
Point. Again I shall observe, that these Spheres being all Rotund, that
Spherical Ro^undity must be filled, and so the Sphere Completed to render it
the Proper Place of those Bodies whereof it is the Sphere, otherwise the Bodies
will flow or fall every way to fill the Sphere, or any Chasm therein; because the
lower parts of that Chasm will be beneath, or nearer to the Center of the World
then the others; wherefore being Equidens, they will all contend for one
Equality or Spherical Community of Situation, which must Equaly relate to the
Center, and Circumference of the World. Also heerby it appears that these
Spherical greater Bodies do not Move to the Center, nor respect it in Regular
Cylinders, as less particular Bodies, Plummets, or Bullets falling through the
Air, which seem to us to Descend in a most Directly Perpendicular Line, and
serve for Measures thereof well enough, because any such requisite Pyramidal
Confirmity thereof to the Center is not discernible by reason of their smalnes,
(as smooth Water in a Pond seems to us Exactly Plane, and that Planities thereof
servs well enough to make a Water level) whereas any Quadrant, or Semiquadrant,
or the like of those Proportionable greater Bodies respect the Center as
Pyramids Inverted with their Cones Downward, and Bases Upward, which is their
Exact Conformity thereunto, and the way of their Gravitation and Motion of
Descent; as we may easily understand, if we duly consider the Relation of any
Circumference to the Center. And therefore such Quadrants, and Semiquadrants,
do not Superpend, nor consequently Superincumb, in such their Pyramidal Bases
beyond their Cones. Yet I do not conceiv of such Proper Places and Spheres that
they are Magical Circles, or any such Fantastical Houses as Astronomers fansy
to be in Heaven, but only, as I have said, Proper Localitys of the whole Body
of Matter and Extension of such several Spherical Bodies according to the more
or less Density and Gravity thereof. Much less do I conceiv that the Center has
any such Magical Virtue or Attractive Power, nor that it is any Cavity, or the
like, but only a Term which is the Midst, and Inmost Point, and consequently
the Lowest of the whole Body of the Matter of the World Immovable and
Inalterable, and relating to the Circumference thereof, that is the Utmost
Superficies of the Superaether, which is Ingenerable, Incorruptible, and
Invariable, being the Universal Bound and Limit of Nature, and of all Bodies,
and of the whole Matter and Extension thereof. Having thus premised, I shall now
examine the Pressure of the Atmosphere, which is so confidently asserted by
some, though evidently there be no such thing, nor can there be any Rational
Supposition thereof, without a supposed Dislocation of the Body of the World,
and offering Violence to Nature, as I shall now prove. God Created the Heaven
and the Earth, and nothing beyond or without them; wherefore certainly they
Press upon nothing, or do not Press Outwardly because there is no Outward thing
to support them, or on which rhey might Press; but only they tend to Union
Inwardly. And as the several Spherical Bodies of the Elements do not Press upon
the Superaether, nor one upon another Outwardly, so neither Inwardly, as Job
says, He hangs the Earth upon nothing, that is, it does not hang or Press at
all either Outwardly, whereof he spoke before, He stretches out the North which
is the most Terreous part of the Globe over the empty place, that is, the Air
(as a Vessel is said to be Comparatively empty when it is filled only with Air)
no^ yet Inwardly, for it hangs upon nothing besides itself on which it might so
Press, and it does not Press upon itself, the whole Body and all the Parts
thereof being in their Proper Place, as I have said. And here again, I must
clear one Vulgar and common Error, which may be the cause of the contrary
Apprehension, that is, That the Earth, and consequently the whole Globe of the
World does Press upon the Center every way, as upon a Foundation, that bears it
up; or as two Bodies of equal Spiritual Strength or Potentia Pressing one
against another with all their Power, by such mutual Encounter and Resistance
do forcible fix and setle each other Immovably in some middle Point between
them: whereas though there be such particular Combats between Contrary Qualitys,
and the like Opponents in Nature, and so there are also particular Dislocations
of Members in the Body thereof, yet generaly the whole Structure of the Body of
the World (and so of the Atmosphere) is so Composed that there is no such
Pressure, which Properly is not Nature but Violence, and the Descent of Heavy
Bodies every way to the Center is only as to a Point, or Term, which they do not
desire to pass, and therefore do not Press beyond it; and because Violence does
not long continue, there is therefore an Innate Principle of Motion in Bodies to
reduce them to their Proper Place, whereby they may obtein that Rest which
Nature Intends, and Abhors all such Pressure, Pain, or Burden. And heerin
the Pondus of Matter and Potentiae of Spirits do manifestly Differ; for whereas
generaly the Powers of Spirits Act to the utmost, Incessantly, and without any
Rest, because they are Qualitys of Active Principles (and so the Heavenly Bodies
Move Indesinently) the Weight of Matter which is a Passive Principle affects
Rest, and only tends unto it, and when and where it obteineth it, then and
there it Rests, and the Actual Weight and Motion thereof is thereby again
reduced to Potentiality, as I have said. And I can not conceiv any Reason nor
frame any Notion in mine own Mind why, or how the Body of the World should
Press rather or more Inwardly then it does Outwardly, which is not at all. And
if we could suppose any such Pressure, it must be either every way; which would
accordingly Press and Squeez or only downward, and then every one of the
Terricolae should be Pressed Downward with a Proportionable Pyramid of the
whole Body of the World so Inverted as I have showed, and according to
Mathematical Rule enlarging itself from his Head or Back or Hand on which it
does so superpend as the Cone, to the Utmost Circumference of the Superaether
as the Basis: for it is all Matter, and there is no Consistent Body Intervening
to prevent that Pressure, and so if one part of that Pyramid Press, all must
Press: and if we compute the Inestimable Burden thereof, it will be found
Insupportable, and at the Atmosphere also to be so Comprest in itself, as would
render it no Atmosphere, or fit place of Breathing. But let us descend farther
and consider the middle Point of the Earth and Center of the whole World;
certainly no Poet can Imagine such an Atlas, or Hercules, as might so bear the
whole Burden of the whole Body of the World being far greater then of the
Heavens only, which they feigned them to bear up (though indeed the Imaginary
Pressure thereof be the greater Fiction.) And I appeal to the common Experience
of all men, who with their own Hands can feel no such Pressure of the
Atmosphere; (whereas it should Press the Area of the Hand Proportionably as much
as 29 Inches of Mercury) and of every Diver, who can testify the Nonpressure
of the Deepest Water lying upon him: and whosoever will not accept these for
Experiments, but seek to evade them I know not how, he does plainly thereby
Invalidate the Testimony of all Experiment, and render it as Skeptical as some
would make both Reason and Faith, since none can be more Sensible and Notorious
then this which is by feeling, the Fundamental and least Fallible Sens: But I
shall plainly clear by a whole Galaxy of Experiments, which I shall therefore
collect into this one S^atike Rule, That in any Body Internaly Consistent in
itself, or made Externaly to Consist together, the more Rare Parts thereof,
being duly placed above the more Dens, do not Actualy Weigh or Press the more
Dens Parts below them, nor the Equidens Parts one another Perpendicularly.
Whereby it shall plainly appear how a Particular Body so disposed is a Module
of the Universal Body of the World in this particular respect. Thus in the
highest Column of Timber, or Stone, or Coloss of Brass, or Pyramid of Brick,
Perpendicularly Erected, (as they ought to be) no one Part thereof does Press
another, supposing them all to be Equidens, (or only so far Proportionably as
they are not so Equidens) for otherwise all must Press the very lowest and
thinest Physical Area thereof, and then let all the Incumbent Weight be computed
and compared with that Area, and the Strength thereof, and I suppose the
Impossibility of such a vast Weight and Pressure, to be born by by such a
slender Fulciment will easily be granted; when we see a whole Brick to be
broken and battered only by a Cart-wheel going over it. Again let us consider
other Bodies sometimes Actualy Fluid, and sometimes Consistent; as a Firkin, or
any larger Cask of Butter, Tallow, or the like; if it be uncased, and the Upper
and Lateral Parts of the Cask taken off from the Mass of Butter, or Tallow; yet
it shall stand as firm as it did before, though there is at least an half
hundred Weight Incumbent upon the Area thereof. Whereas if you lay an Equal Plate
of Lead or any more Dens Body, of the same Weight upon a thicker Area of the
Butter, or Tallow, it will not be able to bear it, but be squeezed Outward;
because the Equidensity and Equiconsistency of all the Parts of its own Body
make them all to be at Rest, but the greater Density of the Lead does Press
them; and so if the Cylinder of Butter or Tallow were much higher, yet the
upper Parts would not Press the nether until the Weight thereof did overcome
the Consistence, as the Lead does by its Unequal Density. And if the Butter and
Tallow were Melted and Fluid in the Cask, and then should be uncased, as
before, they would Press and flow every way; but yet while they are contained
Externaly within the Cask, no Part thereof does Weigh or Press another. So in a
Cistern of Water, while it has no Vent, no one Part of the Water does Weigh or
Press another, nor would Oil, or the like, upon the Water, Press it. But though
the Parts in these and the like Cases do not Weigh, or Press one another, yet
the Whole Body whether Internaly or Externaly Consistent does Weigh and Press
the next Body beneath it, not Continuous and Consistent with it, or not
Equidens. And so a Man bearing the Firkin or Cask does feel the whole Weight
thereof, because the Parts Weigh according to the Whole; and so the Whole does
Press another Body, though the Parts of the same Body in such Cases do not
Press one another. As a Pale of Water upon a Man's Head does Weigh and Press
according to the Whole, thougha Fish in the bottom of the Pale under the Water
does not feel any Weight or Pressure thereof; because the Fish is as a Part
thereof, and within the Pale, which is the External Term of the Consistence
thereof; and the Body of the Fish Equidens, or therabout, with the Body of the
Water. But if a Body Naturaly Consistent be not Erected Perpendicularly, as if
a Column of Timber be held Obliquely, then the upper Parts thereof do Weigh and
Press Obliquely, according to the Obliquity thereof; and so if any of the upper
Parts do Superpend, they also do Superincumb-Proportionably. As if a Pyramid
Inverted (and be greater then the Pyramidal Proportion which I before
mentioned) or a piece of Timber laid Transversly over the Top of another. Which
I conceiv also to be the true Reason of the Proportionable Overweight and
Advantage by Distances from the Center. But if a Fluid Body broader above then
beneath, be in a Vessel of that Figure, yet the upper Parts being Equidens do
not Press the lower, because they all Rest together upon the Consistent Vessel,
and only Press upon it. Again, if the Stopcock of a Cistern, or Gutt of a
Water-mill, be opened, whereby the Water has a Vent, then the Parts above that
Vent, being not supported by the Consistence, and in Motion do Press one upon
another Proportionably, and issue forth with a force Proportionable thereunto.
And any Parts which Move do accordingly Press, though there may be a Pressure
without Actual Motion by an Actual Nisus or Endeavor thereof, As a Burden upon
a Man's Shoulders does Press upon them, though it does not Move or Sink farther
into them, and so a Weight hanging and not Moving Downward does Press as well
as when it does Move.

XI. This is, as I conceiv, the State of the Matter, which was created One
Universal Body in the Beginning, Extended in itself through its whole Body, and
having all its Parts beyond Parts, and so continuing Universaly in the
Successive Duration thereof, that as the Whole cannot be Extended more or less,
so no Part thereof can be Divelled and Separated from all the others, and
thereby be made another several Body, or less World in itself; nor is any Part
thereof Annihilated, whereby it should be Diminished, nor any new Part Created,
whereby It should be Augmented; but as it remains the same Universaly in the
Whole Substance, so also in the Universal Affections thereof, though they were
first Generaly, and still may be Particularly Varied, according to the several
Degrees thereof which were Potentialy in itself. And yet the whole Body thereof
still is and must be the same, having the same Orbicular Figure, and the same
Total Density and Gravity; because the whole Matter thereof is the same, neither
more, nor less, then it was, being all Bounded with the same Circumference and
Center; and so as one Elementary Part is made more Dens, or Grave, another is
made more Rare, or Light. And all are Bounded with the Superaether, which is
Superelementary, and immutable. And as this Universal State thereof can not be
Varied so it has Universal Rest in itself, which is indeed this Universal
Status thereof, and can not be Varied by any such Universal Motus which might
Move the whole World. Also there is a General Status or Rest, which is the
Station or Position of the Great and General Bodies thereof, as they were first
Created in the Beginning, and afterward Ordered in Six Days; that is, of the
Superaether, Ether, Air, Water, and Earth, which can not be Varied Generaly;
though Particular Elementary Bodies are, or may be Particularly Varied, by
Generation or Corruption: whereby the Extension, Figure, Density, or Gravity
thereof, are so Altered. And yet in these Particular Variations thereof the
Matter does always observe the Universal and General Law of itself, and of the
Locality of its own Body, and of all the Parts thereof, by containing all within
the same Circumference and Center; and if any Elementary Part become more, or
less, Dens in itself, by Altering the Particular Station thereof where it was
before, and removing it to the General Station, and so if it be Violently
Removed out of it, restoring it by a Natural Motion or Nisus of Restitution and
Return thereunto. Thus there is a double State or Rest of Matter, that is,
either Universaly of Union, or Generaly of fit Station and Position therein; and
as the Union is of Extension, so both the Rest and Motion to Union do, as I
suppose, subsist in Extension: and as the Rest and Motion to Station is to the
Center of Gravity, so they both Subsist in Density; which is also Analogous:
for as Matter tends to Union with itself and has thereby some Density in
itself; so Dens, or more Matter of less Extension tends to more close Union or
more Inwardly within itself. And this Union is the Foundation of the Universal
Rest or Aquiescence thereof in itself, which it first and most Naturaly
affects; and of the other of Station which is next unto it, as being
Convenient and Conformable to the other. And both these Rests when they are
Disturbed are Recovered by that other Subservient Principle in itself, which is
the Natural Motion thereof. And this Motion is not Actively Contrary to Rest, as
Heat to Cold; and the like Contrary Active Quality; for Rest is not Active, but
rather Privative or a Not moving in respect to Motion, and only a Positive
Acquiescence of the Matter itself, Subsisting in it; as also Motion does Move
unto Rest as another Assistant or Auxiliary Affection thereof, and Subordinate
unto Rest: (as Verticity is not Contrary, but Subordinate to Polarity, serving
only to reduce Magnetike Bodies to that fixed Position, which is the Polar Rest
thereof.) Which Rest Bodies do most Naturaly affect, but being Dislocated or
Disturbed, cannot attein it without Motion. And therefore Rest and Motion seem
to some to be Contrary, because though Motion be to Rest, yet it is in itself
Motion, and not Rest, and indeed it is Analogous to that which Moraly is termed
Invita Voluntas. As when a man goes a Journey, not willingly in respect of the
Journey, and yet willingly in respect to Rest at Home: but as this Rest of
Matter is Acquiescence in the Natural Union and Station thereof, so Disunion or
Dislocation are more Contrary thereunto, which yet are not Contrary to the Rest
itself, and are rather Privations of the Union and Station wherein Rest does
Acquiesce. Nor are any Different Local Motions, Upward, and Downward, and the
like, Properly Contrary; but only Localy Advers, or Opposite; for they may be
both from the same Principle of Motion to prevent Vacuity, and tend to the same
Union of the Matter; though they may Vary the Station thereof; because the
Station, which is of Convenience, is also Subordinate to the Union, which is of
Necessity. But to affirm that Bodies of Matter are in themselves Indifferent to
Motion or Rest, and so being once put into Motion would Move always if there
were no Obex or Impediment, is most contrary to the very Nature of Matter,
which would never Move itself if it were not first Removed by others; and of
Motion itself, which is only to reduce it to Rest; and to all Sens: for we feel
our own Bodies (and so do all other Bodies) as they are Bodies to affect Rest, and
return unto it as soon as they may: though while they are Moved by the Active
Spirits they can not Rest in themselves; but Distinctly considered in themselves
as Bodies, they are only Passive; and so indeed Naturaly apt to be Moved by the
Spirits, but not to Move themselves; and Torpid, having no Activity in
themselves, whereby to resist the Spirits or Potentiae thereof, but only a Dull
Pondus or Heavines. And that Natural Affection of Union or Station which is in
themselves is not any such Power or Strength as the Consistence of the Earth,
whereof I shall discourse hereafter, but only a Stupid Acquiescence in itself.
And that very Motion, whereby they preserv their Union, or recover their
Station, is only an Infirmity, that is an Inclination unto, and Recumbence of
one Body upon another, for a mutual Support; or a Succumbence or Sinking and
Falling Downward, for want of such Support: which are all Symptoms of Weakness,
and not of any Strength. And all the Motion of Matter is only Local and not
Active or Operative in itself, like the Motions of Spirits, but as an
Instrument of their Spiritual Qualitys, as I have said. Nor is Local Motion
strictly considered as such in itself either the Action of the Mover, or
Passion of the Moved, nor both the Action and Passion of any Automatous Mover
and Moved; but the very Moving, or Transition from one Place to another. And
thus, Eo, Curro, Fugio, Volo, and the like Words of Local Motion, are all of a
Neutral Signification, neither Active, nor Passive. And though thereupon does
ensue a Variation of the Distance of the Body Moving from or toward all other
Bodies in the World, yet its own Motion considered in itself is only a Variation
of its own Locality; and that Body itself only so Moves, and none other Body
is thereby Moved besides itself, (unles it be also Impelled or Attracted by it
otherwise) but Rests in its own former Locality which it had in the great
Body of the World. Otherwise when any one particular Body Moves, all other
particular Bodies in the whole World, and all Parts of Bodies which are thereby
Distanced more or less from it, or toward it, or this way, or that way,
according to the Motion of that one Body Moved, should likewise be Moved
thereby. And so if Matter and Motion were the Natural Principles of Generation
and Corruption, as some affirm, then by such Motion of any particular Body
(which is a Part of the Matter) and of all the Parts and Particles therein, and
consequently the Generation and Corruption thereof by such Motion, all other
particular Bodies, and all the Parts and Particles thereof, should be conformably
Moved, and consequently so Generated and Corrupted; which does confound their
own Principles. Oportet esse memorem. But I do acknowledge that as the Body is
the Subject Matter, so also that the Local Motion of the Parts and Particles
thereof is very Instrumental in Generation and Corruption by Spirits, which are
the Movers, Operators, and Architects thereof, whereby they make fit Seat and
Officines for themselves; whereas otherwise the Body or Matter has in itself
only that Principle of Local Motion, which is to Union and Station, as I have
showed: and though Spirits may Vary the Station, yet they can never Vary the
Union of Bodies, because they are also within the same Vbi of the Circumference
of the Universal Body of the World, and the whole Extension thereof, which
therefore they may not break; or transgress; and they Inhabit in several
Stations thereof, according to the Nature of those Bodies which they require; or
if they require no Body, as Angels, they may indeed pass through the whole
Globe, but can not go beyond it, as I have showed. But Rest and Motion to this
Union and Station are, as I have said, Affections of the Matter Subsisting in
it Mediately, but Immediately in the other Proper Affections thereof; that is,
Rest is the Acquiescence of Matter in that Union and Station, and Motion the
Tendence of it thereunto. Now from this Union or Unition is the Adhesion of
Matter which is more Naturaly and Necessarily effected thereby, then by or with
any Adamantine Chains or Ligaments whatsoever: for so Nature always works her
own Works by her own Natural and Internal Principles, and needs no such
Artificial or Mechanical Hooks and Clasps, and I know not what Intangling,
rather then Uniting Figures, which some have vainly Excogitated. Whereas the
very Homogeneity of the Matter Inclines it of itself to Union with itself; and
Discontinuity is only from Heterogeneous Spirits, as I have showed, which make
several Heterogeneous Composita, that are therefore Spiritualy Continuous only
in themselves, and Contiguous one with another; and yet even in them all, the
Matter is still Continuous to and with itself, as it was before, and so
continues to be one Universal Body of the whole World. Nor is this Motion to
Union so Powerful in Spirits as it is in Matter, because it is not so Necessary
in them: yet any Homogeneous Composita are not so easily Discontinued or
Severed, as Heterogeneous; and therefore have also their Motions of
Restitution; and some, as Magnets, do not only Incline, but notably attein this
Unition of their Spiritual Homogeneity, whereof I shall Discourse hereafter: And
now will proceed farther to inquire into the Degrees of the Motion of Matter,
and of the Velocity thereof. I have said before, that more Matter of less
Extension or any Dens Body Moves more swiftly; which is one Internal Cause of
the Velocity thereof: And so also the more or longer it Moves, it Moves more
Swiftly; which is another Internal Cause thereof: and it is not only from the
External Motion of Restitution in the Air, above, or behind the Bullet, or
other Body falling through it, which did Impell and Violently Dimove it, and so
when the Bullet is past through that Part of the Air, which was so Impelled and
Dimoved, it returns smartly again by that Motion of Restitution behind, and
upon the Bullet, which may give the Bullet some small Impuls, and so cause it to
Move somewhat faster; and then the Bullet Moving faster, Impells and Dimoves
the next part of the Air more forcibly, which accordingly increases the Motion
of the Restitution thereof, and so causes the Increments of the Velocity of the
Motion of the Bullet. And the Bullet in Descending also Impells and summoves
that part of the Air which is beneath, and before it, and that part the next;
and so prepares a way, or Vortex, for itself, whereby it may more easily, and
consequently more swiftly, Descend. But, though it be true, that either
Addition of Force, or Subtraction of Impediment, may Accelerate Motion, and
here perhaps both together do concur, and may somewhat conduce thereunto; yet I
am not so Curious as others, to apprehend, either, or both of these, to be
sufficient and the only Causes of so consyderable an Effect, as the notable
Increas of Velocity of Motion in such Descending Body^; but rather ascribe it
to the Internal and Proper Nature of the Motion itself; which being capable of
such Degrees in itself (as well as Density in which it does Subsist) and while
the Body was in Rest was only in Potentiality, and no Actual Motion, till it
began to Move; and as it then begins to Actuate itself, so the longer it
continues, it does still Actuate itself more and more by Degrees in the Natural
Motion thereof to the Center. And there is no such Increment of Velocity in the
Weigh^ of a Clock moving Sensim: Nor is there any Attractive Virtue in the
Center itself, as I have said, because that is only a Point wherein such Virtue
can not Subsist, and only a Term of Locality Downward which God has Immovably
fixed and ordained so to be, as the Circumference is Upward, and it does no
more Attract Downward then the other does Upward. And any Equal Weight in the
same Medium, whether it be placed in a higher, or a lower part thereof, Weighs
and Moves Equaly, first; and according to the continuance of the Motion, so are
the Degrees of Velocity. Nor is it from the Magnetike Virtue of the Earth, for
such Motions are Proportionably Equal, as I suppose throughout, and not Per
Gradu^, but Per Saltum, as I shall show hereafter: and I know no Difference
heerin, between a B^llet of Lead, and a Bullet of Steel, or Magnet, so
Descending. And the common Observation that Natural Motions are Swifter, and
V^olent Slower toward their End, is not generaly true of all, but only of the
Matter: for the Planetary Motions are Natural, but Equal. Which Instance may
well prove what I said formerly, That Spiritual Motions are for Motion and
Action; but Motion of the Matter is only to Rest; and therefore Slow when the
Body is first Removed from its Rest, any Remotion from which it Disaffecteth,
and Swifter as it draws nearer to the next place of Rest, which it Affects.
Also this plainly shows that Motion of Desc^nt is Realy Different from all
the former Affections of the Matter, because it so Varieth itself, though they
continue the same. Now it is also observable that according to the Increas of
the Swiftness of the Motion, so is also the Strength of Percussion: for
Swiftnes is a Conspissation, or as I may so say Condensation of the Motion, and
all Conde^sation being an Union does fortify. Again, as Motion is an Advantage
of Percussion, so it is also of Penetration; because Penetration is by
Percussion; and a Swifter and Stronger Percussion makes a Swifter and Stronger
Penetration: which is observable in Bows, Balists, Catapults, and the like;
wherein the quick and smart Delivery makes the great Percussion and
Penetration; and Time is very consyderable heerin; for if the Percussion be so
Strong and Swift, that the Body Percussed has not requisite Time to Resist, it
pierces through it, as if i^ were only a Medium; as a Bullet shot Directly
through a Board, or Glass, makes only a round Hole in it; whereas the same
Strength, not so Swift, would make it first Bend and Cleav, or Break, which
show a Partial Resistance. And so if the Percussion be more Swift then Strong,
whereby it has not requisite Time to Penetrate, it will be more Resisted; as a
Bullet shot Obliquely will Reflect from Water, or as they say Graze; as also
Oistershells (wherewith Boys use to make Ducks and Drakes as they call them)
whereas in more time they would Sink into the Water. Also all Motions of
Percussion or Penetration are Violent as to the Body Percussed or Penetrated,
though the other may Move Naturaly, as a Bullet falling through Air, or Water,
Naturaly Downward, does Violently Percuss and Penetrate the Air or Water, which
is thereby Dislocated, and Violently Elevated, as I have said: and it seems to
me that even that Motion of the Bullet is also as it were Violent in respect of
the Place of Rest from which the Bullet first Moves, which makes it to be so
Slow at first; and only N^tural in respect to the next Place of Rest to which
it Moves, which makes it so Swift at last, as I have said: but the Bullet
shot is first put into Motion by the External Impression, and that Motion being
wholly Violent is Swiftest at first, and Slowest at last. And yet the Motion
continues Proportionably according to the Impression, though that last no
longer then the very Contact, and is Discontinued with it. Nor can I conceiv
that that there is any Continuation thereof, or Magical Line of Motion, between
such a Mover and Moved, as some have fansied: for the Impression, being an
Accident, must necessarily Subsist in its own Substance, and can not Migrate
into another, nor is the Potentia which makes the Impression Emanant, but
Inherent. Certainly this is a Mystery in Nature, and I know no Instance which
does more seemingly prove a Migration of Accidents, and I suppose the
disproving heerof will very much confirm the contrary Truth. Now, as I have
said before, the Matter having Naturaly in itself Motion is putt into it, and
the Motion Actuated by any Violent Impression; as well as by Natural Tendence
to Union or Station: and that which is most wonderful heerin is, that the
External Impression does not only Actuate the Motion at first, but Divert the
Natural Tendence thereof Downward, and Direct it another way. But as I have
said, there is in Matter not only a Motion to Station which is Downward; but
also to Union, which is generaly Directed by the other Downward, but may be any
way; as sometimes it is Upward: and this Motion which is most Natural and
Principal, is also the Universal Motion of Matter; and being Diverted, and
Directed Violently, by the External Impression, does carry the Body that way,
yet so as it does only Divert, and not destroy it, or the other Notion of
Descent, which more Particylarly is to Station, and that is Particularly also
Natural, whereby the Body has still a Nisus and Inclination that way. And the
Diversion of the Motion being Violent is, as I have also said, Strongest at
first, and the Natural Weakest; and so the Violent Diversion does overcome the
Natural Motion of Descent, and Proportionably Divert it, as in Flying or
Swimming; and while it does Totaly prevail against the Motion of Descent,
carries the Body in a Direct Line and Level any other way, though with some
Decrement of the force: so that a Bullet shot out of a Gun does not Move with
an Equal Force so long as it flys Level, as may appear by the Unequal
Execution that it does at a nearer or farther Distance within that Level, and
so does Decreas by Proportionable Degrees: or if it be short Perpendicularly
Upward it will Decreas in Swiftnes and Strength till it return again Downward,
which is the very Difference between such Violent and Natural Motions heerin.
And as Rest and Motion are seemingly Contrary, and yet Motion is indeed
Subordinate, and Subservient to Rest, so is the Natural Motion to this Violent
Diversion so long as it is Predominant over it. All which I shall manifestly
approve by the common Experiment of a Ball Rebounding from a Paviment of Stone.
Certainly the Ball first falls Perpendicularly upon the Paviment by its own
Natural Motion of Descent, which being greater then is sufficient to carry it
to its next Place of Rest, and being stopped by the Stone, is Reflected Upward,
and that is a Motion Diametricaly Opposite to the former, and is by reason of
that Diversion and Direction, which it receives from the Paviment Externaly,
and yet not by any Continued Impression thereof, but only from its own Natural
Motion Actuated in itself, and so Diverted and Directed thereby. For the
Paviment of Stone, being Consistent and Quiescent, can add nothing to it, nor
make any such Impression upon the Ball; as an Hand may by throwing or beating
it back; or a Racket by the Springines of the Strings, first yielding, and then
Repercussing it; nor is there any such Springines in the Ball which falls
upon the Paviment, and there is the same Motion of a Marble, or the like most
Consistent, and not Springy or yielding Globules. But both the Direct and
Reflex Motion are from the Ball or Marble themselves, and the Motion thereof, as
the Emanation of Rays, which are Naturaly Reflexive, as well as Emanant. And as
the Bullet, ^o also the Ball, or Marble, by their own Natural Motion so
D^verted, do by Degrees prevail against that Violent Diversion, and at last
attein their Natural Rest. And I suppose, that if an Hole were made through the
Body and Center of the Earth, and a Bullet dropped in it, the Bullet would pass
beyond the Center forward and backward, like a Pendulum, or Needle by its own
Motion Actuated in itself, and so by Degrees return to it. Now if the Ball or
Marble fall by a Diagonial Declivity, as from a Penthous, Roof, or Hill, or the
like; then, because it half Rests, and half Moves, that Motion acquireth only
half the Increments, or Degrees of Velocity, and may describe a Quadrant of a
Proportionable Cycloid in the Descent afterward upon the Paviment; and as I
suppose a Granado shot from a Mortarpiece Diagonialy does from the Angle of
Inclination, or Zenith, describe such a Quadrant between the Perpendicular and
Arch of the Circle: which I leav to the Curious more Exactly to determine. And
there is the like Reason of the Semicircular Vibrations of the Pendulum: whereof
the Center of Extension is the Point where the Line hangs, and whereby the
Pendulum is Produced to the Extremity of the Semidiametrical Plane, where the
Arch thereof begineth Downward, and then is let go, but cannot Descend
Perpendicularly Downward, because the Line which is suspended at the Center does
stop it, and so Divert and Direct its own Motion of Descent accordingly to
describe almost a Semicircle half about that Center, which it plainly does,
without any External Impression or Reflection from any other Body, but only by
its own Natural Motion so Diverted and Directed; and by Proportionable
Decrements, as is aforesaid; (as the Needle of the Compass does also so Move
Horizontaly by a greater Motion of Verticity then is sufficient to reduce it to
the Pole) and so at last the Natural Motion prevailing against the Violent
Diversion, it Rests Perpendicularly upon the Nadir of the Arch which it
describes, and is Correspondent to the Center of the Perpendicular Line. And
probably such Decrements of Violently Diverted Motions are Proportionable to
the Increments of Natural Motion* And perhaps Motions of Restitution, which are
Spiritual and from the Potentia of Spirits, are heerin Analogous to the Natural
Motion of Matter: and so a Spring of Steel beat one way seems to make one
Vibration almost as much the other way; and the many V^brations in the
Torricellian Experiment are from such Causes. It may be also inquired, whether
there are such Increments of the Natural Motion to Union Upward as well as to
Station Downward, as whether a Bullet which is sucked up by a man's Breath
through a longer Musket barrel does Ascend more Swiftly and more Strongly, then
if it were shorter; or Per Saltum, like the Motion of Magnets? for it is by the
Sucking and Expanding of the Included Air thereby, which when it is so far
Expanded, that the Retractive Potentia thereof is more Praepotent then the
Pondus of the Bullet, and the Air being still sucked the Bullet does by the
other Motion of Matter to Union, as Naturaly follow it to prevent Vacuity
(which I shall show hereafter) as if it did Descend by the Motion to Station,
or at least equaly as swiftly at last as at first like Ether. And I shall now
observe one thing more in such Diverted Motions (which I have before intimated)
that if the Impetus or Force thereof, which is so Actuated, be greater then can
be spent in carrying the Body Moved forward by reason of the Resistance of the
Medium, or otherwise; then it not only so carry's it Directly, but the Excess
thereof does also Move the Body Circularly. Thus a Bullet or Arrow discharged
Violently from a Gun or Bow, besides the Direct Motion thereof, Moves also
Circularly. And so in a Whirlpitt which has a Vent at the Bot^om, whereby all
the Parts of the Water above it are putt in Motion, as I have showed, and yet
can not all Descend and issue out together, therefore they Move Round, as also
Water in a Boiling Pott: and so in the common Experiment of Water Ascending
from a Basin, wherein a Flaming Candle or Charcoal kindled at one end is
Perpendicularly fixed above the Water, and then an Urinal, or the like Vessel
Inverted over it into the Water in the Basin, the Water will Move Round in the
Basin when it begins to Ascend into the Urinal, as may appear by any Motes
swimming in the Superficies of the Water. And so I conceiv it to be a general
Rule, That if a Body in Actual Motion, so far as it can not, according to the
Actual Motion thereof Move Directly, the Parts thereof will Move Circularly. Now
because all Circular Motion of the same Body, and in the same Place has to some
seemed so very Wonderful and Inexplicable; I shall here endeavor to explain it,
and grant that which is the very cause of their Wonderment, that is, that all
Local Motion is, and necessarily must be, Progressive; because it is from Place
to Place: but we must also consider, that such a Circular Motion is Immediately
of the Parts, as of the aforesaid Motes in the Water, and accordingly of all
the Parts of the Water, Circularly, and consequently of the Whole, Mediately
thereby: and so the Parts Move Progressively, and Successively, from their
several Positions and Places in the Whole, which they have in their own Body,
as well as their own Body has in the Body of the whole World, East, West,
North, and South, which is the very Nature of Place, as I shall show hereafter:
and consequently by them the Whole Moves Circularly also in its Place, wherein
it was, and still is; but only is Localy Varied or Moved according to that
Variation and Motion of the Parts being itself in the who^e where it was
before: and certainly all the Parts may as well Move so Simultaneously in Time,
and Successively and Orderly in Place, as the Motes; and the Motion of the
Whole does thereupon as Naturaly and Necessarily ensue: And so a Planet Moves
about its own Axis Immediately by the Parts thereof, and it Moves about the Sun
Immediately by the Whole as a Part of that Circle which it describes
Progressively, though in a Line Perpetualy Curv, And in such Motion of a Fluid
Body any way, the Parts thereof do so far forth Weigh, Press, or Move, one
another: as a Diver shall find in any Vortex or Stream, if he oppose himself
against the Current thereof, but not in any Progressive Motion of the Whole as
when he swims along with it, which is a Sensible Difference. And this may help
also to salv another Difficulty, which has been esteemed Incomprehensible. How
a Body Moving Circularly should Move Round in the Circumferential Parts thereof
in the same Space of Time as in the Centrical; since the Circumferential
describe larger Circles, and Move through a greater Space or Distance of Place
then the Centrical, and yet both by the same Pondus or Potentia. Wherein we must
consider that the Pondus or Potentia being Equaly applied to the whole
Consistent Body Moved is distributed Equaly to all the Parts, but does Unequaly
Move them according to their Unequal Distances from the Center, whereby the
Circumferential being Proportionably more Moved by their Equal share thereof,
according to those Distances, do Move Swifter, or through Proportionably larger
Circumferences though Simultaneously in the same Space of T^me, which is an
Equality in Inequality; and both are Proportionable to the Nature of the
Consistent Body so Moved thereby, and the Distance of the Circumferences thereof
from the Center. Also there is a Motion of the Whole partly Progressive, and
partly Circular, As when a Coach or Cartwheel in going forward Moves Round.
And hence has arose another Problem. How such a larger and a less Wheel being
both fixed upon the same Axis should Move upon lower and higher Planes with
Equal Circumvolutions. Which needs no such Solution as the former, because it
is a plain Fallacy: for in such a Position and Motion the larger Wheel Moves
Round by Perfect Circumvolutions, and the less Wheel partly Slides along (as
well as Moves Round) so far as to equal the Circumvolutions of the larger
Wheel: for indeed otherwise it were Impossible that one Circumvolution of a
less Wheel should Equaly run over so much of the Planes, being both of the same
Longitude, as of a larger, because their Circumferences are not Equal. And this
Fallacy may sensibly appear by not fixing, but putting both the Wheels loos
upon the same Axis; and then you may plainly perceiv the Exact Difference of
the Circumvolutions Proportionably according to the Difference of the
Circumferences.

XII. Local Motion, as I have said, is Transition from Place to Place; and does
therefore import Place; which is Relative, and not only the Position of a Body
in its own Extension otherwise then as the Parts thereof are in their Respective
Places in the Whole. And therefore no Body is said to be Localy in itself, or
in its own Whole Positively, but only Relatively: as we do not say England is
in England. Wherefore also the whole Body of the World is not Properly in a
Place, but in its own Position and Extension, which is not Properly a Place
Positively in itself, but only Relatively to all the Parts thereof, and without
it there is no other Body, in respect whereof it may be said to be in such a
Place. Nor is Place the Superficies of other Bodies Ambient; for not only the
whole Body, but every Part within the Superficies of itself is also in a Place,
which, as I have said, it Varieth in a Circular Motion of the Whole, and yet
the Whole is in the same Place and Vicinity of Bodies: and so is also every
Point thereof in a Place according to its own Proper Nature, that is, as it does
Coexist with others, and so Commove with them; so it is also Collocated with
them, though not severaly by itself alone: wherefore also the Superficies of
its own Body is not the Place thereof, nor indeed can it be so many several
Places: but as Extension has Part beyond Part, which therefore is not one and
the same Position of every one Part severaly in itself, because every one has a
several Position in itself; so the Place thereof is the Relation of one to the
other in the Whole, or as it is Beyond, farther, or nearer, here, there, and
the like; which is not only a Notional Relation, as First and Last in
Extension, but Real; because Extension has Realy Part beyond Part, as well as
Time has Realy Part after Part, as I have formerly showed. And so
Circumference and Center are Real Relations of Extension, and there are Real
Advantages of more or less Distance of any Parts from the Center, as I have
said. Now according to this Real Relation, a Body is said to be in such a Place
or Part of the whole Body of the World, and not in another: And if the whole
Globe of the World were a Magnet, it should have a North and South Pole in
respect of its own Parts, and so all the other Points of the Utmost, or any
other Inner Circumference thereof, though there be no Body beyond it to which
they may so Point. And so England is said to be in such a Part of the World,
and not in another; and London in such a Part of England; and not in another;
and so of any less Bodies, as the Parts thereof are Relatively Distant more or
less from the other Parts of that Body, or of the whole Body of the World, or
their Situation any way Varied. Again, as there are such Real Places, so also
certain Real Stages and Posts, which God has Realy fixed in the World, as the
Circumference and Center of the whole Body of the World, according to which any
Part or Particular Body thereof is said to be Higher, or Lower; that is, more
Outward or Inward, and two Poles of the Earth whereof the Axis does Intersect
the Center by one determinate Line ending in two certain Points, and so
directing it, and thereby determining North and South, and consequently all the
Points of the Compass. And so there are also two Opposite Circumvolutions of
Ether and Aethereous Bodies, which Denominate East, and West, in all such
Circumvolutions, one way, or other, as I shall show hereafter. And according to
these Real Differences I suppose all the several Localitys and Motions of any
other Bodies in the World, (which may be as Various as all Mathematical Figures)
may be Determined and Denominated. Also because all Spirits whether Material or
Immaterial are within the whole Body of the World which no one of them can
Possess, or fill, or be Coextended with it all; therefore they are in some
Definite Place, or Vbi thereof, and not in another, according to that Proper
Place of the Matter which they Possess; though Matter itself be only in such a
Proper Place Circumscriptively and Extensively, because it only has Extension
of itself; and Spirits and Spiritual Qualitys by being Localy therein do acquire
such a Definitive Coextension therewith and thereby; which Coextension is the
Commune Vinculum of Matter and of all Spirits, whereby such are Immaterial, and
do not Consubstantiate Matter, nor Inhere in it in Staetu Conjuncto, ^s Angels,
Magnetical Virtue Emanant, and the like, yet are in it and in some certain Vbi
thereof (though in Statu Separato), as well as the others: and their Coextension
is the same, though there be not the same Consubstantiation, or Inhesion as I
have showed: and the other which we call Material are indeed no more Matter,
nor Material, then Angelical Spirits; but only so termed by way of Distinction
from such their Consubstantiation and Inhesion being in themselves truly Spirits
in Bodies (as I have therefore so called them all by one general Name) as well
as Angels out of Bodies, (as Inherent Magnetical Virtue is a Spiritual Quality,
as well as Emanant) and though they be indeed Inferior and less Spiritual Kinds
of Spirits then Immaterial in many other respects, and therefore so
distinguished, as I have said; yet they are all of the same Universal Kind, or
Genus of Spirits; and so as much Contradistinguished from Matter: and therefore
are no more Matter nor Material in that sens one then another. Which I shall
again and again desire Materialists to consider, and remind; and rightly to
understand these Terms of Material and Immaterial Spirits, as I have explained
them, and to judge thereof according to ^he Things themselves, and not of Things
according to mistaken Terms, or otherwise to waiv the Terms wholly, and call
Matter Body, and every such Form or Substantial Activity Spirit, whether
Conjunct, or Separate; and so to apprehend them rightly in our Minds, as they
are in their own Nature. Whereas some, who have not so cleared these Terms and
Notions to themselves, either affirm all Spirits to be Matter, or that there are
only Material Spirits. And I beg of every Christian Philosopher, who believes
that there are Angelical Spirits, and Spirits of Men after Death, thus Separate
from the Matter, only as freely and fairly to Contemplate them in his Mind, as
he does the Matter; and Spiritual Qualitys, as he does the Corporeal Quantity,
and so prepare himself to be a fit Judge of what I shall prove unto him beyond
any Postulation; and I hope that thereby every Materialist may so Purify and
Spiritualise his own Immaterial Mind, which is now too far Immersed and
Engaged in the Matter, that he may also himself clearly discern Spirits and
Spiritual Qualitys by his own Spiritual Light beyond all my Probations: whereas
some, because they do not Distinguish between Extension and Coextension,
therefore Confound Bodies and Spirits, and so, because they do not distinguish
between Extension and Matter, therefore Confound Substances and Accidents, and
because they do not distinguish between Extension and Vacuity, therefore
Confound Entity and Nonentity. And though they will not allow Spirits to be in
the Body of Matter, and the Coextension thereof to be their Ubi, yet they can
Suppose Matter itself and the very Extension thereof to be in some other Vbi, or
something which they call Space, and which must either be another Extension
without a Body, or the same, or Nothing: though, as Position is only a
particular Consideration or Notion of Extension (as the Body or any Part thereof
is in its own Extension) so Space is only another Particular Consyderation or
Notion of Extension, as the Body or any Part thereof is in so much of that
Extension: and neither of them are Realy any Things in themselves Absolutely, as
Extension, or Relatively, as Place; and though these are such particular
Notions of Something Real, that is of Extension: yet Vacuity considered in
itself as no Extension of Matter can not be so much as any Notion whatsoever of
any thing Real: for then it should be Space which Realy is the same with
Extension of Matter, whereof it is only such a particular Notion: Wherefore they
must conceiv it to be another Extension without Matter; or, as I may so say,
another Imaginary Extension of Extension, or that wherein both the Matter and
also Extension thereof is; and so we may proceed Infinitely: but all such
Process Infinite is most Contrary to Finite Nature and to all Philosophy;
because, as I have said, it is only the vain Reduplication in Terms of the same
Thing in itself. Now if Matter and Extension were one and same, then Matter
needs none other such Imaginary Extension, or Vacuous Space, wherein it may be
Extended, because it is Extended in itself, otherwise it should not also be
Extension: or if Matter be the Substance, and Extension the Proper and
Inseparable Accident and Affection thereof, then also it needs none other such
Imaginary Extension, or Vacuous Space wherein it may be Extended; because it is
Extended by its own Extension. Wherefore Vacuity is neither Matter, nor
Extension, nor any Real Relation, nor Notion thereof, nor indeed any Thing, or
Entity whatsoever, but merely Nothing or Nonentity, whereof it is only a
particular Consyderation or Notion; as Nullity or a Cyphar is of Number, or
Nontime of Time; and the like Improper Notfinites, whereof I have formerly
discoursed. Nor is it any Privative founded in Positives, which thereby
Complexively may be Considered, and seem to be Something, but a particular
Negative, and the very Negation of that which is the Respective Affirmative
Being, that is, both of Matter and Extension: and so it is neither Long, nor
Short; Broad, nor Narrow; High, nor Low: having no Longitude, Latitude, or
Profundity; otherwise it should be the same with Extension; which we all
acknowledge, and should not differ about Terms: but as considered severaly from
it, it is Nothing, and Notfinite, and so consydering it I need not disprove it,
for it plainly proves itself not to be; being only a Negation, which is its own
Denial of what any would Affirm or Imagine it to be: and so Vacuum est Non ens,
or Vacuum Non est, or Non est Vacuum, are tantamount. Yet because some are so
fond of it, that not only like Lovers they feign it to be that which it is not,
but I think would almost like Paracelsians Create it to Be by their own
Imagination thereof, I shall briefly argue against it. And certainly there is no
such Vacuity, because God himself never Created it, nor indeed can he; because it
is a Nonentity, which is not Creable, but, as I have before showed, the very
Negative Term from which Creation does commence, and which does necessarily
Cause that to Be which it Creates; because Being is the other Affirmative Term of
Creation, which is from Not being to Being. And whereas it is commonly demanded,
Whether God could not Possibly have Created two or more Worlds having Such a
Space or Distance one from another, or one Part of this World having such a
Space or Distance from another? I answer, He might; if he did also Creute such
a Space or Distance (which as I have showed, is Realy Extension) without any
Body or Matter, which I suppose they who ask the Question, and any Materialists
themselves will not so easily grant, and they who affirm the Extension itself to
be one and the same with the Matter, whereof it is the Extension, must by
granting it, deny it, and so Contradict themselves: for then that Extensive
Space or Distance must also be Matter. The Philosophers Reason against Vacuity,
That then two Body^ should not be together, and yet no other Body, nor
consequently any Extension or Extensive Space thereof, nor indeed any Thing,
which may Disterminate them, be between them; is so very true and Cogent, that
I profess to dispute no farther with him who shall deny it, until he can show
me the Fallacy, or Infirmity, thereof. Sensible Experiments against it are
manifold; and there is such a Constellation thereof in the whole Sphere of the
Universal Nature, that I shall collect them all into one Statike Rule, that is,
no Weight nor Power can wholly Remove any Body out of the present Place thereof
(though it may Rarefy or Expand it and so Exue part thereof) unles another Body
may Succeed: and if it do so Remove any Body, another does Naturaly and so must
Necessarily Succeed. As let Air be sucked out of a Bladder the Sides thereof
will Proportionably Approach, and at last Close together; and if by an Airpump
or Expansor the Operation should be so Strong as exceed the Consistence and
Strength of the Glass, such an Exuction would also break the very Receiver. Now
certainly there is no other Cause or Reason of the Adhesion of the Air to the
Bladder, or Glass (which are Heterogeneous, and therefore Discontinuous
Spiritualy) but only the Continuity of Matter and Motion thereof to Union, as I
have said: which is to prevent Vacuity, or any Discontinuity of the Universal
Matter. So in a Siphon, though the overweight of Water in the longer Leg be
requisite, yet the Motion of Descent by the Gravity does not otherwise Cause so
great a weight of Water in the shorter Leg to Ascend then only by its own
Natural Decession whereby the other does as Naturaly Succeed, as may appear if
any Ai^ be let in at the top of the Siphon* And it is not as when a
Preponderous Weight or Prepotent Power at one end of a Rope draws up a less
Weight tied to the other end thereof: for as Air is not so fastened to the
Bladder or Glass which are Heterogeneous, so neither Water to Water, though
Homogeneous, because Water is a Fluid Body, and has no such Consistence as will
endure any such drawing, but only such a small and weak Consistence, as I shall
show hereafter. But one part thereof in the Siphon is so United to another by
this Natural and most Indissoluble Ligament of Adhesion and Union of Matter to
Matter, so that for the Necessary Completion of the Universal Body thereof, so
great a Weigh^ of Water does Succeed, otherwise Water in the Siphon might run
at any hight if the overweight were the only Cause. And Air Rarefied by Flame in
a Glass, though much Lighter, Draws up Water, which is Heavier, by being
again Condensated in itself by Cold after the Extinction of the Flame or Fire,
whereby it occupys a less Space; and the Water does Succeed it, and Ascend as
Naturaly to prevent the Vacuity as it does Descend in a Whirlpitt; Yea as I
have showed this Motion to Union is most Natural and Predominant, even over
Motion to Station, and no Body can Move any way in the whole Orb of Matter by
any Private Motion whatsoever, unles the Universal Body thereof be first
Completed. And therefore the whole Body of the World is, and must be, as I have
said, Orbicular; not only because the Superaether is most Rare, and therefore I
suppose most Fluid: and all Fluidity does Naturaly Conglobate, as I have before
showed: but though we should suppose it most Dens, and Firm or Consistent, yet
it must be Perfectly Globous; because that is the Proper and only Perfect Figure
of Union, to which this most Natural Motion to Union of the M^tter must reduce
it: and as it would reduce the Bladder or Glass, or any other most Consistent
Bodies to Perfect Union Inwardly if the Air could be wholly Exucted, and no other
Body within it; so it would also Outwardly, to a most Perfect Globular Figure,
if there were no Body without it; because God has Created in it a Principle of
most Perfect Union which is Globular. Now as all Sens does militate against
Vacuity, so I know no Sensible Experiment which has ever yet been offered to
prove it, but such as when Vacuists themselves have farther considered it, they
have at last found therein some Plenitude, which they did not discern at first:
and I very much wonder how ever any man first fansied such a Vacuity other then
as a Notion of such a part^cular Notfinite, or Negation of any Extension,
whenas Mankind has never yet so Imagined any of the rest, as any such Nullity
in Number; or Nontime; either Coacervate, which is as if an History should thus
begin, In the 6954th year before the Beginning of the World: or Interspersed;
which is as if we should affirm some Nontime or Nonday between Sunday and
Monday, or the like. Having thus Considered Matter as it is in itself, with the
Corporeal Quantity or Extension, and other Accidents or Affections thereof,
whereby only we can know it, as we may Spirits by their Spiritual Qualitys; let
us now so Review it simply as it is in itself, with all the Accidents or
Affections thereof, and severaly and distinctly from any Spirit or Spiritual
Quality whatsoever, whereof I shall discourse hereafter, and see if we can make
of itself alone, or with all its own Apparatus, any such Spirit or Spiritual
Quality, as some would Produce out of it, and the Atoms or Corpuscles thereof:
whereas it is in itself only one Universal Homogeneous and most Entire Body,
which though it has Aggregate Atoms and Corpuscles in its own whole,
Mathematicaly, yet there are indeed no such Segregate Atoms or Corpuscles
thereof Physicaly as they do Imagine, nor can any such Possibly be without
Intervening Vacuity, which we have sufficiently disproved. And therefore the
Ancient Atomists did also hold Vacuity, and so their Doctrine, though most
falls, yet was more Consistent in itself, then the other of our Modern
Corpuscularians, who affirm Segregate Corpuscles of Matter, and yet no Vacuity,
but other Matter Intervening, which is a plain Contradiction or Matter
Segregate, and not Segregate: and that Segregation thereof which they pretend is
only the Discontinuity of the Bodies of several Composita by their Individual
Spirits, which are Heterogeneous, and not by the Matter, which is one
Homogeneous and Continuous Body in itself, as I have said; and even
Heterogeneous Composita, which are Spiritualy Discontinuous, are yet Materialy
as Continuous, as Homogeneous: And so polished Metal and Marble, Drops of
Water and Glass, Brick and Mortar, cannot be Divelled or Discontinued, unles
Air or other Matter may Succeed to prevent Vacuity, and supply the Continuity
of the whole Body of Matter and Extension thereof; which is Absolutely
Necessary: and the Spiritual Continuity of any Compositum, which is Generable
and Corruptible, is only Respectively Requisite for the preservation thereof,
and whereby it does Continue its own Body, as much, and as long as it can, and
defend itself from other Ambient Bodies, which do Besiege and Assalt the
Spiritual Qualitys thereof, with their Heterogeneous Spiritual Qualitys; and by
the Menstruous Power thereof enter and Corrupt it if they can: whereas if there
be any Discontinuity in the Matter of the Bodily Compositum, the next Ambient
Bodies, whatsoever they be, do and must Immediately Succeed to Complete the
Great Body of Matter, which can suffer no Discontinuity, as I have showed. And
yet we will afford them such Materials as they would have, that is, supposed
Segregate Atoms or Corpuscles, and then let them Compose and Confabricate them
as they please into any Body, having Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity; that
is, Corporeal Extension; yet certainly this will be only Matter so Extended,
and no other thing whatsoever, either Ether, or Air, or Water, or Earth, or
Tree, or Brute, or Man, or Angel. And this Extension of the Matter itself will
only, as I have said, be Orbicular, for though all other Figures be in
Extension Potentialy, yet any Variation from this most Homogeneous Figure of
Union is by the Heterogeneity of Spirits, and the Plastike Virtue thereof, which
as the Architect or Statuary does superinduce them, by Varying that one
Universal Figure of the Matter. And yet we will also allow them, without any
Spirits or Spiritual Q^alitys, to Mold the Matter into what Figure they please;
which will be none other then Matter so Figured and Effigiated, and only as so
many Statues of Elements, Vegetatives, Sensitives, and Intelligences, but not
the Things themselves. Also though all Matter be Equidens in itself, and
consequently Equigrave, and the Variations thereof only superinduced in it by
the Spirits, and are therefore by some termed Qualitys, yet we will allow them
to Densify or Rarify, Gravitate, or Levitate, those Statues as they pleas;
which will be made thereby no other then they were before; but only more Dens,
or Rare, Grave, or Light. And lastly, though all Matter does Naturaly affect
Rest, and all the Natural Motion thereof is only to Rest, as I have showed, when
it is at any time Violently Removed and Dislocated by Spirits or Disturbed by
their Spiritual Operations; yet we will also allow them all the Motions of
Matter, that is only Local Motions; and then let them either Move their whole
Statues or any Parts, Corpuscles, or Atoms thereof, this way, or that way, or
every way, as they please; and make them as Automatous as they can suppose them
to be Moved by or with any such Local Motions: yet as the whole Statues Moving
Upward, or Downward, Progressively or Circularly, and the like, will only be
Statues; so every one of their Parts, Corpuscles, or Atoms, so Moving therein,
will be only such Parts, Corpuscles, or Atoms thereof, as they were before; and
so consequently the Whole also the same as it was before; only with such
Variations of the Local Motion of the Matter or Parts thereof, and of other
Affections of the Matter, as of Gravity Levity Density and Rarity producing
those Various Motions, or of Figure and Extension produced thereby, but still
the Statues will be only Matter, having such or such Extension, Figure,
Density, Rarity, Gravity, Motion, or Rest, and the like Affections of Matter:
which are Formaly in themselves and all together only such as they are, and
render the Matter only such or such a Statue: but can induce no Spirits and
Spiritual Qualitys; Heat, Cold, Moisture, Drines, Vegetation, Sensation, and
Intellection; which, as I have said, are formaly in themselves other things
far Different from Matter, and any or all the Affections thereof: and so I
shall more particularly prove them to be in my following Discourses: though I
have already acknowledged, that as Matter is the Body of Spirits, so all the
Affections thereof are the instruments of Spiritual Qualitys and their
Operations, and so as I have said before (though now I have admitted it to be
otherwise only by way of Supposition) they are superinduced in the Matter by
the Spirit, to make it a fit House and Work house for itself, and then they both
dwell and Work therein; and so Spirits are Instrumental to Matter, and Matter to
Spirits. But yet as when I see a Ship sailing upon the Sea, and steering her
Course according to the Art of Navigation, with her Sails spread, Tackling, and
Rudder, and the rest of her Furniture rightly Instructed and Gubernated, I may
not therefore conceiv that she can thus perform the Voyage of herself, and by
all those Instrumentalitys, but that as she was first thus rigged and fitted by
men, so she has still men abord who thus guide her, though I may not see them
upon the Deck; So when I Contemplate the Active Operations of the several
Composita, I know that the Rude and Common Matter could never so ^ffigiate and
Diversify itself, but that the Spirits did so Prepare it for themselves, and
that they still do Act it and Operate in it. Also I acknowledge, that therefore
there is not only some Correspondence and Analogy between all Created Nature as
it is one Univers and Republike; but more or less between all the several
Creatures, as I have observed, to be between all Quantitys: and so there is
also between all the Affections of Matter among themselves, and likewise between
Matter, and the Affections thereof, and Spirits, and their Spiritual Qualitys,
which are all contained within the same Extension of the whole Body of Matter,
and the several Figures thereof are the Hieroglyphical Images of the Various
Spirits, and may have some kind of Signature thereof: and so Condensation is
Analogous to Intension, and Rarity to Remission of Qualitys, and Pondus to
Potentia, and the rest; but especialy Motion is Analogous to the very Activity
of Spirits; and yet as Matter and Spirit, so all Material and Spiritual
Accidents are Genericaly Different, and particularly Local Motion from the
Active and Generative or Corruptive Motion of Elementary Spirits; and much more
from Vegetation, Sensation, and Intellection, which are Motions of a far other
Nature, as I shall show hereafter. Again, as Matter and Material Accidents are
not, nor can not be Formaly the very Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys, so
neither are they Potentialy as others have supposed, and so would Educe them
all out of I know not what Potentia Materiae, and some Christian Philosophers
in compliance therewith have supposed the first Chaos to be only such a Materia
Prima; though God says expressly that in the very Beginning he Created Heaven
and Earth, Comprehending Superaether and all the four Elements, as I have
said; and that the Matter had not only, as a Materia Prima, the first and
common Affections thereof, that is, one Extension, one Orbicular Figure,
Equidensity, and Equigravity, and the like, but particular Diversifications,
and Variations of Spheres, of several Figures, Densitys, and Gravitys, and the
like: and the Superaether then probably was Created Perfect, and adorned with
all the Furniture thereof, whatsoever it is: and the Elements were Created in
such a manner as did Denominate them Ethereal, and Aereal Heavens, Earth, and
Water, (yea the very Heavens and the very Earth, as some have Criticaly
observed) though Inform, and Inane, and without Motion, which is Secondary and
Subordinate to Rest, and whereof there was no Need nor Use before Generation and
Corruption were Ordained afterward in the Six Days. Of all which I shall now
proceed to discourse.

SECTION VI.
And the Spirit of God Moved upon the face of the Waters.
EXPLICATION.
The Spirit of God, Moving in the Chaos, by Supernatural Incubation did Prepare
and Predispose it for the Producing and Perfecting all things, (that were
before Created in it) afterward in the Six Days.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of the Incubation of the Divine Spirit. 2. Of Actuality and Potentiality.
3. Of Generation and Corruption. 4. Of the Process thereof. 5. Of the Scale of
Nature. 6. Of the Economy thereof.

I. GOd, who in the Beginning, or very first Instant, Created Heaven and Earth,
could also have Perfected them, and all Creatures therein, in the very same
Instant; as most probably he did so Perfect the Superaether, and Angelical
Nature, which are the highest Sphere, and highest Nature, for the manifestation
of his Infinite Power; yet also to manifest his Infinite Liberty and Absolute
Sovereignty over Created Being, and the Subordination and Subjection thereof to
himself; and how the Creatures, as they could not Cause themselves to Be from
Notbeing, so also after they had a Being, could not of themselves Perfect
themselves, nor attein any farther Degree of Welbeing without him and his
Creating Causality, did first let this Elementary World ly in the Chaos thereof,
and afterward, in such a Space of Time as seemed fit to his Divine Wisdom,
that is, in Six several Days, proceed Gradualy and Orderly to Perfect them. And
though the first Creation, which was from Absolute Notbeing to Being, must
therefore have been in an Instant; because there is only one Affirmative Term
thereof, that is, Being; which must necessarily be in the same Instant as soon as
it was; yet all these Works of the Six Days which were Productions from
Potentiality to Actuality, or Original Generations from not such a Being to
such a Being (which are several Affirmative Terms of Being, and the first only
Negative of such a Being, which yet implys Being) was Gradualy in Time,
according to Natural Generation, and the Process and Course thereof, which was
then Instituted, as I shall show hereafter. And this Original Generation was
another Improper Creation, and P^rfective of the Primitive and Proper Creation;
and such as could not be per^ormed by Nature, until the Natural Course thereof
was set in Order by the Divine Spirit: who, before it was so Produced, and
until it was Perfected, did from the Beginning Effectively Move, or Incubate in,
or upon, the Created Chaos; (as it were hatching the Eg^, or Embryo, thereof) in
the midst of all the Elements: that is, upon, or above, the Face of the Waters,
and Earth beneath them; and under the Aereal, and Aehereal Heavens: Preparing
and Predisposing them for the Production of all their Apparatus, and
Inhabitants, out of their first Created Potent^alitys Latent in the first
Chaos, into their Actualitys in the Six Days: And all those Productions were
also the Immediate Works of the same Divine Power, as it is said, God said Let
there be Light; and so of the rest; which were not the same Creations with the
first, for that had been Vain and Superfl^ous; nor in the same manner, for that
was in the Beginning, or first Instant; but these in Six several Days, Gradualy,
and Orderly, according to the Natural Process of Generation which was then
first Instituted, as I have said: and wherein, as all their Primitive En^itys
were first Created in the Chaos, and then Prepared and Predisposed by the
Divine Spirit; so every Production in every one of the Six Days was Previous
and Preparatory in Nature to and for the Succeeding Productions, as I also
shall show hereafter. And Angels, probably being Create^ Perfect in and with
their Superae her in the Beginning (though they mig^t be Spectators) yet neither
did Operate, nor Assist, in this Improper Creation; which though Improper in
respect of the former, yet is only Proper to God himself, who is expressly said
so to Create in all the Six Days, as well as in the Beginning. But I presume
rather, that as God made all things for himself, and the manifestation of his
own Glory to his Intellective Creatures, Angels, and Men, so Angels were
Created in the Beginning, in and with their Native Region of the Highest Heaven,
that they, who can Intuitively behold all things, and needed no Created Light
to Inspect the Dark Chaos (and so I suppose, the whole World and Frame of
Nature is Transparent to them) might Contemplate all the Works of God in the
Improper Creations of the Inferior Elementary World; which was to be the Region
of Man, as he, who is the other Intelligence, was made last, to Review (as God
himself afterward did) all the Works which he had made, and to celebrate that
Sabbath of Rest which God Instituted, and as it is said, made for him. And as
the Divine Spirit was the only Creator, and Angelical Spirits no Subcreators;
so much less was there, or is there, any such Archaus Faber, or Plastes,
Demiurgus, or Demogorgon, or I know not what Fictitious Operators, which some
have substituted. And though there be, as I have said, one Universal Body of
Matter, or Corpus Mundi; yet there is not therefore one Universal Spirit, or
Anima Mundi, as others have fansied: for then all had been Perfected in the
Beginning, both the whole Body, and Spirit of the World; and all Natural
Generation and Corruption had commenced from thence, and should so have
continued; and there had needed no such farther several Creations in the Six
several Days, for setting in Order the several Courses thereof; from which they
did Originaly commence, and so have continued: Whereas though the Matter be one
Homogeneous Body, yet the Spirits are many and several, and their Spiritual
Qualitys Contrary one unto another, which cannot proceed from one and the same
Principle; but plainly discover several Spiritual Principles thereof: as I have
showed. And though they are United together in one Compositum, as in a Beast,
or the like; yet they remain several Spirits in their own Natures, as they were
before, Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirits; and were not, nor are
not, made one Universal Spirit of that one Compositum; much less is there any
such Universal Spirit of all the several Composita in the whole Body of the
World. And more apparently in Man, besides all these, there is also an
Intellective Spirit, which is far different from all, or any of these. So that
Physicaly there is no such Universal Spirit, which is only one in Nature, as
Matter is one, whereby the whole Body and Spirit of the World should be one
Individuum, but only Metaphysicaly, and Genericaly, as there is one Univers,
and as Spirit is another Active Principle, or Substantial Activity, and so
common to all Spirits, (though Specificaly Heterogeneous in themselves) wherein
they all agree, and which does Subsist in them all, as a Real Relation of all
their Substances so agreeing and Relating, which yet are so Heterogeneous and
several in themselves; but not as any Total Substance in itself, like Matter,
and whereof they are all only so many Parts, like the Particular Bodies of
Matter. Neither is there any such Potentia Materiae which may be the Universal
Principle of all Spirits; nor are they only Diversifications of the Matter, or
of any, or all the Affections thereof, as I have showed. And there are
Immaterial Spirits of Angels, and Men, Separate, or Separable, from the Matter
(otherwise, then as they are in the Ubi of the Universal Body thereof, which is
only a Locality, or Local Circumstance, and not the Formality of their
Spiritual Nature) and so neither is Consubstantiation of the Matter the
Formality of Spirits, which we therefore call Material, (as we call some
Animals Corporeal) and might as well for the same Reason call their Bodies of
Matter Spiritual as it is said There is a Spiritual Body, and yet even these
are Spirits Genericaly as well as Angels, though they are Far Inferior to them
Specificaly; because Spirits are Specificaly Heterogeneous, and may thus differ;
though Matter be Homogeneous, and only one and the same. Nor indeed is there or
can there be any such Potentia, either of Matter, or Spirits, whereby they may
Produce any Substance; which is never Potential, but always Actual: because it
always Subsisteth in itself, and therefore cannot be Produced out of
Potentiality into Actuality; (but only by Mistion or Union in a Substantial
Compositum) not like Accidents, which may be Potential; because they can Subsist
in their Substances, when they are not Actualy in themselves, nor are they like
the S^bstantial Composita, which are Poten^ialy in their several Substantial
Princ^ples, wherein they Subsist, and Actuated by their Composition. And so in
the Consubstantiation of Matter and Spirit, the Matter does no more Produce the
Spirit, then the Spirit does the Matter; as also in Accidental Composition of
several Accidents, one Accident does not Produce the Essence of another. Thus
the true Potentia of the Matter is only the Power of Producing its Proper
Accidents, or Affections, out of its own Substance; as Spirits also do theirs
out of their own Substances: And yet though the General Accidents, or
Affections, of Matter be Produced out of itself, the Particular
D^versifications thereof Instrumentaly are Superinduced by the Spirits, as I
have showed: whereas an Immaterial Spirit, as an Angel, Produces his own
Accidents, or Affections, not only out of his Substance but by it alone, and
without any Matter; And Matter, which is otherwise more rightly said to be
Receptive of all Spirits Extrinsecaly, is not therefore Productive of them
Intrinsecaly. Nor indeed could both Matter and Spirits Produce either
themselves, or one another, or their own Accidents or Affections, or any Thing
whatsoever, Properly without a Proper Creation, nor Improperly out of their
Chaos of Potentiality, without out an Improper Creation; nor do any Substances
now Produce any Accidents, or Substantial or Accidental Composita Naturaly, or
by Natural Generation and Corruption, otherwise then by the Successive Power
and Virtue of the first Institution thereof, and Divine Benediction by the
Spirit of God; who so Created them, both by a Proper and Improper Creation, as
I have showed; whereby the Course of Nature, and of all Natural Generation and
Corruption, does continue accordingly. But this Original Generation, which was
a Secondary and Improper Creation, did commence from the First and Proper
Creation, by the Supernatural Preparation and Predisposition of the Chaos by
the Divine Spirit: and as it was not Immediately from Nonentity, so neither
from Corruption; because there was yet no such Generated Compositum which might
be Corrupted; but there were only the Simple Essences of Substances and
Accidents Created in the Beginning in the Chaos of their Potentiality, and
Produced into Actuality afterward, whereas Natural Generation does always
commence from Corruption of some former Compositum; which if it should still
remain as it was before Generated, there could not be any new Generation of
another; and therefore it does necessarily require and presuppose such a
Corruption thereof.

II. Thus the Potentia of Matter, or Spirits, is only the Power of Educing
something Subsisting in themselves, and apt to proceed and flow from them, out of
Potentiality into Actuality; as I have often said, and shall now prove, when I
have first explained my Terms. By Actuality I suppose we easily understand the
Extrinsical Existence of any Essence; wherefore there must also be an
Intrinsecal Essence, or Entity, whereof that is the Existence, and which without
that Actual Existence does not Actu^ly Exist, and when it does so Actualy
Exist, is therefore said to be in Actuality; and when it does not, in
Potentiality; because it is an Essence or Entity in itself whether it does also
Exist, or not Exist: which Essence, or Entity, while it does not Actualy Exist,
does always Subsi^t in some others; and therefore always is Essentialy, though
not Existentialy. And when the Essence is Produced out of that Potentiality
into the Actuality, then there is a Generation thereof; and when again that
Actuality is Reduced into the Potentiality, then there is a Corruption thereof,
But Simple Substances which subsist in themselves, therefore always are Actualy
in themselves; and are Ingenerable, and Incorruptible: Thus in the Beginning
there was not only the Matter, nor only the Spirit of the Superaether, Actualy
Subsisting, but also of Ether, Air, Water, and Earth; which did so Denominate
those first Elementary Composita of the Matter and their several Spirits, the
Heavens, and the Earth, as I have showed. And so there were also in them, and
with them, all the Substantial Simple Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirits,
Subsisting Actualy in themselves; though there were yet no such Mist Composita
of the Elements themselves as afterward which might Denominate them Stone,
Metal, and the like; nor any Composition of the Elementary Spirits with the
Vegetative, or of Elementary and Vegetative with Sensitive, which might so
Denominate them Trees, Beasts, and the like; until such Composita were
Produced in the Six Days afterward. And so also there were all the Intrinsecal
Created Essences, or Entitys, of Simple Accidents, as well as Substances, which
were also Created together in the Beginning, in and with their Substances,
though only the Universal Accidents of Matter, Extension, Orbicular Figure,
Density, Rest, and the like, did then Actualy and Extrinsecaly Exist in the
Matter; and there were yet none of those Particular Variations thereof, which
were afterward superinduced by the Spiritual Qualitys of Spirits; because those
Spiritual Accidents did not yet Exist themselves: and so not only Substantial
Composita, but also such Simple Accidents were in their Chaos of Potentiality.
As there was no Actual Light, but Darkness; and so of the rest: but yet the
Intrinsecal Essence or Entity of Light, and the Rest, was in the Chaos
P^tentialy; which is therefore termed Inform, and Ina^e, because they were not
yet in it Actualy and Extrinsecaly, but were afterward so Produced in the Six
Days. And all the Previous and Requisite Principles, Substantial, or
Accidental, wherein any of their Produced Composita did Subsist Mediately, or
Imme^iately, were first Produced themselves; without which the other could not
have been Produced: as Mist Elements before Vegetative Composita, and
Vegetatives before Sensitive Composita. And so does the Natural Generation and
Corruption, bot^ Su^stant^al, and Accidental, still continue; as does plainly
appear by all Generative Mistion and Composition, and production thereby of the
Composita, which are so Confabricated Naturaly, as well as Artificialy. As a
House is Potentialy in all the Materials before it be built, and every
particular Figure in the Extension of the Materials before it is framed: and
when it is so Prepared and E^ected it may be said to be Artificialy Generated;
and when it is Demolished to be Corrupted; the Materials, like Substances,
still remaining the same, and the whole Compositum, and every Figure thereof,
being first Potentialy and afterward Actualy therein; and so again Reduced from
Actuality to Potentiality by Demolition: and there is no other Difference
heerin between them, but only that Natural Generation and Corruption are
Intrinsecal Consubstant^ations or Compositions of Proper Principles of Nature,
which are both the Materials and Architect thereof, and Artificial Generation
and Corruption are Extrinsecal; which only can be, by Application and
Apposition of the Intrinsecal Principles of Nature, so applied and conjoined by
the Architecture of Art. And as all these Mistions, Compositions, Figures, and
Virtues, which were afterward Produced in the Six Days, were Potentialy in this
first General Chaos; so every thing now in the Course of any Generation, or
Corruption, while it is in Potentiality, is so far forth in the Particular
Chaos thereof; and when it is Actuated, is Produced out of it: and there is no
other difference heerin between them, but that the first Production was by the
Supernatural Power of the Divine Spirit, and the others by the Power of
Instituted Nature, or Application of Art: so that this Potentiality is not
Relative to Essence, or Entity; as if it were only a Possibility of something,
which yet has no Essence, or Entity, in any manner whatsoever; but only to
Actuality of the Essence, or Entity, thereof, which is not yet in such a manner
as Potentialy it may be, not only by Divine Power, which may Create it
Properly, or Improperly, but according to the ordinary Course of Nature, or Art,
which may so Generate it Naturaly, or Artificialy. And so the Existence itself
or this Realy Dif^erent manner of Being is an Entity, Potentialy in the Essence
before it Exists, and Actualy when it does Actualy Exist. And whatsoever is not
so Actualy Existent must necessarily Be before in the Essence thereof
Potentialy; otherwise it could never be Produced, or made Actualy to Exist by
any Power of Nature, or Art. And these Essences, or Entitys, which are yet in
their Chaos of Potentiality, do then Actualy Exist, when, as I may so say, they
come forth upon the Stage of Nature, and there Appear, and Act, or might so
Appear, and would so Act, if there were no Violent Impediment; as Accidents,
which are the Emissarys and Instruments of Spirits, do Exist, when they are
Actualy so Emitted and Instructed, and consequently Actuated, whereby the
Spirits of Sensible Composita do Immediately Act or Operate upon our Senses, or
Sensitive Facultys; which are also Accidents, and thereby Mediately upon our
Substantial Spirits: and yet there may be such a Violent Impediment whereby
like Substantial Spirits which always Exist, though sometimes Latent, they may
not so Appear, and Act, unto, or upon us, though they Exist Actualy in
themselves; as a Picture under a Curtain, or the like. And so there may be also
an Erupturient Endeavor, which we call Nisus, when they can not Appear, and
Act, as otherwise they might, and would, by reason of some more immediate
Obstruction (like Retention by any Spontaneous Power with some Strife and
Difficulty) which plainly shows them to be so far Actual; because there is no
Actual Contention of or between any Accidents, while they are in Potentiality,
though their Essential Natures be most Contrary one to another. And I conceiv
that all Mistion, and Contemperature, of Contrary Qualitys, is first begun,
while they are in the Chaos of their several Potentialitys; as they were so
Prepared and Predisposed by the Divine Spirit in the Universal Chaos, as I have
before showed, and then there being no Actual Contrariety between them, they
are easily Mist at first, and so by Degrees, are more and more Actualy Mist, as
their Contrary Essences are more and more Actuated and Produced into Existence
by a mutual Contemperation, and Gradual Process thereof. Thus I have more
largely explained what I intend by Actuality and Potentiality; because the right
Understanding thereof is, as I conceiv, and shall show hereafter, the
Fundamental Knowledge of the whole Doctrine of Generation and Corruption. And
now I shall proceed to prove it accordingly: It is said of the first Chaos,
that it was Inform, and and Inane, without any of those Actual Mistions,
Compositions, Figures, and Virtues which were afterward Produced in the Six
Days; whereof all the Essence or Entity was Created in the Beginning; and which
to Produce were the several Works thereof: but there were all the Simple
Essences and Entitys thereof Potentialy in that Chaos, otherwise they had not
been Created in the Beginning, nor had it been such a Chaos thereof, Inform, and
Inane, in respect of those Essenses, which it had in itself Potentialy, and
ought to have Actualy also Existent, but yet had not, and which were afterward
Produced into their several Actualitys, and Existences, in the Six Days; wherein
there was no Proper Creation of any new Essence or Entity (but only of the
Spirit of Man as I shall show afterward) and the Improper Creations therein were
only the Productions of these Potentialitys into their Actualitys by the
supernatural Power of the Divine Spirit, which was the Original Institution of
Natural Generation and Corruption, as I have often inculcated, and shall now
declare by a more particular Enumeration. Thus in the first Day Light was
Produced out of Ether (wherein it was Potentialy before) by the Mistion thereof,
into Actuality; and there was no new Creation of the Essence or Entity thereof:
and therefore it is said, Sit, or Exista^ Lux; as it is also said elsewhere, God
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, or to be Produced out of the
Dark Ether, like Fu^us Accensus: and so probably Heat, and other Ethereal
Qualitys, were then Produced. Also i^ the Second Day Vapors, which were no new
Created Substances, or Essences, but only Water Rarefied, did Ascend out of the
Water into the Air; and the Qualitys of the Air, or Expansum, were Probably
then Produced by the Mistion thereof. And in the Third Day the Waters and Earth
were Distributed, and Disposed, and Drines, Moisture, and Probably the other
Qualitys thereof Produced by the Mistions thereof. And in the Fourth Day the Sun
and Moon and Stars were made of the Ethereal Substance, and so probably all
the Qualitys thereof Produced. And in the Fifth Day the Water is said to bring
forth or Produce Fishes; and so also Fowls were Produced accordingly. And in
the Sixth Day the Earth is said to Produce Beasts, which could not be so
Produced in their Composita, unles they were there before in all their Simple
Essences, or Entitys, which were all Created in the Beginning. And in these Six
Days there were both Compositions and Mistions, or Formae Mistorum, and also
Simple Substantial Spirits which were before Created in the Beginning were then
Produced, as is expressly Interpreted afterward of them all, and their Improper
Creation or Making, that he Rested from all his Works which God Created, and
made; or Originaly, Created to Make, that is, Created in the Beginning to Make
or Perfect afterward in the Six Days. And the Apostle like a Divine Philosopher
does also so Interpret it, Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were
framed by the Word of God; so that things which are seen were not made of
things which do Appear: that is, the Secula or Generations were so Framed and
Ordered by God in the First Institution thereof, that in all Successive
Generations nothing should be made of any former Phenomenon, or things which do
Appear, by any Transpeciation or Conversion thereof into other Essences or
Entitys, but of their own Essences or Entitys, which he Immediately Created in
the Beginning, and in their first Chaos of Potentiality, wherein they then were
not any such Actual Phenomenon, or Appearances, but were made to be such
afterward, and so still continue to be Generated out of their Potentiality into
Actuality. Which as every Christian understands by Faith, according to this
Divine History of the Creation, and first Chaos; so also any Heathen, who
wisely consydereth the same Course of Successive Generation and Corruption, must
acknowledge to be according to Natural Reason, and Sen^. And as the first
Universal Chaos, so every Particular Successive Chaos, is Hebraicaly called
Gods Treasury, or Storehous, out of which he Produces or brings forth all
things Generable, or Corruptible, Expending and Employing them in their
Appearances and Operations, which is their Actual Use and Office: and so we
read of his Treasures of Rain, Snow, Hail, Wind, and the like. And the Author
of Esdras says particularly of the Light, which was first so Produced: Then
commandedst thou a fair Light to come forth of thy Treasures, that thy Work
might Appear; that is, to Exist Actualy, which before was Latent in the Chaos
of Potentiality. And certainly no Successive Generation in the Present Course of
Nature can be a greater Work then those Primitive Generations, which were the
Immediate Works of God, and Improper Creations. Whereas if Natural Generation
should be any other then the Production of Created Essences into their Actual
Existences, or Corruption then such Reduction thereof, they should be Proper
Creation and Annihilation: For if any new Essence or Entity whatsoever, which
was not before, should be Caused to Be by Generation, then it must be Properly
Created; and if that which was before be Caused Not to be by Corruption, then
it must be Properly Annihilated. Nor does it suffice to say, that Generation or
Corruption are not of any Simple Substances, either Matter, or Spirits, but
only of Composita, and Accidents, or Modes, or whatsoever they pleas to call
them; for whatsoever they are, or howsoever Exile, or Desultory their Nature
may be, yet they are Real, and Entitative Somthings, not only in our Reason,
but in Nature, as I have showed: and indeed otherwise Generation and Corruption
should be no Real Alterations; but the things Generated or Corrupted should be
Realy the same as they were before; and so we should deny all Generation and
Corruption: whereas they Realy are, and do Produce Real Alterations, or some new
thing Actualy, which was before only Pontentialy; as every Compositum, whether
Substantial, as any Elementary Substance by Mistion of the four Elements, or
Accidental, as Green by Mistion of Blew and Yellow, and the like. Also this
does Sensibly appear in and by all Generations and Corruptions whatsoever: as
of all Substantial Composita, whereof there is only such a Composition;
otherwise they should not be Composita: and certainly the Simple Substances
were before Actualy Subsisting in themselves, otherwise they should not be
Substances; and so likewise were the Simple Essences of Accidental Composita;
as of Green, whereof certainly the Blew and Yellow were before Actualy Existent,
and the Green Potentialy in both. And so of more Simple Accidents Produced out
of their Potentiality into their Actuality: Whether of the Matter, as this or
that Particular Extension, Figure, Density, and the rest; which are Produced
Actualy, yet were before Potentialy in Universal Extension, Figure, Density,
and the rest; otherwise they could not be so Produced; nor can they be Produced
into more Actualy then they were before Potentialy. Or of the Spirits; as
Light, and Heat, Produced out of Calx viva, Thunderclowds, Haystacks,
Firecanes, or any other Inflammable Bodies whatsoever, were before in the
Substantial Fire thereof Potentialy; otherwise they could not be so Produced;
nor can they be Produced into more Actualy then they were before Potentialy.
And so we commonly say of Spices, Wines, and the like; that they are Cold
Actualy, but Hott Potentialy. And so Vegetatives Produce many Qualitys Actualy
in Summer, which were Potentialy Latent in them in Winter: and Sensitives such
in their more Adult State, which were Potentialy in them while they were
Embryons. And this is the very Natural Course of Generation and Corruption, and
of all the mutual Reciprocations thereof; whereby Generatio unius est Corruption
alterius, and Corruption unius est Generatio alterius; which is the Rota, or
Figline Wheel of Nature, turning about in the perpetual Revolutions and
Conversions thereof by such Production and Reduction, as I have before declared.
Between which two does always intercede Privation; as it was Antecedent in the
first Chaos, which being Inform, and Inane, was the Universal Privation of all
those Actual Existences which were afterward Produced in the Six Days; for so
Existence is capable of Privation, but Essence only of Negation. But Privation
is not any such Positive Principle in Generation or Corruption as Matter and
Spirit, which are the Simple Substances whereby the Compositum is
Consubstantiated, because it is only Privative: nor as the Essences of Accidents
in their Potentiality, which are Positive Entitys; but only the very
Potentiality thereof; which as it Relates to Actuality, is called Potentiality,
and as it Relates to Existence, Privation. Thus both Matter, and Spirit, or
Form, and also Privation, are all Comprehended in the Chaos. And from this Dark
Chaos of Potentiality by the Revelation of the same Divine Spirit, (which first
Moved in it, and brought forth Light out of Darkness) we may discover the Magnum
Arcanum, or Grand Secret, of Natural Generation and Corruption; and plainly
perceiv how all the Phenomenon were therein no such Phenomenon as since they
are, but first Created Potentialy, and then Produced into their Actualitys, and
Appearances, Originaly in the Six Days, and since Successively in all the
Secula thereof. Whereas all Human Philosophy, being ignorant heerof, has groped
in the Darkness of several Imaginary Notions, which the several Sects thereof
have Invented to themselves, and so in stead of this Chaos and Creation have
supposed an Eternity, and Selfsufficiency of Matter, and the Potentia thereof,
or Matter and Motion, Equivocal Generations, Transpeciations, and the like; and
though Anaxagoras in his Homoeomeria has approached somewhat nearer to the
Truth, yet his Conception thereof is very gross and rude, and like the rest,
supposes that also to have been Eternal. And now, though I have so largely
explained and fully proved this Doctrine of Natural Generation and Corruption;
yet because I conceiv it to be so Fundamental, and therefore very requisite that
we should most clearly and familiarly understand it, and discern this Divine
Light; and that I may produce it out of the dark Crepuscula and Confused
Notions of the ancient Philosophers, who have partly acknowledged it in their
Potentialitys, Eminences, and Homoeomeria, and the like; and again obscured it
with the denial of a Creation; I shall now sum up together the Effect of all I
have said before. That God in the Beginning Created all Essences of any
Generable and Corruptible things either in their Actualitys, or Potentialitys,
and all the Real Modalitys thereof whatsoever whereby they were made Generable
and Corruptible, and indeed every thing of them or in them that is Entitative
in any kind or manner whatsoever; that is, all the Simple Substances of Matter
and Spirits; Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive, which Subfist in
themselves, in their own Actualitys, which therefore in themselves are
Ingenerable and Incorruptible. But whereas they of the same Classis may be Mist
together, when they are so Mist, they all become one Mistum, which is the Thing
Generated, and Realy is another Something Different from them; but Actualy
Subsisting in them, which therefore was before Potentialy in them; that is, in
their Power to Produce it, and in its own Potentiality to be Produced out of
them; and the Form thereof is, that which I therefore call Forma Misti; as of
Stones, Metalls, Mules, and the like: and if they be of several Classes which
cannot be Mist, yet they may be Composited together; as indeed there is no
Mis^ion without some such Composition; for so the very Elementary Mista are
Composited with the Matter, and Vegetatives with them, and the like; and
therefore the Form thereof may be more rightly termed Forma Compositi. And as
this Forma Misti, or Compositi, is thus Generable or Corruptible, because it
does Subsist in the Simple Substances, and so may be Produced out of them
wherein it was Potentialy; and then it is Generated, and in its Actuality; or
Reduced again from it into its Potentiality, and so Corrupted: so also Simple
Accidents, which clearly were Created in and with their Simple Substances, as
Extension, Figure, Density, Rest, and the like, in and with the Matter; because
they also Subsist not in themselves, but in their Substances, they may be so
Altered and Varied by Generation and Corruption, as to be Produced out of their
Potentiality into Actuality, and Reduced from their Actuality to Potentiality
again: thus Heat and Cold, and the like, do sometimes Actualy Exist, and
sometimes do not, but are in their Potentialitys: and so also they may be Mist
or Composited, as Tepor, and the like: and all such Accidental Mist or
Composited Forms Subsist Immediately in one another, and all of them Mediately
or Immediately in their Substances. And this is that which I intend; wherein I
can not conceiv how any, who does not deny a Creation, can differ in the Thing,
but only about Terms; concerning which I must assign one Distinction, the want
whereof I suppose has much hindered the right understanding of the thing itself;
that is, between this Potentiality, which we all mention generaly, but more
strictly is to be restrained only to things Generable and Corruptible, whose
Simple Essences were before Created, as I have showed, in their Potentialitys;
and Possibility, which may be also of any thing Creable or Annihilable: For
though Possibility is not nor can not be Infinite, (because there can be no
other Infinite besides God, who always Actualy is; nor Notfinite, because there
can be no other Notfinite besides Nonentity, which always Actualy is not) yet
it is Properly Indefinite, and as boundless as Infinite Omnipotence, which only
can not Create another Infinite; and not such an Improperly Indefinite, as the
Dust of the Earth, and the like, which I formerly mentioned. But it is to be
distinguished from Potentiality, as that which has no manner of being in
Nature, neither Actualy, nor yet Potentialy; for then it should not be only
Possible, or Creable, which is yet in Notfinite Nonentity, and only may be
Caused to Be by Infinite Entity or Divine Omnipotence; whereas whatsoever is in
Natural Potentiality was Created in the Beginning, and may be Produced into
Actuality by the Finite Power of Natural Generation. Wherefore I conclude, that
whatsoever is in Natural Potentiality is Entitative, even while it is
Potential: because otherwise Generation and Corruption should either be Creation
and Annihilation, which is Impossible; or no Real Alterations, which is most
falls. But Divine Philosophy, which is only true and satisfactory, does lead us
back from the present Course of Natural Generation and Corruption to the
Original Institution thereof in the Six Days, and from thence to this first
Chaos of Potentialitys, and from thence to the Creation, and so terminates in
one Infinite Creator of all things Actual or Potential.

III. Thus Generation rightly understood is and must be always Univocal; that
is, not only of the same Name, but also Unigenous, or of the very same Nature.
But we must distinguish between the Generation itself, which I now Intend,
whereby any thing is Formaly Caused, or Intrinsecaly Generated in itself, and
the Generator, or Extrinsecal Efficient Cause, which indeed may be either
Equivocal, as when an Horse and Ass beget a Mule, and the like; as well as it
may also be Univocal in that respect, as when Horses beget an Horse, and Asses
beget an Ass, and the like: Yet in both these the Generation itself is Univocal
with itself; because it is, as I have showed, only the Production of something
out of its Essence into its Existence, which is most Unigenous; because the
Existence Produced is only the Existence of the Essence thereof, which was
Created by God with a Potentiality of Existence, and cannot be Annihilated by
Generation, but is only Altered thereby, being so Produced into the Actuality
of that which it was before Potentialy in itself; and so it is only its own
Existence of its own Essence; then which nothing can be more Univocal, or
Unigenous. But the Generator, only as an Extrinsecal Agent or Efficient, does
collect and concoct the Seed, Preparing and Predisposing it for the Generation,
and then deciding and casting it forth from it self, or containing it in
itself, as some other thing besides itself, and its own Individuality, as it is
said of Vegetatives, Cujus Semen seipsum Seminet; and so a Beast does contein
the Faetus in its Womb, cherishing and fostering it as a Fowl does an Egg
Excluded; and a Fowl does hatch Eggs by Incubation and the Heat of its own
Body; as Eggs of Fishes are cherished and fostered by the Heat of the Sun in
the Water, or as Seeds of Vegetatives in the Earth; which are no more more then
is performed by Egyptian Ovens, or Italian Capons: but the Seeds by their own
Plastical Virtue and Power do Effigiate, Compose, and Generate, themselves
Intrinsecaly, according to their own Species, and Individual Nature. And thus
Horses and Asses Generate Mules Equivocaly, no otherwise then Horses begett
Horses, and Asses Univocaly, by an Extrinsecal and Instrumental Causality,
which is like the Spear that wounded the pregnant Sow in the Spectaculum,
whereby she brought forth Pigs, and in some Generations, as of Sound, this
Instrumentality is Necessary. Only Univocal Generators are more Proper, and
more Natural and Efficacious, Efficients then Equivocal; and even some
Equivocal Generators as they are more Homoeogeneous are also more Instrumental
then others; but always the Generation itself, or Production of the Essence
into the Existence of the thing Generated, is most Univocal; and is not, nor
can not be Equivocal by Transpeciation, or any Transmutation, or Conversion of
one Essence into another, but only of the same Essence into Existence, for as
it is most true, Ex Nihilo Nihil fit, by any such Conversion of Nothing into
Something, which is Impossible, as I have showed; so, Nihil dat quod non habet,
is also as true and tantamount. And yet they who Deny the one can Affirm the
other, with the Addition of Fictitious Eminences, and Transcendent Potentiae,
or Creations by the Finite Power of Natural Generation instead of the true
Chaos, and Creation by the Infinite Power of a Divine Creator, who is indeed
the only true Eminent Cause. Nor do any of their Instances prove any such
Equivocal Generation in itself, but clearly disprove it. So when an Horse and
Ass beget a Mule, that Generation is as Conformable to the Mist Seeds of both
Parents, as when Horses beget Horses and Asses beget Asses. Only that Instance
affords this farther discovery, that the Seed of the Female Horse does
Contribute to the Generation, as well as the Seed of the Male Ass; because the
Mule is of a Species Mist of both. And the Burning Glass proves the Sun to be
Actualy Hott; which yet some deny, and so from one Falsity would prove another.
But their most common Instance of Conversion of Water into Air, and so
Reciprocaly, is very fond; for the Water is not Converted into Air, but only
Rarefied in itself, and then we call it Vapor; which Differs as much from Air,
as Air does from Ether or Ethereal Matter, as they term it, which I shall
show hereafter to be very Different.

IV. I shall now inquire generaly into the Manner, Method, or Process of Natural
Generation and Corruption, and how they are performed. All Generated
Substances, or Substantial Composita, are as I have said, Composed of Matter
and Spirits. Wherefore in their Substantial Generation there must first be
Matter, and a requisite Body thereof, which though it may be Rarefied, or
Densified, yet can not be Augmented, or Diminished, without a new Creation, or
Annihilation; which is beyond the Finite Power of Natural Generation and
Corruption. And as there must be such a Body of Matter, so also Spirit, and
such Spirits Subordinate or Coordinate as are Requisite according to the Law of
Nature, and of the particular Compositum. Also the Matter and the several
Material Spirits must Consubstantiate one another, that is, Sensitive
Vegetative and Vegetative Elementary and they the Matter being all Imperfect in
themselves, which can not otherwise be Generated; but the Human Spirit being a
Perfect Substance in itself, is only Composited; Also Coordinate Spirits of the
same Classis may be Mist together, as the Elements must always be so Mist;
which appears by the Mistion of their Qualitys as in Tepor and the like: whereas
Gravity, Heat, Plastical Virtue, and the like are not so Mist in
Consubstantiation. And as in Original, so also in Successive Generation the
Composition and Mistion must be such as does Produce the requisite Accidents
both of Matter, and Spirits into their Actualitys: without which their
Substances cannot Act, nor Appear to us, but are unto us, as if they were not,
and as in their first Chaos, Us^les, and Ineffectual. And this is carefully to
be observed by Chymis^s, and Physicians, and all such Operators; that there be
not only requisite Matter, and Spirits, Ingredient in their Compositions; but
also such a fit Mistion Internaly, and such Instrumental Causalitys Externaly,
as may Evoke and Actuate the Accidents or Affections thereof, without which they
will not Operate or Appear; and whereby their Operations and Appearances will
be very strangely and suddenly Altered, as I have said of Wine, and Spices,
which are Actualy Cold to the Touch, but Hott to the Taste; and so some may be
Cold to the Taste, which will afterward become Hott by farther Concoction in the
Stomach, and the like. Now this Union or Local Mistion of Matter and Spirits
must not only be per minima Corpuscula, but per omnia Puncta, though Maceration
and Comminution are indeed Degrees thereof, and Preparatory to Mistion, and
every Compositum being Macerated and Comminuted is thereby Prepared for
Corruption, and so for a new Generation; according to that general Maxim in
Nature, that Union does fortify, and Disunion weaken; not only Proportionably,
according to the respective Parts, but in the Whole. And so the more the
Maceration and Comminution is into less and less Particles, the more
Preparation is there for a new Generation, which is by Perfect Mistion, or
Adunation, and not by Aggregation only; because without such Adunation there is
no Generative Composition, nor indeed any Mistion, but a Local Separation, and
consequently no Compositum Generated, either Substantial, (for so a Mule must
be Perfectly Mist and Composed of an Equine and Asinine Substance, otherwise it
should consist of Indefinite Equine and Asinine Particles, which should not be
a Perfect Mule, but a greater Monster then any Poetical Hippocentaur, or
Hircocerv, (which is only half of one Kind, and half of another) or Accidental,
as of Contrary Qualitys, Heat, and Cold, and the like, whereof there can be no
Contemperature without such a Mistion; for such Qualitys are not like Passive
Affections of Matter having only Degrees in themselves, as Density, and Rarity,
Gravity, and Levity, and the like, but being also Active in their own Nature
would Naturaly Act to the utmost, and be most Intens in themselves, if they were
not either Violently Obstructed by some Contrarietys or Impediments, which by
their Nisus they also endeavor to overcome and break through, or Contemperated
by a Natural Mistion of their Contrary Qualitys per omnia in and by the
Primitive Generation thereof out of their Potentiality into Actuality by
Degrees; and which is their Natural Remission. For their Temperature must be by
a Perfect Union of both whereby neither has any Advantage over or against the
other, by being in the least Disunited, or having any private Sphere of
Activity in itself, for then it fights against the other to the utmost, as Fire
and Water, and the like: which if it were so in their Composition there should
never be any Natural and Continuing Contemperature thereby, but the most
Temperate Flesh should have only so many several Pricks, or Needles, of Intens
Heat, and Intense Cold, which would be rather a double Torture, then any
grateful Temperature. And so Lucretius his Meadow of Flowers, though at a
distance, through the Infirmity of Sight, it may represent one Confused Color,
yet Sensibly has so many several and distinct Colors: and so dry Powders of
Blew and Yellow being very finely Pulverisated and M^xt together by a close
Aggregation may appear Confusedly Greenish; which is only the same Infirmity of
Sight, and may be rectified by a Microscope: whereas Nature is certainly
Natural, that is, most Genuine, and Real, in all her Operations, and not, as
such Uncouth Opinions would render her, only External Violence, and Imposture.
And as there must be such a Local Union of Spirits per omnia Puncta of the Body
of Matter to Consubstantiate it and Appropriate it as a Particular Body for
itself, which otherwise could not be so Consubstantiated per omnia; so the
proper Union or Mistion of Spirits among themselves though it be Coextensively
per omnia, yet if it be not also Spiritual, that is Spiritualy Contemperated,
and Coadunated, the Generation will be Imperfect, and either Momentany, or
Meteorical. As if Cloth or Paper be wetted with Water, though there be a
notable Imbibition thereof by the Cloth or Paper, yet they are not Perfectly
Impregnated, and so there is no Perfect Generation; but they seem still to
remain Cloth, or Paper, and Water, severaly and distinctly in their own
Natures; and not to be Mist, into one Compositum: and yet that Imbibition is an
Inception thereof, so that when they are Perfectly Separated again by
Exiccation, and Evaporation, the Vapor which is a very Subtle and Intenerating
Menstruum, as I shall show hereafter, does Evoke and carry away with it some of
the Spirit of the Cloth, or Paper, Mist with it. But Oiled Paper seems to
have a farther Degree of Imbibition, and is not so easily Separable, and is
like Staining with Colorate Corpuscles, Liqued that are so Imbibed, which is of
a middle kind between Mingling of dry Colors and Dying in Grain. And there is a
Perfect Coextension or Local Union per omnia of Emanant Colors, which yet is
not Complete Generation, because their Substantial Spirits are not Localy
United, though the Emanant Qualitys are Localy Mist per omnia; as if Rays of
Light be Transmitted through a Blew and through a Yellow Glass so as they
Intersect and are thereby Localy Mist per omnia, there will be a Green
Generated by that Intersection; or if you hold the two Glasses Partly one over
the other against the Sun where they are Single they will appear Blew, and
Yellow, and where Double a very Orient and Smaragdine Green: and yet these
being Emanant Rays, belonging to their several Inherent Q^alitys, must
necessarily remain several; and only make a Local and Temporary Compositum of
the several Emanant Qualitys, while they are so Localy United per omnia. And
this Generation or Corruption is Instantaneous and without any Gradual Process;
for in the same Instant when the Blew and Yellow Rays are United, a Green is
thus Generated thereby, and when they are Disunited it is Corrupted: And so
some more Perfect Generations, which are not only Material and Local, but
Spiritual Compositions; as of Sounds, Magnetical Virtue, Life, and the like:
but there are in some others Inceptions, and several Successions, from the
Primitive Corruption to the Ultimate and Complete Generation, which Chemists
therefore call a Process: and again generaly according to the Process of
Generation so is the Process of Corruption; yet if the Extrinsecal Generator or
Corrupter be more Prepotent, it may Generate or Corrupt more strongly and
suddenly and also more, durably though some Compositae do require more Time and
will not be Generated, as such, in less Time, or by more Prepotent Generators;
as Fire does strongly and suddenly Generate and Corrupt generaly any Elementary
Composita, being the most Active Element, yet some will not be so Generated by
the Torrid Power thereof, but in more Time by a Calefactive and Gentle Heat, in
Baths, Horsdung, hott Sands, and the like. And in all Generations, which are
not Momentany (as that of Emanant Colors, and the like) there are first
Inceptions, and Embryons thereof, and so more and more Perfect Composita by
Degrees, in every Instant of the Process thereof, which if it be produced to the
Perfection of the Species, is Perfect, and otherwise more or less Meteorical
and Imperfect. But though Local Union only does not make a Perfect Generation
of the Compositum; which therefore is as suddenly Separable, as it is Miscible,
yet no perfect Generation can be without such a Local Union per omnia, as well
as Spiritual Unition, as I have said: and such a Generated Compositum as is by
both is not easily Separable, or Corruptible. And I desire that trial may be
farther made heerof, whether any Substances so Separable were ever so Generated
and Spiritualy Impregnated per omnia; (as Metal Corroded or dissolved by Aqua
fortis which will again return into its own Body, and perhaps was only
Comminuted and made more Fusile, but never Impregnated by the Aqua fortis)
which commonly appears by Alteration of the Density of the Body. But Flame
which is a most Momentany Substantial Compositum, as I shall show hereafter, is
a more Perfect Production of the Actual Fire out of the Potentiality of the
Fiery Vapor, and so seems continualy to be Corrupted and pass away with every
Individual part of the Fume. And I suppose Brine to be a Perfect Compositum of
Water and Salt, which can not be Praecipitated, nor Percolated, or the like.
And it appears plainly that they are so Mist per omnia by the former Experiment
of their Condensation, which can not Possibly be only by Aggregation or
Allocation. Nor can they be severed by any Filtration, though never so Subtle
and Powerful, as may be tried by Mint, Willow, or the like set in a Glass of
Brine, which will draw up both the Water and Salt together; and though by the
Vegetative Power and Plastical Virtue thereof it will afterward Excern and
Expume the Salt a while, yet it will be soon overcome and killd by it, as Salt
does generaly kill all Vegetatives (except some Seaweeds which require and
retein a Saltnes in themselves) if it be too strong, though a little Saltness,
and such as the Plastic Virtue can overcome and subordinate to itself, may
excite Vegetation both in the Earth and Seeds. Thus as Matter is
Consubstantiated with Elementary Spirits, and they one with another, so also
with Vegetatives, and they with Sensitives; and so certainly Vegetatives; might
be Mist one with another, as well as Sensitives are in a Mule and the like,
which are more Entire and Indivisible in themselves, and not so Miscible as
Vegetative Spirits, as I shall show hereafter: though they are none of them
Properly Indivisible like Immaterial Spirits, because they are Material and do
Immediately or Meditately Consubstantiate the Matter, which is Divisible. But
probably none of these Spirits are necessarily Engaged in any Particular Body
or part of Matter nor Confined unto it, but only Contained within the Universal
Body thereof, as I have said; because no Matter, which is equaly Indifferent to
all Spirits, and Receptive thereof, is so mutualy Engaged to them. Yet as
Elementary Spirits do require a several Density or Rarity of their Bodily
Composita (which they Form for themselves according to requisite Degrees of
Density and Rarity, though generaly without any Regular or Symmetrical Figures)
So Vegetative Spirits have a Plastike Virtue whereby they do also Regularly and
Symmetricaly Effigiate their own Bodies, and the Bodies of Sensitives whereunto
they are subordinate, and make them more Organical, as fit Officines, and
Instruments for those more Regular and Oeconomical Spirits (which Economy is
only Potential, and not Actual, until Generation.) And then, because they are
also very Vehement and Operative Spirits, and like Culinary Fire would soon be
Extinguished, they require a constant Fuel and Nutriment; yet that Nutriment is
not like the Fomes of Flame, which is only Fumus Accensus, and so the
Individuality of the Flame is continualy changed with the Individuality of the
Fume, but a subordinate Nutriment of Vegetative Spirits by Elementary, and of
Sensitive by Vegetative; which are so Subordinate one unto another, as I shall
show hereafter. And the Compositum, Vegetative, or Sensitive (which, as I have
said, is more Entire and Indivisible, as it is also more Oeconomical) remains
the same in its Oeconomical Individuality till it be corrupted: otherwise a
Tree, as an Oak, or the like, should be like Theseus his Ship, at last not the
same which it was at first; and so an old Beast should not Remember what he did
when he was young, if he should not continue Individualy the same. But though
the more Excremental Parts as Leaves, Flowers, Hairs, Nails, and the like do
often decay, and are as often renewed, and the more Integral Parts less, as
Pith, Bark, Flesh, and the Like; and the more Noble and Constituent Parts
least, as Root Wood, the Skeleton, Veins; Arterys, Nervs, Intestines, and
Organs; yet certainly the Individual Predominant Spirit Vegetative or
Sensitive, which Denominates the Compositum, and renders it Individual, does
remain until the Dissolution thereof. The Excess of Nutriment is turned into
Augment of all those Parts, and perhaps of the Spirit itself, which as it may
be Mist with other Heterogeneous Spirits, as in a Mule; so may also Unite with
more of its own Homogeneous Spirit, and be Augmented thereby, until it attein
its Acme. Nor is there Properly any Consistent State without any Growth or
Decay, as in a Square; but when the Growth ends the Decay begins, though more
like the Ascent and Descent of an Arch, then of an Isosceles; that is, most at
first and last, and least in the midst. The Excess of Nutriment and Augment
does Generate other Individuals of the same Species, and though Generation be
during Nutrition, and Nutrition during Augmentation, if the Nutriment be
Copious, and the Actual Virtue of the Spirit Vigorous, which can Concoct to all
those Degrees, and accordingly Decide what is requisite for those several Uses;
yet if otherwise a Beast or Tree be Penuriously Nourished, it will be Dwarfed,
or very little Augmented, and Generate less; because Nutrition is First and most
Necessary for the Individual Compositum, Augmentation Next and Less, and
Generation Last and Least. And indeed Nutrition and Augmentation, are, as other
Subordinate Generations, for the Preservation and Growth of the Individual
Compositum; and for the other, which is therefore more specialy called
Generation, because it is Coordinate and Specifical, for the Propagation of
another like Individual Compositum; which is by Collecting and Composing
another Specifical Spirit and Body into the Epitome of the Seed, which, as I
have said, by its own Intrinsecal Virtue does Intrinsecaly Generate itself, and
so becomes another Compositum in itself, Effigiating its own Body, and
Nourishing and Augmenting it, and afterward also Generating another by the
Plastike Virtue thereof, and other Internal Spiritual Powers, which God first
Created in and with the Spirits in the Beginning, and were afterward Actuated
and set in Order by the Divine Spirit, who was the Supernatural and Universal
Protoplastes of them all, as I have showed. And so they still continue in their
Successive Generations and Corruptions; wherein, though the Spirits and
Spiritual Qualitys be the chief Operators and Architects, yet the Matter is the
Body, and all the Accidents, and Affections thereof are accordingly Instrumental
therein: and so are also all Common Accidents; as Number, whereof the chief
Instrumentality is Unity, which does Fortify and reduce several Principles into
one Compositum Economy and Individuality. Nor indeed can I conceiv any other
Power to be in Number, which is only so many Units; and the very Multiplication
thereof or Duality is rather Instrumental in Corruption then in Generation. Also
Time is very requisite in the Process of Generation,, as I have showed. And so
likewise Extension; for no Body either Elementary, or Vegetative, or Sensitive,
can possibly be only a Point; which can not Exist severaly, And though every
Part or Particle of Water be Water, and the like, yet Organical Bodies must have
several Organs, or so many Members or less Corpuscles whereof the Whole must be
Composed; and that according to the Species thereof must be of some requisite
Magnitude; for though Oaks and less Trees may be of several S^zes, yet none of
them can be so small as some Herbs, and Grass; and so though there be Dogs of
very Different Bigness, yet none can be so little as a Mite, or some almost
Atomical Animals. Also Figure is very Instrumental heerin, as well as in
Mechanical Tools, or in the Body of an Army; where the Globus, or Orbicular
Figure, is for Safety round about, the Square Phalanx for Strength, the Cuneus
or Wedg to make Impressions, and the like. And so they and others are also
requisite in Nature and Natural Operations, especialy in Organical Composita
which require Bodies fit for such Operations, of Various Figures, and most
Symmetricaly Composed. And no Art of Statuary, or Painter, can so far Imitate
them as to endure the Criticism of a Microscope. And the whole Feature and
Beauty of Organical Bodies is only the Symmetrical Conformity of their Various
Figures. Porosity serves for Excerning, and thereby for Preservation of the
Compositum, and also for Corruption by more easy admission of any Dissolvent
or Menstruum, being a Partial Comminution or Dissolution of the Body in itself,
as Perfect Continuity does fortify. And therefore also Density does Preserv,
not only in Proportion to the Parts, but in the Whole, as it is more United in
itself and in all the Parts thereof: and has Proportionably more of the Spirit,
and more United. And as Maceration does weaken, so also Rarefaction. And every
Specifical Spirit does require a Body of a Proper Density or Rarity, whereof
there are Innumerable Degrees, and it can hardly be supposed that any two Bodies
of Spirits Specificaly Different are of the same Degree of Density exactly, but
either more or less. And as the Compositum is Varied by a new Predominating
Spirit, so the Density or Rarity of the Body thereof is Varied likewise: as may
appear by Impregnating, and Superimpregnating, and the like. And so likewise
Gravity and Levity and the Motion thereof to Station, but especialy the
Principal Motion to Union or Contact, are very Instrumental in Generation and
Corruption, as appears by the Local Union of Emanant Rays. Yet Matter and all
these Various Affections thereof are no Formal Causalitys of Spirits, or
Spiritual Qualitys, or of the whole Composita Consubstantiated and fitted
thereby, as I have showed. But when the Compositum is thus Composed M^terialy
and Spiritualy, and Invested and Instructed with all the requisite Accidents,
both of the Matter, and Spirits, then is the Generation thereof Perfected, and
then it does Appear and Operate, being thus Produced out of Potentiality into
Actuality with all the Furniture thereof, and so continues Naturaly until it be
again Corrupted. And so were the Original Composita Produced by the Divine
Spirit in the Six Days, and have ever since, and still do continue according to
that Instituted Course of Nature; From which when God himself does Vary, it is
Miraculous, and when Nature does Aberr, it is Monstrous: and yet even those
particular Monstrositys are generaly Comprehended within this Universal Law of
Generation and Corruption; as all Equivocal Productions, and the like; being
otherwise generaly Conformable thereunto, as I have showed. And as Nature does
only work by those Ingenerable and Incorruptible Principles, Powers, and
Virtues, which God first Created in the Beginning, and then set in Order in the
Six Days; so Art can only work by Application of these Natural Principles,
Powers, and Virtues, which is also Monstrous and Disorderly in respect of the
Constant Course of Nature that was Produced in the Six Days, though it be
according to the Nature of Intellectives, and Sensitives, being External
Operators, so Ingeniously and Artificialy to Apply them, by their Natural Wit
and Art, which is something more Divine, and more like to the Operation of the
Divine Spirit, even thus by Disordering to Order and Improve Nature for their
own Use and Service. But neither Nature, nor Art, can work Miracles, much less
Create, or Annihilate, any thing. Nor has God himself ever since Created any
new thing Generable and Corruptible, nor ever wrought any such Miracles, or
added any thing to the Chaos, o^ Elementary World, which he first Created in
the Beginning, and Made in the Six Days, as I have showed, and then Rested from
all that Work of such Improper Creation. Nor probably will he ever Annihilate
any thing thereof, more then of Superaether, or the Intelligences; though the
first Chaos may afterward become an everlasting Gehenna, and many present
Actualitys be for ever Reduced into Potentiality. However the Created Essences
shall remain Eternaly for the Eternal manifestation of the same Divine Glory:
as the Wise man has said, I know that whatso^ver God does shall be for ever;
Nothing can be putt unto it, nor any thing taken from it.

V. Now as the Divine Spirit did thus Prepare and Predispose the Chaos, and out
of it Produce the whole Frame and Course of Na^ural Generation and Corruption,
so I shall from the Review thereof Deduce the whole Scale and Order of all
Generable and Corruptible Natures. Whereof Matter is the Lowest, which is the
Common Body of all such Spirits as do Consubstantiate it, Immediately, or
Mediately, and Mansion of others which do only Inhabit it. And no Matter can be
without some Spirit Consubstantiating it, being only an Imperfect Substance in
itself, and therefore in the Beginning had a Superaethereal Spirit to
Consubstantiate the Superaethereal Body of Matter, whence it is Denominated
Heaven, as well as Ether and Air, and therefore also Superaether, though it be
not Elementary yet is of the same Classis, because it does Immediately
Consubstantiate the Matter, as well as Elementary. But though the Matter can
not be without some Material Spirit so Consubstantiating it, yet, as I said,
they are not Engaged to any particular Matter but may Remove from one part of
Matter to another, as Matter may from one Place to another in the Universal
Body thereof; and clearly Immaterial Spirits, which do not Consubstantiate the
Matter, need no Consubstantiation by it, and may be in this or that Extension
of the Matter, but can not pass beyond it into any Imaginary Inanity, or
Nonentity; because they also are Entitys; and within one and the same Universal
Province and Law thereof. Much less can any Matter wander beyond the Utmost
Limits of itself which is the Circumferential Superficies of the Highest Orb
thereof, beyond which it can not Ascend, as it can not Descend below the Center.
Wherefore that Fansy of Lucretius is very Futile and Vain, that if an Arrow
were shot forth beyond that Circumference it would fly forward Perpetualy; for
then it must always Ascend from the Center of the World, and never attein any
other Center of Rest; which is most contrary to the Law of Motion to Station;
and also might Exist, Localy beyond the Universal Extension of the whole Body
of the World, and be another less World or Univers in itself, which is most
contrary to the Law of Motion to Union; whereby, as I have said, the whole Body
of Matter is Naturaly Constituted such an Orbicular Body, by such a Perfect
Circumference and Center, and is not Protuberant in any Part of itself or other
then a most exact Globe, because that is the most United Figure, whereunto the
most Universal Law of Union does Oblige the whole Matter thereof: and even
Spirits themselves do Exist only within the Universal Coextension and Locality;
because beyond it there is no Place, or Ubi, or Entity, wherein they may Possibly
Exist; for as they have no Extension of themselves, so also no Place, or Vbi,
whatsoever, but only in the Extension and Body of Matter, whereof, and wherein,
they are Such Active and Operative Substances and Spirits. The next in this
Scale of Nature are the four Elements; Ether, Air, Water, and Earth; which
none can deny to be, and I shall now prove them to be Elements, when I have
first explained the Term, which will plainly Elucidate the Thing: and I shall
do it Exemplarily by Matter itself, which is indeed the most Common Element, or
Praeelement thereof, and Immediately Consubstantiated by them, and the
Superaetheral Spirit: and so Matter is their first Body, or Element, which is
the true Notion of an Element; and so I intend it to be a Natural Substratum of
some other Superior and more Active Substance, and which may be so Composited
or United with it, as a Body with a Spirit but not that the Spirit is Produced
out of any Potentia, or Equivocal Causality thereof, which I have already
s^fficiently refuted; or that it is Generated thereby more then the Body is
Generated by the Spirit; but that both are Composited or United Naturaly
together in^o one Compositum, which is the very Generation thereof. And these
four Elements are commonly so called in respect of the Superior Spirits,
whereof they, with the Matter, become a Second Matter, or Prepared Body thereof,
as the Matter was of them, for they only, and the Superaethereal Spirit, can
Immediately Inform the Matter, and the Superior Spirits only Mediately by them,
and so one by another, according to their Classes and Ranks in the Scale of
Nature, as I shall now show. And though any one Elementary Spirit might
Consubstantiate the Matter in the first Chaos, as well as the Superaethereal
Spirit, yet until they were all Prepared and Predisposed by the Divine Spirit,
and fitly Mist together in the Three first Days, no Vegetative or other
Superior Spirit could be Produced, or Inform any one of them alone, and also
the Matter; because not any one of them alone together with the Matter is a fit
Body of the Superior Spirits, more then the Superaether, which is
Superelementary, and no such Elementary Body of any other Spirit whatsoever.
But these Four Elements must be all Mist together as they were in the Three
first Days, and never since were, nor shall be, until the Dissolution of the
World, wholly Unmist and Separate, as they were in the first Chaos; though that
Mistion is and must be Varied by continual Generation and Corruption, to make
them more particularly fit Bodies for the several Superior Spirits, whereof
probably every Species does require a Various Mistion, as well as some Variation
of the Figure and Density of the Matter, which is so Varied by the Various
Mistion of these Elementary Spirits. Now that they are four such Elements as I
have described, does plainly appear by their Denominations in the first Chaos,
and their orderly Preparation in the Three first Days, for the Production of
the Superior Spirits, Vegetative, and Sensitive; which I shall more fully
discover in my ensuing Discourses thereof. And as I have proved that they are
not only Matte^, nor any Diversifications thereof; but do so diversify the
Matter, as their Body for themselves; (and much less are they Produced out of
any Potentia of the Matter) so also are the Superior Spirits no
Diversifications of them, but do so Diversify them for themselves in their
Various Mistions. By all which precedent Discourses I have sufficiently proved
that there are such Inferior Substances and Spirits which are the Bodies or
Elements of the Superior, otherwise all Material Spirits should only be Matter,
or they should be without their Bodies, and consequently Immaterial: wherefore
if they have such Bodies, and yet are not the same with those Bodies, then
plainly they are the Spirits, or more Active and Operative Substances which
Inform or Inspirit those Bodies, and Reside, and Operate therein, as their
Domicils, and Officines; which I therefore call their Element or Subordinate,
and Preparatory Substance, or Elementary Principle, of the Compositum, which
together with the Predominant Spirit thereof does Constitute it such a
Compositum as it is: by which Composition and Constitution it is Generated, and
so Denominated by the Predominant Spirit thereof to be of this or that Classis
in the Scale of Nature. And this is all that I intend by Element generaly; and
whosoever frames any other Notion thereof, may thereby doubt and dispute it, and
fight with his own shadow; though more particularly we call these first and
lowest Spirits which Immediately Consubstantiate the Matter Elementary, and so
the four Elements; because they are the first and lowest of Spirits, and the
first Elements thereof. And sensibly in all Dissolutions of any Material
Composita, as we may still deprehend Matter, which is the Praeelement of all
others, so also these four Elements, which can not now Naturaly Exist Pure, as
they did in the first Chaos, though we call them this or that Element, as any
of them is more Predominant. And so in the Carcass of any Beast, when it is
dead, yet there may be still some other Spirits remaining, but most apparently
the Elementary; and so in the Trunk of a dead Tree, or Timber, or the like: and
there is not only one, but all Four, which also do always remain in all
Chemical Separations whatsoever; so that the Caput Mortuum is not only Matter,
or only one Element, as in the first Chao^, nor their Spirits, as they term
them, only Spirits, but also Corporeal Matter, and all the four Elements, and
having some Various Mistion thereof, whereby any Caput Mortuum still differs
notably from others, and any such Chemical Spirit from others; which could not
be if they were most Simple Substances in themselves, or Matter, and only one
Spirit, which would make only one Compositum thereof, not Specificaly Different
from others. Nor is it Possible for any Art, or any Power of Nature (according
to the present State thereof which was first Instituted by God) to Separate
these four Elements one from another; though they are and may be Variously
Mist one with another, as also it is not Possible to destroy their four great
Elementary Bodies, Ae^her, Air, Water, an^ Earth, in the whole; which though
they are also Mist one with another, (and so Denominated from the Predomination
of every one severaly in those general Bodies) yet that Predomination of their
Elementary Spirit is so notable, and their vast Bodies so notorious, that they
do Ocularly declare to every Ey their four Elementary Natures, and also that
they are the Common Elements, and Prepared Bodies of all Superior Spirits,
within this Elementary Orb, which they wholly divide among themselves, and are
the great Storehouses and Stocks of Nature, from which all Elementary Bodies
were borrowed, and to which the Inferior do return again. And accordingly they
are as four several Provinces, Variously Inhabited and Furnished with all the
Composita, Stars, Vapors, and Meteors, Fishes, Beasts, and the like, and
Situated according to the Predominance of their proper Elementary Bodies, and
requisite Station thereof in several Spheres one above another, so as no
Planetical Orbs are. And here I must also observe from my Text, that there are
only four such Elements, and no more (nor any such several Kinds of them, or
of any of them; as is expressly said of Vegetatives, and Sensitives, as I shall
show hereafter.) And therefore we have no mention of Stones, Metalls, and the
like, in this History of the Creation, as of several Elementary Kinds, because
they are only several Composita of these four Elements. Wherefore we must also
understand that there are not only four first Qualitys of these four first
Elements, as some have supposed, which could never make so many and so very
Different Sorts of Elementary Composita, as there are in Nature; nor yet may we
assign to any one Element besides its own Proper first Quality some other
Social Quality of another Element in a more Remiss Degree, as to Ae^her or Fire
besides Heat Intens, Drines Remiss: for no Spirit whatsoever has any Proper
Spiritual Quality of another Spirit either Intens or Remiss; of and in itself,
because every such Spiritual Substance is a Proper Spirit in itself, and has
its own Proper Qualitys Differing Specificaly, (besides such as are Genericaly
Common to the same Genus) whereby only we know it to be what it is; and thus,
unles we should affirm Ether, or Fire, to be also Earth, we can not assign
any Drines to it, as any Proper Quality Subsisting in it, and flowing from it;
and certainly it is no Affection of the Matter, as Extension, Figure, Density,
Gravity, Motion, or the like, which may be Common to Spirits in respect of
their Bodies: Also if it were a Proper Quality of any other Spirit it should not
be Remiss, but most Intens; for every such Spirit Naturaly Acts to the utmost,
and there is nothing in itself to hinder it, because no Nature does Obstruct or
Restrain its own Operations, unles it be Spontaneous (for that indeed is an
Effect of Spontaneity) nor does Heat Naturaly hinder Drines, but should rather
Advance and Assist it, as all Qualitys of the same Spirit are generaly
Assistant one to another; and so indeed may the Accidents of several
Substances, as of Matter and Spirits, be Analogous, and of several Spirits,
Homoeogeneous; though they be not Homogeneous, as I shall show hereafter: and
thus Drines is more Concordant with Heat then with Cold, which is Contrary to
Heat; though neither of them be any Proper Qualitys of the same Spirit of
Ether, or Fire, but of other Elements: nor does Heat Properly or Directly Dry
more then Moisten, but only Consequentialy, as I shall also show hereafter. But
they who can affirm all the Elementary Spirits to be Educed out of the Potentia
of Matter, and that one Element may be Transpeciated or Converted into another,
may also affirm what they pleas of their Qualitys, and transfer them from one
to another: which Suzugy of Qualitys they have also Invented, as they suppose
to Reconcile and Mediate between Contrary Qualitys; though they be not any
Degrees of either of them, but Proper Qualitys in themselves, and Accidents of
other Substantial Spirits: nor does that Contrariety of Qualitys need any such
Mediation, being Produced by Degrees out of their Potentialitys, which are not
Contrary Actualy, or otherwise Mist by Degrees into their Actual
Contemperature. The Ignorance of which Doctrine of the Chaos, and the
Potentialitys thereof, and the Imaginary Supposition of such a Potentia of the
Matter, out of which not only Existences, but the very Essences both of
Accidents, and also Substances, may be Educed, by Equivocal Causalitys,
Transpeciations, and such new kinds of Creation, and Annihilation, as men have
pleased to Invent, instead of the true Creation, and Chaos, which God has
Made, and Revealed to us, has been the Fundamental Error, and Root of all the
Consequential Absurditys. But yet while they thus Grope in the Dark, they Catch
at some Shadows of Truth; as plainly their Potentia does allude to the Doctrine
of Potentialitys, and is Substituted instead thereof: and so this Supposition of
several Different Qualitys in the same Substance does partly Intimate another
great Mystery in Nature, which I shall now discover and unfold; that is, That
indeed there are several Qualitys also Created Essentialy in one and the same
Substance, Proper to itself, and so subsisting in it, and flowing from it, as I
have already declared concerning Matter and the Affections thereof; not only
Mediately, as Figure from Extension, and Gravity from Density, and the like,
(which are only several and Realy distinct Products or Propertys of the same
Qualitys) but as others Immediately Subsisting in, and flowing from it; as
Extension, and Density, which are not such several Propertys one of another,
for so the same Orbicular or Cubical Extension and Figure may be either Dens or
Rare, Grave or Ligh^, and the same Density or Rarity, Gravity or Levity, may be
of any Extension or Figure whatsoever; and they are not concerned otherwise one
in another, but only as they are Social Qualitys of the same Substance: so as
every Extension or Figure must have some Density, and all Density some
Extension and Figure Indefinitely. And thus in the Ether there is not only
Heat, but also Light, and Planetary or Circular Motion, and perhaps several
other Principles of Influential Virtues and Qualitys not only proceeding one
from another, as Particular Propertys, but Immediately Subsisting in, and
flowing from the Ae^hereal Substance; and so Cold, and some Active Principle of
Sound, and others, in Air; Moisture and some Active Principles of Odor, and
Sapor, and others, in Water; Drines, Opacity, Consistence, and Magnetike
Polarity, and others, in Earth: as certainly we all know that there are such
Various Virtues in Vegetative and Sensitive Spirits. Of all which I shall
Discourse hereafter, and now only observe that of these, and the Various Mistures
and Temperatures thereof, all the Elementary Composita, like so many
Arithmetical Changes, are Compounded, which therefore are not mentioned in this
History of the Creation; because they are only Compounded of such other Simple
Essences before mentioned, and not of any new Essence Created in the Beginning,
and not before mentioned, as Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirits, and the
particular Sydereous Spirits: whereas all Sulphurous, Mercurial, Saline,
Sanguineous, Bilious, Phlegmatike, Oleous, Saxeous, Vitreous, Ligneous,
Carneous, Coriaceous, Osseous, Corneous, and many other such Elementary
Q^alitys, are not Simple in themselves, but Compounded of others, which are
such, and were the first Created Essences, and Principles thereof. And if we
could Investigate and find out all those Simple Qualitys (whereof very many are
still Occult to us) none of these Compound Qualitys could be any longer Occult.
And yet many Curious and Chemical Wits, because they will not freely acknowledge
their own, which yet indeed is Human Ignorance, and Common to us all, will also
Substitute as Simple Principles, such Compound Qualitys of Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury, though others among themselves not satisfied heerwith do also assign
many more of the rest; and yet none of them all are Principles or Simple
Essences, but only Compounds, and Decompounds of others, or one of another. And
the last Chemical Separation that can be made, Sensibly will be only a
Reduction to the four first Elements, that is, to something wher^n one of them
is most Predominant, as in their four great Elementary Bodies; though like them
they can never be Perfectly Unmist and Separated. Thus Sulphur is as Fire,
Predominant in the Composition thereof, Mercury as Water, and Sal as Earth; but
because Air is the most Insensible of all Elements, therefore they have not
observed it among the rest in their Separations, nor in this or any other of
their Distributions: so that if we should wholly trust to Chemists, we might
even lose one of the four Elements; though they are to be commended heerin
that they have not assigned or set up Mercury Volant, which is only a Vapor,
instead of it. Also like Air there are many other Simple Essences of Elementary
Qualitys, which in their Mistion with others do not Sensibly so betray
themselves, as those which they call the four first Qualitys, and yet
Philosophers have found out the Sent of some of them, as Opacity, Magnetical
Virtue, and the like; which I shall endeavor to prosecute and promote as far
as I may in some previous Essays, and so recommend the more Curious Search
thereof unto others, as one of the greatest Desiderata in Philosophy: and now
proceed farther. As Elements are the Second Matter, or Prepared Body of
Vegetatives, so are they also of Sensitives, as a Third Matter, or Prepared
Body thereof; and so Sensitives do Comprehend Subordinately in their Composition
Vegetatives Immediately, and Mediately the Elementary Spirits, and by them more
Mediately the Matter, and Vegetatives Immediately the Elementary Spirits, and
Mediately the Matter, and Elementary Spirits Immediately the Matter; but not
Convertibly; nor are any of the Superior Educed out of the Potentia of the
Inferior, because they are Superior, but only Subordinate them unto themselves,
as I have said. And as Elementary Spirits require several Diversifications of
the Matter to make fit Bodies thereof for themselves, and accordingly diversifie
it by their own Architecture, so do Vegetative Spirits both it and the
Elementary Bodies, and so Effigiate it, and Temper them, for their own Proper
Use, as I have said. And I suppose all Plastike Virtue to be from these
Inferior Spirits; that is, Inorganical from Elementary, and Organical from
Vegetative: and though the Sensitive Spirits do Predominate and may Govern
them, yet that is in another and higher manner by Sponta^eous Perception and
Appetite, as Living Souls; and their Plastike Virtue is of a Mechanike and
another more Vital Kind, that is, Artificial and I^genious: and so that they
are not Architects of their own Bodies, as has been supposed by others, but of
their Cells, Nests, Houses, and the like Artificial Habitations: for if a Beast
first Live the Life of a Plant, then certainly the Sensitive Spirit, which does
not yet Live and Operate does not Fabricate the Curious Structure of its own
Embryonical Body. Also all Sensitive Operations are with Sensation, that is,
Perception and Appetite; but we do not so Sens the daily Concoction, Nutrition,
and A^gmentation of our own Bodies, nor Formation of Seed therein; and therefore
it is not the Proper Work of the Sensitive Spirit, but of the Vegetative, which
is apparently Plastical in itself, and Forms its own Body Organicaly, as in
Trees, Herbs, and Grass, nor has any one Spirit in itself the Proper Qualitys
of another. And though Elementary Spirits are Definitely Four and no more, yet
these Vegetative and also Sensitive Spirits, are Indefinite; and it is so said
of them, that they were brought forth after their kinds Indefinitely, and so
all these Species of Beasts and Fowls were preserved in the Ark, and can not be
Multiplied, nor shall be Diminished. Nor are there only such several Spirits of
Trees, Herbs, Grass, and of every Species of them, which by a Proper Plastical
Virtue Created in and with them by God do severaly Effigiate their Proper
Bodies, and the Organism thereof, but also Proper Subordinate Vegetative Spirits
of Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, and of every Species of them, which does so
Effig^ate their Proper Bodies, and the Organism thereof: Yet as the Vegetative
Spirits are not also Elementary, nor do, nor indeed can, contein the Contrary
Qualitys thereof in themselves, so neither do Sensitive contein in themselves
Vegetative and their Facultys, though they are Compounded with their several
and Proper Vegetative Spirits which Organize their Sensitive Bodies, and which I
suppose can not be so Organized by the same Plastike Virtue of any T^ee, Herb,
or Grass, which is Proper to the Spirit thereof, and would only make it to be of
that Shape and Substance. And co^seq^ently I conceiv that there is also a
Proper Mi^tion and Temperature of the Elementary Spirits and Qualitys, which is
so Subordinate and Sub^ervient to the Sensitive Spirit, and that they are all
Consubstantiated together in and with the Matter in the Sensitive Compositum.
And lastly, a Proper Sensitive Body thus Prepared is a fourth Matter or Body,
of the Intellective Spirit of Man; and the Body of Adam, into which God first
Inspired his Human Spirit, was such, and more then a Statue of Clay, as is
commonly supposed. And this Spirit of Man thus Inspired is of another and far
Different Kind from all the former, which were not Inspired into, but Educed
out of the Inferior Bodies thereof; nor is it so Consubstantiated with them as
Material Spirits, because it is Immaterial, and a Perfect Substance in itself,
which needs no such Consubstantiation, but like an Angelical Spirit can also
live and Operate Separately. Nor yet does it only Possess a Body as an Angel
may; but has a Natural Union and Composition with it, and does Naturaly
Inspirit or Inform it, that is, Live, and Operate in it as in a fit^ Domicil
and Officine in this Conjunct State; and Predominate and Govern it, as a Master
in a Ship. All which I shall more particularly declare hereafter, having now
generaly treated thereof only to discover and describe this Scale of Nature, as
God did first Erect it, and as it still stan^eth, whose Basis is the Matter,
and whose Acme the Intellective Spirit; wherein Man also is Coordinate with the
Immaterial and Separate Spirits of Angels. And so all Created Nature is not
only Localy but Politicaly United, that is, all Coordinate, except Angelical
and Human Spirits, may be properly Mist, but Subordinate, except Angels, only
Composited together, but not Confounded, either by Transpeciation of one
Species into another, or Production of one out of another, as some have
supposed; nor, by Middle Natures, or Participles, as they call them, partaking
of the Natures of several Classes, which is more Monstrous and Anomalous then
the Generation of Mules, and the like, which are only of one and the same
Classis, though of two Confused Species therein; but every one is in itself
either Spirit, or not Spirit, as all Elementary, and other Material Spirits;
Vegetative, or Not Vegetative, as Moss and the like; Sensitive, or not
Sensitive, as all Plantanimals, Intellective, or not Intellective, as Idiots,
Lunatiks, or other Human Monsters: though there be such Compositions and
Subordinations Classes and Hosts of them all, and of one unto and with another,
as I have declared; and as Moses has concluded this History of the Creation,
Thus the Heavens and Earth were Finished, and all the Hosts of them.

VI. And yet some, who will not so understand it, seem to deny any such Scale
and Order of Nature, and any such Economy and Polity thereof; because they also
deny those very Natural Principles, Powers, and Virtues, which God has
Immediately Created, and Imprinted therein; since they can Educe no such things
from the rude Matter, nor indeed does any such Wisdom or Will appear to be
Actively in any Inferior Natures which are neither Sensitive, or Intellective;
nor yet does it proceed from the Sensitive, and Intellective Facultys in the
Superior Natures, nor is it in the Universal Nature of them all, and therefore
they laugh at all such Expressions, as that Nature intends the Best,
Affects Union, Abhors Vacuity, and the like: and I suppose no man so void
of of Sens and Intellect as to conceiv it capable thereof, but when we see and
must acknowledge such Analogous Effects therein, we must ascribe them to some
Analogous Causalitys, and express them by such Analogous Expressions, which is
all that is Intended thereby; that is, that God has so Ordered, Compaginated,
and as the Apostle says, Catartis^d, Nature, that it does Naturaly Cause the
same Effects, and indeed more Powerful and Political, then our Intellective and
all the Sensitive Spirits therein can Cause and Produce. And that God does not so
Cause these wonderful Effects Immediately by himself as he does Supernaturaly
Conserv all things which he has Created, Upholding them by the same Word of
his Power; but Mediately by Natural Principles, Powers and Virtues, which he
who is Infinitely Powerful and Wise, so Immediately first Created and Imprinted
in Nature, and thus set it in Order in the Six Days, whereby it does and shall
so continue in itself until the last Dissolution thereof, to Cause and Produce
such Effects; which certainly as none can deny them Realy to be such, so unles
he ascribe them unto the Immediate Power and Wisdom of God himself, and so only
to such a Continued Creation without any other Natural Causation (whereas he
says, he Rested from all these Works which he had thus made and set in Order
in the Six Days) he must acknowledge them to be also Natural and Created
Causalitys then Produced and Actuated, (which indeed were the very Works of all
the Six Days) because ever since there are manifestly such Effects, and
therefore there must necessarily be some Causes thereof, either Supernatural or
Natural; for such Order, Economy and Polity can not be reasonably supposed to
be Casual, because it is, not only most Regular, but also most Constant (which
yet Epicurus, who was more Rational and true to his own Principles, did affirm)
but must be either, as some others affirm, by such Immediate Divine Causation,
which does render all Philosophy (which is the Study of Nature and Natural
Causes and Effects) Vain and Impertinent: Or otherwise it must be by such
Natural Principles, Powers, and Virtues, as we have: as I have declared and
proved to have been so Created and Instituted; and this indeed is that which we
call Nature, Subsisting in all the Particular Natures, which do Particularly so
Concur and Cooperate therein; not the^^^^ any such Active Wisdom or Will in
themselves, but by the^^ (...) Natural Principles, Powers, and Virtues, which
God, who Crea^^d and Imprinted them severaly and Particularly, did also so
Coordinate and Direct Relatively and Maturely one toward another as that they
should so Concur and Cooperate to the Universal Good, Safety, and Beauty of
one another, and of them all, and consequently of this Universal Nature. As an
Artist who makes a Clock or Watch, or the like, so frames the Wheels and Parts
thereof, and so setts them together, and so applys the Weight or Spring
thereunto, that they shall all Cooperate and Complete the Engine, for that Use,
and the Production of that Effect, which he had Designed: and as Art, which is
the Nature of Man, does thus work by Artificial and External Application of
Natural and Internal Principles, Powers, and Virtues, so does Nature, which is
the Art of God, Act and Effect the like, and more Curious Engines, who^ by
them, Naturaly and Internaly: whereby not only the Weight or Spring, but also
the very Plastical Figuration, Gravity, Motion, and mutual Application, is so
Caused and Produced, though without any such Artificial Wisdom, or Will, in
any Automatous Compositum, more then in the Clock or Watch itself, but by
Created Impressions in the one Naturaly and Intrinsecaly as the others are so
Effected by Violent and Extrinsecal Application of that which is Natural in
itself. And yet they who can affirm Sensation, and perhaps Intellection itself,
to be only Motions of the Matter, might also, if they pleased, ascribe thereunto
Sens and Intellect, (as some have affirmed Elementary Natures to be Sensitive)
which would not only satisfy their Doubt heerin, but also confirm their Opinion
of the other, though both be equaly Falls, and most contrary to all Sens, and
Intellect. And this acknowledged and agreed want of any such Wisdom and Will
in Nature, which yet does Produce such undeniable Effects, does most Sensibly
and Intelligibly prove a most Wise, and Willing, First Cause, that is, God, who,
as I have already proved, that he Created all things out of Nothing in the
Beginning by his Infinite Power, so he also both Created them in their first
Chaos, and afterward Ordered them in the Six Days, and so Catartised the whole
Frame of Nature with such Polity and Economy, as does Invincibly prove his
Creating Wisdom, and Will, by these Created Effects thereof, which are so
Naturaly Produced by Nature, as it is Gods Creature, Artifice, and Engine; and
yet itself has neither Wisdom, nor Will Actively, as Intelligent Creatures
have in themselves. And thus the rude Matter which of all others has least
thereof, yet has thus Naturaly in itself Motion to Union, and also to Station,
and thereby does Naturaly cast the whole Body thereof into a Perfect Orb, which
is the most United, Uniform, and Capacious Figure; which also every Particular
Body thereof does Affect and Endeavor as far as it can, and does Place all the
Particular Bodies in their due Position. And if Matter may Act thus Politicaly
without any Policy in itself, Why may not also Material Spirits, which are more
Spiritual and Active, have their Particular Plastical Virtues, whereby they may
also Effigiate their Bodies in fit and requisite Figures for themselves,
Inorganicaly, or Organicaly, and Oeconomicaly, though they have no Oeconomical
Wisdom, or Will, in themselves. And even in Sensitives the same Effects are
Produced without their Sentiment, and so ^et Man, who Comprehends all these
Inferior Natures in himself, consider his own Body; and whether he does Cause
and Order the Introduction of his Finger to Union, or the Falling down of his
Body through the Air to Station, or can hinder them with all his Sens, and
Intellect, or whether therewith and thereby he does Plasticaly Figurate and
Effigiate all his Members, or can add a Cubit to his Stature, or does so
perform those most Curious and Chemical Works of Nutrition, Augmentation,
Sanguification, Seminification, and the like. And this Polity and Economy is
not Proper to any one Nature, but is Particularly in every one, and Universaly
in all, which are not only Subordinate, but do accordingly Communicate one with
another. Thus every Individual Nature is a Compositum of more or less
Principles or Parts, and more or less Oeconomicaly Composed, and Ordered,
according to the Particular Nature and Orb thereof, which is heerin a Module of
the great Orb of the Univers. So also all Specifical Natures, which are
Homogeneous, do Comply and Consort together and open their Bodies one to
another, and so also Generate one another, and there is some Accord, though
less among Homaeogeneous, and as we say, Par Pari; and there are certain
Analogys and Confederacys between Heterogeneous; yea even Advers and Contrary
Natures do thus Conspire together for the Common Good, as Rest and Motion to
Union, which may be Upward, and to Station which is downward, and so Heat and
Cold, Moisture and Drines, do all make a fit Temperature for all Elementary,
as well as Vegetative, and Sensitive Composita. And their own Proper Qualitys
can not Actualy Exist without such Temperature of and with the rest; which is
their Political Perfection, though the others be their own Proper and Private
Perfections. and therefore in the Chaos, though the Elementary Spirits did then
accordingly Constitute the Matter of their Four great Bodies by requisite
Proportions of Extension, Spherical, and Globular Figures, Density, Rarity, and
their several Stations, and the like; yet they could not Actualy Produce their
own Heat, Cold, Moisture, Drines, and their other Active Qualitys, before they
were Prepared and Predisposed by the Divine Spirit with fit Mistions and
Contemperations; nor could they, or can they, yet Exist in their utmost
Vehemence and Intension, without such Contemperation (which as I have said is
most wonderfully Produced by Degrees out of their Potentialitys into such Mist
and Contemperate Actualitys, more Naturaly then by their Actual Extremitys,
which Violently Oppugn one another, and thereby endeavor to destroy one
another) and Such Actual Concertation and Oppugnation, which at last does
destroy one or both of them; as Flame, which is almost continualy Incensed and
Extinguished, and the like: and yet these Contrary Qualitys of the Elementary
Spirits are thus Naturaly Miscible, whereas the Proper Accidents or Affections
of any Substances of Different Classes are not nor can not be so M^st in their
Consubstantiated Composita. As in a Sensitive Compositum the Extension, Figure,
Density, Gravity, Motion, and the like Affections of the M^tter are not so Mist
with any of the Spiritual Qualitys; though they are United or Composited in the
whole Compositum. Nor the Elementary Qualitys with the Vegetative, nor the
Vegetative with the Sensitive, but as their Substances are of several Classes,
which can not be so Mist as they of the same Classis, though Composed together,
so they continue several in themselves, though they mutualy Contribute and
Cooperate in the whole, because they Subsist in their own several Substances.
And because Individual and Specifical Natures do thus Confederate, therefore
there is also such a Polity and Economy of the Universal Nature which does
Subsist in them all; and not only a Scale of Degrees, whereof I discoursed
before, but a Republike of all the Cives and Societys thereof. And as Beauty,
Virtue, Piety, and their Symmetrical and Conformable Excellencys, are the most
Excellent things in Nature, so is this Polity, and Economy, the Strength,
Goodness, and Glory thereof. Wherefore as he is no very good Anatomist, who
though he may know all the several Members, Parts, and Particles, of the Body
as they are in themselves, yet knows nothing De Usu Partium, and the whole
Composition, Cooperation, and Benefits thereof; so he is no good Philosopher,
who though he could know all the Atoms, and Corpuscles of Matter, and all
Spirits, and Substances, and all their Accidents, and Affections, and the very
Essences both of Substances, and Accidents; as well as their Existences,
severaly, as they are in themselves, yet knows not, or rather will not know
any thing of their Mutual Union, Analogy, Confederacy, Cooperation, Economy,
and Polity, and all the Benefits and Advantages thereof, which God has Created
in and with this Republike of Entitys, which we call Nature; and so Nature does
accordingly Effect, not only for his own Use and Service, but also for his
Contemplation; whereby he does neither acknowledge God to be the God of Nature,
nor indeed Nature to be Nature, nor her Mundus any Mundus, and so renders his
own Philosophy no Philosophy; which are such Absurditys, that I doubt he who
only reads this Discourse, may esteem it Idle and Superfluous, but if he also
read their Discourses, he will find that they have made it Necessary. And I
rather fear that all this, and much more that may be said, will not be
sufficient to convince them, whose Delicate Wits are grown so Wanton, that
they can not be pleased with any thing unles it be some Curious Novelty, and
Ingenious Error, and so much delight to wander in the wild Labyrinth thereof;
that they care not to be brought out of it; where I shall therefore leav them
to themselves, and proceed in the beaten Path of Common and Solid Truth, which
God has set out and Reve^led in this History of Creation, wherein he has
showed us how it was his very Counsel and Design, thus to set the whole Frame
of Nature in Order in the Six Days, whereby he did Perfect it, and distinguish
it from the first Chaos; and as he did Proclaim the Particular Goodness of his
Particular Works in their several Days, wherein they were so Ordered, so when
the whole System thereof was finished, God saw every thing which he had Made,
and behold it was Very Good: which Valde and the Emphatical Addition thereof
plainly shows another Entity and Bonity of Universal Nature, Subsisting in all
the Particular Natures besides their Particular Entitys and Bonitys, which were
before declared. And this is the Law and Order and Economy of the whole
Household and Family of Nature, which indeed is Nature, and was thus Settled and
Fixed in the whole Series and Course thereof, and so still Continued by virtue of
the Divine Benediction in all Successive Generation and Corruption; as the
Psalmist says, He Commanded and they were Created, He has Stablished them for
ever and ever, He has made a Decree which shall not pass: whereby all things
are thus Constituted and United into one great Compositum of the Univers,
wherein they are all either Coordinate, and Inservient, or Subordinate, and
Subservient one unto another. And particularly this whole Visible World unto
Man, as I shall show hereafter, and Men and Angels Immediately unto God, the
Author, and End, of the whole Creation.

SECTION VII.
And God said, Let there be Light; and there was Light. And God saw the Light
that it was Good. And God Divided the Light from the Darkness. And God called
the Light Day, and the Darkness he called Night. And the Evening and the Morning
were the First Day.
EXPLICATION.
God Produced out of the Ether the Proper Qualitys thereof, and particularly
Light, whereby it was Perfected, and which was the Goodness thereof, Conformable
to the Divine Wisdom and Will of the Creator, and Law of Cr^^tion. And he made
Diurnal Light to be in one Hemisphere of the Ether, which was Divided from
Nocturnal Darknesin the other, And so made Day and Night Artificial. And the
Evening which Commenced from the Beginning, and the Morning of Diurnal Light,
were together the First Day Natural.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of Ether. 2. Of Heat. 3. Of Light. 4. Of Color. 5. Of Day and Night. 6. Of
the Goodness of the Works of the First Day.

I. HAving before discovered and declared the General System of Nature, I shall
now more Particularly discourse of the several Kinds of Creatu^es as they were
in the Six Days; whereof Ether is the First (being that Firmament of Heaven
mentioned in the Fourth Day, and so made before) which is Supreme of all the
Elements, and next to Superaether (which is Superelementary, as I have said,
and probably was Perfected when it was Created in the Beginning) and yet Ether
has been esteemed to be the very Highest and Utmost Sphere of the whole World
by Heathen, who made it to be their Superaether, or Caelum Daemoniac^m, wherein
they placed all their chief Idols, which were the Planets and Stars thereof;
being indeed not only the Highest, but also the the Greatest, and most
Glorious, of all Spectable Creatures. And some of their Philosophers induced
thereunto, or in compliance with the Popular Religion, did not only deny the
Ether to be Elementary, and Igneous; but also seemed to doubt whether the very
Matter thereof were Common and Homogeneous with Elementary Matter; as certainly
it must be, if it be M^tter, (which is one most Common and Homogeneous
Substance in itself, and only Diversified according to the several Accidents
and Affections thereof, that are indeed Common to all Matter) and it must be
Matter, otherwise it could not be a Body. And so is also the very Superaether,
and all Bodies whatsoever. But the Matter and Body of Ae^her is most Rare of all
the Elements, because the Spirit thereof does so Require it, and Cause it to be;
and therefore, as I have said, it is Highest of all Elements, though not so
Rare as the Superaether, which is therefore the Highest of all Bodies. And so
Rarity of Matter, because it has less Matter in the same Extension, has
therefore some fitnes and Analogy to a more Spiritual Substance, and is as it
were a more Spiritual Body, as more gross Spirits are more Material: and this
chief Elementary Spirit of Ether requires a more Rare Matter then the rest,
and so also does Culinary Fire Rarefy, as I shall show hereafter; but yet, as I
have said, the most Rare Matter is Matter, as well as the most Dens, and not
Spirit, but of another Different Classis. And as the Body thereof is very Rare,
so also it is very Fluid, though Rarity and Fluidity be not one and the same,
more then Density and Consistence; yet as Density is Analogous to Consistence,
so is Rarity to Inconsistence or Fluidity. And therefore an Adamantine, Golden,
Brazen, or Specular Ether, or Planets therein, are rather Poetical, then
Philosophical. And whereas Elihu says, Have thou with him spread out the Sky,
which is strong, and as a molten Looking Glass, or Speculum? The word Sky, also
signifies Upper Clouds in the Original, and if it were to be rendered Sky,
might be as well understood of the Air, which is an Expansum, and spread out, as
well as Ether; and that very Expansion seems to imply no Consistence in either
of them: and the Comparison is not of a Consistent, but a Molten or Fusile
Speculum, such as Water or the like: Now plainly the Text intends the Upper
Clouds, whereof the precedent Discourse is in the Context, and which being
Anhydrous do so Reflect the Light, like such a Molten Looking Glass. And yet
Translators render Expansum (as it is Originaly) Firmament, in favor and
compliance with Grecian Philosophy; whereas certainly the Air, which is also
termed Expansum as well as Ether, is not Solid or Firm. And the Reason
assigned why the Ether should be Solid and Firm is more Vain then the
Hypothesis; which is, because it Moves one way, and the Planets therein another
way, and therefore there must be Seven Spheres of them, and an Eighth of the
Fixed Stars, and to these is since added a Ninth, and a Tenth, which must be
the Primum Mobile, to solv these Phenomenon. Whereas in the First Day there was
only one Circumvolution of the whole Ether, one and the same way, to make Day
and Night, and so until the Fourth Day; and then we do not read of any such
Division thereof into Spheres, as of the Disposition of the Water and Earth into
a Terraqueous Globe, but only of the Creation of the Stars. Nor is this
Supposition of Ethereal Spheres any Solution of the several Advers Motions;
for perhaps the slower Motions of the Fixed Star^s (as they are therefore so
termed Comparatively) which are also Advers to the Motion of the Ether may be
as several, and then they must also allow as many several Spheres for every one
of them, and so for any of the Planetary Satellites about another Planet. Also
the Circumvolution of them by the Primum Mobile must be either by a Corporeal
and External Impu^s, and then they must Cohere to it like the Circular Spheres
of an Onion (which is the usual Comparison) which Cohesion will also make the
Circumvolution Conjunct and one and the same way; as if you turn an Onion so
about: otherwise if they do not so Cohere, no Motion of the Inferior Spheres
will be Caused by the Circumvolution of the Superior or Primum Mobile, as if
you turn a Wheel about an Axis without any Contact; much less can it Move all
the others so many several ways; Or it must be by some Spiritual Potentia which
must be either of another Spirit, and so Infinitely; or of itself, as indeed it
is, and then the several Planets and Stars may also as well have such several
Potentiae in themselves, as the Primum Mobile, and so many several Spheres
Moving themselves and their several Planets in them by such several and Advers
Motions: Also firmnes or Consistence is a Proper Quality of Earth, as I shall
show hereafter, and not of Ether; and though the Ether be Mist with all the
other Elements in some small Proportion, yet the Consistence which it ha^h
thereby is very Inconsyderable, and less then of Air, and Water (which yet are
Denominated Fluid Bodies, and not Consistent) and is rather like the Terrene
Opacity thereof, which does not fix any Color in Ether, nor Reflect like Earth,
or Water, though very much Assisted by the vast Profundity thereof, which is
somewhat Analogous to Opacity, as well as Density; as may appear by Deep Water
which seems more Black, and Specular, then Shallow. The Spirit of Ether is
Fire, as the very Name thereof does Import; which also plainly declares the
common Opinion of the Ancient Graecians (though they who deny the Thing would
also elude the Etymology.) And so the Persia^s, who worshipped the Sun,
therefore Consecrated Fire, and used it in their Mysterious Ceremonys. And all
Language, both Sacred, and Profane, has ever styled the Sun Hott, which all
Sens does likewise attest, (though this also and any thing whatsoever will be
evaded by a resolved Error:) and instead thereof Fire is placed in a new
Invented Sphere or Province, which it must have in Conformity to the great
B^dys of the other Elements, and which is termed, Concavum Lunae, or Caelum
Incognitum. All which Absurditys were only Philosophical Inventions to preserv
the Idolatrous Reverence and Religion of H^aven, which is now together with
them to be Exploded by Christianity. Nor do I suppose Ae^hereal and Culinary
Fire to be several Elements Genericaly Different, because they have the same
Proper Qualitys, Heat, Light, and others; though they may perhaps D^ffer more
Specificaly; because Ether has other Proper Qualitys, as Circular Motion, and
Infl^ential Virtues, which may not be in the other, or at least not Actualy; as
the E^e^entary Earth has Magnetical Virtue, which is not Actualy in all
Terrene Bodies: and there is certainly a grea^er Mistion of the other Elements
in Culinary Fire, which renders it more Impure then Ethereal. But there is
Heat very notably in Ether, which is Instrumental in the Rapid Motion thereof;
for Heat being a most Active Quality is also very Motive; I know not whether
any Actual Heat can ^e without Actual Motion; though Heat be not only Motion,
nor Motion Heat, as I shall show hereafter. And this Motion of Ethereal Heat
must necessarily be Circular, because, as I have showed, if there be more Motion
then the Body Moving can Exercise and Expend Directly, it will Move it
Circularly; and Ether can not Move any other way; for being more Rare then
Air, it will not Move Downward into it, and being more Dens then Superaether,
which is also Superelementary and most Heterogeneous, it can not Move Upward
into it; but being already in its own Proper Sphere, and Station, it Moves only
in it, which must be Circularly; and therefore also it Move^ Perpetualy, because
it is Moved by its own Proper Potentia, which is always Actual in itself, and
not Corrupted or Obstructed by any other; and it therefore Moves Equaly, because
there is none other Causality to make any Increments or Decrements thereof. And
it is by a Spiritual Q^ality in itself which is not to Rest as the Motion of
Matter. Nor is it Invaded by the Supe^ae^her; and it is Defended from the
Ambient Air by that Rapid Motion, which affords no Time requisite for the Air
to Operate upon it: and therefore it is more Ingenerable, and Incorrupt^ble,
then the Inferior Elements, and probably does not Emitt a^y of its own Matter:
and yet by its Emissary Rays is itself the greatest Operator of them all, and
does Generate and Corrupt them; and so generaly all Superior Elements do most
Operate upon the Inferior, and the Inferior less upon the Superior. Nor does it
need any Fuel, because it is not continualy Incensed, and Extinguished, like
Flame, whose Individuality is therefore Varied as Successively as the F^me, but
Ae^her has its own Spiritual Potentia always Actual in i^self, which is not
Corrupted nor O^structe^ by any other^. But I conceiv that the Regularity of
the Aet^ere^l Circ^mvolution Exactly in every Day Natural is from a Special
Quality which was also Actu^ted therein in this first Day and so continu^th, and
is a Natural Motion thereof An^^ogous to the V^rricity of the M^^net, whereby it
reduces ^tself to the Regularity of ^ts Polar Position. And this I colle^t
from the Text, wherein (...) said, that God so made Day and Night the^in: and
though the Proper Ethereal Virtue according to that general Power thereof does
so carry it about with a Perfect Regularity, yet since it has been Accursed
and Blasted as well as Earth for the Sin of Man there are many particular
Alterations, Generations, and Corruptions, appearing in it, such as Maculae,
Comets, and the like; as I shall show hereafter, which plainly prove both that
it was Mist with the other Elements, and was a Generated Compositum in the
first Perfection thereof, and that now it is Imperfect: and yet the Diurnal
Motion thereof is still as Regular as before, as well as the constant and
Immovable Position of the Earth: and therefore most probably there is some
other Special Quality which does Preserv it in that Regularity, as Verticity
does the Earth and Magnets in their Polar Positions. And as this Element is
most Active and Operative, so God, who does nothing in vain, and is styled The
God of Order, and not of Confusion, did therefore first Perfect it, and Produce
the Active Qualitys thereof, as the Chemical Instruments of Nature, whereby it
was first set on work; and so at last when he shall Dissolv this whole
Elementary World, it shall be by Fire, both Ethereal, and Culinary,
Congregated and Condensated (as before the Fountains of the great Deep were
broken up, and also the Cataracts of Heaven opened) and shall thereby again
Melt down this whole Inferior Globe, if I may so speak, with a Deluge of Fire,
as he did formerly overflow the Terraqueous Globe, with a Deluge of Water;
whereof he has thus far declared unto us the manner, but not the Time; for Of
that Day and Hour knows no Man, no not the Angels in Heaven; nor may we
compute it by any Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, or of any of them; for this
Dissolution not being Natural, but Violent, does therefore attend no Natural
Causality, but may be at one Time as well as another.

II. The Spirit of Ether being Fire, the most Proper Qualitys thereof are
apparently Heat, and Light; which are neither one and the same in themselves,
nor do Immediately Subsist or Proceed in, or from one another, but both in and
from the Substantial Spirit. For apparently one may be Actualy without the
other, as Heat without Light, in Fume; and if there be not also Light without
Heat, as in the Gloworm, and other such Bodies, yet certainly the Actual Heat is
not Proportionable to the Actual Light thereof: and here in the Text Light only
is Named, and not Heat, though they are partly Synonymous in their Original
Etymology, and very Congenerous and Social Qualitys in Nature, Proceeding from
the same Substantial Spirit. But I can not conceiv Drines, as I have said, to
be any Second Quality Proceeding from Heat, nor indeed very Symbolical or
Homaeogeneous with it, but rather another Collateral Quality of Earth, and
Indifferent between Heat, and Cold; for Vapors, Oils, and the like, which are
very Moist Bodies, are more Inflammable then Salts, and Ashes, which are very
Dry, and all Heat does Melt or prepare for Fusion, which does Actuate Moisture;
wherefore all Consistent Bodies generaly are Actualy Cold, and Actualy Dry, or
at least, Indifferent to either Heat, or Cold, to be Actuated in them. But the
Proper Action of Heat is to Heat, or Univocaly to Generate or Produce Heat out
of other Inflammable Bodies; which thereby it does also Move, because as I have
said, it requires a most Rare Body, and so when Heat begins to be Actuated, it
begins to Rarefy the Body Heated, which being an Expansion thereof, necessarily
causes some Local Motion: and so it Melts and prepares for Fusion by
Rarefaction, and even Iron Heated does Swell before it Melt; and in order
thereunto it does Convell and Corrode the Parts of the Bodies, as may appear by
the Operation of Aqua fortis in Dissolution of Metalls: and as it thus
Operateth in respect of Corporeal Rarefaction, or Comminution, which is
Preparatory thereunto, so it is Spiritualy Active in itself, and Causes Motion,
as a fit and Analogous Instrument thereof, as well as in its own Ether, as I
have showed; though that be probably as Rare as it can Naturaly be, because it
is the most Rare Element, and can not be more Rarefied by any other Elementary
Quality, and has already Produced the greatest Rarity that it can in itself.
But though Motion be such a notable Instrument of Heat, as generaly it is also
of all the Operations of Material Spirits upon the Matter, yet neither Heat nor
any others are only Motion, as I have formerly showed generaly, and shall now
show particularly concerning Heat, which is not so much Caused Originaly by
Motion, as it is a Cause thereof, though the Generator may Generate Heat, which
was Potentialy before in the Body wherein it is Actuated, by Motion, as I have
said, Mediately, but more Immediately by Rarefaction; and its own Ethereal
Motion is Caused by its own Natural Heat, and not Heat by Motion: for so Light
and Heat were Created in it first, at least in order of Nature, before there
was any such Motion or Circumvolut^on of the Ether, which followed thereupon,
and whereby God D^vided the D^^rnal Light from the Nocturnal Darkness; and so
made Day and Ni^^t Artificial. Also if Motion be Formaly Heat, and Heat Motion,
then Cold which is the Contrary thereof m^st be Rest, and Rest Col^; which it is
not; for it does both Expand Ice, and also Compress Water in the Sealed Weather
Glass; and certainly Expansion and Compression are not without M^tion, because
they Vary the Extension, and consequently the Locality of Bodies so Expanded or
Comprest. Nor are Motion and Rest Contrary Actively, but only Advers Localy;
for Rest is not Active, and therefor Motion cannot be Active^y Contrary to
Rest; a^ I have showed: but Heat and Cold are both Active, and Activ^^y
Contrary. And if any can suppose that Heat is a Motion one way, and Cold
another way, I desire them to assign the different Local Motions of these, or
any other Spiritual Qualitys, which they never yet have done, nor indeed can
do, because they are no such Motions Naturaly. Certainly Heat and Cold, which
are most Contrary Qualitys, require answerably Contrary Motions: but as there
is no such Contrariety between Rest and Motion, so neither is there in Motion
itself, whereof there is only a Local Opposition, as I have said: for Motion is
only one and the same Principle, from which no such Active Contrariety can
Possibly proceed: though it may be an Indifferent Instrument of Contrary
Agents, as of Heat, and Cold. Again, Heat and Cold may be M^st together into
one Temperature, which we call Tepor, and that is both Hott and Cold, though
Mist, and more Remiss thereby; whereas Opposite Motions can not be so Mist, for
if Heat should be by Local Motion one way, and Cold by it another way (which
though not Properly Contrary, yet must be Diametricaly Opposite and Advers)
then one such Motion must necessarily stay and stop the other, mutualy, whereby
there should be no Motion at all, and consequently neither Heat nor Cold: and
this Tepor is, as I have said, per omnia, and not only per minima, much less by
any Imaginary Parallel, or Meridional Lines, or the like, which yet must
Intersect, and thereby also the Moving Parts must stay and stop one another:
and I suppose if Mathematical Philosophers would pleas to reconsyder Local
Motion according to Mathematical Rules, they would easily discover the Vanity
of any such Hypotheses. But as Heat does thus Cause Motion by Rarefaction,
Segregation, Corrosion, and Comminution, of some Parts, so consequently by
Condensation, and Congregation of others; and so it is said to Segregate
Heterogeneous, and Congregate Homogeneous Parts; because, when the whole Body is
Rarefied and in Fusion, the Homogeneous Parts Naturaly Congregate themselves,
and the Heterogeneous are thereby Segregated. And so in making of Salt the
Vapors go one way and fly Upward, and thereby the Salt goes together another
way, and Sinks Downward. Also thus though Heat does Immediately Rarefy, it may
Mediately Condensate; and as it does Immediately Melt, so also Mediately
Constipate; as by Rarefying the Water, and Melting it more into Vapor, it
Condensates and Constipates the Salt, and more notably in Syrups, Tarr, and the
like, which will be boiled into a Gumm, or Pitch, or into a Consistence beyond
them. And so it may have many other such Collateral and Consequential
Operations and Effects. But there is not only Heat Inherent in the Igneous
Body; for plainly it heats at a very great distance, which must be by Heat
Emanant, because all Operation is by Contact; for as there is no Vacuity between
Entitys, so neither in Operations, between the Operator and Operated: and that
there is such Emanation both of Heat and Light I shall plainly show hereafter,
and also now observe, that there is another wonderful Property of Emanant Heat,
which is Attraction, and this is indeed the chief End of the Emanation thereof,
by which it does not only heat at a distance, but also draw other Bodies to it,
whereby it may more nearly and more strongly Operate upon them by its Inherent
Quality from which the Emanant flows forth, as I shall also plainly show
hereafter concerning Electricity. And such an Attractive Heat is that which is
called Vital, whereby Animals Nourish themselves, Attracting their Fomes, or
Materia Nutritiva, by this Heat, and then Firmenting, Concocting, Congregating,
Segregating, and Exercising all the other Properties thereof in order to their
Nutrition. Also to this purpose there is a double Power, or rather several
Degrees of Heat, whereof one is Calefactive, and more Moderate, and Temperate,
which Generates, Nourishes and Fosters, as the Te^^^ of the Spring, Incubation
of Fowls, and the like; and the other Caustike, and more Intens and Torrid;
which Corrupts, Destroys, and Burns, as in all Incendia. But certainly Heat
itself is Generated only by Production out of Potentiality into Actuality, as I
have said, either Univocaly by Fire alone; as when Wood burns in the Fire, and
the like; or Equivocaly, which may be by many other Equivocal Causes, whereby
the Potential Heat may be freed and delivered out of its Chaos, and Prison of
Potentiality. And so it is Generated by Motion, as by Collision of a Flint and
Steel, or by rubbing of Firecanes, wherein one may smell the Fire before any
such Collision or rubbing, which was ready to break forth, and is freed by such
Commotion, and the Fiery Vapors or Corpuscles thereby discharged; and so by
Contrition, as Coachwheels will sometimes be fired; and generaly all Terrene
Bodies Rubbed do heat, because, as Earth has the greatest and grossest Mistion
with all the other Elements, so it has commonly a notable Portion of Fire in
it. And it plainly appears that the Motion is only Instrumental heerin, because
other things do thus also Equivocaly Generate Heat; as Water cast upon
Quicklime, and Vapor in Thunder-clouds, Hay-stacks, and the like: and it
likewise appears that they do only thus Equivocaly and Instrumentaly Generate
or Produce it, because the Flame thereof afterward will be Extinguished by
Water, or blown out by Motion like any other Fire. Nor may we wonder much at
the large quantity of Fiery Flame which is thus Produced out of a little Wood,
or Gunpowder, or the like, when we consider ^he great Rarefaction of Water into
Vapor, and the Vapor of Fume, which Incensed is Flame, is yet more Rarefied; as
may appear by the very quick and direct Ascent thereof, while it is in Flame,
through the Ambient Air; whereas afterward it Ascends more slowly and in
rolling Volumes, or Cincinni of Smoke. And indeed we hardly perceiv or can
conceiv how suddenly the Individual Flame passes away, and is Altered and
Re^novated. Certainly Ignes Fatui, Stellae Cadentes, and the like, Continue
much longer in their Individualitys; which is through their more Temperate and
Generative Heat, whereas the Fire of Flame is more Caustike and Corruptive, and
both Generates and Corrupts so suddenly. But Fire in Iron Candent (which is not
Iron and Fire Individualy several, nor Fire only in the Pores of the Iron, as
has been supposed any more then in Fume) for so Glass which is Imporous will
also be Candent; but, as I have said, the Fire wherewith the Earth of the Iron
is Mist, and which was before in it Potentialy, being now Actuated, does Appear
and Operate in it; and because it does Emitt none or very little of the Fiery
Vapor or Fume, therefore does not Flame, or very little, and so reteineth the
same Individual Fire Actualy in itself much longer; which may be so Actuated in
it again, and again; because the Fire thereof is more fixed in the Mistion, and
less Volatile: whereas if a very strong Coal, as of the best Oak, or Birch, or
the like, be Incensed and Inflamed very long in a Furnace, (which it will
endure and yet come out Whole and Firm) though it may be made Candent again,
yet it will not so kindle nor burn afterward, as it did before the Fiery Vapor
thereof was Emitted and Volatilised. And whereas some have Projected to make Fire
Perpetual, I esteem it Possible if the same Individual Fire could always be
continued in A^tuality in the same Body, as in Iron, or Gold, or the like (as
it is in the Sun, and Ethereal Bodies) but not Practicable (otherwise then as
in our new Iron Harths, which do not only Reflect, but also add the Actual Heat
of the Iron;) because the other Elements, which are Predominant in the Mistion
thereof, and Ambient about it, do always Oppugn it, a^^ though, while it is in
Act, it does notably prevail against them all, yet at length they Overcome and
Extinguish it by their Density, or Cold; and if Nature had not armed them all
against it, there would be a present Conflagration of them. And so Perpetual
Fire would make a Perpetual Motion, which is Possible, and not only Actual in
Ether, but also in Water, and yet not found to be Practicable by Art. Also
Fire is Corrupted by its own Vehemence; for by Rarefying the Body wherein it is,
it Dilates and weakens itself; and lies more open to the Air, which thereby
has greater Advantage, and Power over it, nor indeed can any of these Contrary
Qualitys Exist in their utmost Intension and Extremity, which is contrary to
the Common Law of Nature, and their own Particular Nature is to be Mist in
Contemperature, or at least to Oppugn others; and if either that Mistion, or
Combat cease, their Activity also cease; and so they return into their
Potentiality, as I have before showed. But Fire as it is a Hott Spirit may be
overcome with Cold, as Flame by the Ambient Air; and as it requires a Rare
Body, so it is Oppressed or Choked by ^ore Dens Bodies, as Water, which does not
Extinguish Fire by Cold, (though it has some Actual Cold in it) so much as by
the Fluid Density thereof, which Insinuates into, and Invadeth all the Fiery
Body; and so Water Actualy Heated will quench Fire as well as Actualy Cold; for
that Actual Cold is very soon and easily overcome by the Fire: and W^rm Water
is somewhat more Rare Vaporous and Insinuative, and by the Actual Heat the Fiery
Body is more opened unto it (as Univocal Spirits do generaly open their Bodies
one unto another) whereby it does as well or better prevail against it then
Cold Water. Also warm Liquors Tinge or Die better then Cold by their
Insinuation, but Clammy, as Milk, and the like do most notably Suffocate Fire,
yet if the Fire be not by such Insinuation Penetrated, but only covered with
some Continuous Bodies it will not be Suffocated, because its own Body is the
same, and not Altered thereby; and therefore Iron Candent in a Box continues
hott almost as long as it would out of it, whereas Flame which is only a Fiery
Vapor is soon putt out by an Extinguisher; which returns the Vapor upon itself,
and so stifles the Flame: And if Coals of Fire be covered with some Ashes, the
Fire in the Body so covered does long continue, though the Flame Emitted be
presently Extinguished thereby. And therefore it is to be observed, that as
Fume is a Niggard, because it is not Incensed, so Flame which is so continualy
Emitted, is a great Waster of Fuel, and of the Actual Heat thereof, which still
passes way; and because it Ascends, does less Diffuse the Heat, but is
therefore fitter for Boiling; for it being a Fluid and Subtle Vapor, does
embrace other Bodies with the Inherent Heat thereof, which is much stronger then
Emanant Proportionably, and by such Insinuative Penetration it does better Melt
Brass, and such other Metalls, that are more Penetrable by it, and more easily
Fusible in themselves; whereas Iron is so Robust Contumacious and Consistent in
itself, that it does not yield much to Flame, but is to be Melted by the
Contact of Inherent Fire of Charcoal, and the like. Again, if Fire can overcome
its Enemy wholly, then it is more Augmented by the Potential Fire thereof, which
it Univocaly Generateth and Produces also into the same Actuality with itself;
as Water cast in a small Proportion upon a very Ardent Fire does increas it,
and Assist it (as Smiths commonly find by such Practice) and I suppose Fire may
be made so Intens, as to burn and spend the very Fume and Fuligo of the Fuel.
Also there is apparently an Antiperistasis between such Contrary Qualitys
(though some pleas to deny it by a greater Antiperistasis of Contradiction)
which does Excite them mutualy, but especialy the Victor, which is commonly
Fire; and this is the very Nature of their Contrariety, which, as I have said,
Marcet sine Adversario, and the Conqueror is both Continued in his Actual^ty,
and Increased in his Activity, by the Combat. And that I may not seem to speak
Metaphoricaly; I shall plainly show that there is Realy such an Intentional
Conflict in these Inferior Natures, though neither Sensitive, nor Intellective
in themselves. For thus is this Combat between Heat and Cold Managed, as it
were, in a formed Batell; wherein first they draw out their Forces to their
Frontires, not only their Emanant, but also their Inherent Powers, and not
Circumferentialy after their ordinary manner, but Purposely and Directly, to
that Part, and toward that Point, where the greatest Opposition is; and whereas
otherwise their greatest Power is generaly in their Center, where it may best
Unite and Fortify itself, (for the same Politic Reason to Preserv and Defend
itself) it does now Issue forth to the very Confines of its own Body, and there
Encounter the Contrary Quality which would destroy it. As in a Boiling Pott the
Bottom thereof which is next to the Fire is most Cold, so as you may safely feel
it with your Hand; and so it is observed that the Vital Heat is Internaly
greater in Winter then in Summer: for Contrary Qualitys not Mist but Actuated
in several Substances do thus Resist one another, as Homogeneous Qualitys do
Evoke and open their Bodies one to another, and are more ready to Unite and
Combine together. And where one Contrary Quality does begin to prevail against
the other, that Retireth back again to its Center where it is strongest, as
Heat to the Stomach. And so in Vesse^s of Beer frozen, and, as some say of
Sack. But if one prevail so far against the other as to Rout and Profligate
it, then it flys away in Vapor, or such Fugitive Corpuscles fit to retein i^
as in Flames, and Dissolutions, and the like. Now whereas it is said that the
Motion of Fire is upward toward its own Element, though it be true that
generaly it is so, yet I do not conceiv that to be the Reason thereof, because
Local Motion Upward, or Downward, is Immediately of the Matter and Body, and
not of the Spirit; and therefore Ether is Uppermost, Because it has a most
Rare Body, and so Flame Ascends Upward, because it is Vapor Accensed, which by
that Accension is also more Rarefied; and whereas that is Properly Culinary Fire
(wherein anyother Element may be Predominant in the Mistion thereof) Vapor or
Water Rarefied is the most fit Body to retein it in its Actuality; for Air,
though as Rare, yet has a Proper Quality Contrary to Heat, that is Cold, as I
shall show hereafter; whereas the Moisture of Vapor is Indifferent, as I have
said, and therefore it exhibiteth a most Lucid and Subtle Fire, and such as is
most like to Ethereal: but if the Fire be Actuated in a more Aqueous or
Terrene Body it does, and necessarily must, Descend; and Aurum Fulminans
Incensed flys every way, with the several Bodies more Rare, or more Dens, that
are Segregated and Dispelled by the Explosion.

III. The other Quality of Ether is Light; which as it is most Glorious in
itself, and does Actuate the Visibility of all this Spectable World, so by the
Spiritual Analogy thereof, it does not only discover the Nature of other
Elementary Qualitys, but also of Vegetative and Sensitive Qualitys, and the
very Substances of Spirits in some respects, Symbolicaly and Hieroglyphicaly;
so as I can not conceiv a fitter representation thereof to Sens then Emanan^
Light, which is more, as I have said in Statu Separato then Inherent, and more
Visible then Magnetike Virtue: and though Light be not it self a Substance, but
an Accident, yet Accidents are Real Entitys as well as Substances, and have as
Real Propertys, and Real Coextension; which may be, according to their Nature,
Analogous to the like Propertys of Substances. And as Heat is the most Chemical
Instrument in Nature, (and therefore some Chemists have styled themselves
Philosophers by Fire) so Light is a most Philosophical Instrument; and a more
exact Study of Optike, Dioptrike, and Catoptrike (that is, of Physical rather
then Mathematical) might render us Philosophers by Light; wherefore as I
recommend the more Curious and particular Inquisition thereof to others; so I
shall now generaly and occasionaly hereafter make some Philosophical
Observations thereupon in my ensuing Discourses. But though Light be such a
Conspicuous and Consyderable Quality, yet I do not therefore suppose it to be
any Substance, much less a Body, or having any Corporeity in itself; and shall
prove it to be no more a Corporeal Substance then Heat; and yet I do not
remember that ever any has affirmed Heat to be any such Substance, though Heat
and Light be very Homogeneous and Analogous, and which is yet more strange, not
Inherent Light, but only Emanant is thus esteemed Corporeal, though Inherent be
far more like to such a Substance then Emanant: but because Inherent is already
in a Body, we look upon it and the Body in Gross, and so take them both
together; whereas Emanant is Emitted out of the Body, and is not Inherent in any
other Body, and therefore some suppose it to be a Bodily Substance in itself;
because they do not distinguish between Substances, and Accidents, whose
Difference nothing can more discover unto us then this Emanant Quality, which
is so far Different from the Substance that it is even Localy Separated from
it, though Originaly and Continualy Radicated and Subsisting in it. I have
already showed that the whole Work of the Six Days was no Creation of any new
Elementary Entitys, either Substances, or Accidents, but only a Production of
Substantial Composita, or of the Actualitys of Accidents out of their
Potentialitys; and such, and none other, was this Production of Light in the
First Day, as I have also more particularly showed in my former Enumeration of
all the Six Days Works: whereas the Substantial Ether was one of the Heavens
expressly mentioned to have been Created in the Beginning, and so the Air was
another, and both were then totaly Dark, and afterward Illuminated by this
Production of Light out of Darkness, as a Lamp is now Lighted by Successive
Generation, or Production of Light, as an Accident out of the Potentiality
thereof into Actuality; which also declares the Original Generation thereof to
have been none other; though Incension seem to be as like to a Creation, and
Extinction to Annihilation, as any other Instances I know in Nature. Also the
first Light was only Inherent in the Ether, or Emanant from that Part thereof
wherein it was Inherent into other parts of it, but not into the Air which was
not yet Expanded or made Diaphanous and fit to Transmitt it, still in the
Chaos of itself as well as Water, and Earth, until the Second Day: for if the
Light, then also the Heat of Ether, should have been Emanant into it, and that
should have been Transmitted to the Water, and so caused the Vapors to Ascend
in the First Day; which plainly was not, until the Second Day. Wherefore if
this Light were a Substance in the Air and Water, and not only an Emanant
Quality, flowing from the Inherent Light of Ether, then either God must have
Created more parts of that Luminous Substance in the Air and Water in the
Second and Third Days, which is False; or Produce it out of them as he did
before out of Ether: and so we must affirm the Air and Water to be Inherently
Luminous in themselves, which they are not; otherwise there should be no Day and
Night Artificial in them, as there is; or they must produce out of themselves a
new Substance, which was not in them before, that is, Create it, which is
Impossible: wherefore it must necessarily be only such an Emanan^ Quality of
Ether, as I have declared of the Inherent Ethereal Light Produced in the
First Day, and then flowing into other Parts of the Ether, which was Prepared
and Perfected in the First Day, and afterward into the Air and Water in the
Second and Third Day, when they were Prepared and Perfected, and thereby made
Diaphanous and the Obstruction of their Informity and Inanity removed. And the
very manner and way of Emanation, being a Transition Localy from the Inherent
Quality, which is Localy in the Substance, into the Diaphanous Body, which is
Localy Distant from it, does plainly prove it to be an Accident, or Accidental
Quality both Realy and Localy Different from the Inherent Light, and also from
the Lucid Substance; because it is Originaly and Continualy Radicated in the
Inherent Light Immediately, and Mediately in the Lucid Substance, wherein it
does Subsist and not in the Diaphanous Body, into which it is Emanant; nor is
it any Part thereof, nor Mist, or in any kind Congenerous with it, which does
plainly show Emanant Light, and all other such Emanant things not only to be
Accidents, and of an Inferior and Different Nature from Substances, but also
from Inherent Qualitys; for though Emanant Qualitys do Spiritualy according to
their Spiritual Nature Subsist in their Lucid Substance by the Mediation of
their Inherent Qualitys, yet Coextensively and Localy they Exist in the
Diaphanous Body; wherein they do not so Subsist, as in the Lucid Body, neither
do they so subsist in themselves, but are Instantly Removed with the Lucid Body;
wherefore they are neither Substances in themselves, nor Mist with the
Diaphanous Body wherein they Localy are, but do not Spiritualy Subsist. And
conformable heerunto are all the Phaenomenae and Sensible Experiments of
Emanant Light, for so it is Moved and Altered in the very Locality thereof
according to any Local Alteration of the Inherent Light, and Lucid Substance,
and not according to any Local Alteration of the Diaphanous Body; though it be
Localy in it, as an Ub^, only Definitively, that is, where it is, and in so
much thereof as it is, and not elsewhere, nor in any more Place then it is; but
not Circumscriptively, and much less Subsistentialy, as it is in the Lucid
Body, to which nothing does Unite it, but such a Spiritual Subsistence therein.
And this Locality thereof in another Body Coextensively does Sensibly represent
the Coextension of Spirits in Matter. And as it is never Actualy in the
Inherent Quality of Light or Substance of the Lucid Body, because it is Emanant
out of them both, so it is never Potentialy in the Diaphanous Body, as it is
such, because as such it is only Diaphanous or fit to Receiv it into itself, as
Matter does Spirits; (which it may also represent unto us.) And itself is
sometimes Actualy, and sometimes Potentialy, Produced and Reduced by a most
Momentaneous Generation, for if the Lucid Body be in a Diaphanous Body, the
Emanant Light will be as Actual as the Inherent; and if it be Obnubilated with
an Opacous Body, it is in the same Moment Reduced to Potentiality, which also
sensibly discovers Actuality and Potentiality. And so in a Moment it passes
from Heaven to Earth, though I do not affirm, or conceiv, that Motion to be
Instantaneous which is through so vast a Space, (whereas no Motion can be
through any Space or Extension, which has Part beyond Part, though it be never
so little, Properly in an Instant; because it is from one Part or Term to
another; as I have said) yet it is so Momentaneous, that to us it is as it were
Instantaneous, so as no Mathematical Science, or Human Wit whatsoever, can
perceiv, and assign any Difference: and yet we must acknowledge that it is
vastly Different in itself, which is also another very wonderful
Contemplation, if it be Curiously considered, and may well be Reposited among
the other Mathematical Mysterys which I have formerly mentioned. Certainly
there is not, nor Possibly can be, any Physical Discrimination or Dissection
thereof* as of a Body or Bodily Substance; for it is Impossible by any other the
quickest Motion in Nature of any Opacous Body Interposed to cut off any Part
of a Ray, or to prevent the Reflection thereof; which also Sensibly proves it
not only to be no Corporeal Substance, but of another Nature far Different
from it, and also Different from Inherent Light, for it does not thereby Return
or Recoil into it, but Reflect itsel^, and continue still in its Actual
Emanation, though in another way; to preserv itself in its own Different
Actuality, as every thing Naturaly does; and this also shows the Specifical
Economy of such Different Natures: and that Accidents can not be Annihilated
more then Substances, or Matter itself: (and consequently not Created) and
therefore a Ray of Light can not Possibly be Dissected, for then it neither
Subsisting Actualy, nor Potentialy, in the Diaphanous Body, wheri^ it does
Localy Exist; but in the Inherent Light and Lucid Substance, as I have said, if
it could be Dissected and cut off from them, it could neither Subsist in
itself, nor in the Diaphanous or Lucid Body, nor in any other, Actualy nor
Potentialy, nor in any manner whatsoever, and so should not only Vanish or
Disappear to us, but totally Perish, and not be any thing, either Actualy, or
Potentialy, or in any manner whatsoever, and consequently be Annihilated: whereas
if the Inherent Light be Obnubilated it returns into it, and into its
Potentiality therein, out of which it will as suddenly proceed and flow forth
again into Actuality, when the Obstruction is removed: or if the Inherent Light
be Extinct, it also is Reduced thereby into its Potentiality, as well as
Emanant Light, and so both into their Potentialitys in the Substantial Spirit,
wherein their Accidental Essences do Originaly Subsist; nor does either Inherent
or Emanant Light add any Material Density or Gravity to the Lucid Body, for no
Spiritual Qualitys though never so much Conspissated Spiritualy (and though as
I have said such Spiritual Conspissation be Analogous to Material Condensation)
do add any Gravity to the Body; as an Iron Candent which is very Fervid and
Lucid, yet is not Heavier then when it is Cold; nor is the Air, unles it be
also Condensated in the very Body thereof, more Grave by Night then by Day, or
in Summer then in Winter: and therefore Planets do not fall through Ether,
though they have more Inherent Heat and Light: Much less is any Body Heavier
when it has more Heat and Light Emanant in it: and the same may be Curiously
tried by any Opacous Body poised in Water, which will not rise by any sudden
admission of the greatest or most Spiss Light into the Water, though it will
afterward Sink by Heat, which is not because the Heat does Levitate, or Light
Gravitate, the Water, by Impregnating it with any more Rare, or Dens, Matter in
themselves; but Heat does Spiritualy Rarefy the Water itself, and so
consequentialy Levitate it, whereas Light does neither Levitate, nor Gravitate
it: and yet if it were Matter Impregnating the Water, or Penetrating the
supposed Pores of any Diaphanous Body, it should thereby Gravitate; but indeed
there is no such Penetration of Pores by Emanant Light; which certainly is not
a Body, because though it be not Mist with it, yet it Penetrateth the very
Diaphanous Body itself per omnia Punctae, for turn an Equaly Diaphanous Globule
against the Light which way you pleas, it will be Equaly as Diaphanous one way
as another; which could not be if the Rays did pass only through Pores, as some
suppose; unles we should also suppose it to be all Pores, and consequently no
such Globulous Body. Also this is most apparently contrary to all the Laws of
Refraction, which are always in Direct Lines from one Point to another within
the Diaphanous Body itself, and by most Regular Inflections, as I shall show
hereafter, and not through any such Porous Meanders and Diverticles: and indeed
Diaphanous Bodies, as Ether itself, through which the Sun does Eradiate, are of
all others least Porous; and if the Light did only Penetrate through some more
Rare Matter in these Pores, then that being therefore Diaphanous, it must
Penetrate through the very Bodily Matter thereof, which no Body can do, or
through other Pores of that Porous Matter, and so Infinitely, as I have showed,
or through Interspersed Vacuitys, which is as Impossible as the other; and if
it were Possible, yet it should be no Diaphaneity, but only a plain Phaneity;
as when we look through a Sive, or Silk, we do not therefore say that the Sive
or Silk is Diaphanous, as the Air; and the Air could not be so Totaly
Diaphanous as it is, unles it were a Diaphanous Body throughout in the whole,
and not only in the Pores thereof. And as several Specifical Qualitys may be in
the same Place per omnia, as Heat, and Light, so also several Individual Lights
Emanant, which must necessarily D^ffer Individualy; because they Subsist in
several Lights Inherent, to which they belong, and to their several Lucid
Bodies, and which does also appear by the several Shadows that they cast, which
being several Privatives, do evidently prove the Positives to be several. So if
the four Walls of a Room be painted with four several Colors, Black, White,
Blew, and Yellow, though the Rays of Light Reflected from them Penetrate one
another per omnia, because they fill the whole Room, whereby the several Colors
may be seen in every Point thereof, yet we see them several and Distinct, and
not Mist or Confounded. By all which it plainly appears that Local Union per
omnia is no Perfect Generative M^stion, and much less Aggregation. Also when
Rays Intersect one another in the same Point, and are Decussated and Inverted,
yet being afterward Reflected, whereby they become Objective to the Sight, they
represent their several Colors Inverted. But if they be Colorate themselves,
being Tinged by passing through several Painted Glasses, and be so Reflected
Objectively in their Local Union, they represent a Mist Color, as I have
formerly showed; though that be only a Local, and no Perfect Union; because they
are still several Individuals belonging to their Individualy several Inherent
Qualitys, and Substances; and therefore are not United into one Proper or
Perfect Compositum, but only become Objectively such to the Sight; and when the
Rays of Light are Incolorous themselves, because they are not Objective, but
Vehicular, as in the whole Room, though they be then also Localy United, yet
they do not represent any Mist Color, but their several Colors, otherwise we
could not see them Distinctly: and the Image thereof will never be so Confounded
in the Focus by such their Intersection, but that being Reflected they still
appear several. And thus as Light, and other Spiritual Qualitys, so also
several Spirits or Spiritual Substances may be together in the same Place, and
Penetrate one another per omnia, as well as they do the Matter in
Consubstantiation; because, as I have said, they are only in such an Ubi
Definitively, which is Common to them all, and not Proper to any of them, as
Circumscriptive Extension is to the Matter; but therefore several Bodies Unmist,
and of several Extensions can not Possibly be in the same Place; which, as I
have before observed, is one of the grand Differences between Bodies and their
Extension; and Spirits and their Spiritual Qualitys, and the Coextension
thereof, and does plainly prove Emanant Light to be such a Spiritual Quality;
because apparently Several L^ghts are in the same Vli, whereas Bodies can not so
be therein. And so also the Motion thereof is not only Different, but Advers to
that of the Matter, which is from the Circumference to the Center, whereas this
is most evidently from the Center to the Circumference, otherwise it should not
be Emanant. And now I shall farther discourse of the Emanation, Transition, and
Retreat of Light, which are all such Spiritual Motions, as shall plainly
discover them to be far Different from the Motions of Matter, or any
Affections thereof, and also most wonderful in their own Spiritual Nature. And
first, the Emanation thereof is very Consyderable and Admirable, as I have
before described it, Subsisting in one Substance, and Existing in another, and
heerin more Admirable then the very Inherent Light, which does Immediately
Subsist in the same Substantial Spirit thereof, and does Exist always Localy with
it in the same Body: but because these most Active and Energetical Qualitys of
the first and most excellent Element, Heat, and Light, are thus Originaly
Inherent and Confined to the Body of their Substantial Spirit, and no Operation
can be at any Distance, but only by Immediate Contact of Substances, or
Qualitys; therefore they are Armed and Instructed with these Emissarys, which
they send forth through all their Sphere of Activity, which perhaps may be as
large as the whole Elementary Globe, but as the Inherent Qualitys are strongest
in their own Center, wherein they are most United; so they are the Centers of
Emanant, from which they proceed, and whereunto they return again; and these
Emanant Qualitys are Proportionably Stronger, or Weaker, as they are nearer, or
farther from the Inherent Qualitys: but in the very Confines between them both,
and from which they are first Emanant, they are much Weaker, then Inherent,
which Subsist Immediately in the Spirit, and these in them. As suppose an Iron
Candent Equilateraly Triangular, whereof the Center is Exactly that Point which
is also the Center of a Circle Circumscribed about such a Triangle, in a third
part of the Perpendicular Line, above the Basis; yet if you touch the Candent
Iron at any Angle it shall Burn more, then if you place your Finger in any
middle Point of the Cir^le, so Circumscribed between the Angles; though all the
Points of a Circle be Equidistant from the Center, because at the Angles you
feel the Inherent Qual^ty of the Candent Iron itself, and in the other Points
only the Emanant Quality thereof. Also I must observe that though we call these
Emanations, Eradiations, and so describe them by Rays or Radii, or as the Poets
style them Spicula, or Crines, as so many several Darts, or as the Spokes of a
Wheel, or Hairs of an Head, Discontinued between themselves more and more as
they proceed farther from the Nave, or Skull, though Originaly Continued in the
Root of them all, that is, in the Inherent Quality (and so I shall make use of
this Common Term) yet Properly there are no such several Rays thereof, nor are
they at all Discontinued, but fill their whole Sphere Continuously and
Completely in every Part and Point thereof, and we only Metaphoricaly fansy and
describe them by such an Eradiation, as we Mathematicaly in a Continuous
Extension Imagine Lines passing from one and the same Center to every Point of
the Circumference, which are Indefinite and Innumerable, and therefore it can
not Realy be so in Nature, unles an Unit and Number almost Innumerable should
be Equal, which is Contradictory, as I have showed. But as they are only
Extension, so the true Emanation is not any such Eradiation, but one Continuous
Flux from the Inherent Q^ality through the whole Sphere unto the Circumference
thereof. And I suppose it to be a Perfect Sphere always, though not Equaly,
Lucid, and that it is not any Spheroid, although the Lucid Body may be of any
other Figure, as the Triangular Iron Candent, and the like; and so it seems
that the Halo of a Candle in a Mist or Foggy Vapor is Orbicular, though the
Flame be Pyramidal; which therefore Painters so represent; as also the Halo
about the Head of a Divus. But this Halo about a Candle, and Bar about the
Moon, and the like, are as it were middle Spheres between the Inherent Light and
Utmost Sphere of the Emanant Light, Caused by the Obstruction and Partial
Repercussion from the Mists and Foggs about the Luminary, whereby the Rays are
partly Reflected which make the Halo, and Partly Transmitted (at in a Comet)
which make the Utmost Sphere of the Activity thereof. Yet these Imaginary Radii
of Emanant Light are as Direct Lines, as the Imaginary Lines of a Mathematical
Circle from the Center to the Circumference: and if they be Interrupted or
Offended by any other Body Refracting or Reflecting them, as often as they are
so Interrupted or Offended, they are Inflected and also pass from any such
point of Inflection to another in Direct Lines. And that which so Interrupteth
and Offends their Emanation is something Contrary thereunto, as Cold is
Contrary to Heat: and that can be no Privative, as Darkness which Light always
overcomes; for such Contrariety is between Positives; nor any thing which is
not Active in itself, as Density, or any other Affection of the Matter, which
as they are not thus Actively Contrary to Heat, so neither to Light, or to any
other Spiritual Qualitys whatsoever, though according to the Universal Polity
and Consociation of Nature, they may be more or less Symbolical, or
Asymbolical. And particularly Density is thus a Symbolical Affection of the
Matter with that which is Contrary to Light, as Rarity is with it, and other
Qualitys of Ether; which, as I have said, requires a very Rare Body: and so
Density is a Corporeal Affection Requisite and Analogous to the one, and Rarity
to the other: but as there may be less Inherent Light in a more Rare Body then
in a more Dens; as in the Flame of Spirit of Wine, then of Pitch, which
certainly is a more Dens and Fuliginous Fume, then the other; so more of
Emanant Light in a more Dens Body; as Glass is more Diaphanous then thick Water
through which it will sink, and yet is more Opacous. Wherefore there is
something besides Density that is Contrary to Light, which has been well
observed by others, and acquired a Name whereby it may be known, and is called
Opacity, which is a Quality of Earth; as I shall show hereafter. And this is
one of the other Qualitys of the Elements, besides those commonly called the
Four First Qualitys, which are to be Considered and Regarded by Philosophers,
as well as them; and as we may not Invent any new fictitious Qualitys, which
God has not Created, so neither may we lose any of them which he has made to
be in Nature, nor Confound any Simple Qualitys with Compound, nor Compound with
Simple, which God Created in the Beginning before there was any such
Composition: and though indeed Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine Necess^^ate,
yet whatsoever God has Created Necessarily is, because he has Created it, and
therefore it is; and whatsoever is, is Necessarily while it is, and none can
Annihilate the Entity thereof, by any Finite Power of Nature, and much less by
Opinion and Fansy. For at it is said of the Divine Word, so we must also
Consider and Discourse of the World as it is; and none can Add to it, or
Diminish from it. And God in his Infinite Wisdom did so Create the Heavens and
the Earth in the Beginning with all their Various Furniture of several Simple
Essences, because as it is his Infinite Perfection to be One in Himself, so it
is also the Perfection of Finite Nature to be Many in One, whereby all the
Various Perfections thereof are Variously Expressed, which could not be only by
One. Wherefore I shall set the same Bound to my self, which God himself has
set in Nature, neither to go beyond the Beginning of the World, nor any thing
which he Created therein, nor to fall short thereof, or fear to affirm these
Original Entitys to be such, because God who is the First Cause has so Created
them, without seeking any farther Cause or Reason thereof; or to deny any Natural
Mistions or Compositions to be any such Simple Principles or Original Essences
though he has also joined them together, with others, so that we can not set
them asunder Localy by any Chemical Separation. And such an Original Quality I
find expressly Light to have been, Produced into Actuality in the First Day,
which lay hid before in the Dark Chaos of Potentiality; and by the same Reason
I know that Opacity was also Produced together with Light, and Mist with it in
the Mistion of Ether, with Earth, as well as with the other Elements: because
there is neither Pura Lux, nor Purae Tene^rae Actualy in Nature, neither can I
conceiv that any such Actual Qualitys can Exist Naturaly in their greatest
Intension and Extremity; and therefore probably might not so Actualy Exist in
the Chaos, before their Mistion, and Contemperation, which seems to be as
Necessary to their Existence, as the present Mistions of the four Elements,
according to the first Works of God in the Six Days, and Original Institution
and Law of Generation, and so must continue as long as any Successive
Generation and Corruption, and present Course of Nature. And this Opacity is a
Terrene Quality, whereunto the Density thereof is Assistant; and so Earth itself
is most Opacous, and Water less, yet having some Opacity that causes
Refraction, which is a Partial Reflection; and so Air, and Ether, and all
Diaphanous Bodies; for there is no Pure Diaphaneity without any Opacity. And
this Opacity does not only Reflect, and Refract; but is also Mist with Light in
Colors, and in Light itself, which has some Desultory Color, and is not simply
Visible of itself, as I shall show hereafter: Thus the more fixed Q^alitys of
Earth do fix the more Agile and Volatile Qualitys of the rest of the Elements,
being as an Alloy to Metal which makes it more Malleable. And so particularly
is Terrene Opacity to Ethereal Light; for as Owls can not see by Daylight, so
the strongest Sight could not see the Pure Light, nor can it Exist in its own
Simple Vehemence without the M^sture of Opacity. And these Elementary Mistions
are the Natural Perfections of the Simple Substances, and Accidents; which do
therefore require it, as well as Matter and Material Spirits do
Consubstantiation, as I have showed. Now Diaphaneity being only a less Degree
of Opacity as Rarity is of Density, it is also Partly Opacous, and therefore,
as I have said, does Refr^ct, which is a Partial Reflection, or rather
Inflection of the Rays from their own Natural Direction; and there is no
Diaphanous Body which does not Refract more or less, and none that does
Refract, but does also Reflect. But in all Refraction and Reflection the
Perpendicular Rays pass through the Diaphanous Body Perpendicularly, and all
Emanations Immediately are Perpendicular, and neither A Perpendiculo, nor Ad
Perpendiculum, as in Refraction, or Reflection; which, as we commonly Intend by
those Terms, are always Oblique Lines. Wherefore I suppose that the Rays of any
Lucid Body are not so Refracted in the Immediate Medium wherein it is, as of the
Sun in the Ether, or of the Flame of a Candle in the Air; for, as I have said,
the Flux or Eradiation of the Rays thereof issues forth Immediately from the
Inherent Light in most direct Rays, and so they must Circumferentialy every way
Penetrate their Immediate Medium with all their Rays Directly, and not
Obliquely, as well as the Perpendicular Ray does any Diaphanous Body which does
Refract the rest. But we must also observe, that as Opacity does cause Refraction
and Reflection of the Rays, so the Density of Diaphanous Bodies does Ampliate or
Distend the Rays of Expansion, whereby it also weakens them: So I conceiv that
Refraction and Reflection are, when the Rays having passed their Immediate
Medium, do meet with another Medium of a Diaphanous Body being of Unequal
Opacity, as Air is in Respect of Ether, and Water of Air, and the like; and as
often as the Medium is so Varied, there may be so many Inflections of the Rays
from every Point of the Variation thereof, as I have said; and according to that
Unequal Opacity so is the Refraction, or Reflection, greater, or less. And
which is most wonderful, and truly Spiritual, the Inherent Light is not less
Lucid in itself by all the Rays which it does Emitt; because, as I have said,
they are Different Entitys in themselves, and when they are Emitted Actualy, are
only Produced ou^ of their Potentiality in the Inherent Light, wherein they
subsist, and from which they flow forth into their Actuality: nor is it more
Lucid when they return into it again; because they only return from their own
Actuality into their own Potentiality. And thus the Inherent Light, having such
a Potentia of Producing the Emanant Rays thereof, like an Inexhaustible
Fountain, does not only send them forth to Complete the Sphere of the Activity
thereof, but if they be Refracted, or Reflected, or do Converge, or Diverge, or
however they be Disordered, yet still fills the Sphere, as before, so far as
it is not hindered by any Interposing Opacity. Also even these Emanant Rays
have other Secondary Rays Inherent in them, and which they do likewise Emitt to
fill the Sphere, as well, and as far as they can, where themselves can not
approach; as the Crepuscula are such Secondary Rays of the Principal Solar
Rays, when they Decline by the Suns setting and sinking beneath the Horizon;
and so Rays that pass into the Foramen of a Dark Room make it more Luminous by
their Secondary Rays then otherwise it would be, and without which the
Principal Rays themselves could not be seen, though the Secondary are much
weaker, and less Lucid; whereby the others, which are notably more Lucid, are
seen Objectively. But as I have said the Emanant Rays are never Actual in the
Lucid Body, because they are always Emanant in their Actuality, and all the
Light in the Lucid Body is Inherent; nor is it Properly any Actual Nisus of the
Emamanant Rays in the Lucid Body to Produce themselves, but of the Inherent
Light to Produce and bring them forth, as the Lucid Substance does the Inherent
Light: and therefore Emanant Rays never Intersect, or Penetrate, the Lucid Body
in their Ema^ations, Refractions, or Reflections; because they never Actualy
Exist in it, for then they should be Inherent. And now I shall discover a
farther Mystery of Light Emanant; whereby I shall show not only how the Motion
thereof is far Different from the Motion of Matter, but how it is a Political
and Intentional Motion, as I may so term it, Effectively, for the Preservation
and Orderly Position of itself. Thus Emanant Rays first pass into their
Immediate Medium in Direct Lines or Rays Circumferentialy, as I have said; and
where they are first Interrupted in that Course, and thereby Offended, all the
Collateral Rays, so far as they may, without Intersecting their own Lucid Body
(which would Reduce them into Potentiality in the Inherent Light) do Incline on
either side to Assist that Perpendicular Ray that is first Interrupted: As if
the Superficies of any Opacous Speculum be Unequal, the first Ray that is
Interrupted thereby is that which is most Directly Opposite to the Vmbo, or
Summit thereof; because that is the nearest Point of the Speculum to the Opposite
Lucid Body, and the Collateral Rays on both sides do therefore Incline
thitherward as far as they may to Assist it; which is the very Reason why the
Image Reflected from such a Speculum appears Proportionably less, because the
Rays by such Inclination do Converge more together; and if many such Specula be
placed together in one Table, as Baby Glasses, and the like, there will be as
many Images of the same Face; because, as I have said, the Inherent Light does
always Emitt Emanant Rays, enough to fill the Sphere, whether they Converge, or
Diverge, or however they be Disturbed or Disordered in their Emanation: and
accordingly every one of these Images will be Proportionably less, if the
Convexity of the Specula be the same, or greater, as they are more, or less
Unequal. And the farther the Face is drawn back from any such Speculum, or the
Speculum from it, the less Proportionably will the Image appear, according to
the Mathematical Proportion of such a Pyramidal Figure, whereof the Face is the
Basis, and the Speculum the Cone: for though the violent Motions of Refraction
or Reflection do much vary from Mathematical Rules and the common Motion of
Matter, yet the Natural Motion of Emanation from the Lucid Body into the
Immediate Medium, and after Refraction, or Reflection from Point to Point, is
Exactly Mathematical, and the Foundation of Catoptrike, as the other is of
Dioptrike. But though the Object and Unequal Speculum be never so far
Distanced, yet the Image will never be Contracted into a Point, (whereby it
should become no Image) because the Perpendicular Ray which is Midst, and has
also some Latitude, will always keep the Collateral Rays asunder; so that though
they Intersect, and Invert themselves, ye^ the Perpendicular Ray will always be
Midst: for that is never Refracted, but only Distended. And if the Speculum be
Concav^ then because the first Rays which are Interrupted, are they (...) are
next to the Limbus, or Brim, thereof; therefore the Col^ Rays every way Incline
to Assist them both without, and (...) it: and so being Reflected back again
from the Limbus i^to (...) Concavity of the Fundus, or Bottom, make the Image
to be Inverted. And in a Foramen, which is as a Concave Specu^um ^^^hout any
Fundus or Bottom beyond it, therefore the Rays no^ being Reflected from the
Sides, but only from the Limbus, pass forward toward their own Focus, where
they Intersect, and are also Inverted by such Decussation thereof, and the
farther the Object is drawn back from the Foramen, or the Foramen from it, the
Focus is nearer to the Foramen, and the Image is less, then when the Focus is
farther, and the Object and Foramen nearer. But it is always least next to the
Focus, wheresoever that is. And so also through a Lens, or any open Unequal
Glass. Now this Motion thus Interrupted and Disturbed is not Mathematical, but
very diverse from it: for if the Base of any Pyramid or Isosceles made of Wires
Inserted in a Foramen be Enlarged by any farther Production thereof according to
the same Figure, yet the Cone will be where it was before, because the Pyramid
or Isosceles is only Produced from the same Point Contracted; whereas if the
Base of the Object be either way Enlarged, the Cone or Focus shall still be
nearer and nearer to the Foramen; and yet the Foramen is still the same, and
filled with Rays, whether the Base of the Object be farther, or nearer,
greater, or less; but when it is farther there are more Rays of the Object
Enlarged Proportionably, which Converge more toward the Limbus of the Foramen,
and they being more Inflected thereby Intersect sooner, and nearer to it
Proportionably according to the Longinquity, and Length of the Rays; as if the
Wires were so Decussated through the Foramen, and then were Distended and
farther Separated at their other Ends without the Foramen, the more they are
Distended the sooner they Converge and Intersect within it: Also where there is
such Interruption of Bodies in their Motion; yet their Inflection is not like
that of Emanant Rays; nor is it Refracted the same way but far otherwise; as
if a Bullet be shot Obliquely into Water, which does Divert the Motion thereof,
it does I^flect Outwardly A Perpendiculo, more, or less, according to the
forcible Penetration thereof, but never Inwardly or within the same Oblique Line
Produced; whereas such Refraction is always Inwardly Ad Perpendiculum, more, or
less, as the Diaphanous Body does Refract more, or less; which are Opposite
Motions, and Ocularly Declare not only a Difference, but also an Opposition,
between these two Motions, and show the Different Natures of Matter, and
Spirits, and of all Material, and Spiritual Accidents and Affections; and there
are plainly as D^fferent Reasons thereof: for the Bullet itself is a Body, which
tending to the Center is Diverted by the Water, that is another Body of Matter
below it, which it cannot Penetrate, and will not be so suddenly Removed, as I
have showed; but does therefore Inflect it in the Water Proportionably, as it
would make it to Graze or Reflect in the Air, which is more Rare: whereas
Emanant Light being no Body, but a Spiritual and Active Quality, whose Motion
is Circumferentialy from the Center, and which can Penetrate, and is not
hindered by a Diaphanous Body, as it is a Body, but only as it is partly
Opacous, (which is another Spiritual Quality Actively Contrary to it) does not
only pass through it, as it is Diaphanous, but as far as it can does also
Decline from its own Motion to Assist any other Rays interrupted by it, (as in
the former Examples) toward which accordingly the rest do Converge and Incline
as far as they may: and thus Spiritual Qualitys can Vary their Motion (which
otherwise also is Mathematical) either to Encounter a Contrary Quality, or to
Assist one another: and this is from the same Political Principle in Nature of
Preserving itself both in its Universal Entity, and in its Specifical
Homogeneity, and also in its Individuality; whereby it plainly appears that
there is such an Universal Nature, and also such Specifical, and Individual
Natures, because there are such Real Unions and Confederacys, and such Real
Effects thereof. And thus Emanant Rays are Refracted in Diaphanous, or Reflected
by Opacous Bodies; and do Converge, both in Unequal, and Concave, Superficies,
toward the Vmbo or toward the Limbus: and though the Image in one be Erected,
and in the other Inverted, yet in both it is Proportionably less; which does
plainly show the Convergence of the Rays, in the Image: and if the Superficies
be Lenticular, and not so Orbicular, whereby it is as it were Semiconvex and
Semiconcave (as one Bank is also half of the Valley) there may be a double Image
Reflected, whereof one shall be Erect, and the other Invers: yet they shall both
be Proportionably less, as before: And if the Speculum be Plane, it Reflects
almost Equaly, unles the Lucid Body be Orbicular; as a full Moon, which in a
Looking Glass appears somewhat less; because the lowest Ray of her Lucid Orb is
somewhat nearer to the Speculum then the rest, and therefore first Interrupted.
And when the Rays have Penetrated the Diaphanous Body, though they are
Refracted according to their Points of Incidence, and Inflection, and are so
Directed thereby, yet they pass through it in Direct Lines, as I have said,
from Point to Point, until they meet with something of Different Diaphaneity
therein, which as another Medium will again Inflect them, and so when they go
forth by the other Opposite Superficies Unequal, Concave, or Plane, into another
Medium, they have another Point of Excidence, as I may so call it, and another
Inflection thereby more, or less, as that other Superficies is Figured, or the
Medium is more, or less, Diaphanous: and so they Incline to the Rays first
Interrupted, or last Engaged either in the lower Vmbo of a Unequal, or Limbus of
a Concave, or Indifferently of a Plane. But if they afterward Intersect, yet
the Focus will never be a Point; because, as I said before of an Image, the
Perpendicular Ray does always cause some Latitude thereof. And this I conceiv to
be the Course of Emanation of Rays of Light, which Naturaly is Circumferential,
and when it is Interrupted, does thus Converge as far as it may, though it be
also said to Diverge as in the Concave Speculum, because the Rays which so
Converge to assist the Interrupted Rays one way, do indeed Diverge from others
the other way; and the whole Limbus so Interrupting them they so Converge to
every Point thereof. And now as I have showed the Motion of Emanant Light to be
very Different from Corporeal Motion of Matter, so I shall also show that any
Light is not only Motion, or Pulls of the Diaphanum, or something of that kind,
which others have affirmed it to be, whereby I suppose they Intend also a
Corporeal Motion, which I have already disproved; but yet as I have
particularly discoursed of the Motion of Heat, so I shall now also of Light;
and certainly if Heat be a Motion, and Light also a Motion, they may not be one
and the same Motion; for then Heat should be Light, and Light Heat; and so we
should not need to argue any farther particularly concerning Light, having
argued it already against Heat: but I do acknowledge them to be several and
Different Qualitys of Ether, and desire such who affirm them to be Motions to
assign their several and Different Local Motions, which if they be several and
Different, must Impede and Obstruct one another, as I have said; for Heat and
Light are Localy United per omnia, and therefore their Local Motions must be
also per omnia, as a Sunbeam or Flame are very Lucid, and very Hott per omnia.
And now let any such satisfy themselves how the same Body, in the same Place,
and the same Time, can Possibly Move by several Motions per omnia Puncta.
Again, if the Motion of Light considered distinctly by itself be only a
Corporeal Pulls, then it must be so Impelled by some other Corporeal Mover, and
then they must also assign some particular Motions and Impressions of the Body
Moving, whereby it does so Impell the Body Moved, as to Generate Light;
otherwise any Body that Moves the Diaphanum in any manner might, as well as the
Sun, thereby Generate Light; and Collision of Icicles should Generate it and
Heat, as well as of Flint and Steel. Also let them show what Connatural Analogy
there is between these two very Different Motions of Circulation, and
Collision, which yet do both Generate Light. But I suppose I may fully satisfy
them with one Consyderation, which is, that the Motion of Emanant Light is so
Swift and Momentaneous, that there is no Corporeal Mover in Nature which may
Move the Diaphanum so swiftly, certainly the Motion of the Sun is
Comparatively, as Rest and Sloth in respect thereof, and therefore can not
Generate Light by his Impulses; because the Pulses Caused thereby can not be
Swifter then the first Impressions. And though it be true that any Consistent
Body, though never so long being Moved in any Part or Point, is Moved in the
Whole, almost Instantaneously and Simultaneously, because it is Consistent; yet
Air, which is the great Diaphanum and Vehicle of Light, is not Consistent, but
Fluid; and so is Ether; as I have before showed: and a Ship sailing in Water,
which is more Consistent then either of them, does not Move it many Leuks; as a
Stone thrown into a Calm Sea will not make Circles therein many Miles: much less
can the Circumgyration, or any other Motion of the Sun, Cause such Pulses in all
the vast Ether, Air, and Water, and wheresoever there is any Ethereal Light.
Nor does every Motion of one Body in another make a Commotion and Pulls therein:
as a most smooth Globe turning round in Air or Water does not Impell much, nor
make any great Friction or Attrition, but only slideth by the Ambient Body; and
the more Swiftly it so Moves, the less Commotion it makes in any other Body;
or as an Entire and Solid Bullet flying in the Air makes little or no Nois,
which is only made by Commotion, as I shall show hereafter. Wherefore if the
Sun thus Move most Swiftly in a Fluid Ether, both Circularly, and
Progressively, he makes little or no Commotion or Impuls, (as manifestly ^e
makes no Sound or Nois by such Motion therein) and certainly none in the Air or
Water, wherein yet manifestly there is Light. Again, though the Emanation itself
be a Motion in itself, yet it causes no Continued Commotion in the Diaphanum;
as when it Moves through Glass, which is a very Consistent Body, and would
easily discover any such Motion or Tremor; yet I suppose any such Motion therein
by the Irradiation of Light can never be discerned with any M^croscope; however
certainly when the Motion of Emanation cease, and the Emanant Light has
filled all the Sphere thereof, it Moves no more but atteineth its Rest; and so
is neither Moved itself, nor does Move the Diaphanum, and yet it is Light
still, as it it was before; and so the Motion thereof is only the very
E^anation, which is Instrumental in Diffusing the Light, and Caused by the
Spiritual Quality thereof, and not the Light by it, which is another thing, and
of another Nature very far Different from it. Also Light Moves through a more
Dens Diaphanum as well as it does through a more Rare, and is not so Resisted
by Density, or Consistence as Bodies are in their Motion, but only by Opacity
which is Contrary to it; and that does Refract or Reflect it as swiftly, and
when it is Perpendicularly Reflected back into itself, there is another Motion
thereof or Reduplication of itself Directly Opposite to the Emanation in the
same Perpendicular Line, and at the same Time per omnia, which could not be if
it were any such Corporeal Motion; and yet the Light is not Obstructed or
stopped, but very much Augmented, as well as the Heat, by such Reduplication
thereof.

IV. Having discovered such a Quality in Nature as Opacity, which is Contrary
to Light, though it be not so Conspicuous, and therefore is not so much
regarded, but denied or neglected by others, as many such Antiqualitys, as I
may so call them, are, because they are not so Agile and Active as their
Contrary Qualitys, but are for Contemperation and Fixation thereof; I shall now
proceed to consider this Opacity in the Mistion thereof with Light, whereby it
does so Contemper, and Fix it, and whereby also we may very plainly discover
it. For as the Mistion of the four Elements does Produce so many Various
Quintessential Composita by the Production and Actuation of perhaps more then
four several Qualitys in every one of them, and Variation of them, and their
several Degrees, according to that Arithmetical Rule of Changes, which I
formerly mentioned, so particularly the very Mistion of Light and Opacity, and
the Various Degrees thereof, Produce many notable Variations. And so not only
Color generaly is Produced by the general Mistion thereof, but all particular
Colors by the particular Variations thereof. And first as I have showed Light
itself could not Exist without some Opacity, and much less be Visible without
it, any more then Opacity without Light; and therefore Light Objective and
Visible does always appear in some Color or other, whether it be Direct, as in
the Sun, which is a Radiant Yellow, and in the Moon, which is White, and the
Ether, which is Blew, or of some such Colors; or Reflex, as in the Rainbow,
wherein all those Simple and other Mist Colors do appear; and though Light which
is not Objective does cast a Brightness, and Darkness a Shadow, and thereby may
Intend or Remit^ Colors, yet they Cause not any Color, more then Colors them,
which yet cast some such Proportionable Brightness, or Sadness, as Rooms Painted
White, or Black; but the Light of the Sun Reflected from Water is Yellow, and
the Moon White, and the Ether Blew, (which also makes Seas and Hills at a
distance in Sude Weather to appear Bluish) though, as I have said, Density and
Profundity are also in that Ethereal Blewnes Analogous, and somewhat Assistant,
to Terrene Opacity, as Rarity and Tenuity are to the Ethereal Brightness. But
if the Common Light (though that also have some small Misture of Opacity) were
Visible in itself without Opacity, we should see nothing besides it, as we can
not well see through Flame which is Objective Light; whereas Light does render
all things Visible, and more Visible by the greater Illustration thereof; and so
it is said to be Actus Diaphani, rendering it Actualy Perspicuous, which was
Potentialy such before in itself; and so also it does Actuate the Visibility of
Fixed Colors, but not the Colors themselves which are Fixed by Mistion Internaly
in themselves; and does Externaly Illustrate them exceedingly by any greater
Brightness thereof. But Light passing through Painted Glass is by the Union
therewith, and Direct Species of the Colors also passing through it, with the
Direct Rays of Light, Imperfectly Tinged; as the Yellow and Blew of the two
several Painted Glasses is by the Local Union thereof; and such Tinged Rays of
Light being Reflected are Visibly Colorous; because they were Tinged before by
their Passage and Penetration through the Body of the Diaphanous Glass: and so
being Localy United with the Inherent Color of the Glass, the Emanant Color or
Species and the Light Emanant afterward continues to be so United, whereby the
Light becomes Colorous; as when we look through a Painted Glass and Inherent
Color thereof against the Light Transmitted through it, we thereby see the Color
most plainly, because that being Inherent is stronger then the Emanant Light;
but the Rays of Emanant Light being somewhat stronger then the Emamant Color or
Species Reflected on a Wall after such Transmission through a Painted Glass
Window, we do not perceiv the Reflected Colors to be altogether so deep or
strong as in the Glass when we look through it. And if the Emanant Light be not
Radiant it is not Colorous, or if it be not first United with the Inherent
Light in the Colorate Body then it is not Colored at all, as in the Reflection
of Light from a Colored Wall: and so also if it be only Reflected from the
Outward Superficies of the Painted Glass, and not Transmitted through it, so
that the Wall or Glass is the Object of our Sight, and the Common Light serves
only to Actuate the Visibility thereof, and is not Colorous and Objective in
itself, or in its own Rays; and yet if they be Conspissated by passing through
a Foramen or Lens, or by R^flection, or the like, they become more Visible; as
Ether also is by Profundity: Or if a Glass be Specular, whereby the Emanant
Rays of Light and Species of Colors Penetrate into the Profundity thereof, and
then are Reflected, they become Objective, because the Superficies of the Glass
does not Terminate the Sight; and the Emanant Rays and Species Penetrating
together into it, and being so Reflected from the Opacous Fundus thereof are
thereby rendered Objective, as if they were Inherent in the Speculum
Reflexively, as well as they appear Directly Visible when we look through an
Incolorous Glass, and see any Colored Object beyond it: and so also in the
Superficies of any Adiaphanous Speculum, as Steel or other polished Metal
(that does not Suffocate the Rays by any Unequal Porosity and Scabrities, which
does confound the Image) they are as Visible almost as the Speculum itself; and
yet also we see the Metal with the Image Reflected; because it is Localy United
in the same Superficies, which being only of one Color (as Black Marble, Brass,
and the like) does not Confound the Image, but only add a Tincture thereunto;
whereas if it were first Picturated itself, it would prevail over the Reflected
Image, which is only Reflected and not Directly Emanant from the Superficies
thereof, as its own Colors are, which are therefore more strong and prevalent
then it. And the Object does not appear beyond it, because the Rays do not
Penetrate the Profundity. And these Local Unions of Light and Opacity, or of
Light and Colors, which are partly Opacous, being Spiritualy only External
though Localy Internal Unions per omnia, do not Produce a Perfect Mistion or
Generation, as I have showed, and therefore are Momentany being Lo^aly United
in one Moment, which is their Imperfect Generation, and Disunited in another,
which is their Corruption. And such is the Momentaneous Generation and
Corruption of some Colors which are therefore truly called Desultory, but
whereas they are called Apparent, I can also admit it in respect of the general
Nature of Color which is to make Objects to Appear at Distance, by the Contact
of their Emanant Species; and so indeed all Colors may be termed Apparent; but
any such Distinction as is by some made between Colors themselves, Real, or
Apparent, as though some Colors were not Real, I can not admit; and though some
affirm only Fixed Colors to be Real, and others deny even the Reality of them,
I must affirm both Fixed and Desultory to be Real, according to my Rule, which
I have formerly set down; and so certainly they are both Realy in Nature, and
Real Objects of our Sens, and not only in our Mind and Reason; like the
Fantastical Species of Colors which Melancholic and Madmen do Imaginate and
Contemplate, and which are the only Apparent Colors that I know (because they
are only Species and Images thereof and no Real Colors in themselves) unles we
also acknowledge all Mankind to be as Fantastical, as some such indeed are, and
the Assertors of this Opinion make themselves to be, and none to have any true
and Real Sens and Sight: for let these Desultory Colors in the same Position,
and with all the same Circumstances, be Inspected by a thousand Sane Men one
after another, and they shall all give in the same Verdict of them, which shows
that they are Realy such in their own Nature, and there is not, nor can there
be, in any Man any other Sensation thereof: whereas any Infirmity of Sens may be
rectified by a rectified Sensation, as I shall show hereafter; and though they
were only Phantasms, as the others in Imagination, yet they should be Real
Phantasms, or Entia Sensationis, as I have said. Thus let the Yellow and Blew
Glasses be always laid over one another and not removed, and you shall always
see a Green through them against the Sun, by that Local Union, as well as of
any Green Produced by a Spiritual Union of both those Colors, by dying, or the
like: and though as their Generation is Momentany, so their Corruption may also
be, yet you may continue them as long time as you pleas to continue the Local
Union. And so also more Fixed Colors made by several Infusions of Chemical
Spirits may be almost as Momentaneously Generated and Corrupted, and yet if any
Chemist shall therefore deny such Fixed Colors to be Real, I desire him to
reconsyder Flame, which is as Momentaneously Generated and Corrupted in the
Successive Individualitys thereof every Moment, and I suppose he will not deny
Flame to be Real, (which is the chief Instrument of his Art) and Sound
certainly is a Real Sensible, and yet never fixed but Desultory. But the true
Difference between them is, as I have said, that Desultory Colors are Generated
only by Local Union Extrinsecaly, and Fixed Colors by Spiritual Mistion
Intrinsecaly; and therefore Desultory Colors, whereof External Light is one
Principle, as in the Prism, Iris, Pigeons Neck, and the like, have not only
their Visibility, but also their very Coloration Actuated by the External
Light; as in the Yellow and Blew Glasses laid over one another, which yet are
not made Green without the Transmission of the Light through both: so that
indeed all Desultory Colors are Actuated by External Light, but Fixed Colors
are Actualy in themselves what they are, without any External Light, which does
only Actuate the Visibility thereof whereby they Appear to our Sight by drawing
forth the Visible Sp^cies which it does Actuate, as I shall show hereafter; but
as a Picture under a Curtain, and many such other things may Actualy be in
themselves, though they do not Appear to our Senses, so are Fixed Colors in the
Dark, by the Internal Mistion of their own Lucidity and Opacity, which seems to
me to be very Evident by Reason, because they are Realy such Mistions of Light
and Opacity in themselves Internaly, and so are Colors in themselves without any
External Light, though not Visible to us without it: and also to Sens, by the
known Experiment of White which in the same Homogeneous Body, Cloth, Paper, or
the like, will not be so soon fired by the Burning Glass as if it be Black,
though there be no other Imaginable Difference but only of the Colors, and that
Difference is Intrinsecaly in themselves, and though it is true that the Sun
beams Transmitted through the Burning Glass do convey Light as well as Heat,
yet I do not conceiv the Light to be Consyderable heerin, or if it be, it is
one and the same in itself as it does Actuate the Visibility of both the Colors
Externaly, but I suppose that as it does pass together in the same Emanant Rays
with the Heat, and so meet with the Internal Light of the White, the Whitenes,
which is more Lucid in itself does, as all Homogeneous Natures, Univocaly
Conspire with it and Dilate itself therewith, which is called a Segregation of
Rays, whereby the Heat in the same Rays is also Diffused, and so Weakened, and
therefore can not Operate so Intens^y upon it, as it does upon Black; which
has most Opacity in itself, that is Contrary unto Light, and does Congregate
the Rays thereof, that Oppugn it, and consequently the Heat, which thereby does
Operate more Intensly upon it; and so it is far more easily Incensed; and
accordingly as Colors are more White and Luminous, or Black and Opacous, so
they do more or less Segregate or Congregate the Rays of Light, and
consequently of Heat: wherefore there is in all Color such an Internal Light,
which is in the Mistion of the other Elements, as well as Heat in Fume, which
is a kind of Culinary Fire, and so I may call this, Culinary Light; which if it
be not Perfectly Fixed with Opacity, as in Flame, and the like, makes only
Imperfect and Meteorical Colors; yet not such as are so Desultory as the others
that are only by Local Union, and if it be Perfectly Fixed, as in other
Colorate Bodies, does Generate more Fixed Colors: And as there are these two
Principles of Colors, that is the Agile Light, and Opacity which does Fix it,
so there are only those two Original Colors, White wherein Light is Predominant,
and Black wherein Opacity is Predominant; concerning which last I have one
Observation, that as all Desultory Colors are, as I have said, Caused by
External Light; so among all those Desultory Colors, Black, wherein Opacity is
Predominant, was never seen in any Prism, Iris, or Pigeons Neck, or the like;
because Opacity, which does Fix Color, as I have said, is most Contrary to their
Desultory Nature; and yet whereas Diers say White is no Color in their Sens,
because it will take any other Color, others Philosophicaly speaking, say, that
Black is no Color, though it will not take any other Color, and generaly that
all Colors are only Apparitions and Specter, who, as though they could Create
and Annihilate what they pleas, will Add to and Diminish from Natures Inventory
as they list. And thus they make all Colors to be only certain Desultory
Variations of the External Light upon the Superficies of Bodies, and the Object
of the most Noble Sens to be only a fictitious Imposture, affirming Black to be
from the Suffocation of the Rays by an Unequal and Porous Superficies, and
White the Contrary, and so all other Intermediate Colors only more or less such
Suffocations of the Rays; which is most Sensibly falls, if we may believ our own
Eyes; for Snow is most Porous, and yet most White, Jett polished least Porous,
and yet most Black; and so Painted Glass is either White or Black, and yet the
Rays Penetrate more through the White then the Black, and both of them are
apparently White and Black in themselves before, and without any such
Penetration; and so Bodies of a like Surface are Indifferently either White or
Black; as polished Marble, Skins of Europaeans, and Ethiopians, and the like.
All which may also Chymicaly be Demonstrated by the Generation of Colors in
Flame; which though they are as Momentaneous as the Flame, yet are no otherwise
Desultory then the Flame itself, as I have said; wherein, when the Fomes thereof,
as the Wax, or Tallow of a Candle, is first Incensed, there is before it be
Inflamed or below the Flame a manifest Black, and so in the Fuligo, and as soon
as it is Inflamed a Blew, and in the purest Flame, a White, and in that which
is in the Cuspis, a Yellow, and if it be very Fuliginous, Red, (which is also
very manifest in the Robust Fire of the Wike) whereby it plainly appears that
Black is from a Terrene Quality in the Fomes, and Fuligo; and White from the
Ethereal Quality of the Flame: whereof I call the one Opacity, and the other
Light; though both of these be Mist together, as all the Elements and their
Contrary Qualitys are; but Opacity is notably Predominant in Black, and Light
in White, and all other Simple Colors are only Gradual Predominations of either
of them; as Blew of less Opacity and more Light then Black; and Yellow of less
Light and more Opacity then White; and I suppose Red to be a more Intens and
CondensYellow, or perhaps of a middle Degree between Yellow and Blew, as seems
by Local Union of any Fuligo with Yellow which renders it more Reddish; but
certainly it is not Mist of both, for that is a Compound Color, which is Green,
as Gray is of Black and White; and so all other Compounds, and Decompounds,
which Painters, and Diers, make of these Simple Colors. And as these Meteorical
Colors, so also all other more Perfect Generations of Fixed Colors are by
Actuating the Internal Lucidity or Opacity thereof, more, or less: and their
Corruption by Reducing it into Potentiality. As the most White Wood by
Actuating the Fuliginous Opacity thereof in Charking becomes a Black Coal; and
when that Fuligo is Emitted by Burning, it becomes again a Whitish Ash, or
Gray, Mist of both.

V. The Antecedent Darkness, which was in the first Chaos, was the Pure Evening
thereof, before any Light, which was Created after it; and therefore Light,
rather then Heat, is particularly mentioned in the Work of this First Day;
because thereby this, and all Successive Days, were made and Divided into Day
and Night Artificial; as it follows thereupon, And God Divided the Light from
the Darkness, etc. And so in this whole History of the Creation (which is as
the Decalog, and the like, very Compendious, and Comprehensive) though only
some more General or Principal things be mentioned, yet all others that are
Coordinate and Connatural must also be Intended: and certainly there never was
any System of the World declared and described either more truly, or in a more
short Epitome. Now whereas the Antecedent Darkness did continue for some Time on
the face of the Deep, wherein the Spirit of God Moved upon it, it may be
Curiously Inquired, how long that Space of Time was, wherein the Antecedent
Darkness was and continued, before the first Light was Created? but as Divine
Wisdom does not regard Human Curiosity, nor attend to satisfy it, so I esteem
it Impertinent, though I may discourse it Humanitus. However I must conceiv, as
I have said, that the Spirit of God did not only Move or Incubate on the first
Chaos to Prepare and Predispose it before and until the Light was Created, but
Conformably until all the other Original Creatures in all the Six Days were
Produced, and the whole Creation and Course of Nature finished: for they were
all Supernatural and the Immediate Works of God. And concerning the particular
Space of Time between the General and Proper Creation or Beginning, and the
first Improper Creation of Light, I conceiv it probably to have been Twelv
Hours, and somewhat more, and that there was neither any Diurnal, nor any
Nocturnal Light, during that Time: For so the Computation of all the Six Days
is by Evening and Morning as well as of the First; and the Evening and Morning
made the First Proper Day Natural, which most probably was Equinoctial, and was
afterward Divided into Day and Night Artificial; and the Evening is always set
before the Morning, as it was before it in Time, but the Day before the Night,
as it is before it in Nature; because the Day Artificial was first so made by
Dividing the Light from the Darkness, that is, into a Diurnal, and Nocturnal
Light, and so God says, I form the Light and Create Darkness, as he did in the
First Day Originaly; whereas Pure Darkness is not Creable, but the Night which is
called Dark Comparatively. Wherefore as this Improper Creation in the Six Days
was Original Generation, whereunto all Successive is Conformable, so I suppose
that as the whole Day, according to the Diurnal Course of the Ether then first
putt into Motion, and so still continuing is four and twenty Hours and somewhat
more; so the two Halvs thereof, or first Evening and Morning must be supposed to
have been also of the same Duration, and each of them Equal, as well as the
Second and Third, before the Sun and Moon were Created. Nor can I conceiv how
there could be any such Day and Night Artificial in the First Day, as since;
because they were then first so Created after the first Evening was ended; but
could not Possibly be before they were so Created: And when Light was Created
it was Morning in all the Ether in respect of the Precedent Evening, and so
there was never since any such Evening and Morning, as made the first Day
Natural: because there is no such Pure Darkness, but only Comparative Darkness,
whereby Night was made after the Evening was ended, by the first Creation of
Light, which was the first Morning; and God in that Morning did afterward
Divide the Light into a Diurnal and Nocturnal Proportion thereof, whereby he
made Day and Night Artificial. And thus, though Time was Created in the
Beginning, from whence also the most Proper Natural Day did Commence, yet the
Artificial was Created in that First Natural Day; and the Day Natural according
to the Course of the Sun in the Fourth Day, and the two Parts of that Day which
we commonly but more Improperly call Day Natural, that is, Night and Day are
not always Equal with the Parts of all other Days: whereas the two Parts of the
Proper Day Natural, that is, the Evening and Morning being Computed from the
Beginning are always Equal and each of them Twelv Hours and somewhat more. And
because the Parts of the Solar or Improper Day Natural, except Equinoctial, are
Unequal, therefore the Whole may be sooner as in Summer, or later as in Winter;
but the Proper Natural Day is never sooner or later, because it is the
Succession of Four and Twenty Hours Daily from the first Four and Twenty
Hours, and Beginning of the first Day Natural: and so all the Six Days both
before and after the Sun and Moon were made to Rule the Day and Night, and also
the Seventh or Sabbath are Computed accordingly. Wherefore because this Day is
most Even Exact and Invariable according to Time, God also appointed it, and
not the Improper Day Natural, to be the Measure of Time in Sacris, and so it is
said from Even to Even shall ye cele^rate your Sabbath, and not from Night to
Night, and though the later Jews did not so observe it; yet Ab Initio non fuit
sic. But both the Day and Time of the Christian Sabbath which is appointed for
us Gentiles in all Parts of the Earth, is, and must be Altered by the
Resurrection of Christ, which if it should begin as the former at Evening, as
some would have it, then it should begin before the Resurrection; for unless
that were also some Time after the Beginning of the Evening Christ should not
have laid in the Grave three Days Synechdochicaly, as most certainly he did,
and though it be expressly declared when the Creation was finished and God
first Rested, that is, at the end of the Sixth Evening and Morning or Proper
Day Natural; yet it is not so expressed or ascerteined when Christ Rose again,
but only that he Rose very early in the Morning of the Third Day, that is, the
Solar, or Improperly Natural. Now as there was not only a Proper Natural Day,
but also a Division therein of the Light from the Comparative Darkness, and so
Day and Night Artificial made thereby in the First Day Originaly, and
Successively in the Second and Third Day, before the Sun or Moon were made to
Rule them, more particularly, as I shall show hereafter; so certainly there
must have been some Circumrotation of the Ether, and of the Light Inherent
therein in the Precedent Days; for if the Light were Equaly in all the Ether,
then there should have been Equaly all Day in all the Ae^her; and there could
not be such Day in one Hemisphere and Night in the other without a
Circumrotation of the Ether and of the Light, whereas there was such a Division
of the Light, as made Day and Night Artificial therein, and this Day and Night
were then Originaly made, and were such as they have ever since been
S^ccessively by the Diurnal Course of the Ether, (except only the more Special
Variations thereof by the Proper Courses of the Sun and Moon which were ma^e
thereby, and are Annual and Menstruous, but not Diurnal) which must necessarily
be by the Circumgyration of the whole Ether, and of the Light thereof in one
Hemisphere, as the Sun now is so carried about by the Ether Diurnaly.
Certainly the Earth, Water, or Air, or any of them could not so Move in this
First Day, because they were not yet Improperly Created, or so Made, as it is
said of the Air that God Made or fitted the Firmament thereof, or Expansum, in
the Second Day, (though they were Properly Created in the Beginning in their
several Bodies and Spheres) but were then all in Rest, and only the Spirit of
God Moved among them, and as the Irregular Winds, and the Regular Courses of
the Tides and of the Sun, Moon and Stars were not before, or until those
other Elementary Bodies were Improperly Created, so neither was there any Motion
of the Earth; whereof if we could suppose any such Motion, yet we may not
reasonably suppose it to have been before the Third Day, and Improper Creation
of the Earth therein; concerning which I shall Discourse hereafter, and now only
add one other Observation; that as the Sun, though far less then one
Hemisphere of the Ether, yet makes Day therein by his Emanant Rays, so
probably the Diurnal Light in this First Day did not fill one whole Hemisphere,
but only some such part thereof, as according to the Vigor and Extent of the
Emanant Rays thereof did make Day Artificial in one Hemisphere, and perhaps with
some such Crepuscula, as the Sun now does make, for we may well conceiv, that
First Day and Night to have been Analogous to every Day since in all the
general Circumstances thereof (besides only such as are more specialy
superinduced in the Variations of sooner, or later, more, or less, by the
Courses of the Sun and Moon) whereas if that Diurnal Light Inherent should have
filled one whole Hemisphere, the Emanant Rays thereof would have extended much
farther, and the Inherent Light should have been Hemispherical, which is not
Conformable to the Natural Figure thereof: and therefore I rather conceiv, that
it was a Particular Globe Glomus or Confluvium collected from the Light, which
was first Generaly and Diffusively Created in the whole Ether, and that which
was left in the common Body thereof is therefore Comparatively called Darkness;
and though it were not strictly such Darkness, as was in the Chaos, yet the
Expression is not therefore Popular, so as some would make all the
Philosophical Expressions in Scripture to be but Necessarily to be so
understood, for there are no Purae Tenebrae in the whole Elementary Nature, and
in the Superaether there is either a Superaethereal Light, or neither Light,
nor Darkness; for where there is not, nor Naturaly ought to be any Positive,
there is no Privative, which is founded in the Positive, and is only the
Privation thereof; as in a Stone there is neither Sight nor Blindness: wherefore
after the first Creation of Light, that Darkness must necessarily be understood
of Comparative Darkness only; and this is the Natural Darkness which God Created,
and is also sufficiently so explained in the ensuing words, And the Darkness he
called Night, which has its Nocturnal Light: whereby it is expressly and most
exactly Distinguished from a Pure Privation of Light, such as was Antecedently
in the Chaos, wherein there was neither Day nor Night. And here again
Cavillation, which is endless, may proceed to term these Expressions, God Said,
or Called, and the like, Popular; though as the others, so these also are most
Necessary; for indeed nothing can be Properly spoken of God, either as he is in
Essence, or in Operation, and there can be no Expression more apposite, then
that the Creatures are Verba Mentis Divinae. And here I must affirm of this
whole History of Creation that it is not Popular, as some would have it, and
thereby render it Insignificant unto all others, as well as to themselves;
whereby they have lost the Benefit of so great a Treasure, which has been a
Chaos to this Day, and is still hid from the Wise and Prudent; or rather they
thus hide it from themselves: though I am confident that neither themselves, nor
any other, can ever declare or describe such a System of the World in more
brief or less Popular Expressions. Wherefore I term it a History, that is, of
Matter of Fact; which has only such apt Expressions as serve to declare and
describe the Matter of Fact, and therefore certainly are not Popular; otherwise
we may call all the Sacred History of Adam and Eve, of Noah, of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and of all the Patriarchs, Judges, and Kings, and Governors, and of
Christ and his Apostles, Popular; and reject all the Matters of Fact Recorded
both in the Old, and New Testament, and our very Creed; which should be most
Irreligious and also Irrational. Thus when God says, In the Beginning he
Created the Heaven and the Earth; shall any say, he did not, and so of the
rest? And if any may be so Irreligious as to deny the Verity of the Fact, yet
he may not be so Irrational as to deny the Veracity of the Expressions, or to
affirm that the Scripture does not say, that In the Beginning God Created the
Heaven and the Earth, and so of the rest. But that we may not frame any Popular
Notion of what we intend by a Popular Expression, and so Confound our Discourse
thereof, as I have hitherto strictly examined other Terms and Expressions, so I
shall also now examine this very Expression of an Expression. And I acknowledge
generaly all Language to be Popular; because Words are no Natural Signatures,
but only Instituted Tesserae, or Symbola of Things, Coined by Men, and so made
to pass Current among themselves. And since the Confusion of Languages every
National Language is more particularly Popular, or peculiar to the People of
that Nation; and the same Word may signify one Thing in one Tongue, and another
in another; as Nay in English has a Contrary Signification in Greek. Wherefore
I acknowledge also that there is such Popularity in the Hebrew Tongue, and also
many Idiotisms thereof, as well as in others; but I suppose this is not the
Popularity Intended; for then we should also Invalidate all Language as well as
this, and all Books as well as the Bible. Also there are certain General
Propertys and Modifications of all Human Language, as well as several Idiotisms
of Particular Languages. As that which is spoken Respectively of any Thing, or
in one Respect, according to that which is the Subject Matter of the present
Discourse, can not reasonably by any Rational Men in any Language be Interpreted
Absolutely, or in all Respects whatsoever. And so again, as I have before
noted, that which no Human Language can Properly Express may not reasonably by
any Rational Men be Interpreted Properly, and the like; which if we should not
allow, we should destroy all Human Discourse; and otherwise then so, I know not
one Popular Expression in this whole History of the Creation; and such
Popularity also is, and must be, in any other History of Matter of Fact: and
therefore this can be no reason why any should regard it less then any other
Philosophical Discourses whatsoever. Wherefore they must rather Intend by
Popular Expressions such as are according to false Apprehensions of Common
People, or Deceptions of Sens, and the like; and I suppose, they can not show
any one such in all this Narration, and indeed it is great Impiety to conceiv
that there should be any such in it, which does so Historicaly and Intentionaly
declare and describe the Genesis of the World: though in other parts of the
Scripture, which are not so Historical and Intentional, I also acknowledge that
there are all the Varietys of Human Language, and so there are many Expressions
which are spoke, as we say Rotunde, and so indeed Popularly for common Use, and
such as are allowed in all Arts and Sciences, even Mathematical; and many
Figurative Expressions, yea Hyperbolical and Ironical, in some more Poetical
and Rhetorical parts thereof; which yet may as easily be discerned as in any
ordinary Discourse: but certainly the Divine Verity does not any where offer any
thing of Falsity or Deception, but Expresses most Infallible Truth in the
common Language of Mankind, and particularly according to those Tongs, wherein
it is writ; and most Wisely Orders and Varieth the Expressions according to
the Occasion and Intention thereof: and so here concerning the Genesis of the
World it speak^th not only most truly, but also as Narratively, and as
Philosophicaly as any Philosopher whatsoever: and therefore none may justly
neglect it upon any such pre^ension of Popularity; neither do I suppose that to
be the very reason thereof, as is pretended, but rather that it speaks too
Expressly and Exactly those things which are Contrary to the Private Opinions
of such Pretenders, who, because they can not Evade the Divine Authority thereof,
would Elude it, by supposing that it neither does, nor can, speak any thing
against their own preconceived Opinions: and therefore as they esteem all the
World of Mankind besides themselves Popular, and to be in a Popular Error; so
they most Profanely and Presumptuously Interpret Scripture itself rather
according to Common Errors, as they suppose, then will endure it to Contradict
their own greater Errors, which yet they will maintein as Oraculous: and I find
this Humor to prevail not only with such who do wholly exclude Scripture from
all Philosophical Discourses; but also in many Commentators, who rather correct
Moses by Heathenish Philosophers, in any such Points as are not Articles of our
Creed (as the Creation, and the like) then them by Moses in their Timid and
Partial Explications: yea even Translators, who should strictly embrace the
very Letter of the Text, yet do thus Warp and Incline as far as they may in
their very Expressions, as I have observed: and I know not how among them all
this Divine Philosophy has hitherto been Rejected, Neglected, or Abused;
whereby Mankind ha^h received little more satisfaction from it then from any
other Human Philosophy; though it be the only Standard of Truth, and the first
Sentence thereof, In the Beginning, etc. the very Alpha of all Divine Letters,
and the Foundation of all that Divinity, and Morality, or our whole Duty toward
God and Man that is contained in the whole Scripture: whereby it plainly
appears how firm a Connection there is between Theology, Morality, and Natural
Philosophy; and of what Consequence and Concernment, according to Divine
Wisdom, a right and sound Knowledge thereof is both in Church, and State: and I
dare affirm that there never was extant in the World any other Writing that
has more firmly and plainly laid the Foundations of these three most Noble and
Profitable Sciences: and as it is my Design to Demonstrate it even in Natural
Philosophy, (which perhaps men may least expect,) so I may suppose, if I shall
perform and obtein this, they will easily grant it of the others: And I hope,
though I may fall short of mine own Intention and their Satisfaction, yet I
shall discover so much Light thereof, that others will begin to believ that more
may be derived from this Fountain, and so proceed to perfect what I have begun.
Certainly whatsoever is in this Sacred History, is Truth, and all that Truth is
Fundamental, whereupon Human Reason (to which God has left the rest for the
Exercitation and Improvement thereof) may proceed to build; but other Foundation
then this can no Man lay. And though the Divine Spirit in Inditing it did not
intend to satisfy the more Curious and Impertinent, yet such things as no
Memory of Man has otherwise Preserved and Delivered, nor our Reason and
Judgment could have Retrived, are here clearly Reveled, and faithfully
Recorded. As not only that there was a Creation and a Beginning, but how many
Thousand Years since, and all the Succeeding Chronology of the World, and the
whole Order and Process of Created Nature, how it was first Ordained and
Instituted in Six several Days, and the like: and as all Christian Historians
have rectified the Fabulous Chronology of Pagans by the former, so should
Christian Philosophers their Contradictory and Unsatisfactory Philosophy by the
latter. But again on the other hand we must carefully avoid all Cabalistical
and Allegorical Interpretations thereof, and satisfy our selves with the plain
and simple Sens of the Text, according to the Subject Matter thereof, and
Context of Scripture. And thus whereas the Rabbis from those former
Expressions, God said, and God called it, and the like, have asserted the
Hebrew Language, wherein this History of the Creation was writ by Moses, and the
Names of Day, Night, Heaven, Sea, Earth, and the like, which are said thus to
be Named by God, to be therefore the Primitive Language Instituted by God, and
Original of all others, I dare not so affirm, though I otherwise grant it to be
the most ancient of all Languages now Extant, because that Book is the most
ancient of all Books now Extant. But God is also said to call the Stars by
their Names, though all of them be not Expressed: for their Names to him who is
the Creator of all things are their Created Natures, by which he knows them
Immediately and Essentialy, and so he speaks by Real Language, or by his Works,
which, as I have said, are the Extrinsecal and Artificial Words of the Divine
Mind, and his Word is only a Comment thereupon, and so the Heaven and Earth were
Denominated by their Created Natures; and when he made Day and Night, he so
denominated them by making them to be such. And heerin Divine Language and
Human Differ; for whereas Adam afterward gave Names unto the Creatures, he only
Verbaly called them by some Instituted Names, Expressive of such Natures as God
had made them; but did no^, nor could Realy make them to be such. And the
Primitive Language, whatsoever it was, may rather be referred to him; for it is
Man's Creature, and of Human Institution; and possibly he might speak that
Language: and so it is said, Adam called his wife Chevah, and she her son
Sheth. However it is certain they both spoke some Language, which also declares
the great Perfection of their Created Wit, which could so soon frame such a
Common Language whereby they understood one another, and that must be
Primitive, because they were the first Man and Woman. And if God afterward spoke
unto them Vocaly and Humanitus, he also spoke their Language, by which they
might understand him: And it is expressly said that God brought the Beasts and
Fowls to Adam, To see what he would Call them: And whatsoever Adam Called every
Living Creature, that was the Name thereof. And Adam gave Names to all Catell,
and to the Fouls of the Air, and to every Beast of the Field: so that plainly
all these Names were Instituted Originaly by Adam, and not by God himself
Immediately, who is said to bring them unto him, To see what he would Call
them; that is, to Exercise his Human Facultys both of Speech and Reason: and
accordingly Adam did give to every one his Specifical Name, and that was the
Name thereof. Therefore whereas they make the Divine Institution of the Hebrew
Language to be the Foundation of their Cabal, that very Foundation is too
Cabalistical, and remains to be proved: and perhaps though that Language
generaly were Primitive, yet the Dialect thereof, as of all others, might be
much Altered before the Confusion, but especialy after it, and most probably it
was first spoken without the Character, which they also make to be
Cabalistical. And there are some such Critics who accuse the Hebrew Language
itself of many Defects; wherefore certe^nly it was not Immediately from God,
all whose Immediate Works are most Perfect; but from Man; and if from Adam in
Paradise Originaly, has been since much altered and corrupted. Therefore as, I
conceiv, there is nothing Mystical or Cabalistical in Numbers, so neither in
Letters or Figures, or any other Quantitys; and as there is only a plain
Signature of the Notion rather then of the Thing in any such Literal
Characters, so also in Words which are only Sounds. And so the Names which Adam
gave, did signify only Notionaly and Intellectualy; whereby also it appears,
that he had a most Perfect Philosophical Contemplation and Inspection of their
Natures, according to his most Perfect Reason and Natural Understanding: which
God, who had Created his Intellective Spirit, and given him Dominion thereby
over all Sensitive and Inferior Natures, brought these most Curious and
D^fficult Pieces of Nature, and in the very next Classis thereof to himself,
purposely to Exercise and Discover to himself: And though some, who think
themselves Wiser then Adam, deny even this to him, and very Presumptuously
Arrogate to themselves more Knowledge of Nature by some Artificial Advantages, as
of the Telescope and Microscope, and the like, then ever Adam had in Paradise;
I will not deny but that they may have more Sensation thereby then he Actualy
had, but yet I suppose both his Understanding to have been far more
Telescopical, and also his Wit more Microscopical then ours; and that
Potentialy he was able to have Contrived all such Artificial Advantages
whatsoever as well as Language, if he had any such need thereof, since they are
only the Applications of certain Natural Causalitys which were then most
Perfect, and whereof he had a most Perfect Intellection according to his Perfect
Human Nature in that Conjunct State thereof wherein he was Created. But yet I do
not conceiv that he did know, or could even then know such things as are
Naturaly in themselves Indemonstrable and Incomprehensible to any Human Reason,
as Mathematical Points, and other Asymmetra, which yet are the very least and
lowest of Entitys; because, as I have showed, they are Demonstrably
Indemonstrable, and were purposely so secreted by God for the Humiliation of
Man in his most Perfect State, and for the Admiration of himself Seen in his
meanest Workmanship: for as there is still left in Nature Veritas in Profundo,
for the Exercise of Human Reason and Study, and it is Sloth and Idleness in us
not to D^gg and Search for it; so there is also Veritas in Abysso, which is
Inscrutable, and it is Folly in any to Inquire farther into it. And so there
are many things which we may Apprehend, That they are, but can never
Comprehend, What they are: and when we once come to know that we can know no
more of them, we have arrived to the utmost Bound of Human Knowledge; and there
we must Acquiesce, and not Affect Contradictions, to know Omne Scibile and non
Scibile; which is a Madness beyond the Tentation of Adam, who knew that he could
know no more then he did as Man in his present State, and therefore Aspired to
be as the Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And though some term such a Prudent
Ignorance and Sober Acquiescence, Ignorantiae Asylum; yet it is indeed rather
Scientiae Adytum, wherein Humble and Pious Minds Adore and Admire their Creator,
who is both Infinite in his Essence, and Incomprehensible in his Operations.

VI. Now let us Prais the Infinite Jehovah; Immens, and Incomprehensible;
Eternal, and Necessary; One, and Universal Being, and Welbeing in Himself. Who
most f^eely overflowing in the Creation of this Finite World, as a Transient
Effect of himself, first Caused it to Start forth from Absolute Notbeing into
Being, and afterward Invested the Naked Being of the Chaos with a Perfect
Welbeing in Six Days. Which thereby was made to be a Finite Something in itself,
but as Nothing in his Infinity; Mensurable in itself, but as Nothing in his
Immensity; Temporary in itself, but as Nothing in his Eternity; Numerable in
itself, but as Nothing in his Unity; who still comprehends all Creatures in
their Essences, as he did before in their Possibilitys. And as the World was
Created by him without itself, so it would again be Annihilated of itself,
without his Continued Creation. Who has built this great City of the Univers
for himself, and for the Majesty of his Kingdom; and has Created all his
Subjects therein by his own Immediate Power, and does Govern them all, and all
their Subordinations for his own Supreme Glory. Who has made the Utmost and
Highest Sphere thereof to be his Holy Temple; Ingenerable, and Incorruptible:
whose Roof and Cover is the Superficies of the Universal Globe, Circularly
Including all Created Entity within itself, and Excluding all Nonentity from
itself. And the Immovable Foundations thereof are Arched over the whole
Elementary World; whereof the Vast Ether, and Highest Convexity thereof, is less
then the lowest Concavity of the Superaether; and the whole Ethereal Sphere is
the great Partition between it and the Immortal Inhabitants thereof, and the
Mortal Inhabitants of the Inferior Globe; Disterminating them not only by its
Immens Superiority and Profundity, but also by its most Rapid Motion; and
Defending itself from all their Assalts and Encounters, while it Predominateth
over them all: Whose Heat as a true Archaeus Fab^r, or Vulcan, from which
nothing is hid, Generateth and Corrupts them; either like a Phoebus,
Fostering and Nourishing them in the more Temperate Zone; or like a Phaeton,
Burning and Consuming them in the Torrid Zone thereof. And therefore is farthest
Removed from them, and Diverted by its own Perpetual Motion, and Tempered by
the Mediation of the Frigid Air, or Drowned with the Clammy Water, or
Imprisoned in the Consistent Earth, until at last this Firstborn and Strength
of Nature shall Destroy them all with an Universal Conflagration, and turn the
very Original Chaos into an Everlasting Gehenn^. Also Light, the other of those
Ethereal Gemini, is as Amiable, at Heat is Powerful; Actuating all the
Visible Beautys of Nature, and is far more Beautiful in itself; Discovering
all that is between us in any of the other Elements and its own Profundity;
Adorning Culinary Fire with a Golden Flammeum: so that Infants newly born are
ravished with the Luster, and fix their Eyes on the Beauty thereof, and all
Domestical and Savage Beasts both Love and Dread the Majesty thereof. Which
opening the Shopwindows of the World setts forth all the Wares thereof with no
falls Lights; Enriching Gold itself with its Brightness, and Irradiating Jewels
with its Rays. Which makes Day by its desired Presence, and Night by its
deplored Absence. And is in itself the most Excellent Sensible of the most
Excellent Sens, and the Visible Hieroglyphike of Invisible Spirits; and of all
other Elementary Natures affords most both of Contemplation and Conversation
to Sensitive and Intellective Animals.

SECTION VIII.
And God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters; and let it
Divide the Waters from the Waters. And God made the Firmament: and Divided the
Waters which were under the Firmament from the Waters which were above the
Firmament. And it was so. And God called the Firmament Heaven, And the Evening
and the Morning were the Second Day.
EXPLICATION.
God having Perfected the Ether, did by the Heat thereof cause the Vapors of
Water to Ascend into the Air; when it also was fitly Expanded between the
Ether and the Waters, and thereby the Vapors of Water which were above were
Divided from the Waters beneath. And this Aereal Expansum was another Heaven,
and so Perfected in the Second Day.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of the Air. 2. Of the Elasticity thereof. 3. Of Cold. 4. Of Sounds. 5. Of
Meteors therein.

1. THe Air is the next Element to Ether, and seems to be Continuous with
it, because it is also Diaphanous, and does not Terminate the Sight. And so it
is called Firmament or Expansum, as well as the Ether, and also Heaven, as
well as the Superaether. And because it is the next and Immediate Heaven to us,
therefore the general Name of Heaven is according to Hebraical Etymology most
Proper and Peculiar to it, though the Superaether be the most Stupendous
Excellent Heaven in its own Nature, as I have said. And as we generaly call all
that is above us Heaven, so in that respect this is the First Heaven, Ether
the Second, and Superaether the Third. But it is in itself very Different from
both them above it, and also from Water, and Earth below it; and as Different
from all the other Elements, as they are generaly one from another, because they
are several Elements; though particularly as they are nearer in Situation, so
also in Nature one to another. And Air is of a Middle Nature between Ether and
Water, as Water is between Air and Earth; and so considered with the Ethereal
Rays Emanant into it may be called an Aeriaethereous Sphere, and with the
Vapors and the Effluvia thereof Ascending into it an Aquaereous Sphere, as Water
and Earth are a Terraqueous Globe. And though because it has Spiritualy less
Sensible Qualitys then Ether, and a less Dens or Gross Body then Water (so
that any Vessel filled with it is Comparat^vely said to be Empty, and Poeticaly
it is called the Inane, a^^ Chemists in their most Curious Separations can not
well discern it) yet God who Created it has discovered it to be a particular
Element, and one of the three Heavens, and the Fowls of that Heaven feel and
find it to be such in their flying therein; and though it be in Rarity next to
Ae^her, yet both of them have some Density, and a Proportionable Weight, as I
have said. Also though it be far more Rare then Water which is supposed to be
about a thousand times more Dens then the Atmosphere according to the Common
Temper thereof, and may be many times more Dens then Air Rarefied or Expanded;
yet perhaps as Water and Earth do more agree in Density, so also Air and Ether
(which are both called Expansa) in Rarity. But as Air is thus Rare, so it is
not only capable of Compression more then Water, but also of Dilatation or
Expansion more then Ether; which Expansion thereof is now made famous by the
Name of Elast^city, whereof I shall purposely treat afterward, and therefore not
now prevent my self. As Astronomers have devifed several Spheres and Regions in
the Ether, so have others also in the Air; whereas indeed they have both only
their own Proper Regions, which are several, because they are both of several
Density and Rarity, and of several Elementary Natures; and so with the other
two Divide the whole Elementary Globe into their four several Provinces, as I
have showed; and if any could show us any such Division Corporeal, and
Spiritual, or either of them, in the Ether or Air themselves, they should Prove
what they Say, and not only Say what they Imagine. But though no Colorable Cause
be offered to make such Partitions in Ether, except the Various Motions of the
Sydereous Bodies, which Move in the Ether, and are Moved with the Ether, and
need no such Proper Spheres, as I have showed; yet there is a more Sensible
Pretension to prove Three several Regions in the Air, which will be also found
to be like them in the Ether, only in Notion, and not in Nature: for whereas
they assign the First Region to be and extend so far as the Emanant Rays of
Ether are Reflected from the Earth, the Middle to be where that Reflection
ends, and wherein the Meteors are, and the Third above them, and so
Immediately Contiguous to the Ether; I find no such Partition thereof, neither
in the Text, nor in Nature. For themselves do not apprehend the First Region to
be many Miles high, (nor indeed can it be of any great Hight, if it be below
all Meteors, Vapors, Dews, and the like, which continualy Ascend into it from
the Terraqueous Globe, and are not very high) but certainly the Rays are
Reflected much farther then any has yet assigned the utmost Hight of the whole
Air to be. It is reported that the Pike of Teneriff, and some such other
Eminences of the Earth, may be seen at the Distance of about three Degrees from
them, which can not be by the Direct Rays thereof, being no Lucid Bodies, and
therefore must be by the Reflected Rays of Ether, which are Reflected so far
through the Air; otherwise there could be no Vision of the Object at such a
Distance: though indeed Reflection be far shorter then Direct Emanation, (and
perhaps there may be some such Proportions thereof, as there are of the Descent
and Reflected Motion of any Ball or Stone from a Paviment.) And therefore we
can not see so far by the Reflected Rays of a Candle in the Night, as we may
see the Candle itself by the Direct Rays thereof. Now Heat is a Congenerous
Quality of Light, and Emanant with it in the same Ethereal Rays, as appears by
the B^rning Glass; and though the Heat of the Sun beams does Penetrate farther
into the Earth, then the Light thereof, because it is not resisted by the Opacity
thereof, which is not Contrary thereunto, but to Light, and is only hindered by
the Density, and so may not be Reflected altogether so much, because it
Penetrates more (which also proves Heat and Light to be several Qualitys) yet
certainly Heat can not so far fall short of the Light, but rather there is
some Degree of Heat Reflected with the Light unto the very Ether, though
Proportionably less; and then, according to their own assignment, there is but
one Region of the Air. Again the Vapors of Water are said to Ascend above the
Airy Expansum Indefinitely, which may be to the utmost Hight thereof, as well as
all over it: and as there are Bright and Dry Clouds above the Moist, and
Stellae Cadentes, and Comets, and the like, above them, so probably other
Tenuious and Invisible Vapors above them; and then also, according to their own
assignment, there is but one Region of the Air; and they who assign must prove
that there are not any Meteors or Vapors above their Second Region assigned,
which they can never do. But the truth is, that though the Ethereal Rays be
Reflected from Earth to Ether, yet that Reflection both of Light and Heat, as
all others, is stronger and longer as it is nearer, and weaker and shorter as
it is farther from the Body Reflecting; as well as Emanation is stronger as it
is nearer, and weaker as it is farther from the Body of the Inherent Quality
which does Emitt it: and so the Reflection of the Ethereal Rays from the
Terraqueous Globe back again to the Ae^her is Gradual, and of different
Degrees; and thereby does Produce Different Degrees of Vapors, and several
sorts of Meteors in several parts of the Air; and accordingly they attein
several Situations therein; and by the Variation of many Circumstantial
Causalitys the same Meteors poised therein almost as Glass Bubbles in Water are
sometimes higher, and sometimes lower, and have no such Planetary Position in
themselves, as Stars in Ether: nor is the Air so Invariable as it. The Spirit
of Air is not Expressed by any known Name, and I know not therefore well how to
Express it, unles we should call it, Aura: or the like. And indeed Philosophers
generaly have so much attended the Gross Matter, and so little regarded Subtle
Spirits, that they have not so much as found out any Vocabu^a of the very
Elementary Spirits, except only Fire, which is most Sensible both by the Heat
and Light thereof; though all the other Spirits be also Substantial Activitys,
and have their Sensible Qualitys; which yet has not been Determined concerning
all the Elements, what are their first Proper Qualitys, as I shall hereafter
show, and particularly prove Cold to be the Proper Quality of Air* as Heat is
of Ether. Also Air has apparently another Quality which is Sound, and that is
very Sensible, almost as much as Light; but is not so much considered, because
it is not so Permanent; and indeed Sound is far more Desultory then Color, as
I have said, for though Desultory Color is not, and can not be, Fixed as an
Image can not be fixed on a Speculum (which if it could be, would Excuse and
Exceed the Art of any Painter) yet it may be Continued in the same Po^ition as
long as you pleas: whereas Sound is always Transient and Fugitive, as I shall
show hereafter, and can not be Continued one Moment, but is still in
Succession, like Flame, and almost like the very Instants of Time. And yet as
all the other Heavens are Hebraicaly Denominated from this first Heaven, Air,
so also all Spirits from the Spirit thereof, almost in all Languages. Air has
also a Mistion with all the other Elements as well as Ether, and perhaps more,
as Water has more then it, and Earth most of them all: and so it has more of
the Terrene Qualitys then Ether, and less then Water, as it has more
Refracting Opacity then the one, and less then the other; and so also more
Consistence, then the one, and less then the other; and therefore is probably
less Fluid then Ether, as it is apparently more Fluid then Water.

II. The Ether, as I have said, is most Rare, and probably can not be more
Rarefied then it is in its own Element; and so the Earth most Dens, and can not
be more Densified. And though I know not whether Ether may be more Densified,
yet certainly Earth may be very much Rarefied, as in Soot, Camphire, Salts
Volatilised, and the like. But Water is most notably capable of Rarefaction
into Vapors, and they are as much Condensated again into Waters, though I
suppose it can not be so much Violently Expanded or Comprest, and that Air can
not be so much Condensated or Rarefied as it may be Comprest or Expanded. And
of all other Elements Air is most capable of Compression as in the Windgun, and
of Expansion as in the Airpump: (which from thence may be rightly termed the
Expansor) and from this Compression and Expansion thereof there follows a
Natural Motus or Nisus ad Restitutionem, or Resilience, which is now
Superscribed with a new Title of Elasticity, though the Term properly signify
rather Abaction or Pulsion then any such Return or Restitution, as is or ought
to be Intended thereby, and in plain English is better termed Springines, which
is more Proper to Compression then Expansion; though as it is Confusedly used
for both, I am forced also so to use it, only for more clearnes and distinction
I shall rather ascribe Elasticity to Fluid Bodies, as Air, and the like, and
Springines to Consistent, as Steel, and the like. But here I must Remind what I
have formerly Observed, that there is a very great Difference between
Rarefaction and Condensation which are Spiritual, and by Intrinsecal
Generation, and Expansion and Compression which are Corporeal, and by
Extrinsecal Violence: which Difference does most plainly appear by this very
Elasticity: for no Elasticity and Motion or Nisus to Restitution does ensue
from the former, because they are so Intrinsecaly Altered by Natural Generation;
whereby the Predominant Spirit having in the Generation reduced the Body to a
fit Rarity or Density for itself, does so continue it as long as it does
Predominate; but only from the latter, when only the Body is by any External
Violence so Expanded or Comprest, and the Predomination of the Spirit not
Varied by Corruption, and therefore it reteineth still such an Actual Nisus;
which, when the External Violence is removed, becomes a Motus ad Restitutionem.
And yet both the former and the latter are generaly Confounded together, which
has so much Confounded the right Knowledge and Understanding thereof: but being
thus clearly Explained and Distinguished, will very much facilitate and clear
our Discourse thereof. And this may evidently appear in all the Experiments of
Rarefaction and Condensation, or of Expansion and Compression. As first in the
Sealed Weather-glass, which is the true Thermometer without any Communication
with the External Air, and accordingly with the Variation of the Density or
Rarity of the Body thereof; from which it is defended by being so Sealed, and is
only Varied in itself by Heat or Cold, which are Spiritual Qualitys,
Penetrating the Glass, or Operating upon it by their Emanant Contact, and
consequently upon the Water, or any other Liquor within it (which whatsoever it
be, we will generaly call Water) and if Cold have no Emanant Rays like Heat,
yet it may, as I have showed, Generate Univocaly a Potential Cold in the Glass,
and so thereby also in the Water by Producing the Potential Cold thereof into
Actuality (as also Sound which is another Quality of Air Mist in the Compositum
thereof may be so Produced, as I shall show hereafter.) And therefore the Water
in the Sealed Weather-glass does not Fall in Hotter Weather, nor Rise in
Colder, as in the Open Weather-glass, but Contrarily Rise in Hotter, and Fall
in Colder Weather; because the Included Water being Intrinsecaly Rarefied by the
Heat does Extrinsecaly Compress the Air, which also would itself be Rarefied,
and has therefore an Intrinsecal Nisus thereunto in itself; but yet is Comprest
Violently by the Water, which is more Dens and Robust in itself, and the Air
more Rare and Tender in itself; and so again the Included Water being
Intrinsecaly Condensated by Cold, does Extrinsecaly Expand the Air, which also
would of itself be so Condensated, and has therefore an Intrinsecal Nisus
thereunto in itself; but yet is expanded Violently by the Water which is
Condensated, and being more Prepotent, as I have said, does so Expand and draw
down the Air to fill the Space which it has left, Ne detur Vacuum. Also if the
Sealed Weather-glass be carried up to the Top of the highest Steeple or Hill,
where the External Air is much more Rare then at the Bottom, yet the Water will
not suddenly Fall, as in an Open Weather-glass; because the Water and Air in the
Sealed Weather-glass have no such Communication with the External Air, and the
Corporeal Rarity or Density thereof; but is only Rarefied or Condensated by
Internal Heat, or Cold; and that can not so suddenly be Produced in it as to
make any such Variations: whereas in the Open Weather-glass; because it is Open,
the External Air does Corporealy Communicate with the Included Air, and so by
Mingling with it does suddenly Vary the Rarity or Density thereof, as Vinegar
Mingled with thick Ink, or the like: And therefore the Included Air is suddenly
Varied, and sooner by the Rarity or Density of the External Air, then by the
Heat or Cold thereof, which require more Time Univocaly to Generate Heat or Cold
in the Included Air, whereby it may be Rarefied or Condensated in itself:
whereas if the External Air be Actualy more Rare, though more Cold (from other
Circumstantial Causalitys, as in clear frosty Weather, or the like) the
Included Air in the Open Weather-glass will also be more Rare; because, as I
have showed, it does Communicate and Mingle with it; and so if it be more Dens,
though more Hott; as in a Minepitt, the Included Air will be also more Dens,
for the same Reason; and consequently the Water will Fall in the former, and
Rise in the latter Experiment, so that the Open Weather-glass is indeed rather
a Pycnometer, as I may call it. Also in the common Experiment of drawing up
Water in an Urinal or other Vessel by Flame, or heating the Vessel, as soon as
the Actual Flame, which did Actualy Rarefy it, is Extinct, the Air is again
Condensated, and the Water will ascend suddenly, (or more slowly if it be
heated,) and afterward so Mingle with the External Air, and Participate of the
Rarity or Density thereof, like any other such Pycnometer; for so it stands at
that Hight whereunto it has Ascended, and will be Varied afterward as in any
Open Weather-glass by applying Heat to the outside of the Glass, which will
make it to Fall, and when that is abated to Rise again, and not stand afterward
as low as it Fell, as it does at that Hight which it atteined by the
Calefaction before. And it is consyderable in this Experiment, that the Air is
Rarefied so notably in the Glass by Flame or Fire within the Glass, together
with all the Fume thereof; and yet the Rarefaction of both, which is
Proportionably as much in Extension as the Water which Ascends afterward,
does not Depress it below the Stagnum thereof in the Basin; wherefore certainly
it must pass out of the Glass, (whose Neck is filled and closed with the Water
therein equaly with the Level of the Water in the Basin, as the Top of the
Torricellian Tube is with the Mercury that is in it) by some such ways and
passages, as I shall hereafter discover and declare concerning the Torricellian
Experiment. And it does not depress the Water below the Stagnum thereof in the
Basin, as Air Rarefied within an Open Weatherglass does the Water therein below
the Standard thereof; because in this Experiment the Water not having yet
Ascended above the Level thereof in the Basin, does not Superpend, nor has any
such Nisus to Return downward or descend, as in the Open Weather-glass, or
Torricellian Tube, wherein the Cylinder of Water, or Mercury, does so Superpend
upon and above the Stagnum, and therefore has such a Nisus of Returning again
Downward, as I shall also show afterward. And so also in this Experiment, after
the Water has Ascended in the Glass, and has thereby such a Nisus of
Returning Downward again, if the Air above it within the Glass be then Rarefied
again by heating, or the like, the Water will fall as well as in any other Open
Weather-glass, as I have showed. And the true Reason heerof is not from any
Natural Spring of the Air, or Abaction or Pulsion outwardly, as I before
noted; because the Expansion is Violent and beyond the Natural Density of the
Common Air, and the Restitution to it Inwardly Natural; as of bent Steel to its
own Natural Figure: for that which is more Constant and Proper is Natural, and
the other Violent. Wherefore also the ^r^e Reason why in this or any other Open
Weather-glass, the Water does not Return to its Level (unles the Air within
the Glass be Rarefied so far) though it otherwise might, (not being
Imprisoned, as in the Sealed Weather-glass) is, because this Elasticity of the
Air Expanded by the Weight of the Descending Water does ^eep it from Descending
any farther then itself will be Expanded by the Weight thereof: for so in the
Tube of Water or Mercury Inverted, as they Descend, they thereby Expand the Air
more, and they Weigh less; and so at length they both come to an Aequilibrium,
between the Potentia of this Elasticity of the Air and Pondus of Water or
Mercury; and then they both stand at that Hight; which we therefore call the
Standard: and though the Included Air does, as I have said, somewhat Communicate
with the External Air; yet not so freely, but that it is still far more
Expanded by the Weight: And as the Included Air will be partly Rarefied or
Densified according to the Proportion of the Rarity or Density of the External
Air; so by the Expansion thereof it may be farther Expanded, and by the
Compression thereof Comprest; which Produces the like Effects thereof in the
Standard, but from a Contrary Reason: for though by Expansion of the External
Air the Included Air and Water or Mercury will Fall, and by the Compression
thereof Rise, yet that is not from any such Intrinsecal Potentia as of
Rarefaction and Condensation, but from the Extrinsecal V^olence of Expansion
and Compression drawing the Air and Water Outwardly toward that End whereunto it
is applied, which is the Stagnum, whereby they must necessarily follow that
way, and so Descend in Expansion, by drawing it up more the same way Outwardly
or Upwardly from the Stagnum; and it must as necessarily Ascend by Compression.
And so in the Airpump or Expansor the Torricellian Tube and Stagnum being
placed therein, by the Operation thereof; which does notably Expand the Air
Outwardly in the Receiver wherein it is placed, the Mercury in the Stagnum is
thereby drawn Outwardly Upward, and consequently it must Descend Inwardly
Downward in the Tube (as that Engine is said to draw up a very great Weight)
and yet it Proportionably also draws the Included Air at the other End, though
not so freely, and therefore not so strongly, nor can so Communicate with it as
the Rarefaction of the External Air does not so freely Communicate with the
Inte^nal Air, as I have said. And this I conceiv to be the true Reason of the
Torricellian Experiment, and also of the Paschalian Experiment, which are the
same Proportionably according to the Different Weight of Mercury and Water, and
both of them Differ from the Common Open Weather-glass only in this, that they
are Erected to the Highest Standard, which can be made of any such Experiments,
whereas the Weather-glass is only a Partial Experiment; as when the Torricellian
Tube is shorter then the Standard, yet the Mercury will stand at that Hight:
but a Pump does Correspond with the Paschalian Experiment, if it be as High;
for the Water will not so stand therein above the Standard, though by Forcers
and Buckets below the Standard, and the like, it may be raised higher, as the
Waterwork at London-bridg; and I know a Pump near the place where I dwell,
which servs an house with Water pumped up about fifty feet high, by making two
Pump posts, whereof the lower is about two Inches Bore, and the upper about five
with Poles, and a Bucket in it, and two Valvs at the Bottom of the Bucket and
top of the lower Post. Also the Siphon, as to this Purpose, is only a double
Pump or double Tube Inverted. But the great Wonderment concerning the
Torricellian Experiment has been, how the Air should come into the Tube, and
Ascend above the Mercurial Cylinder; which first seemed so Impossible, as that
it was generaly Proclaimed to be a Sensible Instance of Vacuity; though it does
as Sensibly Disprove it by the very S^andard of the Mercury in the Tube, which
therefore does not Descend to its Level in the Stagnum to prevent Vacuity; and
also by Expansion of Bladder, and by the Light which appears in the Tube above
the Mercurial Cylinder; which some say is a Body itself, but certainly, though
it be only an Emanant Quality, it can not Possibly Exist without a D^aphanous
Body, as Inherent Light can not Subsist without a Lucid Body. Others therefore
suppose it to be Materia Subtilis, or Aethereous Corpuscles, or something they
know not what, which yet they will affirm upon all such occasions to fill Pores
or Vacuitys rather then acknowledge the Truth and Evidence of the most Sensible
Experiments: but though Ether does send forth Emanant Rays every way, yet by
its own Rapid Motion Circularly it prevents any such Excursions of its
Substantial Corpuscles, or Effluvia, as certainly would long since have
Exhausted it, and made it no Ether, unles they can also find a way to
Reciprocate and Restore them again, like Vapors to the Sea. But plainly and
simply all that is above the Mercurial Cylinder in the Tube is only Common Air
Expanded, as I have said; and may appear by all the Phenomenon thereof. As by
the Vibrations and Subsiliences of the Mercury in the Tube when being stopped
with the Finger it is Inverted and set^ in the Stagnum, which are not like the
Undulations of the Surface of the Mercury in the Stagnum when it is afterward
Moved, but far different, and more Busy and Tumultuous, as you may easily
perceiv, if after the Mercury is settled at the Standard, you so Move it by
Jogging, which will cause a common Undulation, but no such Commotion as before;
and so if you fill a Torricellian Tube half full with Water, and then stop it
with your Finger, and Invert it; you shall see the Air heaving and striving in
like manner to pass through the Water, and bearing up part thereof before it to
the top of the Tube; till at last the Air setleth above, and the Water beneath:
and so if you leave some Air in the Torricellian Tube with theMercury, or some
Watery Bubbles (which commonly remain lurking in it whether you will or no) you
shall see almost the same Vibrations and Subsiliences, and that is manifestly
Included Air or Water, because they were so left in it before. But for a farther
Evidence heerof, take another Tube close at one End, and of such a convenient
Length and Bore, as that the Torricellian Tube may freely move and play in it
(whence I shall call th^s other the Extratorricellian Tube) and setting it with
the Close End Downward, place the Torricellian Tube so likewise with some small
Supporter in the Extratorricellian Tube, that the Open End of the Torricellian
Tube may be almost as high as the Open End of the Extratorricellian Tube, and
then fill the Torricellian Tube so standing in the Extratorricellian Tube with
Mercury; and afterward stop the Open End of the Extratorricellian Tube
carefully with a Cork, or the like, and then suddenly Invert both together, and
the Mercury will stand in the Torricellian Tube above the hight of the
Standard; whereas if it were any thing but part of the Air Included in the
Extratorricellian Tube, which by the Descent and Weight of the Mercury in the
Stagnum Comprest, it should in this Extratorricellian Experiment stand at the
same Hight as in the common Torricellian Experiment, which yet it does not; but
above it, because a very little of the Air, so very much Expanded, does suffice
to fill the small Space above the Mercurial Cylinder in the Torricellian Tube,
in this Experiment, and to suspend the Mercury, and therefore when so much of
the Mercury as before filled that Space does after the Inversion Re^tagnate in
the Extratorricellian Tube, the rest of Air which was Included therein is
thereby Proportionably Comprest, and by the Elastical Potentia of that
Compression bears up the Mercury and Cylinder thereof somewhat higher then in the
Torricellian Experiment; which does Concur with what I said before, concerning
the drawing down of the Mercurial Cylinder by Expansion of the Included Air in
the Receiver of the Airpump or Expansor; for so contrarily the Compression of
the like Included Air in this Experiment does bear it upward; (and plainly
appears to be stronger then any pretended Pressure of the Atmosphere). And this
may further appear if you open the first Close End of the Extratorricellian
Tube, for then the Included Air therein so Comprest will issue forth with a
little Poppysm, which is a manifest sig^e of the Compression of Air; and then
the Mercurial Cylinder will fall down to the usual Standard. And yet more
Visibly if you carefully close the first Closed End of the Extratorricellian
Tube with a little piece of Bladder, when both the Tubes are Inverted as before
the Bladder will apparently strutt, and stiffly rise up, and not be born down
by the Atmosphere, as has been supposed; and then the Mercurial Cylinder will
not stand altogether so high as before, but proportionably lower, according to
the more Space gained by the strutting of the Bladder. And if the Torricellian
Tube be Open at both Ends, and you stop one with your Finger beneath, and then
it be filled with Mercury, and so you Invert it with your other hand, and place
it in the Stagnum, it will notably Introsuct your Finger (which by the
Inversion will then be above it) in stead of Air, because it is next to the
Mercurial Cylinder, and Weight thereof; and yet it will also Introsuct Air below
it to fill the Space above it; and all such Introsuctions are manifest Symptoms
of Air Expanded, and not of any Vacuity, which as it can not Extrude, so
neither can it Introsuct any Body, nor does need any Body to succeed, as
Plenitude does; but those forcible Introsuctions are from that Elastical
Potentia of a Body Expanded, which is to Restore itself to its own Natural
Density, and other Successions of any Body against the Natural Motion thereof
are, as I have showed, only to prevent Vacuity. Nor is such Introsuction any
Pressure of the Atmosphere above the Finger, but most Sensibly only a Torture
beneath it. Wherefore it is sufficiently evident that the Space above the
Mercurial Cylinder is filled only with Expanded Air, which they who deny, do
thereby shutt their Eyes against a very Curious Improvement which otherwise
they might make thereof by Inquiring farther how very subtily and strangely the
Air does pass into the Torricellian Tube so prepossessed with the Mercury.
Which I shall now also consider. And I can easily grant to others and my self,
that it does not nor, can it Possibly pass and Penetrate through the Extensive
Body of the Glass or Mercury, because itself is also an Extensive Body, and two
such severaly Extensive Bodies can not be in the same Place (which, as I have
said, is only Extension in Relation to the Substance of the Body itself, which
thereby is in such a Position and Place as it is, (in respect of all other
Bodies in the Univers) nor can there be any such Penetration of Extensions, or
two Extensions in the same Vbi, because it is the Position of the Extensions,
and so there can not be two Positions of one and the same Extension, though by
Condensation and Rarefaction, Compression and Expansion the Extension itself
may be Varied, the Matter being the same, as I have formerly showed, and does
plainly appear by these and all other Instances thereof. Also I conceiv that
neither the Glass which is a very Imporous Body, nor the Mercury which is Fluid
has any such Pores in itself through which the Air might pass without
Penetration; but that the very great Force and Violence of the Introsuction,
which I have before discovered, does make Temporary Pores, or rather some
pervious Passages, which are those very close and Indiscernible Strainers
through which the Air does pass in the Body of the Mercury itself into the
Tube, and thereby is so very much Expanded. As when Boys blow through a Q^ill,
or Cane, into Water, wherein there are no Pores before, yet the Force and
Violence of that Blast does make such Temporary Passages, whereby their Breath
passes through the Body thereof in manifest Bubbles: so when a Drawer fills his
Wine, out of a Pott held very high into a Glass below, some Air between is by
the Fall dashed into the Wine, and appears therein in very small Corpuscles,
(which he therefore calls Nitts) and again Ascend in small Bubbles standing on
the Surface of the Wine: and so in the common Experiment of Tobacco taken
through a close Vessel almost filled with Water, whereby the Fume of the
Tobacco shall pass from the Pipe, through the Water, to the Mouth of him who so
Introsucts it, which is very like the Introsuction of the Air through the
Mercury by the Weight thereof; and though the same Body does Introsuct through
itself in the Torricellian Experiment, which is also consyderable, whereas in
all the others the Operation is by another; yet I do not apprehend this
Diversity to make any Difference in the Reason of the thing itself: for so as
there be a sufficient Force thus to Introsuct, it is all one whether it be by
the Force of the same Body, or of another, or whether it be by a Potentia, or
Pondus, and the Mercury, in the Torricellian Experiment, is putt into such a
Posture, as it can not Descend with all the Weight thereof, unles it first make
way for another Body, that is, the Air, so to pass through it, and to succeed
it, Ne detur Vacuum; which it does, as I have said, by the very Weight thereof,
and so the Air passes through it, though not without very much Resistance and
Commotion, either by Indiscernible Bubbles, or some such Passages. And being so
Introsucted by the Overweight of the Mercury, and to Prevent Vacuity the Weight
of the Mercurial Cylinder below it is as if there were an Introsuctive Potentia
above it, which might be sufficient so to Introsuct Air through it, as the
Breath of a Man is sufficient to Introsuct it through a little Body of Water,
whereas the Pondus of the Mercurial Cylinder is far greater then the Potentia
of any Man's Breath. And the Mercurial Cylinder by the Weight thereof does very
hardly Introduce the Air through or between the Body thereof, and may be set in
such a quiet Posture as it will not so Operate, until it be Jogged, and begin
to Fall; and when it does Operate the Passages through the Body thereof are
opened with great Reluctance and Commotion; as Water by the Weight thereof does
so open its own Body to let out Bubbles with an Ebullition and Undulation in
itself; and so the Mercurial Cylinder plainly discovers a very notable
Commotion by the Ebullition and Undulation in the Surface and Top thereof, which
is to me a most plain Evidence of Air passing through it the same way, as it
does through Water; and so indeed it does pass through Water in the Paschalian
Experiment: and if any may yet conceiv a Difference between Bubbles which are
first forced into the Water, and so must necessarily pass out again, or Fume
Introsucted by another, and Air Introduced by the Water or Mercury itself, and
the Overweight thereof, let him try and satisfy himself with the other
Experiment of filling a Torricellian Tube almost full with Water or Mercury,
and then stopping it with his Finger (or if he pleas Hermeticaly sealing it)
suddenly Invert it, and he shall find that there will be both the same
Phenomenon Proportionably of the Commotions, and the same Effect at last of the
Air Ascending above the Cylinder of Water or Mercury, and of that Subsiding
beneath it: and, as I have said before, that the Space above the Mercurial
Cylinder is and can be filled with nothing but the Air, so Included before in
it; so in all these or in any other such Experiments, the Air passes into the
Glass as it does out of it in the former Experiment, and though the Air be
Included in the same Tube with the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment, yet
in this last mentioned Experiment, when the Tube is Inverted, it is thereby
placed beneath, and without it (though the Air were before in the Tube) as well
as any External Air; and must some way or other pass to Ascend above and within
the Mercury, which plainly it does by the Weight and Pressure of the Mercurial
Cylinder itself; and so the Air Included in the Tube with the Mercury when the
Tube is Inverted is by the Weight of the Mercury first Comprest beneath, and by
little and little Transmitted through the Mercury into the Space above it,
whereby it is Expanded above, and then again Reduced to its former Density,
which fills the same Space above, as it did beneath. And though I sometimes
conceived that the External Air might in the Torricellian Tube and Experiment
pass between the Glass and the Mercury, (as generaly Air will, if it can, pass
that way; because those two Bodies are only Contiguous and not Continuous, as the
Water is in itself; and so probably some Air does so pass in the Torricellian
Experiment) yet certainly it passes also between or through the very Body of
the Mercury by those secret Passages which it so makes, as may appear by the
Commotion in the whole Cylinder, and more plainly by filling the
Extratorricellian Tube with Water or Oil, so as when both the Tubes are
Inverted, the Water or Oil shall stand above the Torricellian Tube, and every
way Encompass and Drown both Tube and Mercury itself; and then let the first
Closed End be opened at the Top of the Extratorricellian Tube Inverted, and the
Mercurial Cylinder will Subside to a Proportionable Standard (accounting also
for the Overweight of Water or Oil) as in the first Experiment, wherein only Air
was left in the Extratorricellian Tube. Wherefore I apprehend it so to pass
through pervious Passages of the Water or Oil, and also of the Mercury, and
that the Proportionable Weight of Water in the Paschalian Experiment is
Equivalent to the Weight of the Mercurial Cylinder, and does Expand the Air
Percolated through it as much: and so the Air which is so Expanded, when it is
above the Cylinder by that Elastical Potentia thereof does Suspend the like
Weight either of Water, or Mercury below it; which after they come to an
Aequipotentia of the one, and Aequipondium of the other, Equaly and Mutualy
Corresponding one with another there and then rest and setle in their Standard,
without any more Commotions and Vibrations. And though the Mercurial Tube be
never so Long, yet the Overweight of the Cylinder will have the same Operation
and Effect Proportionably; And so I suppose, that if the Stagnum of the Mercury
were never so Deep, and the Torricellian Tube were plunged in it with the
Orifice downward, and any Air left in it, or not, and then drawn upward to any
Hight whatsoever, yet it shall never be raised above the Standard, nor shall
the Air be ever the more Expanded, though there may be several Degrees of the
Expansion thereof beneath the Standard. And the Torricellian Experiment when it
is finished, is also a Weather-glass, and will Rise and Fall as well as a
common Pycnometer, (but somewhat otherwise, and not so much in Measure) by
Communication of the External Air with the Internal in the Torricellian Tube,
as well as any other open Weather-glass; and I therefore conceiv, that the
pervious Passages between the Glass and Mercury, and perhaps also in the Body
of the Mercury still stand open to the Subtle and Imperceptible Air therein,
and which does still Intervene between the Internal and External Air, whereby
they so Communicate one with another; And some have observed little No^ches or
Inequalitys of the Surface of the Mercurial Cylinder at the hight of the
Standard after the Torricellian Experiment is finished, which seems to be a
Perceptible symptom heerof. And thus I suppose that there is the same Reason
Proportionably of the Weather-glass, Pumps, Siphons, the Paschalian, and
Torricellian Experiments, and the like, from the Expansion by the Weight of
Water or Mercury and Elastical Potentia of the Air itself, by Retraction and
not by Pulsion, or any Pressure thereof, which they do no more prove, then they
did prove the preconceived Opinion of Vacuity; and yet Men are so Fond of their
own Fansys that they would persuade not only other Men, but also Nature and
Experiments themselves, to be of their Opinion, and thus have very Confidently
Inscribed on the Torricellian Experiment the Title of a Barometer; supposing
the Atmosphere to press down the Stagnum, and so to raise the Mercurial
Cylinder in the Tube to the Standard thereof; whereas in the Extratorricellian
Experiment after the First Closed End is opened and the Atmosphere admitted the
Mercurial Cylinder does Subside; and so certainly the whole Pressure thereof can
not be so much as the Potentia of the little Compression of Air in the
Extratorricellian Tube before mentioned. Thus the Torricellian Experiment is
grown famous only by certain Errors affixed to it, rather then by any Sensible
Truth gained thereby, more then formerly; it being in itself, only the utmost
Extent of a Weather-glass, and Epitome of a Pump.

III. The First or Principal Quality of Air is Cold, as Heat is of Ether,
which being Contrary do Mutualy Temper one another; and thereby also preserve
the Body of Water, that it should not be wholly Resolved into Vapors by the
Emanant Heat of Ether, nor Congeled into Ice by the Contact of the Cold Air,
and both of them do extend the benefits of that Temperature to the Earth, and
all the Vegetatives and Animals therein. But because some deny Air to be Cold,
before I proceed any farther, I shall prove it. I know not that ever any denied
or doubted Heat to be the Proper Quality of Ether or Fire, which also the Text
does imply, because it is Synonymous and Connatural to Light, and belongs to the
same Element, though Light be only mentioned for all the other Qualitys of
Ether from another special Reason, which I have already declared. And
expressly Drines is the Proper Quality of Earth, which is therefore in the Text
Em^nently called the Arida; (and so also our Savior calls it in the Gospel)
that is, the Primum Aridum. Wherefore either Air, or Water must be the Primum
Frigidum; but Water is apparently most Moist, and so is every where termed in
Scripture, and by all Mankind (except some Philosophers) And that Air is most
Cold was the ancient Opinion of Pythagora^, and afterward of the Stoikes, and
may be proved by that very Argument whereby the Peripatetikes would establish
the contrary Opinion, which is their Syzygy of the Elements, and their Four
First Qualitys; for they say Air is most Moist, and therefore Water is most
Cold, and so prove one Error by another; whereas by the very same Induction I
prove Air to be most Cold; because that which themselves assign to be most
Moist, that is, Vapor, is plainly Water Rarefied, and not Air, nor like it in
any thing, but only in Corporeal Rarity, which is very different from all
Spiritual Qualitys; and that Vapor is Water, and not Air I shall evidently
prove hereafter. Also it does very Sensibly appear by Wind or the Motion of
Air, which Cools, and if it be not Vaporous, but Pure and Clear Air, though
most Cold, it dries rather then Moistneth: though, as I have said before of
Heat, Drines, or Moisture, are not Congenerous with either, but Indifferent
between both it and Cold, and may accompany one or other, according to
Circumstantial Causalytys. But when Air is most Vaporous, it is commonly most
Tepid; as appears by South Winds, and the Surface of Water, which is next to
the Air, and is soonest and most Congeled; whereas Subterraneous Springs are
never Congeled, like Suba^reous Rivers; but are rather observed to be Warmer in
Winter, and Cooler in Summer, though perhaps not Positively, but Comparatively;
and probably Earth has more Misture of Ether, and Water of Air, and so Ice
which is Congeled, and Actualy most Cold, is Actualy most Aereous; whereby, as
they say, it is more Expanded, but Properly Rarefied: Yet Water has generaly
some Actual Cold in it, as may appear by Washing, and especialy by Laving or
Waving the Hand in it, which Motion does more Actuate the Cold of Water, as
Winds do Actuate the Cold of Air: though as Heat in a Burning Glass does not
Instantly Burn, so Cold which is less Active, may not suddenly Cool; and being
Mingled with Vapor in all the Atmosphere, the Air is thereby Tempered, and does
Cool less: and from many such Circumstantial Causalitys the Activity thereof may
be much abated. And though it be generaly Actuated by Motion, yet it is not
therefore Motion, as I have said of Heat, and therein also proved Cold not to be
either Rest, or Motion formaly in itself: and though Heat generaly cause some
Motion, yet Cold may be without any Sensible Motion; as in Ice, whereof the
whole Body, and all the Parts thereof per omnia, are Consistent and Immote. And
there may be a very notable Motion and Commotion, without any notable Variation
of Heat or Cold, as if the Torricellian Tube be filled almost with Mercury or
Water and some Air left in it, and then stopped with your finger, and suddenly
Inverted, as I before mentioned, you shall observe a very notable Commotion in
the Ascent of the Included Air through the Body of the Water or Mercury, almost
like the Commotion that appears in the Dissolution of Metalls by Aqua fortis;
and yet no notable Variation of Heat, or Cold; which plainly shows that the
notable Heat in the other is not from the Motion, but rather the Motion from
the Heat, as here it is from the Weight: and so Motion being a Common
Instrument both of Bodies and Spirits, is Caused by any of them, and sometimes
does Cause them Equivocaly; but is not Univocaly in itself any other thing then
Motion, as I have showed before generaly, and shall still proceed to show
particularly in every thing which may Colorably be suspected to be only Motion.
Now though Ether and Air be the more Active E^ements, and Water and Earth less
Active; and consequently the Proper Qualitys of Ether and Air, which are Heat
and Cold, more Operative, and of Water and Earth, which are Moisture and
Drines, less Operative; yet they also again Differ among themselves; and so Cold
is less Operative then Heat, and Drines then Moisture. Thus Heat by Contact, or
otherwise so Intens as to prevail against Cold, does sooner overcome it then
Cold Heat; as Fire Warms the Ambient Air almost Instantly; but the Ambient Air
does not so suddenly Extinguish Fire in Iron Candent: and though it prevail so
far against Flame as to to destroy the Individuality, yet it can not prevent
the Successive Generation thereof. Nor did the English or Dutch, who Wintered in
Groenland, or Nova Zembla, find their Fires or Lights to go out in the Coldest
Seasons. And in their Antiperist^sis and Conflict, Cold does more Excite and
Provoke the Potential Heat, then Heat does Cold; for so it makes Flesh to Burn
and Blister, and Nive perustus is no such Improper Phrase: but when the Cold
overcomes the Heat, it Mortifys and causes Gangrenation; which is sometimes
prevented by applying a more Moderate Cold, as of Snow, or the like; which does
not Profligate, but rather Excite and Recover the Internal Heat again. Thus
though the Proper Effects of Heat be to heat, and of Cold to cool, yet by
Antiperistasis they may Produce Contrary Effects, which pilanly shows that
there is such Antiperistas^s in Nature, and not only in Notion. Also from other
Circumstantial Causalitys they may Produce other Collateral and Consequential
Effects, as I have already observed of Heat. But whereas Heat first Rarefieth
and then Condensateth, contrarily Cold first Condensateth, as Water in the
Sealed VVeather-glass by the Frigefactive Power thereof, and so also in any Open
Water; and then Rarefieth by the Congelative Power thereof, as in Ice. And as
Metalls Swell and are Dilated by Heat in and before Fusion, and Contracted
again by Cold, so Ice is Dilated by Conglaciation and Contracted again by
Melting. And whereas Cold does not Conglaciate Bodies Actualy Cold which have
much Potential Heat in them, as Sack is hardly Congeled, and so some very Hott
Spirits, and Oils, and the like; it plainly proves Generation to be only the
Production out of Potentiality into Actuality. Also Cold may thus not only
Congregate Heterogeneo^s things by Conglaciation, which does Constipate them in
the Consistence thereof, but also Segregate them, as Saltwater frozen is more
Insipid, and I suppose that which is not frozen is thereby rendered more Briny.
And thus also it may Segregate Homogeneous things, as Stone^, and the like;
which may Crack and Break with Cold, as well as Heat: but I esteem this to be
rather a Discontinuation, then a Segregation. And so generaly it renders Bodies
more Fragile; as Ice, or Petrified Bodies, Glass, and most notably Steel
suddenly Cooled; and so any Iron is more Britle in Frosty Weather; and
Physicians observe the like of Bones of Animals. Thus also Cold is a Dissolvent
as well as Heat, and does cause Vitrification and Crystallisation sometimes
suddenly; and I suppose might Effect more by long and Mature Generation, if it
were tried; for though it is not so strong and quick a Generator as Heat, yet
as a weaker Magnetical Virtue by long continuance does Produce Magnetism in
other Bodies; and Violent Tension of a Spring of Steel, if it be long continued
will by Degrees overcome the Elastical Potentia thereof, and make the very
Spirit to Conform to that Figure of the Body; so there are many neglected
Operators in Nature, which though more weak and dull may in longer time Produce
very notable Effects.

IV. As Ether Produces Color, so does Air Sound; which yet as the other
seems to me to be no Simple, but a Mist Quality. And though it has been
anciently observed that Color is Mist of Light and Opacity, yet no notice has
been taken of any such Misture in Sound, which is the great Instrument of Human
Speech and Discourse, and yet there is none of those other Sensibles, whose
Intrinsecal Nature is less known unto us. And I I find it very difficult
farther to explain any thing thereof, because I want even Common Terms, and words
whereby to express my Conceptions. I have already proposed generaly, that as
Earth has some Proper Qualitys, as Consistence, and Magnetical Virtue, whereby
to Fix itself; so it has also other Connatural Qualitys in itself, whereby it
does Fix the more Agile Qualitys of the other three Fluid Elements, which also
require their Contrary Qualitys, wherewith to be Mist and Contemperated, as
well as the four First Qualitys. And thus we have discovered Opacity to be a
Simple Quality Contrary to Light, and that by the Mistion thereof Color is
Produced. And that as Light is an Ethereal Quality, so Opacity is a Terrene
Quality; as plainly the Earth is most Opacous, and there are no Fixed Colors
without some Terreity, and the most Fixed are in such Bodies as are also
Consistent. But yet I fear to seem too Curious and Novell in asserting any such
Analogy in Sound; however, as I have promised, I shall adventure, and make a
farther Essay thereof. And according to the best Musical Terms that I know,
shall call the two Simple Contrary Qualitys, which I conceiv to be the
Principles of Sound Acutum and Grave, or Shrill and Flatt: whereof Shrilnes is
the Aereal, and more Agile Quality; and Flatnes the Terrene, and more Fixative
Quality: or if we will accept of Latin Terms Analogical to Light and Colors, we
may call a Sound or Voice wherein Shrilnes does Predominate, Vox Clara; and
wherein Flatnes, Vox Fusca: but as Pure Light or Pure Opacity are not Visible,
so I suppose Pure Shrilnes, or Pure Flatnes, are not Audible, nor indeed that
they can Actualy Exist in their own Simple Extremitys. And as Light is not the
least Degree of Opacity, nor Opacity of Light, but Different and Contrary
Qualitys; so that which I intend by Acutum and Grave, and their Shrilnes and
Flatnes is no Degree; as Tones or the several Not es of the Gamut, and the
like, but Contrary and Different Qualitys. Yet I also observe one general
Difference of Degrees between Color and Sound, that is, as all Fixed Colors
have a notable Degree of Terreity, which fixes them, and Desultory Colors
less; so Sound, which is only Desultory and Momentaneous Individualy, as I have
said, requires a less share of Terreity then Desultory Color, though it be
commonly Produced by Collision of Terrene Bodies Originaly. And as Fire Produced
by Collision Originaly may fire a whole Train of Gunpowder Successively, so
does the Original Collision Produce Sound, that is afterward Continued by its
own Spiritual Quality, which is always Potentialy in all the Air, and Actuated
by such Collision of the Air, which has also, as I have said, some Earth in
the Mistion thereof, as well as the other Elements (and as we may see Terreous
Motes and Corpuscles to float therein). And it is so Produced Instrumentaly and
Equivocaly by Motion, or rather Commotion; for as the Original Instrument
thereof is Collision, so the Immediate Cause of any Sound is the Tremor, which is
only caused by Commotion. Wherefore Ether and Planets though most Swift
Movers, yet because they Move in Fluid Ambient Bodies most Equaly, and thereby
make no Commotion thereof, therefore also they make no Sound, or Nois, or
Pythagorean Music: yea Aqueous or Terreous Bodies so Moving in Air, make little
or no Sound; as a Stella Cadens, Snow, Rain, Hail, in the fall before they come
to the Earth: so a Round and Smooth Bullet, that is not hollow, shot from a
Gun makes no Proportionable Nois, because by the swift Motion thereof it
preventeth the Resistance of the Air, as I have said, and so makes little or no
Commotion therein; whereas a Rod, or Whip, by a Smart Percussion of the Air
Resisting it, and thereby suffering a Commotion, makes a notable Sound; and
especialy Thunder, which suddenly breaking out of the Cloudy Meteor teareth it
asunder, every way, and dasheth it upon the Air, and by sudden Expansion of the
Inflamed Lightning makes such a Terrible Report (like the Flame of Gunpowder
out of a Gun) and so fluid Bodies by mutual Resistance, and by the sudden Impuls
that will not suffer them to Mingle peaceably, make a Violent Commotion, and
Produce Sound; as Water suddenly dashed against Water; whereas in a gentle Flux
and Mixture it makes little or no Commotion, or Sound. But to Continue the
Sound, there must be a Continued Tremor in the Solid Body, as Bells, Strings,
and the like: and where there is no such Tremor Originaly by Commotion, there
is no Sound, as I have said; as in Collition of Wool; and if it be not
Continued the Sound cease; as by stopping a Bell. But any Tremor of a Body in
the outward Superficies thereof, may so cause the Sound to be heard without the
Body; as is reported of the Aetites, and of a Bell of Gold being Closed round
with a Stone, or Clapper, within it; and so Commotion under Water, which makes
a Tremor also in the Superficies thereof, may cause a Sound to be heard in the
Air; though also Water and Ice, Glass, and the like Terraqueous Composita have
much Air, as well as Earth, in their Mistions and so may be Proportionably
capable of Sound, which is Mist of the two Simple Qualitys, Proper to Air, and
Earth. And though this Tremor is the most Notable and Immediate Instrument of
Sound, yet the Multiplication of the Sound in the Air is, as I have said, only
of the Spiritual Quality itself so first Actuated thereby without any more
Commotion. And indeed Sound does not cause any such Undulation or Waveing thereof
up and down, like Circles in a Pond, as has been supposed. Much less is Sound
or Voice, though Articulate, any figuration of the Air, or Carving thereof into
Characters, like written Letters; for then we could not hear two several Sounds
together, as we may if they be very Dissonant; as of a Voice and of a Musical
Instrument; or any one Sound of one of the Voices in Consort by attending more
to it then to others: and certainly several Auditors may so attend to, and hear
several Voices: for the Figure of the one Intersecting the other would thereby
Disfigure and Deface one another. Nor could an Echo then return any Articulate
Voice, when the Figured Air is dashed against a Concave Bank or Wall, unless
the Bank or Wall had also such Organical Parts, whereby to Figurate it again,
and so Return it: but only the Air as I have said, having the sound Actuated in
it, and being Reverberated, does Return it with the Sound in it; which is by a
Stop thereof, as it may also be Diverted by Wind. And in an Echo we only Hear
the last Word Because it is last, for the precedent Words by that Stop being
overtaken by the following are somewhat drowned, as the last is not. Nor do
great Winds or Wafts of the Air cause Proportionable Sounds, unles they Collide
the Air against Trees or Houses, or the like, whereby they cause such a Tremor
in it; whereas the Motion or Undulation of the Air in itself, causes neither
Tremor, nor Sound. And the Sound or Voice is Continualy Propagated in the Air
by the first Sound or Voice Actuated in it: and so does pass away continualy;
and as it i^ said, Nescit Vox missa reverti; nor can the same Voice (otherwise
then by an Echo) be heard twice by one man, unles he could fly away Faster then
it, and hear it again, as another man does at a farther Distance, which is
Impossible: for it is very swift, though not like Emanant Light of Lightning,
which is seen before we hear the Thunderclap, and if we estimate the distance
of the Thunder cloud and different Space of Time, between the first Sight of
the Flash, and Hearing of the Clap, we may partly judge of their different
Velocitys. Also Sound is very Longinquous, though not so far as Light Emanant:
Broad sides in a late Naval Batell have been heard an hundred Miles from the
Place. Nor is Sound Emanant, but always Inherent, though never Immanent, but
Transient, and therefore has no Refraction, nor Reflection of itself; but as
the Air (in which it is Inherent) is only Moved by the Wind, which yet does not
wholly Divert it; because it is so suddenly Propagated in the Air, and
Penetrateth and passes away more swiftly, then the Body of the Air can Move in
itself by any Corporeal Motion: and it is Reflected in an Echo only by the
Reverberation of the Air itself; otherwise it terminateth and abateth itself by
less and less Degrees. And yet while it continues, it is not Spent, or
Exhausted by Hearing, as Odors, and Sapors, which are more Gross, and more
Immersed in the Vapors, and Liquors, thereof; but a whole Army of Soldiers may
all Hear the Oration of their General: which also plainly shows it not to be
any Figurative, or Corporeal thing, but a most wonderful Spiritual Quality;
which successively and by Innumerable Propagated Individualitys so conveys
itself to the very Organ of Hearing, yet not corporealy striking upon the
Tympanum thereof; as Anatomists generaly suppose, and so also call some Internal
Parts of the Ear by such Significant Names, Incus and Malleus; for plainly in
Hearing we do not Perceiv any the least Commotion or Tremor, but only the
Spiritual Quality itself, which is the Proper Sensible and Object of the Sens;
and if we feel any Commotion, as in discharging a Gun near to the Ear, that is
only the Waft of Air which the Ear feels, as any other Part of the Body also
may by the Sens of Feeling, but does Hear only the Vehement Sensible of Sound
by the Sens of Hearing. Nor yet are there any Rays of Sound as of Light, so to
convey unto the Sense the Image thereof, and so several Images to several men's
Senses; but only the same Spiritual Quality is so propagated per omnia; which
is very Admirable and Curious, and deserving more Notice and Consyderation then
Philosophy has hitherto bestowed upon it. Also several Sounds do Penetrate one
another per omnia, so as to Convey the whole Sound in every Point of the Air,
and to every Ear within the Sphere thereof, and not Confound any of them so
being Inherent in the Air, which yet is not only Directed by the Breath of the
Speaker, and the like, but also Diverted by Winds, and Reflected by Echo's: and
several Sounds seem somewhat to hinder and Interrupt one another, if that be not
rather an Infirmity of the Sens, then any Confusion of the Sensible Qualitys,
as the Ey can not so distinctly See several Visibles, though certainly the
Images thereof do not Confound one another. And as Spiritual Magnitude, or
Ampliation by Multiplication of several Parts into one Total, does, as I have
observed, Augment the whole beyond the Proportions of the Particulars; so many
Sounds together are Heard farther then any one of them Singly; as a whole
Broadside, or Cry of Hounds; like a great Mountain, which is farther Visible in
the Whole then any Part alone could be Seen. And Sound reflected at a great
Distance is heard better then Directly, but best near to the Reflection (like
Reflected Rays of Heat or Light) because though the Reflection does not make any
new figuration of the Sound or Voice, yet it does Return and Reduplicate it so
Generating itself Successively in the Air, as I have showed. But the greatest
Mystery and Incognitum is, how the Air which plainly is not Configurated or
Effigiated by Sound or Voice, but only putt into such or such a Tremor by the
first Collision thereof, whereby the Sound or Voice is first Actuated and
Specificated Equivocaly, should afterward Univocaly Generate it in itself
Successively without any more Collision Commotion or Tremor in itself. For
there seems to be none such afterward in the Air; as you may try by a Flame
of a Candle or the least Feather hung by a Thread in an upper Chamber, and let
the greatest Sound, or Noise, be made under the Chamber window in the open Air,
so as the Chamber be not shaken, nor the Waft of Air come toward it, but go the
other way from it; which, as I have said, does not at all concern the Sound:
and then observe whether there be any Motion or Tremor in the Flame or Feather,
more then would be without any such Sound or Nois: certainly it will not be in
any manner Proportionable to the greatness of the Sound or Nois, as it should be
if it were the very Sound or Nois. But I shall not Penetrate any farther into
this very Curious Secret of Nature, nor Pronounce what Sound is Particularly;
only Affirming it generaly to be a Spiritual Quality, and not any Corporeal
Motion, though it be always first Equivocaly Generated by Motion, which is
therefore so Concom^tant and Instrumental in it, and perhaps more Necessarily
Antecedent then in Heat, or any other Quality whatsoever. Yet we must carefully
Distinguish, as I have said, between the very Essence and Formality of any
thing, and any most necessary Instrumentality thereof whatsoever; otherwise we
should know no Difference between our own Bodies and Spirits in this Conjunct
State thereof. And whosoever will not so Distinguish between the Spiritual
Quality of Sound (which is a Proper Sensible and the first Collision Motion and
Tremor which is only the Equivocal Generator thereof, though always necessarily
requisite as an Instrument, and yet, in itself hardly so much as a Common
Sensible, nor Perceptible in and with the Sound by the same Sens of Hearing)
seems to me to be like unto him who affirmed that he could play upon the
Organs, and upon farther Examination it was found that he could only blow the
Bellows. Wherefore that we may better consider all together, and carry on this
great question concerning Motion throughout, we will Recollect what we have
said before, and now also add this unto the rest; And so suppose, as we may
very well, the same Air to be per omnia Tepid, that is Hott, and Cold, and also
Luminous, and now also Sonorous, at the same Time, yea to have many Visible
Images and Audible Sounds Penetrating one another, and all that Body of Air
wherein they are in every point thereof; and if any Human Invention can find out
and assign so many several motions, as all these and some more, which I shall
hereafter also add in one Body per omnia Puncta thereof, and in the same
Instant, he may perhaps also Move me from my present Judgment and contrary
Opinion.

V. The Aerie Expansum, which was made to be the Common Passage between the
Ether and Terraqueous Globe Transmitting Ae^hereous Rays Downward, and Aqueous
Vapors Upward, has no Proper and Fixed Inhabitants in itself, but only Vapors
or Waters above, and Meteors, which Move up and down, like Birds flying in it;
whereas the Ether has Stars, and the Terraqueous Globe is the Native Country
and Region of Various Elementary Composita, Vegetatives, Sensitives, and of Man
himself. Nor can I conceive that all these Unnecessary and Deformed Meteors,
which now appear in the Air, were so in it when it was first made, or before
the Fall of Man; for whose sake, not only Earth, but all the Elements were
Accursed; and that Curs has produced many Sensitive Anomala; and not only
Briars and Thorns, but also Inundations, Meteors, Comets, and all the
Imperfections Monsters and Anomala of Nature, which was first made Perfect and
truly Natural: and we only read of Vapors then in the Air which are the Natural
Effluvia of Water, (as Rays are the Emanations of Ether) and most wonderful
M^nstrua, Vehicles of Spirits, and Instruments of Nature; and it is said
expressly that the Excess thereof, which is Rain, and which otherwise may seem
most Needful, and least Noxious, was not then in the Air, and that, God had
not yet caused it to Rain upon the Earth, which was Watered only with Vapors
and that, There went up a Mist from the Earth, and Watered the whole face of
the Ground; and so also supplied the Fountains Springs and Rivers of Fresh
Water. Wherefore, as I have before Engaged, I shall now plainly prove Vapor to
be only Water Rarefied, and not Air. It is expressly so termed in the Text,
Waters above, in respect of the other Elementary Water or Waters beneath. And
it is Demonstrable that it is so, because it has all the Propertys of Water,
and none of Air, except only the Corporeal and Common Affection of Rarity; but
as Air if it be never so much Rarefied or Expanded, yet does not therefore ceas
to be Air, so neither Water Rarefied into Vapor, to be Water. Also it is not,
as I have said, so Cold as Air, but rather Tepid; nor so Diaphanous, but
Refracts more; nor so Sonorous, for any Voice is better and farther heard in
Sude and Serene Weather, then in Mists and Foggs; and it is confessed by all
that it Moistens more then Air, which is the true Property of Water. And we
have most Sensible Experiment int he ready Return thereof into Water, as well as
the Efflux thereof from Water, which is only by Condensation and Rarefaction,
and no Transpeciation. Certainly we may as well affirm Ice to be Earth, as
Vapor Air. Nor are all those Bubbles which appear in Expansion of Fluid Bodies
always Air, as is supposed, but commonly Vapor; and therefore have a greater
aptitude to be Imbibed by Dry Bodies, and to Insinuate themselves into them more
then into Pores, into which Air does more readily enter; and they stick longer
to Glass, Stone, Metalls, and the like, then Air; and Moisten more; with many
such Symptoms, whereby they may be Discerned, being in themselves of very
Different Natures. And we must also Distinguish between Vapors themselves,
which are either Produced by the more gentle and Calefactive Power of Heat, and
were, as I have said, so made in this Second Day, and readily Return again into
Water; as in Rain, or any Distillation, and still continue Actualy Moist; and
these Vapors are also more Fluid, and only Conglomerate together with little
Consistence in more Dark Mi^ts and Foggs in the Air, such as we see to rise
from Rivers and Vallys in a Morning, or Evening; yet they are not Common
Elementary Water or Waters beneath, but Waters above; which therefore are so
easily Trasmuted, Neither are Clouds any Cisterns, Membranes, or Sponges,
containing Rain; for indeed Rainwater is such a Ponderous Body as could not
Possibly be Suspended in the Air, but would fall down in Cataracts, and destroy
the Terricolae; whereas these Vapors being suddenly Rarefied by Heat, and as
suddenly Condensated again by Cold, or Comprest by Wind, do accordingly Descend
leasurely in greater or less Drops, and the main Body thereof is in the mean
time carried about to Water a greater Space of Ground; and so Dews, which are
Vapors not drawn up so forcibly, nor so high, (commonly by the Nocturnal
Tepor,) soon fall down again upon Trees and Herbs, and are there collected and
hang in Drops. And if the Air be very Cold, whereby these Moist Vapors are
Congelated, then accordingly they either fall in Hail (as Icicles, and Stiriae
in some Cold Caverns of the Earth) and by their very Stillicidation and
Agitation are formed into such Corpuscular Figures, which could not be, if they
had ever been one Entire Body of Ice in the Air. And if the Cold be not so
Intens, and the Vapors much Agitated before and in their Congelation, then they
are turned into Snow, which is only frozen Spume, and being a Lighter Body is
therefore longer Suspended in the Air, and there Congeled in whole Lumps as
appears plainly in the Alps, but falling lower in our lower Regions breaks into
Flakes. And Dews which do not Ascend higher are turned into Frosts. Or there is
another kind of Vapor Produced by the more Violent and Caustike Power of Heat,
and which is Burnt and Adust thereby, and therefore we call it, Fume, or Smoke;
which is more Desiccated and Consistent, and has such Terrene Qualitys,
wherewith Water is Mist, Actuated in it; and so will continue longer, and is
rather Actualy Dry then Moist. And there are some such Dry Mists lower in
Summer; and they portend Dry Weather commonly; And of these Fumes are the
Bright Clouds (which indeed are more Properly Clouds, and have a particular
Name in Hebrew) Composed; and they are usualy higher in the Air then the
others, being so raised by the greater Heat, and so the Sky is also Expressed by
their Name. And more moist Thunderclouds which are of the other kind and usualy
Resolved into Rain are lower then these Bright Clouds, and many times go one
way while the others go another way. But I suppose that these Bright Clouds
(which are therefore so called because they do more Equaly Reflect the Sun beams
like a Molten Speculum as has been said) commonly are not Resolved into Rain,
and therefore are termed Clouds without Water, but that according to the
Hebraical Etymology by farther Concoction and Condensation or Compression and
the Agitation of the Air they are at length broken and Comminuted into those
little Bodies or Pulviscles which we call Motes, and are Visibly seen in Sun
beams, and continue so in the Air floating up and down longer then any dust of
the Earth (or, as the Poet calls it, Cloud of Dust) which almost as suddenly
falls as it rises; Whereas these being more Fuliginous and Light do wander up
and down much longer; though at length they also Descend and Subside on the
Earth, otherwise they should clogg and choke the Atmosphere; which yet is
usualy replenished with them, and we drink them in continualy as Horses do Mudd
the Water to thicken it; And so Fishes Introsuct Air, which contrarily does
Temper their more Dens Drink and make it more Thin, and which they suck in and
through the Water, as I have showed in the Torricellian Experiment, and when
they would suck it in more freely come toward the Top of the Water, whereby the
Air in the Introsuction thereof passes through a less Strainer, and they cannot
long Live without some Introsuction of Air; as appears in Ponds frozen, wherein
we use to break Holes in the Ice for that purpose; and accordingly the Fishes
come to them, even to the very Top of the Water, to Refresh themselves with the
fresh Air, which they there Introsuct, and are so greedy of it, or sick for
want of it, that they are easily taken: though also several sorts of Fishes
require severaly more Rare or more Dens Drink, as River fish will be stifled
with Mudding the Water, and Seafish grow faint in fresh Water, and the like.
And indeed our Atmosphere is not nor may not be pure Air, as is found by them
who have been in the Tops of the Andes, and by the Experiments of Birds and
Beasts in the Airpump or expansor, which are almost Exanimated thereby; and
also by the Tension and Elastici^y of the Air which is able to draw up Mercury
in the Stagnum, and very consyderable Weights: And Breathing is not only
Spiration, but Reciprocaly Inspiration or Drinking in of Air; And there is much
more Inspired then Respired, which is the Atmospherical Drink, and perhaps some
kind of Aliment of the Spirits, but very much Vapor is Excreted by
Perspiration. And there is very great Difference of the Atmosphere in several
Habitations, Higher, or Lower; as may appear by the Pycnometer. But I conceive
generaly that such a Temper of the Atmosphere, as was in the first Expansum, is
most desirable and healthful; which, whatsoever it might be otherwise, was
rather Mingled with Vapor or Waters above then with Fume; And it is requisite
in an Healthful Air also that Excrementitious Vapors as well as Fumes, which
continualy Ascend into the Air, be Purged and Dispersed continualy by Wind, or
some Agitation of Open Air, and therefore Close Rooms are very Offensive, and
almost Stifle the Breath, especialy if they be Vaporous as newly Plasterd, or
With a Charcoal Fire in them, which strangely Alters the Air by a sudden and
vehement Rarefaction; And because the Water does most evaporate, therefore
there is a chief Consyderation to be had thereof, whether it be Pure, or Moorish
or Brackish; for Salt also will be Volatilised, as I have said; and because the
Earth does also Evaporate, and not only the Vapors therein, but Rarefied
Corpuscles of Earth do also Ascend with the Vapors, Consyderation is to be had
thereof; as whether it be Sandy or Chalky, which Emitt least or best Corpuscles,
or Fenny or Slimy, which are worst. So that in the Situation of Houses there is
also regard to be had of the Soil, and of the Atmosphere, which is an Aliment,
or at least a great and continual Instrument of Life, and must be Considered as
some part of Houskeeping. The Wind which Purifys the Atmosphere is rightly
termed Aer Motus, (as the same Hebrew word signifys both) and I easily grant it
to be no special Quality in itself, but only Motion and Agitation of the Air
which is a very Fluid and Mobile Body, and is Moved Variously by the Vapors
Variously Ascending into it, and other Meteors in it, and such Circumstantial
Causalitys, more or less Condensating or Rarefying it, and which render the
Weathercock as Unstable as the Weather-glass. And where the Motion begins, it
drives forward the Parts of the Mobile Body of the Air one upon another; and
where they find any Vent or Passage, they being in Motion flow thither, like
Water; whereby in some places there are more Constant Etesiae, and Tradewinds,
as they call them, like Vento's or Ventiducts made by Art; and this was one of
Columbus his Arguments that there was more Earth. And as the Winds are thus
caused by Vapors, so the Southern parts of the World being more Watery, are
therefore, as I have said, more Tepid or Warm, and Rainy or Misty; and the
Northern parts being more Terreous, and Emitting more of the Terreitys,
therefore the Northwind is contrarily more Cold and Dry. And the Sun in the
Diurnal Motion of the Ether being carried from East to West, and so better
Concocting the Vapors which he has before raised and passed over in such his
Diurnal Course, therefore generaly Eastern Winds are also more Cold and Dry, and
Western Warmer and Moister; and some Winds are observed to Rise and Fall with
the Rising and Setting of the Sun. But if any Wind or Weather be so Copious and
Durable as to be carried about the whole Terraqueous Globe, then the same Wind
may be of a Contrary Temper from the same Cause; and so many times Rains come
from the North and East; and commonly they are very great, because they are so
Copious and Durable; and so in Africa, and other hot Climes, there are
Infrequent Rains, but when they happen they are Excessive, because the Sun does
very Copiously raise Vapors, and if it happen by any Circumstantial Causality
that he can not Concremate and Desiccate them as much, they all turn into Rain.
And so the Hot Meteor of a Thunder-cloud draws very Copious and Dark Vapors,
which, when the Heat breaks forth in Lightning, are presently Resolved into
Rain: though otherwise, when there are few other such Vapors in the Air near to
it, there are also dry Lightnings without any great Nois; because they are not
Exploded out of such Clouds as the others: and Thunder-clouds may go against
the Wind, as we say; because they are Moved and Impelled by their own Heat, and
by their great Commotion after the Explosion of the Lightning they commonly
turn the Wind. And Concurrent Causes may Move and Impell the Mobile Air every
way, and when it cannot Move fast enough Progressively, then, as I have said,
it must Move Circularly; whereby it becomes a Turbo or Whirlwind, which I
conceive rather to be such, then all the Winds blowing against one another.
Ignes fatui are Inflamed Exhalations, more Lucid, and less Fiery, having some
Fatt and Viscous Corpuscles of Earth in their Misture; and arise generaly from
such Soils. And if they be more Igneous, and more Rarefied thereby, they are
better Concocted, and Ascend higher, and become Stellae Cadentes, and the l^ke,
which fall down again when that Heat is Extinct. But these Fiery Meteors which
last longer, are not comparably Igneous like Fulgur or Lightning, which having
a most Rare and Subtle Fomes, and being also pent in and Condensated in the
Cloud, when it breaks forth, does not only make a Terrible Nois by the sudden
Collision of the Cloud every way against the Air, but also by that sudden
Eruption, as well as by the Spiritual Power thereof, does wonderful Execution,
and is strangely Influential; and I suppose of all Culinary Fire is most like
to Ethereal; but I cannot conceiv that it can so Calcine any part of the Cloud
as to forge a Fulm^n, Thunderbolt, or Stone; though I acknowledge that there is
much Earth also in it; whereof as well as of the Water, some Insects, as
Tadpols, and others are found to be Produced after Rain. All which Violent and
Excessive Meteors are, as I have said, general Effects of the Divine Curs; and
so Thunder is called the Voice of God; and ought to be regarded: but I do not
apprehend these general Effects to be any such special Prodigys and Portents,
as some would have them to be. The Iris, and the like, are Properly no Meteors,
but only Reflections of the Sunbeams from a Vaporous Cloud like a Prism, being
also more Opacous then the Bright Clouds. And I doubt not but that there were
Rainbows before the Deluge, (though not before the Fall) as well as Lambs
before the Passover, Water and Bread and Wine before Baptism and the Lords
Supper: for all such Sacramental Elements are in themselves Natural, and only
supernaturaly Instituted to be Symbolical Signs; and so was the Rainbow, which
signifys Sunshine after Rain, and does very fitly declare the Covenant that God
made with Noah; that as he and his Family were then saved from the Deluge, so
it should never after come upon his Posterity: and as God said, I will look
upon it, that I may remember the everlasting Covenant between God and every
Living Creature of all flesh that is upon the Earth, so should we, when we
behold this his Bow in the Clouds, thankfully remember his wonderful
Deliverance; both that which is past, wherein we all who were then in the loins
of Noah's Sons were preserved, and also future; concerning which God has given
us such an everlasting Covenant, and this Sign thereof.

SECTION IX.
And God said, Let the Waters under the Heaven be gathered into one place, and
let the Dry Land appear. And it was so, And God called the Dry Land Earth, and
the gathering together of the Waters called he Seas. And God saw that it was
Good. And God said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding Seed,
and the Fruit Tree yielding Seed after his kind, whose Seed is in itself, upon
the Earth. And it was so, And the Earth brought forth Grass, and Herb yielding
Seed after his Kind, and the Tree yielding Fruit, whose Seed was in itself
after his Kind. And God saw that it was Good. And the Evening and the Morning
were the Third Day.
EXPLICATION.
God having before caused part of the Water to ascend in Vapors into the Air,
did afterward cause the rest to subside, and be derived into certain Canales in
the Earth, which he had also prepared for it: and so made the Surface of the
Earth, which before was covered with Water, to appear together with it in one
Terraqueous Globe; whereof the Dry Land was Earth, and the Confluvia of Waters
Seas. And this Ordination of all these three Elements was their Goodness and
Perfection. And when God had thus prepared all the four Elements, he caused
the Earth, being pregnant with Vegetative Principles, accordingly to bring
forth Grass, Herbs, and Trees, above the Surface thereof, after their several
Kinds: and the Herbs and Trees had also their several Seeds and Seminal Virtues
in themselves, whereby to Propagate and Multiply afterward. And this was their
Goodness and Perfection. And all these were the Works of the Third Day.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of Water. 2. Of Moisture. 3. Of Odors and Sapors. 4. Of the Flux and Reflux
of Waters. 5. Of Earth. 6. Of Drines. 7. Of Consistence. 8. Of Magnetical
Virtue and Electricity. 9. Of the Immobility of the Earth. 10. Of Vegetatives.
11. Of the Goodness of the Works of the Second and Third Days.

I. THe Water which is Elementary and more properly such, and whereof Vapor and
Ice are only Various, is next to Air above it, both in Situation, and Nature,
as may appear by Vapor, and to Earth beneath it, as may appear by Ice. And
though Earth and Water were in this Third Day made, and still are, one
Terraqueous Globe; yet as they were Created in the Beginning, so they still are
several and different Elements; as well as Air and Ae^her are several and
d^fferent Heavens. And though they are thus Composed into one Globe, yet they
have their several Provinces therein, as well as the others, though not in the
same manner or Figure. And so it is said not only that Dry Land did appear,
which was before covered with the Sphere of Water, as that was with Air, and
Air with Ether, but also that there was a gathering together of the Waters
into one place, generaly, whereunto all Rivers do run, though branched out into
several Canale^: and though standing Ponds, Lakes, and perhaps some Gulphs or
Seas, as the Caspian Sea, may not communicate with the Ocean, yet they are also
Confluvia, and Seas, and so termed distributively afterward, and all of them
distinguished from the Waters which first covered the Earth all over; whereas
now the main Ocean covers and compasses it about only in one place. And as
these Waters beneath flow from the Earth, so they are still above it; as the
Waters above floating in the Air, are also said to be above or upon it (for so
the word signifies upon or above, and so Fowl are said to fly above, or upon
the Heavens) and as they are thus distinguished from Waters beneath, so are
also those Waters above the Earth from Waters beneath the Earth, that is,
Subterraneous Fountains, or depths of the Seas: for neither are any Waters
under the whole Earth, which is most Dens, and consequently lowest; nor above
any of the whole Heavens, Superaether, Ether, or Air itself, which are more
Rare, and consequently Higher, as I have showed: but these Expressions
concerning the Vapors and Fountains are Respective, according to the Subject
Matter, and not to be understood Absolutely; and they do indicate several
Regions of the Waters, whereas we have no such indication of any several Regions
in the Air or Ether, as I have observed. Also though the Evaporation of Waters
by Heat be Natural, and only Supernaturaly produced by God in the Second Day,
as his other Works of Improper Creation were in other Days; yet this
Distribution of Earth and Waters in the Terraq^eous Globe thereof, which was so
Composed in this Third Day, seems more Extraordinary, and Artificial, and such
as does most plainly declare the Immediate Operation of God in this, and all
the other Days: for by what Natural Power could the Earth and Isles be raised
above the Waters? or the Mountains and Vallys be so ordered and Indented? or
who could cast those great Banks of the Shores, and cut those vast Chanells of
the Seas and Rivers, or say unto them, thither shall ye go and no farther?
which therefore God is said Originaly to do by Line and Level; as in
Waterworks, we so set them out that they may run to their Level this way or
that way in the Cutts prepared for them. And though men may make such less
alterations therein, and some greater have been made by accidental Breaches and
Inundations, yet as God says, I brake up for it my Decreed place (or as it is
Originaly, established my Decree upon it) and set Bars and D^ors, so generaly
and in the main it continues the same: and since that Great and Universal
Deluge, yet Cosmographers can still find out those Seas, Rivers, and Isles,
which Moses declares to have been before it. And thus the Divine Psalmist
describes both the Proper and Improper Creation of Waters and Earth, Thou
coveredst it with the Deep, as with a Garment; the Waters stood above the
Mountains. At thy rebuke they fled, at the Voice of thy Thunder they hasted
away. They go up by the Mountains, they go down by the Vallys, unto the place
that thou have founded for them. Thou have set a Bound that they might not
pass, that they turn not again to cover the Earth, and so proceeds to show the
great Usefulness thereof, which thereby God prepared both for Vegetatives and
Sensitives in the whole Oecumene or Habitable Earth. But though the Earth
generaly is thus raised above the Waters, not only in the Mountains and Summits
thereof, but in its whole Campus, which lys above the Level of the Waters; yet
the Water, in its own Province, is above the Earth, on which it flows; and so
the Earth is very elegantly expressed standing out of the Water, and in the
Water. And whereas it is said that God founded it upon (or above) the Seas, and
established it upon (or above) the Floods; it is very true and proper according
to the Subject Matter, whereof the Psalmist there speaks; that is, of the
Oecumene or Habitable Earth, as it was so raised above the Waters, which before
were above it; and thereby was made fru^tfull and Habitable: which the
precedent Context does plainly declare, The Earth is the Lords and the fulness
thereof, the World and all that dwell therein: nor do I apprehend that the whole
World of Spheres, Aereal, Ethereal, and Superaethereal, is there intended;
though the Author of Esdras says also, that the Heavens are founded upon the
Waters: but I rather conceiv that by World is there meant Orbis Terrae, as it
is usually so taken Hebraicaly, and in all other Languages, because the Earth
is our present World; and so more restrictively we say the Christian World, and
the like. But how far the Waters are beneath the Level or Campus of the Earth
is not particularly expressed; yet we read of a great Deep or Ocean, and of
Fountains thereof or therein; (as we so say Fons. Blundusii, and the like) not
that there is, besides the Ocean, any Fountain thereof beneath it, which feeds
and supplys it; for it is called the Deep, because it is the deepest of all
Waters: and so Fountains and Depths of Waters are used indifferently, as it is
said, A Land of Brooks of Water, of Fountains, and Depths, that spring out of
Vallys and Hills: and both are said to be under the Earth; wherefore because
Rain and Waters in those dry Countries were accounted great Blessings, Jacob
blesses Joseph with Blessings of Heaven above, and Blessings of the deep that
lies under, which Moses also repeateth: nor is it said that there is a Deep,
and also Fountains thereof, beneath, and besides it, but they are always termed
the Fountains of the Deep, not only in respect of itself, but also of all
Vapors, Rain and Rivers, whereof the Deep or Sea is the Fountain; to which that
expression seems to refer, for so they are joined together, as it is said, that
there were the Fountains of the Great Deep broken up, and the Windows of Heaven
were opened: and indeed they are so made to be Fountains one unto another
mutualy and reciprocaly, as I shall show hereafter: and in the Deluge, the
Conflux of all the Waters was gathered together, to cover the whole Earth, not
as it did at first equaly cover the whole Surface thereof, but the Canales,
Campus, and highest Hills, as they then stood and continued: fifteen Cubits did
the Waters prevail, and the Mountains were covered. Whereby we may partly
estimate the quantity of the whole Body of Waters, which yet may be Rarefied or
Condensated more or less: nor can we exactly tell what is the Proportion of the
Surface of the Waters to the Surface of Dry Land in the whole Terraqueous
Globe. The Author of Esdras says, Upon the Third Day thou did command that
the Waters should be gathered in the Seventh part of the Earth; Six parts have thou dried up; which might probably also have encouraged Columbus in his happy
confidence of more Earth then was discovered before him, and according to this
account there should still be much Terra Incognita. The Density of the Body of
Air more then of Water has been observed to be as about a Thousand to One, and
yet Waters beneath are Rarefied into Vapors or Waters above, which are as Rare
as Air itself; for Vapors and Fumes do not ascend into the Air by Impulsion of
one part after another, as Water may be squirted upward out of a Syringe, or as
they are called Pillars of Smoke in respect of the Figure thereof; but if a
Titi^ or Brand be held downward in the open Air, yet the Smoke thereof will
ascend upward, or remain suspended: and perhaps some Vaporous Meteors are
Indefinitely in the Air or any Region thereof, even the highest Surface, and so
said to be upon it, as I have showed. And I shall here observe, that as Vapors,
or Waters above, were so made by special Creation in the Second Day, so they
are of special Use and Consideration, being a very Subtle and Spirituous
Effluvium, and a notable Instrument of Nature, and also a Menstruum carrying
forth with it not only part of the Body, but also much of the Spirit: and this
is indeed that which Chemists commonly call, Spirit, as it so carries forth
the Spiritual Qualitys with itself; being a very fit Vehicle thereof: whence
some have fansied a Conversion and Transpeciation in itself, which I have
already refuted: but certainly it causes a very great Alteration of the Bodies
out of which it is emitted, and Translation of the Spirits thereof; being not so
Dens or Consistent as Earth, nor as Water out of which it is produced; and
almost as Rare as Air and Ether: and so Intercedeth and Mediateth between all
the Elements, and does Evoke the Spirits thereof; as is commonly observed of the
firmest Timber, that if it be often Wett and Dry again, it soon Rotts; which
also takes away the State of Hay, as Husbandmen say, in their Chemical
expression thereof. Yea, I suppose, that what is intended by the famous Chemical
Term of Fermentation is only the Operation of a Hott Spirit on a Moist,
Intrinsecaly within the Body thereof, by Vaporation; which plainly discovers
itself accordingly by some Turgescence and Ebullition; and whereby the Benign
and Homogeneous Spirits are better Concocted and more equaly Distributed, which
does exceedingly Meliorate and Maturate; and the more Malign and Heterogeneous
do Evaporate, or otherwise the Spirits being in agitation, by any Intemperate
Excess, or Defect, become more Corrupt and Putrid. Thus Heat and Moisture
Operating and Fermenting within Bodies produce all Elementary Generation and
Corruption, and are thereby also very subservient to Vegetation, and
Vivification. Now as I said before of Air, so the very Spirit of Water is
unknown to us, nor have we any apt Vocabulum thereof; or if we had, yet we could
not thereby know the Substantial Spirit itself, or the Nature thereof; but only
by those Accidents or Spiritual Qualitys, whereof I shall now proceed to
discourse.

II. The first or principal Quality of Water is Moisture, as I have already
proved: and indeed, unless Water be Moist, I neither know what is Water, nor
what is Moisture. And I suppose that Elementary Water is most Moist, that is,
it does Moisten most strongly, though Vapor, being more Rare and Subtle, may
sooner penetrate; as Fixed Fire does certainly Heat most, though Volatile Flame
does most penetrate: and yet when Vapor has thus penetrated, it does most
Moisten by being Condensated again into Water: but Vapor may be also Adusted
and turned into Smoke, which is Actualy Dry, as I have showed, and that cannot
be supposed of Water Immediately, until it be first turned into Vapor. And Oil
seems to Moisten more then Elementary Water, because it is more Unctuous, and
Evaporateth less, whereby it reteins the Moisture longer; as a boiling pot of
Water being covered, does retein the Vapor and Moisture more then uncovered,
and therefore that Water is longer in boiling away, and so is Oil then Water;
thus though pure Water does, as I said, Moisten most, because Moisture is the
Proper Quality thereof, and all others Moisten only by participation of Water;
yet it does also Evaporate most, whereby it becomes Vapor and Water above,
which is also another Proper Quality thereof, and thereby drys away soonest.
Also though it moisten most, yet in Washing it may be advantaged by other
Bodies; as pure Water does not Rens or Scowr so well, as if it be mingled with
Earthy particles of Chalk, Marl, Bran, or the like, which render it more
Abstersive, and make it, as Huswives say, bear Soap better; because those
Terreous Corpuscles do Imbibe Unctuous Bodies better then Water, and thereby
reconcile them together, yet not without heating, beating, laving, or the like:
and so Water and Milk mingle together, the Oleous parts of the Butyrum being
reconciled to the Water by the Serum; whereas Butter itself, Oil, Turpentine,
Mercury, and the like, will not so easily mingle with Water; because they are
not so Aqueous; which appears by their less Evaporation: nor will Water easily
mingle with Vapor, while they continue such; because God has so vastly
differenced them in their Creation, that they shall be either Waters beneath,
or Waters above; whose different Density is as a Thousand to One, and they can
hardly continue in any of those thousand Degrees between them, though they pass
from one to the other by them all; as may appear by the Motion of Water boiling
in a pott, which first is scarcely seen to Move, and then Simpers, as they say,
and so boils up more and more, though they will continue in some Degrees beyond
that proportion, as Meteors in any Region of the Air. And Evaporation is such a
notable Property of Water, and Symptom of the Aqueous Nature, that I suppose
all Elementary Water, if it be not frozen with Cold, will Evaporate always with
any Degree of Heat, or Tep^r; as certainly it will in a Cold Still; though
proportionably less with less, and more with more Heat: and so even those
winds, which we call Cold from that Predominant Quality, do Dry notably, by
carrying away the Vapors, which even then do arise, whereby others may more
freely succeed, (as I said concerning the boiling pott, and so it may be
observed in Saltworks, or the like.) But though such more Heterogene^u^ and
less Aqueous Bodies, as Butter, Oil, Turpentine, and the like, will not easily
mingle with Water, or other such Bodies; nor become Continuous with them: yet if
they be Fluid, they may be notably Contiguous, because they can conjoin
themselves to every part and pore thereof; and do notably Cohere to and with
Consistent Bodies by their own Unctuous Glutinosity: yea, even Water itself,
though neither Unctuous, nor Glutinous, so will Cohere; and so would Mercury
also, if the Weight thereof did not oversway it. And, I suppose, the Experiment
of the Capillar Tube to be from this Cohesion and the Homogeneity of Water, and
another Conjunct Reason (which I shall assign afterward) for I know no such
Spiritual Homogeneity between Water and Glass, which is rather Terreous (though
Poets call Water Vitreous) but as I have showed the whole Body of Matter is
Homogeneous in itself, and Continuous with itself, though Spirits may be
Heterogeneous, and by their Heterogeneity Discontinue their Bodies of Matter;
therefore, as when by reason of their Consistence, or otherwise, they cannot
perfectly close together, other Bodies do and must Intervene, to prevent
Vacuity; so when themselves can so close, they also in like manner prevent it
themselves, and so need no^, but rather exclude the Intervention of any other
Bodies by their own Praepossession; whether such Contiguous Bodies be
Homogeneous, or Heterogeneous; because they are all Bodies of Matter, whatsoever
their Spirits may be: and so polished Metalls will Cohere to Marble, as well as
Metal to Metal, or Marble to Marble: and thus Water being Naturaly as Smooth,
and of as equal a Surface, as any Glass can be made Artificialy, and being
Contiguous to the Capillar Glass, does notably Cohere, as it will to any Smooth
Glass, so that it can very hardly be shaken off by swinging, or the like;
though it will more easily slide by its own Weight or Pondus, as polished
Marbles will one from another being moved by any Potentia, whereby Air may
succeed at the Edges thereof; though otherwise they will not be pulled one from
another Parpendicularly with less Power then if they were so far Imperfectly
Continuous: and so according to the proportionable Weight of the Water in the
Capillar Tube, it does descend and depart from its Contiguity. And thus the
Inside of the Tube of Glass, (which is therefore Capillar, because the Cavity
thereof is not much bigger then an Hair) being Madefied, either by other Water,
or by the Vapor of that Water wherein it stands (which as I have said does
always Evaporate, if it be not obstructed) Madefying the Glass by Degrees,
though very slowly, and in much longer time, and the Glass being either way
Madefied with Water in the Inside thereof, which, as I said, sticks so closely
to the Consistent Body thereof, and reaching down to the Water wherein it stands,
and which is Homogeneous with it, both the Waters do mingle, and would flow
together, as all Aqueous Bodies Naturaly do; and because the Water in which it
stands being Stagnant, and having no Actual Weight, cannot draw the other down
to itself being so strongly Coherent to the Inside of the Glass, as I have
showed that upper Water according to the strength of the Cohesion draws up the
lower Water to itself, so long, and so high, until ^he Weight of the Water so
drawn up does oversway it; and accordingly it lifts up and keeps suspended a
proportionable Cylinder of Water, higher, or lower, as the Cavity of the Tube
is less, or greater; and because that Cylinder of Water is supported, as I said,
by the Cohesion to the Sides of the Tube, which is therefore strongest at the
Sides, the Water so supported is there highest, and so less, and less, and
lowest in the midst; whereby the Surface of the Cylinder becomes Concave:
whereas Mercury will not so ascend by reason of its over-weight, which, as I
have said, does prevail against any such Cohesion with Glass; and therefore
also if the Capillar Tube be set in it, the Surface within the Orifice thereof
will not be Concave, but Unequal; because by the Orifice of the Tube, the
Mercury, which is a far more Consistent Body then Water, is deprest most at
the Sides, and so thereby less, and less, and therefore is highest in the
midst. Also Water has some Consistence in it from the Terreity, that is in the
Mistion thereof; and this is the other Concurrent Reason which I before
intimated; for if it were wholly Consistent, as Earth; or Fluid, as Ether, the
Experiment would not Succeed; but by the partial Consistence thereof, it does
also somewhat Rope, as we say, or hang together, and so by the Homogeneity of
the Water in the Tube, and that wherein it stands, meeting and mingling
together, and being apt to flow together one way or other, the Water in the
Tube, having the advantage of Cohesion, and Prevalence thereof above the Weight
of the Water in which it stands, does so far draw it up, until they both
become Equipollent, and then there they stand. And thus if you fill a Glass
Cruet almost to the top with Water, and then incline it toward the Nose thereof,
so as the Water may run farther into it then when it stood erected
Perpendicularly, and then very gently revers it, and erect it again
Perpendicularly as before; the Water will stand in the Nose proportionably
above the Level thereof in the Neck of the Cruet, as it will in the Capillar
Tube; and both are from the same Concurrent Reasons, which I have declared. Nor
do we discover the Symptoms of any other Motions of the Water afterward, or any
farther advantage gained by such Elevation thereof, neither will it so run in a
Siphon higher, or more swiftly, then it would do otherwise. And though the
Subsilience of the Water in the Capillar Tube be very quick, and per Saltum,
(as generaly such Motions are) yet it is not very strong, as you may perceiv,
if you stop the upper Orifice of the Tube with your Finger, which will hinder
the Ascent thereof, because it has not sufficient strength to Compress the
Included Air. But this Experiment plainly discovers the Continuity of Matter,
and Spiritual Appetite of Union, that is between Homogeneous Natures, especialy
Elementary, being next to Matter, which can never be Disunited from itself, as
Material Spirits and their Bodies may be; which yet being Actualy United, will
flow together, if they may, and cannot be so easily Divelled, as Heterogeneous.
And it shows that there is some Earthy Consistence, even in Water; which
appears also in Bubbles, that are as Skins of Water including Air; and as the
Heterogeneous Air does Conglobate within, which makes the Bubble Spherical, so
it does thereby resist the Air without. Also not only thicker Liquors, but even
standing Water has some such Skin upon it; so that a Needle very gently laid
upon it will not sink so fast at first, as when it has broken through that
Skin: And so we see such Cobwebs on the ground, as Husbandmen call them; but
this Terreity most notably appears in Vapor Adust, or Fume, which turns into a
Soot in Chimnys not only as Motes, but in larger Pulviscles; and so in
Conglaciation of Ice, which discover plainly a Misture of Drines and
Consistence, that are Earthy Qualitys, with the Moisture of Water: Also we may
observe how in Filtratio^ Water ascends, as in the Capillar Tube, but by many
Steps and Degrees; and then descends by the Overweight, as in the Siphon; and
as it would in the Capillar Tube so made, and posited, and then madefied; but
not otherwise.

III. Though I suppose there may be several other Simple Qualitys both of Air,
and Water, besides the First, as they are called, that is, Cold of Air, and
Moisture of Water, as well as Light and others, besides Heat, in Ether; and
Consistence and others, besides Drines, in Earth; yet because they are not so
obvious, I shall not now hunt after them farther then I meet with them in such
Sensibles, wherein I conceiv Water and some Simple Quality thereof to be
Predominant, as I have before observed of Color, and Sound. Now these Aqueous
Sensibles are Odors, and Sapors; and as God divided the Waters into Water
beneath, and above, or Gross Water, and Subtle Vapor; so these two several
Sensibles are severaly Inherent in them, that is, Odor in the Vapor and
Effluvium, and Sapor in the Grosser Water. And yet Odor is more Gross then
Sound, as Sound is then Color, and neither Transient as Sound, nor Emanant as
Color, but more Fixed and Inherent in the Odorous Effluvium; and is accordingly
varied and carried away with it: and as the Vapor is more Dens, or Rare, so
generaly is the Odor more Gross, or Fine: and as the Vapor, so the Odor, is
more Dens and Gross, as it is more near to the Aqueous Body; and more Rare and
Fine as it is farther Effluent from it, and more Dispersed thereby: and yet
there is a very longinquous Efflux and Waft of Odors in such diffusion of
Vapors; as is sensibly perceived by the Sent of Heaths of Rosemary very far at
Sea, and by the Convolation of Ravens and Vulturs to Carcasses very far
distant. Also as Odors are of an Aqueous nature, so there is a very quick and
permanent Adhesion thereof to Moist Bodies; for so the Sent of an Hares or Deers
Foot continues long on the Moist ground in every Vestigium thereof, though they
run very swiftly over it; which could not be so detained without the Subtle
Vapor, in which it is Inherent, and which sticks to the ground; and is not so
easily discharged as a Cloud of Breath from a D^sh of Pewter, or Silver, or
such other Bodies which are less Moist: yet as the Subtle Effluvium of Odorous
Vapors is emitted from the Body which is the Fountain ther^f, so that Body
itself also is Odorous, having its own Inherent Odor, and may be sented by the
Odorous Vapors as they pass out of it into the Nostrills; and though Drines may
Predominate in it, yet if it be not so Dry, or such a Caput Mortuum as does
amitt no Vapors, which very few Bodies do; it may have a Sent, and that very
strong and vehement; ^s Spices, and the like; because such Vapors are also more
strong, and there is a Terreous Quality, as well as Aqueous, whereof Odor is
Compounded, as I shall afterward show: but commonly the Odorous Evaporation is
more Actuated and produced by Moisture; as Flowers and Herbs after Rain smell
more sweetly: and Dry or Unctuous Perfumes, by Infrication of the Powder, or
Imbibition of the Oil or Butter, are more strong and durable* because thereby
there is an Incorporation of the very Odorous Bodies, which are the Fountains of
the Odors, as I said: and generaly all Dissolutions, either by Maceration
Externaly, or Putrefaction Internaly, whereby the Vapors are more freely
Emitted, and the Odors Actuated, do cause greater Sents: also long restraint of
the Actual Vapors and Odors, as in close Vessels, or Rooms, when they are first
opened cause stronger Smells, because they are so Copious. Now as Odor is a
Proper Sensible in itself, so it is also Previous to Sapor, and Smelling, as it
were, a Pregustator of the Sens of Taste; because Odor and Sapor, as I said, are
Connatural Qualitys chiefly Subsisting in the same Element of Water; though
they are very different in themselves, as Heat and Light are in Ether, and
perhaps more, because they are not Simple, but Compounded with other Terreous
Qualitys, and require such several Bodies of their own Element, as Waters above,
and beneath; and certainly they must so differ, because they are several
Sensibles of several Senses, which also very sensibly proves Heat and Light to
be Realy D^fferent, because Heat is an Object of Tact, and Light of Sight. Thus
there may be more Odor, or more pleasing or displeasing, then Sapor; and so
convertibly, in the same Body; but such as are of fetid Sapors have also
commonly fetid Odors, and pleasing Sapors no displeasing Odors. And I suppose
that vehement and strong Odors or Vapors in any Body do indicate and declare it
to be some notable Pharmacum, especialy if they be such as are not very
grateful to the Senses, which declare it to be not of any Dietical, or
ordinary, but extraordinary Use and Virtue. Now as it is evident, that Actual
Odors are Immediately Inherent in Vaporous Effluvia, which the very Organ of
Smelling, that is, the Mammillary Processes, do sufficiently attest, being
situated above the Nares, through which, as Tonells, those Vapors do pass; so
it is as apparent that Sapors do Inhere in the Watery Juice of the Sapid Body,
because if that be expressed, it becomes Insipid and the expressed Juice more
Sapid, as Wine, Cider, Perry, Gravy or Juice of Fleshmeat, and the like. And it
also appears to me that Odors or Sapors are no Simple Qualitys of Water only,
(as Sound and Color are not of Air, or Ether only) but that they are all Mist
with some Terreous Simple Qualitys, which are unknown to us, what they are, and
yet we may also know, that they are not Odorous or Saporous in themselves;
because Elementary Water, or Earth, do not either Smell, or Taste much; as
Lucidity and Opacity are not much seen of themselves, and indeed not without the
advantage of Conspissation or some small Mistion, or the like: but, as I
confess, I first derived this Notion from the ancient Philosophers, who have
discovered Lucidum and Opacum to be the Principles of Color, which I have thus
far improved and produced to the other three Sensibles, Sound, Odor, and
Sapor, that is, all the proper Sensibles, except the four first Qualitys
(which are also in themselves Simple, and Mist to be made Sensible, being too
strong and vehement in their own Elementary Bodies) and they are indeed Social,
and perhaps Auxiliary Qualitys, with all and every the Simple Qualitys of the
other Sensibles; as their Proper Sens, which is Tact, is the Fundamental Sens
of all the other Senses, as I shall show hereafter: so I fear to seem too
Curious and Novell heerin to others, and also doubt, lest by putting too much
of this new Wine into old bottles I should offend others; having not any
Current Vocabula whereby to express the very Names of these Principles, nor
Authority enough to Coin them; yet I shall generaly express my Sentiment; of
the more Active and Aqueous Principle both of Odor, and Sapor, which I call
Acidum or Sharp, as also of the Terreous Principle thereof, which I shall call
Fatuum or Vapid; and so leav it to others more particularly to distribute them.
And so I conceiv, that accordingly in Chemical Separation the Vaporous Spirits
or Effluxes are more Acid, and the Caput Mortuum more Fatuous and Stupid; and
in Natural Generation and the Process thereof, the Succus of Fruits, and the
like, is first Acid, or more Acerb; and afterward more Sweet, then Strong or
Rancid; and at last Vapid: wherein the more Active Quality first prevailing in
the Fermentation, does Actuate some such Acid Humor, which makes the Fruit, or
the like, more Acid and Poinant, and then by expens of the eagernes thereof, by
Evaporation, and a more equal Distribution in the Concoction of both Qualitys,
it becomes more grateful to the Sens, or Sweet; and as that Temperature begins
again to be dissolved, more Rancid; and at last when the Active Quality is
wholly emitted in the Effluvia, or Consopited and overcome by the Terreous,
Vapid. Thus also the Mouth, which tastes Meat, has judged thereof, Infanti
Melimela dato fatuafque Mariscas,
At mihi quae novit pungere Chia Sapit.
And therefore generaly elder men delight more in such Acid and Poinant Sapors;
because their Sens of Tasting is more Weak, and as I may so say, Insipid in
itself; and children in Sweetmeats, which are of a more equal Temper, and
consequently more suitable to their more exact Sensation* There is an old
Problem, whether Odors do Nourish? which I suppose may easily be resolved, that
they do not, nor cannot Nourish, as Odors; for so Sapors, as Sapors, do not
Nourish; because they are only Spiritual Qualitys, and no Materia Nutritiva; nor
can they Migrate out of their Bodies; nor do they so much Nourish in and with
their Bodies, as Condite Meats and D^inks, wherein they Inhere; and there are
many other Qualitys; which are neither so Odorous nor Saporous, and yet more
Nutritive and Assimilative. But as Sapor does most properly commend Meats and
Drinks to the Appetite (which greatly conduces to Nourishment, and so there is
sometimes a better Concoction and Nutrition of and by that which is more
grateful to the Taste, though less wholesome in itself, then of that which is
more wholesome, and less grateful according to the the Consent and Confederacy
of Nature, especialy if the Delectation and Aversation be extraordinary, as in
Longing or Loathing) so next to Sapor, Odor also, which is very Homogeneous
with it, as I have said, does by a pleasing Fragrancy excite the Appetite; and
so, though more remotely, may Music at a Feast, as Siracides observes; and
the Color of Wine when it looks Red, and sparkleth in the Glass, as Solomon
observes: but these are only Sympathetical Exhilarations and Provocations of
the Sensitive Imagination and Appetite, (which yet conduce to Vegetative
Nutrition, and plainly show the Subordination thereof and Combination between
them) and so Physicians generaly prescribe Mirth at Meals; as he also advises,
Eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy Wine with a Merry heart. But the greater
Question is, whether Vapors as Vapors, and particularly, Odorous, may Nourish?
and then they are to be considered, either as they may pass into the Brain, and
so certainly they may Intoxicate, as some find by Sents of Winecellars, Fumes
of Tobacco, and the like; yea, sweet Perfumes, if strong and vehement, may cause
Headache; and it has been credibly reported that some have been Poisoned by
Venomous Sents: wherefore i^ will be very hard to conceiv, that the Animal
Spirits may not as well be refreshed and cherished by benign Vapors, as by
malign thus distempered: or as they pass by Introsuction or Inspiration into
the Lungs, and so seem to be not only for Refrigeration; but since there is
more Inspired continualy then Respired, it may deserv farther Inquisition,
whether the rest does not pass out of the Lungs by the Heart into the Arterys,
and therebyserv both for Purification and Attenuation of the Blood, and also
for Nutrition? for though I conceiv Elementary Fire or Air alone not to be
Nutritive, yet I know not why Vapors may not Nourish as well as Drink, since
they are only Water Rarefied: and there is not only Air, but also much Vapor in
the Atmosphere wherein we breath, and which we continualy suck in by such
Inspiration: and if that be too pure an Air, and not sufficiently Vaporous, as
in the Andes; or if the Vapors be more Adusted by Fire of Charcoal, or the
like; or Corrupted by much breathing in a close Room, or the like; we feel
great want of a more Nutritive as well as Refrigerative Air: and plainly the
Birth or Foetus while it it in the Mothers Womb, and is Nourished by her, has
no Use of the Lungs, nor Inspiration thereby; but as soon as it is brought
forth, it needs this Breath of Life, as it is termed, as well as any other
Nourishment, and cannot live, as before, without it; though there was before
the same Motion and Heat of the Heart, which did need as much Refrigeration as
afterward: and though it may seem very strange that Vapor thus passing
Immediately from the Lungs by the other passages through the Heart into the
Arterys, and not like other Meat and Drink first into the Stomach, should
Nourish, without any more Process of Concoction, yet it may be also considered
how much sooner Drink in an empty Stomach is Concocted then Meat; and whether
Vapor, which is so much more Rare and Fusile then Drink, need any such Process,
and may not by the Heat and Mot^on of the Blood be Concocted and Mist with it;
which is all that I intend by this kind of Nutrition; and so I refer it to the
Judgment of learned Physicians; who if they shall judge it to be so, will also
judge the Atmosphere to be of such consequence as I formerly intimated.

IV. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full. Unto the place
from whence the Rivers came, thither they return again, as the wise Philosopher
says, most truly and Philosophicaly, according to the Divine History of the
Creation of Waters beneath, and Waters above, and the mutual Reciprocation
thereof; though perhaps not according to Popular Understanding: for indeed the
Popularity, which some weak and shallow Wits impute to Scripture, is rather in
their own Apprehensions, then in the Expressions, wherein Scripture is always
Consonant, and the Truth thereof Consistent with itself; and so we are to
Interpret them accordingly, and to reduce them all to the System of the World,
which is Intentionaly reveled and declared unto us in this Divine History of
the Genesis thereof: and then we shall neither, as some, place Waters below the
Earth, because Springs are termed Subterraneous, or above the Ether, yea the
Superaether, because the same word signifies both Air and Heavens; and so make
them to possess both the Center and Circumference of the whole World: nor
conceiv that Rivers flow from the Ocean only by Subterraneous passages, and so
flow thither again in their Canales: whenas there is not any mention made of
Rivers in all the Six Days Works; but only of Waters above and Waters beneath,
which were first gathered into Seas: though I doubt not but that Rivers were
also made afterward in the Third Day; yet first by Waters above, or Vapors, and
in the same Order of Nature wherein they are still continued; that is, by the
descent of Vapors first raised from the Seas into the Earth; and therefore only
Vapors or Waters above, and Seas or Waters beneath, are here mentioned: and so
afterward we read that There went up a Mist from the Earth, and watered the
whole face of the Ground, before we read of the four Rivers that encompassed
Eden about, and were also fed and continued by it: and the Vapors thus
descending into the Spongy Earth, where they meet with Stones, or other such
Bodies less apt to Imbibe them, do stand in Drops, as they do on Marble (which
Poets call the Tears of Niobe) and those Drops gathering together in Fluxes
make at first little Rills, and they afterward Rivulets and Rivers, which run
again into the Sea, and so the Rivers were made, and are still continued; and
this, and no other, is the Course of the Waters, as the Psalmist affirms, They
go up by the Mountains, they go down by the Vallys, unto the place which thou
have founded for them, and so we read of Windows of Heaven, as well as of
Fountains of the Deep, and the Author of Esdras calls them also, Springs
above the Firmament: for so indeed they are Mutualy and Reciprocaly Fountains
each to other. And this plainly is proved by the freshnes of Rivers, which may
not be imputed to any such Percolation through the Earth, whereby it has
formerly been supposed that Salt might be Separated from Water, but is now
found to be otherwise: I have tried it by so strict a Percolation, that only a
Drop or two of Brine have been Excerned in a whole Days time, and yet they were
so Briny, that I could perceiv very little or no difference; and all Saltmen
find Evaporation to be the most easy and natural way of making Salt, which
therefore certainly is the way of Nature, in so great an Evaporation, as
apparently makes all Rainwater fresh, and consequently all Riverwater. Nor are
Salt Springs from the Sea Immediately, or Mediately, but from Salt Mines in the
Earth, l^ke other N^trous, Bitumineous, or Iron Springs; and the like; though I
also acknowledge, that Salt may be Volatilised, as Chemists say, and which does
very sensibly appear to us who dwell near to the Sea, where Woods on that side
toward the Sea are blasted thereby, and Iron Nails and Window Bars rotted (as
Iron will swell and be corrupted by lying long in Saltwater) yet these Vapors
of the Sea go not far, nor are such Experiments thereof found at any great
distance; much less can they make Salt Springs in the Inland, where also fresh
Springs ^low very near to them: but they are both first from Vapors, and then
the Salt Springs are made Salt by running through Salt Mines. And lastly, I
shall approve it by a plain Experiment which I received from a very Credible
Person, whose House standing at the bottom of a declive Hill, and wanting Water,
he caused a large Trench to be dug down the side thereof, and many other less
Trenches branching out of it both ways, and then filled them all with Pebble
Stones, and again covered them over with the Earth; and found Water to flow at
the bottom of the main Trench, through a Pipe laid to receiv it: which is only
by Artificial application of the same Natural Causalitys. And when I had
reported this to a Noble Lord, he confirmed it with another Observation which
himself had made, in certain Quillets or little Quagmires, which have Water
springing and standing in them; by causing them to be searched, and the ground
to be dug under them, where he found Beds of Stone: (which might also give
occasion to the Poets to feign Rivers pouring their Waters out of Stony Urns)
Nor indeed is it Imaginable that Rivers and Springs should otherwise come from
the Sea, whose highest Watermark is far below the Springs; as is well known to
such who live near to the higher Shores of the Sea: and so also is attested by
such who have gone up the Pike of T^neriff, wherein they found a Spring far
above the Sea: whereas Water, while it is such, cannot ascend above its Level;
for then it should rise above itself: because it is all one Equidens and Fluid
Body. And Springs rise first out of the Earth in very small Sources, and not
from any such Subterraneous Rivers, as some have supposed, flowing in great
Canales under the Earth, and Impelled by I know not what Subterraneous Vapors,
like Blood in the Veins. But though all Water will run to its Level, yet if it
be not also some way Impelled, it will run very slowly, and so swell and mingle
by degrees as it can hardly be perceived to run: wherefore it is observed in
such Cutts and Aqueducts, that if about a foot Fall be not allowed for every
Mile, there will be a very little Current of the Water, whereas Rivers run very
swiftly, and some of them with a very Rapid Current; which must be by a far
greater Fall: and therefore the Springs or Sources of all great Rivers must be
far within Land, and also fall from much higher ground; as the Author of
Esdr^^ says, That the Flowds might power down from the Rocks. Having thus far
considered the Course of Waters from the Sea into the Air by Evaporation, and
from thence to the Earth, and from the Mountains or higher ground thereof to the
Seas again, which is the first and great Reciprocation thereof, whereby they are
such Mutual Fountains each to other, I shall now farther consider that which we
commonly call the Flood and Ebb, or Tides of Seas and Rivers, which is also
another Mutual Reciprocation of Waters; for so the Flood of the Seas is the Ebb
of the Rivers, and the Ebb of the Rivers the Flood of the Seas, not Circularly,
as the other, but only describing a very small Segment, or part of an Arch,
like a Pendulum. Now because so many several Hypotheses thereof have been offered
by others, and scarcely any two agree together, I shall also present my
Hypothesis among the rest, not going out of my way, nor far from the Text to
produce it; which is this. As I suppose, that Rivers run from the higher parts
of the Earth, so also that the Main Ocean into which they run is some lower
part of the Cortex thereof, which is the fittest Alveus to receiv it; and
therefore it is called the Deep: and though I know not how deep the Fundus
thereof is, yet certainly it must be far deeper then any of the Narrow Seas,
which run into it, otherwise they could not so run into it; and the Narrow Seas
must also be deeper then the Rivers which run into them: and they not only run
one into another, but with such a force and Current as does plainly declare a
proportionable Fall. And while the Rivers so run into the Sea, yet the Sea is
not full; and all these Waters certainly do not sink into the Earth below the
Fundus, or into any vast Barathrum thereof, which would long since have been
filled, but apparently they Flow and Reflow continualy: nor are they Imbibed by
the Shores, or Absorbed by Evaporation, which is continualy according to that
Reciprocation of Waters and Vapors that I before described, and any Inequality
thereof can make very little or no difference in this case. Also we know that
Water Impelling Water by Fall or Force, if it has no Vent or farther Passage,
will cause the Water so Impelled to rise before it; because the Impuls driving it
forward, and consequently hindering it from flowing back, when and where it is
stopped, must cause it to rise and swell. Thus the Rivers running forcibly with
such an Impuls into the Narrow Seas, and they into the Ocean, beyond which they
do not, nor cannot pass, do certainly cause it to rise and swell toward the
Middle by such Motive Impuls and Current of all the Rivers and Narrow Seas on
every side thereof; and then when it has so raised the Pondus of the Water
somewhat above the Level of the Ocean, and so far, as it can raise it no
higher; when that prevails against the Impuls, and the Water of the Ocean
begins to fall again, it will drive all the Water between (being a Voluble and
Undulating Body) as fast and as far back again; because it was Equivalent to
the Impuls which so raised it: whereby the Water between the highest Watermark
of the Ocean (to which it did so rise and swell, and from which by reason of
the greatest Pondus thereof it began to fall back) and the highest Watermark of
the Rivers, to which it can so fall back, reflows into the Narrow Seas and
Rivers accordingly: that is, above the Level in the Rivers, as it before
proportionably rose above the Level of the Ocean: because, as I said, it is a
Rolling and Fluctuating Motion, which will ever be Reciprocaly higher at each
end, like the shorter Vibrations of a Pendulum: and it does not raise it so high
as the Springs, from which the Fall of the Rivers first began; because the
Fluctuation does not reach so far, forward, or backward; and probably so much
Water as is beyond the highest Watermark of the Rivers in the Canales thereof,
and from thence to the Springs, is by Evaporation continualy Exhausted from the
Sea; which returning to the Earth does serve continualy to supply the Rivers,
though more or less, according to the Operation of the Ether and Planets,
especialy the Moon, which cause and regulate the Evaporation; but generaly so as
the Sea is never full, nor the Rivers empty: and by this Constant supply of the
Springs and Rivers there is accordingly a Constant Fall of the Waters one way,
and an answerable Return thereof by the Pondus of the Water of the Ocean so
raised thereby, as I have showed, the other way: as if we suppose a Pendulum
having a Constant and almost equal Impuls added to it one way, and so Impelling
it in every Vibration, it will certainly so return by its own Pondus and
thereby Constantly and Equaly Vibrate. And this I conceiv to be the account of
Tides generaly; though there are many particular Variations thereof, both
Ordinary, as the Menstruous; and Extraordinary, as Annual, and Casual: and I
suppose the Menstruous, and indeed the Diurnal Variation of the Tides therein,
to be from the Moon; not that they do follow her Course, which is from West to
East, for so plainly they do not, the Flux and Reflux being from all Shores to
the Ocean, and back again: but as I conceiv, that as the Sun raises those Dry
Vapors or Fumes, whereof I before discoursed, by his vehement Heat; and which
cause no such Increas of Waters, as I before mentioned; so the Moon by her more
moderate Heat principaly raises those Moist Vapors, which so return into
Waters, and cause the Increas thereof: and this Influence of the Moon is
sufficiently known in many other Instances, but most eminently in Tides, which
accordingly observe her two Apogaea* when she is farthest from the Earth, and
her Heat then most moderate; and so the Tides are then highest when she is New
in her first Apogaeum, and Full in her Second, every Month, and so
proportionably every Day between them. Thus I have briefly delivered my
Conception of this great Arcanum; which I shall leav to be farther examined by
others, especialy the most expert Navigators; and desire them to try it by
these Criteria: Whether the Tides do not Impell the Main Ocean from both the
opposite Shores at the same time? as most probably they should; because the
Impuls of the Rivers and Narrow Seas will not last so far, and so long, as to
drive the Water from one Shore to another cross the whole Ocean, nor perhaps
very far into it; but rather by driving it from both the advers Shores at the
same time they make the Ocean to rise and swell a little toward the middle; as if
several men with Brooms, or the like, at the two ends of some long Channel,
should sweep the Water therein forward both ways, following close after one
another, it will thereby be Impelled, rising and swelling toward the middle; and
when they ceas, by its own Weight, fall and return both ways back again. Again
whether Tides be not less, and less, toward the middle of the Ocean, and about
the middle, perhaps Imperceptible, from which the Rivers and Narrow Seas
Impelling it are farthest, and so their Impuls more, and more, abated; and the
Water driven before them still rising and swelling, the Weight thereof is
increased; which at length makes the Return thereof back again into the Narrow
Seas and Rivers? Also whether there be any Perceptible Tide in Narrow Seas and
Rivers between such Tracts of Land which are most longinquous and farthest from
the Ocean? or whether they are not proportionably less, and less, as they are
farther from it in any Parallel of the Earth? because the Pondus of the Water
rising and swelling therein, as I have showed, and thereby returning the Waters
back again, does abate by degrees, and may not reach so far as such
longinquous Seas and Rivers. Lastly, I desire it may once be ascerteined by
them, whether indeed there be any such Circumterranean Tide, or Course of the
Main Ocean from East to West, as is commonly supposed? which certainly is
contrary to the Course of the Moon, nor do I find any ground or reason in my
Hypothesis, that might induce me to affirm it; nor can the supposed Motion of
the Earth solv all the Tides every way. And this Circumterranean Sea is the
Main Ocean that I intend, and which, as I conceiv, is chiefly intended by the
Congregation and gathering together of Waters, mentioned in the Creation
thereof, to and from which the Rivers thus flow and reflow, and though it cannot
return to cover the Earth, as it did in the first Chaos, or since in the
Deluge, yet as a Fascia it still environeth it round about, and is the great
Province of Elementary Water. Extraordinary Tides are not so consyderable,
being Various and Casual; and as they proceed from no such constant and certain
Causes, so they have no such certain and constant Courses. The Annual Tides are
observed by us in our Southern Coast to be generaly greater about November, and
February; and accordingly we observe that about November, when the Heat of the
Summer is past, and the Earth is filled first with Water, the Springs begin to
rise, as we say, in Fountains, Wells, and Ponds, and apparently are seen to
peez, as we term it, out of the Banks into Ditches* and to run more freely in
Rivers; and so again about February, (which is commonly said to fill the Dike)
after the Earth has been bound with Frosts, and is fully thawed, and the
Waters begin to run more freely, whereby they cause such an Impuls thereof; which
proceeds from such more general Confluvia, and sudden Fluxes; and so sudden
Inundations may cause some Temporary Tides in some places, but the Universal
Deluge was Immediately by the Divine Power, and Providence, as God says
thereof, Behold I, even I, do bring a Flood of Waters upon the Earth: which
whether it were by producing all the Moisture in the Pores of the Spongy Earth
(which certainly if it were all gathered together would make another great Sea)
and making it Miraculously to flow upon the Surface of the Earth instead of
being imbibed by it, as it is now a constant Fountain to supply the Rivers, and
Seas Naturaly, (and so may be conceived to be these Fountains of the great Deep
which were broken up) and by resolving all the Vapors and Fumes in the Air into
Cataracts of Rain, and so also opening those Windows or Floudgates of Heaven,
or otherwise, I will not presume to determine; because it was Miraculous, and
Preternatural. But there are some little Tides and Euripi, so very strange and
wonderful, as have puzzled the greatest Philosophers, and I know no Colorable
reason or account, which any have ever yet given thereof; nor am I such an
Oedipus, as to unfold these Ridles of Nature, which though they seem to be her
ludicrous Disports and Galliards, yet certainly are according to some
Harmonious Measures, of answerable Causalitys; though we may not hear them or
do not hearken to them. Concerning which I shall only relate an Experiment, of
which I must freely say, -- Non inventa reperta est: for I confess I received
it from another, who declared to me the Matter of Fact that he had done it, but
was not pleased to revele the Secret how it was done, which yet after I had
found out he acknowledged unto me to be the same. The Invention was to make a
Waterdial, wherein the Water should rise and fall every twelv hours, in this
manner. Let there be a Font or Basin of the Dial made with a Hole at the bottom,
and let there be a Pipe open at each end, whereof one end must be applied to a
Subterraneous Spring, or the like Flux of Water, and the other end closed to
the Hole in the bottom of the Basin, so as the Water may descend from the
Spring (being as high as the top of the Basin) to the Hole in the bottom, and
through it reascend in the Basin in twelv Hours: and as it so ascends by
degrees every hour describe Lines in that side within the Basin: And at the
twelfth and last Line make another Hole in the other side of the Basin, and let
a Siphon be inserted toward the top of the Basin, and closed to it, so as the
Water in the Basin may fill the shorter Leg thereof hanging down to the very
bottom of the Basin, and just turn over at the Vertex of the Siphon: and the
Cavity of this Siphon must be doubly as capacious as the Cavity of the former
Pipe, so as to convey away doubly as much Water in the same time by the longer
Leg thereof out of the Basin, as ran into it through the Pipe; whereby though it
continue still to run through the Pipe from the Spring, yet the Cavity of the
Pipe being only half so capacious as the Cavity of the Siphon, it can run in
only half so fast by the Pipe as it runs out by the Siphon; which will be set
on running by the Water ascending into the shorter Leg thereof within the Basin,
when it rises to the Line of the twelfth hour, and there turns over at the
Vertex into the longer Leg without the Basin, and that will carry it away
doubly as fast, until the Siphon be emptied; and consequently cause the Water
to descend in other like twelv hours: which must also be noted by Lines
described on the other side of the Basin: and when the Siphon is empty it will
ceas running; and then the Water running through the Pipe only will ascend into
the Basin in other twelv hours, as before, and so continualy. But because it is
somewhat Curious and difficult exactly to make the Cavity of the Siphon doubly
as capacious as the Cavity of the Pipe, a Stopcock may be inserted into one, or
both of them, whereby the just proportion of Water in them may be accordingly
regulated. Now, though I can neither affirm, nor do I know, that there are any
such Fonts, Urns, or Caverns, in the Earth, so disposed as in this Experiment,
whereby the Euripi are caused, yet I know that it may possibly be so; and if
not, yet I am assured that both this and any other Regularitys in Elementary
Nature, wherein there is neither Plastes, nor Artist, must be by some answerable
Causalitys; which I leav to others more particularly to Investigate.

V. The Earth which is last and lowest of all the Elements has a most Dens
Body of Matter, though the least Active Spirit; and so every Element has a
less De^s or Gross Body of Matter accordingly as the Spirit thereof is more
Active; and Vegetative Spirits are less Immersed in the Matter then Elementary,
and only by the Mediation of them; and Sensitive less then Vegetative, and only
by the Mediation of them, and Elementary; and Intellective, which we therefore
call Immaterial, not at all, as I shall show hereafter. Now as Ae^her is the
most Rare of all the Elements, and so as I suppose the Body thereof cannot be
made more Rare by any other Elementary Spirit, because there is none other that
is more Active, and which may more Rarefy it; so Earth is most Dens, and as I
suppose the Body thereof cannot be made more Dens by any other Elementary
Spirit, because there is none other less Active which may more Condensate it
then it does itself: for as these Elementary Spirits do require more or less
Rare or Dens Bodies, so they do Naturaly and most Effectualy cause them; and thus
the most Rare Ae^her, which is Utmost, and the most Dens Earth, which is
Inmost, do contein and bound the two other more Variable Elements, Air, and
Water, between them, as I have showed. The Rarity of Ether is altogether
unknown to us; but if it be, as I suppose it, more Rare then the most Rarefied
or Expanded Air, and the very common Air be a thousand times more Rare then
Water, and that fourteen times more Rare then Mercury, and the Elementary Earth
(whereof we know not the utmost Density, as we know not the Rarity of Ether)
yet more dens then it or Gold, (which is said to be nineteen times heavier then
Water) or any other Cortical Earths whatsoever, then certainly there is a vast
Disproportion of Density and Rarity between the Bodies of Ether and Earth: and
yet though Earth be most Dens, Ether is not most Rare, nor do we know, or can
assign how much more Rare Superaether may be then it; which will Multiply the
Disproportion exceedingly more, whereof though we can give no just account; yet
heerby we plainly perceiv how strangely Matter may be Densefied, or Rarefied;
and consequently what vast or Innumerable Pores, or Spaces, they must assign,
who will still contend that Rarity is only from Porosity, or Vacuity. As in
Water, so also in Earth, there are two distinct Regions, not only Mathematicaly
such, as some have made, both in Ether, and Air, where they are not; but
Physicaly such; and yet they have not found them out where they are: for as
there are Waters above, and beneath, so there is manifestly both a Cortex of
the Earth, wherein there are not only many other Composita, and many sorts of
Earths, Metalls, Minerals, Stones, Chalk, Clay, Marl, Loam, Sand, and several
others, which thereby discover and declare it not to be the very Elementary
Earth, but also Water flowing in the Canales thereof and imbibed by all this
Spongy Cortex, whence it is denominated Terraqueous, and is almost as much
Elementary Water, as Earth: nor is any part thereof in itself so purely
Elementary Earth, as the Ocean is Elementary Water; wherefore there is most
probably another Elementary and Subco^tical Earth, (or as it is said,
Foundations of the Earth) which though we know not where it begins, and the
Cortex ends, yet I presume it to be below any the lowest Fundus of the Water,
or descent of Rain or Dew; otherwise it should not be the Elementary Earth,
which seems to be intimated by that expression of the Psalmist, Then the
Chanells of Waters were seen, the Foundations of the World were discovered. Nor
may we reasonably conceiv that there are below the Cortex any such hid
Treasures of Metalls, Minerals, or the like, as there are in it; since they can
never be searched or dug out by any Industry of Men or Beasts, whereas God
and Nature made nothing in vain. But that which does most confirm me in this
Opinion, is the most Ingenious Invention of the Inclinatory or Dipping Needle,
as they call it; for most evidently that varys its Position respectively, as it
is nearer to, or farther from, either of the Poles of the Earth, and not
according to the Poles of the World: which very sensibly discovers that there
is such a Subcortical Earth; and also that it is Magnetical: for though there
be Rocks of Magnets in the Cortex, yet this Inclinatory Needle, as I shall call
it, does not so Incline unto them, but generaly to the Poles of the Earth, as
to one great Magnet, and exactly so as a Needle carried about a round Magnet or
Terrella does Incline itself in all the Points of the Circumference, as I shall
show hereafter: and this also shows that the Elementary and Magnetike Earth is
Globular, as well as the Terrella; otherwise any Eminences therein would vary
the Inclination, as well as in the Terrella. Yet I do not conceiv that this
Elementary Body of the Subcortical Earth, which I call Magnetical, is of the
same kind with any Cortical Magnets; as they are not of the same kind with Iron
Stone, or Mine, though both have a Magnetike Quality: but rather that it is
far more Dens then them, as I have said, as it is also far more Consistent
then Gold. Nor is it vain or useless (as other Terreous Composita below the
Cortex should be) but very proper and requilite in every respect: for as by the
most solid Consistence thereof it becomes the Foundation, and Basis of the
Cortex (as they are therefore termed Strong Foundations and Pillars of the
Earth) and indeed of all the Superior Spheres, and of the whole Body of the
Universal Globe; so by its Magnetical Polarity it does continue its own Body in
one Immovable Position, as I shall show hereafter: and most probably it has no
Pores whereby it may be penetrated, convelled, or comminuted by any others, or
one part thereof severed from another; and so many Bodies in the Cortex, Marble,
Glass, Gemms are Imporous, as I have showed, much more this most Dens, Compact,
and Adamantine Body of the Elementary Earth. And though some Planets and the
Stars may be greater Orbs then it; yet they are not such Foundations and
Pillars of the World, nor is there any other such Centrical Orb relating to the
Circumferential Orb, or whole Globe of the World, besides the Earth; which
therefore also is called Orbis, and the World, whereof it is an Epitome; and
all the Superior parts of the Globe of the World are only Concave Spheres. Thus
though Earth be most Base and Brute of all the Elements, yet it has also its
proper Excellency and Glory, having the greatest Bodily perfection of the
Density of the Matter, to which it does most approximate; and the Spirit thereof
has the greatest Stability and Fix^tive Strength, though the least Activity:
and as I have observed, it has also such Qualitys in itself, whereby in
Mistion it does Fix almost all the more Agile Qualitys of the other Elements:
and the Cortex thereof has the greatest Mistion with them all, and the greatest
Variety of Composita, being the Native Country and Region of all Vegetatives,
and of Beasts, the best of Sensitives; yea the Manor house and Demesnes of Man,
as it is said, The Earth has he given to the children of Men: and because this
whole Spectable World, which Moses describes, was made for him, and all the
other Elements are as it were his Roialties, therefore they all point to the
Earth, as the Circumference does to the Center, and are Inservient to it, as
that is to Man.

VI. The First or Principal Quality of Earth is Drines; as I have showed, which
is contrary to Moisture, as Cold is to Heat. But as the Earth is the most Brute
and Dull Element, so are also the Qualitys thereof like unto itself; and it is
heerin most Analogous to the Passive Matter, though it be in itself a Spiritual
Substance Genericaly different from Matter, as well as any others: for there
are such Analogys in Nature, not only beeween Spirits, but also between them
and Matter, as they are all Entitys, and Substantial parts of the Univers,
though several Classical Natures differ Classicaly, and Specifical Specificaly,
and Individual Individualy; and these Differences are their proper Bonitys,
whereby they excel all others, though otherwise generaly Superior to them, as
Matter is better Matter then any Spirit, and so Earth is better Earth then
Ether; though the Spirit of Ether otherwise be Superior to the Spirit of Air,
and of Air to Water, and of Water to Earth, according to the Order of the
Elements which God has declared, in the Creation thereof. And accordingly the
Spiritual Qualitys of Ether are more Active and Powerful then of Air, and of
Air then of Water, and of Water then of Earth. Yet; as I said, Drines is an
Active Quality, and Actively contrary to Moisture, and not any less Degree
thereof, and much less only a Privation of Moisture; and though Moisture does
more notably Operate in and upon it, as Heat does upon Cold; and if it be
weakened by Comminution into Dust, or Ashes, and the like, it seems not much to
Resist, but rather to Imbibe Moisture, and almost to be Receptive of it; as
Matter is of Spirits; yet there is some Mutual Operation, as well as Active
Contrariety between them; and so Earth itself is called Dry Land, and
contradistinguished from Water in the Terraqueous Globe of them both: and it is
known accordingly to Operate by Drines, both to Physicians in their Desiccating
Emplastra, and to Mechanikes in their Cementations; and that Desiccation is not
only by Evaporation or Exclusion of the Moisture, but also by Mistion of both,
and Predomination, and Prevalence of the Drines over Moisture; for so in the
utmost Adustion of Ashes, or any Terra damnata, there is Water, and
consequently Moisture in the Mistion thereof, which yet is not Actual, but
reduced to Potentiality by Dryness: and apparently in Congelation of Ice, Glue,
Metalls, and the like, there is Water, and so Moisture Potentialy, which is
again Actuated by Fusion, but is not Actual before they be melted. And, as I
said, Moisture, and so Drines, are Indifferent between the other two Qualitys,
Heat, and Cold, and they between Moisture, and Drines, and they are no
Secondary Qualitys each of other, but Operate only by themselves Univocaly and
Efficiently; for as Heat only does heat, and Cold cool, and Moisture moisten,
so Drines, and no other Quality but that, does properly dry; though Equivocaly
or Instrumentaly either Heat, or Cold, may dry, as I have showed. And as I have
observed of Heat, that being the most Active and Predominant of all the
Elementary Qualitys, it has also the most Confinements, Imprisonments, and
Restraints, and several ways of Reducing it into Potentiality, as I have
formerly showed, far more then Cold, which thereby has such advantage against
it; so has Drines against Moisture by the very Cession thereof; for though
Drines cannot easily Profligate it, yet is it Naturaly so very Fugitive of
itself, that it is still Flying away; whereas Drines is more Fixed, and much
assisted therein by its own Connatural Quality of Consistence; so that there is
not any Body Dry, which is not Consistent, nor Moist that is not Fluid: and yet
Consistence is a several and distinct Quality, both from Moisture, and Drines;
because they are Actively contrary one unto another; but neither of them to
Consistence, nor Consistence to them.

VII. As Drines and Consistence are not one and the same Quality of Earth;
besides which there are also many other Qualitys thereof, as Magnetike Virtue,
and the like; and so Heat, and Light, of Ether, besides many other Qualitys
thereof, as Planetary Virtue, and the like; so likewise are there several
Qualitys of Air besides Cold, and of Water besides Moisture, which though
unknown to us what they are particularly, yet do generaly appear in the many
various Mistions of all the Elementary Bodies; and that want of a more
particular knowledge thereof is a chief cause and reason why we know so little of
Elementary Mistions: wherefore I have begun to pry into them, and advanced some
few steps toward them, to show the way to others; and though I may by some be
judged to be too Curious heerin, yet I am confident that there are such other
Qualitys of every Element, besides those which are commonly called First, and
that I have sufficiently made it to appear that they are such as do not, like
Second Qualitys, subsist Immediately in the First, and Mediately by them in the
Substantial Spirit, but every one of them Immediately therein, as well as
another: and so I conceiv Consistence or Firmnes and Drines only to be
Connatural Qualitys of the same Element of Earth, and that Consistence does
Immediately Subsist in the Elementary Spirit thereof, and not in Drines; as
Fluidity is not from the other Q^alitys, but rather from the Matter, for so
indeed all the other Elements are Fluid; and Consistence is a proper and more
particular Property of Earth alone; which has no Contrary, as Drines has, nor
does contrarily oppose any one Q^ality of the other Elements; but only is that
whereby the Elementary Spirit of Earth does render its own Body Firm and Solid,
so as no other Elementary Spirit, not having any such Q^ality, can Confirm or
Consolidate its own Body, which therefore remains Fluid and Weak, as the Matter
itself. And this Terrene Consistence as it is not only Drines, nor any Second
Q^ality thereof; so much less is it Density (for so Mercury is Dens but not
Consistent) though that also be assistant to it, as well as Drines; for
Density, as I have showed, is not any Active or Spiritual Q^ality, but only an
Affection of Matter itself, superinduced or varied by the Densefaction of
Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys; as Figure, which is plainly an Affection of
the Matter, is superinduced and varied by the Spiritual Q^alitys: and therefore
Density and Consistence are as different, as Matter and Spirits, wherein they do
respectively Subsist: and as I have thus distinguished Consistence from other
Qualitys or Affections of the Spirit and Matter of Earth, that thereby we may
more discern it, so I shall now show that it is a Spiritual Quality, and
particularly what it is; because I do not find it to be sufficiently explained
by others; and because indeed it is a very Noble Quality of Earth, and of great
Mechanical Use: for it is not only a Compaction and Consolidation of all the
parts of the Earthy Body, but, as it is also termed, a Firmnes or Stability of
the whole Body thereof, both which I comprehend under the name of Consistence;
whereby I also intend that Strength and Rigor of the Consistent Body, which
though it be no such Vigor or Force whereby it can Move other Bodies, like the
Angelical Powers, nor its own Body, as Material Spirits, nor yet like the
Motion of Matter to Union or Station, (whereby indeed Matter Moves itself, but
without any Activity or Strength, only by a Recumbence or Succumbence, as I
have showed) and so Fluidity is only an Inconsistence thereof, or Falling every
way, without any Consistent Strength, or Stability holding it together; whereby
it does plainly appear that such Motion of the Matter, as well as of Fluid
Bodies, is not from any Spiritual Activity or Vigor, but contrarily from
Infirmity and Weakness of the Bodies themselves: yet Consistence does Spiritualy
and Actively Unite and Contein all the parts thereof, and also Arrect and
Fortify the whole Body, having a proper Center therein, as all Spirits and
Spiritual Qualitys have, without any respect to the Center of Matter; which, as
I have showed, is the Universal Center of the whole Body of the World: and so a
Timberlogg floating upon Water, or suspended in the Air far enough from that
Universal Center, yet has in itself a Center of its own Consistence, where it
is strongest, and is most hardly Bent or Broken, and from which it
proportionably extends that Strength or Rigor through all the parts thereof
unto the Extremitys, and so this Consistence thereof is Mechanicaly useful to
make it a Boat, or Beam of a Balance, which though it be suspended in the more
Rare Air only at the Center, yet by this Strength and Rigor all the other parts
thereof being so Consistent in the whole (though otherwise hanging freely in the
same Air) are Arrected and upheld from falling or bending downward, as
otherwise they would; and though the parts thereof weigh most toward the
Extremitys, because Gravity is an Affection of the Matter, and therefore weighs
most downward in the Extremitys, which are farthest from the Center of the
Consistent Strength, which is a Spiritual Quality; yet that is strongest in the
Center, which is most opposite, and farthest distant from the Extremitys; and
plainly shows that Consistence is not Density, nor Gravity, which Subsisteth in
Density, and that any bowing downward in the Extremitys is rather from the
Fluidity of the Matter, whereby all the parts of that Wooden Balance would flow
downward, like Water, if they were not so upheld by Terrene Consistence. Nor
does Matter Move from, but toward the Center; whereas Consistence, as all other
Spiritual Qualitys, issues forth from the Center to the Extremitys, though it
be stronger in the Center then in the Extremitys; which Matter is not, as it is
Matter; for it is not more Heavy, nor does it Move more strongly, or rather
swiftly as it is nearer to the Center, by reason of the Center; but by reason
of the longinquity of the Motion; which would be the same, whether the Body
Move in such a Space, and through the same Medium, farther from, or nearer to
the Center; and so the Weight of a Clock does not Weigh more, or Move faster
when it is almost down, then at first. Also Consistence, which is a firm Union
of all the Parts in the Whole, may be such to the Parts in their Private Whole,
as Station of Matter is to itself in the Public Whole thereof: for so it
keeps the Parts of any Fluid Body within a Consistent Vessel in Rest, as I
have formerly showed; because the Consistence is a Fulciment, which is quasi a
Center unto them, and whereupon they rest as well as in the N^tural Station of a
more Rare above any more Dens Body, or as they would if they were Immediately
next to the Center. Again, Consistence, which is a Spiritual and Active Quality
only for the Fixation of its own Body, has, as I said, no Contrary; being
heerin like to Magnetical Virtue, which is for the Polar Position of the Body:
for Fluidity, as I said, is only an Inconsistence and Infirmity of the Matter,
which is not a Contrary, but a Negation of Consistence: and though there be an
Universal Union and Coherence of the Matter to and with itself in the Whole,
yet there is also such a Mobility of the Parts thereof within that Whole, that
they will easily be removed, and flow any way, unles they be made to Consist by
this Spiritual Quality of Earth; and no other Elementary Body does Consist by
any other Quality of the Spirit thereof, but only by this Spiritual Quality of
the Earth that is in the Mistion thereof: and accordingly Water, which has more
of Earth in the Mistion thereof, does Consist more then Air, and Air then
Ether, as I have showed: and so Terrene Bodies do more Consist as they are less
Mist with the other Elements. Nor is the Incoherence of many Terreous
Corpuscles, Fluidity, though it seem to be Complexively such; for every
Corpuscle thereof Simply is Consistent in itself, (as I have before observed of
Porosity) and so though there be many Sands in an heap, yet every one of them
in itself is as Consistent as a Sandstone, and Dusts of Steel, or Brass, as the
Steel or Brass itself: and though by Commotion thereof there may be a Motion
every way like the Motion of Fluid Bodies, yet that is not from the Consistent
Corpuscles, or any of them in themselves, but from ^he Interspersed Fluidity of
Air; as if there be Innumerable Terreous Motes in Water, unles they be Mist and
made into a Past, the Water in itself is not thereby made more Consistent. But
Bodies which have a Consistence in themselves, and have also other Fluid Bodies
Interspersed, are made more to Consist in and with themselves, by exclusion of
the Fluid Bodies out of their Pores; as a Cable being stretched very stiffly
will be made to Consist almost as much as Wood, and so is used by Funambuli;
for by stretching the Air is excluded, and the Pores are drawn together and
Contracted: and a Wett Cable will be far more stiff of itself, and not so
easily stretched as a Dry; because, as I said, Water has more Consistence then
Air, and is not so easily excluded or squeezed out of the Pores; also it is
more Imbibed, and thereby more Mist with the Terreous Body of the Cable, then
Air, and therefore not so easily Extruded. But here I must observe, that as it
is a general Rule and Canon of Nature, that in all Spiritual Powers and
Operat^ons Union does fortify, so it is most sensibly evident in Consistence;
which though it be the same in every Corpuscle, as in any equal Part of a
greater Body of the same nature (as it is in a Pindust as well as in such a
small Part of the greater Body of Brass from which the Dust was decided, as I
before showed) yet all the Parts of the greate^^ (...) being united together do
proportionably more fortify themselves, and the whole Body is thereby made more
strong in every equal Part thereof, then the Corpuscle decided from it: and it
were more then a Curiosity, and of great Mechanical Use, to find out the
Increment of the Strength of Consistence according to the Majoration of
Consistent Bodies: for certainly the Total of the Strength of the greater will
be found to be more then the Addition of so many Units, as there are Parts in
it equal to the Corpuscle decided from it. As a Bar of Wood one Inch square
will bear about eight times so much Weight, as if it be equaly divided into
four quarters, any one of those four quarters will bear; though that has a
fourth part of the whole Magnitude of the other: whereby it appears that the
Increment of the Consistent Strength thereof is about doubly as much as the
proportion of the Magnitude; though I do not conceiv that it always so doubles,
but that where the disproportion is greater of the Magnitude, it will be
greater also of the Increment, and where less, less. As suppose the Bar of
Wood an Inch Square and a yard long, and being equaly supported by Fulciments
at the Extremitys to bear two hundred pounds Weight hanging at the Center
thereof, and a Bar of a fourth part of the Magnitude thereof to bear a quarter
of one hundred pounds Weight, so that the greater Bar bears eight times as
much as the less Bar, which yet has a fourth part of the Magnitude thereof;
then also suppose another Bar two Inches square, which has four times the
Magnitude of the Bar an Inch Square, the Increment of the Strength thereof must
proportionably be doubled in respect of that, as the Increment of the Strength
of that was in respect of the other, and consequently, if the Bar of an Inch
square did bear two hundred, as I supposed, the Bar two Inches square must be
supposed to bear sixteen hundred pounds Weight; that is, four two hundreds
doubled, as the Bar an Inch square did bear two hundred; that is, four
quarters of one hundred doubled: now the proportions of Magnitudes between
these three Bars are, as I said, of the least to the midst as one to four,
and to the greatest as one to sixteen; and the Increment of the midst in
respect of the least is as eight to one, which is doubly four; and of the
greatest in respect of the least, as sixty four to one, which is four times
sixteen. Also it may be tried in Bars of other Figures; as of round Bars of
an Inch Diameter, and ^^^angular Bars of an Inch Perpendicular, and any other
Regular, or Irregular Polygons: as a Bar half square and half flatt, or an
Inch one way, and half an Inch the other way, and how much it will bear one
way, and how much the other way, and the like: and I shall propound it to be
examined by Mathematicians and Mechanikes, whether in all cases the Increment
of the Strength of the greater Consistent Bodies be not proportionably according
to the Increment of the Superficies of the less Bodies? as the middle Bar being
an Inch Square, the four Lateral Superficies thereof made only four Inches;
whereas every one of the four least Bars being half an Inch square, the four
Lateral Superficies thereof made two Inches; and so of all the four least
Bars, whose whole Magnitude is equal to the middle Bar of an Inch square,
eight Inches; whereas the four Lateral Superficies of the middle Bar made
on(...) Inches, as I said, and so of the other; wherein the Decrement of the
Superficies thereof is double, and also the Increment of the Strength of the
Consistence thereof double: Now though there be, as I have showed, an Increment
of the Velocity of Motion, and accordingly of the Gravitation or Descent, and
Percussion of a Scale or other Body, by the Pondus of the Matter (whereby the
Increment of Velocity may be tried) yet that is by several Degrees Successively
Actuated, whereas the Increment of Consistent Strength is present and
Simultaneous. And heerin may plainly appear another difference between Matter
and the Affections thereof, and Spirits and their Spiritual Qualitys: for though
Matter by Union does fortify and defend itself in the Whole against any
Nonentity, as I have said; because the Extension thereof, being Quantity
Consistent (which is the only Consistence of Matter) must Consist together
through the whole Quantity of the Universal Body thereof, as the Extension of
any Particular Body must Consist and be Continued through all the Parts thereof;
otherwise it should not be the same Extension as it is: and therefore though
one Part may be removed from one Place in the whole Body of the World to
another, yet another Part must necessarily succeed, to Continue the whole
Extension thereof, and thereby to render the same whole Body Complete and
Entire, and the whole Extension thereof Consistent: ye^ the Union of Part to
Part, though never so many, does not make any Increment of the whole Extension
above the Total of all the Proportions of all the Parts; and so an hundred
several Weights of one pound of Lead, being melted or otherwise united
together, will not weigh in all more then one hundred pounds; or if the same
Matter in a greater Extension be Condensated into a less Extension, it weighs
only according to the Mass of the whole Matter, and not according to the
Extension; and therefore is the same, whether the Extension be greater, or
less; though as it is so much Matter in a less Extension, it will penetrate and
sink through an equal portion of Matter in a greater Extension, as I have
showed: but yet does not by such Condensation acquire any greater Gravity in
itself, then proportionable to the whole Body of the Matter; as we say, that a
pound of Feathers is as heavy as a pound of Lead; though the Lead will press
down the Feathers, and not the Feathers (...), in respect to one another and
their due Station and (...) the Universal Body of Matter, as I have declared:
whereas this Terreous Consistence being a Spiritual Quality gains an
Increment of Strength in itself by such Physical Union above the proportions of
all the Parts United or added together Arithmeticaly; and so Fire of so many
equal Parts United together Physicaly into one Body will heat and burn more
then so many several Sparks equal to those Parts, as being United or added
together Arithmeticaly will amount to an equal Total. Also a Wire of Iron may
be made so small and so long as that it will not bear its own weight at the
Extremitys, and Glass so Capillar, as may be wound about the finger, though
Glass be very fragile. And though I conceiv Hardness and Softnes to be only
different Sensibilitys of Consistence or the degrees thereof, as more Consistent
does more resist the Touch, and less less; yet Fragility and Ductility are
different kinds of Consistence itself: for Consistence has both a Strength and
Rigor of the whole Body, which Fragility also has, and Ductility has not; and
likewise a Spiritual Cohesion and Tenacity of all the parts thereof, which
Ductility has, and Fragility has not so perfectly as proper Consistence: and
therefore Fragile Bodies, as Glass, are easily Broken, but will not so easily
Bend; and Ductile Bodies, as Wax, will easily Bend, but are not so easily
Broken: nor indeed do I conceiv any Body to be properly Consistent, and such as
will neither Break nor Bend, except only the Subcortical Earth, which is
Elementary, and has the proper Qualitys thereof in their greatest Actuality; as
Ether has Heat, and Light: whereas other Cortical Bodies, though most Rigid, as
Iron, and the like, may be Broken, or Bent; yea by Fusion become Ductile and
Fluid: so that Ductility is partly from Moisture; and is only an imperfect
Consistence, which though it be not the same with Drines, is very much assisted
by it, as I have showed. Also Fragile Bodies of less Crassitude may Bend more,
as I said before of very slender Glass; because there is less Distortion, that
is, less Expansion in the outward Convexity, and Compression in the inward
Concavity of the Arch, or Angle, that it makes in Bending: and the very Bending
before it Breaks shows that there is some Ductility in it, which is an
Imperfection of Consistence: and this does plainly appear in Glass heated,
which is far more Ductile, and molten, which is Fusile: whence also it has
that other Imperfection thereof, that is, Fragility, which it betrays when it is
cooled: but I conceiv that Fragility is a less Imperfection of Consistence then
Ductility; because that appears in Actual Drines, and this in Actual Moisture.
And Fragile Bodies, though somewhat Flexile, yet, if they be not over-bent, will
return again very smartly to their Position, which we call Springines, and will
not stand bent, as we say, as Ductile, unles the Rigor (which is properly every
way, as it were, by so many Radii from the Center to the Circumference) be
overcome by long continuance. And this Springines is only a Return to the
Position of the Consistent Body; (and not as Elastical Potentia, which is to
the Density or Rarity of more Fluid Bodies) according to that Natural Rigor, or
Temper of Bodies, which the Spirits require, and cause to be in them, and from
which they are Violently diverted, and therefore so suddenly and forcibly
return unto it again, if the Violence do not continue so long as to cause the
very Spirit to conform unto that Figure, as I have showed, though it will
hardly conform to that Temper, in Elastical Bodies: as also Vegetative and
Sensitive Spirits will hardly conform to Inorganical Figures. Now Consistence
being not a Compound, but Simple Quality of Earth, therefore it does contein
Earthy Bodies together, if they be Continuous, though very various and different
Composita; for so it conteins both the Subcortical, and Cortical Earth, and all
the Rocks, Mountains, and Eminences thereof, as one Compages: and so Brick, and
Mortar when it is dried, do not only Adhere, as Water and Glass, but Cohere and
Consist together; because though they be several Composita or Mista of all the
Elements, yet their Consistence is common to them all, as they are Earthy
Bodies: as Matter does therefore so Unite itself in all the Bodies of various
Composita in the World: I have seen an old Brick Chimny undermined and pulled
down to fall like a Pillar of Timber without any Breaking; which consequently
had one Center of Consistence, that did contein all the Earthy parts thereof
together, as a Needle has, which is half Silver and half Steel; and as the
whole Body of Matter has one Center, to which it all tends, though varied
into the several Bodies of Innumerable Composita.

VIII. As Siccity and Consistence are not one and the same Quality of Earth, so
much less Consistence and Magnetical Virtue, though that require a Consistence,
as Consistence does Siccity: but, as I have said, Consistence does only Contein
and Arrect the Parts in the whole Body generaly and indifferently every way;
whereas Magnetical Virtue does Direct it particularly in one Relative Place or
Position, (which we call Polar) unto North and South; whereby the Difference
between Positive Extension in its own Vbi and Relative Place may plainly
appear: for a Magnet is in its own Ubi as any other Body, but besides it has
such a Relative Position, which is Polar, whereby the Polar Points thereof,
North, and South, are so Directed as that they will not be placed otherwise,
and so thereby consequently all the other Points and Parts thereof in the Whole,
though the Whole be only in its own Vbi, as any other Body. Also Consistence is
without any Motion, for it is the same whether the Body Move, or not; but
Magnetical Virtue has a Verticity to reduce it to its Polar Position. Again
Consistence is Orbicular, as the Strength of a Wooden Wheel is equal at the
Extremity of every Radius, being equidistant from the Center; but Magnetical
Virtue is much stronger at the Poles then at the Extremitys of the Equator, as
I shall show hereafter; and indeed otherwise it should not be so Polar, or
North, and South, more then East, and West. Also Consistence has no Emanation
like Magnetical Virtue; and there are many such other Differences. But yet, as
I said, Consistence is an Auxiliary Quality thereof, being both Connatural
Qualitys of the same Element. And so the Elementary Earth probably is most
Consistent, and most Magnetical: and the Magnet-Stone is also very Consistent,
and so is Iron Mine, and especialy Iron, and Steel, which are the Extractions
thereof: and I know not whether there might not be some such Extraction of the
Magnet Stone more Magnetical then the Stone or Mine thereof: but certainly the
Elementary Earth is far more Magnetical then any other Magnet, because it is
Elementary; and also because it is so vastly great, whereby there is a
proportionable Increment of the Virtue: and this is proved by the very strong
Emanations thereof which penetrate the whole Cortex of the Earth; as appears by
the Inclinatory Needle; for Magnetical Virtue, like Consistence, has no
Contrary; because it is only for Direction and Position of its own Body: though
Density, as well as Longinquity, may hinder, or abate it, as they do any other
Spiritual Powers whatsoever, but not repel, and reflect it. Also the Magnetike
Earth by the Emanations thereof does Excite and Actuate the Potential Polarity
which is in some Cortical Bodies; as Iron Bars, which have stood long in a
Polar Position, or Iron, and as some say Brick-earth, heated and laid to cool
North and South; which is not by any communication of the Magnetical Virtue of
the Earth, (for no Accident can so Migrate out of its own Substance, wherein it
does Subsist, into another) but, according to the Doctrine of Potentiality,
which I have formerly delivered, by Univocal Generation or Production of the
Magnetical Virtue Potentialy being and Subsisting in those less and weaker
Magnets into their Actuality. Also if the Virtue of them or the Magnet Stone be
Actual, and they laid in a Position not Polar, as suppose East and West, yet if
they ly so long, the Magnetike Virtue of the Earth will Predominate, and vary
that Polarity to its own North and South, which is very observable; and as it
shows that the Earth is the great Magnet, which in time can so overruled all
these less Magnets; so also that these less Magnets, or Terrellae, are such
Individualy in themselves, because while they are laid in that Position East and
West, which is not Polar, yet they retein their own Individual Polarity, in
such a Position as is opposite to the Polarity of the Earth; and though the
Earth will at last overruled them, or if they were freely suspended in the Air
they would Naturaly conform themselves to the Poles of the Earth, yet while they
are so Violently laid in an opposite Position, they still retein their own
Individual Center, Axis, Poles, and Equator, apparently distinct, and opposite
to those of the Earth; and in that Position will turn another less Magnet
freely suspended within the Orb thereof from the Pol^^ of the Earth to their own
Poles. Now tha^ the Earth itself does never vary its own Polarity, we may
sensibly perceiv by these Terrellae, and their Natural Polarity, and Verticity;
as by the Directory, but especialy by the Inclinatory Needle, which being
carried about the Earth always Inclines the Southern Pole thereof more toward
the Northern, as it is nearer to it, and the Northern Pole thereof toward the
Southern Pole of the Earth, as it is nearer to it, and so accordingly changes
its Poles and Perpendicularity (whence I suppose it is also called the Dipping
Needle) and which plainly proves that the Polar Virtue is not from any North
Starr, as some have fansied; for the Southern Polarity is not only a
Consequence of the Northern, nor that of it, but both are equaly Polar in
themselves; and the Needle accordingly changes the Inclination of both its
Poles; which also the Directory Needle does, as far as it can, by a little
bowing down of its Poles toward one of the Poles of the Earth. Nor is the
Polarity from both Northern and Southern Effluvia, as others affirm, which
cannot penetrate Glass, as Magnetical Virtue does; for neither is there any
penetration of several Bodies, nor is Glass Porous, nor yet Fluid, as Water, or
Air, or the like, wherein we may suppose a Cession to any such Imperceptible
Corpuscles; which are only the Spawn of Epicurus his Atoms, and can never be
perceived by Sens in any greater or less Bodies so to pass; nor are any
Phenomenon themselves, and yet are Introduced to solv the Phenomenon: and though
they be supposed to be so Imperceptibly Minute, yet must not only Move little
Needles, but also contein the vast Magnetike Earth in its constant Polar
Position, against all the furious assalts of Air and Water, and the conjoined
force of their Storms and Tempests, being such as could easily divert these
Corporeal Effluvia, and so prevent their I^pet^^; which yet must be supposed to
be the same in a Calm or in a Storm, because the Magnetike Operations are the
same. Wherefore plainly it is a Spiritual Quality Subsisting in the Substantial
Spirit of the Magnet, and both Inherent in it, and Emanant from it, like Light,
though in another manner, as I shall show hereafter, and it does only require
Consistence and Drines as Social Qualitys of the same Element, as Light does
Heat; and also Density of the Matter, as they do Rarity; and by the want thereof
may be Corrupted, as well as they; and so Magnets by Rust, Contusion, and the
like, may lose their Act^al Virtue, not because they are contrary unto it, but
because they disorder the Body thereof, as Wounds do Vegetative and Sensitive
Bodies. Certainly the Magnetical Virtue in a Needle is not from any Northern and
Southern Atoms or Corpuscles, for plainly it is Excited by another Magnet
Actualy, being what it is Potentialy before in itself: which evidently appears
by the very quick and sudden Actuation thereof, almost like Heat, and Light, or
Sound, and the like; though it will last longer in the State of Actuality then
they, because it has no Contrary to oppugn and Corrupt it, like them: and yet
rubbing it with another Magnet the contrary way does as soon reduce it to
Potentiality, by drawing it from its Polar Longitude, and destroying the Axis
thereof; (and nothing does more approve the Doctrine of Potentiality then such
Experiments) The Magnetical Virtue and Motions thereof are most evidently
discovered by the Magnetical Needle carried about a round Terrella; for at the
Equator it does apply itself Lateraly to the Magnetical Terrella and Parallel
to the Axis, because the Equator of the Magnet, or Terrella, does equaly
attract the Equator of the Needle, as also the Poles of the Magnet do the
Poles of the Needle, when it is so applied to either of them. And when it has
passed the Equator, the Correspondent Pole of the Needle begins to Incline,
and to point to the Correspo^dent Pole of the Magnet, and so more and more,
until it be Perpendicularly Erected at the very Pole; And it is half Erected,
and makes a right Angle with the middle of the Axis of the Magnet, though I
suppose not exactly in the midst thereof, unless we estimate it according to the
Oval Arch of the Magnetike Virtue: yet because after it has passed the very
Equator of the Magnet, it does no longer apply itself Lateraly, having both
its Poles equidistant from the Magnet, but presently begins to touch the Magnet
obliquely with one Pole pointing to the Correspondent Pole of the Magnet, I
also suppose, that either Pole of the Magnet does not attract beyond its own
Hemisphere, Northern, or Southern; (but the Magnet beng Polar does attract
Circumferentialy from the Center) for otherwise it should still cause the Needle
to apply itself to the Magnet with some part of the Side thereof, though less,
and less, and not touch it Immediately with the Pole, until it be Erected
Perpendicularly at the Correspondent Pole of the Magnet; as if two Chords were
fastened to the two Poles or ends of the Needle, and drawn through Hooks or
Staples fixed at each Pole of the Magnet, and so the Needle by them drawn
beyond the Equator thereof, by pulling in one Chord, and letting out the other;
yet it should still apply part of the Side thereof to the Magnet, though less,
and less, as I showed: but I refer this Hypothesis to more Curious trial and
examination. Also it may be tried, how much less the Attractive Power of the
Equator is then of the Poles: for certainly the Magnetical Virtue is not
equaly Orbicular, but rather Oval, (and that perhaps may discover it, as I
before intimated) though we call it an Orb, and it may be so; as there is an
Orb of the Emanation of Light from an Elliptical, or other Inorbicular Lucid
Body, and yet the Power thereof is not equaly Orbicular, as I have showed: for
though the Circumferential Extension from the Center be equal, yet the
Circumferential Power in that Extension may be unequal: however it is evident
in Magnets that though they be Orbicular, yet their Virtue is Oval; and so in
their Orbs of Magnetical Emanations, the Virtue is greater at the Poles, and
nearer to them proportionably, and less at the Equator, and nearer to it
proprotionably. And not only the Center, but also the Poles are very Points; as
may appear by two Needles placed at one of the Poles, which will thrust one
against another to attein the very Polar Point, which does most strongly
attract them; and therefore Divaricate at their other ends: as they must
according to Statike Law; for there can be no Angular Point of two several
Lines concurring in it, without a Divergence of the two Lines from it. Now in
this Circular course of the Needle about the round Magnet it is very observable,
that if it be moved about it at a distance, it does observe the Poles and
Equator of the Orb of the Emanant, and not the Inherent Virtue thereof, in the
Magnet it self, though the Emanant Virtue be not C^rporeal (nor indeed the
Inherent) as the Magnetike Body is: which I have already proved in discoursing
of Emanant Light, and may appear more manifestly by Magnetike Emanations, which
penetrate not only Imporous Glass, but any other Bodies whatsoever. Now whereas
it is a general Magnetike Rule, that the Correspondent Pole of one Magnet to
another is of a contrary Denomination, as of North to South, and South to
North, the Magnets are accordingly found to Conform themselves, and the less
Magnet will turn about itself so to apply its Correspondent Pole unto the
other: which is no Flight of each others Poles, as some have supposed, but a
Concordance, and Conformity according to the Magnetike Law of their Nature: and
it does so, not only by Contact of the greater Magnet, but at any distance
within the Emanant Orb thereof; because as the Inherent and Emanant Virtue of the
same Magnet make one Entire Orb of the Magnetical Virtue thereof, though of
several and unequal Powers; so also does the less Magnet endeavor thus to
Conform itself within the Orb of the greater Magnet. And it may be tried,
whether, as two several Lights in the same place do Colluminate, so these two
Magnetike Virtues being so placed together do Cooperate by their Emanant
Virtues. Also if one and the same Magnet be divided into several Magnets, the
Individual Polarity of the Whole will be doubled; and accordingly as they are
made by the Dissection two less Wholes, so they will also have two Individualy
less Magnetike Virtues; and according to the Dissection so will the Polarity of
each of them be: for if the Magnet be dissected by a Line cutting the Axis and
Parallel to the Equator, then the Poles, Center, Axis and Equator, are only
doubled; that is, the former Northern Pole in the one, and Southern Pole in the
other, still remain, and where the Dissection is, there is a new Southern Pole
opposite to the former Northern Pole, and a new Northern Pole opposite to the
former Southern Pole, and the Axis is divided into two, and the former Center
and Equator are also changed into two new Centers and Aequators conformable to
the Position of these double Poles: but if the Magnet be dissected by a Line
cutting the Equator and Parallel to the Axis, then the Continuity remaining
until the Dissection be finished, (which does end toward one of the Poles) it
is as if Wax were so divided by a Dissection almost throughout, but did stick
together only at one end; and then the two branches thereof produced and erected
one above another, and after the upper part wholly severed from the nether,
whereby that last Dissection does not cut the Equator, as the first did, but
the Axis, by a Line Parallel to the Equator, as in the former Instance: and if
we could suppose the Magnet to be so produced and erected Corporealy, and then
wholly severed, there would be one Pole at the end of the greater part of the
Magnet, which we will suppose to continue in the same Position as it was
before; and the other part, which is first divided, and then supposed to be so
produced and erected above it, must necessarily have another Pole opposite
thereunto, and consequently to that which itself had before when it was
conjoined to the other; and so when it is wholly severed, that part seems to
acquire two new Poles of contrary Denominations to the other, though indeed the
reason thereof be only the same, as of the former Experiment; and they are all
only Correspondences, according to the Magnetike Law; whereby, as I said, North
does Correspond to South, and South to North: and so every Point of the Axis
between the North Pole and the Center is Southern in respect of it, though it
be within the Northern Hemisphere of the whole Magnet; as England is Southern
in respect of the North Pole, or Gr^enland, though Northern in respect of the
Equator, or Aethiopia, and so likewise every Point between the South Pole and
Center is Southern; and thus if the Magnet be divided by a Line cutting the
Axis in any Point, the Correspondence of the Poles still remains, and if it cut
the Equator, yet in effect it is the same at last, as I have showed by the
Instance of Wax so dissected, and then produced and erected, and afterward
severed: and though this be not so effected Corporealy in the dissection of a
Magnet, yet the Spiritual Virtue thereof being dissected at one end, and
continued at the other, does so produce itself, and run through the whole Body,
that the part dissected will Correspond Magneticaly with that part from which
it is last severed, whether, according to the Dissection, it be requisite that
it be of the same, or of a contrary Denomination. And heerby we may plainly
perceiv the Real Individuality of any Elementary Compositum, while it is
Continuous in itself and Discontinued from others, and the Individual Economy
thereof in itself; for so the Magnet, while it is one, has but one Center,
Axis, Poles, and Equator; and as soon as it is Discontinued, the two Parts have
each of them all the same Apparatus which is doubled, and so even Elementary
Spirits have their Economy, and are Conforted by Majoration and Consociation,
as I have showed. And these two Elements, Ether, and Earth, have not only
their Inherent Qualitys, but also Emanant; because they are most remote, and
therefore their Emanations are their Emissarys, whereby to operate at distance;
whereas Water, and Air, have their Effluvia: but I know not whether they also
have any such Emanant Qualitys (which deserves farther Inquisition) for Water,
and Air may otherwise Operate at distance; that is, Water by Vapors, and Air by
its own Body, which enters into any Pores of other Bodies, or may be Introsucted
through them by their Cession, if they be Fluid, as Bubbles are through Water.
These two Emanant Qualitys of Ether, and Earth, are Analogous in some
respects: for both Subsist in their Inherent Qualitys, and Bodies, and from them
pass Localy into other Bodies; and perhaps they may both Cooperate within the
same Orb, though only Loc^ly United, and not Spiritualy Mist together; but the
Polarity of the less Magnet is not varied presently by being placed within the
Orb of a greater, or by the Earth itself, nor can Cooperate, if it do not
Conform unto the greater Magnet, at the Equator, or either of the Poles
thereof, as the Needle to the round Terrella, but ly in another Position, East
and West, or the like; for then I rather suppose that they hinder one another,
and attract severaly, more or less, according to their several Virtues, until
the greater Magnet can alter the Inherent Polarity of the less; and
consequently the Emanation thereof. Also they differ in many other things, as in
that which I have mentioned, that the Emanant Orb of a round Magnets Body is
not of equal Circumferential Power, like the Luminous Orb of a Starr, or other
such Orbicular Lucid Body; which plainly proves Magnetical Virtue and Planetary
to be very different; and that Magnetical Virtue having no Contrary, like
Light, or Heat, is not Refracted, or Reflected; and so the Radii thereof cannot
be conspissated and Intended, as the Sunbeams by a Burning glass. And though
they do both attract, yet their Attraction is also very different: for Magnets
do only attract such other Bodies that are either Actualy or Potentialy
Magnetical, and whereof the Potentiality is first Actuated by them: so that it
is indeed rather a Concours or mutual Embrace of both, then Attraction of one
by the other, like the Attraction of Heat; and Heat may attract cold Bodies as
well as hott; for though Cold be contrary to Heat, yet it is not contrary to
the Attractive Virtue thereof, which does attract a cold Body, as it is a Body
generaly, whether hott or cold; and is hindered only by the Gravity thereof,
which is also some Remora to Magnetike Attraction, though both that, and Heat,
if they can once overcome the Gravity of the Body attracted, do attract with a
very quick and smart Motion by their Emanant Rays; and the Magnet very notably,
so that an Iron wheel, or Steel Pendulum, will either be wholly staid by a
Magnet, and suspended like the Inclinatory Needle; or otherwise Move as freely,
as if it were out of the Orb thereof by its own Gravity: for though Motion of
Matter is per Gradum, yet Spiritual Motions are per Saltum; and so are Motions
by Elastical Potentia, as a Bullet Sucked up in the Barrel of a Musket by a
man's breath staieth so long as the Gravity thereof can resist the Elasticity of
the Air Expanded by the Exuction, and then being overcome, leaps up very
suddenly and violently; and, as I suppose, equaly, like the Planetary Motion of
the Ae^her. The Attraction of Heat is either by the Inherent Quality thereof,
which though our new Philosophers deride, yet it is most evident, not only by
the Attractive Power of the Vital Heat in Sensitive Bodies Internaly, but also
Externaly of the Heat of Wool, raw Silk, hott Spices, Tobacco, and many
Medicaments, which do notably draw; and it may be also very strong, yea
stronger then the draught of Horse, or Ox, as all workmen in Furnaces and
Saltworks can attest. And this Attraction of Inherent Heat may be not only
Immediately by Contact, but also Mediately by the Emanation thereof, as in the
former Instances: but if the Inherent Heat be not constant, and Fixed, as if it
be excited by a little rubbing, or otherwise, so as it is ready to return again
suddenly into its Potentiality, then it attracteth not constantly, but suddenly
in a special manner, which is called Electricity, and appears by such rubbing of
Electrum or Amber, Jett, hard Wax, and some Stones: and is somewhat like to
Elasticity, but from another reason; for that is only by violent Expansion of a
Body, which the Spirit thereof again reducing to its former Density, does
thereby draw other Bodies after it to avoid Vacuity, as I have said: whereas
Electricity is by the sudden Generation of Heat, which accordingly emitteth its
Emanant Rays, and then this sudden Calefaction as suddenly ceasing, and the
Inherent Heat returning into its Potentiality, the Emanant Rays, which do
Subsist in it, must also return into it, and in their Retreat or Resilience,
which, as I have showed, is very sudden and momentaneous, bring back with them
small Bodies within the Orb thereof, whose Gravity does not hinder and prevail
against the Spiritual Potentia thereof: whereas a more Constant and Fixed Heat,
though it may otherwise draw more strongly and durably, yet does not attract so
Electricaly; as may appear by hard Wax melted, which will not attract so
Electricaly, as if it be only rubbed, and not melted: nor does the Heat of
Flame attract Electricaly, though it be very sudden and momentaneous; because it
as suddenly passes away in the Fume and Body thereof; but yet the Successive
Fire thereof in the Candle or Wood does attract, like Inherent Heat; And heerby
it plainly appears that Emanant Rays do Subsist in, and flow from the Inherent
Quality in the Substance, because they do thus return to it again; and that even
Emanant Accidents, though they flow forth out of their Substances, yet do not
Migrate into others, because they do thus return to them again. And now upon
this occasion, and more fully to explain this very strange Electrical Motion,
as I have before discoursed of the Motion of Matter to Union, or Station,
Recumbence, or Succumbence, (which though Local Motions, are only such as
leaning to, or falling on, without any Active Power or Strength) so I shall now
discourse of the Motions of Spirits, which are properly Active and Vigorous, and
truly Spiritual: and such are the Motions of Elementary Spirits, which are the
very lowest Classis of all Substantial Activitys. Thus Heat and Moisture Rarefy
their own Bodies of Matter, as may appear in Fusion; and Cold and Drines
Condensate them again, when they return to their Consistence: and in all these
Variations of the Density or Rarity of their Bodies, there is a Local Motion of
the Matter itself Intrinsecaly in the Body thereof, otherwise there should be no
such Rarefaction and Condensation; and the Motion of the Matter therein is only
Passive, but the Motive Potentia of the Spirit, which by its Qualitys does so
Intrinsecaly Distend and Contract its own Body, is properly Active, as well as
when it does Extrinsecaly Expand or Compress another Body; which it may do
consequentialy by Rarefying or Condensating its own Body: for so Fire by
Rarefying the Powder into Flame and Fume does explode a Bullet; and though when
it Densefieth its own Body the next commonly succeeds by Motion of the Matter
to prevent Vacuity, yet this notable Instance of Electricity and all other
Attractions by Heat show also how it may attract another Body, not only by
Concursion, as two Magnets mutualy meet one another, but by plain drawing
without any Corporeal Instruments, and Imm^diately by its own Spiritual Power,
which Spirits have in themselves, as plainly appears by the Motive Power of
Angels, who are purely Immaterial, and yet most swiftly Move themselves, and
most strongly other Bodies; as our Saviors Body was so carried up to the
Pinnacle of the Temple: and ye^ according to that Universal Economy of Nature
and Combination of all the Scale thereof, as Angels cannot Move so soon through
a greater Space as a less, so I suppose also that they cannot Move so easily
through a more Dens Body as a more Rare (as I have also observed of the
Magnetike Virtue) nor Move a more Heavy Body as easily as a more L^ght: and
though they are the most Excellent and Potent Spirits, and so among other
Titles called Powers, yet their Motive Power plainly declares how a Spirit may
Immediately Move a Body of Matter, and that Materialists strangely err, who
suppose that Matter can only be Moved by Matter, or Bodies by Bodies: for indeed
Spirits, which are Substantial Activitys, are made purposely to Act and Move
the Matter: and so all other Inferior Spirits, though less Potent, may Move it
less Powerfully, according to their several Natures and Orders; that is,
Material Spirits Move it more Materialy, and one by another; as Sensitive by
the mediation of Vegetative, and Vegetative by the mediation of Elementary,
according to the Scale of Nature, as I shall show hereafter; but Elementary,
which immediately Consubstantiate the Matter, may Immediately Move it, as I
have before showed, both Intrinsecaly, and Extrinsecaly, with very forcible and
violent Motions: as in Thunder, Shooting in a Gun, and Rarefaction of Water
into Vapors; whereby very great Execution may be done, yea, as great as by
firing of Gunpowder, which indeed is only Rarefaction by Incension; and yet
without Incension, if the Rarefaction be as much and as sudden, it has the
same Effect, because there is one and the same Cause of both; that is, the
Rarefaction itself, whether it be one way, or other: and yet it is very
consyderable, wherefore since the Vaporous Body is also capable of Compression
as well as Rarefaction, the Bullet in the Gun should not again Compress the
Flame into its former Extension, rather then be itself exploded by the
Rarefaction, or, if it cannot be clearly expelled, why the very Gun itself
should rather be broken; since Air is strangely Comprest in a Windgun by less
Strength: but I conceiv the reason thereof to be both the greatness of the
Dilatation, which certainly is more proportionably then the Compression; for
the Air is never Comprest so much in the Windgun as to break it, and also the
suddennes, whereby the force thereof coming all at once (like the delivery of
weighty Stones, Arrows, or the like out of Catapults, and Balists) does all
together prevail over the resistance, which in longer time and by degrees might
prevail against it: and thus if the Rarefaction of Vapor be very great and very
sudden, the Execution will be very forcible and quick, and if less, less
proportionably: nor can I conceiv any other cause of those vast Eruptions, and
Ejaculations of whole Torrents of such massy Matter from Mount Aetna to so
great a distance, but only the great, sudden, and continual Rarefaction of
Vapors happening in some fit Caverns thereof. Also the Planetary Motions of
those vast Orbs in such rapid and perpetual courses is very wonderful: which
yet are only Elementary. Thus Magnetical, Electrical, and Planetary Motions are
indeed by such Natural Magike as I have described; and though I also acknowledge
that Emanations may be at the greatest distances, and Effluvia may pass very
far, yet I cannot conceiv how any Sympathetical Operations can Naturaly have
an equal Effect at the farthest distance as at the nearest, since no
Emanations, Effluvia, nor Angels themselves, do, or can so Operate. Now
Effluvia, as I have said, are of Inherent Qualitys, as odorous, or others, in
and with their Vaporous Bodies, and not like Emanations, which are only of
Emanant Qualitys, and which, though weaker then Inherent, yet are more
Spiritual and Separate from the Matter; and may be easily distinguished from
the others; for they penetrate the very Bodies, whereas Effluvia only pierce and
enter into the Pores thereof; also Emanant Qualitys are never Exhausted, but
always (while they are in Act and not obstructed) fill their whole Sphere; nor
do they weigh, or by their Emanation make their Substantial Bodies to be
Lighter; whereas Effluvia, though they may be very Rare and Subtle, yet do
proportionably diminish their Bodies, and accordingly make them to weigh somewhat
less, unless they be also continualy renewed. There is also a great Cohesion
and Continuation of Homogeneous Bodies, which I have formerly observed, though
few of them do so attract or concur as Magnets. It is said, that Gold does
attract the Fume of Mercury, and workmen use to hold a piece of Gold in their
mouths to receiv it, which will be notably silvered thereby; but that may be
only by so much of the Fume as does happen to fall upon the Gold, as Dew upon
leaves of Trees or Herbs; yet certainly when the Mercury does so fall upon the
Gold, it does notably retein it, being, as I suppose, very Homogeneous with it,
and that there is much Mercury in the Composition of Gold, and so fixed in it,
as that no Fume thereof will again be emitted by any Operation of the most
Intens Fire, though never so long continued: but there is also some other
predominant Principle in the Composition thereof, which apparently renders it
heavier then Mercury; though probably Mercury be one Principle in the
Composition of all Metalls (except perhaps of Iron which is Magnetical, and
will not be Corroded by it.) There is also a Fume emitted in melting Lead
somewhat like that of Mercury, very hurtful to workmen, and which does
strangely allure Cats, as a sweet Poison, and thereby kill them. But I shall
not proceed to discourse of Metalls, and Minerals, and the like, which I conceiv
to be Composita, and the Spirits thereof no Simple Substances, Created in the
Beginning, but that they are Mist of such several Simple and Created Principles;
and therefore not mentioned in all the Six Days works, though they and all
other perfect Mista were then also Improperly Created; and so we read of Gold,
Bdellium, and Onyx: but this general System mentions only such grand Mista,
as Elements, and Planets, which in the Whole are Ingenerable, and
Incorruptible, and therefore are particularly mentioned, as they were so
specialy Created.

IX. The Earth, being such as I have described, does plainly declate itself to
be Immovable, that is, not apt to Move itself, (if possible to be Moved by any
others) Yet there are some, who not by any Natural Power, nor by Faith, but
Fansy, can remove, not only Mountains, but the whole Earth; not by heaping and
raising it up to Heaven, as the Poets report of the Giants; but, as if they had
obtained the Victory for it, can place it among those Idol Gods, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, and others; which I shall now disprove, having already showed
how the Earth is one whole Element in itself Naturaly, and only Localy United
with Water in the surface thereof, and so made one Terraqueous Globe in this
Third Day; but not with the Aerie Expansum, which was made in the Second Day;
and how in the First Day the Ether was made to Move about the Earth with the
Light therein, Diurnaly, which made Day and Night; and that the Earth was not
made to Move about it, but remained in its Chaos, until this Third Day.
Whereunto I shall add one Text more as a Comment upon the other, being part of
that Divine Hymn of Creation, Who laid the Foundations of the Earth (or founded
the Earth upon its Basis) that it cannot be Moved. And so where it is said, The
World also is stablished that it cannot be Moved, it is to be understood of
this Orbis Terrae particularly, as I have showed; or if any may conceiv
otherwise, then it shows that the Circumferential Superaether, as well as the
Centrical Earth, is Immovable; like the Roof, and Foundation, of an House, which
are both Immovable; though other Bodies Move and are Moved therein between them:
and though the Roof also may be supposed to be Mobile (as some very great
Amphitheaters have been turned about) yet the Foundation must be Immobile;
otherwise it should not be such a Foundation: and so it is expressly said, that
the Earth is so founded upon her Bases, that it may not be Moved. Now as the
Earth has no Heat, Planetary Virt^e, or the like Active, and Motive Qualitys,
which might Move it, as Ether; so it has such as serve to found and fix it,
which are therefore called the Bases thereof, and Pillars of the Earth; whence
it is also by others rightly termed Bruta tellus. Thus, as I have showed, it is
the most Dens of all Bodies, and consequently most Grave; and therefore
possesses the Center of the World, to which it is united, as to another thing,
by its own Gravity; wherefore as the Universal Center is Immobile, otherwise it
should not be such a Center, so the Gravity of the Earth does Indissolubly
unite it thereunto, unless there can be assigned any other Body in Nature more
Grave then it, which might extrude it. Again, as by its own Gravity it is thus
united to the Center, so by its own Consistence it does unite all its Parts
together, whereby they will not, nor cannot, Move in the Whole, as Motes in
Water: and though it should be supposed to have more Consistent Parts one way
then another, yet because they are all Consistent, they do not flow every way to
fill the Sphere, but all weigh Perpendicularly downward upon the same Center,
without any Fluctuation, Trepidation, or Inclination any other way. And to keep
it from being Moved in the Whole about the Center any way, it has Magnetical
Virtue to fix it in one determinate Polar Position, North and South; so that it
can neither be Moved out of its Place, nor in its Place, but is wholly Immobile.
And because this Magnetical Virtue of the Earth is the only colorable Cause
offered to prove it Motive, (and so the Planets are also said to be Magnets,
and both confounded together, which are most different in Nature) I shall now
more largely disprove that Assertion, and thereby plainly prove the Earth not
to Move. I have granted the Earth to be Magnetical, and I do also grant the
Ether to be Planetary; and shall observe a wonderful Analogy between them;
that is, that the Poles of the Earth do so Correspond with the Poles of the
Ether, that if the Magnetical Axis of the Earth were produced, it would
Intersect the Poles of the Ae^her, so as it should seem to Move round upon, and
about them; for so the Poles of the Earth are North and South, and the Motion
of the Ether East and West; but though both Earth and Ether have their Axis,
Poles, Equator, and Meridian, and the rest, not only Mathematicaly, but
Physicaly, as I shall show hereafter, yet they are not Univocal, as some
suppose, because they have the same Names, but Equivocal in Nature, and
Physicaly different; for the Earth has them all for Fixation and Rest, and the
Ether to direct the Motion thereof, as I shall now show. I suppose, we all
agree, that the Verticity of a Magnet is a Motion from Pole to Pole, that is,
from North to South, or from South to North, Meridionaly according to the
Magnetike Axis thereof, and not from East to West, or from West to East, about
the Axis, and according to the Equator thereof; and also, that if the Earth did
Move Diurnaly, it must Move from East to West, or West to East, because it is so
Illuminated. Now I say, that no Magnet does, or can so Move, but only from
North to South, or from South to North, as may be tried by any Magnet, or
Terrella, which has Verticity: Wherefore they greatly err who affirm any such
Motion of the Earth, or of any Magnet about its Axis; for indeed, if it should
so Move about its Axis, according to the Equator, it could not also Move from
Pole to Pole, according to the Meridian, as I shall also show hereafter. Nor
did the Ancients so express the Earth to Move about its Axis, but Circa Medium,
or about its Center; which yet, as I have showed, it cannot do Diurnaly, because
that Motion is according to the Equator. Again, Verticity which is the only
Motion of one and the same Magnet by itself is not Circular, but only from Pole
to Pole Semicircularly; and Concursion of one Magnet to another is not
Circular, but Directly Progressive; and therefore it may not be Imagined, that
the Earth, or Planets, do so Magneticaly Move one about another, as I shall
show hereafter. And though the Verticity of the Earth be Potentialy in it, yet
it never is, nor shall be Actual; for unless it could be Moved from its Polar
Position, there is no need nor use thereof: and such Potentialitys, though they
be never reduced into Act* are not vain, because they are Hypothetical, and
first suppose a violence, which Nature abhors: and so Superaether, as it is
Matter, has Motion as well as all other Bodies Potentialy, but never Actualy:
and so the whole Earth has also Gravity, and the like. And as I have now
disproved this pretended Motion of the Earth, by the Magnetical virtue thereof,
so I know no other Cause assigned of such a rapid Motion thereof as must be
supposed, that is, about fifteen Miles every Minute Diurnaly, and almost fifty
Annualy; and the D^stance between our Accesses, and Recesses to, or from the
fixed Stars, should be about eight Millions of Miles (which is a large stride)
and yet we perceiv no difference thereof, as we do of Mars, who is placed in the
fifth Sphere. Nor is there any difference of a Bullet shot from a Gun East, or
West, as there should be very consyderably according to this common
Calculation, and so of a Bullet dropped from a a Steeple: but they say, the
Bullet also is a Terrella, and Moves with the Motion of the Earth; and would
prove it by the fallacious Experiment of an Arrow shot upright from a Ship
sailing, and falling down again in the same place: but then if the Steeple also
were removed, as much as the Ship saileth, the Bullet dropped from it should
follow it, which certainly is not according to the Motion of the Earth, or
Terrella: and therefore to defend this they have invented another wors
Absurdity: That there is, I know not what, Magical Line of Motion still
continuing and interceding between the Mover and Moved, after the Impression
past, and Contact discontinued: but neither does the Arrow flying spin any such
Corporeal Thread or Line, like a Spider; nor the Archer shooting emitt any such
Spiritual Radius, like Emanant Heat, which may so direct the Motion. Certainly
a Parthian, who shoots flying, or a Ship sailing, do not draw back the Arrow or
Bullet after them; nor will Stones so fall into the hand of a Boy playing at
Checkstone, without any answerable Motion thereof, whereby to catch them.
Neither is there any such Magnetical Stake reaching from the Subcortical Earth,
through the Cortex, Water, and Air, and, as some say, to the Moon; for
Magnetical Virtue has no such long or strong Orb, like Light, or Heat; as no
particular Magnet, or Terrella, does Eradiate like a Candle, or Spark of Fire.
Or if it should, yet it could not Move Magneticaly any other Body, that is not
Magnetical, or indeed that is not Consistent; as a Stake in a Pond cannot
direct the Motion of the Water in it, or Air above it; because they are Fluid
and not Consistent. Certainly Birds in the Air, though more Consistent, are not
Magnetical; and though a Bullet of Iron be Consistent, and Magnetical,
Potentialy, yet if it be not so Actualy, the former Experiments will be the
same, as if it were; and if it have the Magnetical Virtue thereof Actualy
excited in itself, then it is a Terrella in itself, and consequently, if the
Earth, which is the great Magnet, Move round, so should every such Terrella,
which it does not, as may be tried by any such round Bullet, or Magnet, placed
upon its Axis in the most exact Aequilibrium: whereas every part of Water,
severed from the Element thereof, is Water, having all the Propertys thereof; and
so should every such Magnet be a Terrella, as indeed they call it, having all
the Magnetical Propertys thereof: and some Magnetical Doctors do therefore
affirm, very falsely, that a Terrella so placed will Move round like the Earth;
who thereby, very truly, acknowledge this Consequence; that if the Earth so
Move, the Terrella must also so Move; wherefore since the Terrella does not so
Move, neither does the Earth so Move: and though a Bullet flying when it is
shot from a Gun, by that Violent Motion, does also Move round, as I have
formerly showed from another reason; yet that may be any other way as well as
the same way with the supposed Motion of the Earth; and the Bullet dropped from
a Steeple, and so falling downward, by a Natural Motion, does not, as I
suppose, Move round, or not the same way with the supposed Motion of the Earth.
Thus every less Magnet, not being one and the same with the Earth, but
Individualy such in itself, and having its own Poles, Axis, Center, and
Equator, as well as the Earth, (as may appear if it be laid East and West, in
which Position it will a long time retein its own Polarity, not only different,
but advers to the Polarity of the Earth, which is North and South) by its own
Immobility does also Sensibly prove the Immobility of the Earth. And yet we
must believ all the Motions thereof, which some Philosophers very confidently
Suppose, and vehemently Impose upon us, maugre all our own Faith, Reason, and
Sens; because they tell us Scripture is Popular, Reason Ancipitous, and Sens
Fallacious; and so all other men must be governed only by the Magistery of
their Fansys, which, whatsoever it may be to themselves, is certainly no more to
others then they can prove by Scripture, Reason, and Sens; in which there is no
Fallacy, but only in our Apprehensions, which are indeed our Infirmitys, and
ought to be rectified and corrected by other right Ratiocinations and
Sensations, and not by other Imaginations. Thus whereas I have granted that
supposing the Earth to Move constantly and equaly, though never so swiftly, if
we were also carried on it, we should not feel it to Move; because we our selves
do not Move, and yet I say, that our Bodies, being also in the Air, should feel
themselves Moved against the Air, though never so calm, but especialy when the
Wind blows the other way against the pretended Motion of the Earth, which
certainly could not be Insensible; but, as I rather suppose, Intolerable; if
their Imagination did not also Summove the Air for us, by supposing both Water
and Air to be parts of the great Magnet, the Earth; which is as contrary to all
Sens as the other: this Insensibility or Deception of Sens ought to be
rectified by other right Sensations, and not by such other Imaginations and
Insensibilitys. Again, according to the very Analogy of Deception, as the Sens
senseth falsely in one case, so it does likewise in all like cases, because there
is the same reason thereof: And now also I will examine the supposed Motion of
the Earth according to this Analogy of that Deception, which they so strongly
urge for it, and I shall only change that Verse (which is their usual Tex)
accordingly Provehimur Terra, Coelum Stellaque recedunt: and so as a Man in a
Ship sailing by the Shore seems to see the Earth and Towns to Move, which do
not, and does not feel himself to be Moved, as indeed he is, if he were so
Moved by the Motion of the Earth, which must be two hundred times more swiftly
then any Ship does sail, he should seem to see the Moon and Planets to Move
Visibly, which he does not: and though against this is objected the greater
distance of the Moon and Starrs^ yet that is recompensed by their greater
Magnitude, which renders them Visible proportionably according to the distance;
and by the far greater and swifter Motion: and so let the Man in the Ship
sailing with full Sail, though against the pretended Motion of the Earth,
behold the Moon and Stars Transversly, and observe whether they do not seem to
Move, otherwise then when he stands on the Earth, or when the Ship, wherein he
is, does not sail. There is one who says that both the Earth and also the
Ether do Move; because, as he supposes, while one Moves from the other, the
other also Moves from it; and so that it is all one and the same, whether we
affirm the Earth or Ether to Move; whereby he can solv this very Phenomenon
of their Motion either way, which I have already re^uted; and I know none
besides himself that did ever maintein it; but generaly others affirm the Earth
to Move, and Ether not to Move; because they suppose all the consequent
Phenomenon may be solved either way: who if they can find out any Error, which
they think is Tenible, though it be not Truth, they affect and embrace it
rather then Truth, and can pleas themselves in amusing the World therewith,
which is a very Falsarious and Disingenuous Humor, and more proper to Juglers
and Impost^rs then Philosophers. And because I scarcely know any Opinion wherein
they more exercise this Art, then this of the Motion of the Earth, as I have
already disproved it, so I shall also hereafter prove the Motion of the Ether
and Sun, and therein show how all the Phenomenon can only be solved thereby; and
shall now proceed to refute that other grand Error, which is indeed more
Fundamental and Universal, that is, their Doctrine of Matter and Motion.
Wherefore having discoursed of the Terraqueous Globe, I shall review it, and
consider whether only Matter and Motion could produce the Spirits and Spiritual
Qualitys thereof; certainly not Moisture, which is the same whether the Water be
Stagnant, or Fluent; nor Drines which is generaly Consistent, and so of the
rest (which to prosecute particularly were supervacaneous) but I will now only
alter the Scene, and transfer it from Air and Ether to Water; and suppose it
to be Tepid, that is, partly Hott, and partly Cold, and also Luminous, as it is
Diaphanous, and we will admit it Sonorous and Saporous, and if you pleas,
Odorous; besides Moisture, and the other Simple Qualitys thereof; all which may
be in the same Instant per omnia Puncta of the Water: and if all these which
are so Specificaly different in their own Nature, could be only so many several
Motions of the same Matter, and we might Microscopicaly behold them, we should
see a most strange Moorish dance, not only of every dancing Corpuscle, but,
even in every Joint and Point thereof, so many several different and advers ways
as must be assigned to make all their several Natures Specifical, and
Individual, Simple, and Compound, which is indeed Impossible, and so
ridiculous, as needs no farther refutation. Again, once more we will alter
the Scene from Water to Earth; which because I have affirmed to be Immovable in
the whole Body of the Matter thereof, and also the Spirits and Spiritual
Qualitys thereof to be least Active, I will likewise inquire into one thing
more, which I doubt our new Philosophers had forgott, and that is, whether as
Motion in others, so also Rest in the Matter of Earth may not produce the
Spirit and Spiritual Qualitys thereof, as Drines, and others? which though they
be indeed less Active then others, yet they are Active and Motive in themselves:
and so Consistence though it be most like the Rest of Matter, yet has a
Strength and Center thereof, very different from that of the Matter, which also
of itself is Fluid, as I have showed: and Magnetike Virtue, though it affect
Polar Rest, yet has also an Intrinsecal Motion of Verticity in itself to
restore it unto it. Nor can all the Terreous Qualitys be only less Active
Motions of the Matter, because they are all in the same Instant per omnia Puncta
in the same Matter, and cannot be so made severaly by one and the same Motion
of the Matter, nor can there be so many several Motions thereof together,
whether more or less Active; whereas all the Terreous Qualitys may be Actualy
together in the same Matter, as I have before sufficiently declared of all the
other Elements, and their Spirits and Spiritual Qualitys; and I now shall
conclude, that even Elementary Spirits and Q^alitys are somewhat more, and
other, then either Matter and Motion, or Matter and Rest.

X. As Matter is Subordinate to the Elementary Spirits, which do Immediately
Consubstantiate it, so are they with the Matter to Vegetative Spirits, as I
have showed in the Scale of Nature: and so Vegetatives were not produced until
the Elements were all Perfected, because Vegetatives require an Elementary
Mistion of them all, and indeed, a proper Mistion thereof, which every Spirit
orders and governs, both as Subordinate and Subservient to itself; but they
are not governed by the special Influence of any Planet or Starr, as the
Rabbis say, there is not a Starr in Heaven which does not point to an Herb on
Earth, and bid it grow; for as the Globe of Light in the First Day sufficed to
make Day and Night, so also the Heat thereof was sufficient for Vegetation; as
may plainly appear, in that Vegetatives were produced before the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, (and so also Metalls, though others ascribe the Production thereof to
Planets) which yet are more particularly Inservient and Beneficial to them; as
they do also more particularly vary Days and Nights, and all the Seasons of the
Year. But Vegetatives were, and still are produced out of the Earth, or
Terraqueous Globe, as it is moistened with Water; for the Earth is the Region
both of Vegetatives, and Sensitives, and also of Man: and so it is said, The
Earth brought forth Grass, etc. and it is observed that the first Produxit is
of Vegetatives; for the Elements which Immediately Consubstantiate the Matter
were not produced, but so Created in, and with it, in the Beginning, whereby
they were then Denominated Heavens and Earth, and so are Inseparably united
unto it, though they were afterward Perfected in their Mistions, and production
of their Qualitys thereby, as I have showed; and so there is no Produxit of
Planets, because they also are Elementary: whereas, though Vegetative Spirits
were Created in the Beginning, as it is said, God made every Plant of the field
before it was in the Earth, and every Herb before it grew; yet they were only
Latent in their Elements, and not produced, before the Elements were Perfected
in their Mistions and Qualitys; which was previous and requisite to their
production, as they also were to the production of Sensitives, as I shall show
hereafter: and though Vegetatives are of a far higher and more excellent
nature then Elements, yet they were Created in this same Third Day, wherein
Earth and Water were Perfected, and were pregnant and parturient of them, and
they ready to be produced, to show the Continuation of the Work of Creation by
God, who never Rested until the last Instant of the Sixth Day, as I shall show
hereafter, and also the Combination of the Superior Natures with the Inferior;
as Man also was Created in the same last Day with Beasts: yet neither could the
Elements so Perfected, (and much less Matter) so produce them, nor they produce
themselves, as the Earth now brings them forth, and they Generate others, until
God said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, etc. or as it is Originaly, Germinet
germen; which imports another way of special production, then the Mistion of
Elements, that is, by Germination or growing out of the Earth, so as no
Elementary Mista are brought forth, and therefore plainly Stones, Metalls,
Minerals, and the like, do not Vegetate; for they are neither Grass, Herbs, nor
Trees, nor of any such Kind, but only Elementary Composita, and Classicaly
Inferior to Vegetatives (and so also are the Planets and Stars, as I shall
show hereafter) nor are they of any middle nature between Elementary and
Vegetative, because there are no such Participia in the Scale of Nature; and
though Elementary Spirits are so far forth Plastical, as to superinduce a
requisite Density or Rarity in their Bodies of Matter, and some Regular
Figuration, as Orbicular, and sometimes perhaps Angular; yet they do not
Organize them, and make such Members, and Joints, and the whole Compages
thereof, as the Bodies of Vegetatives certainly; they have no Vegetative
Nutrition, Augmentation, and Generation, though they may seem to Grow by
Accretion, as Fire does Generate Fire Univocaly in Bodies pregnant therewith; nor
do they grow or sprout of the Earth; or as it is said, upon the Earth, as
Germens; but abide in their Element. Also Vegetatives commonly grow out of
them, as well as out of Earth, and not only Moss, and Ivy, and the like, but
great Trees are seen to grow out of Stones, Rooting into them, and as I
suppose, cleaving them asunder, if perhaps the Seeds did not first fall into
such clefts; otherwise it is a Noble Instance of the Predominant Potentia of
Vegetative Spirits over Elementary: for the Root of the Tree is a far softer
Body then the Stone, and therefore cannot cleav it by any Corporeal, but only
by a Spiritual Power: whereas I have seen a Birch grow out of an Oak, and not
cleav it; which, as I suppose, was produced first by a Seed falling into the
Crown of the Oak, where was some Earth, wherein it first Rooted itself, and so
grew to be another Individual and Entire Tree in itself; and not like a Branch
Ingraffed into another Tree, having one and the same common Root: and whereas
all Vegetatives have Roots, certainly no Metalls, or Stars, or the like, have
any; and Stones are only Poeticaly termed Vive, when they are in their proper
Beds, but neither Live, nor Vegetate, any more then when they are out of them.
And indeed though Vegetatives do Vegetate, yet they do not properly Live, as I
shall show hereafter, but all their Operations, though far above Elementary,
are as far below Sensitive; and are as Subordinate to Sensitive Spirits, as
Elementary are to them: but as Elementary are Mist one with another, and
Composited only with the Matter, so Vegetatives are Composited with them, and
are the first kind of Spirits that are Composited with other Spirits; and
therefore are first said to be produced, as I have showed. And as Elementary
Composita are variously Mist among themselves, and by their various Qualitys,
(which are many more then only one First with a Second Quality of another
Element attending it, as some have very falsely supposed, in every one of them)
and by all the Changes thereof, in their Compositions, and Decompositions, as I
have observed, whereby Glass, Stones, Metalls, Minerals, and such like only
Elementary things, are Generated; so, as I said, there are Ligneous, and other
Elementary Mista, properly Subordinate unto Vegetatives, and most probably some
proper Mistion to every Species thereof, as there is a proper Vegetative Spirit
Subordinate to every Sensitive Species: for certainly the proper Plastical
Virtue of any Grass, Herb, or Tree, which does accordingly Organize and
Effigiate it, cannot Organize and Effigiate another Specificaly different from
it, and much less any Sensitive Body, which yet is so Organized and Effigiated
by a Vegetative Spirit, as I shall show hereafter: nor indeed can the proper
Q^alitys of one Spirit Subsist in another; which to affirm, as some do, is more
absurd then Migration of Accidents, as it is more to produce any thing
Originaly out of itself, then being first produced by another to receiv and
entertein it into itself: nor yet has any Superior Spirit Eminently, as they
say, in itself the proper Qualitys of any Inferior Spirit, because they are
proper to the other; which though Inferior, yet has also its own proper
excellencys, whereby it is known to be, and indeed is what it is; and so
Vegetative Spirits only do Vegetate, as well as Sensitive only Sens, and
Intellective only understand. Thus though there are four Elements, and no
more, of which all the various Elementary Mista are made, yet Vegetative
Spirits are Indefinite, and so it is Indefinitely said of them, that they were
brought forth after their Kinds; and perhaps Vegetative Spirits are more
various then any others, because they are also Subordinate to every Sensitive
Species, whereas there is only one Sensitive Spirit so Subordinate to
Intellective, that is, to the Spirit of Man. But though the Species of
Vegetatives are not enumerated, yet there are three Genera thereof mentioned,
Grass, Herbs, and Trees, if the same Word Germen may also signify Gramen, and
be not only a general Name of all Vegetatives, which then must be subdivided
only into Herbs, and Trees, (as they only are mentioned afterward to be for
food of Man) but as it is often rendered Grass, so I rather conceiv it in the
largest sens: certainly it is not only a Tender Blade, for they were all made
Perfect and Mature; and whereas Herbs are said to have Seed, and Trees Fruit, if
there is Grass also, which has neither Fruit, nor Seed, I conceiv it ought so
to be intended thereof. Yet I do not suppose Mold, or the like, to be any
perfect Vegetatives, Immediately Created by God, but rather Meteorical
Vegetative Composita, and only Imperfect Rudiments of Vegetation; and so
likewise the Excrescences of Vegetatives, as Jews Ear, Sponk, Agarike, and the
like, which are somewhat like Wens in Sensitives; as there are such Anomala of
any Material Spirits, which are Generable and Corruptible, though neither of
Matter, nor Immaterial Spirits, which are Ingenerable and Incorruptible. And
thus I suppose Vegetatives growing in Water, as Duckweed, and the like, to be
Anomalous; for it is said of perfect Vegetatives in their Creation, Let the
Earth bring them forth; and so they were said to be upon the Earth, and not
upon the Water: and as all Grass has a Root, so I conceiv any Vegetative which
has no Root, to be Anomalous. Also Moss, and Sponge, which is a kind of
Seamoss, are Imperfect Grass; but that which we commonly call Grass, having a
Root, Leaf, and Spire of Grass, is, as I suppose, the first perfect Vegetative.
And I shall consider first the Root, which is a Bulbous Substance, and has
generaly more of the Vegetative Virtue in it then the Blade of Grass, or
Calamus of Herbs, or solid Trunk of a Tree, being also Esculent and Medicinal;
and is in itself the Mouth of Vegetatives set Downward in the Earth, whereas
the Mouths of Sensitives are Upward, and not fixed to their Element, but more
discontinued, because Sensitive Spirits are not so united to the Matter as
Vegetative, nor Vegetative as Elementary. Also though the Root be the Mouth,
and partly as the Stomach of Vegetatives, yet the upper parts of Plants above
the Earth do likewise perform the Concoction, as may appear by a Cion, which
does overruled the Stock heerin; and the Concoction in the Root is for
Nourishment of itself, and perhaps preparatory for the upper parts, as that of
the Oak is for Ivy, or Mistleto; for properly Plants have no Stomach, or such a
common Coquine, as Sensitives; though as they have a more special and proper
Elementary Mistion which they order and govern for themselves, as I said, so
consequently a Radical Heat, Moisture, and those other Q^alitys, with a certain
Proportion and Acme thereof, to which they grow up, and then decay again, as
well as Sensitives* but these seem not to be so Powerful and Operative in
themselves, as the Vital Heat, and the like, in Sensitives, and are much
assisted by external Heat, and the like, and therefore grow most in hotter and
moister weather: and this Woodmen observe in their situation to the Sun and
Winds, and notably in cutting Wood in the Spring, that as the Air is more hott,
or cold, and the Wind changes from South to North, the Sap will rise and fall
again, as Water in a Weatherglass: but it rises in hotter, and falls in
colder weather, and not contrarily, as it does in the Weatherglass, because it
is not ruled by any such Expansion, and Elastical Potentia, as I have showed of
the open Weatherglass, but only by Rarefaction of the Juice itself, which
plainly causes it to ascend through the Pores or Cavitys of the Plant, like
Vapor in the Air: nor are the inward parts of Vegetatives so Actualy hott, as
of Sensitives, whose Concoction is generaly best performed, when the Ambient
Air is more Cold, and not as of Vegetatives, when it is more hott. Yet the
upper parts of Plants seem also to Attract by their Heat, though not so much as
Sensitives. It is a Curiosity much affected to make Equivocal Plants and
Fruits, which cannot be so well effected as in Sensitives, whose Seeds are
Fluid, and more easily Mist; though I conceiv the most probable way to be by
some Unition of their Seeds, and especialy such as are Homogeneous, or more
Homoeogeneous, as Mules are commonly Generated by the Mistion of Equine and
Asinine Seeds: also it may be tried by Unition of their Roots, but then care
must be had in slitting and dividing them; for Gardiners say there is a
Centrical part of the Root, which if it be pricked through with a Pin, it will
never grow; as there is an Apex or Gemma which Ants bite off in Seeds. The Leaf
or Blade of Grass, which is only an Ornament of other Plants, is the Body
thereof above ground, and is more Esculent then Leaves of Trees; but both Blades
and Leaves are generaly Green, which is a most equaly Mist, and therefore most
grateful and inoffensive Color, and so most fit for their common Covering;
and they plainly show, how Green is Mist of Blew and Yellow, for when the Blew,
which is more Opacous, and Subsists in the stronger Juice, decays, together
with it the Leaves turn Yellow, and fall. The next Rank is of Herbs, which
besides Leaves have a Stalk to exalt and support them, interceding between the
Root and the Leaves; and that is generaly an hollow Calamus, not so strong and
Ligneous as the Trunks of Trees, but more Stramineous, and first only a Blade
of Grass, and not any Surculus, and it is commonly strengthened by Joints and
Knotts, which also serve, as Val^s, to retein the Vaporous Sap ascending in
them; and besides Leaves they have commonly Flowers* and are so denominated
Flores. And of this kind the lowest is such Grass as has Seeds and a Flower,
or Efflorescence, as Corn, before it be perfect Seed; and the Seed is commonly
in the Flower, which is a more delicate kind of Leaf, and composed of more
refined and concocted Sap, having also generaly more Color or Odor, or both;
but very rarely is Green, to distinguish it from common Leaves; and hardly ever
Black of itself, though Leaves and Flowers are often made so by Adustion, as
when Dews falling on them are adusted by a Torrid heat, they turn Blackish,
whereas ordinary Vegetation is by a more moderate Tepor: and yet there are
Blackberrys, and such like Fruits, which are first of some other Color, and by
an high Concoction are made Blackish to the sight; but their Juice does hardly
Denigrate, or Die Black, like perfect Adustion; as Mossy Wood charked will be
thoroughly Black, both in the Wood, Bark, and Moss: The Seed is of an higher
nature then the Flower, not only more Esculent and Medicinal generaly, but also
containing another Individual Spirit of the same Species in itself, whereby the
Plant does Univocaly Generate after its Kind, as I have showed. The Third sort
is of all other perfect Vegetatives, which are neither of the others; and they
are described to be Ligneous, as the Original word imports, that is, Arboreous;
and though some of them, as Vines, Brambles, and the like, be less Ligneous,
and need other Trees to support them, yet themselves also are Trees, according
to this general distribution of Plants, and we do not call them Herbs; as
Terrene Reptiles are Beasts, and not Fishes. And all Trees grow up first from
softer Sur^uli, which af^erward may become so firm, that they are not only
Ligneous, but seem almost to be Saxeous, as Lignum vita, Ebony, Brasile wood,
and the like Trees of a more strong and Terreous Juice. I have seen Oaken wood
dug out of the Sea Beach (where formerly the Tree had grown, and was
overthrown and overwhelmed by Inundations, after long lying in the Salt Juice
thereof) as hard and firm as the beforementioned. Coral also, which is a Frutex
of the Rocks, is very hard, when it is out of the Water; and perhaps not so
very tender under it as is commonly reported; though when the thick Juice
thereof is desiccated, it is most Lapideous. And I suppose some such cold and
gross Juice is the cause of Petrification; not so much by Conglaciation, as by
reduction of a fit Juice in the Body thereof to such a Consistence; and plainly
Stones of Fruits are so denominated from their almost Saxeous hardness. whereby
they become such Caskets for Seeds, which are Natures Gemms; and yet we cannot
conceiv their Induration to be any Conglaciation, but rather Desiccation; for
Earth and Water are most Congenerous Elements, and as they are composed into
one Terraqueous Globe, so they have a greater Intermistion: and as Metalls may
become Fluid by Fusion, so may these Succi be Indurated and fixed by Drines and
Consistence; though as Heat is assistant in the one, so may Cold be in the
other. But Trunks of Trees, though not hollow as Stalks of Herbs, have their
Porous passages through which the Sap does ascend, and commonly by the most
Spongy part thereof, that is, the Pith, which is formed by the Bubbling and
Spumeous Vapor ascending in it, and is fixed by degrees; as may be seen by
Birds Quills, which have little Bladders left in the Cavitys thereof, though
their Pith is more Constipated in the Feather. And there is observed to be some
such hollownes in Hairs; and both Feathers and Hairs are Vegetatives, though
Subordinate parts of Sensitive Bodies; and yet they have neither Seed, nor Root
properly, because they are not properly Individuals in themselves, but parts of
others; and so they are Analogous to Leaves and Flowers, and of as Beautiful
and more strong Colors, and many of them perfectly Black. Also the Sap does not
only ascend through the Pith, but notably between the Wood and the Bark; and in
the ascent is Concocted into Wood every year, as may appear by the Circles
thereof very visibly in more sappy Trees, as Willow, Ash, Birch, and the like,
whereby, knowing the several years growth thereof, you may compute the Gain or
Loss, according to the proportion of the Majority of the latter Circles, and
Interest of the yearly Rents precedent: and the Sap may also rise between these
Circles, and through the very Pores of the Wood, as Blood in Sensitive Bodies
may Transudat^ through the Flesh; for the Tree will sprout, and shoot forth,
every where; and hollow Trees without any Pith may bear Fruit: and indeed the
Bark or Skin, which is outward, is more requisite to the Vegetation of the
Tree, then the Pith or Medulla, which is inward: and as it will hardly Live, as
they term it, without a Bark, so if that be bound, it will not thrive, which
therefore is cured by cutting: for, as I said, Vegetative Spirits in Plants
being much assisted by the Temperature of External Qualitys (as also by
Internal in Animals) are as easily hurt by the Distemperature thereof, from
which the Bark servs to defend it; and as it so defends the Body of the Tree,
it thereby suffers much weather-beating and adustion in itself, which makes it
so Rugous and harsh. And because the External Heat draws the Sap outward, as
well as upward, therefore the Pith is commonly Insipid, but the Bark very
strong and Stiptike, as may appear by Tan; and so is the Wood itself more then
Pith, as appears by the Salivous Oil of Oaken wood which issues out at the
ends in burning, and is very Astringent and Desiccating: so also the Rinds of
some Fruits, as Orenges, Lemons, Citrons, and the like, are very Spirituous and
Sapid; but then that Pith, which is next to them, is very Insipid. There is
another Character of Trees, which is their Fruit; not particularly of every
Kind of them, for all are not Frugiferous, but generaly, because most of them
are such, and others which are not so, yet being Ligneous, and otherwise like
unto them (and so not to be accounted Herbs, or Grass) are therefore also
Trees: and they are generaly thus described, because this was the chief end of
Vegetatives, to be food for Sensitives; and the Fruits are most Esculent,
wherein also, as in Flowers of Herbs, the Seeds of Trees are contained more
Immediately, as it is so said, whose Seed is in it. All Plants grow out of the
Earth Perpendicularly, and so the Earth does nourish them: and thus all Grounds
bear only according to the Plane or Level thereof, and not according to any
Unequal or Concave Superficies: as a Park may be Impaled with as few Pales,
though the ground be rising and Indented, as if it were plain and Poll; because
all the Pales stand Perpendicularly, though it require more Rail
proportionably, because the Rail runs Horizontaly according to the Superficies,
and yet we thus measure and purchase Lands, which bring forth the other way.
And here I shall observe, that whereas it is said, The Earth brought forth Grass,
and Herb yielding Seed after his Kind, and the Tree yielding Fruit, whose Seed
was in itself, God in these Six Days made them and all other things in their
Acme of Perfection, as well as Adam in his Adult State, and so every way Good;
for thus Vegetatives were made not only Complete in themselves, but pregnant
with their Seeds, and ready to propagate others; and to this Individual
Perfection of Vegetatives and Sensitives was added the Divine Benediction,
Increas and Multiply; according to the Kind Specificaly: and so God having set
in order Original Generation by Improper Creation, as I have showed,
transmitted it to the Successive Generations of Nature. And whereas it is a
common Problem whether any Poisonous Vegetatives, or otherwise Noxious, as
Briars, and Thorns, were before the Fall and Curs? I suppose by Analogy of
Nature, that as then, though there could be no Elementary Qualitys Actualy
Existing in their Extremitys, yet they were very Intens and Predominant in
their own Elementary Bodies; as the Q^alitys of Fire in Ether, and of Water in
the Sea, which might destroy Sensitive Animals, if they should be Localy in
them; whereas they were so ordered, that they were very Grateful and Useful to
them; so also that ^here were Vegetatives in the same Excessive degrees of
Qualitys, as now, which we therefore call Poisons in respect to Animals, though
they be indeed Eminences of Nature in themselves; and so also Briars, and
Thorns, and such others, as are no Anomalous but Perfect Plants: but I suppose
that Animals were preserved from Poisons by a Natural Abhorrence, and
Discretion, having all their most exact Senses, and Bodily Temperaments, which
would not accept of any other food then what was suitable thereunto; and so they
might also avoid Briars, and Thorns, and the like, as they pleased; whose
Berrys are also food for Fowls: but I also suppose that there was no such
Excessive Quantity thereof, as since; and that this was the import of that Curs
of the Earth, Thorns and Thistles it shall bring forth: that is, whereas before
of itself it brought forth abundantly all sorts of Vegetative food for Man and
Beasts, and such Poisonous Herbs, and Noxious Plants, as rarely as it does now
good Fruits; so then vice versa it should bring forth abundantly Weeds, Thorns,
and Thistles, and the like. Thus I have briefly and generaly discoursed of
Vegetatives, as before of the four Elements, according to this Divine History,
which is an Universal System of the World, both in the Proper and Improper
Creation thereof: nor do I intend any particular Historys of them, as Solomon
spoke of them all, from the Ceder of Lebanon to the Hysop that is on the wall.
But here, before I conclude, I shall again desire any who will rightly consider
the Nature of Vegetatives, to try whether they also may be made only by Matter
and Motion, without their own proper Plastical Spirits, which the Earth did
bring forth; and as I have observed the four Elements were before perfected
and prepared in order thereunto, without which the Matter alone, as so
considered in itself (though indeed it can never be without the
Consubstantiation of Elementary or the Superaethereal Spirit) has no
Automatous Motion of itself, nor, when it is dislocated, any other then to
Union and Station, as I have showed, which is only to recover its due Rest and
Position; and therefore certainly it cannot also Move from Rest, which is
Naturaly contrary thereunto, (as Verticity is to Polar Position, and therefore
cannot be from it) nor has it any such Plastical Virtue of itself which may
guide the Motions thereof, but would be only Equidens and Orbicular; whereas
Plastical Formation of all Vegetative Bodies, and much more of the Bodies of
Sensitives, is constantly so Symmetrical Organical and Curious according to
every Kind, and Species, and the successive Propagation thereof, and they so
very various and different, that he who will not believ Divine Authority, nor
Natural Reason heerin, may satisfy himself by his own Sensation, and making use
of his Microscope Inspect the most admirable Structure and Mechanism of the
least Vegetative, or Sensitive, which is composed far otherwise, and beyond
the most admired workmanship of any Bezaleel, Daedalus, Apelles, or Ar^hytas,
and all the Mechanical Borcherys of Art (which yet is all that some will allow
to Nature itself) and when he shall have considered the most exact and
Mathematical Conformitys of the one, and Enormitys of the other (which also
shows that Mathematical Exactnes is not, nor cannot be, of Common Use) he may
easily judge with himself, that since the Intellective Spirit of the most
Ingenious Man cannot effect the like, certainly it must either still be
Immediately Digitus Dei, and so deny this whole History of Creation in the Six
Days, and all the Works of God therein, whereby he did set in order the Course
of Nature, and consequently deny all Created Nature; or otherwise acknowledge it
to be the continual Succession of the same Natural Causalitys, which also lead
us back again to the Acknowledgment and Adoration of the Supernatural Creator,
who is the only Author and Institutor thereof.

XI. Wherefore let us prais the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, as for the
Ethereal, so also for the Aereal Heaven, and for the Water, and the Earth. And
here we must sing his praises in Consort for them all together, as it is once
said of them all, that they were Good; though they be in themselves several
Elements, and were perfected in two several Days. Nor is the Goodness of
Vegetatives, which is another Classis of Creatures, though also perfected in
the last of these two Days, pronounced of them, which were before declared
Good; but because these three Inferior Elements, Air, Water, and Earth, being
separated from the Ether by the rapid Motion, and Circumvolution thereof about
them, and more conjunct among themselves, were not perfected one without the
other; and the Water (which is the middle Element, and contributed to the
Perfection both of the Air, and of the Earth, by ascending in Vapors into the
Air, and descending itself into the Canales and P^res of the Earth) was no^
perfected until this last Day; nor in that alone, but in both these two Days;
therefore this Proclamation of their Goodness and Perfection was reserved for
the Consummation of the whole Work of both the Days, and then Relatively to be
distributed to all the three Elements, which were so perfected therein: and so
they now continue to be Severaly, and also Mutualy Good. And the Ether, which
was before made Good in itself, yet had not been. Good to others without the
Goodness of the Air; whose Refrigerating Cold does Temper the vehement Heat, and
Refracting Pellucidity the Lucidity of all the Ethereal Luminarys; whereby not
only as a common Thorough-fare, but also as a Cooperator therein, it both adapts
and conveys the Ethereal Blessings of Rays above, and also the Spirituous
Vapors of the Waters beneath (which as an Al^mbic, it distills and refunds) to
the Terraqueous Globe. Nor is it only thus Concurrent with Ether, and Water,
and the Influences thereof, but has in itself the Ventos of Winds, both to Cool
and Purify the Atmosphere, and all the Organs of those admirable Sounds, which
it does propagate continualy and successively, and which as so many Cursores or
swift Messengers make their Reports through the whole Sphere thereof, and all
the Surface of the Earth: and so is made to be the Cymbal of Nature, which with
its Enchanting Music ravisheth or affrighteth, all Sensitive Spirits; and
whereby Men Discourse and Convers one with another, and in Sacred Hymns render
their grateful praises of the whole Creation to the Divine Creator: Also the
Atmosphere thereof is the very Breath and Life of Animals. Neither does the more
Dens Water intercept all the Benefits of Ether, and Air, but partly transmitt
them to the Earth, which it contempers with its own Moisture, and is as the
Blood Circulating through the Veins and Arterys thereof by constant
Reciprocations; conveying Nutriment to all the Cortical Body thereof, being both
the Inexhaustible Fountain of Drink to all Sensitives, and also conditing their
Meats with most grateful Sapors, and perfuming them with varietys of most
delicate Odors. And though both these Elements of Air, and Water, seem very
Weak and Infirm, in comparison of the Rapid Ether, and Robust Earth; yet being
provoked and armed to execute Divine Revenge, they so mutualy assist and
fortify one another, with unusual and unexpected Rage, that Conflagrations, and
Earthquakes, do not much exceed their furious Herricans, and violent
Inundations. The Earth, though last and lowest of all the Elements, is not only
their most Dens and Consistent Fulciment, and Center of their Situation, but
also of all their Offices and Services Circumferentialy tending unto it; being
the Foundation of the whole Univers, and another Orb in itself, and Epitome of
the great Globe; whereof all the rest are only Concave Spheres, having only some
particular Orbs in themselves; and on which all those Luminous Orbs cast their
smiling Aspects, and the Sun Illustrateth all the other Luminarys, that so they
together with himself may give Light unto it: which the nimble Air fanneth and
refrigerateth with the Wings of Wind, and waters the great Garden thereof with
D^ws and Rains: and the officious Water runeth up and down to wash the face of
the dusty Cortex, and to bath and supple all the Limbs thereof; and also flows
forward and backward to carry and recarry the greatest Burdens from Shore to
Shore. Thus all the other more Active Elements, as so many Circumsistent
Servitors, in their several Courses and Orders, minister unto Earth; which
sitting still and resting in itself receives all their Homages and Tributes,
not Moving, nor being Moved with all their Disorders and Confusions; but
founded on the Solid Base of its own Density and Gravity, and strengthened by
its own Consistence, and fixed by its own Polarity does also by its other
Q^alitys fix all the more subtle and volatile Elementary Spirits. Which
covers its own Nakedness with the Daedalous Embroidery of Leaves and Flowers,
and enricheth itself, not only with the Stock of all the hid Treasures of
Jewels, Metalls, and Minerals; but also with all the Rents and Revenues of
Annual Fruits and Profits both producing and mainteining all Vegetatives, and
the chief of Sensitive Animals, yea, Man himself, whose Body is also formed of
the Congenerous Dust; and so the Earth, which is given to the children of Men,
is the Stage of this great Amphitheater of the World, wherein all the present
Affairs thereof are transacted; and as all the other Elements are now
subservient thereunto, so hereafter also the Superaether, or Heaven of Heavens,
shall be the everlasting Mansion of Blessed Souls.

And now again let us tune our praises to an higher Note, and bless God for the
Creation of Vegetatives, Grass, Herbs, and Trees: and let us contemplate their
several Kinds, and Virtues, which yet are Innumerable and Unknown to us; their
Curious Formations, and Oeconomical Administrations; the careless Comlines of
their Leaves, and Beautys of their Flowers; the general conformity of their
Greennes to our Sight, and the delightful varietys of all their other Colors:
how wonderfully they Compose, Nourish, and Augment their own Bodies, and
Generate others; and having neither Sens, nor Intellect in themselves, yet by
their own Innate Plastical Virtues perform such works, as no Sens, or
Intellect, can Imitate, or sufficiently Admire. The Microscopical perfection
whereof does exactly correspond with the most Critical Sens, and Organical
usefulnes with the most Political Intellect. And as God in the Beginning
Immediately Created the Heavens and the Eart^, and the great Building of the
whole World, so they Mediately build all the Domicils, and Officines, of their
own, and all Superior Bodies, as the Architects thereof, and Vulcans of all their
Organs and Instruments: and are themselves, together with the Subordinate
Elements and Matter, the Immediate Bodies of all Sensitive Spirits, wherein they
Reside, and Operate: and both Dress and Digest for them all their Nutriment,
whereof a great part is of the same Vegetative Nature, which affords not only
Salads for delight, but solid food for strongest Animals, Horses, Bulls, and
the great Behemoth; furnishing also Man's Table with Wine, that makes glad the
Heart of Man, and Oil to make his Face to shine, and Bread which strengthens
Man's Heart. Renewing the Annual Fruits of the Earth as fast as all the Animals
can devour them; which in Man's better State were his sole Diet, and since he
tasted of their only forbidden Fruit, are his Physic, or Natures Tree of Life
for healing of the Nations.

SECTION X.
And God said, Let there be Lights in the Firmament of Heaven, to divide the
Day from the Night. And let them be for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days,
and for Years. And let them be for Lights in the Firmament of Heaven to give
Light upon the Earth. And it was so. And God made two great Lights, the greater
Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night. He made the
Stars also. And God set them in the Firmament of Heaven to give Light upon
the Earth, and to rule ober the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the
Light from the Darkness. And God saw that it was Good. And the Evening and the
Morning were the Fourth Day.
EXPLICATION.
God having in the First Day made the Light, and by it one Hemisphere of the
Ether more Luminous then the other, and thereby Day and Night Artificial in
that first Day Natural, which did accordingly succeed in the two following
Days; now in this Fourth Day did more particularly distinguish them by the
several Luminarys, which he made therein for that purpose, and also for
Signfications of Times, and Seasons, Months, and Years, and all the variations
thereof. And he made two chief Lights, the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon to
rule the Night. Also he severaly made all the Stars according to their several
natures; And so set all these Heavenly Luminarys in their several Positions in
the Ether, to run their several Courses therein, and thereby to Illuminate the
Earth, and to make all the said Divisions and Distinctions of Time, which was
their Goodness and Perfection. And these were the Works of the Fourth Day.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of the Ethereal Lumina^ys. 2. Of the Sun. 3. Of the Moon. 4. Of the
Stars. 5. Of Comets. 6. Of the Goodness of the Works of the Fourth Day.

I. WE now proceed to discourse of the Second Part of Creation; wherein, when God
had before perfected and prepared all the ^ower Elements, and planted the
Earth, which was the last, with Vegetatives, which he produced out of it, he
began now to Introduce into them all their more Locomotive Inhabitants: and to
show the Connection of both these two Parts of Creation, it is again said of the
first Created Light, Sit, or Fiat Luminaria, whereunto, as I suppose, the
Singular Number does referr, and that it must be so understood, Lux fiat
Luminaria, for it is afterward Sint or Fiant Pluraly. And I also observe, that
whereas it is said of all the other Days Works, when they were finished and
perfected, generaly, God saw that it was Good; it is said of that first Created
Light more particularly, God saw the Light that it was Good; though also
afterward in the same Day he divided the Light from the Darkness: but as I have
before observed of the three Inferior Elements, Air, Water, and Earth, that it
is not said, God saw that it was Good, until they were all perfected, and the
whole Work finished; so though Day and Night Artificial were made generaly by
the division of the Light from the Darkness in the First Day Natural, yet because
they were also to be more particularly distinguished by the Luminarys, and to
be so ruled by the two great Lights expressly made for that purpose, that is,
the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon to rule the Night, therefore the Goodness
is not pronounced of Day and Night in the First Day, but in this Fourth Day,
wherein the whole perfection thereof was consummated: so accurately exact is God
the Author of Nature, and Scripture, both in his Operation, and Expressions.
And though the common Light, and Day and Night thereby, in Ether, and the
ascent of Vapors in Air, and eduction of Earth above the Waters, and
madefaction thereof by them, was sufficient for the product^on of Vegetatives,
which thereupon were Immediately produced, as I have showed; yet before the
Introduction of Fishes and Fowls into the Water, and Air; and Beasts and Man
into Earth; it was requisite that the Ether, which Sensitive Animals only can
behold, and by the Ligh^ thereof all other Spectable things, should be made
perfect and complete, and adorned with all the various Luminarys, (...) in
their various Positions, and running their several Courses, and so ordered and
disposed as might best serve both for the Sensation of Sensitive Animals, and
Contemplation of Intellective Man. And though these Luminarys were made after
Vegetatives, yet they are not therefore Vegetative, or of a Superior Nature
above Vegetatives, as Vegetatives are above all that were made before them, and
as Man the chief of all was made last; for though indeed this Order is observed
in each of the Parts of the Creation; and so the Creatures made in the last
were respectively more excel ent, then they which were made in the first Part
thereof; yet the Luminarys, which were made in the first of the last three Days,
are much Inferior to Vegetatives, which were made in the last of the three
first Days; for they are Elementary, and of the Elementary Classis, though
chief Composita of the chief Element, Ether: but all Elements and Elementary
things are Classicaly below Vegetatives; and though Planets have Locomotion out
of their places, which Vegetatives have not, but only in their places, being
all Rooted in the Earth; yet Locomotion is also in the Matter, when it is
dislocated, and indeed no Material Spirit can so elevate their Bodies and cause
them to ascend, as Matter does necessarily to Union, and to prevent V^cu^ty, as
I have showed: and much less are the Planets Sensitive, or Intellective in
themselv^, or any such Deitys or Demons, as the Idolatry of Heathens made
them* and their Philosophy durst not contradict; nor yet Moved by Intelligences
or Angels, as the Rabbis and Scholemen suppose: for they can be only External
Movers thereof, whereas Planets Move by their own Natural Power, and Intrinsecal
Virtue, like the Verticity of Magnets, and are not Moved like Studds fixed in
solid Spheres, as I have proved, and as the Eccentrical Motions of the Planets
therein do thereby plainly disprove; and therefore others affirm them to be
Magnets, and the Earth, which is the great Magnet, to be a Planet; but
certainly Ether and Earth are two different Elements, having different
Elementary Spirits, wherein the same Qualitys cannot Subsist, as I have showed;
and so the Ether cannot be Magnetical, nor the Earth Planetary, unles we can
also make the Ether to be Terrestrial, and the Earth Ethereal; whereas Heaven
and Earth are generaly contradistinguished in the Beginning, and particularly
Ether and Earth were made two several Elements in two several Days: and Ether
being, as I have showed, Fluid, cannot possibly be Magnetical, which requires a
very solid Consistence; certainly the whole Ether, which is a Concave Sphere,
cannot be so Magnetical as Earth, which is an Orbicular Globe; for it cannot
have an Axis, and consequently Magnetical Poles; as if a Ring of Iron be
touched with a Loadstone, it will have only one Pole: and though the Ethereal
Planets be Orbs, yet they also are Fluid: and Sensibly all Ethereal Motions
are Circular and Perpetual; whereas Magnetical Verticity is only Polar, or to a
Pole, and not round about the Center, nor about an Axis, like Motion of
Planets, but to the Poles thereof, when by Trepidation it passes beyond them;
and so Moving its own Axis the same way, that is, Meridionaly, and not
according to the Equator of its own Body, as I have showed: whereas if Earth,
and Water, and Air, as they say, and also Ether, and the Planets, were all
Magnetical, they should make one Magnetical Orb, and all Move one and the same
way; which plainly they do not: or if otherwise one be Moved about another, as
they say the Moon is about the Earth, it should observe the Magnetike Law, which
it does not, as I shall hereafter demonstrate of the Moon. Thus the Magnetical
Planetary Motions are very different, and indeed opposite in their very
Natures, and Ends; for Planetary Virtue makes the Planets to abhor all Rest,
and Magnetical Verticity is to reduce Magnets to their Polar Rest. Wherefore we
may not confound them, though they are both Elementary Motions, and not only
Motions of the Matter, or only by the Pondus thereof, as the Flux and Reflux of
Water; nor by Impuls, like Winds in the Air, whereof I have formerly discoursed;
nor yet any Vegetative, Sensitive, or Intellective Motions, whereof I shall
discourse hereafter: as indeed all things are Motive or Mobile one way or other
within the whole Globe of the World, and the Circumferential Superaether, and
Centrical Earth are only Immobile: and as we are Sensibly satisfied concerning
Magnetical Verticity, so thereby we may conceiv of these other Planetary
Virtues, which God produced in this Fourth Day in the Planets, as he did before
the Magnetical Virtue in the Earth and Magnets. Whereby also it plainly appears
that Motion is not only of the Matter, but also that Elementary Spirits may
have a Motive and Directive Power in themselves, as well as any other Superior
Spirits; and from their different kinds and ways of Motion we may collect the
very different Motive Powers and Virtues of the several Movers: whereof Matter
is most general, and only tending unto a State of Rest in the whole Body
thereof, and Center of itself; whereas Magnets have a more particular Position of
their Bodies, which is Polar Rest, North and South, and a Verticity particularly
to reduce them to it; and Planets have their several and various Positions, and
Courses, and an answerable Planetary Virtue, which so setts them, and Moves
them, and makes them to abhor all Rest, and Vegetative Spirits are more
Plastical, but Involuntary, and Sensitive Spontaneous or Voluntary Movers, and
more indifferent either to Motion or Rest. And thus as Magnetical Bodies may
Move from Pole to Pole Semicircularly by their Magnetical Verticity, so we may
very well conceiv how also Planets may Move Circularly, which is only a
continuation of Motion through the whole Circle, whereby also they may so Move
Perpetualy; and as the Needle does leap to the Loadstone by the Magnetical
Virtue Actuated in itself, which Motion is Progressively Locomotive, so may
also Planets by their Planetary Virtue, which is always Actual in them, Move
Progressively in the Circles which they describe; but though the Magnetical
Virtue which setts the Magnetical Body in one determinate Polar Position may be
removed, as I have showed, and pass from that part of the Magnet wherein it now
seats itself, and which thereby becomes Polar, unto any other part thereof, and
so render that Polar, as may be sensibly seen in any Terrella, (whereby it is
plainly proved that the Magnetical Virtue is a Spiritual Quality, which can so
remove itself from any part of the Body of the Matter to another, and not any
fixed Affection of the Matter itself) yet Planetary Virtue, being seated in the
whole Orbicular Body of the Planet, does not, nor can it, so remove itself;
because it always possesses the whole Body, not Polarly, or Ovaly, but
Orbicularly; or at least it is therefore not to be discerned so to vary its own
Situation in the Planetary Body. Now, as God in the First Day did Actuate that
proper Ethereal Virtue, which also may be termed Planetary, causing it thereby
to Move about the Inferior Globe from East to West in four and twenty hours or
therabout, whereby he made Day and Night, which could not otherwise be, without
such a Circumgyration of the Ether, and of the Globe of Light therein, as now
the Ether does still Move with all the Planets and Stars in it, (whose
Planetary Virtue is diversified into several other Motions, which yet are all
only Planetary Motion Genericaly; as if, whereas the Polar Position of the
Magnetike Earth is only North and South, God should have diversified it in
other Magnets or Terrellae, and made some East and West, and so to any other
Points) so it is also said that in this Fourth Day he made Lights in the
Firmament of Heaven to divide the Day from the Night; that is, to cause more
particular Variations thereof, longer, or shorter, sooner, or later, and the
like; which must be by their Planetary Virtues Actuated in them, whereby they
Move respectively in the Ether, as the Ether does about the Inferior Globe;
and so they were not only for Days, but also for Years, Months, and the like,
which, though more or less then the Solar Year, are the respective Years of
their particular Planets, Lunar, Jovial, or the like, as we commonly call them.
And so God made not only the two great Lights to rule the Day and the Night,
(that is, the Sun and Moon as both Scripture and Nature do declare) but it is
said, He made the Stars also. And God set them in the Firmament of Heaven, so
as to perform these several Offices by all their various Courses. Thus I
conceiv that the Ether having the Planetary Virtue thereof Actuated in it in
the First Day, when God said, Let there be Light, a great part of that
Ethereal Light was divided from the common Light of Ether, which was left and
still is in the whole Body thereof, though not so Visible to us; and that Globe
of Light, as it was generaly Connatural with the Ethereal Light, being in one
Hemispere of Ether, was carried about Diurnaly by it and with it, and not any
other way by any special Planetary Virtue in itself, which was not Actuated
before this Fourth Day; but that this common Globe of Light so divided, and
whereof we have no other account, was the Chaos of the Potentialitys of all the
Planetary Virtues, which were afterward educed out of it; and that then they
were not only Moved in and with the common Ether Diurnaly, but by their own
special Planetary Virtues Predominant in them, and directing every one of them
to Move according to their several Courses; for though Locomotive Virtue be
common to Ether, and all Ethereal Bodies, yet the Motion of Ether from East
to West Diurnaly was by a proper Planetary Virtue, as I have said, Actuated in
it, when God so divided it from that Globe of Light (which is eminently called
Light and made Day; and so mutualy that Globe of Light) from the rest of the
Ether, and Ethereal Light, (which is Comparatively called Darkness, because it
made only Night, as I have showed) And so this particular Chaos of all the
Planetary Potentiality^ being so divided from the common Ether, and not having
any Planetary Virtue Actuated therein, was carried about in and with the common
Ether in the three First Days; and then it was again divided into all the
particular Planets, and all their particular Planetary Virtues were
respectively Actuated therein, and by those special Planetary Virtues they
perform all their several Planetary Motions and Courses. Nor is it less
wonderful, if we rightly consider it, how they Move in their several Zodiaks;
being indeed no such Gemmeous Studds, or Bullae, fixed in the Ether, as some
have imagined; for both the Ether, and they also, being Ethereal Bodies, are
Fluid; nor do they Fly, or swim therein, by any Spontaneous Power, like Fowls in
the Air, and Fishes in the Sea, because they are not Spontaneous: but they are
all Aetheruli, as I may so term them; and so their Original Globe of Light was
only such a particular Portion of the common Body of Ether, not differing from
the rest, but only as it was more Lucid; for so it is said of the formation
thereof, that God divided the Light from the Darkness, in the Ether, but not any
part of the Ether from the Light; or the Light from it: nor is the Body of the
Sun, or any Planet, more Condensated, as I have showed; though they shall
hereafter sink through the Fluid Ether to the Air and Earth at the Last Day,
when they shall be discomposed and disordered, whereas now they are Connaturaly
adapted to the Ethereal Heaven: and so it is said of the Light; Fiat Luminaria
in Expanso, and they are all equaly Expanded in it; but their Light is far
more Conspissated, as it was in their Original Globus: and yet such
Conspissation of a Spiritual Quality does not make the Lucid Body to be more
Dens or Grave, which also proves Light not to be Corporeal, but a Spiritual
Quality, as I have said: and indeed, as all Heat does Naturaly Rarefy, so
should they be rather made more Rare and Light thereby, but that Ethereal
Bodies are already as Rare as any Elementary Power can make them to be; and yet
though we may easily conceiv them, being Equirare with the common Body of
Ether, to be poised therein, as Glass Bubbles in Water: it is also to be
considered, why, or how, they should still Move in their Regular Circularitys,
and not to be diverted or removed, as such Glass Bubbles may very easily be:
and we have the true account heerof in the Text, Posuit, he set them so at
first, and so they are still continued, not by an Immediate Manutenence; as he
does not Move them by an Immediate Manuduction, but by the same Planetary
Virtue Actuated in them, and causing them Naturaly so to Move in their own
Zodiaks. Now because, as I have observed, there is no Produxit of any of these
Planets, as there was before of Vegetatives, and afterward of Sensitives; and
indeed, because there was such a Globe of Light decided before from the Ether,
which was the common Chaos of them all, and whereof they were so many particular
Decisions, I conceiv that they were so many several Composita made thereof,
whereby they are all thus different, and several one from another, as they are
all from the Planetary Ether, (as it is said God divided between their Light
and the other Ethereal Light) and that every one of them is a Specificaly
different Compositum in itself: and that every Individual Planet is such a
Phoenix in its kind, that it is also a whole Species in itself: wherefore it is
said that God particularly made, not only the two great Lights, but the Stars
also, and so it is said, There is one Glory of the Sun, and another of the
Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for one Starr differs from another
Starr in Glory. And therefore their Creation is thus specialy mentioned, and
was the whole Work of this Fourth Day, and so I conceiv, there are no such
Ethereal Compositae, as Stones, Metalls, Minerals, are Terrestrial Composita,
and whereof no such special Creation is mentioned, as I have observed; but
neither that there is a Simple Spirit of every one of them, Created in the
Beginning by a Proper Creation. And I conceiv that these vast Individua, which
are also so many Species in themselves, made Immediately by God, as I said, can
neither be Naturaly diminished, nor multiplied, as Comets, which are Anomalous,
may be: for so the Stars are said to be for ever, and it is said of God their
Creator and Preserver, He tells the number of the Stars, he calls them all
by their Names, though Supernaturaly and Miraculously he may compose a new
Starr, as probably that which appeared at our Saviors Birth was such an
extraordinary Starr, and so is specialy called, His Starr; which yet did not
continue, but, after it had performed the End for which it was made, was again
dissolved: for otherwise the Ordinances of Heaven, which are said to be
Unchangeable, should be changed, and the Constellations thereof disordered. And
though the Stars be every one such a several Species, yet there is also a
Combination of them all generaly, as they are all one Host, and of some more
specialy, which are called Constellations, and are not only such in Name, but
also described to be such in Nature: so whereas it is here said, that God made
the greater Light, that is, the Sun, to rule the Day, and the less, that is,
the Moon, to rule the Night, the Psalmist says, To him that made great Lights,
etc. The Sun to rule by Day, etc. The Moon and Stars to rule by Night, etc.
where he divides the Moon and all the Stars, as a Separate Constellation from
the Sun alone, and attributes unto them their several Offices to rule by Day,
and by Night; for though all the Stars do not attend the Moon every Night, yet
they do by turns; and therefore she alone is said to rule the Night, because she
does so every Night, more or less: and though, as I said, the common Ethereal
Light divided from the whole Globe of Light, (which was the Stellant Light, and
whereof the Planets and Stars were all made afterward) did make the first
Night, as that Globe of Light did the first Day; and that Nocturnal Light is
therefore called Darkness Comparatively, which had neither Moon nor Starr in it,
yet in order to Sensitives, who need more Nocturnal Light, the Moon and Stars,
or a great part of them, were added in this Fourth Day, to rule the Night;
whereof therefore there is also such an Additional Expression, To rule over the
Day, and over the Night, and to divide the Light from the Darkness. Thus also
more specialy there are said to be Courses of the Stars, and many of their
Constellations particularly named, and their Cooperations denoted, Can thou
bind the sweet Influences of Pleiades, or loos the Bonds of Orion? Can thou
bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or, Can thou guide Arcturus with his
Sons? Now whereas some have Curiously inquired in what time of the Year the
World was Created; which the Poets fansy to have been in the Spring, because
that indeed is the time of Renovation; and the Rabbis in the Autumn, because
then all Fruits, and the like, are in their Perfection, as they were first
Created; certainly neither of their Computations can be true of the very first
Creation in the Beginning, for then there was no Year, nor any Commencement
thereof; but only Day and Night generaly in the three first Days; and in the
Fourth Day, the Planets were made for Days, and for Years; and then they must
also calculate their Computation for the Meridian of Paradise; otherwise, when
it was Spring in one part of the Earth, it was Autumn in the other; as it is
now to us and our Antipodes. But such is our Human Vanity, that we will
Curiously pry into those things, which God has thought fit to Concele, and
yet not acquiesce in those things, which he has pleased to Revele.

II. In the History of the Creation of the Planets and Stars it is farther
said of them, that God set them in the Firmament of Heaven to give Light upon
the Earth. Wherefore certainly they are all Lucid, not only as all Ether is in
itself, but so as to give Light upon the Earth, otherwise they could not so
give Light upon it; and so certainly the Earth is not Lucid in itself,
otherwise it should not need to be Illuminated by these Heavenly Luminarys.
Thus as the Apostle says, There are Bodies Celestial, and Bodies Terrestrial;
but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the Glory of the Terrestrial is
another; and so neither are the Planets any Magnets, nor the Earth a Planet,
but, as several Elementary Natures, they differ Genericaly, and have their
several Generical Glorys, that is, their different Goodness described and
expressed in the History of their Creation, severaly in several Days: and which
also evidently appears in Nature, as may satisfy any, except such who being
confounded in their own Understandings can also confound Heaven and Earth,
which differ far more and otherwise then the Ether and Planets differ one
from another; for they are Bodies Terrestrial, and Bodies Celestial, whereas these
are all Genericaly Bodies Celestial, though they also Specificaly differ one
from another in Glory: And of all these Celestial Bodies the Sun is incomparably
most Glorious; who, as I observed, alone is opposed to the Moon and all the
Stars, and also preferred before them all; for they with his Solar
Illustrations and Secundary Light only make Night in the backside of the Earth,
which is but as the Shadow of his Diurnal Presence, and therefore is still
called, Darkness: and so he is said to rule by Day, and they to rule by Night.
Whose darting Rays penetrate through all the Spectable World, and are bounded
only by the two common Bounds of Nature, Superaether, and Earth; and in all the
Elementary World there is Nihil simile, aut secundum. Wherefore Heathen
generaly worshipped him as a God, who yet in the Scale of Nature is far
Inferior to the Vegetative Deitys of Egypt: but they who place him in the
Center of the World, and fasten him to it, though otherwise they almost Idolize
him, yet heerby they even deprive him of that true Glory which God and
Scripture ascribe unto him: and therefore, as I promised, and because it is so
pertinacious a Controversy, I shall now again prove the Earth not to Move about
the Sun, but the Sun and Ether about the Earth; and that the Glory of the
Celestial Bodies is to Move about the Terrestrial, and to bestow their
Influences upon them, and of the Terrestrial to Rest, and receiv all their
Benefits. Thus the Text says expressly, God made the Luminarys to give Light
upon the Earth, whereby they Rule Day and Night, and all the Seasons; and
therefore they are called Ordinances of Heaven, and not of the Earth; as God
says, Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set the Dominion
thereof on the Earth? Now where the Rule and Dominion is, there is also the
Motion and Action, whereby it is exercised; and so thereby the Planets are said
to divide the Light from the Darkness, which the Earth should rather do, if it
did Move about the Sun, and the Sun should only minister, and as it were hold a
Candle to the Earth Moving about it: and it is also said in the First Day, that
God himself so divided the Light from the Darkness before Sun or Moon were made,
and thereby made Day and Night: and as the Sun does now divide the Diurnal
Light from the Nocturnal Darkness by his Light, so does the Moon divide the
Nocturnal Darkness from the Diurnal Light by her Light, and so she was made to
rule the Night, as well as the Sun to rule the Day; which certainly she does by
her Motion about the Earth, and therefore so does also the Sun by his Motion
about the Earth: wherefore Joshua, who was the Disciple and next Successor of
our Divine Philosopher Moses, says Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou
Moon in the valley of Ajalon. Which conjunction of Sun and Moon had been very
incongruous, if the Sun did not Move as well as the Moon Diurnaly, as he does
also Annualy, and she Menstrualy; but Joshua should rather have said, Earth and
Moon stand still, or only Sun stand thou still; for so he had spoke either
properly and truly, or Popularly, as they term it, that is, falsely: whereas it
is most absurd to conceiv him to speak both properly and Popularly, truly and
falsely, at the same time, and in the same words. And whereas they say this was
only Popular speaking, they thereby do acknowledge that Mankind was anciently of
this Opinion before Pythagoras, Leucippus, and other Grecian Wits fansied the
contrary, and therefore propounded it as their Novell Invention; though I am
not satisfied that they affirmed any more then the Diurnal Motion of the Earth
about its own Center, to save, as they supposed, the vast Ether so great a
labor; but I conceiv that they allowed the Sun also to Move Annualy, as well as
the Moon Menstrualy: whereas our new Philosophers (whose Inventions are only
Additions, and their Additions some greater Absurditys) will Move the Earth,
not only Diurnaly, but also Annualy; which is both contrary to Reason and Sens,
as I shall show hereafter, and also most contradictory to Scripture, the
Authority whereof no Christian should contemn, much less oppose; and that says
expressly, The Sun stood still, and the Moon staid: and though it is true, that
the Sun does not Move Diurnaly by his own Planetary Virtue, as he does about
his Axis, and Annualy; but is carried about by the Diurnal Motion of the
Ether, which so Moves by its own Planetary Virtue, as I have showed; yet even
so the Sun Moves together with the Ether Diurnaly; for Motion being, as I
said, only a Transition from Place to Place, though the Sun does not so change
his Place in the Ether by the Diurnal Motion thereof, yet he does in and with
the Ether thereby change his Place in the whole Body of the World, and
consequently Move; as Rare Bodies do Move Localy in ascending upward, though
they are Moved Virtualy by the elevation of more Dens Bodies, as I have showed:
and so also the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Ether itself, staid in all
their Motions, according to the Context. So the Sun stood still in the midst of
Heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole Day; whereby, as Siracides
interprets it, One Day was as long as two: and afterward the whole Chorus of
Heaven proceeded to Move again according to all the several Motions thereof, as
it did before: and certainly the other is Maledicta expositio quae corrumpit
Textum, and destroieth the very Literal meaning of such an Historical and
Memorable Matter of Fact: and though I hope such Interpreters of Scripture may
be true Believers of Matters of Faith, yet the wild Liberty of such
Interpretations does so far render Scripture no Scripture, by an
acknowledgment only of the Letter, which they dare not deny, and yet by denying
the Sens, which they will not admit. Wherefore plainly I will proceed to deal
with them as I would with Heathen, or any others, that is, by Reason and Sens:
Now, whereas they affirm three Motions of the Earth, I will accordingly examine
them, and first clearly explain them, because I doubt they are not sufficiently
understood; nor indeed the very Doctrine of Motion generaly; which some make
only to be Remotion or Distancing of one Body from another, and so confound the
Motion of one Body with the Rest of others, as I formerly observed; and others
confound opposite Motions from East to West, and from West to East; and
generaly all confound Locomotive Action and Passion, which are very different,
that is, one a Moving, and the other a being Moved, as I said, the Sun Moves
Actively in his Annual Motion, and Passively in his Diurnal Motion; and though
both these be only Motions or Transitions in themselves, yet clearly one is an
Active Motion, and the other a Passive Motion; which though they may not differ
as Motions, yet do so differ as they are Active or Passive; and as they
confound Motions, so also the Terms of Barocenter and Center, and Poles, Axis,
and Equator, and the like, as I have showed, which are Aequivocal Names
according to the several Natures of the Things whereof they are expressed; for
so they may be either only Mathematical, as all these may be painted and
described on any Globe of Wood, or Stone, or the like, Indifferently, because
there are no such things Physicaly in the Bodies thereof; or also Physical,
either in Terrestrial Bodies, as Magnets, wherein the Magnetical Virtue does cause
them all to be Physicaly to fix the Magnetical Body accordingly in one
determinate Polar Position; or in Celestial Bodies, as Planets, wherein the
Planetary Virtue does cause them also to be Physicaly to Move the Planetary Body
accordingly in such a determinate Course, as I have formerly showed, and shall
now upon this occasion clearly discover; whereby we may no longer confound
ourselvs with such confused Notions concerning things which are so different
and distinct in their own Natures, and whereby the Truth itself shall evidently
appear. And I shall make the Body of any man himself to be the Diagramm, and
suppose him to throw a Bowl from him, certainly while the Bowl Moves from him
he does not Move from the Bowl, because he stands still in the same place and
at the same distance from the Jack or mark, toward which the Bowl runeth, and
which does not stay in the same place where it was, and so certainly if the Sun
Move about the Earth, the Earth does not Move about it. Again, I will suppose
his Right hand to be East, and his Left West, and his Face before, and his Back
Behind; and so let him throw the Bowl with his Right hand forward, or before
his Face, toward his Left hand; this, as I have supposed, is as a Motion from
East to West: but if he be an Ehud, or Scaevola, let him throw the Bowl with
his Left hand forward, or before his Face, toward his Right hand, and then
this, as I have supposed, will be Motion from West to East, which certainly is
an opposite Motion to the other; for so if two several Bowls were thrown at the
same time by two several men, as before, in the same Line, they would meet and
oppose one another: but if the first Right-handed man, after he had thrown the
Bowl from his Right hand before his Face to his Left hand, should with his Left
hand proceed to throw it behind his Back to his Right hand again; though this
be from Left to Right, yet it is still from East to West, and not opposite to
the former Motion; because that was before the Face, and this is behind the
Back, and so only a continuation of the former Motion, and the Circle that it
describes: and if two several men should in the same Line so throw one Bowl
before his Face to his Left hand, and another behind his Back to his Right
hand, yet they should never meet, nor oppose, but follow one another: and so
the Sun Moves about the Earth from East to West, and not from West to East,
but Diurnaly. B^t now we will also suppose the Earth Moving about the Sun to be
as the Bowl, or a Globe, and to have correspondent Points described on it,
whereof the East shall be India, the West Spain, the Forepart Aethiopia, and the
Backpart Guiana, according to such their Position and Illumination by the Sun,
which as we supposed before, to be as the Bowl, so now we will suppose to be as
the Body; and we all know, and agree, that the Earth is Daily Illuminated in
India before it is Illuminated in Aethiopia, and in Aethiopia before Spain, and
in Spain before Guiana, and so from East to West: wherefore India, or the East
part of the Earth, being next to the Sun, whereby it may be Illuminated, we
must also suppose the Sun Illuminating it to be West, because it is opposite to
it; and then the Earth being in the same Position in itself (as certainly it
must be, whether it Move about the Sun, or the Sun about it) that is, having
Aethiopia as its forepart, and Gu^ana its Backpart, as before, and without any
Inversion of the Poles, or making Aethiopia, which was the Forepart, to be the
Backpart, and Guiana, which was the Backpart, to be the Forepart, it must Move
itself Diurnaly from West to East, that is from a West Point of the Vbi of the
Sun toward an East Point thereof, whereby Aethiopia being the Forepart must be
next Illuminated, as before, and not Guiana. Thus also in the Annual Motion of
the Sun about the Earth, it Moves in the Zodiak from Aries to Cancer* and from
Cancer to Libra, and from Libra to Capricorn; or from West to East, that is,
from Spain, or the West Point of the Earth, toward the East, by Aethiopia; and
not by Guiana, which is from East to West, as I have showed: Now, if we suppose
the Earth, as the Bowl, to Move about the Sun, as the Body Annualy, and the Sun
to be in the Center, and the Earth in the Z^d^ak, keeping the same Position as
before, that is, having Aethiopia as the Forepart, and Guiana as the Backpart,
we must suppose an East Point in the Vbi of the Sun, opposite to Spain, or the
West Point in the Earth, and then the Earth must Move from that East Point to
the West, whereby Aethiopia may be next opposite to the Sun, and not Guiana;
for as East is Relatively opposite to West, and West to East, so the
Correspondent Points of the Sun and Earth must be Relatively East and West, and
opposite one to another; and so consequently must their Motions be Relatively
opposite: and however we may call East West, or West East, or that which is
Relatively East in respect of one Body, may be West in respect of another, yet
in the same respect it cannot be both East and West; nor the same Motion in the
same respect both from East to West, and from West to East; but as such, they
must necessarily be different and opposite. Thus by fixing four such
Correspondent Points in the Body or Ubi of a Globe or Circle, we may fix our
apprehensions of the Position, or Motion thereof. And though thus far I
acknowledge that the Phenomenon generaly may be solved, if either we should
suppose the Sun to Move about the Earth from West to East, or the Earth about
the Sun from East to West Diurnaly, supposing also Aethiopia to be the
Backpart, and Guiana to be Forepart, which are as different and opposite
Positions one way, as East and West are the other way; yet certainly the
particular Phenomenon of that Position cannot be solved both ways, because it
is only one way, and not the other: for though we may call the Forepart the
Backpart, or the Backpart the Forepart, or they may be so in other Relative
respects, (which plainly proves Place to be such a Relative Position, as I have
showed) yet they cannot be so in one and the same respect: whereas certainly the
Real Position of each of the Bodies of the Sun and Earth, whatsoever it be, is
one and the same, and not different and opposite to itself; but the Position of
one is Relatively different and opposite to the Position of the other: and so
consequently are there Motions. Thus also I grant, that though the Sun, which,
I say, Moves from West to East Annualy about the Earth, should Realy Move about
it from East to West without any supposed variation of the Position thereof,
whereby the Sun, proceeding from Libra to Cancer, should first Illuminate
India, or the East, and next Aethiopia, or the Forepart, and not Guiana, or the
Backpart, yet the Phenomenon generaly might be thereby solved, and there should
be the like Aequinoxes, Solstices, and all other intermediate Illuminations,
throughout the Year, in all the Earth; but this particular Phenomenon can not
be solved thereby; for since we know that India is first Illuminated, and
Guiana next Annualy, by the Sun passing from Spain to Aethiopia, and so to
India and Guiana, India cannot be first Illuminated, and Aethiopia next; because
such different and opposite ways of Illumination cannot be without different
and opposite Motions of the Illuminator, that is, of the Sun about the Earth;
and such different and opposite Motions cannot be at the same time in the same
Bo^y of the Sun, and in the same Relative respect to the Body of the Earth. And
so it may be, though we suppose the Earth to Move Annualy about the Sun one way
or other. Thus whereas it is said, that whether the Sun Move about the Earth, or
the Earth about the Sun one way or other, the Phenomenon will be the same, it
is true generaly of such as are Relatively the same one way or other, (as it is
so in all such Relations) but not of such particular Phenomenon in themselves
Positively, which must be only such as they are, and cannot be otherwise. But
this I only premise, and do not insist upon either of these two Motions
Diurnal, or Annual; because, as we do affirm two Active Motions in the Sun, that
is, one about his own Axis, and the other in his Zodiak or Circle which he
describes, and which is his Annual Motion; and though indeed the other be not
his own Diurnal Motion Actively, but the Motion of the Ether, yet we cannot
deny, that it may be supposed that there are two such Motions in the Earth,
which therein may be Annual and Diurnal Actively; and both these Motions must be
supposed, because though the Sun cannot Illuminate the Globe of the Earth
standing still, and only by turning about his own Axis, but must be Moved about
by the Ether Diurnaly; nor otherwise then by describing a Circle about it
Annualy; yet the Globe of the Earth may be Illuminated by the Motion of the
Earth itself about its own Center toward the Sun standing still; but the great
Criterion, as I conceiv, is, that whereas only two Motions are ascribed to the
Sun, and a third to the Ether, which is another Body Moving also the Sun in
and with itself, whether the Earth alone can have all these three Motions in
itself, as it must have to solv the Phenomenon of the very Motion thereof. And
now I shall first prove this third Motion to be Necessary, and afterward to be
both Absurd, and Impossible; lest having showed the Absurdity and Impossibility
any may afterward deny or doubt the Necessity thereof. And here again I shall
make himself that denies or doubts it to be the Diagramm; and let him place
a Terrestrial Globe, how he pleases, on one of his hands, supposing it to turn
round also of itself about, according to its own Equator, like the supposed
Diurnal Motion thereof with either Pole toward his Body, as if the Earth were in
Cancer, or Capricorn, and suppose his Body to be the Sun, and so let him turn
his hand with the Globe on it from the Right part of his Body toward the Left,
or from East to West, like the supposed Annual Motion of the Earth in the
Zodiak thereof, without any third Motion to Incline the Poles one way or other;
and then the same Pole thereof, which was Inward or next to the Body, or S^n,
will still be so, and it will not be varied by either of the other two Motions;
and so only that Hemisphere, whether Arctike, or Antarctike, should be
Illuminated, both Diurnaly, and Annualy, and not the other at any time, which
is manifestly falls: wherefore to solv this there must Necessarily be a third
Motion supposed to Incline it, which I shall therefore call Inclinatory; and
which he may also add to the other two, by turning the Pole that is toward his
Body with his other hand, (while he turns the Globe, as before, from Right to
Left, or from East to West,) equaly the other way, that is, from Left to Right,
or from West to East, according to the Meridian of the Globe; which though the
same way from West to East, is another Motion, Annualy, and not Diurnaly; nor
according to the Equator thereof, like the supposed Diurnal Motion, and
opposite to the Annual Motion; and by this third Inclinatory Motion the other
Pole will also be turned toward the Body or Sun, and consequently the other
Hemisphere also Illuminated, but without such Inclination the Phenomenon cannot
be solved. And now I shall show the Absurdity of such a supposed third Motion
of the Earth, if it were Possible in Nature. We all agree that the Earth is
Magnetical, or that like every Magnet, or Terrella it has two Poles or Polar
Points, exactly North and South, without any the least Inclination or Variation
in themselves, either toward East, or West; and nothing else can make the Earth,
which is the great Magnet so to Incline or vary from the Polarity thereof, which
is according to its own Natural Position; though less Magnets may be Inclined
or varied by greater, or by being fixed in a contrary Position. Now as these
two Polar Points must be Correspondent to two such Points in the Body of the
Superaether, if that be Immovable, as we suppose, or in the Vbi thereof, in the
Position of the Whole, though the Parts may Move round therein; so also to two
like Points in the Ether, which, if the Axis of the Earth were produced beyond
the Poles thereof through the Ether to the utmost Circumference of the Globe of
the World, it must Intersect, and so Terminate in two such Points in the utmost
Superficies of the Superaether: though these two Points or Poles of the
Superaether may be only Mathematical; and however some deny that there are two
such Physical Points or Poles of Ether to direct the Motion thereof, as I have
showed, yet generaly it is conceived that there is some Physical Correspondence
between them, and the Poles of the Earth; and therefore some assign the
Influence thereof, or of some Northstarr about the North Pole, to be the Cause of
the Polarity of the Earth; and others ascribe it to some Northern and Southern
Atoms, flowing and reflowing thence forward and backward, I know not how; and
every Astronomer tells us that there are such Poles, Axis, and Equator of the
Ether. All which Opinions, whether true or falls, presuppose such Poles or
Points in the Ether, and that they some way or other Correspond with the Poles
of the Earth, which this Hypothesis of the Inclinatory Motion of the Earth does
deny, and suppose only a Northern and Southern Hemisphere of the Ether, to
which the respective Poles in the Earth may point and Correspond in every Part
and Point thereof, according to such an Inclinatory Motion; whereby if an Axis
were produced beyond the Poles of the Earth to the Ethereal Hemispheres, each
Pole so produced would vary through all the sixteen Points or more of each
Hemisphere; as a Directory Needle does, when it is Moved violently from North
to South, vary each of the Poles thereof through the sixteen Points or more of
each side of the Compass: but as the Terrella or Needle does not Naturaly so
vary in the least manner from the North and South Points, wherein only it
rests, so it is most Absurd to affirm that the whole Magnetical Earth does so
vary, or has any other Position then exactly North and South: for, as I have
before showed, though the Body of a Magnet may indeed be so varied, and that
part which was Northern become Southern, by the Magnetical Virtue removing in
it; yet the Magnetical Virtue itself is always and only Polar, that is, exactly
North and South, and cannot be otherwise, for then it should ceas to be
Magnetical, which must also be Polar Naturaly: and the Magnetical Virtue of the
great Magnet the Earth is Inalterable by any greater Power in Nature, which
might remove it, as appears by the Inclinatory Needle, which always conformably
Inclines to the same two Points of the Body of the Earth, which are also the
two Poles of the Magnetical Virtue thereof. But now I shall prove this
Inclinatory Motion of the Earth to be Inconsistent with the Diurnal Motion
thereof, and therefore Impossible: for it is about its own Center according to
the Meridian of its own Body, as the other is also about its own Center
according to the Equator of its own Body; which two Motions of the same Body
at the same time are Inconsistent, and consequently Impossible. I have already
showed how a Body at the same time may Move about its own. Axis according to
the Parts, and also Progressively according to the Whole; as a Cart-wheel
Moves running down a hill; or any Planet Moving about its own Axis, and also
Progressively in the Circle that it describes: and so also the Motion thereof
about its Axis may be one way, as from East to West, and the Progressive Motion
the other way, as from West to East; as suppose an undershot Wheel running down
a declive Chanel of Water, which shall also carry it about its own Axis one
way, while it runs down the other way: and so the handle of a Q^ern may be
Moved Progressively one way, and yet Directed or Inclined about its own Axis
the other way, or a Turbo, or Top, set up by the Right hand drawing back the
Scutica, or Slash, wound about it, is turned about its own Axis back again from
the Left hand to the Right hand; and yet it may be also whipped Progressively
from the Right hand to the Left hand: And the Satellites about a principal
Planet do describe Hemitrochoids, as I may so term them, whereby it most
evidently appears, that they are not, nor can they possibly be so Moved by the
Spheres, for it is not only by a Circular, but a Progressive Motion; so as if
while by the Axis a Quernstone were drawn forward Circularly, by the Handle it
should be also Moved round about the Axis; the Handle would describe such an
Hemitrochoid about the Axis. Also I grant that three, or more, several Motions
may be in the same Body at the same time, by several Movers: as suppose a Ship
sailing round, and describing a Circle Zodiacaly, like the Annual Motion of the
Earth; and a Globe Moving in the Ship about its own Axis according to the
Equator thereof, like the Diurnal Motion of the Earth; and a Fly Moving upon
the Globe according to the Meridian thereof, like the Inclinatory Motion thereof;
the Fly does not only so Move upon the Globe, but is also Moved by the Globe
according to the Motion thereof, and the Globe, and consequently the Fly, by the
Ship according to the Motion thereof: and so there may be in the same Body at
the same time as many several Motions as you pleas; for the Body does not Move
itself Actively according to all these Motions, but is also Moved Passively by
others; which is as great a difference, as there is between Action and Passion,
as I have showed. Now, though I grant, that there may be an Active Motion of
the Body itself according to the Parts about its own Axis, and according to the
Whole Progressively, either in a Direct, or Circular Progression, yet I deny
that the same Body at the same time can Actively Move itself any more then
these two several ways; as that while it Moves about its Center one way, it can
also Move about its Center any other way, or that while it Moves Progressively,
according to any Line, Direct, or Circular, one way, it can Move Progressively
according to any other Line another way: which plainly is as Impossible, as
that the same Body at the same time should be in several Places; for so indeed
it must be, either according to the Parts, if it could so Move about its
Center, for then the same Part must be in or upon several Points at the same
time; or according to the Whole, if it could so Move Progressively; for then
the Whole must be in or upon several Lines at the same time: and it may be
tried by a round Bullet of Iron or Lead marked with the two Poles, and an
Equator, and Meridian, and then place it on a declive Board on either of the
Poles, and it will run round according to the Meridian, from Pole to Pole, by
the Gravity thereof; but if by the Prepotence of your hand you set it up like a
Top according to the Equator, with one Pole on the Board, as before, yet it
will not run round, as before, according to the Meridian from Pole to Pole, but
slide down turning round according to the Equator only upon that one Pole,
because it cannot Move both ways at the same time, though it does Move about its
Axis according to the Equator by the Impressed Motion, and Progressively
downward by the Gravity at the same time; but as it cannot then Possibly Move
Progressively any other way then downward, or in or upon any other Line at the
same time then as it does then Move: so neither can it Move about its Axis any
other then one and the same way that it does Move at the same time. And so, as
I have showed, though there may be supposed a Diurnal Motion of the Earth about
its own Center according to the Equator, and an Annual Motion Progressively in
the Zodiak or Circle that it describes, yet there cannot also be a third
Inclinatory Motion about the Center according to the Meridian; because there
cannot be two Motions about several Axes thereof according to the Meridian and
Equator, or about the Center of itself, as I said: especialy since the Diurnal
Motion of the Earth must be about the Axis according to the Equator, and the
Inclinatory about the Center according to the Meridian, not only thus severaly,
but one Diurnaly, and the other Annualy, as I have said; (whereby it should
Move both slower and faster about its own Cen^er at the same time, which is
Impossible, otherwise then by an Epicyclicous Motion, as I showed in a Quern)
and that this is an Amechanon, I appeal to any Mechanike, or to any who shall
Mechanicaly try, to make a Terrestrial Globe so to Move the three several
supposed ways, or indeed any two several ways about any two several Axes of its
own Body at the same time (as certainly none can Move by two several
Progressive Motions at the same time) without several Movers, as is aforesaid:
so that though all the Relative Phenomenon of Ether or Earth may be solved by
the Motion of either of them, yet the three supposed Motions of the Earth
itself cannot be solved: whereas the Motion of the Sun about his Axis, and also
Progressively in the Zodiak Annualy, and his being Moved and carried about
Diurnaly by the Ether, which is another Mover; and so of Venus and Mercury
Moving about him, as any other Satellites about other Planets, Progressively,
and being also Moved and carried about Diurnaly with him by the Ether, are
easily solved Primo Intuitu, and according to the plainnes and facility of
Nature, without such Inconceivable, and Impossible, Inclining, and Distorting
of the Earth or their Brains, as others have vainly done, and can never
approve, unless they also find out some other Mover to carry about the Earth,
as the Ether does the Sun; which certainly may not be the Ether, because they
affirm it to be Immovable; nor the Air, nor Water, which have no such Diurnal
Motions themselves. Wherefore though Scripture, and the Verdict of all Mankind
generaly besides themselves, were sufficient to turn the Balance and determine
against such an Hypothesis, whereof they can never be satisfied, that it is so,
but only suppose that it may be so; yet consydering that I have to deal with
such Empirical Philosophers, who make Sens alone to be both their Text and
Topikes, I have doubly and thus largely proved it against them that it is not,
nor cannot be so; and though this last Ratiocination be also a Sensation, or a
Mathematical and Mechanical Demonstration, yet I shall add one Sensible
Experiment more, which is agreed by all, and that is the Motion of the Sun
about its own Axis by his own Planetary Power; whereby it plainly appears to be
Actively Motive in itself, and as a Wheel that may be Moved round by another
Passively, may by the same Passive Motion be also Moved Progressively, (and so
all Coaches and Carts are Moved or drawn by Beasts) so the Sun may, and does,
by the same Planetary Virtue, whereby he Moves himself about his Axis, Move
also Progressively in the Zodiak (though not in like manner, or by such
proportionable Circumvolutions) by his own Motive Power, which apparently he
has in himself: and so the Moon also Moves about the Earth, and the
Satellites about a principal Planet, and other Planets about the Sun; which
plainly shows that these Aetheruli are Motive, and so indeed are all the rest,
and Ether itself; whereas Magnets, or Terrellae, as I have showed, though they
have Verticity, yet cannot thereby Move once round about their Center, nor at
all about their Magnetical Axes; and though they have a Magnetical Concursion,
yet one of them cannot thereby Move once round about the other, by the
Magnetical Virtue of one or both of them. Wherefore the Earth is only a Magne^,
which cannot Move round by its own Magnetical Virtue, and the Ether, and
Aetheruli, Planets, which do so Move round by such several Motions perpetualy:
and therefore we ought to ascribe these Motions to Ether, and not to Earth;
because the Motion of either may solv the Phaenomen^; and most Sensibly and
confessedly the Aetheruli are so Motive, and the Terrellae are not; and so the
Motion of the Ether and Aetheruli does sufficiently solv them without any
Motion of the Earth: and whereas others would therefore ascribe Motion to the
Earth, because the Motion of that alone may suffice without the several Motions
of all the Ether, and so many Aetheruli, they plainly contradict the Text
(which says, God set them in the Firmanent of Heaven to give Light upon the
Earth, (that is, that both the Firmament of Heaven, and all the Luminarys
therein, thus by Moving about this one Terraqueous Globe, might give Light upon
it by their Rays passing through the Diaphanous Air unto it, as so many Lines
from the Circumference to the Center) and also the Reason of their very Nature,
which is most Motive of all the Elementary Bodies, and likewise Sens itself,
which discovers them to be Mobile. Others suppose the Earth should be more
Mobile, because it is less then most of the Luminarys, (which I believ was the
first occasion of this Error) but they consider not also, that it has the
least Motive Virtue, which in the Ethereal Bodies is more proportionable to
their Bulk; and so the Sun is fitly compared to a Strong man, or Giant, running
his Race, which he can do more swiftly then the Dull and Dwarfish Earth. But
their grand Argument, and that which they esteem their most beautiful Helena,
(though it be as falls and adulterine) is the Orderly and Circumferential
Situation of the Planets in their Spheres about the Sun as the Center; whereof
they make the Earth to be one: but here again the Moon does break the Chorus;
because she Moves about the Earth, and not about the Sun, as the rest, and so
the Sun with them also about the Earth; and therefore it is said, that God made
these two great Lights, to rule the Day and Night upon the Earth (as they
principaly so Move about the Earth, and all others about the Sun) and they; and
all the others, were set by him in such Posit^ons, and to run such Courses,
whereby they might be most serviceable to the Earth: nor are there any such
several Spheres in the Ether, as I have showed; but the true Spheres of the
Elementary Globe are most Orderly and Circumferentialy situated about the
Terraqueous Globe* as the Center of them all; without any Eccentricitys,
Epicyclicitys, Hemitrochoids, or the like: and so the Air does encompass it,
and the Ether the Air, and the Superaether the Ether: and thus Spheres
properly and most conformably relate to their inmost Orb, and not all, or any
one Orb in the Ether to the Orb of the Earth: for so one Orb does not relate
unto another, nor can Unequal Orbs so comply, as Concave Spheres, with any Orb;
nor can they otherwise be Centers either of Gravity, or Extension, one to
another; because there can be but one Center to which all Gravia do tend, as I
have showed; and Orbs applied one to another make the greatest Chasms between
them in their Extension. And thus there is the greatest Conformity both of the
Situation of the Elementary Bodies, according to their more or less Density,
downward; and of the Elementary Spirits therein, according to their more or less
Activity, upward; whereas if the Sun should be supposed to be, or have, the
Center of the World in himself, he must also be supposed to be the most Dens
and Dull of all Elementary Bodies, who is the most Glorious and Active of all
Elementary Operators: and as he, and the Moon, so also all the Stars, were
made to divide the Day from the Night, and to be for Signs, and for Seasons,
and for Days, and for Years, which is accordingly performed by their due and
determinate Situations; which however they may appear unto us, yet by their
very various Positions, yea their Eccentricitys, and the like, they do so
produce those varietys of Seasons, and their Annos Saturni, Iovis, and others;
and observe such Orderly Courses, as if we did rightly understand them, we
should easily conceiv, and confess, that it would be a great Monstrosity in any
of them to be placed otherwise. Thus the Sun, who does chiefly excel, and
exceed, all the others in the two principal Ethereal Qualitys, Heat, and
Light, is seated at such a distance, as does best afford to the Terraqueous
Globe a fi^t Temperature thereof, and does Move and is Moved in such Courses,
whereby, though he be but one Luminary, yet his Heat is so distributed and
communicated to all the Globe, that there is no Zone Inhabitable, as was
anciently supposed; and so also his Light in all the Parallels thereof, that in
the whole Year, though not every Day, one has as much of his Principal Light
as another; and they which are farthest from the Equator, and nearer to the
Pole, are also recompensed with more of his Secondary Light, and have longer
Crepusculae.

III. God made two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, and the
lesser Light to rule the Night: that is, the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon
to rule the Night: and whereas they are said to be great Lights, that is no such
Popular Expression as some would have it; for as it is said, so indeed they are
great Positively, though not greater Comparatively then all the others, or so
as the Sun is said to be greater then the Moon, nor are they termed great
Stars, but great Lights, or Luminarys; and so indeed they are greater then any
others: and this is the very sens and meaning of the Expression, according to
the Subject Matter, which is immediately subjoined, the greater Light to rule
the Day, and the lesser Light to Rule the Night: and as they were all made to
give Light upon the Earth, so certainly these two give most Light upon it, the
Sun by Day, and the Moon by Night; and to stop the mouths of all such
Cavillers, it is O^iginaly, not the Greater and Lesser Lights, but the Great
Light and the Little Light; and so indeed they are: and as they are specialy
named, so their special differences from the rest are very consyderable; not
only of the Sun, which are sufficiently noted and acknowledged, but also of the
Moon; as her not Moving about her Axis, her Epicyclicitys, Apogaea, and the
like: and though the Sun is the Illuminator of them all, yet he rules Day
alone by his own Diurnal Light; whereas the Stars attend and assist the Moon in
their Courses and Orders while she rules the Night by the Conjunction of their
Nocturnal Light: but that which is most notable, is her Moving so often
Immediately and only about the Earth, and never about the Sun also, like
others; and it being the very End of the Creation of all the Luminarys to give
Light upon the Earth, this shows her to be another Principal Planet in that
respect, which is the chief End of them all, as well as the Sun; and so indeed
the Sun and Moon do cause more Variations, and greater Effects in the Earth,
then all the Planets and Stars besides; yet as I deny the Earth to be a
Planet, so I do not conceiv that the Moon is any more a Satelles, or Appendix,
of the Earth* then the Sun; though she does Move about it, as the Satellites
seem to do about their principal Planets; which is not by any Magnetical
Emanations of the principal Planets so carrying them about, but by their own
Planetary Virtues so Moving themselves; nor do they Realy Move about them
Circularly as they should, if they were so Moved by them, but by such
Hemitrochoids which they describe, as I have showed, while the principal Planet
Moves in a Line cutting the Perpendicular thereof in the midst between the Basis
and the Zenith; whereby they are sometimes below them, and sometimes above
them, and sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on the other, and so may
seem to Move Circularly: which is no Magnetical Motion, as I shall now show;
and yet they who can solv the Phenomenon by affirming whatsoever they pleas,
will join not only three Elements, which are the very true and real Dividers
and Sharers of the whole Elementary Globe, according to their very different
Natures, Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys, and also more or less Densitys of
their several Bodies, (which are far more evident and consyderable Distinctions
and Heterogeneitys then any greater or less Quantity of Matter, which as such
is always Homogeneous) but also the Moon itself, which is a consydera^le part
of the fourth Element, Ether, into one Magnetical Correspondence and
Combination: Wherefore, as I have proved that the Earth is no Planet, or Moon;
so I will now also prove that the Moon is no Magnet, or Earth: and this I hope
may also serve to disprove any such supposition of any of the other Planets,
which are of the same Ethereal nature with the Moon, and as different from the
Earth. Certainly we thus read that the Earth and all the Elements were made and
perfected before any Planets or S^arrs; which afterward in this Fourth Day were
made to give Light upon the Earth, and not the Earth upon them, or any of them;
and God placed them all in their several Positions about their Centrical Orb,
the Earth, and the other Elementary Spheres about it, before there were any
Positions or Motions of the Planets; and he made Dry Land and Seas in the
Terraqueous Globe, but not in the Moon, or any of them; and so the Earth, and
Waters, and not they, brought forth Grass, Herbs, and F^shes, and Fowls, and
Beasts. And though Superaether, and Angels, be farther removed from us then the
Ether, and Aetheruli; yet we have some Conusance of them, and some Communion
with them, declared in Scripture; but not of any Inhabitants, or such other
things in the Moon, or any other Planets: so that if we will yet oppose Ipse
Dixit to Deus Creavit, we must say, that not God, but Man, made this World in
the Moon: and they who can so Create in it Earth, and Seas, ought also to make
therein Vegetatives, yea Sensitive, and Intellective Inhabitants: for since we
here on Earth, where God has founded his Troop, and made his Plantation both
of Vegetatives, and Animals, have no Use nor Inspection thereof, it must
conformably have its own proper Inhabitants to use and enjoy it, otherwise it
should be so made in vain. Again, the Moon cannot be any such Magnet as the
Earth, which appears plainly by her Motions so often about the Earth, without
Moving once about her own Axis, for such are not Magnetical, nor in any respect
like unto ^he Motion of any Terrella about the Earth, or Needle about a
Terrella, which makes two Revolutions about its own Axis, while it Moves once
round about the other, (like one Wheel with Teeth so Moving about another)
whereby also the South Pole thereof does always comply with the Noth Pole of the
other, and the North Pole with the South Pole of the other, and so all the
other Intermediate Points: and if we say that the Moon has any other
Magnetical Virtue different from that of the Earth, which does so regulate her
own Motions, I grant that both the Moon and all the others, have such proper
Specifical Virtues, as I have showed, and which I Genericaly call Planetary;
and though others may more Genericaly call them all Magnetical, yet I must
affirm them Subalternately to differ, as I have said, and showed that the
Poles, Axis, and Equator, of Ether do from them in the Earth, though they be
both so Denominated Equivocaly. Also it is Sensibly evident that the Moon is
not an Earth, nor the Earth a Moon; because the Moon is Luminous, but the Earth
Opacous, though very much Illustrated by the Sun; which because it is denied,
and will also concern all the other Stars, therefore I more willingly
undertake to prove it; though it be only a Superfoetation of the former Error.
It is expressly said, that God made two great Lights, that is, the Sun, and the
Moon: wherefore the Moon is a Light or Luminary as well as the Sun; and greater
or less Light does not deny, but affirm, the less to be a Light as well as the
greater: and so they are both termed Synonymously and Univocaly Luminaria; and
not the Sun Luminare, and the Moon Speculare, as some men would make her to be:
and so it is said generaly of them and of all the other Planets, and Stars,
Let there be Lights in the Firmament of Heaven; and so indeed is the whole
Ether both Calid and Luminous, though yet less then the Moon or Stars, because
Heat and Light are the common Ethereal Qualitys, though there may be far more
in one Ethereal Body then another, because their Composita are Specificaly
different; but as they are all more Genericaly Ethereal, so they must all have
their Generical Qualitys, without which they should not be Genericaly what they
are; as well as all Vegetatives, and Sensitives, though they differ Specificaly
one from another in their S^mple Substances, and so have their Specificaly
different Spirits, and Spiritual Qualitys, yet must also have such as are
Genericaly Vegetative and Sensitive; otherwise they should not be what they
are, Vegetatives, or Sensitives: and thus indeed they make the Moon to be a
Terrella, and not Ethereal; which they may as well affirm of the Sun, and all
the Aetheruli, and Ether itself, and so make it to be no Ether. And whereas we
Sensibly see the Moon to shine, the Question is, whether she sh^ne by her own
Light, or only by the Solar Rays Reflected from the Earth, whereby the Earth
should give Light upon her? which I have before refuted: nor can it be so
according to Optike Law, if we consider the very great distance between the
Earth and Moon: for though Direct Rays pass from the Center Circumferentialy to
the utmost Sphere of their Activity, as the Solar Rays so Illuminate the Earth,
and the whole opposite Hemisphere; yet Reflex Rays are much shorter, though
very Vivid and quick, because they are so Reduplicated and Conspissated, like
the Horns of a Snail when they are touched; and they are proportionably
stronger as they are nearer to the Reflecting Angle or Point; as we see a
Candle much farther by the Direct Rays then any Object Illuminated thereby by
the Reflex Rays thereof, and the nearer we are to the Object, we see it better.
And so, though it is said, that the Pike of Teneriff may be seen at the
distance of two or three Degrees (as any Eminences of the Earth may be seen so
far as a Line drawn from the Summit thereof will be Tangent upon the Globe of
the Earth, and perhaps somewhat farther by the advantage of Refraction, which
may suffice to render an Object Visible about such a distance as three
Degrees); yet at the first Degree it will be seen very Dull and Obtuse; and
much more at the Second; and he that can see it at the third, Aut videt, aut
vidisse putat, -- though he look upon it at Sunrising or setting, when the Rays
are most Directly Reflected, or with a Telescope, (which does Magnify rather
then Prolong the Reflected Rays); or though the Object be of the greatest
Magnitude, as the Alps, or Apennine, or Rock of Lisbon, and the like; which yet
will never be seen very Lucid or Colorate, but Confused like a Cloud, or Fume;
(yea, though it be Specular) at so great a distance: whereas plainly we see the
Moon walking in Brightness, as it is said of her, with our naked Ey, yea, her
very F^gure and Spotts. Nor is it only by Reflection of the Solar Rays from the
Moon herself, though that be nearer to the Truth, being only by a single
Reflection, whereas the other must be double, first from the Earth to the Moon,
and then from the Moon back again to us on the Earth; wherefore to find out the
Mystery of so clear a Phenomenon, we must consider the Moon in her own Native
Light, which is so great in herself, that thereby she is also Visible unto us,
in an Eclips, in her whole Disk, and that part of her Disk, which is not
Illustrated by the Sun, is Visible sometimes, or with some advantages: and
whereas this Visibility is imputed to the Secondary Light of the Sun, I have
showed that an Object cannot be so far seen by his Principal Light Reflected,
and much less by any Secondary Light. Wherefore certainly she has some Light
in herself, and such as is far greater then the common Light of Ether; because
she may be so seen thereby in the Ether; and yet this Light is far less Lucid
or Visible then when and where she is Illustrated by the Principal Solar Light:
which to explain, we must consider, that she also is Ethereal and Connatural
with the Sun; and so was made one of those Luminarys, which were Created in the
Firmament of Heaven, and set there to give Light upon the Earth, not only
generaly, as all the rest of the vulgar Stars, but more specia^y and
principaly, as she is so called the Queen of Heaven: and so we must conceiv
that they all had not only their own Native Light produced in themselves, but
also adapted so as to Colluminate together, and give Light upon the Earth, as
it is so said of them all together, as well as particularly of the Sun, to rule
the Day, and of the Moon to rule the Night: and thus they were made one general
Constellation, or Host of Heaven, whereof the Sun, who was made to rule the Day
(which is called Light, and in respect whereof the Night and all the Nocturnal
L^ght is Comparatively termed D^rknes, not only as they were so Divided and
Denominated in the First Day, before there were any Moon or Stars to rule the
Night, but now also again in this Fourth Day, wherein the Luminarys were made to
rule over the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the Light from the
Darkness) was made also to be Fountain of Light, generaly as the Ocean, and the
rest as Rivers or Streams of Light; and as all the Luminarys, and
Constellations, have their Influences, so every other Planet, and Starr, and
the whole Ether, had their own Native Light more or less Actualy produced in
themselves; and likewise an aptitude or Potentiality of production of a greater
Lucidity and Emanation thereof, as well as of their Influences, by the Sun,
whereby they also might give Light upon the Earth. And thus, as I have
observed, Univocal Generators do most Effectualy Generate and produce, as Heat
is so said to draw forth Heat; and particularly Colors, which are composed, as
I said, of Lucidity and Opacity, though they be Inherent in the Colorate Bodies,
wherein they are so Mist, and do Subsist; yet being so Mist with Opacity, their
Lucidity is thereby also so Imprisoned or fixed and confined to the Colorate
Body, that it is only Actualy Inherent therein, and cannot issue forth in
Emanan^ Rays, whereby it becomes Visible unto us, until it be Evoked, Excited,
and Assisted, by the External Light: and the more Lucid the Color is, as White,
and the like, the more it is so produced; as Whites are best Marks at a
distance, and a White Horse a better Mark or Guide in a dark Night then a
Black; and the more Light or Rays thereof are cast upon any Colorate Object, the
more are the Visible Species thereof produced; whereas Culinary Lucid Bodies,
which of themselves do Emitt their own Rays, are not Assisted, but rather have
their Visibility Obscured by External Light; especialy if it be greater; as a
Candle in the Sun, and so the Stars and Moon itself above the Horizon before
Sun rising, or setting, are not so Visible as afterward, as Water does quench
the flame of an Haystack, which it before Incensed. Wherefore I thus conceiv,
that the Native Light of the Moon, being not a Culinary, but an Ethereal
Light, Inherent in the Moon itself, is like Color, yet far more Lucid, and so
far more Evoked, Excited, and Assisted, by the Solar Light; as a White Color
is thereby rendered more Visible then Black: and that the Inherent Light of the
Moon, and External Light of the Sun so concurring by their more Connatural
Homogeneitys, do produce and draw forth themselves together to so great a
distance, and with so great a Splendour; and though the Sun does so produce the
Inherent Light of the Moon Positively by his Principal Rays, when they are both
above the Horizon, yet the Moon does not then appear so Visible and Splendid,
because Comparatively she is thereby made far less Visible and Splendid then he
is in himself: for certainly this Lucidity cannot be only from Reflection of
the Solar Rays, whether we suppose the Moon to be Cortical, having Earth and
Seas, like the Terraqueous Globe, which Sensibly does not Reflect very far; or
specular, which may Reflect farther, because the Rays penetrate less and more
Splendidly, in a fit Position to the Ey, being Reflected thereby more equaly;
but it must be also by some Inherent Light which is in the Moon itself, that is
so Collustrated by the Solar Light, and by the Connatural Quality thereof: nor
is it to be Imagined that the highest Planets, and Stars which are at the
farthest distance, and yet Emitt such a Splendid and Vivid Light, should so
shine only by the Reflection of the Solar Light. Now, though there are Spotts
in the middle, and seeming Gibbi in the Circumference of the Moon, (which I
rather conceiv so to appear by such Intervenient Spotts therein) yet this may
not be from any Concavitys in the Body of the Moon, and the unequal Reflection
of the Solar Light thereby; for there are Spotts also in the Sun, whereby his
conversion about his Axis is noted, and yet he shines by his own Light: but I
suppose them to be only less Luminous parts, and such defects of their Native
and Inherent Light, as I doubt much, whether they were so Created in this
Fourth Day: and though Earth which is a Consistent Body may have such Constant
Eminences, and Water some Temporary Waves, yet it has been observed that as
Flame of a Candle, which is somewhat more Rare, is rendered Pyramidal by
Compression of the Ambient Air, so if it be defended by another Intermediate
Flame, as of Spirit of Wine Inflamed, or the like, it will Conglobate within
that Flame. And whereas Saturn is commonly represented Oval, it is said by a
very curious Inspector, that indeed he appears so if you behold him through a
less Telescope, but if through a larger, you may discern two little Aetheruli on
each side of him, and very nearly distant from him, which make him so to appear
when they are beheld together with him Confusedly and Indistinctly. Though I
shall not determine this, or how they might be Composed and Constituted by the
Divine Creator: certainly all the Planets do not Move in exact Circles, but
some of them describe Circles Indented with such Hemitrochoids, as I have
showed: but it shall suffice to have proved that the Moon, and consequently the
Stars have their own Inherent Light as well as the Sun, though perhaps not
Emanant without his Coll^^tration; and so plainly they have their several
Influences, and every one its own Planetary V^rtue Inherent in themselves, which
Moves their own Bodies, because there are such various and several Motions
thereof, which therefore must be caused by various and several Motive Virtues.
The Moon, as I have said, does not Move about her own Axis, but she does Move
very notably and rapidly in her Zodiak Progressively; and, if we compute that
Motion according to all her Revolutions, perhaps as fast as the Sun; which are
the two swiftest Movers Progressively. And the Moon, as she is nearest to us,
so probably she is least Calid and Lucid; wherefore her chief Influence is
observed to be over Moisture; not that she is Moist in herself, which is a
Quality of Water; but as the Sun does by his Heat draw up Vapors, and also
Desiccate or Concremate them, whereby they do not presently return again into
Water, but turn into Dry Exhalations, Clouds, and Motes, whereas more Moist
Vapors and Mists commonly rise when the Sun is set, and in the colder Night;
so the Moon by a more Moderate and Insensible Tepor does draw up more gross
Vapors, which presently return into Dews and Water, and chiefly when she is in
her Apogaea, (as I have said formerly of Tides which are then highest) whereby
the Vapors are not drawn up so high, but the Water (which, as I have observed,
does Naturaly Evaporate, and again return to Water) by her less Heat is less
Desiccated and Suspended; and so the Vapors are lower, and sooner return into
Water again: for though Internal Heat in the Water itself, by Rarefying it,
does help Evaporation, yet any greater External Heat does reduce the Moisture
of the Vapors which it raises to Potentiality in Fume, which is prevented by
the less Heat of the Moon; and ^y this, or some other way unknown to us, the
Moon does very notably Predominate over Moisture; And thus, as Heat and
Moisture are the chief Instruments in Elementary Generations, wherein Cold
serves to temper Heat, and Drines to fix Moisture, so these two chief
Luminarys do most notably Predominate over them, that is, the Sun over Heat,
and the Moon over Moisture, as well as the Sun does rule the Day, and the Moon
the Night.

IV. Besides these two there are five other Principal Planets, as they are
termed, to distinguish them from the other Stars, which are contrarily termed
Fixed; though here they are all comprehended under the common Name of Stars,
and so indeed they are in Nature; though men taking more notice of the Planets,
as nearest to us, and most sensible by us, have formerly Deified them, and
still dote upon them, and so have assigned them their several Spheres, and only
one Eighth Sphere for all the rest, which are Innumerably more; and yet among
the Planets themselves there are found out some Satellites, and perhaps more may
be found out hereafter, though we know them not yet, as others before us did
not know these: and whereas men also have fansied such several Regions of
Ethereal Spheres as are not to be found in Nature, so also such an Orderly and
Uniform Position of the Aetheruli therein, as is indeed contrary to the very End
and Intention of these Luminarys, which, as I have showed, was for the greatest
Variety of Seasons and Influences, and that could not be without their various
Positions and Motions; which I do rather suppose to be so very various and
difform, that like the Motions of F^sh, Fowl, and Beasts, not any one of them
is like to any other, but every one most Regular in its kind, as I have
observed of Mathematical Figures, that is, the Circle, and all Regular
Polygons, which therefore are Asymmetrous; and so are the Aetheruli, because
they are all several Specifical Natures, purposely Created to express such
Varietys, and Conform in their very Difformitys. Certainly their Positions are
all very different and distant, the next to them is the Menstrual Motion of the
Moon, which makes Months, and that also is Incommensurable with either of
them; according to which, besides the Sabbath Day (which was made for Man, or
Mankind generaly; and so Instituted first in Parad^se, and is still kept and
observed by virtue of that first Command, and only the Circumstance of Time
varied, whereby it is exalted from a Rest of Creation to a Rest of Redemption)
and also the Annual Feasts, and Jubiles, according to the Motion of the Sun,
there were also Monthly Feasts in the New Moons, and the like, according to the
Course of the Moon, appointed by God for the Jews. And because, as we cannot work
according to Mathematical Exactnes, so also we cannot know Astronomical
scrupulosity; therefore the Priests were to blow with the Trumpets, as it is
said, In the Day of your gladness, and in your Solemn Days, and in the Beginings
of your Months, to call the Assemblys, and give notice to the People when they
should begin them. And so also there were Weights and Measures of the
Sanctuary, or there reposited as Sacred things; as it is said, A just Weight
and Balance are the Lords: and therefore the Standards thereof were kept by the
Priests: but certainly these Measures could not Commensurate that which is
Naturaly Incommensurable: and so it is supposed, that whereas it is said of the
Lavacre or Brazen Sea, that it was Ten Cubits from Brim to Brim, or from Lip to
Lip, round in Compass, and a Line of Thirty Cubits did compass it about, that
it was so not Exactly, but Rotunde, according to the common Mechanical Account:
which because more Curious Mathematicians will not accept; and thereupon insult
over Scripture; and from this one Expression would prove all others therein to
be Popular, and themselves to be the only Exact men; I shall here farther examine
it; and desire them to reconsyder how it was a Vessel having Brims, or Lips;
and so is said to be Ten Cubits from Lip to Lip Inclusively, as A Capite ad
Calcem is also so rendered Inclusively, -- Talos a Vertice pulcher ad imos: and
the Compass of the Body of the Vessel itself was under the Lips Exclusively; as
it follows, and under the Brim of it round about Knops compassing it, ten in
a Cubit, compassing the Sea round about: whereby also we may understand what
was the particular Breadth of the Brim or Lip; that is, almost a quarter of a
Cubit (but never according to Mathematical Exactnes) and therefore the Measure
thereof is not otherwise particularly mentioned; as it is of the Body, that the
Thicknes of it was an Hands breadth. But I shall leav these Disquisitions to
more learned Critics, who, if they pleas to understand Scripture, not
according to such Malign, but Benign Interpretations, shall find therein not
only Verity, but the greatest Curiositys couched in the most Mysterious
Expressions: and so I profess, and hope to show through this whole D^scours,
that when Scripture and Nature are thoroughly examined and sifted to the utmost,
they will be found to be most Concordant, one with another; and all Scripture,
as well as Nature, with itself.

V. Though, as I have showed, there are no new Stars Created, nor any
Annihilated, as some affirm of the Pleiades, or Seven Stars, as they are
commonly called; but as Ovid observed of them in his time, Quae septem dici,
sex tamen esse solent; so long before him in Scripture they are called only by
the Name of their Constellation, and no where Numericaly Seven, as Translators
render them; yet since the Heavens as well as the Earth were cursed for Man's
sake, there are also some Anomala and Meteors in Ether; and such as are not
like the Starr of our Savior, which was made by a Miraculous production; but
Monstrous and Prodigious; whereof the Ancients make mention, as that which
appeared at the death of Julius Caesar, to celebrate his Exit, as the other did
our Saviors Intrat; which was some extraordinary Comet in the Ether, where
they denied any Comets to be, and affirmed it Ingenerable and Incorrptible,
both in the whole, and in every part thereof; whereas now plainly there are found
to be in it both Maculae, and Comets: and the Maculae are such Luminous Flocci
as are either Ethereal Effluvia of the Luminarys, or perhaps sometimes
Confluvia of the Ethereal Matter, and of which, as I suppose, the Comets are
Composed, as Aereal Meteors are of Vapors: but there is no mention of any such
in the Six Days Works, which were all Good and Perfect; though, as I have
showed, there was in the first Day a Confluvim of the Ethereal Light, which
was afterward in this Fourth Day divided and formed into the several Luminarys,
and which was the Goodness and Perfection thereof. But as all Ether is Motive
and Planetary, and every Luminary therein has a proper Specifical Compositum
and Qualitys, as well as it is Genericaly Ethereal; so I suppose these
Redundances and Excrescences thereof, being Composed of several parts of them,
have accordingly Mist Bodies, and Planetary Qualitys, whereby they perform their
odd Motions, and Courses; and when this Meteorical Composition is dissolved,
then they disappear and ceas. And there are not only such Maculae contiualy in
Ether, which do not always Conglobate into Comets, but very often less Comets
not so much observed by us, or not on Land, as Seamen say they see them at Sea:
but such as are greater, and perhaps more Concocted, are by us commonly called
Blazing Stars; which indeed are no true Stars, but only Stellae fatuae, (as I
may call them, alluding to the like Meteors in the Air, which we call Ignes
fatui) and yet differing from Stellae cadentes therein, which are so called from
their falling again to the Earth; being Composed of Culinary Flame; whereas
Comets being Composed of Ethereal Substance, when they are Corrupted, are
resolved into it again; and they differ from the true Stars, in that they are
so Composed and Dissolved only by Meteorical Generation and Corruption, and not
by any Improper Creation, as the others: and though they also be Illustrated by
the Sun, and thereby have a notable Eman^nt Light, yet they are far more Dull
and Obtuse; so that as the Sun is the Universal Illustrator of all this
Spectable World, he does more or less Illustrate every Spectable thing, as it
has more or less of the Connatural Lucidity in it; and thus the Terreous
Opacity, which is contrary to Light, does Reflect, Refract, and Distend it, as
I have formerly showed; and Black, which has most Opacity in it, does engage
the Light in the Encounter, and more detein it thereby; Also though the Solar
Rays be not Engaged, as I said before, in the Opacous Body, nor partly
detained, as in Reflection from the Opacous Fundus of a Diaphanous Body, as of
a Jewel, Looking-glass, or the like; but may be otherwise Reflected from any
Polite Body, as a Steel Speculum, or the like; yet they are thereby Retunded,
and their Reflection much abated: and the strongest and farthest Reflection, or
rather Collustration is, as I said before, when the Solar Rays meet with such
Lucidity, as is more Ethereal and Connatural unto themselves: for indeed that
is not so properly a Reflection or Repuls, as an Influxion and Concurrence,
like a great Stream that falls into the Channel of a less, and so both flow
together. Now the Inherent Light of Comets being not only Ethereal, but
Meteorical, and more Heterogeneous, the Solar Rays do not so Collustrate and
Colluminate with it, as with the perfect Luminarys: and this also proves to me
that there is such an Inherent Light in all the other Aetheruli themselves,
because the Sun does accordingly Collustrate and Colluminate with them
proportionably to their own Light in several manners and degrees; as in the
Fixed Stars, in the other Planets less, and in the Comets yet less; but least
with the Inherent Light of Ether itself. And perhaps the Solar Rays are tinged
and varied, by being so Mist with the Stellant in their Emanations, which he
causes thereby, and whereby they appear so very different: certainly the
Inherent Light of Stars is much greater and stronger then of Comets, which the
Sun partly penetrateth, as he does a Globule of Glass; for a stronger Light
Inherent does Terminate and not Transmitt the Solar Rays, as we cannot see
through a greater Flame of Light, as we may partly through a less, as through
the Flame of Spirit of Wine, or the like; though any other such Light makes
Objects to appear very strange and ghastly, as the Efflammation of Furnaces,
and the like. Now the Solar Rays which are thus Transmitted, but not so freely,
through the Comet, as through the Ether, by that Offense and Interruption do,
as I have showed, Converge, and so go out at the farther Vmbo more sharp and
comprest, and then again dilate themselves, which is their Cauda, in the more
Rare Medium of the Ether, like Comprest Vapors which so issue out of an
Aeolipile; and they are always in that part which is avers from the Sun: whereas
the Moon, though she has Spotts, which are less Luminous then her other parts,
yet does not Transmitt the Solar Rays through them; which shows even those
Spotts to have more Inherent Light in them then Comets, though they may not
seem to us so Lucid Compaparatively, in respect of her other more Luminous
parts. Also Comets are Globular as well as any other Luminarys, and they are
not only carried about by the Ether as well as Stars, but have their own
Altitudes, and proper Courses, as they happen to be placed in the Ether in
their Generative Composition, according to which they also Move by their Mist
Planetary Virtue; as God first set the Stars in their Stations and Orders,
according to which they perform their Courses by their several Planetary
Virtues. And thus indeed according to Statike Law, if any Body Move in another
by any stronger Spiritual Potentia then the Pondus of its Body would cause it to
Sink or Swim in the other, it will neither Sink nor Swim, but Move
Progressively according to the Moving Potentia: as a Man so swims in Water by
fitly Moving his Body with a stronger Potentia then the Pondus of his Body in
that Medium would cause it to Sink; and so also a Bird flys in the Air: and
though I conceiv the Stars to be Fluid as well as the Ether, and Ether as
well as the other Expansum of Air, yet I also acknowledge, that if they were
Dens and Terreous Bodies, yet some of them, as the Sun and Moon, and others,
might notwithstanding so Move in the Rare Ether, by their very rapid Motions,
according to their own several Courses, and so perhaps, not Sink in it: though
otherwise, I say, that no Body whatsoever, Magnetical, Planetary, or Sensitive,
can Move itself without a Fulciment to keep it from sinking; which Invincibly
proves that the Earth cannot so Move, unless, it being most Consistent, Dens,
and Heavy, could by any Planetary Virtue in itself be so supposed to Move in
the most Rare and Fluid Ether, as that it should not Sink therein, by supposing
also such a rapid Motion thereof Annualy, as must be admitted according to the
Zodiak, and Circle, which it is said to describe, and which according to the
Phenomenon one way or other, must be the same with that wherein the Sun does
Realy Move; whereby that Motion will be found to be, as I said, almost fifty
Miles in a Minute; and then unless we can also suppose that the Earth would
sink and fall so fast through the Ether in the very first Degree of the
Velocity of the Motion of Descent, which must be swifter then the aforesaid
Motion, it will not so fall or sink: which to estimate more exactly I leav to
the Curious. But whereas Judicial Astrologers pretend to foretell by the Stars,
and especialy by Comets the Fates and Fortunes of Men, yea, their very
Imaginations, Affections, and Inclinations, and, which is yet more, Divine
Counsels and Intentions, it is certainly most Unchristian and Intolerable: for
Originaly God made the Stars to be for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days,
and for Years, which is therefore so Emphaticaly repeated; not as Ostents or
Portents, whereof there could be no use in that State of Perfection, but for
Signification and Indication, as well as Causation, of Seasons, Days, and
Years, which were certain, constant, and orderly, when there were yet no
Meteors in Earth, or Air, and much less any Changes, Confusions, and Disorders,
in the Superior Natures; nor did they then portend that greatest Change, and
most Dire Event that ever was, or shall be in the World, which was the fall of
Angels and Men; otherwise themselves might easily have forseen it: wherefore
certainly they were not first Created to signify any such Contingencys, but
only Natural Futuritys: and now whereas they affirm, that the Stars do by their
Influences govern the Bodily Humors, and by them the Minds and Spirits of Men,
let them show us the Experiment of that, which they make to be the Foundation
of their Art, and (as it is said of Thales) foretell what will be dear next
year: whereas their Prognostications of any such Contingent things in their
yearly Almanaks are generaly as falls as true; though I grant, as our Savior
says, that such who are weatherwise may probably foretell what shall so ensue
the next Day, or some such short time after: In the Evening ye say it will be
fair weather, for the Sky is red; and in the Morning it will be foul weather to
day, for the Sky is red and lowering. Thus also they represent Eclipses as very
Prodigious things, which yet they know are most Natural, otherwise they could
not so foretell them; and if Man had still continued in Paradise, they must
naturaly have been; yea, it were the greater Monster and Prodigy, if they
should not so constantly happen. And though Comets, which are Extraordinary,
may produce Extraordinary Effects, as other Meteors, Thunders, Earthquakes, and
the like, and are sure Signs of what is past, tha^ is, the Fall of Man, which
has been the Cause and Occasion thereof, and so are to be regarded; and may be
also Extraordinary Ostents of Gods future Judgments; yet it is also as true,
that we cannot read this Handwriting on the Wall of Heaven without a
Supernatural Revelation or Indigitation; as the Magi were directed by Angels,
(of whom it is also said they were warned in a Dream) otherwise by all their
Art they could never have found out the very Town, yea the very House in the
Town, yea the very Place in the House where the Child lay, and over which the
Starr is said to have stood: so neither could the most Curious or Cabalistical
Judgment of any Man have foretold the Retrocession of Hezekiah's Sickness by the
Retrogradation of the Sun ten Degrees on the Dial of Ahaz: and the Signs in
Heaven and Earth at our Saviors Death probably were as Miraculous as the Starr
at his Birth; and that Darkness no common Eclips of any Luminary, but an
Obtenebration of the Ether itself over all that Land, as the Earthquake was
also therein; and all the Signification thereof was plainly declared by his
present Suffering, which made the Centurion cry out, Truly this was the Son of
God! Wherefore, though I honor Natural Astronomy, and only wish that it were
rectified according to this Divine Rule of Scripture, (as I would also gladly
be corrected by it in any mistakes of the Natural Phenomenon, or any
Expressions thereof) so with the Scripture and all Christianity I must conclude
against all such Judicial Astrology, as an Heathenish Artifice, whereof we are
expressly forewarned, that we should not be dismayed at the Signs of Heaven,
for the Heathen are dismayed at them: and Let now the Astrologers, the
Starrgazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand up, and show how they can
maintein the Veracity of their Art against the Divine Verity. And now I shall
return again to such Materialists, who though they cannot affirm, that because a
whole Body is Moved up or down, this way or that way, therefore it cease to
be the same, yet can suppose, that if the parts in the Body be Moved in such a
manner, as neither they nor we can discern them, there being a new Corporeal
Texture, Schematism, and Mechanism thereof, it shall therefore acquire a new
Individual Spirit and Spiritual Qualitys, by such Local Motion, as it does by
Physical Generation and Corruption; which may be best Experimented in the vast
Body of Ether, wherein there are also so many Orbs continualy Moving so many
several ways, and yet they do not therefore ceas to be the same Ether, and the
same Orbs, that they were before: and so will any other Compositum be the same,
though the Parts in it Move this way, or that way, or any way whatsoever,
unless there be a new Generation to alter it; otherwise only the Figure and
Situation of the Parts in the Whole will be altered, but not the Physical
Nature of the Whole, or Parts: and so though their Hypothesis be of less
Corpuscles, and not of such great Bodies, (which, as they propound the others,
because they are Indiscernible, so I propound these, because they are more
discernible) for the reason will be the same in these Elementary Natures,
though the Parts be never so minute; as every part of Water is Water, though it
be never so small, and though it be Moved any way whatsoever: and so suppose
the Parts of any one Orb to Move in the Orb, as all the Orbs do in the Ether,
they will no more alter the Orb, then the Orbs do the Ether: and if Matter and
Motion cannot thus make or alter Elementary Natures, which are Inferior, much
less any others that are Superior: and I suppose, that the Superaether is
altogether Immovable, both in the Whole, and in all the Parts thereof.
Wherefore, since this and all the other Heavens are so Stupendous, (that as
some suppose, they are therefore so Named) let us not conceiv, that we, or any
Angel, could Mechanicaly form those Glorious Bodies by any the most curious
Artifice, and much less by our own Imaginations: but acknowledge the Divine
Creation, and Original Institution of Ether, and all the Luminarys therein,
which have been from this Beginning thereof, and so shall continue and persevere
until the dissolution of this present Elementary World, Ingenerable and
Incorruptible in the Whole, though not in all the Parts thereof.

VI. Now let us prais the Father of Lights for all the Luminarys of Heaven, the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars; which the Heathen World formerly adored, and which
we ought all to admire, and to adore him who is the Creator thereof; whose G^ory
the Heavens declare, and the Firmament his handiwork: which, though we behold
them according to their seeming Aspects, yet we perceiv not their Real
Magnitudes, and Altitudes; and much less their wonderful Motions, and
I^fluences: and though they are but small Portions of one Element, yet are many
of them greater then any other, and some of them then all the rest: whose
Positions are higher above us then the Center of the Univers is beneath us; and
whose Motions are without any Rest, and yet swifter then of any other Bodies,
and stronger then of Spontaneous Spirits. And they are all such Locomotive
Automata in themselves, and every one Moved by his own proper Power, going on in
his own Path, both distant and different from another, but never from itself
either in Space, or Time: which are the grand Horologes of Nature, without any
Weight, Spring, or Pendulum, and yet far more constant and certain, not only
marking and dividing by Lines and Numbers, but making Day and Night, and all
the Seasons in the Year, and such long Secula and Revolutions, as probably
shall never attein any Natural Period, but be Violently prevented by the Final
Conflagration; which shall be effected by their own Ether and Element of Fire,
and all these Firebrands thereof, who as they were Supernaturaly Generated, so
shall also be Supernaturaly Corrupted. And yet while this Elementary Globe does
stand, it is Preserved and Governed by their Progresses and Circuits about the
Inferior Orb; who as they pass along scatter the Missilia of their various
Influences. And though they being a very great Multitude, to us seem to be in a
continual Rout, yet every one of them marches in his own Rank and File, and
they are all severaly distributed into Troops and Partys of Constellations, and
the whole Host of them forms one most Orderly and Powerful Militia, whereof
Sol is the great General and Imperator; who himself alone is able to conquer
all the Inferior World, not only by encountering it with his Victorious
Presence, which would burn up all before him, but by his very Flight and
Absence, which would otherwise destroy them, through their own Indigence and
want of his Vital Heat: who as the true Adonis brings along with him in his
Accesses all the Fruits of the Year, and Foetus of Animals, and again carries
away all that is Annual in his Recesses: who is Sponsus Naturae, As a
Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoicing as a strong man to run his
Race. His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his Circuit to the
ends thereof. And there is nothing hid from the Heat thereof.

SECTION XI.
And God said, Let the Waters bring forth abundantly the Moving Creature that
has Life, and Fowl that may fly above the Earth in the open Firmament of
Heaven. And God Created great Whales, and every Living Creature that Moves,
which the Waters brought forth abundantly after their Kind; and every winged
Fowl after his Kind. And God saw that it was Good. And God blessed them,
saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the Waters of the Sea; and let the
Fowl multiply on the Earth. And the Evening and the Morning were the Fifth Day.
EXPLICATION.
God having prepared the Elements, Vegetatives, and Ethereal Luminarys, in
order to the production, and for the use and service of Sensitives, did then
cause the Waters to bring forth Fishes, whose Spirits were before latent in
them, according to their several Kinds; and particularly Whales, the greatest
of all Animals: and so also caused flying Fowls, according to their several
Kinds, to be produced. And this was their Specifical Goodness and Perfection.
And after God had thus made them Good and Perfect in themselves, he added the
Blessing of Procreation, whereby Fishes should multiply in the Waters, and
Fowls on the Earth, according to their Kinds. And these were the Works of the
Fifth Day.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of Fishes and Fowls. 2. Of Sensation. 3. Of the five Senses. 4. Of
Imagination. 5. Of Appetite. 6. Of the Goodness of the Works of the Fifth Day.

I. WE now ascend into the Region of Life, which is not only above all
Elementary and Vegetative Nature, but also so far different from them as the
same Living Animal is from its own Dead Carcass: and though I have termed them
all generaly Spirits, whereby I intend only Substantial Activitys, though they
do not breath and Live, as Sensitives, and the Soul of Man, which therefore, to
distinguish from others, I shall only call Souls or Psych^, and so Hebraicaly
they only are termed Living Spirits or Souls: though as the Poets termed Water,
Stone, Turf, and the like Vive, so both they and Philosophers conceived that
Vegetatives did indeed Live; as appears by their Fabulous Transmigrations of
Animals into Flowers, and Trees, and their Anima Vegetativa; whereas Scripture
thus speaks only Metaphoricaly, when it mentions Living Water, Stone,
Bread, and the like; or that Trees and Corn Die: and I shall never differ about
Terms, but only contend, that Elementary or Vegetative Spirits are also
Substantial Spirits, (which Expression they, who also call them Vive, may very
well allow) but I also affirm, that they do not Live as these Living Spirits;
nor have any Perception or Appe^ite (which is properly and truly Life, as I
shall show hereafter) to defend my self and all my Expressions from the Opinion
of them, who either affirm both Vegetatives and Elements, yea, Matter itself,
to be Sensitive; because they have such Affections, Inclinations, and Principles
Created together with their Substances, and Imprinted in them by God, according
to which they Act and Operate, and produce such Effects Naturaly, as Sensitives
do Ingeniously, Spontaneously, and Artificialy, with Perception and Appetite,
Knowing, Affecting, and Intending, what they do, which those Inferior Natures
do not, nor cannot, because they have no such Perception, nor Appetite properly
and truly, though Metaphoricaly they are also ascribed unto them in respect to
such Effects: and also of ot hers who, because these Inferior Natures have not
any such Perception or Appetite, therefore deny them to have any such Natural
Principles so Created or Imprinted in them, whereby, according to their several
Natures thus Originaly Instituted and set^ in order, they proceed to Act; and
conceiv that only the Spirit of God Immediately does still Move on them all, as
on the first Chaos; and so by Matter and Motion only does Generate and Corrupt
all such Inferior things; which he did first Institute and set^ in order in the
four first Days, and all their Original Generations and Corruptions, as well
as the others in the two last Days: otherwise all the Works of those former
Days, which were also in preparation to the latter, had been vain and
supervacaneous; which I have sufficiently refuted; and shall now proceed to
discourse of Sensitives, which indeed are far more Noble Natures, and as I
said, so much Superior to the other, that here God is said again to Create, in
giving Life, or causing that, which though it was the same Spirit in itself
latent in the Chaos, and had Potentialy Life in itself, yet did not before
Live. Now to Live Actualy; and thus to raise from Death to Life is a most
Miraculous Work, and most like to a Proper Creation, not only in the suddennes
thereof, as Incension, (for certainly nothing can Live, and not Live in the same
Instant) but in the Excellency thereof, whereby the Animal is as it were raised
up from the Grave, and out of that dead Sleep, wherein the Body or Carcass of
all the Inferior Natures, whereof it is Constituted, did before ly. And this is
Eminently spoken of Whales the greatest of all such Animals, though of the
lowest Kind thereof, that is, of Fishes: for as in the same Vegetative Classis
there are three general Kinds mentioned, Grass, Herbs, and Trees; so also in
this Classis of Sensitives, Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts. And as the Elementary
Bodies of Sensitives are far more Organical then of Vegetatives, as fit
Instruments of their more Operative Spirits, so also their very Vegetative
Spirits, which in their Compositions are Subordinate unto them, are more
Excellent, and have a more Curious Nutrition and Augmentation, and most notably
another manner of Generation: for whereas it is said of Vegetatives, Cujus Semen
seipsum seminet, here is added a special Blessing of Procreation to Sensitives;
and Perfect Animals, such as God Created, do not grow out of the Water, nor out
of the Earth, as some Vegetatives; nor only by Putrefaction, and the like, as
many Anomalous Sensitives; but are Generated by Conjunct Procreation: and they
are made of two several Sexes; as is expressed of all such as entered into
Noah's Ark, that they were Male and Female; and therefore a Phoenix, which is
only of one Sex, is such as was not to be found there, and indeed only a
Poetical Creature; and the Male and Female Piony made such only by the
Gardiners Fansy: for certainly they do not propagate by any Conjunct
Procreation. But the Sensitive Spirit itself, and the Living Powers thereof, are
far above any Vegetative Spirit, or the Facultys thereof. For as the Matter is
so Divisible, that it is as it were always Divisible, and every Part and
Particle thereof will still be the same Homogeneous-Matter in all respects; so
Elementary Spirits, which do Immediately Consubstantiate it; are therefore most
Material, or United to it, and Coextended with it, and if they be so Divided
with it, yet, as I have said, every Part and Particle of Earth will be Earth,
and of Water Water, and so of the rest generaly; though in some respects, as I
observed of Terreous Consistence, there may be a difference between Majority
and Minority of their Bodies: and Vegetatives, though every least Part or
Particle of their Organical Bodies be not a sufficient Domicil and Officine for
their Spirits, because they are Organical; yet the Branch or Twig of many Trees
being set, will Radicate and Grow, reteining therein a sufficient Portion of
their Divisible Spirit to erect a new Economy, and form itself into another
Individual Tree, as well as the Root and Stem: but if Sensitives be so Divided,
whereby the Principal Parts thereof, as the Head, Heart, or the like, have their
Organism destroyed, they cannot Live; and any other Part Divided from them will
not Live long; as an Eel cut in pieces: and yet as Fishes are of the lowest
Kind of Sensitives, so generaly after such Dissection they Live longest: I have
seen a Tench slitt and Exenterated to leap in the Pan where it was fried; and
Fowls will not Live so long as they, nor Beasts as Fowls, as a Chicken after
the Head is wrung off Moves itself both longer and stronger then a Beast
Decollated, which shows the more Indivisibility of their Spirits. But, as I
said, the grand difference between Sensitive and any Inferior Spirits is their
Perception and Appetite: for so, though Elementary and Vegetative Spirits also
Move their Bodies, yet only Sensitives Move them with Apprehension and
Spontaneity, this way, and that way, and every way, as they pleas; and so,
though their Motive Powers may not be so strong, yet they are Living, and more
Spiritual: and thus they Feed, and Generate, and Act all their Sensitive
Operations Sensitively; otherwise they should not be Sensitives. Yet according
to the Degrees of Sensitives in their own Classis, so also is their Locomotion:
and thus Fishes, which are the very lowest Kind thereof, are Originaly termed
Reptiles; as their Swiming is indeed a kind of Creeping, or Sliding: and so an
Eel swims in Water as a Snake Creeps on Land; and though other Fishes in
Swiming shoot forth Directly, and make no Curv Lines, yet they only Slide in a
more Direct manner; and their Bodies are of a Direct and Oblong Figure for that
purpose, being born up, and partly carried, upon an Equidens Fulciment of
Water: but there are also Testaceous Fishes, which are Gradient, having Claws
and Legs for that purpose, like Beasts; and if they Swim, it is also like the
Swiming of Beasts: yet that Motion is another kind of Creeping; and they are
more Tardigradous, and Multipedous, as generaly more Infirm Bodies are, which
need so many Fulciments: and Shelfishes which have no Claws nor Legs, as
Oisters, Muscles, and the like, are most Infirm, and, as I suppose, Imperfect
Animals: but they are no Plantanimals, as others term them; for plainly they
are Sensitive; and therefore of the Sensitive Classis, and so to be
Denominated; which appears by their Flesh, and by opening and shutting their
shells accordingly as they Sensitively Affect or Disaffect any thing, and many
other such Indications of Sens: and though they Continue in their places, yet
they are not Rooted in them, nor do Cohere thereunto, like Vegetatives; because
all Sensitives, as I said, are less United to the Elementary Matter, both
Internaly, and Externaly, then Vegetatives: and that which is called the
Sensitive Plant, is not properly and truly Sensitive, but only fansied to be
such, as I said of the Piony: and so the Oatbeard, Marigold, Heliotropium, and
the like, may as well be said to be Sensitive: whereas clearly their Motions are
without any Perception or Appetite, and only by Elementary Rarefaction and
Condensation of their Bodies, or by some kind of Vegetative Expansion and
Compression, as I shall show afterward. As Fishes are expressly said to be
produced out of the Waters wherein their Spirits were before latent, so they
require a Body Aqueous, wherein they Reside and Operate; and they were
accordingly formed of the Water, as it was then Mist with the other Elements,
and thereby prepared for such productions and formations: and though some may
wonder, as I have formerly, at this strange formation of the Bodies of Fishes,
how their Flesh, and Bones, which are Firm and Consistent, (though not so much
as of Fowls, and Beasts,) should be made of Fluid Water, which could not be
Transmuted into Earth, since there is no such Transpeciation, as I have before
proved; yet here also we may see how these Mysterys of Scripture and Nature do
Consist and Correspond together: for so it is found by Experiment, that some
Trees, and Fruits, as Willows, Pumpions, and the like, may be as much Augmented
thereby: and so the whole Sensitive Body is still formed of Blood: for every
Mistum contains all the Elements, and their Virtues; and there is in Water,
or Blood, also sufficient Matter (and so drink, if not so Nutritive, yet may be
as Augmentative as Meat; as appears in such who drink much, and eat little) and
Sensitive Bodies, as of Tadpols, may be formed of Water, and if we consider the
Mistion of all the four Elements, and the Doctrine of Potentialitys (which I
have before deduced from the Chaos of all these Potentialitys) and already
approved by many other Instances, (as also it may be clearly confirmed heerby)
we may understand how, as I have said, it is indeed the Clavis of all
Generation and Corruption: for thus all the Terraqueous Composita are
Terraqueous, having also some Misture, though less, of Air, and Ether, in
them; and so in their Generation or Corruption, if the Terreous Qualitys be
Actuated, they appear to be, and so indeed Actualy are, Terreous Bodies, and
have a proportionable Firmnes or Consistence, which, as I said, is a Terreous
Quality; as Smoke is turned into Soot, and the like: and if the Aqueous
Qualitys be Actuated, and the Terreous reduced to their Potentiality, then the
same Bodies will be no longer Firm and Consistent Actualy, but Fluid; as in
Fusion and Corrosion of Metalls, whereby it is said, that even Gold itself may
be reduced to an Oil, or to some such Aqueous Body, and others affirm the like
of any Terreous Bodies whatsoever: and so though Aereous Qualitys, according to
the less Misture of that Element in Terraqueous Bodies, are not so easily and
commonly Actuated, yet thereby, or by Vapor, or both, Camphire, and Salts, may
be Volatilised; (as Meteors may be in the Air, like Amurca, o^ Mudder, standing
in the top of Water): yea, by Actuating the Aethereous Qualitys therein, the
Terraqueous Body may seem to be all Fire; as Iron Candent, Pitch, Wax, Tallow,
Oil, Spirit of Wine, and the like, Inflamed. But the Bodies of Fishes are not so
Terreous as to Sink to the bottom, nor so Aereous as to Swim and float above
the Water, being most fitly poised, and prepared for their Moving in their
Native Element, Water. As the Spirits of Fishes are Sensitive, so the more
Perfect have all Senses, except Hearing, which some deny, and also that they
have any Auditory Nervs: certainly they do not hear themselves, because they are
generaly M^te; and yet I rather conceiv that they have also the Sens of
Hearing, because they have the more excellent Sens of Seeing, though perhaps
their Hearing may be very Dull, as their Element of Water is no very fit
Medium of Sound. Yet Oisters, and such Imperfect Fishes, have neither of these
Scientifical Senses, Seeing, or Hearing; but only Feeling, and Tasting, and
perhaps Smelling, which, as I have said, is Concomitant and Assistant to Taste;
though the distinct Organs of any Sens are not discernible in them, nor any
Brain or Heart, but they seem to be one Lump, with something like a Blood in
it, which all Sensitives have, and also, as I suppose, something Analogous to
the Organs in more perfect Animals, of such Senses as they have; and so of
Imagination, and Appetite, which are the common Sensitive Fountains of all the
Senses, and wherein they Subsist, (though they have no Imaginative Ingeny) as I
shall show afterward, and therefore no Sensitive can be without them, and
consequently not without some apt Organs thereof. And here I must observe, that
as every Specifical Nature is most excellent in its own Specifical Difference,
because it is the very Specifical Difference thereof; so in the same Classis the
lower Species may have some Inferior Qualitys more Excellent, or at least more
Vehement and Notorious then the Superior. Thus Fishes are generaly more
Voracious, and less Valetudinary, then other Sensitives, and Augment vastly,
and Procreate abundantly, especialy such as Generate by Ejection and
Superinjection of their Seeds, and not by Copulation, as is reported of Whales;
and their Fecundity is expressly mentioned in the Text, that the Waters brought
them forth abundantly, and so again Emphaticaly repeated: and therefore I do
not conceiv, as some, that this Difference happened by the Deluge, which indeed
did not concern Fishes, because it is so intimated in their very Creation. But
in all these and many other Piscine Qualitys and Facultys the Whale, and such
other grand Animals of the Sea, do excel; and such Thynni, Balaenae, and
immania Cete, are therefore called Sea Monsters, not because they are Anomalous,
but from their vast and terrible Greatness; and the chief of them, which is
supposed to be the Whale, is termed Leviathan, whom God himself has largely
described elsewhere, and says of him, Upon all the Earth there is not his
like, he is King over all the children of Pride, I suppose, in respect of his
great Bulk and Strength generaly; though his strength in proportion to his Bulk
be not so great as of many Terrestrial Animals, especialy the Elephant, which
is also termed Behemoth, and who in that respect is said to be Chief of the
ways of God. But Fowls are of the least Bodily Magnitude, though their Spirits
be of an higher Kind then Fishes, and yet more allied to them then to Beasts,
and therefore made in the same Day with them; and so it is also observed that
their Brains are more Conformable to the Brains of Fishes, and the Brains of
Beasts to the Brain of Man. The Bodies of Fowls are less, because the Air in
which they were made to fly, is a more Rare and weaker Fulciment then Water,
though otherwise their flying is Analogous to Swiming, and such a kind of
Sliding or Creeping, and their Wings and the Motion thereof to Fins and the
Motion thereof: and as they were not produced out of the Air, nor their Bodies
formed of it, (for, as I said, all Animals as well as Vegetatives are
Terraqueous) so neither of the Water, as Fishes; for it is not so said of them,
but as it is Originaly, Let Fowls fly in the Firmament of Heaven: and the other
words following, and every winged Fowl after his Kind seem rather to refer to
Gods Creation of them both in that Day, then particularly to their Creation out
of the Waters: and it is said afterward of them, as well as of Beasts, And out
of the Ground God formed every Beast of the Earth, and every Fowl of the Air:
but whereas plainly it is said that Fishes were produced out of Water, and
Beasts out of the Earth, and neither is so before particularly expressed of
Fowls; I suppose they were made of some more equaly Mist Terraqueous Substance,
wherein neither Water did so much Predominate, as in the Bodies of Fishes, nor
Earth, as in the Bodies of Beasts: and accordingly the Bodies of Fowls are of a
middle Substance, not so Tender as of Fishes, nor yet so Fi m and Solid as of
Beasts. But Fowls, though they be generaly Oviparous as well as Fishes, yet
also Procreate by Copulation, and not by Exclusion of the Seed Immediately, as
Vegetatives, and as Fishes generaly are Procreated; nor yet by Gestation in the
Womb until there be a Formation of the Foetus, as Beasts; which is a more
perfect Birth, and proper to Superior Animals. Certainly they excel Fishes in
their Spiritual Facultys of Sens, and Imagination, as in their Singing,
Nidification, and the like; as they are Inferior to Beasts in Imaginative
Ingeny, and Act generaly. And whereas there are some flying Fishes, as they are
commonly called, so indeed they are not Fowls, but Fishes, which generaly live
in the Water, as others, and only fly above it so long as their Wings are wett,
which makes them to be more stiff and strong, as Sails are stifned by wetting:
and so Waterfowls are not Fishes, but Fowls, that generaly fly in the Air,
though they can also dive in the Water, and continue there so long as their
Breath lasts, as we say; and so Otters, and the like Amphibia, are Beasts,
and no Fishes: and though there be Aquatical Insects, which afterward prove
Flys, yet this is no Transpeciation, but the Worm, both in Earth, and Water, is
only the Embryo, or Inception, of such flying Insects, as the Vegetative Embryo
is of a Sensitive Animal.

II. Having thus far discoursed of these two Kinds of Sensitives, Fishes, and
Fowls, generaly, according to my Intention, which is only to Elucidate the
general System of the World, as God himself has declared it unto us in this
Divine History of Creation, and to conferr Scripture and Nature together, I
shall now proceed to discourse of Sensation in the same general manner, having
already declared what I intend thereby; that is, a Life with Imaginative
Perception, and Spontaneous Appetite, whereby the Animal does not only Act and
Ope^ate, as all other Inferior Natures, but Perceivs what it does, and Consents
to do it; and so also Contemplates, and accordingly Affects, or Disaffects the
Object, about which it is conversant, and Exercises its Operations: which is a
Double Operation, and not such a Simple, Imperceptive, and Involuntary, or Non
Spontaneous kind of Operation, as there is in other Inferior Agents; but also
with a Sensitive Enjoyment thereof, and of itself, and its own Operations, in a
Living manner by Perception and Appetite, as I said, which are the proper
Facultys of the Sensitive Spirit, and that denominateth the Animal Sensitive;
because Sensitive Spirits whereof Perception and Appetite are the proper Facultys
are of an higher Classis, and far other Nature then the other Subordinate
Spirits Vegetative and Elementary, and the Matter, which they so Subordinate to
themselves, according to that Scale of Nature, as I have formerly showed: and as
according to that Scale, Sensitive Spirits are Sensitive in themselves, and
Subordinate the others Immediately, or Mediately, according to the several
Degrees thereof, to themselves; so also their Operations are either such as they
can Act and Exercise of themselves, and by their own Intrinsecal Power, or such
as they only Command and Govern, but are Executed and Performed by the Inferior
Spirits, Vegetative, and Elementary; but how the Sensitive Spirit does thus
Command and Govern the Vegetative Spirit, and that the Elementary, and the
like, is not so easily Intelligible, because these several Natures are
Classicaly different; and therefore also though the Sensitive Spirit Perceives
what it does, as I said, generaly; because it is Sensitive, yet it Perceives
not how any Vegetative or Elementary Operations are done and performed by those
Subordinate Spirits in its own Compositum; because they are not Sensitive, nor
can they, or the Sensitive Spirit by them, Perceiv what they do, or how the
Work is done, farther then as it may have some Sensation thereof in itself;
which is a manifest Evidence to me, that there are such several Spirits
Classicaly distinct, and which, as I have said, are never Mist together in the
same Sensitive, or Intellective, Compositum, because there are evidently in it
such distinct and different Operations; whereof some are Sensible and
Perceptible, and others are not: concerning which I shall discourse hereafter,
and now Inquire into these Mysterys of Sensation, which though they be
performed within us, yet are less obvious then other things without us: as any
may better see how a Chick is formed in the Egg, then how Augmentation is
performed within his own Body. Also the higher any Nature is, the more
Excellent, and Curious, and Difficult it is to be understood; And being now
entered into this Region of Life, I am very conscious in what a dark Adytum I
am, and how little Light others do afford me; but -- dabi^ Deus his quoque
finem. Wherefore grounding my self upon his Word, I shall proceed. It is said,
The Life of all Flesh is the Blood thereof, or as it is in the precedent words,
the Blood of it is for the Life thereof. And here we shall see again how
Scripture and Nature do mutualy Interpret one another. And I shall first
collect from these words, that all Flesh, that is, all Sensitive and Living
Bodies, have a Blood, or something Analogous of whatsoever Color or Crassitude
it may be; and that this Blood is not only the Aliment or Nutriment, but the
very Rudiment of the Life thereof, and indeed of the Flesh itself, and all other
Parts of the Body Potentialy; as every thing is Nourished by that whereof it is
Constituted: and thus it is well observed, that in the Formation of the Foetus,
there is a Bubble of Vital Liquor, which first Moves, and so forms itself and
its own Coat or Canale, by a Vital Heat Operating upon it; whereby, in the
Fermentation thereof, the more Pure and Subtle parts are Congregated in and
toward the middle, and the more Gross and Viscid are Seg^egated and amandated to
the outsides; and there, as Milk heated, when it begins to cool, has a little
Skin in the Superficies, so this Congenerous Liquor, which is the Rudiment of
Blood, and also of Milk, does begin thereby to form a tender Tunicle, or Vein,
for itself, wherein, as in a Canale, it also begins to flow: and afterward the
Heart and all the Sensitive Body is formed thereby: and as it does thus
Constitute the Body, so also it does Nourish it; and for that purpose passes
through the Heart into the Arterys, into which it is Impelled by the Systole or
Contraction of the Muscular Heart, and Pulls thereof, (which is continued, though
less and less, in and through all the Arterys) and through them passes into
the Flesh, and Veins, and so into the Heart Circularly: which, most true and
very Curious Observation was not understood by the Ancients, nor easily
admitted by Moderns; because the Passage thereof, without the help of
Anastomases, is so hard to be conceived; but as all Truth which is founded in
Nature, and not only in Notion, though never so Difficult and Inexplicable,
when it is once offered to Mankind, will work out its own way (whereas Error,
though never so Plausible, will soon be confuted by it, when they are Committed
and set^ together) so has this Truth prevailed, and must prevail, because it is
Truth: and I thus explicate it to my self. I suppose the Veins and A^tery* to
be several Canales, not running one into another at one end, but at the other
meeting at the Heart, as at a Watermill, which receives the Blood out of the
Vina Cava, as one of the Canales, and discharges it at last into the Aorta, as
into the other Canale; and the Flesh to be as a very Spongy ground, between
these two Canales: I say the Water discharged from the Mill will flow in one
Canale with a Pulls, less and less, according to the Strokes of the Wheel; which
we will also suppose to be so distinctly and equaly caused by every Spoke
thereof; and because it cannot freely pass in that Canale where it has no
farther Passage and Vent, and may soak into the Spongy Earth between it and the
other Canale, it will so soak into them; and also supposing it, being in that
Canale, to be raised higher (by any Engine or otherwise) it will then flow in
that Canale to the Mill back again, where it has a Passage and Vent; as,
though Water will not easily flow of itself, but be detained in a Sponge full
of it, unles it be pressed, or more Water come to the Sponge; yet it will flow
together freely in any Ca^ale where it has a Fall, or any other Impuls; which
though in this Scheme must be supposed, yet is so Realy effected by the Natural
Power of the Living Body, as I shall show* ^^^rafter. Again, as the Blood by
this Circulation and (...) thereof does pass into and Nourish all the parts of
the Body continualy, (which are Potentialy in the Blood) and is the Nutriment
of the Life thereof; so also it is the Instrument of all its Living or Sensitive
Operations: for from the Heart it passes not only into the Aorta, but also
into the Carotides, and so to the Brain, wherein it is again purified and
rectified, and from the Brain discharged into the Nervs, wherein, as well as in
the Brain itself, it is the Instrument of all Sensation, both Perceptive, and
Motive: and this Nerval Succus is also that, which I call Blood, according to
Scripture, which does not distinguish it into Venal, Arterial, and Nerval
Blood, but Comprehends all under one common Name, Blood; because it is indeed
one Continuous Flux, as the Ocean is one, though where it flows into several
Seas it acquireth several Names. Having thus premised and stated the
Phenomenon, I come now unto the grand Difficulty, how all Sensitive Operations
are, or can be, so curiously and wonderfully effected by the Spirits
Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive. And first, as I formerly said, I conceiv
that there is a proper Elementary Mistion, which is Subordinate to every
Vegetative Spirit, as well as a proper Vegetative Spirit, which is Subordinate
to every Sensitive Spirit; and in this Mistion we commonly take notice of two
Elementary Qualitys, which are indeed most notable, that is Heat, and Moisture,
and which we do therefore Eminently call Innate, Vital, and Radical; but
certainly we cannot conceiv that the Heat is without any allay of Cold, or the
Moisture of Drines; for then they should be so Vehement and Excessive, that
they should not be Vital and Radical, but Mortal and Final: wherefore there
must be such a Temperament of all these four Qualitys, and consequently a
Mistion of the four Elements, and Elementary Spirits, wherein they do Subsist;
and as these four Qualitys are susceptible of More and Less, and thereby of
many various Degrees, so according to the Arithmetical Rule of Changes the
various Mistions thereof, besides other Simple Elementary Qualitys, may be
Innumerable unto us. Now the Vegetative Spirit* to which the Elementary are
Immediately Subordinate, does Collect and Contemper for itself a proper
Mistion, and fit Temperament thereof, such as Naturaly it requires; that is,
such as God himself, when he had first prepared the Elements, and after them
Vegetatives* ^n making of Sensitives in this Fifth Day, did then Collect and
Contemper for the Vegetative, and so prepared and instructed the Vegetative for
the Sensitive Spirit, according to every Kind and Species thereof; which was, as
I have showed, the Original Generation or production thereof, and first
Institution of all Generation and Corruption, according to which all Successive
Generation does and ever shall continue unto the End and Corruption of this
whole Elementary World. And this proper Mistion is not only the Crasis, but
also the Crisis of the Life of the Animal: for as it is Subordinate to the
Vegetative Spirit, it is Oeconomical, and such as does according to the
Original Rectitude and Temper thereof Naturaly Increas to an Acme, and from
thence Decreas again to a Period; unless it be Violently disturbed or altered;
which is the true cause of all Diseases (which we therefore call Distempers) but
if there be no such Violence offered unto it, then the Sensitive Animal does
continue from the Birth until the Death, or Dissolution thereof, (like a Lamp
which goes out only for want of Oil) in sound and perfect Health, yet with such
Degrees and Variations from one Stage thereof unto another, as I have formerly
showed: and though according to the State of this Original Temperament the
Thread of one Animals Life, as we call it, may be stronger or longer then of
another, yet I conceiv it is always according to this first Vital or Radical
Mistion or Temperament, in which the Constitution of every Sensitive Body is
founded; and though Augment and Decrement, as well as Nutrition, be of the
Vegetative Spirit, yet it is also by this Elementary Mistion, which that does
Subordinate to itself, but cannot alter any Primigeneous Error therein, which is
Naturaly in it, though both Nature and Art may Cure Violent Accidents; and
though Nature does of herself always intend the Best, as she did obtein it in
this first Creation, when all things were made Good and Perfect, yet being now
blasted, there is always some Error, more or less, appearing therein; and
especialy since the Flood, wherein the Secula were Abbreviated Extraordinarily
by a farther Curs and Punishment of Sin: and yet also before, there were
Natural Bounds set by God in the very Principles of Generation itself, as well
as he has set Bounds to the Matter and Body of the World. Now, whereas I say,
that in Generation this proper Elementary Mistion and the Temperament thereof is
Governed by the Vegetative Spirit, I do not intend therefore that the
Vegetative Spirit is first produced; for as in the first Creation, so still the
Elementary Spirits are before the Vegetative; but I say that the Vegetative
Spirit, which then begins to be produced, does by and with the proper Mistion
of the Elementary Spirits so begin to Operate and Contemper them; and is, as I
conceiv, that Operator or Motor therein, which is called Punctus saliens, and
the Architect of the Body, and which being also Oeconomical and Periodical in
itself, does accordingly Govern the proper Mistion as Subordinate to itself.
And whereas not only Elementary, but also in and with them Vegetative, and
Sensitive Spirits, are Confounded and Coagulated in their Chaos, without any
Actual Economy, or Individual Compositum, all the Potential Principles thereof
are collected in the Seed, and prepared by the Generator; not only in Herbs,
and Trees, which is sensibly Evident, and acknowledged by all, but also in all
Sensitive Generation of Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, which is denied or doubted
by some; whereas almost every where in Scripture, not only the Foetus of Beasts,
but also Children are termed the Seed of the Man, as well as of the Woman; and
so were said to have been in the Loins of the Man, as well as to be in the Womb
of the Woman: nor can the Woman Naturaly Generate without the Man, any more
then the Man without the Woman: And whereas it is Curiously observed, that no
Seed appears in the Womb after Copulation, this indeed shows the way of
Impregnation not to be, as has been supposed, by the gross Matter of the Seed,
appearing there as in the cold Air, but that it is more Colliquated Attracted
and Imbibed, whereby the Womb is Imbued therewith, and so also with the Woman's
own Seed, and thereby she is Fecundated; and so is the Egg or Seed of the Hen
by the Seed of the Cock; which, I conceiv, appears Sensibly by the Procreation
of Fishes, wherein the Seed of the Female being Ejected is Imbued by the Milky
Seed of the Male Superinjected (and so is the Seed of Man said to be powered out
as Milk) and also by the Wombs of other Sensitives, which thereby become more
replete, moist, and lubricous; (as the Womb of the Earth is by Rain) and so the
Female is said to Conceiv the Seed of the Male: and as the Blood is the Life,
or for the Life of the Generator, as I said, so the Seed is a Decision and
farther Concoction thereof in the Testicles; that is, not only of the Venal, and
Arterial, but also of the Nerval Blood; as sensibly appears by Evacuation
thereof, which very much affects the Brain; when Pythagoras called it Stilla
Cerebri; and Castration does Effeminate and strangely alter the Habit of the
whole Body. Nor is it more difficult to conceiv how the Seed should so Imbue
the Substance of the Womb Internaly, and Impregnate it, and thereby the Egg,
then how the Blood Venal, Arterial, and perhaps also the Nerval, (as it seems
by the Seed) should Penetrate and Invigorate the Flesh, and other Parenchymes,
and the whole Body. And heerby we may understand how fallacious Sens and
Experiment is, and not to be trusted alone, without the Harmonious Concurrence
of Faith and Reason, even in Sensible things; for thus if we go never so little
beyond the very Sensation itself we may soon be deceived, and unless we be very
accurate, our Sens may deceiv itself in the very Sensible Phenomenon. The
Sensitive Spirit, as I suppose, is not produced as soon as the Vegetative, to
which the Elementary are Immediately Subordinate, and therefore until that be
produced in some Embryonical Inception, there will be only an Elementary Mass:
but the Vegetative Spirit beginning to come forth out of its Chaos, in and with
the fit Mistion which it requires and Governs, there appears something like a
Life, which yet is only Vegetative; and though the Sensitive Spirit be also
then latent in the same Chaos, and be ready to issue forth as soon as the
Organical Body is Completed in all the Constituent parts thereof, though at
first more Rudely and Embryonicaly; yet until then, it does not truly Live,
nor Operate Sensitively with Perception and Appetite; which is therefore
called, The time of Life; and accordingly, as is supposed, was the Judgment of
Life or Death, for striking a Woman with Child, whereby she miscarried: but, as
I said before, there is first an Operation of the Vegetative Spirit and
Organisation of the Body; and so not only the Vital Heat does Move the Liquor,
by Rarefying and Impelling it, but there is also the Punctus Saliens,
Regulating that Motion, and the Body Moved, by its Plastical Virtue; as when
the Glass is heated in the Furnace, and thereby in Fusion and Motion, the
Glass-man by blowing does Effigiate it as he pleases, whereby he does also
Move it this way, and that way, according to his Art: and so does the
Vegetative Spirit Move that Rudimental Liquor Naturaly by its own Plastical
Virtue, whereby it does Effigiate the whole Body, which cannot be without
Motion: and so the Systole and Diastole of the Heart indeed are not Elementary
Motions, but Vegetative; for Heat, the chief Elementary Mover, does not
Contract, which is the Motion of the Systole of the Heart, but Expand, which is
needles therein, for the Diastole is the Natural Expansion of the Heart itself.
Also it is Regular and Reciprocal, such as scarcely any Elementary Motion is of
itself: for so though the Motion of Tides be Elementary, and also partly of the
Matter, and Pondus thereof, in the Fall of the Water, first one way, and then
another, as I have showed; yet it is Regulated by the Course of the Moon, which
itself also (as all Motions of Ethereal Bodies) is indeed Regular, but not
Reciprocal; and I suppose these, and such like are Critical Symptoms of
Vegetative Motions; and so, as I have said, Elementary Motion of itself is of
Rarefaction and Condensation, and not of Expansion and Contraction, whereas
there is a Contraction of the Heart in the Systole; though, as before, I
conceiv the Heat of the Blood and Elementary Motion thereof by Rarefaction and
Impuls to be Subordinate and Subservient thereunto, and that thereby the Pulls is
more Vehement, and the Blood in the Veins Impelled; otherwise without any such
Natural Instrument to raise it, (like Water by an Engine) as I have showed, I do
not well see how it can ascend in the Veins, but rather that both Concurrent
Motions are needful and requisite to cause the whole Blood in a Man's Body to
Circulate about twelv times in an hour, as it does continualy; and plainly in
Exercise and Contention, whereby the Body and Blood is heated, the Pulls is more
quick, and less when it is Chilled with Cold: (and so Moisture applied to the
Heart taken out makes it to Move again). And clearly these are no Sensitive
Motions, because we do not sens them, as we do Expulsion and Retention, which
are Vegetative by Expansion and Compression, as well as Sensitive, and
Spontaneous or Voluntary, and so far we may perceiv the Operation, but we know
not how the Vegetative Spirit does Expand or Contract by its own Specifike
Power: and so the Sensitive, yea the Intellective Spirit of Man, though it does
Perceiv whatsoever it does itself, and how it Commands the Inferior Spirits,
yet does not Perceiv how they do Obey and Perform; as, though I do very well
Perceiv that I do See, Hear, Move, or the like, yet I know not how these
Operations are Performed in me by Vegetative, and Elementary Instrumentalitys,
whereof the first and most common is Blood, but Immediately and Principaly the
Nerval Blood, or Succus. Now whereas Physicians say, that there are three sorts
of Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal, (which I confess I do not so well
understand, or that there are any such Spirituous Corpuscles in the Blood which
do Invigorate it) I conceiv rather that it has itself, and in its own
Substance, all those Qualitys which they attribute unto such Corpuscles; and
which I shall so call Animal Spirits, or Spiritual Qualitys, very Pure and
Powerful, and the most Refined of any thing that is Elementary; and I suppose
that they are so Prepared by the Vegetative Spirit, and are the most Immediate
Instruments of the Sensitive Soul in all its Sensations; and so, as the Stoiks
say, Vincula Animae and Corporis, whereby there is such mutual Conversation
between them: for certainly by their Instrumentality we See, Hear, Imagine,
Affect, and Move the Body Sensitively with Perception and Appetite: and so we
find that the Brain, wherein they chiefly Reside, works, and grows hott, and
that they are Exhausted, and must be at least every Night Recruited by Sleep;
wherefore since plainly there are such Animal Spirits, or Spiritual Qualitys,
Subsisting in the Nerval Blood, or Succus, I will adventure to inquire farther
into them. And, as I said, this Nerval Blood, which has passed through the
Heart, and was there once before Refined and Subtilised, does ascend into the
Brain, and there is again Refined and Purified by the Concoctive Faculty of the
Vegetative Spirit in another manner, and for other uses and purposes: wherefore
the Brain is not so Calid, nor Motive, but more Cool, Moist, and Moderate,
wherein the Vegetative Spirit does Temper this Arterial Blood, Percolating it
through the Maeandrous Passages thereof, and so Qualifying, and Concocting it,
and producing the Animal Spirits, or Qualitys therein, for the service of the
Sensitive Soul; as it does Temper and Digest the other Blood, for Nutrition,
and Augmentation of the Sensitive Body, and for Generation, and other such
Inferior and Subordinate Uses: and from the Brain, as the Fountain, this Nerval
Succus is diffused into the Spina, and Nervs, as the Streams: being indeed of a
wonderful Purity, and Vigor, whereby it has not only Potentialy the Species
of Sensibles (as Extension has all Figures in itself Potentialy) which the
Sensitive Spirit can call forth and Elicit; but also a very great Strength,
which the Sensitive Spirit likewise Governs, like a well managed Horse, how and
when it pleases. And certainly these are the most Spiritual Extractions,
Powers, and Virtues, of Elementary Spirits, and the most Subtle and Sudden
Artifices of Vegetative Spirits, and most like to Sensitive and Intellective
Notions and Motions: and therefore the Immediate and most apt Instruments of
those higher Spirits, and of their Operations; and which plainly discover the
Combination between Superior and Inferior Spirits, as I shall show hereafter.
And though I doubt, that heerin I may seem Novell and Curious, yet I shall show
how far I satisfy my self concerning them, whereof I do thus conceiv; that this
Nerval Blood, or Succus, is, as I said, a most Refined Elementary Substance,
prepared by the Vegetative Spirit for these Uses and Services of the Sensitive
Spirit; and that as in the four Elements, and their Mistion, there are
Potentialy all Sensible Qualitys, which are variously Actuated therein, and many
of them very Momentaneously, as Light, Colors, Sounds, and the like, and so
also Magnetike Virtue, and such other more Subtle and Pure Q^alitys; and also
their Irradiations and Species Abstracted thereby as Colorate Species by Light,
and the like: so the Vegetative Spirit, at the Command of the Sensitive, does
by another more Spiritual and Plastical Virtue Actuate these Spiritual
Qualitys, as it does Corporeal Figure, and the like Affections of the Matter,
and more Gross Elementary Qualitys, in Effigiating the Body, and producing that
proper Mistion of the Elements, which it requires and Subordinates to itself;
and also does Extract some other Internal Emanations and Species thereof, more
Subtle and Pure then the External Emanations and Species of Colors, and the
like, though not so Vivid and Permanent, but like Specter and Ghosts of the
deceased; both which the Sensitive Spirit does also Irradiate, and thereby the
Imagination Internaly Contemplates them, when the Sensible Object is present,
and also when the External Species depart and are absent. Like unto a Man, who
beholding his natural Face in a Glass, for he beholds himself, and goes his
way, and streightway forgets what manner of Man he was: where are expressed
or intimated, all the several Degrees of Purification and Sublimation of the
Species; that is, both the Immediate Species Emanant from the Colorate Face to
the Speculum, and the Reflection of the Image or Picture thereof to the Ey of
the Man beholding himself thereby, which I call External, and which when he
goes his way and departs from them, do also depart from him; and so he
forgets them, but still he has some Internal Vision thereof in his
Imagination, which is by another Internal Species, as the Type of the former,
or an Vmbra, and as it were an Apparition, which very suddenly appears and
disappeareth, so that a man Comparatively is said to forgett what he before
beheld. Now certainly the External Species, either Direct, or Reflex, which are
Emanant from the Face, and Reflected from the Glass, when the Man goes his way
and departs from the Speculum, do no longer continue in his Ey, or Optike
Nervs; for it was the Species of the Colorate Superfi^ies of his Face, which is
Emanant Directly outward, and was Reflected toward the Ey only by the Glass;
and when he removes his Ey from the Glass, that Reflection to the Ey cease,
and then it is as if any other Directly Visible Object were removed from the
Ey, whereby also the Species Emanant from it, and Subsisting in it, are
removed, and so the Vision cease: and yet there is such another Internal
Vision by the Imagination, as I have showed, and every Man may sensibly perceiv
in himself; though, as the Scripture very Curiously intimates, he has a
weaker and shorter representation of his own Face, whereof he beholds only the
Reflected Image in a Glass, then of the Face of his Wife or Child, which he
beholds Directly and more Immediately. Now certainly the Imagination cannot
so behold Internaly without some Internal Species, as the Ey cannot see
External Objects without such an such an External Species: and this Internal
Species is not any such Image of the External, as that which appears in the
Speculum by Reflection is of the Direct Species, but another thing Separate
from it, when the Object, and all the Emanant and Reflected Species thereof
Subsisting in it, are absent and wholly removed; and of another Nature far
different from the former; and more spiritual and Phanstatical, and Transient
as Thought; nor can it Subsist in the Imagination itself, which is a Sensitive
Spirit; because this is the Species of some Sensible Quality, which is
Elementary; and so are all the Species thereof, whether External, or Internal;
nor is it so Actuated and produced as they, by any such External Irradiation,
as Color, or by any such Motion as Sound, and the like; but only at the Command
of the Imagination, which being a Faculty of the Sensitive Spirit, and such
Contemplation of External Sensibles by these Internal Species not being
performed without them, nor by any Intrinsecal and Specifike Power of the
Imagination alone: therefore it must be, as I conceiv, by the Mediation of the
Vegetative Spirit, which first prepares this Elementary Substance, or Succus,
wherein they Subsist Potentialy, and when the Imagination calls for them, does
Actuate and produce them; and so when the Imagination does Animadvert, it does
Irradiate them by its own Light, as I may so term it, which is yet more
Spiritual, and Sensitive; and thereby does so Contemplate all Sensibles in such
little Types and Images (wherein they are Pictured in Small) and so very Subtle
and Spiritual, which is indeed very admirable: and so also is Sensation by the
External Species, which in the Ey and Optike Nervs are very strangely
Contracted and Subtilised, as I shall show hereafter. And now proceed from
these Spiritual Species, which are the Instruments of Imagination or
Speculation, to consider those Spiritual Potestates, which are the Instruments
of Appetite, and Spontaneous Motions; and these also may be in the same Nervs,
and Nervous Succus, together with the others, for so all the Nervs are generaly
Tactive as well as Motive; and this sufficiently convinces me that they are
neither of them any such little Corporeitys, as is supposed, which cannot
probably be together in such little Cavitys without disturbing and disordering
one another; whereas clearly such Spiritual Qualitys may so Subsist together in
the same place and not to be Confounded, or Mist (as two Lights) and so though
they be Heterogeneous and of different Natures; as Light and Heat (which heerin
are somewhat Analogous to these two Spiritual Qualitys in the Nervs; that is,
the Perceptive are as Light, and the Motive as Hea^) yet they may well consist
together. And as the Species, which are the Instruments of Perception are, as I
said, of an Elementary Nature, so more manifestly are the Motive Spirits, which
are sensibly excited by Heat, and dejected by Cold, though they be both in
themselves far more Spiritual and Ethereal then these common Culinary Qualitys
of Light and Heat; for, as I have said, these Motive Spirits are such and so
prepared, that they Move not at all; but are in their Potentiality as the
others, until the Appetitive Faculty of the Sensitive Spirit Command them; and
then the Vegetative Spirit, which by its Plastical Virtue did prepare them for
this purpose, does Immediately Actuate and produce them; and so they, like
Gunpowder Incensed, suddenly and strongly Move the Body; and yet no more or any
other parts thereof, nor in any other manner, then according to the Imperium of
the Sensitive Spirit, and the Specifike Power thereof; which is the first Mover
itself; and does so Move them, as the Imagination does Contemplate the Species
Actuated and produced by the Vegetative Spirit; though the Motion of the Body
be Immediately by the Vegetative Spirit, and Motive Animal Spirits themselves;
as the Immediate Representation is by the Species: and so I conceiv that the
Sensitive Appetite also Moves these Motive Spirits, not as a Coachman does
Exhort his Horses only with his Voice, but as he Governs them with the Reins,
whereby he guides the Coach, and causes it to go this way, or that way as he
pleases, though it be Immediately drawn and Moved by the Horses, as the Body
is by the Vegetative and Animal Spirits: and this is the Gubernation that I
intend, whereby the Superior Spirits thus Govern the Inferior, that is, not
only by a bare Imperium or Command, but a Spiritual and Superior Motion, which
I call, Gubernatio, or Guiding, respectively according to the several Natures
of the Motions; but always according to its own Nature, and the Specifike Powers
thereof, that is, Spiritualy, and Sensitively with Perception and Appetite, and
not without them. Thus when the Sensitive Spirit would Imagine, it Commands
that such Internal Species be Actuated and Produced, which it also, as it were,
dictateth and calls for what it would have, and itself also Irradiateth and
Contemplateth them; and though, as I have showed, they are indeed of an
Elementary Nature, Prepared, Actuated, and produced, by the Vegetative Spirit,
yet the Performance is so Consentaneous, that we are apt to think, that our
Imagination does Create all its Phantasms in itself, and of itself; (as Poets
are so Poeticaly termed Makers). And so when it would Move the Body it not only
commands that the Motive Spirits be Actuated and produced, or that, as I
said, the Horses be made ready, but it also by a Superior Motive Power Guides
and Governs them so Spontaneously, that we are apt to think that our very
Soul does Move the Body Immediately by its own Impuls of the Appetite and Will,
and without any such Instrumentality of our Vegetative, or Elementary, Motive
Spirits; which yet we must acknowledge, since we plainly perceiv, that if there
be any defect in them, the Operations of the Soul are also defective; yea many
other very Curious Artifices and Motions of these Inferior Spirits in our own
Bodies, (that is, such as be not so Immediately Subservient to the Sensitive
Operations of the Imagination and Appetite) are performed without the
Imagination or Appetite; as Nutrition, the Motion of the Heart, and the like;
which we therefore call Involuntary, because therein the Vegetative and
Elementary Spirits do not Ordinarily attend the Command of the Sensitive
Spirit, nor are Governed thereby. Yet also, as they are such proper Inferior
Spirits Subordinate unto it, and Conjunct with it in the same Compositum, so
there is, as I said, and shall now show, a very notable Combination between
them; which may plainly appear by many Extraordinary Effects, and such as may
strangely vary and alter them: thus, as I have formerly observed, Mirth helps
Digestion, and is as it were the Nurs of Nutrition, whereas the Sorrow of the
World works Death: and these Sensitive Affections not only cause several
Motions of the Blood, and Alterations therein, but also in the very Systole and
Diastole, and Palpitations of the Heart; and, which is yet more Notable, in the
very Generation of another Individuum: and not only the Motive Power of the
Appetite, but also the Imagination itself does strangely Operate heerin; as we
commonly say, Conceit may do much; that is, concerning any thing which is
Internal, either in our Mind, or Body, yea in the very Foetus, while it is in
the Womb, and Nourished by the Parent, and is yet as it were some part of the
Compositum thereof; especialy while it is more Young and Tender, and more
capable of such Impressions; but chiefly in the very Act of Generation (which
Jacob knew, or was Supernaturaly taught and assisted by the Angel, who appeared
to him) for as it grows more Perfect in itself, and is nearer to Exclusion, it
becomes more Separate from the Parent, and another Compositum in itself, and
more firm and strong, and so less capable of Impressions by another: and thus I
conceiv, that the Imagination or Appetite of the Father does not Operate upon
the Foetus in the Womb of the Mother, nor of an Hen upon an Egg Excluded,
whiles she Incubates, and is hatching it. But the most wonderful thing is, how
the proper Vegetative Spirit of any Sensitive Animal, by the Command or
Intimation, of the Sensitive Imagination and Appetite, so Fansying and
Affecting some other Vegetative thing, should Actuate and produce in the
Foetus, not only Signatures thereof, but also somewhat of the same Vegetative
Nature: as I have been very credibly informed of a Person, whom I well knew,
and have often seen the Mole on his Chin, which was said to have been caused by
a Cherry thrown at his Mother, while she was Pregnant of him, in a Frolike
among Ladys who were then eating Cherries; that every year in the Season when
Cherry trees begin to budd, the Mole began to budd, as I may say, and so ripen
more, and at last putt forth some little Tufts, and be very angry and
troublesome; and then again, as the Season of Cher^ys departed, to decreas
likewise, and be less sensible; whereby it did plainly discover something of
the Cerasine Nature, Inoculated as it were into the Body of a Man. Whereof I
know no other account to be given, but only this Combination and Cooperation of
the Sensitive and Vegetative Spirit: and though, as I have showed, there is no
Universal Spirit, or Anima Mundi, from which such particular Spirits may be
derived and produced in any Bodies whatsoever; yet it is truly enough said,
Omnia Animarum sunt plena, if it be rightly understood; that is, as in the
first Chaos the Spirits were latent in their proper Elements, out of which they
were produced in the Six Days, so still there are Ethereal, and Aereal,
Spirits in Ether, and Air, out of which Comets, and the like Ethereal, or
Aereal, Meteors may be produced; and so the Terraqueous Globe, or the Cortex
thereof, is Pregnant not only with the Elementary Spirits of Water, and Earth,
but also of Vegetative and Sensitive Spirits, which while they are therein, as
in their Chaos, are dispersed and diffused, and so Confounded as in a Coagulum,
Inane, and Inform, that is, without any Economy, or Inviduality, which is
afterward Actuated and acquired by Successive Generation still producing them
according to the Archetypes or Protoplasta of Original Generation Instituted in
their first Improper Creations, as I have often mentioned: and though they
cannot always attein their Regular Perfections according to the Law of Nature,
yet there may be several Degrees thereof to which they may arrive, and so their
productions be more or less Anomalous or Monstrous, by reason of many
Obstructions and Defects: whereof the greatest is the general Curs of Nature for
the Sin of Man; so that now indeed, both he, and all this Spectable World,
which was given unto him, and all things therein, have some Monstrosity in them;
and there is now none of them exactly Perfect according to the first Instituted
Law of Nature, but all are Heterocliticaly Redundant, or Deficient: and though
we take less notice of others, yet some are so misshapen, that we Eminently term
them Monsters; and others such Imperfect Inceptions, that we hardly discern any
thing of the Specifike Nature therein: and such I conceiv this Cerasine Meteor,
as I may so term it, in the Body of Man to be; whose Cerasine Spirit, though
the Compositum thereof was Corrupted by Eating and Conversion into the Nutriment
of the Mother, and consequently of the Child in the Womb, yet was latent in the
new Compositum Generated by that Corruption; and that by the Imperium and
Impression of the Mothers Imagination and Appetite working on her proper
Vegetative Spirit, and that on its own Nutriment, the Cerasine Spirit was
Equivocaly, and very Rudely and Imperfectly produced; For thus, as I have said,
the Vegetative Spirit does Actuate and produce Elementary Mistion, Qualitys,
and Species, as Subordinate and Subservient to itself, though Classicaly
different; and so it may also Imperfectly produce another Vegetative Spirit,
which is of the same Classis with itself, as well as one Spirit of the same
Classis may, be Mist with another; and thus I conceiv, that as there apparently
is an Individual Economy in every particular Compositum, so also a Specifical
and Classical Polity, Subordination, and Combination of several Natures,
especialy in the same Compositum: and that thus the Sensitive Spirit by its own
Specifike Facultys does Command and Govern its own proper Vegetative Spirit,
which also by its own Specifike Powers does Serve and Obey it; and likewise
Order and Govern the proper Elementary Mistion that it requires, which
accordingly does Serve and Obey it Naturaly, with all Suavity and Facility: And
thus as the Imagination does more Spiritualy and Sensitively Irradiate the
Species, whereby it does Perceptively Contemplate them; so the Appetite does
also Sensitively enliven the Spirits, whereby it does Spontaneously Guide and
Govern them without any Violence or Reluctance; unless their happen some
D^stemper and Disorder among them: and I suppose, that as there are these
Confederacys and Combinations between Spirits, according to the Scale of Nature
and Economy thereof, so also there is a Subordinate Approximation, though no
Participation, Communication, or Confusion, of their different Natures; and
that the proper Vegetative Spirit of any Sensitive Animal is far more
Excellent and Spiritual then of any Grass, Herb, or Tree; and of Superior
Sensitives more then of Inferior; as of Fowls more then of Fishes, and of
Beasts then Fowls, and of Man then any others: and so also that the proper
Elementary Mistion which is Subordinate to Vegetatives, is more Excellent and
Spiritual then any other Elementary Mistum; and of Superior Vegetatives more
then of Inferior, and so of the Vegetative Blood which is the Instrument of
Sensitive Life, as I have showed, then any others whatsoever.

III. Having thus largely discoursed of this very Curious and Mysterious way of
Sensation generaly, whereby to make way for the Explication of the several
Kinds of particular Sensations, I shall now also proceed to discourse thereof,
and thereby to Confirm this general Doctrine of Sensation. The Senses are
particularly Five; though they all Subsist in the Imagination, which is seated
in the Brain, as I shall show hereafter, but they are rightly thus
di^^inguished, because they are Realy several in themselves; for Oisters, and
some such Imperfect Sensitives, have some of them, and not others, which they
want not only Actualy, but also Potentialy; so that an Oister may be no more
termed Blind, or Deaf, then a Stone: and thus, though in every Classis all the
several Species of that Classis have such Generical Spirits and Qualitys, as
Denominate and make them to be of that Classis; as Oisters have Sensation
generaly, and therefore are Sensitive Animals Genericaly as well as Beasts, or
any most Excellent Sensitive; yet their proper Sensation is Specifical, and
Specificaly different; as every Grass, Herb, and Tree, is Vegetative, and yet
every one of them, and every kind thereof, has a proper Specifical Spirit, and
Qualitys; as apparently they have their Specifical Plastical Virtues, which do
so severaly Effigiate them, and the like: and so also have Sensitives, so far
as they are specificaly different, their several ways or manners of Sensation,
as may also appear by the several Formation, Quantity, and Quality, or Temper
of their Brains, and Organs; as the Eyes of some Insects are not Movable, and
then they are Multocular, as well as many of them Multipedous; and Biocular
Animals have also their Eyes of several Figures, and Coats, and Temperatures;
and thus there are some such Generical Differences which vary the Classis; and
they are greatest and widest, as Intellective, Sensitive, Vegetative, and
Elementary; and some that vary the Species more or less Subalternately, as
Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts; and of Fishes, Oisters, and Whales: and accordingly
their Specifical Differences are more or less, but all less then Classicaly
Generical; and some that only vary the Individuality, as the particular
Individuality and Economy of every Compositum; among which also there may be
More or Less of the same Specifical Qualitys, but such as does not vary the
Species, and therefore is least of all; as Myopes do not see in such manner as
others of the same Species, and yet their Sight is Specificaly the same with
other men's Sight. And thus, as I have said, nothing of any one Classis does, or
can, partake of that which makes a Classical Difference in others; for then
they should not Classicaly Differ, nor any of one Species of the Proper
Specifical Difference of another, nor any one Individuum of the Individuality
of another, otherwise they should not so Differ; nor of the Differences of
their Spirits and Qualitys, whereby only we can know them, otherwise we could
not so know them, nor affirm them to Differ: but contrarily every Individuum
does partake of the Specifical Difference, and every Species of the Classical
Difference thereof; otherwise they should not be of the same Species, or
Classis. And thus the Senses are more Genericaly Five, and may be more
Specificaly as many as there are several Species of Sensitives, as well as they
are Individualy as many as there are several Sensitive Individua. And whereas
they are so said to be Fivefold according to their Fivefold several Organs,
that is, their External Organs, Eyes, Ears, and the like, which also the
Scripture does often mention as such, generaly and Comprehensively (as it does
deliver almost all things of Natural Philosophy in that general manner,
according to the first System thereof, and leav Particulars to our farther
Search and Study); yet if we farther Inquire into them, we shall find that the
Nervs, and Brain, and Elementary Qualitys, or Animal Spirits therein, and the
Proper Vegetative Spirit, and Virtues thereof, are also Internal Organs, that
is, Instruments of Sensation, as well as Eyes, and Ears, and the like Corporeal
Organs, which are External: and indeed the several Organs do not make the
Senses several, but rather the several Senses do require such several Organs:
for the Corporeal Organ of Tact is the whole Body, or all the Nervs, which are
Tactive, and every Organ of the four other Senses must have Tact or Feeling,
which is the Sens of all Senses, as the Organ thereof is the Organ of all their
Organs; and so is the Object thereof, which we therefore call the four first
Qualitys (though otherwise they are not first more then others, as I have
showed); and whereas the Objects of all the other Senses are Compounded of some
such other first Qualitys, and probably cannot Exist without some fit Mistion
of these four first Qualitys also, as Subordinately and Fundamentaly requisite
in their Composition, though they are not Immediately Compounded thereof: so
likewise the Object of this Sens, as it is in itself, is not all, or any of
these four first Qualitys severaly, but a Mistion or Composition of them, as
well as the Objects of all the other Senses are Mist and Compounded of their
several Principles: for indeed any of these four First and Simple Qualitys are
too Vehement Sensibles, in themselves which would destroy the Senses, yea and
all Sensible things, and one another; and therefore, as I have said, never
Exist Actualy without such a Mistion, as their Elementary Spirits were so Mist
in the three first Days, before which no Vegetative or Sensitive Nature could
be produced, and so must continue as long as this present Nature, and from the
Original Generation unto the Final Corruption thereof. Also all the Organs, both
External, and Internal, do require the Vegetative Spirit, and Virtues thereof,
Plasticaly to Form them, and Temper their Elementary Qualitys, and also to
Actuate and produce their Animal Spirits, as I have showed: and this I conceiv
to be the very Organism of all the Organs of Sensation, and Instrumentalitys of
the Sensitive Spirit, wherein as Tact or Feeling is Ingredient, as I said, so it
is in itself the Fundamental, and lest Fallible, and as it were Corporeal Sens;
yet Contact of Bodies, (as it is said, that nothing can touch or be touched but
only Bodies, and so indeed there must be a Contact of all Bodies without any
Discontinuity or Vacuity, as I have showed) which is Corporeal, and Tact which
is Spiritual, do very much differ: for so Heat by its Emanant Rays may be felt
at a very great distance without Corporeal Contact, as well as Light, or Color,
may be so seen; and yet it is also true, that as no other Operation, so also no
Sensation can be without Contact Corporeal or Spiritual. Now whereas all
Sensation is performed in the Brain, it is somewhat strange to conceiv how any
Sensible Object, yea the most Pure and Spiritual, should arrive thither through
all the Body, and the Nerval Succus, and all the Maeandrous Passages thereof;
which certainly is not by the Bodies thereof, that can not so penetrate and pass,
and if they should, would rather disturb and confound the Brain; nor by any
Effluvia thereof, which are also Bodies, though more Rare and Subtle; nor only
by their Emanations, for not only Sapors, and O^ors, which are Effluent, and
Light, and Heat, which are Emanant, but Cold, and Drines, which are not
Effluent, nor yet discovered to be Emanant, or very little, are Sensed; and so
also Sound, which certainly is neither Effluent, nor Emanant, but Transient:
but the Sensible Objects cause Sensation by Actuating their like Qualitys in the
Body, or some fit^ and Immediate Standard therein, as I shall now show, and not
by Motion and Pulls of the Brain, as I shall show hereafter; nor by any such
Gross and Corporeal Contact, or less Spiritual way, but such as is the most
Pure and Spiritual, whereof any Elementary Nature is capable, that is, by those
very wonderful Animal Spirits in the Nervs, as most Similar and fit
Instruments of the Sensitive Spirit, and which, as I conceiv, are severaly
prepared in the several Nervs by the Vegetative Spirit, that does so Effigiate
and Qualify the External Organs, and also these Internal Instrumentalitys,
whereby all the Nervs are furnished and instructed with their proper Spirits;
and then the External Object or Species thereof Operating upon the Standard by
Univocal Generation of like Qualitys, and they touching upon the Nervs, do
Irradiate, Excite, and Actuate them; whereby they having the Types thereof always
Potentialy in themselves, like a Needle touched with a Magnet, are suddenly, but
not Instantaneously as is supposed, quickened, and enlivened as it were, from
that very Contact to the Brain. And this is evidently seen in Juglers Feats of
Activity, as they are called, being so very quick and nimble, that they will
throw a small black Ball out of one hand into another before your Eyes, and yet
you shall not see it: and so in the common Experiment of a Firestick moved
swiftly round, which seems to make a Firewheel or whole Circle thereof, though
certainly the Stick be only in one and the same Point in the same Instant:
wherefore as the Emanation of Light and Color, though it be most swift and
Momentaneous, yet is not Instantaneous; so much less the Sensation of Sight,
which requires some time, for the Species not only to pass from the Contact to
the Nerv, but also to Irradiate and Excite the Animal Spirits therein; which
plainly are so Excited and Actuated thereby in the Nervs, because when the
Firestick passes away from one Point to another, yet the Ey sees it in that
Point from which it has passed, until it return thither again through the
whole Circle; whereas the Emanant Ray of the Light of the Fire always is, and
passes away Simultaneously, with the Inherent Light in the Body of the
Firestick: and therefore the Species in the Nervs, while it is newly Irradiated
and Actuated, is more strong and vivid then afterward: but the Ray being past
and gone, the Vision cannot be Immediately by that, but must be by something
more Immediate, which, as I suppose, can be none other then what I have
assigned; that is, the Irradiating Actuacting and Evoking of the Vi^ive Animal
Spirit, and the like Species therein by the Sensible Species; as the Sun by
Illustrating the Moon does Actuate and Evoke the Native Light which is
Potentialy in the Moon itself, as I have showed: and this Sensation of the
Senses, which is by the Instrumentality of the Sensorious Nervs, is that first
Sensation, whereof I discoursed before, whereby a Man sees another Man
Directly, or his own Face in a Glass Reflexively; and which is therefore so
Bright and Vivid, because the Irradiation, and Actuation is Immediately by the
Contact of the Real Sensible itself; whereas the other, that is by Imagination
or Contemplation of Phantasms in the Animal Spirits in the Brain, is but as a
Spectre or Apparition in respect thereof, because it has no such Irradiation by
the Object itself, but is only Actuated by the Vegetative Spirit, and then
Irradiated by the Imagination, as I conceiv; because as the Sensitive Spirit
cannot Immediately Consubstantiate the Elements without the Mediation of the
Vegetative Spirit, so neither can it Operate without the Mediation thereof: for
as things are in Being, so they are in Operation; as plainly the Intellective
Spirit of Man in this Conjunct State cannot Operate without the Mediation of
the Sensitive Spirit; and so of the rest, according to the Scale of Nature.
Also I conceiv that whereas this Operation of the Senses, which is by Elementary
upon Elementary, that is, of Sensibles upon the Animal Spirits, is by Immediate
Contact of the Sensibles; and so Light enters into the Ey, and Sound into the
Tympanum of the Ear, and Odors into the Nares, and Sapors into the Substance of
the Spongy Tongue, and the Flesh and whole Temper of the Body* is the Standard of
Feeling: for unless we do admit Emanations of Cold, Moisture, and Drines also
as well as of Heat, I cannot conceiv how the Object itself and the Tactive
Nervs can come together, whereby there may be any Contact between them, without
which certainly there can be no Operation; for when I touch a Cold S^one with
my Fingers ends, or other part of my Body, there are some Cuticles, if not
Flesh, between it and the Tactive Nervs; so that there cannot possibly be any
Contact: nor can the Inherent Cold in the Stone pass through the Pores unto the
Nervs any more then the Stone itself, in which it is Inherent: and though it is
true, that if a very fine Linen Cloth be girt hard and smooth about a polished
Agat haft of a Knife, and a live Coal laid upon the Linen Cloth, it will not
easily burn it, being defended by the Cold Agat; and so there may be some such
short Emanations of those Qualitys, which are therefore less noted, then of
Heat, and Light, and the like, which are so longinquous, and thereby more
notable; yet I conceiv that the Immediate Contact is between the Flesh and
Nervs. And it is to be observed, and well examined, what others affirm, that
there may be Motive Animal Spirits, and yet no Tactive Spirits in the same
Nervs; and there are Historical Instances of some such men who could work with
their hands as well as ever, and yet not feel, though they were pinched,
pricked, or cut; which I cannot deny, according to my former Hypothesis: for
so I suppose, that several Animal Spirits being only Spiritual Qualitys, may be
in the same Nerval Succus, and Substance, per omnia; and therefore also one
kind thereof may Actualy be without the other, (as Actual Heat without Light);
but then I suppose, that the Sens of Feeling being Fundamental, there cannot be
any other Sensorious Organ and Nervs in the Body of any such man, without it,
as the Eyes, Ears, Nares, Tongue, and the like. And it is also to be Inquired,
whether in such a Body the Flesh, which is the Standard, be not mortified or
benumbed? and then there can be no Sensation, though the Tactive, as well as
the Motive Spirits, be sound and perfect in the Nervs: and the constant
Temperament of the Flesh, though it be also a Misture of the four first
Qualitys, is not felt, because it is so Equal, and Natural, that it is also
suitable to the Crasis of the Body, and likewise of the Nervs, and Tactive
Spirits therein, and so does not Offend, or any way Affect them, whereby there
should be any such Feeling thereof, as when it is any way Distempered; and as we
feel any Excess of Heat, Cold, Moisture, or Drines, in the Flesh itself, so if
any other Tactible Object, which is External, be Unequal and Excessive in any
of those Qualitys, or otherwise not in every respect of all other Sensibility
such as is in the Flesh itself, it does more or less Offend or Affect it
whereby it is felt; and so the Temperament of the Flesh is the Standard, which
is varied by the Univocal Generation of any such Sensible Qualitys therein,
which Immediately touch upon the Nervs, and from that Contact, and Irradiation
of the Animal Spirits in the Nervs, the Sensibility passes to the Brain, where
the Sensation is performed. Thus Sens, which is itself a Spiritual and Living
Faculty, requires its own more Immediate Standard, and most Refined Spiritual^
Qualitys, or Animal Spirits, and the Spiritualy Plastical Virtue of the
Vegetative Spirit, in the spiritual Operation of any Sensation; as I have
showed in this Sens of Feeling (which is most Gross, and more Corporeal then
others) and shall farther show in all the other Senses, and their Sensations.
The next Sens to Feeling is Tasting; which therefore some have supposed to be
only another manner of Feeling; and it is indeed by Immediate Contact between
the Sapid Juice and the Tongue, which has also a Saliva, that is, the Standard
thereof, being in itself Indifferent to any Sapor, but when it is Infected by
the Sapid Liquor does convey it to the Gustative Nervs, whereby the Sensation
is performed, as I have showed: Yet certainly, as Sapor is a different Sensible
from all or any of the four first Qualitys (though there be some Mistion
thereof in the Juice, that may be felt by the Organ of Tasting, which is also
Tactive, by another Sensation) so is Taste a different Sens from Tact: and
though all the Body does Feel, yet it does not therefore Taste, but only the
Tongue, or Palate, and this Sensation is most Sensitively and exactly performed by
the Cuspis of the Tongue, where the Gustative Nervs meet together; as the Tactive
do in the Fingers ends of a Man, or Tail of an Eel: and in the whole Tongue there
is as it were a Source of Moisture, keeping it always Moist, and ready to issue
forth, to temper any Dry, and convey any Actualy Moist Sapors to the Nervs: and
if the Sapid Meat or Drink be not in the Mouth, but distant from it, yet the
Appetite does stir up Salivation, which is prepared to receiv it: whereby we
may observe that Combination and Confederacy between several Natures which I
have often mentioned, and which is indeed the true Sympathy, and the contrary
thereof the true Antipathy in Nature. The next Sens is Smelling; which also is
as like to Tasting, as Odor, which is the Object thereof, is like to Sapor,
which is the Object of Tasting; and as Sapor is in the grosser Liquor, and Odor
in the Vapor, so I suppose, that there is some Inodorous Vapor in the Nares, or
Mammillary Processes, which is the Standard of this Sens of Smelling, as the
Saliva is of Tasting; though it is more Subtle, and not so Discernible: and
though perhaps the very Body of Vapor may pass into the Brain, and though also
Sensation be, as I said, in the Brain, yet I do not conceiv that there is any
Smelling thereby, and more then when Odorous Vapors descend into the Stomach,
but that this Sensation also is performed like all the rest; that is, the
Odorous Vapor entering into the Tonell of the Nares, and passing thereby to the
Mammillary Processes, is there met and received by some such Mammillary Vapor
or Exudation, and so conveyed to the Olfactive Nervs therein, and thereby to the
Brain, where the Sensation is performed, by this way only, and not by the other
without it. Nor are the Nares the Immediate Organ of Smelling, but only the
Tonell, as I said, to convey the Odorous Vapor to the M^mmillary Processes,
which are the very Organ thereof; as all the Senses, except Feeling, (whereof the
Organ is the whole Body) have, besides their several External Organs, such
Atria or Avenues to conduct the Sensible unto the Sensorious Nervs. So the
Mouth is a Cavern, and the Nares, as I said, are a Tonell, and the Ears.
Anfractuous Passages, and the Wea has a Foramen, beside the Spherical Figure
of the Ey, which causes the Rays to Converge toward it. Also it is observed,
that as Vegetative Nutrition is performed in the lower Coquine of the Stomach,
so Sensation is in the Capitol of the Brain; and the Organs of the Superior and
more Excellent Senses are higher and nearer to it. Th^s Feeling is principaly
by the Fingers, and the Tongue is higher then them, and the Mammillary Processes
above that, and the Ears above them; and the Eyes above them all. Also the Ears
are double; not only as the Nares, which are Bipartite (having a Bridge to
strengthen them being such a Prominent part, and chief Ornament of the Face,
and both their For amina meet again above it) but standing asunder on each side
of the Head, to receiv Sound, which is Circumferentialy diffused* And so there
are two Eyes, to receiv Light and Colors: and this double provision is made for
these two Scientifical Senses, so as their Sensations may be performed by one
alone without the other, though not so completely; for as by shutting one Ey,
and contracting the Wea of the other, we see more distinctly, so we see less
of the Object in Latitude; and common Sight is by both Eyes together; so that if
an Object be placed at the tip of the Nose, you cannot well see it with both
Eyes at the same time; because both of them moving together, as one turns toward
it, the other turns from it; whereas, if the Object be more Remote the Rays come
more equaly, and less transversly, to both the Eyes. Yet though Hearing and
Seeing be such high and noble Senses, they are not performed in the Brain only,
like Imagination, and Appetition, but have their more External Organs, and
Standards: for so Hearing needs Ears; and there is also an Aura in the
Tympana, which is a Pure, Calm, and Silent Air, included in them, whereunto the
External Sound approaching, does propagate an Internal Sound in it, as in the
S^andard (wherein all Sounds were before Potentialy, as well as in the open Air)
and the Sound is Spiritualy propagated in it, as in the open Air, as I have
showed; and not by any new Collision or beating on the Tympana, as has been
supposed. And so Sight has not only its External Organs, the Eyes, (which have
a very quick and tender Feeling, and are very curiously composed) but also a
Standard therein, as I shall now show. Certainly Sight is not by any such
Intentional Species Emitted, as the Ancients supposed; for the Eyes, as well as
the Organs of all the Four other Senses, are made more fit for Reception then
Emission; and the Light, which does Irradiate the Colorate Object, does
manifestly with its Reflected Rays bring back the Actuated Species thereof to
the Eyes, and so Intromitt them; and therefore there is no need of any such
Extramission; though indeed in Seeing we seem to see the Object Outwardly, where
it Realy is, rather then Inwardly, where it is not: which, I suppose, was the
ground of that Error: whereas it is the Sens within, which does behold the
Object without, by Conjunction of both the Internal and External Lights, as I
shall show afterward. Wherefore others consydering that the External Ligh^ does
penetrate the whole Ey, even to the Retina, and Fundus, have persuaded
themselves that the Vision is there performed: but then we should see Visu
Inverso, Backwardly, and not Forwardly, as indeed we do: and because the Rays do
Intersect in the Ey above the Fundus, wherein they are Inverted, we should see
the Image of the Object Situ Inverso, as indeed we do not. But I conceiv the
true manner of Vision to be both by Intromission of the External Light, and
Extramission of an Internal Light, meeting therewith in the Ey, though not
passing out of it; whereby the Species of the Object is doubly refined, that
is, first by the External Light Irradiating it, and Abstracting from it the
Colorous Species (which are not Emanant of themselves, nor Sensible, as Emanant
Heat, but must be thus first Purified and Abstracted by the External Light) and
then again the Internal Light in the Ey meeting it, and being Irradiated and
Affected thereby, as the Standard of Sight, has its own Potential Species,
which are yet more Pure and Spiritual, Actuated in itself; as well as in the
Standards of all the other Senses, as I have before showed. And this meeting or
Conjunction of both these Lights, is, as I suppose, in or about the Crystalline
Humor, which Physicians rightly term, Speculum Oculi; though we do not see the
Image therein Reflected from the Retina, and Fundus, where it is Inverted; for
then again we should see it Inverted: but we see it foreright and Direct,
according to the Refracted Rays of the External Light Intromitted, and
Extramission of the Internal Light, there meeting with it, as I have said; as
when we look through Perspicills or Spectacles: and though indeed in a Speculum
which is Plane or Unequal, as the Crystalline Humor is, we see the Reflected
Image foreright and Direct, according to the Natural manner of Vision; yet we
see it as the Object itself is, and not Inverted, as we should by such double
Reflection, as I have showed: and such double Reflection would too much weaken
the Species, and hinder Vision. Now that there is such an Internal Light, which
being Incolorous in itself, is the Standard of Sight, as I have said, is
acknowledged by Physicians, who call it the Bright Spirit of the Ey, which
though in a dead Ey it be extinct, and does not appear, yet is manifest by the
great difference heerin between a living and a dead Ey: and you may easily
deprehend it in your own living Ey, by depressing and distorting the Vitreous
Humor in the hinder part thereof* whereby you shall perceiv a Golden Ring of
Light, with a dark Meditullium in the midst thereof; which will not so appear by
depressing and distorting the Aqueous Humor in the forepart of the Ey, wherein
this Internal Light is not, but in the Vitreous Humor; which is next to the
Optike Nervs: and by such depression and distortion, as also by any great blow
upon the Ey, it is Conspissa^ed, and rendered Visible; yea the Sun, or any
vehement Lucidity, if you behold it long, will so Irradiate and Actuate the
Internal Light, that it will not soon be extinguished afterward: which also
plainly shows, how External Species of Sensible Objects may Irradiate and
Actuate the Internal, as I have said, so as they shall continue some time after
the Objects themselves, and their Species, are removed. And the dark Meditullium
is the Crystalline Lens, which by such depression and distortion of the Ey is
rendered V^sible, though otherwise it be only the Diaphanum of the External
Light, and as it were a Speculum to the Internal Sight. Having premised this
Hypothesis of the most Natural and Direct way of Vision, I recommend it, as I
do all others, to more Exact and farther Examination: and as I have formerly
presented Optike, as a very Scientifical Study, or Philosophical Light, I shall
here transgress the bounds of a general System, in some more particular
Observations, and Physical Conceptions thereof; because indeed I find Optike so
much mistaken by others, and made a particular Mathematical Science; though it
be no more Mathematical, then Astronomy; which certainly is distinct and very
different from Geometry, or Uranometry, which is only assistant and subservient
unto it. So though Actinometry be assistant and subservient to Optike, because
the Rays from Point to Point pass, as I have said, in most direct Mathematical
Lines, yet the Inflection thereof at the Points, either by Refraction, or
Reflection, which is properly Optical, is purely Physical and Spiritual; and
not so well understood, and therefore commonly pretermitted: but though the
Spiritual Nature thereof be very various and may seem to be contrary; yet that
is from contrary Reasons, which, if rightly understood, will be found most
Regular and Proportionable in that very variety, and contrariety* The Light,
which is not Corporeal, but Spiritual, as I have showed, is Actus Visibilis,
and Diaphani; and is Naturaly of itself Emanant from the Center of Inherent
Light to the Circumference of the Sphere of Emanation, which is the Sphere of
its Activity; but by some contrary Opacity in the more or less Opacum, or
Diaphanum, is more or less Reflected, or Refracted: Yet the Air, which is the
Natural Diaphanum, and Medium of Sight, causes very little Refraction, and no
Visible Intersection of the Rays; as I have observed of four several Colors
from four several Walls of a Rome, crossing one another, which yet are seen in
any Point of the Room severaly and distinctly, without any Visible
Intersection, and Inversion, or Confusion thereby; such as appears in it
afterward through Water or Glass, and the like, which are no Natural, but
Artificial Media of Sight; and in both we see not by any Intersecting Rays
which pass over the Ey. And though Air be much more Dens, yet perhaps not much
more Opacou^ then Ether, but is as a Medium, neither Lucid, nor very Opacous;
and I suppose the Opacity that is in it, is more from the Waters above, or
Vapors, then from itself, which is an Expansum as well as Ether: and it is
Opacity that Refracts, and Reflects, more then Density, as Ink does more then
other Water, or Glass, though as Dens and Heavy. Thus I conceiv the reason, why
the Sun, or full Moon, rising, or setting, seem so much greater, to be from the
Vapors in the Airy Atmosphere (as a small Vessel at Sea, in Misty Weather, will
seem as bigg as a greater Ship, in Sude Weather, at the same distance) and the
Prospect of them Horizontaly through the Vapors may be as far as a Line of
Vision from them to the Ey may be tangent on the Globe of the Earth: and this
also makes them seem more Red, by Local Union of their Rays of Light with the
more Opacous and Dens Vapors: as if you hold Leaf Gold against the Sun, and so
look through it, you shall see it Green, by the Union of its Yellow with its
own Opacity and Density: but the Sun at Midday, and Moon at M^dnight, are seen
less, and more bright; because the Prospect of them then is through a less space
of the Vaporous Atmosphere, which is not so great, as the Sensible Horizon of
the Earth; and as the Vapors ascend higher, they are less Opacous and Dens; as
appears by an open Weather-glass, at the bottom, or top, of a Steeple: and a
Man, standing on the top of a Steeple, seems less, then at the same distance on
the ground; which is partly from the same, and partly from another reason;
because we see him Perpendicularly on the top of the Steeple, and more
Hemisphericaly on the ground; as if we look from the bottom of a Steeple
Perpendicularly to the top thereof, it will seem shorter, and nearer, then if we
stand at a like distance from the bottom, and behold it more Hemisphericaly;
which is the Natural manner of Vision, as I shall show hereafter. Again, as the
Sun at Midday may be wholly Obnubilated by a thick Cloud, and not seen at all,
so he may be so partly Veiled by a more thin Cloud, that we may see his Disk,
but less then when we see him in a clear Sky, with the Halo and Luster of his
Rays about him. And thus Venus, or Mercury, or other Stars, rising, or
setting, may appear less; because their less Lights are partly so Veiled, though
not wholly Obnubilated, by the very Vaporous Atmosphere: for according to the
several Degrees of the Opacity and Density of the Media, and more or less
Lucidity of the Objects, so they are seen greater, or less, respectively and
proportionably. And thus not only External, but also Internal Vapors, as in
Drunken men, may Magnify Objects. But there is a very great Refraction in the
Organ of the Ey, which is therefore so composed, to temper the vehement
Lucidity of the Rays; and also by that Refraction, the Rays Converge, and are
Contracted, in and by the Spherical Figure of the Ey, whereby the greatest
Objects may be seen in small. And as there is no Visible Intersection and
Inversion in the Air (as Babys in the Cornea, which are Erect Images, and not
Inverted, do plainly show) so neither in the Ey itself, after the point of
Incidence in the Cornea, where the Rays are so Reflected; and also pass through
it and the Foramen Vveae, into the Crystalline Humor, whereby they are
Refracted, and Converge, until after and beyond the Point of Exidence; from
and out of which they Intersect, and are Inverted, as I suppose, in the
Vitreous Humor: for the Aqueous Humor is as a Convexoconcave Glass in itself,
whose Convexity does cause to Converge, and Concavity to Diverge; and being
Contiguous with the Crystalline Lens, they are Opticaly both as it were one
Continuous Glass, or the like, with some small difference between them; that
is, the Crystalline is somewhat more Opacous and Dens, and so may Refract, and
cause to Converge somewhat more, and to Intersect somewhat sooner: and we may
best conceiv of them both, as of a Globule, or rather Cylinder, of a Glass
Vessel, whose upper part is filled with Water, and lower part is solid Glass,
and having the upper Extremity more Unequal then the nether: and I conceiv,
that Rays transmitted through such a short Cylinder will not Intersect, and be
Inverted, within the Body thereof, but beneath, and after the Point of
Excidence, in the nether Extremity thereof; (and in the Cylinder itself are
only proportionably Inflected and distended) as if you look through a round
Glass Vessel filled with Water (and, if you pleas, also let down a Lens into
it hanging by a string) and place the Flame of a Candle before it, and then
apply your Ey behind it, you shall see the Image of the Flame Erect, and not
Inverted; though it is true, that if you look behind the dead Oxes Ey, in the
Foramen of a dark Room, you shall see the Image of the Object Inverted; because
you look behind the Vitreous Humor thereof, wherein I suppose the Intersection
and Inversion to be; and probably in or about the Center of the Ey, which may
be below the Superficies of such a Sphere, whereof the Gibbus in the Cornea is a
Portion or Segment; and I conceiv, that the Irradiation and Actuation of the
Species in the Internal Light, by the External, and Conjunction therewith, is
before the first Intersection and Inversion of the Rays thereof in the Ey;
because we thereby see the Image of the Object Erect, and not Inverted; and the
Internal Light, being so Irradiated, and having its Species already Actuated in
itself, by the Conjunction with the External Light, is no farther concerned
therein, nor in the Intersection and Inversion thereof afterward in the Retina,
then in the Babys in the Cornea; and that it sees nothing behind it, or
backward, but only forward; which is the very Natural way of Vision; and the
Immediate Vision is by its own Species so Actuated in the Internal Light, as
the Standard; as in all other Sensations, as I have showed: and as the Aqueous
Humor is the Organical and Immediate Medium, for the transmission of the
External Light, so is the Vitreous Humor of the Internal Light: and as we see
nothing in the Air, which is the most Natural and common Medium, so neither in
these Organical Media, ordinarily, and according to Nature; unless they be
Violently distorted, or infected. Wherefore we do not see the Image of the
Object Inverted, and Reflected from the Retina, as I have said: for if we did
so, we should also see the Retina itself, and Concavity of the Vitreous Humor;
as when we see an Image in a Speculum, we also see the Speculum; or on the
white Paper in a dark Room, we also see the Paper, and that part of the Room.
Having thus far considered the Natural way of Vision, I shall now proceed to
consider Refraction, and Reflection, also in order to Vision: which to
explicate Visibly and Ocularly, let Experiment, thereof be made by Lights of
Candles set one near to another; and first place a Unequal Lens against the
midst of the Candles, at such a distance as we usualy read; and apply your Ey
to the Lens, as nigh as we do Spectacles to the Eyes; and you shall see all the
Candles standing asunder, as wide as a Line of the Page of a Book, and somewhat
greater, but not altogether so clear and bright as with the open Ey, as we do
thus see by reading with Spectacles. Of which Invention this is the use and
benefit, that though they make the Letters to appear somewhat more dim, yet in
reading small prints, it is recompensed with the advantage of making them them
to appear conveniently great; whereas they are not so useful in beholding
greater Objects, or at a farther distance: and probably Presbytae, or old men,
who need Spectacles, have their Eyes, or Crystalline Lentes, too much deprest,
or otherwise so figured, whereby the Intersection, and Focus of the Rays, is to
far below in the Vitreous Humor* for the best Vision is neither too near to
the Focus, or Concours, where the Confusion is; nor too far from it, where the
Species are less, as I shall show hereafter. Then if you draw back your Ey from
the Lens, being held at a convenient distance between the Candles and your Ey,
you shall see only one Candle, and the Flame thereof greater and greater, and
more and more dim, until you come to the Focus; because the Rays, being
Refracted through the Unequal Lens, do Converge to the Focus, and the Rays of
the Collateral Candles first Intersect, and pass over the Ey and Crystalline
Humor; and so, not meeting with the Internal Light, are not seen; but the Rays
of that Candle, which is seen, being more Perpendicular, pass into the Ey and
Crystalline Humor, whereby it is seen; and they alone so passing into it, and
being distended by the Refraction, are Diluted and weakened, and become more
dim; and also by their Distention, their Objective Base is enlarged, and the
Sight of them is under a larger or greater Angle of Vision, whereby they seem
greater, as I shall show hereafter. And at, and about the Focus, where the
Visible Intersection is in a very odd manner, as I shall also show hereafter,
there is a Confusion of the Rays, and no distinct Image of the Flame, but only
a glaring Light. And as you draw your Ey farther back from it, you shall begin
to see the Image Inverted, and proportionably as great behind the Focus, as
before it, and so less and less, and more and more distinct, until it begin to
be Rotundated into the Spherical Light of the Rays, and so disappear and vanish
away into them. Again, if laying aside the Unequal Lens, you place a Concave
Lens instead thereof, as you did first before, and so look through it, you shall
see all the Candles, but much less, and more clear and bright; because the Rays,
passing through it, do Diverge; and therefore Myopes use such Concave
Spectacles because their Eyes, or Crystalline Lentes, are too Spherical, or
otherwise so figured, as that the Intersection in the Ey is too high in the
Vitreous Humor, whereby the Internal Light meeting with the External, in
Confusion of the Rays, or too near unto it, the Concave Spectacles do prolong
the Intersection, and make it to be lower, whereby they see more distinctly.
And the more you draw back your Ey from the Concave Lens, you shall see all the
Candles still less and less, from the contrary Reason of Divergence; and very
clearly, because so many Rays of them all come together into the Ey, and so
Illustrate and fortify one another. But there is no Intersection or Inversion
seen by looking through any Concave Lentes; because there is no such
Convergence, as by Unequal Lentes. Thus you may also try by a Covex Lens before
a Concave, or Concave before a Unequal, or with a Convexoconcave, Planoconvex,
or Planoconcave Lens, or with Globules, or Prisms, or the like, as you pleas;
whereby you shall better satisfy your self, then can be expressed in any
Diagramms. And particularly, you may try with the Perspective Tube, or
Telescope, which was the happy Invention of all the advantages of seeing at a
great distance, and whereby all the disadvantages are mutualy remedied; that
is, the Convergence of the Rays does Magnify, and enlarge the Objective Base,
according to the proportion of those few Rays, which arrive to, and meet with
the Internal Light; and the Divergence thereof again, before the Intersection,
does also widen the Angle of Vision, and render them more Parallel, and Direct;
and as the Perpendicular Ray itself, or Axis of Vision, so all Collateral Rays,
as they are more Pependicular, and less Oblique, are more Visible, strong, and
clear. Again, let the Planoconvex, or Planoconcave Lentes, be lined, behind on
the Plane side, with black Paper, or the like; and first place the other side
of the Planoconvex Lens toward one Candle, and you shall see the Principal
Image of the Flame, which penetrates the Glass, less; and, as you draw back the
Lens, still less and less Reflected from the Fundus, or black Paper, and Erect;
though there may be also (especialy if you hold the Lens somewhat Obliquely)
another Image thereof, Reflected only from the Superficies, and dancing about
it; which will be Inverted, as I have showed: and the Erect Image in this, or
any Plane Speculum, though the Profundity thereof be very little, seems to
penetrate it as much forward, as the Object is backward, or behind the Ey; for
the Natural way of Vision being, as I said, foreright, we seem to see the
Reflected Images of Objects behind, as if they were before, and as far before
as they are behind, or proportionably according to the Position of the Ey
between the Speculum and the Object: for we Immediately see the Image, and the
Object Mediately by it: and yet as it penetrates the Diaphanous Speculum, and
is Reflected from the Fundus, we see it according to the Longitude of the Ray
Reflected from the Object to the Speculum, if the Ey be near to it, because we
also see the Object Mediately by it. Also the penetration of the Speculum by
the Ray is consyderable; for if it be too Profund, it does not only diminish
the Visible Longitude, but drown the Brightness and Color of the Image; as if
you look into a deep Water, you shall see only a dark Shadow of your self;
whereas in a more shallow Water, you may see more bright Colors of the Reflected
Image; but I suppose the dark Shadow which appears in more deep Water is,
because the Brightness is Extinguished thereby, and the Rays which penetrate it,
are drowned in it: but if the Object be Lucid, as the Flame of a Candle, or
Sun, Moon, or Starr, they may appear otherwise; because by their great Lucidity
they overcome the Opacity and Density of the deep Water. Also it is to be
observed, that the Object at the Bank or Limbus of a River or Speculum is seen
Inverted, according to Longitude; because the feet, which are next to it, are
seen upper, and the Head, that is farther, is seen nether; and as your Ey
draws nearer to the Object, or that to your Ey, so it will appear more and
more Erect: but it is never seen Inverted, according to Latitude, as in a
Concave Speculum, whereby the Right side shall be seen Left, and the Left
Right. But if you take away the Planoconvex Lens, and instead thereof place the
Planoconcave Lens, so as before, you shall see the Object, if you look very
near, much Magnified, by the Divergence of the Rays thereof; and, as you draw it
farther back, less and less. Also as before, in the very Fundus of the
Concavity to which the Rays pass more Directly, and where they so penetrate the
Speculum, as well as if it were Unequal, or Plane, you may see one Erect Image;
whereas, if the Concave Speculum be not Diaphanous, but Opacous, and only
Polite, as of Steel, or the like, you shall see no such Erect Image therein; but
only Inverted, so as you shall see others Reflected only from, and dancing
about the Superficies of the Concave Speculum; because they do not penetrate the
Diaphanum thereof, but being Reflected first from the Limbus, and back again
from the sides to the Ey, are thereby Inverted, as I have showed. And if you
behold the Inverted Image in the Concave Speculum Obliquely, it may seem to
come toward the Ey; because it does not penetrate, and pass forward, as the
Erect Image; but you shall always see it before, and never behind, though the
Object be behind you. Thus as there are Primary and Secondary Rays of Light, as
I have formerly showed, so also Species of Colors, or Images; that is, the
Primary Species are of Fixed Colors, which are seen Objectively, as they are,
and where they are, (if there be no other Impediment); and the Secondary
Species are of desultory Colors, or Images, whereby the Objects are seen as
they are not, and where they are not, according to the variation of the Rays,
as I have showed. But as we see no Images in the Natural Medium, as Specter in
the Air; so neither in the Natural Organ of the Ey, unles it be violently
distorted, as I have showed, or be infected, as with the Jaundise, or the like,
or have Motes and Suffusions in it, whereof the Erect Images do appear foreright
without the Ey, because they penetrate the Apex of the Concave Cornea, like the
Erect Image in the Fundus of a Concave Speculum, as I have showed. And now I
shall proceed farther to show the Differences between Refraction and
Reflection; and how Vision is Immediately by Refraction, and only Mediately by
Reflection of Rays, or Images: for Refraction is more Instrumentaly Visive,
according to which we see through the Organ and Medium foreright, but
Reflection is more Objective, according to which we see the Object by the
Reflected Image thereof Forwardly, but never Backwardly, as I have said.
Refraction, as is commonly observed, if it be through a more Opacous and Dens
Medium, is ad Perpendiculum, according to the Point of Incidence; and through a
less Opacous and Dens Medium, it is a Perpendiculo, that is, its own
Perpendicular Line, according to the Point of Excidence; and so the Rays,
though they Diverge from their own Perpendicula according to the Points of
Excidence, yet Converge to the common Perpendiculum according to their Points
of Incidence; whereby after they have passed through the more Opacous and Dens
Medium into the other, which is l^ss Opacous and Dens, they Intersect and are
Decussated forward, as Reflected Rays do Intersect and are Decussated backward:
for so the several Lines of Incidence Intersect, and are Decussated through
their several Lines of Reflection; but then the first Reflected is Intersected
by the second Incident Ray, and so in order one after another (as we may
conceiv thereof, though in truth it is the Continuous Flux of Light, as I have
said, which is Reflected after such a manner; otherwise we should see the
Reflected Image only as so many several Points, such as children prick out to
make Faces in Paper, and not as one Continuous Picture) whereas in Refraction,
whereby the Rays are not terminated and reverberated, as by Reflection, but
only Converge, and so pass forward, the two utmost Oblique Rays first Intersect
one another, and so the next, and the next, in an odd manner; and somewhat like
to Lines of Contingence, or such as are Tangent upon the several Points of a
Sphere. And now again, for more sensible Explanation, Let a Unequal Lens be
placed against the Flame of one Candle, as before, (whereby the Intersection
may be seen on a white Paper) and let the Paper be so placed as to receiv and
Reflect it (which may discover all these Optical Experiments, as well as if
they were made in the dark Room, for the reason is the same, and though the
Room be not so dark, yet the Flame being so very Lucid does sufficiently
manifest them) Thus if the Lens be somewhat near to the Candle, and ^he Paper to
the Lens, you shall see first a glaring Light, and Confusion, by that odd
Intersection of the Refracted Rays, Converging, and passing through the Lens,
and then Reflected on the Paper: and as you draw the Paper farther back from
the Lens, you shall begin to see a greater Image of the Flame Inverted, and so
less and less, until you see it least; and then it is most bright and vivid,
by Conspissation of the Rays: whereas if you look through the Lens with your Ey
a^ such distances, you shall first see the Flame Erect, and greater and
greater, until you come to that distance where it was least on the Paper; and
there looking through the Lens, you shall see the glaring Light and Confusion;
whereby it plainly appears, that Sight, which is by such looking through the
Ey, forward, and not backward, is not by Intuition of the Reflected Image in
the Retina, but by the Direct Species of the Object Refracted through the
Crystalline Lens; otherwise we should see the Object least, where we see it
greatest: and though the Image be Inverted in the Retina after the
Intersection, yet the Species is Erect in the Crystalline Humor, before it;
whereby we see the Object Erect, as I have showed. And as I have formerly
observed, so it may appear by the Image Reflected on the white Paper, that the
farther the Object is from the Lens before it, the nearer is the Intersection
behind it, and the nearer the farther; and the more Unequal the Lens is, like
the Crystalline Humor, the difference is the less; and it is greatest at first,
and less afterward; so that there appears no great difference in the distances
of the Focus of the Sun, and Moon, through the same Lens, Reflected on a white
Paper, though the distances of the Sun, and Moon, themselves, be vastly
different; and though their several Diameters also be as different, yet there
appears little difference thereof in their Foci; whence some useful Observations
may be collected, which I leav to Astronomers; and shall only Opticaly observe,
that where the Object, and consequently the Intersection in the Ey, are at the
fittest Distance, there is the Meta of Sight, and most distinct and clear
Vision; which also varys according to the several Figures of several Eyes, and
nearer or farther to or from that Meta, we see less distinctly and clearly, as
I shall show afterward. Again, if you take away the Unequal, and instead thereof
place a Concave Lens, as before, between the Candle and the Paper, you shall
begin to see an Image of the Flame Inverted, but less then through the Unequal
Lens, and not Erect, as through the Planoconcave Lens, because the Refracted
Rays Diverge both ways through this Ambiconcave Lens, and penetrate through no
such Planities, nor are Reflected from the Fundus, as in the other: and as this
Inverted Image appears less and less, so where it is least, you may plainly see
it environed with a Halo about it, which is by the Divergence of the Collateral
Rays: and I conceiv that Vision through a Concave Glass is according to those
Rays which so Diverge thereby, and not according to the little Image Reflected
on the Paper; but I suppose, that it being Inverted and Intersecting far
nearer then that through the Unequal Glass, the Rays thereof, which are doubly
Reflected to and from the Limbus, as I have showed, and so penetrate the
Fundus, which is inmost, and pass unto the Paper, where the second Reflection
is, do in the Ey pass over the Crystalline Lens; and therefore we do not see
thereby, and these are much weaker then the other, in their Focus, where they
burn far less through a Concave, then through a Unequal Lens: and so are the
Inverted Images, which dance about the Superficies more feint and weak, then
the Erect, which penetrate the Profundity; because such Inversion is caused by
double Reflection, which does weaken, as I have said: whereas single Reflection
through the Lens does more strengthen, by Conspissation of the Rays, and that
also does make the Inverted Image in the Focus Reflected on the Paper very
vivid, and more bright then such as dance about the Superficies of the Glass.
But it is plain, that we do see through the Concave Lens only according to the
Diverging Rays, because we do not see only the Image of one Object, as through a
Unequal Lens, but very many, and all Erect, and never Inverted: for Divergence
does not cause Intersection, nor Inversion. But generaly after the most bright
and least Image Reflected on the Paper, either through the Concave or Unequal
Lens, it begins again to be dispersed and disappear, by drawing back the Paper
farther beyond the Focus, and so to Rotundate itself, by returning to fill the
Natural Sphere of Light, though the Flame of the Candle be Pyramidal. Also it
is generaly true, that all Refraction, by passing through that contrary Opacity
and Density of the Diaphanous Body, though it does penetrate, and partly
overcome it, yet does also so far thereby distend and dilate and weaken the
Refracted Rays; and by that Union with the Opacity and Density, the Diaphanum,
with the Light in it, is rendered partly Objective and Visible, and quas^
Colorous: but Reflection of Rays, which do not penetrate the Superficies, or
not very far, but are terminated thereby, and made to Converge, or
Reduplicated, does Illustrate and fortify them; and therefore no Unequal burning
glass can be made to burn so strongly, as a Parabolicaly Concave Steel Polite;
wherein, as there is no such disadvantage by Refraction, so there are the
advantages both of Reduplication, and also of Concursion of the Rays to a
Point. Now I shall consider Latitude, and Longitude of Vision; which though
they are also Optical, and not only Mathematical, yet they are Opticaly
proportionable one unto another, and both with Magnitude. And I suppose that as
the Light is Naturaly Spherical, and that part of the Ey, whereby we see
forward, Hemispherical; so also that Sight is according to an Hemisphere, or
some Segment thereof; and that, as a Lens, which is the Segment of a larger
Circle, though it be therefore greater Mathematicaly, yet is Opticaly no more
then a proportionable Segment of a less Circle; so the Objective Base of the
Pyramid Radiosa, whereby we see, being, as I said, an Hemispherical Segment,
though it be of a greater Circle, and proportionably greater, or more Late, yet
conteins no more Objects, then of a less Circle; because both are proportionably
Circular, whether they be Quadrants, or Semiquadrants, or the like, of either
Circle: and as the Optical Segment is greater or more Late, so the same Objects
contained within it are seen greater proportionably, then if they be continued
within the Segment of a less Circle; but heerin the Optical differs from the
Mathematical Segment of a Circle; for the Objects are seen greater through a
more Circular Lens, if it be held near to the Ey, as in a common Microscope,
and proportionably according to the Distance, and Circumference of the Lens,
which must be greater and more Late, if it be held farther, as in the
Telescope; because they are seen fewer, when fewer Rays thereof pass into the Ey,
and more pass over; and fewer Rays passing into the Ey always make a greater or
more Late Optical Segment, and are seen as great, as more Objects together
within that Segment, when more Rays pass into the Ey. Also the Angle of Vision,
as they term it, is proportionable to the Objective Base; for indeed it is not,
nor can it be an Angle of Contingence, nor any perfect Cone (as an Image can
never be a Point) but a Conoid, and somewhat Late, proportionably according to
the Base of the Pyramid Radiosa: and so we are said to see more Objects, under
a wider Mathematical Angle; but we see the same Object greater or more Late,
under a more Late Optical Angle, or Conoid; according to which we see more
Immediately in the Ey itself, which is the Standard of Vision, both of the
Color, and also of the Latitude, and Longitude. Also the Longitude is
proportionable to the Latitude Opticaly, rather then Mathematicaly; for though
a larger Circle has always a longer Diameter, yet as the Optical Segment and
Conoid are greater and more Late, so the Axis or Diameter is shorter; like a
Lens, which as it has a more Late Superficies, has a less Profundity: and
thus always, when we see the same Object greater, we see it nearer, and less,
farther. And because the Natural way of Vision is Hemispherical, therefore if we
see Perpendicularly, as I said, that is, according to half the Hemispere; as if
we lay our Ey on a long Plane Table; or standing on the Shore, behold the Sea;
or looking on the side of a Brickwall, behold the white Lines thereof; our
Vision is disturbed thereby: because the other Rays, which do not come to the Ey
Hemisphericaly, but rise toward and press upon the Perpendicular Axis of
Vision, do oppress and disturb it; and so the Object seems to rise higher, as
the Sea does to the Sight one way; and the Rays Converging together toward the
Axis the other way, seem at length to meet, and terminate the Sight, as the
white Lines of the Brickwall. Again in Natural Vision itself, there is an
Optical proportion to be considered, according to the several Figures of
several Eyes, as I have said; and so the Meta of the most distinct Vision is
such, as that some read best farther, and some nearer, as Myopes, who hold a
Book as near to their Ey as they may; because the Object being nearer, the
Intersection in the Ey is somewhat farther and lower, as I have said before: and
they are thus helped by Concave Glasses, as I suppose, rather then by the little
Image which does penetrate the Fundus thereof; though I conceiv that Presbytae
are helped by the like Image penetrating the Unequal Glasses, which they use:
but as the Convergence by the Unequal Glasses does help them, whereby certainly
the Intersection is nearer and higherin their Eyes; so the Divergence by the
Concave Glasses does help the other, whereby the Intersection in their Eyes
should be farther and lower; as certainly their common Vision is very much
nearer: and as in Unequal Glasses, the utmost Rays, which Converge most, and so
first Intersect, do therefore pass over the Ey, and only the Rays of the Image
pass into it; so also in Concave Glasses, the inmost Rays of the Image, which
only Converge, and Intersect so soon, do therefore pass over it: but I referr
this to the consyderation of Myopes themselves, who can better declare the
Experiment thereof unto us, then we unto ourselvs, who have not their Eyes. Yet I
may very well suppose that according to the Meta of Vision, which is different
in several men, according to the different Figures of their Eyes, so the
Latitude and Longitude of Objects seen at the Meta is proportionable Opticaly,
but not Mathematicaly: for probably he that sees at the nearest Meta, sees as
many Objects within the Latitude thereof, and them Visibly as far in Longitude,
as he that sees at the farthest, and so proportionably: and so as we all look
beyond this Meta of the most distinct Vision, we see less distinctly; because
the Intersection in the Ey is somewhat varied thereby; though not consyderably
at any greater distance, as I have said: but I conceiv also, that because the
Rays which come into the Ey being weaker as they are more distant do less
affect the Sight by its own Internal Light in the Standard, therefore we see
the Objects less clearly and distinctly; and if they be very Remote, and not
very Lucid, we see them very confusedly; and at last not at all; that is, as
far as the V^sible Lucidity of their Rays does pass, and no farther: Thus as
there is that, which I call the Meta of the most distinct Vision, so also a
Limes, or Boundary of the utmost V^sion; which if the O^jects be only Colorate,
as the Earth, and Earthy Bodies, is not many miles distant from the Ey, and as I
suppose proportionable to the Meta: but if the Objects be more, or less Lucid,
as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, they may be seen proportionably farther: and yet
as the Intersection, so the Latitude, and Longitude, is not consyderable at any
greater distance: for so if we look on the surface of the Sea, we see the
Ether, and Ethereal Bodies therein, not much greater, nor farther
proportionably; but only see the Ether beyond the Sea, as we see Ships at Sea
at a great distance, one beyond another, but very near one to another, though
they be far distant one from another. Also as the Vigor of the Rays is Finite,
and therefore less as they pass farther, so is the Strength of Vision itself;
and therefore if we look through an open Tube with o^e Ey, we see the same
Object, being but one, more clearly and distinctly, then if we see many Objects
with both our open Eyes; though we see the one O^ject neither greater, nor
nearer, so as we do through the Telescope. And so though Art may help Nature in
one respect, yet it hinders it in another; and therefore also when we see
Objects greater, and nearer, through the Telescope, we see them more dim then
when we see as great, and as near, with our open Eyes: for Nature is Universaly
best in herself, and has best consulted all those benefits together which she
intends; as I have observed of the three Quantitys; that what is gained by
one is lost in another; and so Madmen are stronger then others, by a sudden and
greater Expens of Spirits, but weaker afterward. And such Artificial advantages
of Sight are only to be made use of upon particular occasions, and not
constantly; for they who use to read with Spectacles cannot well read without
them; nor is it good to dilate the Sight in reading by more Light then is
needful, or to strain it in reading by less, or in too small Prints, and the
like: and of all others this most Noble Sens does soonest decay, and while we
enjoy it, is most liable to Deception, as we term it (though it be rather a
Natural Infirmity) because Color, which is the Object of Sight, is not
Immediately Visible in itself, but by Light, whereof there may be so many
several Refractions, and Reflections: and Sensation is Immediately by that
which is Immediately produced in the Standard thereof, as I have showed: and so
in feeling itself, which is least subject to Deception, yet he that is Nive
perustus does not feel the Cold of the Snow, because by the Antiperistasis, the
Flesh of his Body, which is the Standard, is made Hott: and so the Ey seeing
according to the Rays which enter into it, and not the Object itself without
it, though it see that which is the Immediate Object to itself truly, yet it
sees the Object itself falsely; and so if either the Optical Axes, or Planes,
be varied, we see accordingly; as if we look upon the same Object through
several Dioptrae, or distort one of our Eyes, whereby there are double Images
thereof in the Brain, we see it double, though it be single in itself: so if we
turn our Bodies round, the Object seems to turn round; or the Object may seem to
be round when only the several Axes make a Circle, as in the Firewheel: and so
also the round Earth seems Plane to us, because our Ey cannot comprehend the
vast Globosity thereof while we stand upon it: whereas all these Infirmities may
be easily Rectified not only by Faith, and Reason, but by right Sensations: and
right Sens is true as well as right Reason, or Faith; and what is true to one
of them is true to them all: nor is there any Falsehood in them, or Fallacity in
Nature, but only Infirmity, or such a Finite Perfection as it is in itself,
which we may otherwise Rectify or Correct, our selves, by the right exercise of
all those Facultys, whereof God and Nature has made us partakers, to instruct
us, and not to deceiv us. Now as these five Senses have their proper Objects,
and several Sensibles, as I have showed; so there are many Common Sensibles,
which by them, and together with them, may be sensed; and they are such Common
Sensibles, not only because they are so sensible by and with others, but also
because many of them may be sensed by several Senses: as all Quantity, and
Affections of the Matter, and the like; and there is indeed nothing in this
Spectable or Sensible World which is not sensible one way or other: for so all
other things, which cannot enjoy themselves, were made to be enjoyed by
Sensitives, who thus enjoy themselves, and all other Sensible things; whereby
also Intellective Man understands Intelligible things in this Conjunct State
with his Sensitive Body, as I shall show hereafter.

IV. Having thus far passed through the Insensible and almost Inextricable
Labyrinth of the Sensorys, I now arrive at the Brain; where, as I said, the
Sensation is performed; and which may evidently appear by what I have said, for
so this is the reason why Sight by the two Eyes, or Hearing by the two Ears, is
not double, though the Organs be double, because the Sensible Species mee^ in
the Brain, where the Sensation is performed: where also, if they do not so
meet, the Sensation will be double, as in distorting one of the Eyes, as I said;
and so if we putt one hand into cold Water, and the other into ^ott, and the
like: and it is well known, that if a Nerv be bound in any part of the Body,
there is no Sensation by it below, but only above, that is, between the
Ligature and the Brain: so also the Gutta serena, which is in the Optike Nervs,
causes Blindness, though the Ey, which is the Organ of Sight, be sound and
perfect: and in Seeing we seem not to see any thing Intermediate between the
Object and the Brain, but as it were by a continued Visive Line, or Radius
Opticus, reaching from one to the other, both through the Medium, and Organ.
And most certainly all the Nervs are rooted in the Brain, and Medulla; and from
thence, all the Nerval Succus, both in the Spina, and in all the Nervs, does
flow forth. Wherefore indeed it was an inexcusable Error in them who would
derive the Nervs from the Heart; though that, as I have showed, by its Motion
be the first Operator and Refiner of the Sanguineous Liquor; which is afterward
Concocted in and by the more Moderate Temper of the Brain, and there first made
a Nerval Succus, and from thence diffused into the Nervs, and Spinalis Medulla.
And so the Scripture, which, as I said, speaks Comprehensively, does only
mention the Heart, as the Original of all Sensation and Intellection: as it
does only mention Blood generaly, which so passes through the Heart, and is
afterward distinguished into Arterial, and Nerval: and though some, (who will,
as we say, correct Magnificat) may cavil and be offended, or judge this
Expression to be Popular, yet they ought to consider, that such Comprehensive
Expressions are not Popular, but exactly true in their Comprehensive sens: and
thus Heart in Scripture is never Contradistinguished from Brain, nor to be
understood so as to Exclude, but Include it, as Blood does all kinds of Blood:
nor is there therefore any mention particularly of any Nerval Succus, or of any
Brain, or any such thing in Scripture; because according to the Language thereof,
such general Names, as Blood, and Heart, do Comprehend all the rest: whereas we
read of Liver, Kidneys, Gall, and such other Instruments of Vegetative
Nutrition, rather then of Sensation, and so of Seed and Milk, which are for
Generation and Nutrition of others. Now that the fivefold Sensations of the
five several Senses are performed in the Brain, as well as the Sensation of the
very Imagination itself, I shall farther most plainly prove, because the
Sensitive Facultys do all Subsist in the Imagination; as may sensibly appear by
the manner of their Sensation, which is not, nor can it be, without
Animadversion, as we rightly term it, because it is the Adverting or applying of
the Imagination to Contemplate the Sensible Species, and also the Irradiation
thereof by its own Animal and Sensitive Light, which makes the Sensation
otherwise; though the Object, Organ, Sensorys, and all the Apparatus thereof, be
ready, and never so well instructed: Seeing we See not, and Hearing we hear
not; or we see and hear not, or hear and see not; or see or hear this, or that,
Visible, or Audible Object, and not another; or one more then another,
accordingly as we Intend it, or apply our Imagination to it, as I have showed:
and I have heard of one, who being to shoot at a Mark for a Wager, professed
that he thought he neither saw Heaven, nor Earth, nor any thing besides the
Mark; which most vehement Intention did very much conduce to his hitting of the
Mark, and wining the Wager: and this Contemplation of the Imagination is that,
as I conceiv, which we commonly call Common Sens; whereby the Imagination,
which is one and the same Faculty in itself, does thus Contemplate all the
several Sensibles; as also one and the same Appetite does Affect or Disaffect
them; and one and the same Understanding understand them, and Will will, or
nill them. For it is not the variety of Objects, but the several manner of
Sensation, that does distinguish the Facultys, and make them Realy to differ;
and thus the Senses according to their fivefold Organs, and Sensorys, whereby
their several Sensible Objects, or Species thereof, are received severaly, and
in a several manner, are several; but though their Objects, that is, their
Proper and Common Sensibles, may be several, yet as they both are so received
in the same manner they do not distinguish the Sens, nor make it several in
itself. Also we may here observe the very Spiritual Nature of the Sensitive
Soul, and Imaginative Faculty thereof, that though the gross Sensible Objects be
not only different, but contrary one unto another, and such as will themselves
be Mist one with another, as Heat and Cold will be Contemperated into a Tepor;
or otherwise there will be a great Conflict between them, when they meet
together; yet the same Imaginative Faculty does apprehend them both together
(as when one hand is in cold Water, and the other in hott) distinctly, and
inconfusedly. Also this shows the reason of that Sympathy and Consent that is
between some parts more specialy, and the whole Body generaly, in Feeling,
whereof the whole Body is capable, as I said; that is, because the Imaginative
Faculty is one and the same, which resideth in the Brain, from whence all the
Nervs are dispersed through the Body, and therefore the whole Body is so
affected; yet so as a Wound in the Toe does not Corporealy affect the Brain, or
Imagination therein, but Spiritualy; and though the feeling in the Toe that is
wounded being in the Standard, does cause a Principal Sensation thereof in that
Part, and so in the Brain, and from thence in the rest of the Body; yet that is
only a Secondary Sensation, as I may so call it: whereof it is said, if one
Member suffer all the Members suffer with it; that is only by the Imaginative
Faculty of the Sensitive Spirit thereof, which is one and the same; though no
other Part be Corporealy affected. And whereas I have often mentioned two such
several Kinds of Sensation, that is, one by the outward Organs and Sensory, and
by the Corporeal or Elementary Mutation made in the Standard within the Body,
and Irradiation of the Elementary Animal Spirits in the Nervs, which is
Primary; and the other by Species, Actuated only by the Vegetative Spirit in
the Elementary Animal Spirits in the Brain itself, as I have formerly showed,
which is Secondary: whereof we call one Sens, and the other Imagination, I shall
now show the Sensible difference thereof in Sleep, when all the Senses are bound
up and obstructed; and yet then the Imagination does thus operate in Dreaming;
and the Senses are so bound up and obstructed by the Vaporous Blood, which
ascends from the Heart, through the Carotides, (whence they are so called the
Sleepy Arterys) to the Brain: and it is said, that if they be stopped, Sleep
will presently ensue, though I rather conceiv that to be an Apoplectical, then
Soporous Effect: for it is not the obstructing of them, and thereby hindering
the Sanguineous Vapors to ascend, which causes Sleep, but rather the contrary;
that is, an ascent thereof more copiously, which does obnubilate the Basis of
the Brain, and reaches as far as the Roots of the Nervs; and the Animal
Spirits therein, which are most Pure and Spiritual, and the fit Instruments of
the Sensitive Spirit, are clouded by such gross and unconcocted Vapors, and
thereby rendered unfitt; and so the Imagination cannot operate by them; whereupon
that kind of Sensation cease, until those Vapors be again rectified and
refined in the Brain, and so pass into the Nervs, and then Sleep cease, and
that Sensation begineth to operate thereby again. But the Imagination, being
seated in the very Brain, itself, and probably in the upper Region thereof, and
Forebrain, (which we accordingly feel to grow most hott by the working thereof)
the Cloud of those ascending Vapors, being there weaker; (as the Vapors are,
which ascend higher in the Atmosphere) and the Concoctive Power of the Brain,
there being greater, the Imagination may Contemplate the Species in the Animal
Spirits, which are in the Brain itself, and there Actuated by the Vegetative
Spirit, which does concoct and prepare them, as I have showed, and which is
sufficient for this Secondary Operation by the Imagination, and needs no such
Irradiation by the Species of External Objects, as is required in the Primary
Sensation. And so this Secondary Operation by by the Imagination, in Dreaming,
is also much weaker, then it is when we are Waking; or at least far more Wild,
and Irregular: either because those ascending Vapors are not yet so purely
defecated in the upper Region of the Brain; or otherwise, because the
Imagination then wants the Archetypes of the Primary Sensation, whereby to
rectify its own Contemplations. And it is evident that in Sleep, even the
Animal Spirits of the Nervs are not so Consopited, or, as we say, in a dead
Sleep, ordinarily, but that any Vehement Sensible does soon awake them; and the
Spirits by degrees are rowsed up, and the Vaporous Cloud dispersed; yea while
we are asleep, as the Cloud is more or less gross in ascending, or sooner or
longer in being purified in the Brain, so is our Sleep greater, or less, or
shorter, or longer, and sometimes the Soporous Cloud is so small, and very
Rare, that we are, as we say, between Sleeping and Waking. Now that it is so,
may plainly appear by the Causes of Sleep; which are either Expens of Spirits,
that induces a Lassitude, whereupon Sleep Naturaly ensues, because Nature
requires a Recruit thereof, and the Blood then ascends more copiously to the
Brain, which is the part affected, and indigent thereof; or Satiety and a full
Stomach, whereby the Vapors so ascend of themselves; and Drinking commonly
causes Sleep more then Eating, because Drinks are more Vaporous and Spirituous
then Meats; or Dejection of the Spirits by Stupidity, and Sorrow, and the like,
and so Narcotike Medicines by their Stupifying Quality induce Sleep; or
Idleness, and Cessation from Exercise of Body, or Mind, may be another Cause
thereof, as it removes the Impediment of Sleep, or indeed the very Contrary
thereof, for so all Exercise is a Waking; and therefore a man cannot well sleep
if he do but stand upright* and Sleep, as I may so say, unbendeth the Bow, and
relaxeth not only the Perceptive, but also the Motive Spirits; and thus as
Exercise and Lassitude, so Waking and Sleeping, do follow, and indeed mutualy
cause, one another, by Expens and Recruit of the Animal Spirits, both Perceptive
and Motive; which heerby appear to be very Connatural: for as much Study is a
Wearines to the Flesh, as the Wise man says, so wearines of the Flesh is also
an Impediment to the Study of the Mind. Now as I have showed, that all
Perceptive Sensation, both Primary and Secondary, is in the Imagination, so if
any require that I should also show what is that Specifike Imaginative Power,
whereby the Sensitive Spirit so Operateth (whereof I have thus far traced the
Operations, or manner of working, from the Sensible Object to this Sensitive
Faculty) as I have showed, that the Sensitive Spirit itself is an Active
Spiritual Substance Created by God in the Beginning, and first produced with
this and all other the Innate Qualitys thereof, so Actuated by God in this Fifth
Day; so I can only affirm tha^ this Imaginative Power is such, because God so
Created it; as Matter is Matter, and Spirit Spirit, Heaven Heaven, and Earth
Earth, Extension Extension, Heat Heat, and the like, because God so Created them
in the beginning; and as no man can go beyond that Beginning, so neither beyond
that Creating Causality; but must necessarily at last terminate in the Wisdom
and Will of the Creator thereof, when he knows that he has arrived at any
Simple Substance, or Accident, which is not Composited, or Mist with others;
and this, as I have said, is the Non ultra, or utmost Bound, not only of Human,
but Angelical Knowledge; and they who will inquire farther into the Cause of
every Cause, and so Infinitely, like Children, shall not, nor can they, ever be
Satisfied. Wherefore I say, that the Sensitive Spirit of any Animal such, as it
was Created and produced in this Fifth Day, or afterward, and not being Mist
with others (as the Sensitive Spirit of a Mule, which is both Equine and
Asinine) is such a Simple Substance Immediately Created by God, though the
whole Compositum be Compounded of that and a Vegetative Spirit, and Elements,
and Matter, as I have showed: and this is, as I conceiv, the proper Work of a
Philosopher, thus, to inquire into the Works of Improper Creation, that is the
Mistion of Elements, Actuation of Qualitys, Composition of Matter, Elementary,
Vegetative, and Sensitive Natures, and the like; and so like a Speculative
Chemist, to Separate those things in their several Natures by his Intellect,
which they can never do in fact by all their Instruments, and that it is a very
Improper Work for him to inquire farther then the Work of Proper Creation,
which he ought wholly to resolv into the first Cause of all Causes, that is, God,
who has made all things for himself, and according to the good pleasure of his
Will. And so also I say, that as God made the Sensitive Soul to be a Living
Perceptive Spirit, accordingly he Imprinted in it certain Simple Innate
Notions, whereby it might so Perceiv in a Living manner, by, and with the
Instrumentality of the Vegetative and Elementary Animal Spirits and Species and
a Conjunction between them and the Sensitive Animal Irradiation. Thus Generical
Imagination, Feeling, and the like Sensitive Notions, wherewith all Sensitive
Spirits are instructed (and not Vegetatives, Elements, or Matter), are the
Innate Facultys, whereby Sensitive Spirits do Imagine, feel, and the like; and
not the others: and this is, as I said, a double or Reflex Operation, whereof no
Inferior Nature does partake: for Sensitives being Perceptive Animals do not
only Imagine, Feel, and the like, but also Perceiv, that they do so: whereas
others only do what they do, without any such Reflection upon their Operations.
Again, there are other less Simple Sensitive Notions Common to all perfect
Sensitives, as that the Whole, while it is Whole, is greater then any Part
thereof divided from it: and so that Two are more then One, and the like. Also I
suppose that they have some Generical Sentiment of Symmetry, Harmony, and the
like; because these also are Common Sensibles, which they may, and do Perceiv,
as well as Proper Sensibles. Besides these there are also Proper Powers; as
Ingeny, or Artifice, whereof all Sensitives, as Oisters, and the like do not
partake, and so are said to wan^ Imagination: whereas they also have that Common
Perception, which I call Imagination, otherwise they should not be Sensitive:
and there are proper Notions, which belong properly to one Species, and not to
another, as to a Bird to Sing and Nidificate, to a Spider to spin, to a Be to
make Honey, and the like; which, though they are very Ingenious and Artificial
in the External performance, yet they are so wrought by them according to the
Specifical Notions or Sentiments of their kind: as an Infant so Sucks; a Lamb
flys a Wolf, which he never saw before; and a young Hound hunts an Hare before
he sees it. Also by these Innate and more Immediate Notions the Imagination is
able farther to Acquire, and Collect any other Sensitive Notions, of whatsoever
it Perceives by any of the External Senses; which it does likewise add and
Ingraff into the others, and retein in itself, and gain Experience, and so may
thereby be more Instructed to live the Sensitive Life thereof. And the
Imaginative Faculty, being thus furnished with Sensitive Notions, can Compound,
and Divide them; and so discourse of Singulars, or by Particulars, which are
Sensible; as an Hound can distinguish one Hare from another, and an hunted from
a fresh Hare, and therefore does accordingly follow one, and not another: and
so likewise the Sent of an Hare from the Sent of a Deer, or Fox, or Otter, or
the like; and therefore does accordingly follow it: for Singulars are only as
so many Pictures of Individual Hares, and Particulars as the Sign of any Hare,
which are both Sensible: and none of these Operations may be denied to Brutes,
which are otherwise distinguishible from Intellective Operations, as I shall
show hereafter. But though there be these Common Notions, or Prenotions, which
are otherwise called Instincts, in Brutes, whereby they are apt to Perceiv
Potentialy, yet they cannot Perceiv Actualy, without the Instrumentality of the
Animal Spirits, and Species therein (as well as their own Sensitive
Irradiations) as I have showed: which to prepare for themselves, they have also
a Specifike Power, whereby they can, as I said, Command and Move the Vegetative
Spirit and Power thereof, so to Actuate and produce them accordingly as they
call for them; and without all these, both Sensitive Principles, and
Vegetative, and Inferior Instrumentalitys, the Sensation cannot be performed.
All which, as I suppose, does plainly appear by Memory; whereby, when we have
Acquired any new Notions, and would Remember them, we thus, as it were, Dictate
to the Inferior Facultys, and then they produce a new Image or Species thereof,
which we do Contemplate: whereas if it were any former Image or Species thereof,
as has been supposed, certainly such should pass away with the Substance of
the Nerval Succus, wherein it does Subsist; and if that does not Circulate as
swiftly as the Blood, yet it passes away more or less continualy, and is
recruited every Night by sleep: wherefore it is Impossible that the Images or
Species should remain therein, which we have Acquired so many years since; but
the Acquired Notions thereof must necessarily remain in the Imaginative Faculty,
which continues to be one and the same according to the Individual Economy of
the Sensitive Spirit, and whereof the Animal Spirits have the Images Potentialy
in themselves. I have been informed by a Physician concerning a Knight his
Patient, and my well known Friend, that sometime before his Death he could not
Remember things done the same Day, and yet could very well Remember things done
many years before; which was from the same reason, that the Notions which he
had Acquired in his Youth, did remain in his Imaginative Faculty; which was now
grown so weak, that he could hardly Acquire any new Notions; and so Youth does
best retein any such Acquired Notions, because they are then recent and fresh:
and there are not many others before Acquired, which might oppress the Memory:
for though Imagination be a very Spiritual Faculty, yet it is Finite, as well
as Sens, and cannot Remember all, nor any more, or better, then according to
the Strength thereof; and these Acquired Notions are fixed by often Repeating,
Meditation, and the like: and as the Sensitive Spirit is very Oeconomical, and
therefore much delighted with Symmetry, and Harmony, so the Memory thereof is
helped by Order; and it will strangely piece its Notions together by any little
Similitudes or Allusions; and sometimes when it cannot suddenly Retrive and
Dictate them, or if the Animal Spirits be not ready to Actuate and produce the
Images thereof, we say it is a^ our Tongs end; as when we are ready to utter a
Word and are some way hindered. But as there are Deceptions of Sens, as I have
showed, so much more of the Imagination, as it is more Remote from the Sensible
Object, which is Realy true in itself; not only as Imagination is a Judicative
Faculty, and so may also Err, in Dividing, Compounding, and Discoursing
thereby; but in its most Simple Perceptions; for it is very Mimical, and can
Imitate any thing, by its own Types, and Images of things which it did before
Contemplate in the more Sensible Prototypes, by the Primary Sensation thereof,
as I have showed: and though these Secondary Species, which are not Irradiated
by the real Sensibles, are mere Phantasms, and far more weak and Momentany
then the others, yet I know not how, a vehement Imagination can so Intend them,
that they shall appear as though they were Real; which certainly is by some
such extraordinary Power of the Vegetative Spirit, whereby it causes External
and Corporeal Signatures in the Foetus; and therefore may well cause such
Species and Images in the Nerval Succus, by such extraordinary Animation of the
Animal Spirits: which yet is also first caused by some very strong Acquired
Notions in the Imagination, through Love, Pride, Covetousnes, Fear, or some
such vehement Lusts and Affections, and a proportionable Sensitive Irradiation
thereby; and this is indeed Laesa Phantasia: but if those Passions be Sudden
and Temporary, then the Imaginations are such also, as in sudden Frights, and
the like; which are only Vno Impetu: or they may be only particular
Distractions, according to such particular Objects about which the Imagination
has been so Intensly exercised; whereof we have a notable Example in him who
was In vacuo laetus sessor plaus^rque Theatro,
Caetera qui vitae servaret munia recte:
and there are many known Instances of such persons, who are thus Habitualy
distracted as to one Object, which whenever it is mentioned unto them, that
strong and vehement Notion thereof, which they have Acquired, is thereby
Excited, and the Phantasm so Sensibly Actuated, that it does so Predominate, as
to overruled and over-turn all their other Notions, and the ordinary Regularity
thereof: and I suppose, that most men have some Tincture of this Madness, more or
less; who though otherwise very Prudent and Sober, yet if mention be made of
any thing wherein they affect to Excel, or which they vehemently Love; as their
Wit, Valor, Gentility, Estates, Children, and the like; they will run out into
such Extravagant discourse thereof, as if they were not the same men therein, as
they are in other things: (which we call their Infirmitys), Also there is a
General and Total Distraction, either Temporary, as in Drunkenes, or Anger,
(which is rightly termed furor brevis) and the like; or Continual; as when any
such Particular Fansy is so Prepotent that it works upon the very Substance of
the Brain, or Qualitys of the Animal Spirits; or they are so hurt by Sickness,
or any Bodily Distemper, which is properly Cerebrum laesum. Now because it is
confessed that there are such Infirmitys and Deceptions of the Sens and
Imagination, therefore Sceptikes say, we are always in a Dream, or Frenzy: but
then how do they know it? if they also are like the rest of Mankind, who are
all in a Dream, or Mad: for they who are so, think all their Phantasms to be
Real Objects; and so they disprove what they affirm: for certainly if all men
were so distempered and deluded, we should all conceiv those Delusions to be
Real, because none could disprove them by any more right Cogitations; as if any
man should only dream all the days of his Life, he could never refute any of
his Dreams, but his whole Life should be only one continued Dream: wherefore
since we can distinguish between Dreaming and Waking, cer^einly we are not
always in a Dream; and because we can distinguish between some Errors and some
Truths certainly we are not always in an Error: though some who cannot, or
rather will not, understand any thing of Truth, because they will not be obliged
to the Obedience and Practice thereof, would thus drown all others with
themselves in the same Bottomless Pit of Perdition. There are also others, that
think these Entia Sensationis to be some such Imaginary Things as are neither
Entitys, nor Not-entitys, but they know not what; whereas, as I have said,
Imagination is certainly a Real Act; and the Phantasm a Real Species; which the
Imagination does behold, and whereby such Real Effects are produced, though
there be no such Real Thing, whereof the Imagination Imagines it to be the
Image or Picture; as a Picture of a Man at large is no less a Picture, though
there be Realy no such Person in Rerum natura as well as the Picture of any
Individual Person. But the Imagined Object, as Imaginary Space, and the like,
are pure Nonentitys in themselves, though we frame some Real Imaginations
thereof. Nor is it possible that there should be any Medium between Entity and
Nonentity, because they are Contradictory Terms, and whatsoever any may Imagine
thereof, yet, if they will Effari, they must say, either Est, or Non est,
whereby they shall either affirm or deny it to Be: and in all Logike, no
Proposition can be otherwise formed, either Categoricaly, or Hypotheticaly; nor
is there any stronger or more undeniable Dilemma, then this, Either it is, or
it is not Metaphysicaly, and Simply, which admitts no Division, or Distinction;
for though there may be many Subalternate Differences of Entity, yet Ens, as I
said, is Genus Generalissimum, without any Specifical Difference whatsoever;
and as whatsoever is, Is, which is a most Identical and Infallible Proposition,
so whatsoever is in any Mode or Respect whatsoever, or with any Subalternate
Difference whatsoever, Is: and if it is, it is a Creature of God, which is
Convertible, because it is Created from Not-being to Being; and therefore is an
Entity in Nature, and not a Nonentity, though the Notion thereof be only an
Imaginative Figment: and if it be no Creature it is no Thing in Nature, but
only an Imaginary Figment; whereof the Fiction is something, but that which is so
feigned is merely Nothing, as I have showed.

V. Sensation, or Sensitive Life, is, as I have said, always with Perception
and Appetite; otherwise it should not be Life: and therefore, as these two do
Immediately Subsist in the Sensitive Spirit, so they do also always Cooperate
to produce any Vital Act: for thus the Imagination does Perceiv Spontaneously;
and the Appetite Affect or Disaffect Perceptively: and these are the most
Intrinsecal and Immanent Acts of both the Facultys, which they do so act
between themselves, but yet their own Operations in themselves, are as different
and several as the Facultys; for to Perceiv, and to Affect any thing, do very
much and very plainly differ: and so their manner of working is very different;
for first the Imagination Perceivs, and Judges the Object to be Sensitively
Good, or Evil; and so presents it to the Appetite, which accordingly Affects
or Disaffects it; wherefore since several Cells have been by some found out in
the Brain, for the Imaginative, Judicative, and Memorative Powers, (which are
only such several Powers of one and the same Imagination, wherein they do all
Immediately Subsist) I wonder that never any such Cell has been appointed by
them for the Appetite, which is certainly a distinct Faculty from the
Imagination, and Subsisting Immediately in the Sensitive Spirit, as well as it.
And as there are such several Powers in the Imagination, so also in the
Appetite; but as first the External Sensible Object by making an Alteration in
the Standard of Sens, which is within the Body, does by it Irradiate the Animal
Spirits, whereby the Sensible Species are produced, which the Imagination does
afterward also Irradiate, and Perceiv by a Primary Sensation, and accordingly
after the Object is removed, Irradiate only by itself, and so Contemplate the
Phantasms thereof, by a Secondary Sensation; so contrarily the Appetite, which
follows the Imagination, does first Internaly Affect, or Disaffect, in
itself, by its own Power which is its Primary Sensation; and then exerts its
Appetitive and Motive Power by a Secondary Sensation, either in those
Affections which we call the Passions of the Soul, or in the Motion of the Body
or any part thereof; and though the more Immediate Instruments of the Appetite
be also the Motive Animal Spirits in the Nervs, yet it likewise causes Fluxes
and Refluxes of the other Bloods accordingly; which discovers a great Union and
Consent between them; and as the Object of this Faculty generaly is Sensible
Good or Evil, so, according to all the Diversifications thereof, the Appetite
does exert itself in those several Passions, which we call Affections, and are,
as it were, the Fluxes and Refluxes of the very Sensitive Soul, answerable to
those of the Blood and Spirits, whereby it so expresses itself: for this
Spiritual Faculty is not an idle and ineffectual Affection or Disaffection of
the Object, but also armed with a Power to Effect all the Sensitive Operations
thereof in the Body. And so also the very Motive Power, whereby the Vegetative
Spirit is Guided in producing and Actuating the Phantasms for the use and
service of the Imagination, is not only from the Imaginative, Perceptively, but
also from the Appetitive Faculty Spontaneously. And thus in the same Sensitive
Compositum, there is not only Local Motion of the Matter to Union, as in the
Instance of Introsuction of the Finger, and the like; and to Station, as when
the Body falls down by its own Weight, and the like: and Elementary Motion by
Rarefaction and Condensation, as I have formerly showed, and also Vegetative
Motion, as in Contraction of the Muscles; which certainly cannot be Motions of
the Matter, because they are Violent and contrary unto the Rest thereof, and as I
have showed, in the Systole, the Heart lifts itself upward by this Vegetative
Motion, but in the Diastole falls downward again by its own Pondus of Matter;
which for the same reason can be no Elementary Motion; for in the Systole it is
contracted, and in the Diastole returns again to its own Elementary Laxity by
its own Elastical Potentia, which was Spiritualy contrary to the Contraction.
And as the Basis of the Heart being united to the Body, the Muscular
Contraction thereof does thereby draw it upward, which otherwise it could not,
so all such Muscular Motions are by such Traction to, or Trusion from another
Body, as a Fulciment; for so an Heart taken out Moves in the Hand; and a man
bowing forward can lift up no more then according to the Weight of his Body, to
which the Traction is; but standing Perpendicularly upright, he may lift up any
greater Weight according to his Muscular Strength, by Trusion from the ground,
as a Fulciment; and so he bears up any Burden on his Shoulders: whereas i^ there
be not such a Fulciment, he can bear nothing, but all will sink together; as if
he stand on the Water, or in a descending Scale, or the like: and so a man in a
Scale holding at the Beam, cannot lift himself up; because it descends toward
him, and he cannot also ascend toward it; as he may, if there be such an
over-weight in the other Scale as will hinder the descent: nor can he make that
Scale, wherein he is, to weigh more then the Weight of his Body, by pulling it
down; because he has no hold below him, to which being fastened himself, he
might so draw it down. Also besides these Muscular Motions in the Flesh, and
the constant Pulls caused thereby, (which plainly is Vegetative, or by a
Pulsifike Power of the Vegetative Spirit,) there seems to me to be such a
sudden and occasional Motion in all these Fluxes and Refluxes of the Blood,
caused by the Passions, as is not only Sensitive, but Vegetative: for I suppose
that the Sensitive Appetite in all such Local Motions thereof does thus Move the
Body, not Immediately by itself, but by the Mediation of such Vegetative
Motions; and so Guides and Governs them, Directively and Spontaneously, as I
have showed: as when I write, the Motion of my Hand and Pen generaly, is from
the Elementary Motive Spirits in the Nervs, which the Vegetative Spirit
Actuates and produces, and itself Moves by and with them, as it does by and
with the Muscles; or as my Hand writes by and with the Pen, only as a ^^tt
Instrument of the Mover; for certainly my Writing is no kind of Elementary
Motion, such as is by Rarefaction or Densefaction, Magnetical or Planetary
Virtue, or the like, but a Vegetative Motion, as that is an higher and fitter
Instrument of a Sensitive Mover, and also as a Motive Instrument itself; and
the Moving of my Hand in writing generaly is no Sensitive Motion, nor does my
Pen, Hand, Nervs, Animal Spirits, or Vegetative Spirit, Se^s or Perceiv what I
do: but only my Sensitive Spirit, which therefore in causing this or that
Letter or Word to be writ Guides and Governs the Vegetative Mover, as if
another should guide my Hand with his; that is, the Sensitive Spirit does not
only Command, as I have said, because the Inferior Spirits have no such
Perception or Appetite, whereby to know what is Commanded, and to Obey, but
also the Sensitive Moves or causes the Vegetative Spirit, which is Motive in
itself (so and in such a manner, whereby this or that Letter or Word shall be
writ) to Move the Elementary Spirits, which are its Immediate Instruments, and
not otherwise: for as the Vegetative Spirit does certainly of itself perform
all those Motions, which we call Involuntary, that is, which are not
Spontaneous, and such as are not Immediately Subservient to the Sensitive
Spirit, nor at the Command thereof; so also I suppose, that it does as well
perform all those other Motions which we therefore call Voluntary, or
Spontaneous, because they are only Guided and Governed by the Sensitive Spirit.
And so that all such Motions in the Sensitive Body, which are not of the
Matter, nor only Elementary; that is, by Rarefaction or Condensation, but of an
higher Nature; that is, either by Expansion or Compression, or more Regular, as
all Involuntary Motions, or more Various and Indifferent, as all Voluntary
Motions, are Vegetative; but the Voluntary are also Guided and Governed by a
Sensitive Motion: and that all such Motions, whereby we perceiv that we do so
Guide and Govern them, are Sensitive. And such are all the Moving Imperia or
Commands of the Sensitive Spirit, whereby it does Spontaneously Move and Guide
the Vegetative Spirit, in producing and Actuating the Animal Spirits, both
Perceptive, and Motive, Arrecting the Muscles, and the like; and so Priapismus
and others may be both Involuntary and Voluntary: and such Sensitive Motions
though never so swift and sudden, yet are not Involuntary, but Voluntary, if
they be with any Perception and Appetite; for in all these Motions the
Vegetative Spirit is always ready to Execute the Spontaneous Commands of the
Sensitive Spirit, and is a very quick and Active Mover in itself, as appears by
its own Involuntary Motions; but especialy in these wherein it is Subservient to
the Sensitive Spirit, which is more Active, and requires such fit
Instruments: and as the Sensitive Spirit Moves in itself, as quick as Thought
or Wish, so where no Deliberation is requisite or to be admitted, or there is
an Acquired Use and Custom it presently Commands, Perceptively and
Spontaneously, and is as presently Obeyed by the Vegetative Spirit, though
without any Perception or Spontaneity thereof. And thus I conceiv, that these
two Sensitive Facultys, Imagination, and Appetite, do Govern the whole
Sensitive Compositum, residing together in the Brain, as they do Mutualy
Cooperate, and that they or any of their several Powers are not seated in
several Cells thereof, as has been supposed; but that the several parts of the
Brain are for refining, percolating, and preparing the Animal Spirits therein,
by the Natural Chemistry of the Vegetative Spirit; and wheresoever these two
Facultys have their Centrical Seat, which probably is in the Forebrain, or
Cerebrum, as it is Eminently so called, they are both together, furnished with
all their Sensitive Powers: for the Brain is not divided into several Organs,
as an Ey, an Ear, and the like, but is all one Organ of these two Facultys, as
the three Humors in the Ey, with their Coat^, and appurtenances are one Organ
of Sight: yet it is also true that they have their Nervs dispersed from the
Brain through the whole Body, both for the Intromission of External Species by
the Animal Perceptive Spirits to the Imagination, and also for the Exerting of
the Motive Spirits and Operating of the Appetite by them in all the Body: and
yet as the Facultys themselves are Conjunctly in the Brain, so also these Animal
Spirits, which are their Instruments, are conjoined therein, and in the same
Nervs: and there may be Operation by the one, and not by the other at the same
time; as in Sleep, when the Senses are obstructed by Vapors, which hinder the
Intromission of the Species of External Objects, yet the Appetite then working
in the Brain, as well as the Imagination, may Exert the Motive Spirits, so as
to cause us not only to Talk, but also to Walk: and as they are thus Conjunct in
themselves, and in their Instruments, so also in their Operations, whereby they
do not only Spontaneously Perceiv, and Perceptively Affect or Disaffect
Immanently, in such Actions as are performed between themselves, as I before
showed; but also in all others, as the Appetite does move the Vegetative Spirit
to produce and Actuate Phantasms, as well as the Imagination does Direct it
what Phantasms it shall so produce and Actuate; and the Imagination does also
Direct the Vegetative Motions, as well as the Appetite does Move and Guide
them, but they are distinctly called Imaginative, or Appetitive Actions,
accordingly as one or other does Predominate therein. And as they are both thus
Conjunct Spiritualy, in themselves, so are they also with the Sensitive Body,
thus Subordinating the Vegetative Spirit therein Immediately, and by it the
Elementary Mistion, and Matter to their Sensitive Spirit, by such Natural
Aptitude and Combination, that as the Elementary Animal Spirits are refined and
sublimated to the highest Purity whereof they are capable, and their Vegetative
Spirit endued with a greater Activity, then appears in any Grass, Herbs, or
Trees; whereby they may ascend toward this Sensitive Economy, and be the
Instruments of a Sensitive Life; so the Sensitive Spirit also is made, as it
were, to Condescend to them by a Conjunct Irradiation of the Imagination, and
Eradiation of the Appetite, and cannot Live, nor Act, without them, nor by or
with any other Elementary or Vegetative Instrumentality whatsoever; and
therefore it has its own Standards in its own Body; whereby only it does
Immediately perceiv and feel, as it does the Temperament of its own Flesh, and
the Alterations therein; and not any of the External Qualitys, as the Heat of
the Fire, or Cold of the Air, without the Body, which only cause the Alterations
without, whereby they cause the like within the Body, and so Mediately become
Sensible; as the Weather is by a Weatherglass; and not otherwise. And these
Internal, and indeed most Proper Sensibles only and none others do Irradiate
the Animal Spirits in the Nervs, which are propagated to the Brain, where the
Sensation is performed; and the Sensitive Soul also does only Move its own
Body, wherein it is confined, by its own Powers and Organs, and others thereby:
as the Hand is therefore called the Instrument of all Instruments. And yet it
is in itself a Living and truly Spiritual Substance, and so are all its own
proper and Immanent Actions Spiritual, whereby it does Abstract from more
Coporeal Objects Sensitively, and also from more Gross and Inferior Spirits, or
Spiritual Qualitys; for so though by its Senses it does Sensibly perceiv Heat,
Cold, Pain, Burden, and the like, yet it can Immanently Contemplate, Affect, or
Disaffect, the Speculative Phantasms thereof, without any more Feeling or Sens,
then it does the Artificial Pictures thereof: and indeed the very Sensible
Species, Irradiated by the Sensible Qualitys, are not such as the Sensible
Qualitys themselves, nor do they so Affect the Brain as they do the Standard; as
I have showed, because the Species are only Irradiated thereby: for so Sensible
Heat and Cold do not Burn or Chill the Brain, as they do the Flesh, which is
the Standard. Having thus far absolved this Hypothesis of Sensation, I shall
now referr it to the Judgment of learned Physicians, whom I have ever esteemed
a Prudent and Sober Nation; and very deservedly; their Profession being a
continual Practice, and their Practice concerning the Life of Man. But I
suppose I need not consult them, whether the Sensitive Soul be Centricaly
seated in the Brain, or in the Diaphragm or Midriff; because it is also termed
Phrenes, nor whether the Septum Lucidum, because it is termed Lucidum be the
chief Organ thereof; or as some say the Pinealis Glandula, because it only is One
and Solitary; a very fit Organ indeed for such an Excrementitious Opinion,
which none would ever have affirmed, nor can believ, who has any purer part of
Brain in him: and I very much wonder how such, who require of others a
Mathematical exactnes, and Demonstration, can with so much Confidence and
Impudence impose upon all others such a Gratis dictum, and lay this, as the
Foundation of their whole Doctrine of Passions; making all Sensation to be only
Local Motion, which is a Common Sensible itself: whereas Sensation, as I have
showed, is a Perceptive and Spontaneous Action; and though a Body be never so
Mechanicaly and Artificialy Composed, like Daedalus or Myron's Cow; or be made
never so Automatous, as the Clock at Strasburg, Archytas his Dove,
Regiomontanus his Fly, or Eagle, or Albertus his Man, with all Imaginable
Members, and Local Motions; not only a Philosopher, but every Vulgar Spectator,
will say Deest aliquid intus: as though a Parret has Perception and Appetite,
which they have not, and can imitate Human Speech, yet we all know that it has
no Human Understanding: and even Vegetative Spirits, which have Plastical, and
many other notable Motions, and so Elementary, as the Planets, and Magnet
(which Thales therefore termed Animal) have many wonderful Local Motions, yet
they have no Perception or Appetite; which are Living Motions or Actions,
whereof all others are only Counterfeits and outward Expressions, like the
Motions of the dead Sultan, to deceiv the People; whereas any Living Man himself
cannot be so deceived, but plainly may Perceiv the Difference in himself: for
Local Motion, which, as I have said, is only Local Motion, is no Spiritual
Action, which is not only Local, but also Spiritual, and not only Motion, but
Action, or an Active Operation, and Superoperation, as the Spirit is a
Substantial Activity; especialy Sensitive Spirits, (whereof the very lowest are
not only termed Creeping or Moving, but also Living Creatures) have such Living
Motions or Actions: and such Motions or Remotions from one State to another, as
from Death to Life, or from not such an Operation to such an Operation, are
certainly Motions, as well as from one Place to another: as they themselves, who
affirm them to be only Local Motions, do confess, in affirming them to be
Motions, as they are indeed, but more or other then Local, that is, also Active
Motions; and many of them such as may be performed without any Local Motion, as
though the Appetite in Moving the Body, or any part thereof, does effect and
exercise also a Local Motion, yet the very Appetition, and Imagination in
itself, and many Operations thereof are without any Local Motion; which does
rather disturb Sensation; as in Seeing, Hearing, and the like, if either the
Body be Moved, or the Object Removed, the Sensation is disturbed: and though
Sensible Objects Moving without, or Humors within, may Spiritualy Move
Sensation by Tempting and Soliciting the Sensitive Spirit, humbly and
Inferiorly, as that does Move them by Commanding and Guiding them, Superiorly;
yet they do not therefore Localy Move the Sensitive Spirit, or the Intrinsecal
and Immanent Operations thereof, as that does Move them Transiently. And I
suppose the next Attempt of them, who can thus affirm Sensation to be only
Local Motion, will be to reduce Intellection and Volition, and our very Human
Spirit, to this common debasement of all Spiritual Natures, (which they
generaly restrain to Matter and Local Motion) nor indeed is there any thing
left, or any such clear difference assigned by them, which may privilege us
from it, but only the favor and Indulgence of these great Masters, who can say
and unsay, make and unmake, what they pleas, and how they pleas; and if all
others were like to such, who have no higher Notions then Matter and Motion, it
might with some probability be suspected that the Human Spirit is
proportionably only Matter and Motion, which would perfectly gratify any who
therefore affect to be Epicureans in Opinion, because they are such in Practice.
But, as Scipio said, It is now more fit for us to return Praises to God for
all these his Various and Wonderful Works, which can never be confined only to
Matter and Motion, then to attend such Triflers any farther.

VI. Therefore let us prais the Father of the Spirits of all Flesh, and advance
our Praises by a Song of Degrees, as he does thus exalt his Creatures by
several Degrees in the Scale of Nature. Who is Himself a Spirit, and Spiritual
Life, Infinitely Contemplating and Enjoying Himself, and all other things in
Himself; and has given Life to all Living Animals, even the lowest Sensitive,
which he has placed in the same Animal Region with Intellective Man; though
all Sensitives be Classicaly different from him, and both Subordinate and
Subservient unto him, as he is to God; who has made them the Images of his
Intellective Spirit, as he is of the Divine Spirit. Whereby also they can
Contemplate and Enjoy themselves, and all other Sensible Natures; which though
Perfect in themselves, and in their own Classes, yet without these Sensitive and
Intellective Spirits, who only can Contemplate and Enjoy them, had been made in
vain, as a Spectable World of many wonderful and useful Objects, without any
Spectator, or Enjoyer thereof; all whose Goodness and Perfection, though Good in
itself, is far Inferior to the least Insect; whose Body though more Minute
then the smallest Watch, or other Engine is more Curiously and Exactly composed
then the greatest Machins; and whose Inimitable Spirit possesses the whole
Sensible World, in the Potential Species and Images thereof, within the little
Module of itself: whereas all Inferior Natures, whatsoever they are in
themselves, are unto themselves, as if they were not; and howsoever they may
differ one from another, yet bury all their Specifical Differences in the
common Grave of their own Imperception, as if they did still continue in their
Original Chaos, or the Eternal Abyss of Nonentity. Wherefore Sensitives were
presently Introduced, when they were before prepared for these, as for their
next and Immediate Ends of Intention, to perfect all their Perfections; which
are not only far more Excellent in themselves, but thus also derive into
themselves all their Inferior Excellencies; Living upon their Inanimate Natures,
while themselves thus Live in their own Animate Natures; and are as far above
them; as themselves are Inferior to Man; with whom, though they are not
Coordinate, as Sensitives, yet they do Convers, as Living Creatures: and their
Sensitive Life, though far Inferior to his Intellective Life, yet is not only
an Image thereof, but also in his own Human Compositum, the Embryonical
Inception, and constant Companion thereof: and his Sensitive Body the Immediate
Mansion and Officine of his Intellective Spirit, and of all the Operations
thereof, in this Conjunct State; and the Imaginative Artifices of Sensitive
Animals are not only the Umbrages of his Intellective Act, but also in himself
Subordinate Operators thereunto. Also many of them have Language, that is either
the Expression of their Notions by Signs, or of their Passions by
Interjections, which is not only a Rudiment of his more Articulate Language but
also some Rude Discourse, and Essay of his Ratiocinations. And yet all these
Vive Images of Man, and his next and Immediate Convivae, are not only
Subjugated to his Tyranny by his Superior Power and Policy, but also by God and
Nature Subordinated to his rightful Roialty and Dominion; being all born his
Slaves and Vassals, who while they Live, serve him in all Offices, either of
Labor, or Pleasure, yea Hawk and Hunt, and destroy one another for him; or are
otherwise subdued and destroyed by himself. And so he Feeds and Preserves
his own Individual Life with Innumerable Lives of their successive
Individualitys; which are in Natures Account the most costly and Princely Diet,
though two Sparrous be sold for a Farthing in the Market of Man.

SECTION XII.
And God said, Let the Earth bring forth every Living Creature after his Kind,
Catell, and Creeping things. And it was so. And God made the Beast of the Earth
after his Kind, and Catell after their Kind. And God saw that it was Good. And
God said, Let us make Man in our own Image, and after our own Likeness. And let
them have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and
over the Catell, and over all the Earth. So God Created Man in his own Image;
in the Image of God Created he him; Male and Female Created he them. And God
said unto them, Be fruitful, and Multiply, and replenish the Earth; and Subdue
it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air,
and over every Living thing that Moves upon the Earth. And God said, Behold, I
have given you every Herb bearing Seed, which is upon the face of all the
Earth, and every Tree in which is the fruit of the Tree yielding Seed; to you
it shall be for Meat, and to every Beast of the Earth, and to every Fowl of the
Air; and to every thing that Creeps on the Earth, wherein there is Life, I
have given every green Herb for Meat. And it was so. And God saw every thing,
that he had made, and behold it was very Good. And the Evening and the Morning
were the Sixth Day.
EXPLICATION.
God caused the Earth also to bring forth Beasts after their several Kinds,
which was their Specifical Goodness and Perfection. And when he had thus
prepared and furnished the Elementary World with Vegetatives, Luminarys, and
with all Kinds of Sensitives, Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, he Immediately Created
the Intellective Spirit of Man, and so made him to have Dominion over them all,
for whom he had before made and prepared them. And he made both Man, and Woman,
who might accordingly Procreate; and blessed them with the Blessing of
Prolification, for the Increas of Mankind. And he made them and all their
Posterity Lords over all the other Inferior Creatures in the Earth; and
appointed Herbs and Fruits to be Meat for them; and for Beasts and Fowls also
the green Herb and Grass; whereby they should be Nourished, and Augmented, and
so Preserved in their own Individualitys. And then God reviewed all his Works,
and the whole Frame and Order thereof, pronouncing and declaring it to be very
Good, and Conformable to his Divine Wisdom and Will, and to the Law of
Creation. And these were the Works of the Sixth Day, and of all the Six days.

ILLUSTRATION.
1. Of Beasts. 2. Of Man. 3. Of the Human Body. 4. Of the Human Spirit. 5. Of
the Image of God in Man. 6. Of the Immortality of the Soul of Man. 7. The
Conclusion of all the Works of Creation. 8. Of the Goodness thereof.

I. I H^ve already discoursed of Fishes and Fowls, and thereupon very largely of
Sensation; and therefore shall now only need to discourse of Beasts, not as they
are also Sensitives, but as they differ from the others, and are Superior unto
them; a^ may appear by their Bodies, that were made of the Earth, and are more
Terrene, Firm, and Consistent, and of a more Quadrate, and Cubical Proportion,
and more like to the Body of Man: and though some of them be also termed
Reptiles, as Fishes ge^eraly are, yet I conceiv, that as there are, as I said,
Gradient Fishes, which have Feet, and so Fowls, that Creep going upon all
four, are called such from their very flow Motions; so also there are some
more Tradigradous Beasts, which are therefore called Reptant, and not that they
were Anomalous, or less perfect in their Kinds, then other; for they are also
mentioned to have been made among other perfect Animals, and they were
afterward specialy preserved, and so are also mentioned among them that entered
into the Ark, wherein no Anomala* were preserved, or such as are by
Putrefaction, for so they might be restored again: and indeed if such other
Sensitives could be made only of Matter and Motion, it had not been necessary
that God should so Extraordinarily have preserved any of them; for so also he
might have restored them, and he does nothing in vain: wherefore since it is
mentioned expressly, not only that God did preserv them generaly according to
their Species, but according to their Sexes, Male, and Female, to keep Seed
alive upon the face of all the Earth, it is very evident that they were neither
Originaly made only of Matter and Motion, nor could be so Naturaly restored.
Also whereas it is said, that God made the Beast of the Earth which is conceived
to be Fera Agrestis, or Wild beast, I suppose it may be so understood in a
moderate Sens, that is, less Philanthropous and Tame, though not Ravenous, or
Rebellious so as certainly none were Created before the Fall and Curs. And
there is still the same difference of more or less Philanthropy remaining in
their very Natures; so that some, though otherwise as Fierce and Courageous as
others, are easily Tamed; as Elephants, Bulls, Boars, Horses, Dogs, and the
like: whereas others will very hardly be so Civilized; as Lions, Tigers, Bears,
Wolvs, Foxes, and the like: and this Natural difference in themselves is the
ground and reason of their more or less Cicuration or Mansuefaction. And that
there is such a difference in their very Natures, may appear by this, that they
are not only so different toward Man, but also among themselves; and so it is a
common Observation, that the more Mansuete do flock and heard together, and
Live in Consort; whereas Wild beasts Live more Solitary, and are more Strange
even to one another. Yet certainly none of them were Carnivorous at first, nor
did devour one another; for both they and man had then another Diet appointed
for them by God, that is, Vegetative; which which also Comprehends the
Elements, and Matter, as subordinate unto it; and as the Elements and Matter
are its Subordinate Body, so it is also Nourished by the same, whereof it is
Constituted; and so the Vegetative Spirit may be Augmented by Mistion of more
of the Homogeneous Vegetative Spirit latent in the Nutriment: and so the
Matter, Elements, and a Vegetative Spirit, make the Body of Sensitives, whereby
it is also Nourished, and may be Augmented by Mistion of more of the
Homogeneous Sensitive Spirit latent in the Nutriment; and now when we and some
Beasts do feed on the Carcasses of other Sensitives, yet we do not, nor can we,
feed on their Sensitive Spirits, or Lives; because they are dead, and there is
no Conversion of one Sensitive Nature into another, nor any such Mistion by
Augmentation, as of Equine and Asinine Spirits in a Mule, or by Generation; nor
yet is the Anima thereof, or Anima Mundi, as some say, so Subordinate, either to
Constitute, or Nourish the Sensitive, as Vegetatives and the rest are, and were
so ordained to be both for the Original Formation, and Nutrition of Sensitives;
and thus they are not only Subordinate, as a Constituent Body, and N^triment of
Sensitives; but also Subservient, as Instruments of the Sensitive Spirit, as I
have showed, both in all those Motions, which we call Involuntary, and are
properly Vegetative, and also in their Instrumental Preparation and Motion of
all the Sensorious Organs, according to the Imperium and Gubernation of the
Sensitive Spirit, in all those Voluntary Motions thereof, which are performed
thereby Transiently, and not Immanently in itself alone. Also though God did
not so expressly appoint Vegetatives, which are Terrestrial, to be food for
Fishes that Live in the Water, yet probably they had the same food growing on
the Shores and Banks; and such, as some report, may still be found in the
bellys of Sea Morses, and such like Fishes, almost as great as Whales. And
though it be not expressly mentioned either here, or after the Deluge, whether
Fishes did not then also prey one upon another; as now they do, yet possibly
they might, being made to bring forth abundantly, whereby they might both
maintein their own Species, and be food for others, or perhaps they might be
Nourished by their, own Element, Water. However I doubt not, but that some
Beasts were Created far more strong then others, as they still are; and that
some were Venaturient, as now they are, and had the same Specifike Sagacity, as
well as Noses; and so might hunt others with a great Natural Delight, as I
suppose they now do with more then any Huntsman that follows them; which
appears, not only by their Indefatigable Industry, but also by their very great
Exultation, and Cry; yet I conceiv, that then they had no Cruentous or Murdrous
Appetite; as now a Lion does not usualy prey when he is full; and Cats first
play with a Mous, and then kill it; but then they did only play, and not Kill,
when they could not Eat thereof; which is the chief End of Killing. And so a
young Leverer, when it first sees a Dog, sh^ns him, and has a Natural Sagacity
of avoiding, and escaping the Dog, as well as the Dog has such a Natural
Sagacity in hunting the Hare. And heerby also the Ingeny of Sensitives did
appear, as well as in avoiding Poisons, and hurtful Vegetatives, which as they
are in themselves certain Excellencys and Eminencys in the Vegetative Nature, so
are these also in the Sensitive Nature; as of Courage, Fear, and the like
Sensitive Affections. But of all Sensitives Beasts are Supreme, that is, in
their whole Bestial Kind generaly, and so particularly according to their
several Ranks and Degrees, which is the true Rule of Comparison; though the
meanest and lowest of of Beasts be: not more excellent then the chief Fowl or
Fish, and so of Fowls and Fishes. And Beasts do not only excel the rest in
their Bodily Constitution, as I have showed, but much more in their Spiritual
Qualitys, which are their very Sensitive Excellencys; though they may not have
greater or more admirable Instincts then Fowls or Fishes; which are some
special Endowments, wherewith Nature does help out many Inferior Animals, yea
Insects, as Bees, Spiders, Silkworms, Ants, and the like; and of all others,
Man himself, though he has generaly the most excellent Sensitive Spirit
Subordinate and Subservient to his Intellective Spirit, yet he has least and
fewest Instincts; and indeed I know none, except Sucking, which is most Common
and Necessary; yet as he does excel them all in the general Sensitive Powers
and Virtues, whereby he can more Curiously Contrive and Effect things even by
his Sensitive Imagination and Ingeny, and has such a most fit Organ thereof,
as the Hand; so do Beasts heerin generaly excel Fowls and Fishes; and
accordingly have more fit Organs then they, and their Brains are more
Conformable to the Brain of Man; and he has not only most Service from them,
but also most Conversation with them: and thus they were made in the same Day
with him, and next and Immediately before him; and as both he and they have
their Sensitive Spirits produced, and their Bodies formed of the Earth, so they
both Live together in the same Floor of this great House of the Elementary
World; as God says to Job of Behemoth, which I made with thee, he eats Grass
as an Ox. Yet we may no^ therefore, with some Credulous Admirers of Brutes to
the Disparagement of our-selves and of all Human Nature, adopt them into the
Family of Mankind, and claim kindred of Apes, Baboons, Marmosets, Drills, and I
know not what Bestial Fauns and Satyrs, as but one Degree removed from
ourselvs: for though they may thus approach unto us in our Body and Sensitive
Spirit, yet we Classicaly differ, and vastly excel them, in our Intellective
Spirit; whereof I shall now proceed to discourse.

II. We now ascend into the highest Degree of the Scale of Nature, that is, of
Intellective Spirits, Human, and Angelical; whereof the Human Spirit does, as I
said, Classicaly differ from Sensitives, and only Specificaly from Angels: but
as the Human Spirit of Man is united into one Compositum with all the Inferior
Spirits, and Matter, as they are Subordinate one unto another; so Man is the
whole Scale in himself, which Angels are not: comprehending both Intellective
and Sensitive and all other Inferior Natures, as Sensitive Composita do
Sensitive and Vegetative and the rest, and Vegetative Vegetative and Elementary
and Matter, and Elementary Elementary and the Matter, which are the true
Approximations and Combinations or Syzygys of Nature (though no Participations
Mistions or Confusions of Classical Differences, as I have showed) but Man only
is the Epitome of all, or as the Ancients rightly styled him a Microcosm, or
little World: for as Angels, who are the other Species of Intellectives, are
pure Spirits, and no Composita; so Sensitive, and all Inferior Composita, are
not Intellective; but only Man is all in one; that is, Potentialy, or
Classicaly; though not Actualy, and Specificaly: as the Body of Man has not
Actualy the Rarity of Superaether, nor the Density of Subcortical Earth, nor
all the Degrees of the Elementary Qualitys; though he has them also Potentialy
in himself, because he has in his Compositum both Matter, and all the four
Elements, which are Potentialy capable thereof, having the Real Potentialitys
thereof in themselves; and so he is not Specificaly Grass, Herb, or Tree, nor
Fowl, Fish, or Beast; yet Classicaly he has a Vegetative and a Sensitive
Spirit in his Compositum, and such as is Specificaly proper to himself, as well
as they have their proper Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirits. Wherefore plainly
he is such a Microcosm in himself, as I have described; and the last Valde bona
is pronounced of him, as he is such a Microcosm, as well as of the great World.
And now I shall first discourse of Man generaly, according to the whole
Compositum, which every Man has in himself, and which is indeed that which we
call, Man. And as a Traveller, who first by his Mapp setts forth and travells
over the World, whereof he has yet only a Notional Module or Image in his Mind,
when he returns back again, he reviews his Mapp with those Real Apprehensions
which he has Acquired, and comparing both together, finds them to agree, and
so being fully satisfied, as he did before Contemplate the World itself only as
Notional, he now looks upon the very Mapp thereof, as almost Real; thus having
gone forth out of my self as it were into this Philosophical World, I seem now
to return home again to my self, and in my own Human Compositum can behold the
Abstract of all that I found abroad: and thus I shall likewise desire any
other, who shall have traveled through these Discourses of the World, now to
make himself and his whole Compositum the Sensible Experiment of the whole
System thereof, as God has described it in this Divine History, which is also
an Intellectual Epitome thereof. And so let him consider whether he has no^ a
Body of Matter, which he may discover by the Extension and Density thereof; and
therein all the four Elements, which he may discover by the four first
Qualitys thereof; and also a Vegetative Spirit, which he may discover by the
Involuntary Motions thereof, in the Plastical Formation of his Body, Nutrition,
and the like; and also a Sensitive Spirit, which he may discover by all his
Sensations; and lastly an Intellective Spirit, whereby he understands all the
others, and itself, and consciously knows, that it is not only rude Matter, or
any Affection or Variation thereof, but that it can Abstract from the Matter,
and that there are in it its own Immaterial Ideae, Notions and Facultys, which
must Subsist in an Immaterial Substance, which is his very Intellective Spirit:
and as this is an Intellective Spirit, so is his Sensitive a Sensitive, and his
Vegetative a Vegetative, and Elementary Elementary Spirits, Classicaly distinct
and different from the Matter, as well as from one another: for thus he knows
and feels in himself, that there is in his Compositum a Sensitive Spirit,
which sometimes rebelleth against his Intellective Spirit, and a Vegetative
Spirit, whose Involuntary Motions the Sensitive Spirit does no^ always Perceiv
nor Govern, and therefore they are called Involuntary; and a Mistion of
Elementary Spirits, which sometimes, as in a Fever, or the like, are
distempered and disordered, and will not be Governed by the Vegetative Spirit,
and Matter which will Move to Union and Station, as I have showed, maugre all
or any Elementary Spirit: wherefore such Different Operations do plainly prove
them to be such Different Substantial Principles. And as they thus Classicaly
differ, so plainly they are Subordinate one unto another, according to the
Scale of Nature: for so the Intellective Spirit generaly Commands and Governs
the Sensitive Spirit, as the Rider does his Horse; and the Sensitive the
Vegetative, and the Vegetative the Elementary, and the Elementary the Matter,
as I have showed at large, and any may Experiment in himself; for as this is
the Scale of Nature, which God Erected, and the true Economy thereof, which he
has Ordered and settled in the World, so every Man has, and if he attentively
and duly consider it, may evidently perceiv the same in his own Compositum.
And, which is yet more admirable, as Man is this Centrical Orb of the whole
World, not only Localy as he is in or upon the Earth, which is his Mansion, but
Physicaly, as he is such a Compendium thereof; so he is also Politicaly,
according to the Divine Intention of the Creator, that one Nature, which all
other Natures do Circumferentialy respect, and relate to him one way or other,
as so many Lines to the Center: Wherefore as Angels probably were Created
first, being the Supreme of all Natures; so Man was made last, as the Sum and
Completion of them all, and the Political End thereof, which was first in the
Divine Intention, and last in the Execution. And Man was so made in order to
the Assumption of his Nature by Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is therefore
called the Beginning of the Creation of God, both Principium, and Principatus;
Alpha, and Omega, the First and the Last; and I suppose tha^ Consultation about
the Creation of Man, Let us make Man etc. (whereas it is said of the rest, only
by a Word of Command, Let there be Light, and the like) did refer specialy to
Christ, who was to Unite and Espous the Human Nature, (which as I said is the
Epitome of the whole Creation) to the Divine Nature, in one Person. And yet
some forgetting that they are Christians, and indeed Men, and seeming to
trample on this supposed Pride of Man with a Real and greater Pride and
Self-conceit, can be so ungrateful toward God their Creator, and Jesus Christ
their Redeemer, and so falls to themselves, as to deny or disparage this
Originaly Natural, though now depraved, Excellence of their own Nature.
Wherefore to retund their Perversity, and to assert the Native Dignity of
Mankind, I shall evidently prove it by the Letter of the Text; which declares
this to be the very Intention of the Creation of Man, Let us make Man after our
Image, and in our own Likeness. And let them have Dominion over the Fish of the
Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over the Catell, and over all the Earth;
and accordingly it is repeated again by God himself unto Man, after he was
made, that he might know and acknowledge it; Replenish the Earth, and Subdue it,
and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea etc. and so after the Deluge, God
again renewed this Great Charter to Mankind, when also he added a farther
Privilege of feeding on Sensitives. And it is still evidently so according to
Natural Reason; for thus, as the Intellective Spirit of Man in his own Human
Compositum Subordinateth all the Inferior Natures to itself, so also does Man
in his whole Compositum Subordinate them all to himself; not as Angels, who by
their greater Power can overrule all or any of them, yea Man himself, Externaly
and Violently, but by an Intrinsecal Right and Power of Sovereignty and
Dominion, whereunto Man was born, and has it in himself according to the Law
of Nature: for so also, though Angels are more excellently Intelligent of all
these Inferior Natures then Man himself; yet he is more Sentient thereof, because
he is Sensitive, and they are not: and thus Man as one of them, and being more
excellent then them all was made to be their Natural and Lawful Prince, yet as
in his own Compositum he has not Actualy and Specificaly all the Differences
of Inferior Natures, but only Classicaly, so he does not possess nor has the
use of all other things particularly, but generaly: and as a Paterfamilias or
Master of the House, though he has not the whole Vsus, but the Fructus of all
in the Family, and House; yet he may have the very Vsus of what he pleases
thereof; for Quic quid acquiritur servo acquiritur Domino, so Man does most
Lawfully use the Service; yea the very Lives of Sensitives: and they have no
Right or Propriety in any thing that they have, no, not in themselves, against
Man, whom God, the Supreme Lord of all, has thus made Lord over the Works of
his hands, and putt all things under his feet; that is, all these Inferior
Natures, Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air, and Fish of the Sea, which
are next and Immediate unto himself, and in the same Region of Life with
himself; and consequently all other things which are below them; but as he is
Naturaly of the same Intellective Classis with Angels, whose Native Province is
the Superaether, which is also Superelementary, so he has only a Coordinate
Communion with them here, and shall have Eternaly hereafter, in such a way and
manner as we do not now understand (nor will I presume to inquire:) and yet even
now they are termed Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister unto them who
shall be heirs of Salvation. But most Sensibly the whole Elementary Globe, and
all things therein, were made thus Subordinate and Subservient to Man, and since
our Rebellion against God, and theirs against us, yet, as God declared to Noah
and his Sons, we still hold the Reins of this Sovereignty and Empire over them
in our hands, and so shall until the last Dissolution: thus it is said, Every
Kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed,
and has been tamed of Mankind: and none of them could ever yet make War with
Men, but in all Ages, and all places of the Habitable Earth, are Enslaved, or
Ejected, by us. Also as the Tapistry, and Pictures, and all the Ornatus of the
House, is for the use of the Master; so has the Intellective Spirit of Man the
Intellectual Contemplation and Enjoyment of all the Spectable World: and thus
we have hitherto discoursed thereof; and though we cannot Comprehend all things,
nor all the Secrets and Mysterys of Nature, which we therefore must Admire; yet
that very Admiration is another kind of Enjoyment of them: as all Wonderful
Spectacles are very delightful, and we willingly bestow our Pains in
traveling to See them, and also very great Cost to Purchase them. But the most
Satisfactory and Sensible Evidence of this great Truth is the Universal Curs
and Blast that is upon all this Inferior Globe for the Sin of Man; which could
not be for any other reason, but only because it, and all that is therein, is
his: and such Derivative Punishment is also used in the Civil Laws of Men. --
Immeritis frangun^ur crura Caballis.

III. I shall now consider Man more distinctly* as he is Composited of Soul and
Body; and first his Human Body, and the Successive Generation thereof, according
to his Original Creation. I have showed, how, according to the Scale of Nature,
the Matter is the first Body* and the Inferior Spirits, together with the
Matter, are the Bodies of the Superior; and so that, and all the Inferior
Spirits, Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive, are the Body of the
Intellective Spirit of Man; which as it is a Sensitive Body may be termed his
Beast, (as Beasts are next unto him in the Order of Nature) though indeed his
Sensitive Spirit be neither such as the Spirit of Fish, Fowl, or Beast,
Specificaly, bu^ only Classicaly Sensitive, as they also are; whereas it is in
itself Specificaly a more excellent and Proper Spirit, as I have showed: which
was also produced out of the Earth as well as the Spirits of Beasts as they are
all of the same Classical Nature: for so, as it is said, Out of the Ground the
Lord formed every Beast, etc. it is also said, God formed Man out of the Dust
of the Gr^und; wherefore his Human Body was not only a Lute^ Imag^, or Statue,
as is commonly supposed, and that so God Inspired into it the B^eath of Life,
both Sensitive, and Intellective; for it was first made a Sensitive Body,
having the Sensitive Spirit then laten^ in it, and ready to be produced; as the
Sensitive Spirit in the Foetus of any other Animal is so produced, when the
Vegetative Spirit has first Formed and Organized the Sensitive Body, as I have
showed, and may now evidently appear in the Creation and Generation of Man; for
so God is said to breath into his Nostrills the Breath of Life, (or Lives, as
it is Hebraicaly) that is, in the same Instant when God so produced by Improper
Creation the Sensitive Spirit, or Life, (which is also called Breath of Life)
by forming Man of the Dust of the Ground, as well as any Beast as I said, he
also introduced into his Body the Intellective Spirit, and Life; for so he is
said to breath into his Nostrills, that is, into such an Organical part of his
Sensitive Body, as any Beast also has; and not only into a Figure or
Similitude thereof, which a Statue may have; but plainly they were Carneae, and
not Luteae Nares; and so was all his Body Carneum Corpus, and not Lutea Imago
Corporis: and so Adam, after he was thus Immediately Created, that is, by
Improper Creation of the Sensitive Body, and Proper Creation, of his
Intellective Spirit, says of Eve, who was also so Immediately Created by God,
this is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh: and certainly the Body of Eve
was made of such a Sensitive part of the Body of Adam, and so indeed they were
both Created by God; as it is said, Male and Female Created he them; and
neither was the Soul of Man made Superior to that of the Woman, as the Jewish
Rabbis most fondly affirm; nor yet the Body of Woman Superior to that of the
Man, as some fond Amorists are apt to fansy. And whereas God is said to Build or
Aedificate Woman, so also it is said that he Formed Man and Beasts. And this
special Aedification of Woman out of the Rib or Side of Man, and not
Immediately out of the Earth, was somewhat like Generation by Seed; which is a
Decision from the Body of the Parents, whereby the Child is as it were a part
thereof; and as that makes the Natural Union and Storge between them, so
likewise this first Creation of Woman in such an Extraordinary manner, otherwise
then of any other Feminine Animal, (which is not so made, nor any Woman since
of the Rib or Side of Man) was not only the Original Institution but Natural
Law of Matrimony between Man and Woman in Paradise, more then between any other
Sensitive Male and Female: and is so Interpreted in the following words,
Therefore shall a Man leav his Father and his Mother, and shall cleav unto his
Wife; and they two shall be one Flesh. And indeed this is the Foundation of all
Civil Society, and Polity of Mankind, wherein he being naturaly Animal Sociabile
excels all other Sensitives; for so Husband and Wife were not only before
Father and Mother, but, as I may so say, the very Parents of Parentality
itself; and without Lawful, that is, such Human Conjugation, there is no
Lawful, or Human Filiation. Thus Matrimony does unite not only Man and Woman
between themselves, but also their Children, as the Pignora of their Matrimonial
Covenant, and Conjugation, during Life; whereas the Bond of Bestial Copulation
and Procreation is not constant, but even Parental is soon forgott and
vanishes away. And this also in Mankind makes Fornication to be Naturaly and
Moraly unlawful, because he that is joined to an Harlot is one Body, for two
(says he) shall be one Flesh. And Matrimony is Mystical, and Typical of Christ
and his Church; between whom there is a Spiritual, as this is a Carnal Union;
and Christ has married it to himself with an everlasting Covenant, as this is
Mortal and Temporary: and thus the Apostle cites the aforesaid Text, and
subjoineth, This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and his
Church. Now whereas it is said, that God formed the Body of Man of the Dust, or
as it is Literaly, Dust of the Ground, and not, as it is said of Beasts, out of
the Ground, it may import a more Delicacy, or Tenderness, of the Human Body,
proportionable to the more Excellent Sensitive Spirit, as Dust is a ^iner and
purer part of Earth; but I rather conceiv, that it is so expressed to humble
Man, the most Excellent of all sensible Animals; in that sens wherein it is so
afterward applied, Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return. Thus it
appears plainly by Authority of Scripture, that Man has not only an
Intellective, but also a Sensitive Spirit, in his Compositum; because it is so
said that God breathed into his Nostrills the Breath Singularly of Lives Dualy,
that is, though his Intellective Soul only was Inspired, yet the other was
produced. And so also according to Reason; for these two Spirits are Classicaly
Different in the same Human Compositum, as well as in a Brute and an Angel; for
one is Material and United Mediately by the Inferior Spirits to the Matter, and
the other Immaterial; and so the one can only be and Operate Conjunctly in and
with the Matter and Body thereof, but the other may be and Operate Seperately
without them: nor can these be two Spirits Mist together, any more then Matter
and Spirit, (whereof, when they are Consubstantiated, the Matter is no less
Matter, nor the Spirit Spirit; though they do Consubstantiate one another
Mutualy and Conjunctly, whereby they are and Operate as one perfect Substance)
and much less the Intellective and Sensitive Spirit of Man, which are not
Consubstantiateed. Neither has the Intellective Spirit Eminently (as it is
commonly termed, though none can understand what it should signify) the
Facultys, Powers, and Qualitys, of the Sensitive Spirit, or the Sensitive of
the Vegetative Spirit, or the Vegetative of the Elementary Spirits, any more
then a Spirit has of the Matter, or the Matter of Spirits; nor can any one
Species have the Proper Qualitys of another, for then they should not be such
Proper Qualitys of its own Species; And whatsoever Scholastical Notions any
others may frame in their Minds, they who search into Nature itself, and
consider things as they find them therein, must confess that as they can know
nothing of Matter what it is, but by the Extension, Density, and like
Affections thereof, so neither of Spirits what they are but by their Proper
Powers, and Qualitys; as it is truly said, that if a Stone could be made to
have truly and Realy all the Proper Qualitys of Gold, it must be Gold, and have
such an Actual Composition of the Elementary Spirits, wherein those Qualitys of
Gold do Subsist: and however Philosophers might distinguish Notionaly, all
Mankind besides would esteem it; and accept it, as true Gold. Wherefore if the
Intellective Spirit of Man had, as they say, all the true and Real Propertys of
a Sensitive Spirit, and also of a Vegetative it must be both an Intellective
and Sensitive and Vegetative Spirit, which is a Confusion, not only of Species,
but of Classes: and so Man should be a greater Monster then a Mule, or the like
Mist Animals: for so indeed there may be a Mistion not only of Homogeneous
Substantial Spirits, as in all Augmentation, whereby more of the same
Specifical Spirit latent in the Nutriment is taken into the Individuality and
Economy of the Substantial Spirit of the Principal Compositum, and Mist with
the very Substance thereof; but also Homoeogeneous Spirits of the same Clussis
may be so Mist, in Primitive Generation, as in a Mule, and the like; and yet
because it is Confusion of the Species, it may not continue and propagate
others: for Nature does abhor all such Rape and Violence offered unto her, in
her Specifical Oeconomys, and will not endure any Successive Multiplication of
a new Species (as it is therefore Proverbialy said, Cum Mula pepererit) as well
as she does also abhor the Abolition of any of her Regular Species, which are
as so many Members of her great Body, and therefore God did so Extraordinarily
preserv them in the Deluge. And though it is true that even Sensitive Spirits
because they also do Live have Perception and Appetite, which are Analogous to
Intellective Understanding and Will; and so also all Analogous Affections of
Love, Hate, Joy, Grief, Hope, Fear, and the like Living Facultys; as there are
many such Analogys in Nature between several Classical Spirits and Spiritual
Qualitys, yea between them and Matter and the Affections thereof, as I have
observed; yet they are still Classicaly Different, as well as there are the
like Specificaly Different Analogys between the like Intellective Facultys and
Powers in Men and Angels. And by these Analogys and Correspondences in her
several Members, Nature does Confederate and Combine and Unite all her
Composita, and her whole Body, and make it one Conjunct Univers in the Whole;
and so does the Human Compositum or Nature of Man, (which is, as I said, the
Epitome of the Univers) thus Confederate and Combine and Unite all the
Classicaly Different Natures in itself. Thus there is both such a Combination
and Compositum of the Whole, and also a Classical Difference of the several
Natures in themselves, as so many parts and Members thereof, which yet are not
Mist or Confounded one with another any more in the little Compositum of Man,
then in the great Body of the Univers; wherein certainly they are so Different,
otherwise there should be no such D^fferences in Nature; but either Materia
prima, or Anima Mundi, or both might be Eminently all things; which I have
before sufficiently refuted. And it may Sensibly appear that there are such
several Spirits in Man, by their several Operations, which are not only
Naturaly Different, but Actively Contrary, as I have showed, and cause a
Conflict in him, as it were between two several Animals; for so it is confessed
by all Philosophy, that the Sensitive Spirit does Rebel against the
Intellective, for the Sensitive Imagination and Appetite, or the Intellective
Understanding and Will, do never so resist and oppose one another; but what the
Imagination determines, and so represents to the Appetite, as Sensual Good,
or Evil, the Appetite accordingly Affects, or Disaffecteth it, without any
Renitence or Regret; and so it is also between the Understanding and the Will:
but the only Dispute in the same Spirit, Sensitive, or Intellective, is in the
Deliberation concerning several Sensual or Intellectual Object^, or
Circumstances thereof, and the like, before the Imagination, or Understanding,
can judge and determine that this, or that Object, so Circumstantiated, is
Sensualy, or Intellectualy, Good, or Evil, or Better, or Wors: whereas after
the determination is once past, the Appetite does follow the Vltimum Dictamen
of the Imagination, and the Will of the Understanding without any the least
Renitence and Regret, most Spontaneously, and Voluntarily. Wherefore such
Opposite Operations as are commonly between the Sensitive Imagination and
Intellective Understanding, and Sensitive Appetite and Intellective Will,
plainly declare that the Intellective and Sensitive Spirit in the same Man are
Realy different, as well as they are so in Brutes and Angels; yea and more
evidently, because there is no such Conflict in either of them, who are wholly
Sensitive, or wholly Intellective; and though the Sensitive Spirit in Man did
perfectly submitt to his Intellective Spirit in his first Creation, yet they
did then also as Realy Differ in their own Natures, which are not altered by
the Fall, and as they now do as much Naturaly Differ when they agree, as when
they disagree; though the Actual disagreement does more Sensibly manifest the
Natural Difference: as Actual Heat and Cold, Moisture and Drines declare the
Elementary Spirits to be Different Substantial Principles; and though they
being all of the same Classis, may be united into one Mistum, and their
Qualitys into one equal and agreing Temperament, yet the Sensitive and
Intellective Spirits in Man being Classicaly Different, neither themselves, nor
their Facultys, nor Operations, can be so Mist; and so any Man may feel in
himself, that when in such a Conflict, the Will, which is Intellective, does
prevail and Overruled the Operation, the Sensitive Appetite does not mingle
itself with it, but as it were also by itself reluct and repine, and as soon as
it can return to its own Sensual Course: and when the Appetite does prevail and
overrule, the Will does in like manner mourn, and bewail itself, and as soon as
it can return to its own Rational Course: which Sensibly satisfies me, that
they are and remain such Different Spirits, or Substantial Principles,
Facultys, and Operations, though they be all in the same Human Compositum. And
whereas it is said, that the Human Embryo first lives the Life of a Vegetative
Plant, then of a Sensitive Brute, and lastly, of an Intellective Man, though I
have showed how it indeed begins to live the Sensitive and Intellective Life
together in one and the same Instant, and so it is said Man became a Living
Soul, or Person, because they are both truly and properly Lives, and the
Intellective Denominates the whole Person, Man: and as soon as the Sensitive
Life dies, and the Breath, which is the Instrument thereof, cease, and
expireth, the Intellective also departs; and as long as the Sensitive Life
remains, though in any Deliquium, or the like, the Intellective continues; and
so the Wiseman says of men, as one dies so dies the other, yea, they have
all one breath: yet it is very true, that the Vegetative Life, as they call it,
is before the Sensitive, as may appear by the Punctus saliens, in the Formation
of the Foetus; and whereas they say, that this is only the Operation of the
Sensitive Soul in a Brute, and of the Intellective in a Man, so Operating
Eminently by those Inferior Powers which it has in itself, before it can exert
its own Proper Superior Powers, it seems to me very Absurd and Improbable,
that it should putt forth any such Eminent Powers which must Subsist in the
Proper Powers, before those Proper Powers be Actuated, wherein it must Subsist;
as Emanant Light, or Heat, are Potentialy, that is Formaly, and not only
Eminently, in Inherent, but certainly cannot be Actualy exerted before the
Inherent be Actuated, and does Operate Actualy: though indeed, as I have said,
no Proper Quality of one Specifical Spirit can be, Actualy, or Potentialy, in
another, either Immediately, or Mediately, as the Proper Qualitys of the same
Specifical Spirit may be: and so as Emanant Light, or Heat, does Immediately
Subsist in Inherent, and Mediately in Ether or Fire. Wherefore there are three
such distinct Spirits, Intellective, Sensitive, and Vegetative, in the Human
Compositum; and also the four Elementary Spirits (and they only Mist together
in one) nor has ever any yet affirmed that they also were Eminently in all or
any of the others, as that the Intellective, Sensitive, or Vegetative Spirit,
is Eminently Hott, Cold, Moist, or Dry, or the like: and yet they might and
must affirm this as well as the other, because they also are Spirits, and not
the Bodily Matter. And thus there are indeed, speaking plainly, Seven
Different Spirits in every Human Compositum; not Possessing it or the Body of
Matter, (as the Seven evil Spirits did, which our Savior cast out of Mary
Magdalen) but Informing, that is, Inspiriting it Naturaly, and according to the
whole Scale of Nature, whereof they are all the Classical Spirits: and if they
were not all in the Human Compositum, Man should not be truly the Epitome of
Nature, or any such Microcosm in himself: but as certainly as he is Composited
of Matter and Spirit, which yet remain distinct and different Natures in one
and the same Compositum, so he has also all the Inferior several Spirits in
him as well as the Matter, and the Matter as well as them; all which together
are his Human Body, and not only the Matter, and Elementary Mistion. And now,
because I know that this affirmation of so many several Spirits in every one Man
will seem very strange to any, who does not attend, and rightly consider, the
true System of Nature, as it is described in this History of Creation, both
Proper, and Improper; and because many Christian Philosophers, who strongly
maintein and affirm the Proper Creation of the World against all Atheism and
Heathenism, yet do not heerin also, as they ought, oppose the Improper Creation
by God against Human Philosophy and Inventions of Men from which they have
derived some preconceived Notions, which are their only Objections against this
Doctrine; I shall recapitulate briefly what I have formerly more fully
declared, whereby they shall plainly understand that the Objections are only
Notions, and that it is not, nor can it be, Realy so in Created Nature. Thus,
as I have said, God the Creator is the only true Eminence, or Eminent
Causality; who comprehending all Possibilitys, not Formaly, but Eminently, in
his own Infinite Omnipotence, could, and did Create, what he pleased from
Absolute Nonentity, and so still does comprehend all Created Entitys, not
Formaly, but Eminently in his own Infinite Entity in an Infinite and
Incomprehensible manner: but as it is Impossible that any thing should be
Generated Actualy, whereof there is only a Nonentitative Possibility, and no
Entitative Potentiality (as I have distinguished them) because Generation is no
Creation; so it is also Impossible that any Natural Agent should Act or Operate
by any Power, which it has not Formaly in itself, but only Eminently, as they
say: for if it can so Act and Operate, then it has Formaly that Power whereby
it does so Act or Operate; otherwise it should Act or Operate without the
Formal and Univocal Power; or it should have ^, and not have it, both which are
equaly Impossible; and so they say, that the Soul of Man does Sens, and
Vegetate, and the like, and yet has no Sensitive, or Vegetative Powers, and
the like, or that it has them Eminently, and not Formaly; that is, it has
them, and it has them not. But since it is most certain that the Human
Compositum does Sens, and Vegetate, and is Hott, Cold, Moist, Dry, Realy and
Formaly, as well as any Beast, or Tree, or Stone, or the like, it is most
evident that it has Formaly the Sensitive and Vegetative and Elementary
Powers, and Qualitys, as well as they: and then by their own Argument, because
the Intellective Soul cannot have them Formaly, there must be also in Man a
Sensitive, Vegetative, and all the four Elementary Spirits, wherein they do
Formaly Subsist. Again, because God is Infinitely one most Simple Essence,
therefore he does also Act and Operate by his Essence; but all Created
Substances (even Angels themselves, as I shall show hereafter) are not Simple as
God, but have their Substances and Accidents, and Act and Operate by their
Accidental Powers and Qualitys, and so their Nature is composed of Substances
and Accidents. And the mutual Conversation of one Substance with another is by
their Accidents that are their Emissarys and Agencys, and which meeting and
joining together, (as Light with Color) by their Conjunction, and mutual Action
and Passion, the Operation is produced, (which, as I have said, cannot be in
Vacuity, or without some Contact Corporeal, or Spiritual) and as we thus Act
and Operate Immediately by Accidents, and upon Accidents, so by them Mediately
we know Substances of other things, and not otherwise. Thus the Intellective
Soul does Act and Operate by Understanding and Will, and by their proper
Irradiations and Eradiations, as I shall show hereafter; and so the Sensitive
Soul by its Imagination and Appetite, and their proper Irradiations and
Eradiations, as I have showed before: whereby we know them to be what they are,
and therefore since Man does thus Sens, as well as Understand, and the like, he
has also Substantialy in his Compositum a Sensitive, as well as an
Intellective Soul, and the like; otherwise we must affirm his Intellective Soul
to be also a Sensitive Soul, which is to confound Natures Classicaly Different;
and we may as well affirm it to be Vegetative, and Elementary Spirits, and
Matter itself, which all make the Human Compositum. Again, as Matter, being an
Imperfect Substance, must be Composited with Spirits to perfect it; so every
Spirit that is Inferior is more Composited with it and others; and the more
Superior less, as I have showed: and this Compositum does not produce any new
Substance which is Forma Compositi, nor is any such introduced into it aliunde,
but it is only the Result of the Composition itself, and the Real Relation
thereof, not Abstractly and Metaphysicaly; as Entity, Genera, Species, and the
like, but Concretely and Homophysicaly, as I may term it; as the Univers, all
Animals, all Men, and the like, which are also so many Physical Individua: and
so is the Human Compositum or Man, so many Physical Spirits and Matter
Composited together. (And this is only a Natural Corporation, wherein the
Intellective Spirit Predominates, and so Denominates the Compositum) and the
Forma Compositi, which is one, is only the Result thereof, and according to the
Scale and Economy of Nature the Composita are thus Naturaly United together:
for so the Elementary Spirits do Immediately Consubstantiate the Matter of the
Body of Man, and are all four Mist together, and have their four first, and
such other Elementary Qualitys, (which are yet Occult and unknown to us)
Actuated therein, as well as in any other Elementary Compositum, Stone, Wood, or
the like, that is, in the Primigenious Mi^tion and Temper of the Blood,
whereby, and whereof, the Flesh, Bones, and all the parts of his Body are
Constituted severaly and respectively, by the Operation and Distribution of the
Vegetative Spirit, which does so Plasticaly Govern and Vary the Elementary
Mistion and Qualitys thereof, as it does the Matter and Extension thereof so
Qualified; and so form and frame the whole Compages of the Body Organized and
Erected thereby: and the Vegetative Spirit, which does so Govern and Vary the
Elementary Spirits, does Immediately Consubstantiate them, as they do the
Matter; for as they cannot be and Operate without the Matter, nor the Matter
become the Body of Elementary Spirits without them; so the Vegetative Spirit
cannot be produced, nor Operate without the Matter, and Elementary Spirits, nor
they become the Body of a Vegetative Spirit without it; nor can the Sensitive
Spirit be produced and Operate without the Vegetative and Elementary Spirits
and Matter, nor they become the Body of the Sensitive Spirit without it; and
thus also the Intellective Spirit is not before Inspired, nor can now Operate
without the Sensitive, Vegetative, and Elementary Spirits, and Matter, nor they
become the Body of an Intellective Spirit without it, and whereof not one, nor
some, but all together are the Body: but contrarily there may be an Elementary
Compositum of the Body of Matter and Elementary Spirits without a Vegetative
Spirit, as Stones, Metalls, Minerals, and the like; or a Vegetative Compositum
without ^t a Sensitive Spirit, as Grass, Herbs, Trees^; or a Sensitive
Compositum without an Intellective Spirit, as Fishes, Fowls, Beasts; according
to the Economy of Nature; as I have formerly showed, and now more fully
approved by the Human Compositum, which so Comprehends them all, and in the
same Order. Also, as I have supposed, that there is a proper Elementary Mistion
Subordinate to the Vegetative Spirit, and a Proper Vegetative Spirit to the
Sensitive Spirit, and a Proper Sensitive Spirit to the Intellective Spirit of
Man, so this likewise may appear in the Human Compositum; for so it is said,
All Flesh is not the same; for there is one Kind of Flesh of Men, another Flesh
of Beasts, another of Fishes, and another of Birds; and yet all Flesh is
Elementary; and therefore the Difference must be from the Various Mistion of
the Human, Bestial, and other Fleshes; and so that there is in Man a Proper
Vegetative Spirit, is evinced by the Plastical Vir^ue thereof so Effigiating his
Body, and specialy his Hands, which are instead of fore-feet, and all the
Natural Arms of other Sensitive Animals, Horns, Tusks, Beaks, Claws, Teeth, and
Tails, and the like; and also his Erect Posture, whereby he differs from all
others: and that there is in him a Proper Sensitive Spirit, is evinced by his
Imaginative Apprehension, and Appetitive Delight of and in Beauty, Harmony; and
the like, which he can also effect far more Curiously and Artificialy then any
Brute; nor are those the Works of his Intellect, but of his Imagination
properly, though that may be much assisted therein by his Understanding: for
many that are otherwise in Understanding almost Idiots, or Lunatikes, have most
Ingenious Fansys (which yet are not Instincts as in Brutes) and wherein they
far excel the most wise and prudent men, as in Singing, Music, Dancing,
Painting, Carving, and Mechanike: but most evidently that which they call
Risibility not only in the Act, but in the Power, is only proper to Mankind,
and to no other Sensitive: and though I know that Philosophy has entailed this
also upon Reason, and I will not deny them such a Rational Risibility as they
would have, yet certainly they cannot deny a Sensitive Risibility, such as
happens by Tickling, as well as Flebility by Beating, wherein Reason has not
any Share; but sometimes we Laugh or Weep against our Will; and it is only a
Sensible Titillation, or Verberation of the Flesh, and a Sensual Delectation,
or Pain thereby, which causes Laughter or Weeping in such cases: though there
be a great Analogy between the Sensitive and Intellective Risibility, as well
as between other Sensitive and Intellective Affections, which I mentioned
before. And now I shall proceed to consider another greater Question, and of
greater concernment; Whether the Intellective Spirit, or Soul, as well as the
Body of Man, be ex Traduce, as they term it, that is, only Generated by the
Parents, as the Decision of the Seed of any other Sensitive Animals, or
Immediately Created by God? Wherein first I do acknowledge, as before, that the
Sensi^ive, Vegetative, and Elementary Spirits of Man, as well as the Matter of
his Body, are so Generated by the Parents, because all these are only the Human
Body, as I have showed, according to the Scale of Nature: and thus God did at
first produce the Sensitive Spirit of Man by Improper Creation Immediately, as
he did all other Sensitive Spirits, latent in the first Chaos; wherein also the
Proper Sensitive Spirit of Man was so latent, as well as his Inferior Spirits,
both Vegetative, and Elementary; all which were Created in the Beginning by a
Proper Creation: and so far I grant a Praeexistence of these Spirits, which
are in all Men, as well as of the Spirits of Brutes, and Plants; which as they
were afterward produced by an Improper Creation by God, and now are Generated
by their Parents Successively, so God and Nature, who do nothing in vain, did
then so produce them, and they do still so Generate them in Man, as well as in
Plants and Brutes. But I deny that the Intellective Spirit of Man is latent in
the Seed, because it was not so latent in the Chaos; nor Generated by the
Parents, because it was not so produced by an Improper Creation, but Immediately
Created by a Proper Creation; and Infused by God as it were aliunde, and so
Inspired, as it is very fitly expressed, in respect of the manner of Infusion
thereof; for though God cannot be said Properly to Breath, yet as it is a
Substantial Activity and Life, so it is termed Spiritus, or Breath; and though
itself be not Properly a Breath, yet as it was Infused in the same Instant,
when God also by Improper Creation produced the Sensitive Spirit, which is the
other Life (and so is termed, the Breath of Life, which distinguishes it from
any Vegetative Spirit, as I have showed), so God is said to breath into the
Nostrills of Man this Breath of Life; and as by Inspiration, the Breath as soon
as it is out of the Inspirer, is in the Inspired, so this Intellective Soul of
Man was Infused into him, as soon as it was Created by God; and thus according
to the Sentence of the Scholeman, Creando Infunditur, and Infundendo Creatur,
and was not Praeexistent, as the Sensitive, or any other Inferior Spirit, or
the Matter, (as some Jewish Rabbis and Rabbinical Christians have Imagined)
nor latent in any Chaos of Potentiality, but only in Divina Potentia, which can
Create any Possible Nonentity, and produce it into Entity; whereas Natural
Generation is only the production of Potential Entity, or Essence, into Actual
Entity, or Existence, as I have showed. And God is said to breath it into the
Nostrills, rather then any other part of the Body, because thereby is the
passage for Vapors into the Brain, which is the Centrical Seat of the Soul, as
is heerby also intimated. Wherefore as all Successive Generation is conformable
to the Original, and all other Spirits which were then only produced, and not
Properly Created, are still Generated by the Parents; so the Intellective Soul
of Man, which was then not produced, nor Improperly, but Properly Created (both
in Adam and Eve, whom he called Flesh of his Flesh, but not Soul of his Soul)
is still Created by God, and not Generated by the Parents as God himself
testifies, All Souls are mine; as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of
the Son is mine, and Elihu acknowledges the same of himself, The Spirit of God
has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life. And it is so
Rational, that unless we also acknowledge it, we must affirm that our very
Intellective and Rational Souls were partly in the Seed of our Father, and
partly in the Seed of our Mother, and so by their mingling together, Mist into
one; as the four Elementary Spirits, or the Muline Spirits, and the like; and
so that half an Human Soul was lost by the sin of Onan. And if the Soul of Man
be thus Miscible, then it may be also Unmist again, and is Divisible, and
consequently Corruptible, as well as Generable; with many other such
Absurditys, which do necessarily follow this Erroneous Opinion. Whereas we may
Sensibly perceiv, that though, as I have said, the Sensitive Body of Man, that
is, the Matter, and Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirit be so
Generated by the Parents, and accordingly are conformable more or less to their
Bodily part, as an Ethiopian, or Negro, begets a N^gro, a Moor a Moor, and an
European an European, according to the several Shapes, and Colors of the
Parents Bodies, not only in their Native Climes of Aethiopia, Mauritania,
Europe, and the like, but also in any others, so long and until the habits of
the Parents Bodies be afterward altered by degrees, and several Successive
Generations: and so Hereditary Diseases happen commonly in Familys: yet there
can be no such certain Observation made of any Intellectual or Moral Endowments
of the Soul, descending from the Parents to their Children; (notwithstanding
the Inclinations from all those Bodily Humors, which may so be derived unto
them, and the great advantages of Education, and Conversation, with them, and
the like) which Virgil had very wisely considered, and so affirmed to Augustus,
that therefore he could not judge of the Race of Men, as of Horses, and Dogs;
and it is a common Observation of Historians, that in Hereditary Kingdoms
seldom two Princes of like Disposition succeed one another. But it is most
observable in the Foetus of Sodomitical Copula^ion, that though i^ may in the
Bodily part retein and represent something of either Parent, Human, and
Belluine, yet the Predominant Spirit, or Soul, is not so Mist, as in a M^le,
which is both Equine, and Asinine; but is either Human, or Belluine, that is
Intellective, or not Intellective, and having, or not having Rational Discourse,
and the like: though I rather suppose, that it is never Human, but always
Belluine; and that though God does generaly Create and Infuse an Human Soul
into a Foetus begott by Adulterous or M^retricious Copulation, which are only
against the Law of Matrimony between two Individua, yet he does not so assist
in Sodomy, which is against the Generical Law of Nature, and the Classical
Difference thereof. And as Sensitive Animals of the same Classis that are very
Heterogeneous will not so copulate, as Beast and Bird, nor Horse and Kine, and
the like, as an Horse and Ass will, which are more Homogeneous; so though Man
(whose very Sensitive Spirit is more Heterogeneous from all Beasts, then any of
them is from another), may through his most Unnatural and Abominable Lust
perpetrate such Infand Villainy, (which cried to heaven and to the God of Nature
for Vengeance against the first Denominators thereof) yet commonly the Foetus is
strangely Biform, and Monstrous, and no fit Receptacle for an Human Spirit;
and so it is said, It is Confusion. Now though Human Parents do not, nor can
they, as I have showed, so Generate or produce the Intellective Spirit of the
Child, as they do the Sensitive Spirit, and others, yet Homo genera^ Hominem,
or the Human Compositum, which is the Man that is Generated, as well as any
other Sensitive Animal does Generate its like Sensitive Compositum; which may
evidently appear if we remind what Generation truly and rightly is, that is, no
Creation of any Possible Nonentity, nor Transpeciation, or Conversion of one
Entity into another, or Production from not such an Entity, Actual, or
Potential, and only Possible; which is tantamount to a Creation; but only a
Composition Aedification or Confabrication of Simple Essences before Created
into one Compositum, whereby there is Generated a Forma Compositi, which was
not before Actualy, but only Potentialy in all the simple Essences, whereof it
is Composited; and which also have their own Simple Formalitys, whereby they
are such as they are, and were so Created by God, in themselves; otherwise they
should not be such as they are, and indeed Absolutely not be, in themselves: and
when they are so Composited, there is no new Creation or Conversion of them or
any of their own Simple Essences or Formalitys, as they are every one in
themselves, into any other; but only the Composition of them all together in
such or such a manner (which was Potentialy before in them all, otherwise they
could not be so Composited) is now made Actualy to be such a Compositum as it
was not before; as any Accident Potentialy Subsisting in the Substance is so
afterward Actuated (as well as an House is so Built as I have showed) and this
is the Generation, that is, Generatio Compositi, by such Composition and
Confabrication of simple Entitys, for there can be no Composition of
Non-entitys. And thus as the Original Generation of Adam, or the whole Man, by
God, was such a Composition and Confabrication, as he is so said to be the Son
of God; and of the Woman, by such Aedification, as it is termed; so is every
Man still Generated by his Parents in all Successive Generation, and the only
Difference between the Generation of Man, and any other Animal, is in the
Creation of the Principles or Simple Essences, whereof they are Composited: that
is, whereas the Matter, Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirits of
Brutes, which are their Principles, were all before Created by God; and are
afterward Composited by the Parents, (which is their Generation) so only the
Matter, Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive Spirit of Man were so before
Created, and his Intellective Spirit which is one Principle is Created by God
Immediately, in and with the Composition and Generation by the Parents,
according to the Law of Nature: which different Creation of the Principles by
God, does not at all concern the Generation by the Parents; that is, the
Composition or Confabrication thereof, which according to the Law of his Nature
is the same in Man as in any other Animal (and therefore there is one and the
same Blessing of Procreation to Man and Beasts) whereas indeed if Generation
were any such Conversion or Transpeciation as is supposed, then Man should not
Generate Man, as he does; And so this Human Generation does most evidently
prove, that all Generation is none other then* such a Composition and
Confabrication, as I have declared: and thus Adam begatt a Son in his own
Likeness, and after his own Image, and his Son Seth was his Seed, as well as
Eves, in whose Womb the Generation was afterward consummated, when there was an
Infusion of the Intellective Soul of Seth by God; whereof the Instrumental
Union, Composition, and Confabrication, was by both Parents, as it is in any
other Animals by the Male and Female: for so the Generation of Man by Man is
according to the Law of his Original Generation, as well as of any Brute by
Brute, according to the Law of their Original Generation; and whatsoever
Difference there may seem to be between them in their Successive Generations,
it is none other then was in their Original Generations; according to which a
Man does Generate a Man, as well as a Brute a Brute. And so according to this
Natural Law, and the Instituted Compact or Covenant of Works, which God made
with Adam for himself and all his Posterity, Original Sin and Corruption is
derived unto us all, and every Man's Soul; though as it is the Immediate Work of
God the Creator, it is Perfect and Incorrupt, (as all his Immediate Works are
most Perfect) yet by this very Union and Composition, which is the Generation,
it is Corrupted; as it is rightly said, Non Corrupta Infunditur, sed Infusa
Corrumpitur: Wherefore Jesus Christ was not so born according to this Law of
Natural Generation; and yet he is also called the Seed of the Woman (though his
Soul was certainly so Immediately Created by God) because the Union thereof with
the Sensitive Body was by his Mother: and as Adam was Created by God, both by a
Proper Creation of his Intellective Soul, and Improper Creation of his
Sensitive Body, so was Christ's Soul Properly, and his Body Improperly Created
by God; as it is also said, A Body have thou prepared me: and thus as the first
Adam was the Epitome of all Creation both Proper and Improper, so also was
Christ the Last Adam, as the Apostle fitly styles him, and all that was
Extraordinary in this First Man, was to typify him who is therefore also styled
the Second Man.

IV. I shall now discourse farther of the Intellective Spirit of Man, which is
his Angel, or Demon, as it is in this Conjunct State in his Body, and as it
Operates therein. And here again we must review the Scale of Nature, and of the
Composita thereof; wherein all such as are Imperfect Substances in themselves, and
cannot Exert themselves in their Oeconomys, nor Operate without a Conjunction
with others, do therefore accordingly affect that Union, Naturaly and
Necessarily, and disaffect to be disunited; which I call their Composition, and
Consubstantiation, whereby they are mutualy Conjoined, and Perfected; as
Matter, which is such an Imperfect Substance, cannot be pure or alone, but does
so affect an Union with Spirits, whereby it is Inspirited, Activated, and
Perfected, or as they term it Informed, and so made, as it were, a Spiritual
Matter: and the Elementary Spirits which are lowest and next unto it, because
they cannot so Oeconomicaly Exert themselves, nor Operate without a Body of
Matter, as their Vehicle, Domicil, and Officine, do therefore mutualy affect an
Union with it, whereby they are Embodied, and so are said to be Material
Spirits: and though any Body and Spirit make a Complete Compositum, yet as
Elementary Spirits, which are the lowest, may be more highly Exalted and
Purified by Vegetative Spirits, so they also affect an Union with them, whereby
they are so much Sublimated, as I have before showed concerning the Blood, and
Animal Spirits; and the Vegetative Spirits, because they cannot so Oeconomicaly
Exert themselves, nor Operate without an Elementary Body, as their Vehicle,
Domicil, and Officine, do therefore mutualy affect an Union therewith, whereby
they are also Embodied in them, Immediately, and, Mediately in and by them, in
the Matter, and so are also termed Material Spirits: and the Proper Vegetative
Spirit of Sensitives, as it may be more Advanced toward the Sensitive Nature by
the Sensitive Spirits, so also it does affect an Union therewith, whereby it is
so much Spiritualised, as I have showed in the Involuntary Motions, and other
Sensitive Offices and Services thereof: and the Sensitive Spirits, because they
cannot so Oeconomicaly Exert themselves, nor Operate without their Proper
Vegetative Bodies, as their Vehicles, Domicils, and Officines, do therefore
mutualy affect an Union therewith, whereby they are also Embodied in their
Proper Vegetative Spirits Immediately, and so in and with them Mediately in the
Elementary Spirits and Matter, and so are also termed Material Spirits. Thus
they all Consubstantiate one another being Localy and Oeconomicaly in the
matter of their Bodies per omnia puncta, and so Coextended thereby, and more or
less Divisible therewith, as I have showed; Also they penetrate one another
without any penetration of Extensions, because they have no Extension of
themselves, but only are Coextended, as I said, in and by the Matter, that is,
they are in their own Vehicle, Domicil, or Officine, which they Inspirit and
Inform, as their Body and Seat, from which, or any part thereof, they abhor to
to be removed, or that it should be in any manner discontinued; but though they
be thus Localy United, and Naturaly Composited and Consubstantiated, yet their
Consubstantiated Natures are still Classicaly Different, and they are still
distinct Matter and Spirits, or one Spirit, and another, as before, both in
their Essences, Affections, and Operations, and do not participate of one
another; for the Extension of Matter is neither Hot^ nor Cold, nor Heat and
Cold Nutritive, nor Nutrition Sensitive, but only they are Subordinate and
Subservient one unto another, as I have showed; whereas Spirits of the same
Classis may be not only Localy United, but Spiritualy so Mist in their
Essences, Qualitys, and Operations, as to participate one of another, and be
confounded one with another, as Heat and Cold are in Tepor, and the Equine and
Asinine Spirits in a Mule, which are no longer a Distinct Heat and Cold, Horse
and Ass, nor only a Compositum, but a Mistum of both, like the Mistion of more
of the same Specifical Spirit in the Seeds of both Parents, whereof one is not
Prolifike without the other, and in the Augmentation of Vegetatives, or
Sensitives, Indistinctly and Confusedly. Now the Intellective Spirit of Man
being a Perfect Substance in itself, and such as may Individualy Exert itself,
and Operate Separately, and does not Inhere, as Light in a Lucid Body, but is
as Light in the Diaphanum, is therefore neither Consubstantiated with the
Sensitive, or any other Inferior Spirits, or the Matter any more then an Angel,
who Possesses an Human Body; nor can it be Mist with the Angelical Nature, or
any Angelical Spirit, or with more of any Human Spirit; because it is
Immediately Created by God, a Perfect Substance in itself, Ingenerable,
Incorruptible, Immis^^ble, and Indivisible, as well as any Angelical Spirit.
And yet as there is some mutual Indigence and Opitulation in and among all
Created Natures, as so many parts and Members of the Universal Body thereof, so
even Angels, who are most Immaterial, (not only as other Spirits, whereof none
is any Matter, as I have showed) but have least need thereof, either by
Consubstantiation, as they, or Inhabitation of a Body, as the Human Spirit, yet
because they also have no Extension of themselves, whereby they may be in their
own Vbi, or Place, therefore must be in the Universal Body of the World, and in
some part or Vbi thereof, as Magnetical Virtue is in any Medium Indifferently,
and when they are in one Place, they are not, nor can they be in another, nor
can Instantaneously pass from one to another, nor can annihilate or evacuate
the Nature of Extension, or the Density, or Gravity of Matter, nor do any thing
contrary to the Law thereof, nor Infinitely overcome it, but Finitely, and
according to some certain proportions: and therefore Move not so swiftly
through more Dens, as through more Rare Matter, nor can so easily lift more
Grave as more Light, as I have showed: and I grant that there is also such
Coordination between the highest and lowest Nature, Angels and Matter; because
they are both Natures, and Created Entitys, contained within this Univers as
Parts and Members thereof, and within the Universal Genus of all Created Entity;
but they have otherwise no Communion with any particular Body of Matter, nor
have any such Vehicles, Syderous, Igneous, Aereous, Aqueous, Terreous, as some
suppose, whose Souls are so far Immersed in the gross Matter, as that they
cannot conceiv Angels, or any thing to be Immaterial, or without a proper Body
of Matter, nor God himself, without an Vbi; though his Immensity be Infinite,
and Infinitely Different from all that is Finite, and therefore Infinitely free
from all Extension, Place, Space, or Vbi, or any Notion, or Imagination thereof,
because it is Incomprehensible, and such as must be acknowledged and adored, but
can never be comprehended. Whereas Man, though he be more concerned in the
Matter, and Material Spirits, then Angels, and so may be said himself to be
more Material then they, yet as he is little lower then the Angels, and much
higher then the other Inferior Natures, (whereof also all, except the Matter,
are Spirits) should more Contemplate Spirits, and their Spiritual Nature, and
not wholly bury himself in Matter, who has no such Union with it Immediately,
or Mediately, but that he may Exist in his own Intellective Spirit, and Operate
Separately without it in his Separate State; though as he is the Epitome of all
Classical Natures, so he does Subordinate all the others unto himself, as they
do one unto another in this Conjunct State; and though his Proper Sensitive
Spirit, as well as others, does also Naturaly and Necessarily affect this
Union, yet he does not so mutualy affect it, as that he cannot Be, and continue
in his own Individuality and the private Economy of his own Spirit, and
Operate Separately without it in his Separate State as well as Angels: and yet
being also capable of this Conjunction or Composition as well as other Spirits,
though in another manner, as I have showed, he does Naturaly indeed, but not
Necessarily, affect it, as they do: and so is the great Amphibium between both,
apt to live Conjunctly and Separately in both Worlds, and in the lowest Earth,
and highest Superaether. And thus the Human Spirit in this Conjunct State is in
the Body, not Inherently, as I have showed, nor yet so in its Element, as a
Fish in the Water, which cannot live out of it, or as a Plant that is Rooted in
the Earth; but as a Master in a Ship, who can also live out of it; or, as the
Scripture more aptly expresses it, as in a Tabernacle, wherein he shall not
abide long; and so the Rabbis call the Body Vagina Animae. But whereas the
Schoolmen say, that it is Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part Corporis; I
cannot understand it of the very Substance of the Soul, nor do I conceiv it to
be Intelligible: for though I acknowledge it to be not only as a Master in one
part of a Ship, as in the Heart, or Head; but like Hercules in Vrceo;
possessing and filling all the Vessel; and also that it has all its Facultys
and Powers every where in the whole Substance of itself, either Actualy or
Potentialy; because it is Indivisible, and has no Extensive, but only
Coextensive parts, and them not so Coextensively United to the Matter, as
Inferior Spirits are; yet it does Operate Actualy in one part rather then
another, (which the Scripture Comprehensively calls the Heart, and sometimes
more particularly the Head) and so indeed it must, because it now Operates by
the Instrumentality of the Sensitive Spirit, which is Centricaly seated in the
Head and Brain, and not so in the whole Body, (though it Opera e
Communicatively and Diffusively through the whole Body) but in other parts,
where it is also, it does not so Operate, Actualy: and as it cannot so Operate,
and not so Opera^e in the same Place, any more then in the same Time, so because
itself is diffused in and through the whole Body, therefore it is not all in
any part thereof; otherwise it should not be so diffused; and it cannot be
diffused and not diffused in the same Place: and as it is all within the Body,
and therefore cannot be without it, in this Conjunct State, so, if it were all
in any one Part of the Body, then it could not be in any other; wherefore since
it is tota in toto, it cannot be tota in qualibet part; for both cannot be
true of any Extension, or Coextension whatsoever. Nor does the Spiritual
Intirety and Indivisibility of the Human Soul alter the nature of the Extension
of the Body, or Coextension of itself; nor do they, or either of them, destroy
the Intirety and Indivisibility thereof, which is not Local, as is supposed, but
only Spiritual; as a Ray, or Orb of Emanant Light is Spiritualy Entire and
Indivisible in the Luster, or Image therein, but not Localy, (for it may be
measured by so many Inches, Feet, and the like, Coextensively, according to the
Extension of the Diaphanous Body wherein it Localy is) but Spiritualy, so as you
cannot clip off an Inch, or an hairs breadth, of the Ray; and wheresoever that
is, there is also the Luster and Image: and so you may measure a Man, both
Body, and Soul, according to his Bodily Extension. Yet if a Leg, or Arm, or
half the Body, by a Turkish Torture, be cut off, the Soul, or any part thereof,
is not divided; but as the Light retires into itself, when you divide the
Diaphanous Body, so does the Soul, which is yet Spiritualy more Entire and
Indivisible then the Light; for that by Reflection is Reduplicated, and
fortified more in and by that Reduplication; whereas a Man, who has lost a
Limb, is not more or less Intellective then before, because the Intellective
Spirit is perfectly Entire and Indivisible in the Spiritual Substance, and all
the Facultys thereof within the Body, and more then any Emanant Quality is out
of the Body; and so is one perfectly Entire and Indivisible Individuality and
Economy in itself, far otherwise, and more then any Tree, or Eel, or other
Vegetative, or Sensitive, as I have showed. And I shall now endeavor to show
how the Intellective Spirit does Operate in this Conjunct State, both in the
Understanding, and in the Will: for though it be, as I said, most perfectly
Entire and Indivisible in its Substance, and in its Facultys, and Operations
therein, yet as a Finite Creature, it has its Substance, Facultys, and
Operations, of several distinct Natures; and is not only Essence, and so does
Operate only by its Essence, as God the Creator, but as other Spirits, or
Substantial Activitys, it also has its Substance, Powers, and Acts; and as the
Sensitive Spirit is a Life, as well as the Intellective, so it is the nearest
and best Resemblance thereof; having, as I said, Sensitive Imagination, and
Appetite, and the rest of the other vital Facultys, respectively Subsisting
therein; for so has the Intellective Spirit an Analogous Understanding, and
Will, and the rest of the other Vital Facultys, respectively Subsisting therein.
Also as there is Imprinted and Implanted by God the Creator in the Imagination
a general Perception, or Notion, so there is such a general Intellection or
Notion in the Understanding, which I shall better explain by what I have said
before of Sensation: for so as I said, this Notion is not only a Simple
Operation, as all Inferior Operations are, but besides the very Operation there
is a Perception thereof in any Brute, whereby it is Perceptive, that it does
See, or the like, (as well as it does Perceptively Affect, as I have said)
Conjunctly in and with the Operation itself, though not Reflexively afterward,
or by a farther Consyderation what Seeing is, as in Man. And this Conjunct
Operation is, as I said, Living, and Sensitive, and is first by the Power of
the Imagination, whereby it so Operateth, that is, Sees, or the like: wherein,
as I have showed, first the External Light, does Irradiate the Colorate Object,
and by the Reflected Rays thereof convey the Species wherewith they are tinged to
the Ey, and there the Internal Light does again Irradiate them, and by the
Reflected Rays thereof convey them to the Animal Spirits in the Optike Nervs,
and Brain, so prepared by the Vegetative Spirit to be fit Instruments of the
Sensitive Soul, and which Actuateth the Potential Images therein, so (...) they
are made fit to be Irradiated and Illustrated by the External Species; and the
Imagination, when it does Animadvert them, does, as I conceiv, again itself
Irradiate them by a far more Pure, Spiritual, and Sensitive Light, as I may so
term it, whereby the Object, which is gross in itself, is thus Purified,
Spiritualised, and Sublimated, first in the Species, then in the Images thereof,
and lastly in these Phantasms, which are, as it were, the Species of those
Images, and the Immediate Objects of Imagination, as being most Refined and so
approaching nearest to the Spiritual nature thereof, and thereby most prepared
and made fit for it: and by that Irradiation of the Imagination Reflected and
retiring into itself, the Sensitive Soul does Sens or perceiv them, and withal
it does Sens or perceiv, that it does so perceiv; which is the other Operation
that I intend, and indeed the very Vital Act thereof; and in that, and the
Spontaneous Appetition, (which does not only Eradiate and Emitt a Motive Power,
or a very Pure, Spiritual, and Sensitive Hear, as I may so term it, but also
does it Spontaneously, by such another Conjunct Operation) does Sensitive Life
consist. And though I express them as Sensibly as I can, by Light, and Heat, as
we usualy call such Spiritual Qualitys Lumina, and Igniculos Animi; yet I do
not intend thereby any such Elementary Qualitys, but far more Spiritual,
Vital, and Sensitive; and only Symbolical, and Analogous to the other, as there
are such Analogys in Nature, and as the Species of the Object are so Refined,
as I have showed, to render them as Spiritual and Analogous as they can be
made: and though I mention only Seeing, because it is a most Spiritual, and most
Conspicuous Sens, and wherein the Species are more Refined by the External and
Internal Light, which is the Standard thereof, then perhaps the Sensible Species
of any other Sens, in and by the Standard thereof; yet I conceiv that their
Sensible Species are in like manner Irradiated respectively (though I want other
respective Terms to express it) by the Imagination: thus in Hearing there is a
Sensible Sound conveyed to the Aura in the Tympanum, though I know not, that
there is any Emanation thereof, nor farther Purification thereby, or in the
Aura, (as is in Seeing, which is the most Spiritual Sens) but only that it is a
Standard between the Sensible Sound, and the Auditive Animal Spirits in the
Nervs and Brain; and that all the Images thereof being Potentialy in them (as
all Parts and Members of the Body are in the Blood, and all Sensible Sounds, as
I said, in the Air) they are Irradiated, as I must so again term it, by them,
and so pass through the Auditive Nervs to the Brain, as any Sound from the
first Collision, at one end of a String stretched and held by the teeth at the
other end, does pass from one to the other; and so they are again Irradiated by
the Imagination, whereby the Sensation is performed: and the Imagination does
both Hear, and perceiv that it Hears, and so of the rest. And thus also, as I
conceiv, when the Imagination does Fansy, as we call it, that is, Contemplate
Phantasms Actuated only by the Vegetative Spirit, at the Command, and by the
Government thereof, without any such Irradiation by the Sensible Object or
Species, yet itself does Irradiate them more or less; that is Animadvert,
though commonly so feintly and transiently, that they are, as I said, only as
Specter of the Species, and pass away, as we say, as quick as Thought; because
the Imagination, being a very Active Spirit, does so pass from one to another;
and it is not requisite that they should continue longer; but give place to
others: and yet sometimes the Imagination is so Vehement, and does so Intensly
Irradiate them, that they are as apparent, as if they were Illustrated by the
very Sensible Object, or Species; as in the Instance of the Firestick, and the
like, after the Object, and Species thereof are removed, as I have showed; and
sometimes also more permanently and steadily, even as if the Phantasm were a
Real Object, as in the Instance of him, Qui se credebat miros audire Tragoedos:
and in very great and sudden Fears and Frights, and the like, in others. Now
the Understanding and Will of Man, though they be Classicaly of an higher
Nature then Imagination, and Appetite, yet they are all in the Region of Life,
as I have said, and very Analogous in their Living Operations; and Conjunct in
the Human Compositum, wherein the Intellective Spirit of Man does Predominate,
and as his Sensitive Spirit is Immediately Subordinate, so it is also
Subservient unto it; and as the Vegetative Spirit does Actuate the Species, and
Phantasms, in the Animal Spirits, which are Elementary, for the Imagination,
which does so Irradiate them Immediately for itself, and thereby Sens and
perceiv them; so the Imagination does also Actualy Irradiate its own Phantasms
for the use and service of the Understanding, whereby they become the most
Spiritual and fit Objects thereof: and then when the Understanding would
Animadvert them, it does farther Irradiate them by its own most Pure and Mental
Light, as I may so term it, and thereby understand them Intellectively, and
with all perceiv that it does so understand; and as it does thus behold
Sensible Objects, so also because itself is an Intelligence, it has
Intellectual Notions, and Idea's thereof, and much more of itself and other
Intelligible things, and can Reflect upon itself and its own Operations, and
understand what they are, by another and higher Act: and so likewise Abstract
from all Singulars, and Particulars, and Contemplate them in their Universal
Natures; as from Album and all or any Alba Concretely it can Abstract Albedo,
and so from Species their Genera, and from all Genera the Genus Generalissimum,
which is Ens, or more Abstractedly Entity (whereof there can be no Sensible
Species, Images, or Phantasms, but only Intellectual Ideae) and therefore it
has a special Art, whereby it can Command and cause the Imagination in another
way to represent such Signatures thereof Sensibly, and which shall represent
them Intelligibly to the Understanding; and that is per Verba Mentis, as we
call them; for as in writing I make such Visible Letters, in Long-hand, or
Characters in Shorthand, that are the Signatures of such Intelligible Sens and
Meaning, which we call Words; or as we so Discourse by Audible Voice and
Articulate Sounds; so by these two Doctrinal Senses, or either of them, and by
the Visible, or Audible Signatures thereof in the Imagination, which the
Understanding does Irradiate, and thereby read or receiv them, it does
understand its own Intelligible Sens and Meaning, which it cannot so do without
them; and therefore, if the Brain be hurt or distempered, not only the
Imagination, but the Understanding also is accordingly hindered in its
Operations, and cannot Operate Immanently in itself, nor Contemplate any of its
own Innate or Acquired Notions without such Inst^umentality, in this Conjunct
State: and the Brain of Man is therefore larger, and has more of these Animal
Spirits in it, then the Brain of any Beast or Brute proportionably; because they
are such Instruments, not only of the Sensitive Imagination, but also of the
Intellective Understanding in Man; and so if the Imagination be hurt or
distempered by any such particular or general Delirium, as I formerly showed,
the Understanding is accordingly disordered: and commonly such as the
Imagination Naturaly is, such also is the Understanding; but where there is a
Prepotent Fansy, which will not be so Subservient to the Understanding, there
is in such men an Extravagant Understanding; and they, as I have said, may
excel in any Works of the Imagination, and yet be almost Idiots in
Understanding: which yet certainly is an Irregularity of their Compositum, and
not according to the Natural Conformity of both these Facultys in their
Composition: And so is a dull and stupid Imagination a great Impediment to the
Understanding; but where there is an equal Excellence of both (which is very
rare) there is a most accomplished Temperament of Wit and Judgment. Nor are
either Sensitive or Intellective Souls all equal, but they have their
Individual, and not only Numerical, Differences, as well as Specifical; as
there is no Species whereof all the Indidual Bodies are of one and the same Size
exactly, (which might make an Universal Standard) because God and Nature do in
all things intend Variety, as I have showed. Much less is there any Common
Understanding, or Intellectus Agens, which does Illuminate or Irradiate all
particular Understandings, but there is only (as I said of Anima Mundi)
Intelligence Genericaly and Metaphysicaly, which comprehends both Human and
Angelical; whereas every Individual Angel, and Man, understands by his own
Individual Understanding; and as God breathed the Intellective Spirit into
Adam, so he Created in it and with it his Intellective Faculty whereby he did
understand. Nor is there any other account to be given of Sensitive, or
Intellective Notion, Perception, or Knowledge generaly, but that God has so
Created them, and made them to be such as they are, as I have already showed;
because their Substantial Spirits in themselves are Simple Essences Immediately
Created by God, that is, Sensitive Spirits in the Beginning, and afterward
produced in the Fifth, and Sixth Days, and the Intellective Spirit of Man last
of all, together with the production of his Sensitive Spirit, which is the most
excellent of all Sensitives, as I have showed: and so their Sensitive, and
Intellective Facultys, also Created in and with them are Simple Accidents and
Essences in themselves, though their Operations are produced afterward by other
Instrumentalitys in their Compositum; into which we may, and have thus far
inquired: and this Operation by Species, and Phantasms seems to differ from
the Created Notions in the Facultys themselves, as Nebuchadnesar's Dream, when
he had forgott it, did from the Revelation thereof unto him by Daniel afterward;
for so he had a Notion thereof in himself before it was Reveled, otherwise he
could not have known it again when it was Reveled; and yet he could not so
Revele it to himself: as the Understanding cannot understand any such Notion,
which it has Immanently in itself, without the Signatures thereof in and by the
Imagination: yet the Innate Notions thereof are not like his, which was Acquired
before, nor in any strict sens such as they are called, Reminiscentiae; but
Immediately Created and Imprinted in the Understanding by God and Nature,
without which it should not have been any Natural Understanding: nor is it only
an Intellectus Patiens, but such as can Actively of itself, and by the
Instrumentality of the Imagination, Operate, and Exert them, as I have showed:
and so they are more rightly termed Anticipations, or P^aenotions; which are
the most Simple Apprehensions of the Soul, neither by Ratiocination, or
Deduction from them Naturaly, nor by Faith or Divine Illumination of God
Supernaturaly: and therefore to distinguish them from Reason, and Faith, I
shall call them, Praenotions, and their Operations, Intuitions, such as the
Sensation of Seeing is, when the Ey beholds itself in a Glass; and the first and
Fundamental of all, or any, of these Praenotions, is, that I am, or Scio quod
Sum, whereby the Intellective Soul is Conscious of its own Being Immanently in
itself, or so as the Understanding understands Willingly, and the Will wills
Understandingly, and therefore the most Innate and First O^ject thereof is its
own Self; and though it is true, that it needs the Instrumentality of
Imagination to produce this, as well as any other Notion, and that it cannot
know that it is, but by an Intellection, which is an Operation; yet it so knows
that it is, Conjunctly, in and with that very Intellection, as well as it knows
that it Operates, as I have showed* and as in order of Nature Esse is before
Operari, so the Intellective Spirit must also in Nature first know that it is
before it can know that it Operates, though it so knows both, in and with the
same Operation in Time: nor is this the Knowledge of what it is Reflexively,
which it Consyders afterward by another Operation, but only the Conscience of
its own Being, or that it is generaly, which needs no Argument or Ergo to
itself; as Cogitas, or Dubitas ergo Es, is used by the Father, to convince
another who was an obstinate Sceptike, and would deny his own Conscience, which
none could manifest to himself, but only himself. But as this is the First
Notion, so the Second is the Knowledge of the Operation, or Scio quod Scio, or
that I am an Intelligent Being, and so are more Remotely and Consequentialy the
other Operations of the Intellective Soul, and Facultys or Powers thereof, such
as are comprehended in one word, Rationality; which yet does not properly
express them all, as these Praenotions, and Faith, and the rest, and which it
ought to Include as well as Reason; and though it might be so conceived
Inclusive of them all, yet it is only of such Proper Facultys, which are
Accidents, and not of the very Specifical Difference of the Soul, which is
Substantial, and such as we know not, and therefore cannot know the Substance
thereof any more then we do the Substance of any other Spirits, or of Matter
itself, that is, only by their Proper Accidents. Now as I thus know that I am,
and that I am a Knowing Being, by a most Simple Apprehension, which is only of
this Simple Enunciation, Ego Scio, (for so by the Egoity, as they term it, I
know that I am, and that I am my self and none other; and by the Scio I know,
that I am Knowing) so because I know, that I am not the first cause of my self,
but a Finite Creature, who had a Beginning of my Being, I know Rationaly by
Immediate Deduction from it, that there is an Infinite first Cause of my Being,
that is, God; and because I know that I am such an Intelligence, whereby I can
thus know God my Creator, (whom therefore I know to be also my Preserver, and
Governor) I know my Soul to be an Immortal Being, made for God himself and his
own Glory, who is Eternal, and will Eternaly recompense me according to my
prepared Capacity of Mercy or Misery: and though these be indeed Ratiocinations
by way of Argument, and not such Simple Enunciations, as the other; yet because
they are such Intimate, Immediate, and Cogent Consequences, we also call them
Common Notions, as they both indeed appear to be such, in all Nations, and all
Ages of the World, and by the Vote of all Mankind, and all Civil Societys
thereof; and are both of them so Complicated, that he who denis one, will also
de^y the other; and he who denis either, must presume himself to be wiser then
Solomon, yea, then all men besides himself: and from these and the like Notions
we may Consequentialy deduce others, and so one from another, Syllogisticaly;
which we call, Reason: but we call only the first and Immediate Deductions, or
Ratiocinations, Common Notions; because they are so obvious and evident to any
Man who has Common Reason; whereas others, which are not so Immediate, and
therefore not so readily to be apprehended by every M^n, whose Reason is not so
Subtle and Firm as to pursue a whole Chain of Inductions, and Ratiocinations,
we do not therefore call Common Notions; because they are not so commonly known
or apprehended by all; though all right Retiocinations be indeed particularly
as true in themselves, as right Reason is generaly. And this I conceiv to be
Reason; and thus God, as it is said, having set the World in the Heart of Man,
that is, an Intellectual World of Knowledge of all things Intelligible, and of
their Natural Causalitys, and Effects, Analogys, Combinations, not only
Singulars and Particulars, but also Universals, both Abstracted or
Metaphysical, and Concrete or Homophysical, which is that general Notion or
Knowledge, that I before mentioned to be Implanted in his Intellective Faculty,
he is thereby thus Instructed to Reason and Discourse from Causes to Effects, or
from Effects to Causes, and according to Natural Analogy, and the like; and to
make Propositions of Singulars and Particulars by some Universal Propositions,
to which they are to be reduced, and the like. Again, as the Understanding of
Man is an Intelligent Faculty, so Created by God in and with his Soul, and has
such First and Common Notions Imprinted in it by him Originaly and generaly, so
God can more specialy by Divine Revelation and Illumination write in it, as I
may so say, any other Notions, which the Soul accordingly apprehending as true
and evident as well as any others whereof it has any such Innate Knowledge, it
does therefore Believ them, without any Ratiocination; and this kind of
Knowledge is called Faith, whereof there is also a Natural Capacity in the Soul;
for God does not so make a Stone, Tree, or Brute, to Believ, but only Men, or
Angels. And though these be several ways of Knowledge, yet it is all one and the
same Knowledge, which is Acquired thereby generaly, though of several Kinds; and
the same Object may be known by all or any of these ways of Knowledge; as I know
Intuitively, that I am, by a most Immediate Conscience of mine own Being, and
yet I can also prove it to my self by my Operations, or any of them: and so I
have proved that the World had a Beginning, and yet as the Apostle says, By
Faith also we understand it. But Sensitives have only a Module of the Sensible
World in their Souls, which they being Perceptive and Living Animals may also
know in a Sensible manner, as I have showed; and so it is possible by such
Signatures, as I have said, to make them understand Sensible things* as Horses,
Dogs, Baboons, Elephants, are taught by Signs, to do many strange feats, which
seem very wonderful, as indeed they are the hights of all Bestial Docility;
but yet as they are not Intelligences themselves, so neither can they apprehend
any Intelligible things; as you cannot by any such Signs make them to
apprehend God, or any Intelligence, Angelical, or Human; nor any Universal
Species or Genus, and the like; nor any Universal Propositions, Connexions, or
Conclusions, and the like; but only Sensible things, and of them only
Singulars, or Particulars: neither do they Understand any thing, that is,
apprehend any Sensible in an Intellective, but only in a Sensitive manner; for
they cannot Intellectively Irradiate their Phantasms, so as the Understanding
does, whereby farther to Purify and Sublimate them, and so behold them
Intellectively with a Mental Light, as I have showed: and I suppose these two
Differences in the Understanding, and the like proportionably in the Will, to
be sufficient to Discriminate us from Beasts; and that we need not to deny them
any Perception, which they may have, that is, of any Sensibles, or in any
Sensitive manner, lest they should seem too like unto Men, and come too near us,
who are thus Classicaly removed from them. The Will of Man is most Connatural
with his Understanding, and has its Instincts, as I may so term them, as that
has its Praenotions; not only general, but special; and thus as the
Intellective Soul first Knows itself, so it also first and most Naturally
Wills itself, and all that belongs unto itself: and as it may Naturaly
apprehend God by Deduction from itself, so it may Love him in order to itself,
and also all other Intelligences and Moral Creatures: and so Man is Animal
Sociabile, and has a Natural Affection in himself more or less toward all
other Men in order to himself, and therefore first and principaly to such as
are nearest to himself, as Wife, Children, Kindred, Countrymen, and the like:
which Natural Affections are all founded in that Original Institution of
Matrimony, as I have showed, and which is indeed the Fountain of all Familys,
Nations, and the like. And upon the Foundations of these First Notions and
Instincts, and the Immediate Consequences thereof, are all Arts and Sciences as
so many Superstructures built; which therefore are laid down as Principia, and
Postula^a, that none may deny who is Man, or a Rational Creature; or if he
shall, there is no farther Entercours of Reason, or Society to be held with
him, but he is to be rejected as an Irrational Brute. Also the way of Volition
is Analogous to the way of Intellection, no^ only in these Praenotions and
Instincts, and Rational Deductions, and Volitions, and any Natural Assent or
Consent, but in the Supernatural Inclinations thereof, according to Divine
Illumination, or Faith: for as that is not only a Light, or Revelation of the
thing to be Believed, but it is an Irradiation also of the Understanding, that
is, of the very Sight thereof, which is thereby farther Illuminated, Purified,
and Sublimated in its own Nature, so as to See or Believ it, not by adding any
new Faculty to the Soul; for Faith is a Natural Faculty thereof, or way of
Knowledge, as well as Reason, or Intuition, but by such Illumination, which is
according to the Natural Capacity thereof, and not contrary unto it; though the
Illumination, that is, both the Light Reveled, and also the Sight of the
Understanding Purified and Sublimated, be so far Supernatural; so Divine
Inclinations of the Will are not only as Moral Persuasions or Tentations, which
may prevail, or not, but such Purifications and Sublimations of the Will,
whereby it is also enabled to will, or Actuate its own Willingness accordingly;
which is also according to the Natural Capacity thereof, and not contrary unto
it, though the Inclinations be so far Supernatural. Again, as the
Understanding cannot Operate without the Instrumentality of the Imagination, so
neither can the Will; for it follows the Dictamen of the Understanding, and
therefore Operates only with it and by it; and as the Imagination does
Spontaneously Perceiv, and the Appetite Perceptively Affect, so the
Understanding does Voluntarily Understand, and the Will Understandingly Will:
and though the Appetite and Will, after they are Illustrated by the Imagination
and Understanding, can Executively Move their own Instruments; yet as the
Appetite can only Move its own Motive Spirits, and thereby the Body, and so
thereby other Bodies; so the Will of Man in this Conjunct State, using the
Instrumentality of the Appetite, as the Understanding does the Instrumentality
of the Imagination, can only so Move by and with the Appetite. And as there are
several other Facultys of the Imagination, as Judgment, Ingeny, Memory, and the
like, and of the Appetite, as all the Affections, and the like; so there are
such Analogous Qualitys, not only in Human, but also in Angelical
Understanding, and Will; because, as I said, they are all within the Region of
Life; and these are Living Facultys, and such without which Life should not be
Life generaly, that is, a Knowledge of what they do, with a Delight in suitable
Objects and Operations, and Abhorrence of the contrary; which indeed is Life,
and is by this double Operation, or Super-operation of the Living Animal upon
its own Operations, as I have often said, whereof no Inferior Nature is capable;
and therefore, as I said, Vegetatives do not thus Live, and much less Elements,
or Matter: for though they also Operate more or less, and by those Principles,
which the most Wise and Powerful Creator has Imprinted in their Natures, can
produce such Constant, Regular, and Oeconomical effects, in their Simple
Operations accordingly, yet they cannot Perceiv or Review their own Operations,
nor have any Sentiment, or Enjoiment thereof, as Sensitives, and Intellectives,
which are Living Animals; but are as the Dead Carcass of the World, whereof
these only are the Living Spirits: and thus Sensitives live a Sensitive, and
Intellectives an Intellective Life. Now though we do not know, nor will I
presume particularly to declare, the way and manner of Angelical Operations; yet
generaly, as I know that they are Intelligences, or such Intellective Lives, so
I know they have Understanding, and Will, and all the Analogy of Life, which
the Scripture most plainly declares unto us; and much more that they are
Creatures or Created Natures as well as others; and that they are no such Dii
Minores, as Platonists, and some Platonical Christians, would make them: and
though they be Immaterial, and most Spiritual of any Spirits, yet they are only
Spirits Genericaly, as others, and are no such Phantasms and Specter, as
Scholemen would make them; nor so wholly unconcerned in the Matter, and the
Univers of all Common Nature, and Entity, and Finite Bounds thereof, which God
has set to all Substantial Beings, and to all Quantitys, and Qualitys thereof;
wherefore they can no more ascend above the Circumference, then descend below
the Center of the wstole Globe of the World; because there is no Vbi, or
Locality, beyond it; and Locality is a Common Accident, or Affection of all
Created Beings, as well as Time, and Number (and certainly no Angel is Elder
then he is, or more then One) nor can they Nullify or Evacuate the Nature of
Extension, Density, or Gravity, so as they should not be more or less such to
them, as they are in themselves, and as well as they are unto all others, as I
have showed. But as we may conceiv by all other Spirits what they are, that is,
Substantial Activitys; so we must also acknowledge Angels to be the most
Spiritual of all Spirits; and though, according to the Economy of Universal
Nature, they are concerned in the Matter, or Body of the World, as well as
others; yet neither are they so Immersed as Elementary, nor Rooted as
Vegetative, nor United as Sensitive, nor Confined therein as Human Spirits are;
which can neither Understand, Will, nor Move themselves, otherwise then by the
Instrumentalitys of their Bodily part in this Conjunct State, as I have showed:
for though Angels also are parts of the Universal Economy of the World, as I
said, yet they have their own Private and Individual Economy wholly in
themselves, and need none other Instrumentalitys, whereby to perform their own
Operations Immanently, and they can also Transiently Operate upon all others in
a most Powerful and Wonderful manner: but as they are Spiritual Substances, so
they have their Accidental Facultys and Operations, and do not Operate by their
Essences, as God, who is a Pure Act; whereas all Created Operation is between
Accidents* which were Created for that very end and purpose, that Substances
might Operate by them, and that they might mutualy Operate upon them by their
own Accidents, as I have showed. And though Angels Operate by their own
Inherent Facultys and Qualitys Immanently in themselves, and may produce their
own Contemplative Ideas in themselves, and Move their own spiritual Substances,
yet certainly they cannot Contemplate any External Objects without some Emanant
Irradiation thereof whereby they bring back to themselves the most Pure and
Refined Species of the Object, and probably more Pure then the Human
Understanding does Contemplate in the Phantasms, which it does Irradiate, by
its own Inherent Light: and so they can Move Corporeal things, not only by
their Inherent Qualitys, as they may Bodies, which they Possess, but probably by
an Eradiation of their Motive Power: for if Inferior Natures can so Move at a
distance, as Emanant Heat can Attract (and so some can suppose that the Sun by
its Rays may Move the Earth about him, though, as I said, that Motion of Heat
is only Attractive, and not Circumlative, nor has it any Imaginable strength
at such a distance so to move the vast Body of the Earth about it) certainly
Angelical Power is far more both Intensive, and Extensive; which, whatsoever
it be, I shall not presume to determine; but rather inquire into that which does
more concern us, that is, what knowledge they may have of our Cogitations, or
how they Tempt us? and as I conceiv, that our Understanding does read in the
Book of our Imagination and Phantasms thereof, which it does Irradiate, as the
External Light does a Book wherein we read; so Angels also may read therein the
same Verba Mentis, or Signatures, though they cannot know how we Irradiate
them, or Animadvert, or what Apprehensions we have of what we so read, nor what
are the Immanent Actions, Motions, and Inclinations of our Understanding or
Will, otherwise then by the Execution and Effects thereof, (for so only God is
Cardiognostes.) And as they may thus read in our Book, so they may also write
therein; as first they may Actuate any Sensible Species in any of the Standards,
and thereby Irradiate the Animal Spirits, and so present them to the
Imagination; which yet may Animadvert, or not, as it pleases, because it is
Spontaneous; also they may Actuate the Species Immediately in the Animal
Spirits, and present them to the Imagination so strongly and vehemently, that
they may seem thereby to appear unto us in any Visible shape, or to utter any
Audible Voice, or the like: and they may stir up Bodily Humors within us, and
the Motive Spirits, and Fluxes or Refluxes thereof, to temp^, but cannot force
the Will: and if they appear outwardly, it must certainly be by assuming some
Superficial Bodies; for they have no such Sensible Qualitys, or Species, or
Phantasms, in themselves, and therefore must borrow some Bodies that have them.
Now though they cannot force us to Animadvert their Tentations, and much less
Incline our Wills, yet this is a very large and wide entrance, which they may
thus have into our Souls; but though I suppose that they have so now generaly,
yet I also conceiv, that they could not invade Man in his first Creation; (as
Adam was restrained from eating of the forbidden fruit,) and also that they
cannot now invade us, or our Lives and Estates, (as otherwise generaly they
might) being restrained by the Divine Power, as before by the Divine Command,
as Satan himself told God, that he had made an Hedge about Job, and his house,
and all that he had, on every side; and he could not infest him, until, nor
any farther, then he afterward obtained Licens from God: and I conceiv, that
ordinarily God does suffer him to tempt great Sinners, who give themselves up
unto him and his Government; and so God suffered a Lying Spirit to seduce Ahab,
and his false Prophets, and the Devil entered into Judas, and the like: And thus
Witches by their Invocations, and others by their Execratio^s, and the like,
may themselves open the door unto him; and he does more or less make his
approaches unto us, in a Spiritual or Corporeal manner, as we give him access by
our own Invitation, Admission, and Enterteinment of him; and when he appears to
men, yet commonly he does not speak until he be first spoken to by them. Thus
the Angels excel in Knowledge and Strength; and the hight of all the Excellency
of the best of Angels, is their Knowledge and Love of God, the Infinite Creator,
whose Menial Servants they are in Heaven, and are said always to behold the
Face of God; not, as some conceiv, that they can possibly have any adequate
Idea of Infinite; because they are Finite; and so they are also said to cover
their Faces, as being dazzled and amazed with the apprehension of
Incomprehensible Infinity: and I suppose, there is no such presumptuous man who
does, or can conceiv, that he knows more of God here, then an Angel in Heaven
realy knows, that he does not, nor can he know of him there. Yet their
beholding the Face of God, is, as I conceiv, not by Deduction or Argumentation,
as we now know him darkly, as in a Glass; but by a Divine Irradiation upon
their Intellects, according to the utmost Capacity of Intuition or Vision,
whereby they see God by his own Light, as we see the Sun: and as they see him
as he is, who is Infinite, so they do also most humbly and sensibly acknowledge
that there is Infinitely more in him then they do, or can see, or knew of him:
whereas we ascend to the knowledge of Gods Infinity Naturaly by steps and
degrees; and as we Abstract Universals from all Singulars and Particulars,
whereby we come to the Knowledge of Metaphysical Entity, and Bonity, so we also
Abstract from him all that is Finite; and thus know him to be Infinite, the
Incomprehensible, Necessary, and Universal Jehovah; not only adequate to our
utmost Apprehensions, but vastly exceeding them; and not only exceeding them,
but Infinitely Different from all that is, or can be, conceived of him, God
blessed for ever. And this Knowledge of God, who is the highest and greatest
Object, according to the utmost Capacity of a Finite Understanding, and the
Love of him, who is the chief and only true Good, is Naturaly in all men
Explicitly, or Implicitly; because every Human Soul is capable thereof, and
must acknowledge it, as I have showed; which does so enlarge it, that all this
World, and a World of Worlds, which are all Infinitely less then God, can never
satisfy it, so that neither the Understanding nor Will of Man can Terminate in
any other thing, but only in God; and heerby it plainly appears, that though
the Soul of Man be not Infinite, as God only is, yet it is most strangely and
wonderfully Indefinite, because nothing less then Infinite God can satisfy it,
Yet I suppose also, that it is not Properly Indefinite, as Possibility is,
which is adequate to Divine Omnipotence, and whereof we cannot, either in our
Understanding or Will, go to the utmost Extent Affirmatively, yet certainly
Negatively nothing less then Absolute Possibility, and Divine Omnipotence
wherein it is founded, can Terminate the Soul of Man which can invent other and
more Worlds, like Anaxagoras, and wish to conquer and enjoy them, like
Alexander.

V. I may not omit to speak of the Image of God in Man, which is so Expressly
mentioned, and Emphaticaly repeated in the Text: though, as I said, God being
Infinite, and Infinitely Different from all Finite Nature, there is not, nor
can there be, any thing like unto him, in any Intuitive or Representative manner
whatsoever; as the Prophet says, To whom will ye Liken God, or what Likeness
will ye Compare unto him? but only Demonstratively, and Doctrinaly; whereby an
Intellective Spirit may know, that there is such an Infinite Being, as I have
showed: and so the whole World, and every Created Being therein does prove him
unto us Argumentatively, though nothing can declare him Representatively: and
therefore God does justly abhor all such Representative Idolatry, and is to be
conceived only by an Intellectual Idea, which is the highest, and purest, and
only lawful Idolum of a Deity. And thus as the Great World, so Man, as he is a
Microcosm, is such a Demonstrative Image of the Creator, because he is a
Collective and Representative Image of the whole Creation; and he is so not
only in his Intellective Spirit, but also in his whole Compositum; and
therefore God pronounced Murder, which is a violent D^ssolution thereof, to be
Capital; for in the Image of God Created he Man. And though Man in himself, by
his Intellective Spirit, does Govern and Rule over his Sensitive part, and can
rectify the Errors thereof, or restrain the Inordinate Motions thereof (whereby I
have plainly proved it to be another Spirit in itself, and distinct from the
Sensitive Spirit in Man), yet by his whole Compositum he does Govern and Rule
over all Inferior Creatures, and therein he is the Image of God, as it follows
in the Text, and let them have Dominion; and so Ovid well expresses it, Finxit
ad Effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum. and thus, as I said, Man was constituted
Lord over the Works of his hands, and made Gods Viceroy here on Earth, by a
most Lawful and Natural Sovereignty; and accordingly God has Crowned him with
Glory and Honor, and Invested him with Roial Power; both in his Mind, which is
more Politic and Prudent, and more Ingenious and Mechanical, then any Brutes,
and also in his Body, which is of an Erect and Sublime Stature, and of a more
Excellent Temper and Organism, especialy his Hands, whereby he can Use and
Manage any other Instruments far otherwise, and to more advantage, then they:
and as Man is Animal Politicum, so Mankind by Conjunct Wisdom and Power does
Subdue all Wild Beasts, and Nations of Brutes. But the Intellective Spirit of
Man is a more Special Image of God in itself, as it is an Intelligence, and
has in itself an Idea of Divinity, and a Capacity of Loving and Enjoying God,
whereof all Inferior Natures are Incapable; and indeed we may justly admire how
a Finite Intellect should be in any manner capable of apprehending Infinite, or
of having any Communion or Conversation with God, who is Infinite: and this our
very Subordination unto him is far higher then our Sovereignty over all
Inferior Creatures; which, as they were made to Serve us, so also to Demonstrate
and declare his Glory, shining in them, unto us, who as Gods Stewards should
gather in all the Revenues thereof from them, and Immediately return it unto
himself: whereas their Immediate Goodness and Perfection is thus to be
Subordinate unto Man, who by his more Divine Contemplations, and Lawful Use of
them, and his Glorifyng of God the Creator thereby, does Sanctify them; and by
his own Immediate Knowledge, Love, and Enjoyment of God his Creator, is himself
as it were Deified; and indeed this is the true Spiritual Image of God in the
Soul, which is the highest Exaltation thereof, and such a Sublime Mystery, as
well deserves a more particular Explication. And first we must know, that the
Knowledge, and Love of God, as God, must be above the Knowledge, or Love of our
very Self; because God is Infinitely above us; not only in himself, but in
Relation unto us, as he is our Creator, and we his Creatures; whereby we are
made wholly Subordinate unto him, and not he unto us: wherefore to Know or Love
him in order to our Self, is no true Knowledge or Love of God, as God, but
Blasphemy, and Impiety: and yet, as I have showed, Self is Naturaly the
Beginning of all our Knowledge, and End of all our Love, and no Man Naturaly can
Know, or Love God, otherwise then in order to himself; which is to make Self
his God, or his Chief and Supreme, and God only to be Subordinate thereunto: nor
can any Nature whatsoever Naturaly of itself ascend above itself (as Water
cannot ascend above its Level) otherwise Self should be more then Self, which
is Impossible. Now whereas the Law of God commands us to Exalt him above
ourselvs, and to Love him with all our Valde, in such a Transcendent and
Supernatural manner, we must also conceiv, that he does not command
Impossibilitys; but that there is a Natural Capacity in our Soul of being thus
Exalted above our Natural Self, which must be by a Supernatural Power so
Exalting us; and because it is the Exaltation of our Intellective Understanding,
and Will, therefore it must not be only a Passive or Receptive Capacity, but
with a most Conscious Knowledge, and Freedom of Will; by a Revelation of the
Light of the Object, and also by an Illumination of the Sight of the
Understanding; and not only by a Moral Persuasion, but also by a Divine
Exaltation of the Will. And thus Man, being made such an Intelligent Creature,
had a Natural Capacity of being so Exalted toward God; and because it was most
Congruous that this Capacity should be filled and completed, in, and with the
very Creation of his Soul, which was made for this very End, and which, if it
had not atteined, God had made it in vain, and so it had been made, though not
Sinful, yet Monstrous, and not Perfect and Good, therefore it is said
expressly, that he thus Created Man in his own Image, that is, this Image of
Holiness, as well as in other respects; and as I have showed, how every other
Nature is Exalted by a Melior Natura, which is Superior unto it, in the Scale
of Nature; as Matter by Elementary Spirits, and they by Vegetative, and they by
Sensitive, and the Sensitive Spirit of Man by his Intellective; so is his
Intellective Spirit also Exalted by the Divine Spirit of God his Creator; and
as the Animal Spirits in his Body are so many times Refined and Sublimated to
that hight as to be fit Instruments of his Intellective Spirit, by the
Irradiation thereof; so is the Understanding, and Will of Man, thus Sublimated
by the Irradiation of the Divine Spirit: and as the Understanding, and Will of
Man, when he was first Created, did Perfectly Command and Rule his Imagination
and Appetite, and they did also Perfectly Obey, with their own Natural
Perception, and Spontaneity; so was the Soul of Man first Created thus Obedient
and Conformable to the Divine Spirit, most Knowingly and Willingly, with its
own Natural Intellection and Volition: and thus, as it is said, God made Man
Upright, and in his own Image, which was that Aliquid Divinum in him, whereby
he was so made, Deiformis, or as Scripture more fully expresses it, Partaker
of the Divine Nature, by resolving himself into his Creator, Intellectively
Knowing, and Willingly Loving God, as God, or as he is in himself, and as he
Loves himself above all. But I do not conceiv that this Life of Grace (as it
is also called the Life of God) is so expressed by Spiraculum Vitarum: for this
History of Creation intends not Accidental, but rather Substantial Lives, as
the Poet terms them, Inde Ho^inum, Pecudumque genus, Vitaeque Volantum. Also
as Naturaly the Imagination, and Appeti^e, being in themselves Perceptive, and
Spontaneous Facultys, might Rebel against the Intellective, and they did
Actualy so Rebel in the Fall of Man; so also, (though this Original Grace was
so far Supernatural) there was still a Natural Capacity in his Intellective
Understanding and Will, (which are in themselves Naturaly Knowing and Willing
Facultys) to Rebel against the Divine Spirit, (who also if he pleases is
Irresistible, because he is God) and they did Actualy so Rebel in his Fall;
whereby his Soul did sink down into Self, and now has not, nor can it
Naturaly, have, any Knowledge or Love of God above itself, as I have showed. And
this is that which the Scripture commonly calls Flesh, as it is opposed to the
Divine Spirit, and the Supernatural Work thereof in the Soul; and so those two
are said to be contrary one unto another; and not only different (so as the
Corporeal Flesh of a Sensitive Body is distinguished from the Sensitive Spirit,
and so is termed the Flesh of Beasts, Birds, or Fishes; nor as the whole
Sensitive Compositum is sometimes distinguished from Intelligences, as it is
said, that Horses are Flesh, and not Spirit), but as the whole Human
Compositum, both in the Sensitive, and Intellective part thereof, is now
Naturaly opposed to the Divine Spirit, as I have showed: and so, the Apostle
says, The Natural Man (or the Animal Man Naturaly) receives not the things
that are of God, for they are Foolishnes unto him; neither can he know them,
(or conceiv and receiv them) because they are Spiritualy discerned. And all this
may most plainly appear by the Renovation of this Divine Image by the Spirit of
God, which is called the New Creature, and New Man, which is renewed in
Knowledge after the Image of him that Created him: though I do not suppose it to
be by any Proper Creation of any new Faculty, or Power in the Soul, but by
Improper Creation, that is, by Supernatural Irradiation of the Divine Spirit,
such as the production of any Accidental Qualitys out of the first Chaos in the
Six Days was by the Divine Power, and whereof, though there was an Entitative
Potentiality before, Created in and with the Substance, and Subsisting and
Latent therein, yet it could not be produced into Actuality, without the
Immediate Power of the Divine Spirit, as I have showed, and that therefore it
is termed a Creation, and is not, as Natural Generation, which is only
production out of a second Chaos of Potentiality, as I so term it, by a Natural
Power Transmitted and Delegated to the Specifical Creatures afterward by the
Divine Benediction, whereby they can so Generate others; and so the Apostle
also says with an express reference to the very first of those Works of
Improper Creation, God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God:
wherefore as that Light, which first shined out of Eternal Darkness, was so
produced not by a Proper, but Improper Creation, as I have showed, and by such
Improper Creation, and not only by a Natural Generation, as the Light of Fire,
or Candle, is now Generated; so is Regeneration the Immediate Work of the
Divine Spirit, not by Proper, but Improper Creation, and by such a Creation,
and not by Natural Generation; as our Savior says, That which is born of the
Flesh is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. And this work
of the Divine Spirit in the Hearts of Men Regenerate is the Divine Life of the
Soul: thus being endued with this Divine Grace, and so exalted far above, not
only the Sensitive, but also the Naturaly Intellective, and the whole Animal
Life thereof; and so is termed, the Life of God: and this Regeneration of the
Soul a Translation from Death to Life, which is indeed a most Miraculous Work,
and though not any Proper Creation of any Substance or Faculty from Absolute
Nonentity, yet is an Improper Creation of the most excellent of all Created
Qualitys, as I have showed. And in this respect it is somewhat more, that it
requires a Conjunct Irradiation of the Divine Spirit continualy (as the
Diaphanous Air does of the Light and Heat of the Sun) which is wholly
Supernatural. And in a Spiritual Life, or the Union and Communion of the Soul
with God, even the wisest of Philosophers have rightly placed the true
Happiness of Man; though they were ignorant of such Supernatural Irradiation by
the Divine Spirit, and of Jesus Christ the Redeemer, through whom only it is to
be obtained. Who is indeed The Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and expr^ss
Image of his Person, Infinitely, and Incomprehensibly, as he is the Essential,
Natural, and most Univocal, and Unigenous Son of the Father, or the very
I^trinsecal Verbum Mentis Divinae, who also has Invested himself with the
Human Nature, as the Epitome of the Univers, and which was therefore made such
in order to him, as I have showed; and so the Apostle styles him both
together, The Image of the Invisible God, and Firstborn of every Creature. And
as I said, this very Consultation of the Trinity about the Creation of Man was
in order unto Christ; as there was afterward another Consultation of God about
the Creation of Woman in order unto Man: And it is also said, Let us make Man
in our Image, after our Likeness; as it is said of Adam, that he begatt a Son In
his Likeness, after his Image: both which Expressions are not Supervacaneously
Impertinent; but as there is a mutual Resemblance between any two Similar
things, so it is here Doubly expressed, and sometimes only Singly, and
Indifferently, by Image, or Likeness. Now as there are Combinations between all
Created Natures, even Angels and Matter, as I have showed; so the Image of
Holiness is the Combination, or Communion between the most Spiritual Nature,
that is, the Intellective, and God the Creator. But the most Admirable and
Incomprehensible Combination is the Personal Union of Jesus Christ God Man both
Creator and Creature in one Person. Also Adam only was first Created Sole,
before Eve, or any other, as he alone was generaly, like any other Man, a
Microcosm, and as he was specialy and Personaly the Prototype of Christ, who
was to be a Man himself, though he was the Seed of the Woman: and though Woman
also, as well as Man, being partaker of the same Human Nature, was generaly
made in the Image of God, and so it is commonly Interpreted, God Created Adam,
or Man according to his Kind, In his own Image, yet it is afterward repeated
again more specialy and Personaly concerning Adam, In the Image of God Created
he him, and then, Male and Female Created he them: and thus Christ is called*
both the Second Man generaly, and the Second Adam Personaly, and so the Apostle
also expressly distinguishes, saying of Man, that He is the Image and Glory of
God, but the Woman is the Glory of the Man: and Christ the Head over all things
to his Church; even as the Man is of the Woman. And thus all that was in the
First Creation of Adam did prelude to Christ, as I have said; who is the only
true, Uncreated, and Created Image of God both in his Essence, and in his
Operations.

VI. That there is a God, and that the Soul of Man is Immortal, are two
Fundamental Points of Religion, as I have showed; and as in my first Discourse I
proved the first, so I shall now in this last prove the other; and between
these two comprehend all the rest, the knowledge whereof is only in order to
these great Ends of Man, that is, the Glory of God, and his own Eternal
Beatitude. But though I have Mathematicaly proved a Beginning and Creation of
the World, and consequently a Creator; because the Univers, which conteins all
in one, does afford a Mathematical Medium, whereby I might so prove it (as I
could also prove it Physicaly or Moraly) and I rather chose that way of
Probation, because the Divine Wisdom, which lays Natural Philosophy as a
Foundation of Divinity, does thus offer the Beginning as an Evidence of both;
and because some men, who pretend most to Evidence, require such Mathematical
Demonstration, which yet may not be exacted, nor expected in the Probation of
any thing that is not Mathematical, as the Soul is not; and which, though it be
Immortal; yet is not indeed such in Present Actuality, but only in Perpetual
Futurity. And as I have proved other Physical Theses Physicaly, so I shall now
prove this, which concerns a Moral Creature, Moraly, according to the Nature of
the Subject Matter; when I have first explained, what I intend by this Term,
Immortality; the very Explication whereof, as of any other Terms, whereby Truth
is presented in her own Naked Simplicity, does, by the Aspect and Eradiation
thereof, carry with it a very great Evidence of the Thing. Now according to all
my former Discourses, it is not, nor can it be any Question, whether all
Spirits whatsoever, Elementary, Vegetative, or Sensitive, as well as Matter, be
Immortal in their own Simple Essences, Substances, and Specifical Natures; for
they, as such, are Ingenerable, and were Properly Created; and therefore cannot
be Corrupted, and shall not be Annihilated: but as their Composita were first
Improperly Created, or Originaly Generated, and so are Successively Generable,
they are also Corruptible; and so undeniably the Intellective Spirit, as it is
one Substantial Principle of the Human Compositum, is also Incorruptible, or
Immortal. Again, as it is no Q^estion whether all Generable Composita be not
also Corruptible, so it cannot be denied but the Human Compositum of Body and
Soul, as it is Generated, may also be Corrupted, and so the Sensitive
Vegetative and Elementary Spirits thereof return into their Chaos, which we call
the Birth, and Death of Men: and so as the Human Spirit is Created, it may also
be Annihilated, and the like: but the true and clear State of the Question is,
Whether the Intellective Spirit of Man considered in itself, and without any
Conjunction or Composition with his Sensitive, Vegetative, Elementary Spirits,
and Matter of his Body, or any of them, be Immortal, or Mortal? that is,
whether it can, and does, as an Angelical Spirit, continue Separate in its own
Personal Individuality and Economy after Death, or the Dissolution of the
Human Compositam? which plainly is the Immortality of the Soul; or like other
Inferior Spirits, when the Compositum is dissolved, does thereby and therewith
also ceas to be such as it was before in itself, Individualy and Oeconomicaly;
and so having no such Individuality or Economy in itself Separately, and
without the Compositum but only in and with the whole Compositum, is disolved
together with it, and the Substance thereof return into the Dust, as its own
Element, and Chaos, wherein it was first Latent and there is Confounded and
Coagulated with others? (out of which again, not the same Individual and
Oeconomical Spirit, but another in a new Compositum may be Generated) which is
the Corruption or Mortality thereof; and such new production another Generation.
Now that the Intellective Soul of Man is not so Mortal or Corruptible, but
Immortal and Incorruptible, is the purport of the whole Scripture; because, as I
said, it is a Fundamental Point of Religion; and whosoever believes Scripture to
be the Word of God, may not, nor can he deny it; but he who will deny the one,
must first deny the other; that is, that the Scripture is the Word of God. Yet
I shall more specialy produce one Text, because it does include with the Divine
Author^ty also some Natural Reason of the Thing. The Wiseman, speaking of the
Death of men, says, Then shall the Dust return to the Earth, as it was; and
the Spirit shall return to God that gave it: wherein he plainly declares that
the Body, and all the Bodily part, (which he terms, D^st, as God so called it
at the first, because he made it of the Dust of the Earth and such generaly as
the Body of Man is in the very Instant when his Intellective Soul departs out
of it, and that certainly is a Body of Flesh, and not only a Lutea Imago, as I
said) does as soon as the Instrumental Life of the Sensitive Soul cease, fall
to the ground, and is more and more by degrees Corrupted and Putrefied, until
it be resolved again into Dust, and the Sensitive Spirit is also Confounded in
the Chaos thereof and Coagulated with others, (as it is also said, Who knows
the Spirit of a Man, that goes Upward, and the Spirit of the Beast, that goes
Downward to the Earth? and indeed we cannot know Spirits as they are in
themselves, nor Pure Matter as it is in itself, otherwise then by their
Accidents, as I have showed) that is, the Intellective Soul returns to God, who
gave it by Immediate Inspiration, and Proper Creation; and as he gave it, so he
receivs it; for as it was not produced out of the Earth, like the Sensitive and
Vegetative Spirits, so neither does it return thither again; that is, as it was
not Generated, so neither is it Corrupted: and the very same Probation, whereby
I have proved it Ingenerable, does also prove it Incorruptible: as Angels, who
are Ingenerable, are also Incorruptible, because they have no Substantial
Composition, and therefore nothing to be Dissolved or Corrupted; but every one
is a Complete Individuum, and Person in himself; and so though the Human
Compositum, which was composited of Body and Soul, may be Dissolved, as I have
said, yet the Human Soul, which is also an Intelligence and Life in itself, was
Immediately Created such by God, and therefore cannot be Dissolved; and was not
produced out of the Earth, and therefore may not return unto i^, but to God
that gave it. Thus as every Compositum is as i^ were an Aggregate Corporation,
so made according to Natural Polity, as an House is by Art; and when the Members
or Parts of the Corporation, or House, decay or are dissipated, the very
Corporation, or House, cease to be such, and the Members or Parts thereof are
Confounded or scattered among others; and as an Angel is as a Sole Corporation,
which cannot be so Dissolved; so Man is both an Aggregate Corporation, like
others, in a Common Capacity with them, in his Conjunct State, and also a Sole
Corporation, like an Angel, in his own Private Capacity by himself, and in his
Separate State: and as the others could not be Individuated, or made such
Natural Corporations, or Composita, without an Improper Creation, which was
their Original Generation; so neither can these Sole Corporations of Angels or
Men, which were made such in themselves Immediately by God, be Dissolved without
a Divine and Supernatural Power, which only can Annihilate them. But, as I
said, I shall rather prove the Immortality of our Souls Moraly, by that
Argument of Plato, which is very Rational and Philosophical, and may be farther
improved by Christianity. Certainly God the Creator and First Cause of all
things is also the utmost End thereof; and he is Immediately served only by
Angels and Men, because they are Immediately Subordinate to him, and the only
Intelligences in Nature, which only have any Conscience or Conusance of him;
and therefore can only perform that Immediate and Spiritual Service, which he
requires, and which is fit and Proper for him who is a Spirit, and will be so
worshipped: and so, as I said, they were Created and appointed to gather in all
the Revenues of his Glory, and to render it to himself, as well as to Glorify
him by their other Personal Services: Wherefore if these Intelligences should
perish or ceas to be in their Personal Individualitys, though their Substantial
Principles might not ceas to be, but be Confounded or Coagulated as others, yet
because they should not so any longer continue to be the same Persons (as no
Compositum, when it is once Dissolved, does Naturaly return again to be the
same) but their Personalitys should so be destroyed; then it should be all one,
in respect to this great and utmost End of Creation, as if they had never been
Created: for as if God had Rested from all his Works after the Fourth Day, and
before any Sensitives were produced, and neither they, nor Angels or Men had
been Created, all the other Creation had been void and vain in respect to
itself, as I have showed; because there had been no Spectators to Perceiv or
Enjoy it, so if Sensitives also had been produced, they could only Behold and
Enjoy the Creation, but not render any Glory thereof unto God the Creator, of
whom they are wholly Ignorant; and so all of them had been made in vain, because
none of them could attein the very End of Creation, which is the Glory of the
Creator: and though they had so continued to be for ever, yet the very End of
their Being had been Nullified; yea though they were made Perfect and Good in
themselves, yet they had not been Sanctified or Sublimated to any Divine Use or
Service, nor could God have so pronounced of them all, that they were Very
Good; nor would he have so Rested until he had so reduced them all to himself,
and his own Glory; nor Instituted such a Sabbath of Spiritual Rest, wherein he
did Review and Rejoice in all the Works which he had wrought, and from which he
received the Emanant Reflections of his own Inherent Glory, according to the
utmost Capacity of Finite Nature: Thus also if the Intelligent Natures of
Angels, or Men, should be Mortal, then all the Manifestations of his Glory to
them, or by them, should with themselves ceas and Vanish away; and whereas they
also do Personaly manifest his Divine Honor, or otherwise Dishonor him, so he,
who is the Great King, according to his Roial Greatness and Goodness will
recompens them with Reward, or Punishment, whereunto Piety and Impiety, Virtue
and Vice, do Moraly Relate; and in the Distribution of his Mercy and Justice
accordingly his Everlasting Kingdom of Glory does consist: and therefore also
all his Subjects thereof must be Immortal; otherwise after they had thus Served
or Disserved him, they should Escape him, and lose their Rewards or
Punishments, and he the Glory thereof: for so the same Man or Angel should ceas
to be, and the Name of his Person, as it stands in Gods Book, be O^literated,
and so all those Eternal Monuments of his Mercy and Justice be Defaced. Though
it is true, that all Men, and all the Angels in Heaven, or Devils in Hell, can
add nothing to, or diminish from Gods Uncreated Glory, which he Eternaly
Enjoieth in himself, and which is Immutable as Himself; nor was the World made
for any such End, but for the Created Manifestation thereof, which accordingly
as they do Advance, or Eclips, by serving him, or sining against him, so he
also according to his Created or Reveled Law of Justice will most certainly
Retribute unto them. And this Moral and Political Argument is very much
enforced by the consyderation of Gods present Providence and Administration,
which is as the Political Chaos of the World Future, and seems to be as Inane
and Inform; and yet out of it will he produce all the Beauty and Glory of the
other World. Thus no man knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before
them; All things come alike to all; There is one Event to the Righteous and to
the Wicked. But also, It is appointed for all men once to Die, and after Death
the Judgment; so that Death shall not Prevent, but Prep^re for Judgment; as the
Prison is not to Concele, but to Secure the Malefactor. And I am so confident
of the Moral Conviction of this Argument (which as I said is a Common Notion,
deduced from the Immediate Knowledge of the Nature of our Intellective Soul, and
of God our Creator, Preserver, and Governor, collated together) that no man's
Conscience can outface it, but only his, who does not, or will not regard it:
and unless such who can deny all Polity of Nature, and the Subordination of all
Inferior Na ures to Man, can also be so Impious as to deny the Immediate
Subordination of Men and Angels to God their Creator, I do not see how they can
evade it; which if they can, they do also thereby elude all Religion and
Worship of God. Nor are Sensible Experiments wanting, though I will not offer
any Direct Testimony thereof to such who can deny Divine Authority, and from
whom therefore I may not reasonably expect, that they should believ any Human
Reports or Records of the Survivorship of the Souls of men after Death: and If
they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the Dead: and should tell them this very thing, that he
has rose from the Dead: but I shall therefore rather offer another common
Experiment among the Living, from which I shall deduce a Collateral Evidence of
this Truth: and that is Self-murder in Man, and in none other Inferior Animals,
who will not so destroy themselves, Perceptively, and Spontaneously, and being
in no Delirium, but in sound Health, and Strength of Body, as Man very often
does most Wittingly and Willingly, and with the greatest and most sedate
Deliberation. Now as I have before showed, Self is such a First Principle and
Fundamental Interest in Nature, that as Nature generaly, so all particular
Natures, do intend and endeavor to the utmost the preservation thereof; nor can
it by any Natural Power of Compulsion, or Persuasion, be removed from this most
Innate Principle and Instinct, (except only for preservation of the Universal
Nature, which is also Natural in order to the necessary preservation of its own
Particular Nature, as a Fox will bite off his Leg to preserv his Life) for if
any thing could be ousted of this most Natural Principle, then it should be
ousted of itself: whereas Self is the Foundation of all other Concernments. Thus
a Lion, Mastiff, Bear, Boar, Horse, or any other most stout and courageous
Brute, will ly whining and pining to the last, rather then destroy itself, or
suffer itself to be destroyed by others, until Death necessarily dissolv it;
because it is Conscious to itself, and has this Common Notion in itself, that
the Individuality thereof, which truly and realy is the very Self thereof, shall
perish for ever: whereas Man, having this Common Notion of the Immortality of
his Soul Imprinted in his Soul (which principaly is himself, as Hebraicaly the
Human Person is called a Soul, and as it is said Animus cujusque est quisque)
though generaly, according to his whole Human Compositum, he affects Life and
dreadeth Death, yet judging it better for him to be in the Separate State of
his Soul, then in the Conjunct State of his Compositum, he can and does
accordingly both determine and execute his own Death and Dissolution: though I
do not conceiv that every Self-murderer (like Cato, who beforehand read over
Plato's Discourse of the Immortality of the Soul) does so consider it
Explicitly; nor as Spira, who in Despair would die, that he might know the
worst after Death; but rather most of them, not regarding any better or wors
State after Death, however are willing to die, to eas themselves of their present
Miserable Life, and so desperately venture upon a future, whatsoever it may be:
or perhaps, according to the vast and most Licentious Liberty of Human
Understanding and Will, may thus Explicitly not only deny, but act contrarily
to any Common Notions or Instincts whatsoever, and so destroy themselves: which
yet they could never effect wit^out such an Implicit Notion of the Immortality
of the Soul Radicated in itself. And so none but an Immortal Being can wish a
Notbeing, which yet is only an Imaginary and Illusory Wish; as we commonly
Imagine Vacuity to be Something, we know not what; and so we may wish Notbeing,
as Something which we conceiv to be a Vacation from Ill-being, we know not how:
for certainly we can Naturaly desire nothing but only in order to Self, which
must always presuppose Self, by which, and for which, we so desire it: But
however we may conceiv heerof in respect to present Ill-being, certainly none
can affirm, that any Brute has any fore-knowledg or expectation of any better
Being hereafter, or of any Transmigration, or Translation, or that it can
thereby be persuaded out of its present Being, whatsoever it is, nor can he
deny that there is such a foreknowledg and expectation in Man, or that he may
Naturaly and Realy desire, and very truly say, Cupio dissolvi; as I believ not
only many Christians, but also some Philosophers have thus welcomed Death; not
through any Necessity, or in a higher Strain of Gallantry; but with a clear and
conscious expectation of another Life after Death, and breathing after it, in
and with the willing expiration of their present Life; which, whether it be
al^o jo^ned with any assurance of a better State therein, or not, yet plainly
proves that the Soul of Man generaly is Immortal, because it can so affect
another Separate State, which no Brute can so affect, because it is Mortal; and
that it shall be either in a wors State of Eternal M sery, because some Men can
so Imaginarily wish to prevent it; or in a better State of Eternal Happiness,
because others can so Realy wish to enjoy it. And though I believ this Opinion
of the Immortality of the Soul (as also the other, that there is a God) to be
Explicitly Exerted and Exercised by few, yet certainly they are both
Implicitly Radicated in the Minds of all men, which Renders their Lives and
Conversations such, as if sometimes, and in some respects, they did seem so to
believ, and at other times, and in other respects as if they did not; and it
may appear so to be in themselves, and to themselves, in that they have such a
continual strife and endeavor to cast and keep these Opinion out of their
Minds, which is commonly done either by not regarding, or resolving against
them, whereof the very fear or doubtful apprehension, which no Brute can have,
does approve to the Soul itself what it may expect; and which, if men begin at
any time to think thereof, will return upon them; though some more learned,
study to confute themselves by Contrary Opinions, and that they may make way for
the denial of the Immortality of the Soul, therefore also deny all Separate
Spirits both of Men, and Angels Good, and Bad; as the Sadduces, and others,
with Epicurus, deny all Inferior Spirits whatsoever; hudling all things and
themselves together in the common Matter; which is such a Physical Libertinism,
as though it may gratify us at present, yet is indeed no less then the Eternal
Self-murder of the Soul. And so likewise others, though they will not reduce
all Spiritual Substances to the gross Matter, yet affirm their Soul to be only
Pars Animae Mundi, as they term it; into which, when it dies, it returns
again, as into another Spiritual Chaos: and so though the Substance remain
therein, Confounded and Coagulated with others, yet the Personality and
Individuality thereof is thereby Corrupted and destroyed, like the Sensitive
Spirits of Brutes; which is only another more subtle Denial of the Immortality
thereof, that is, of the very Individuality and Personality of every Human
Spirit, as I have showed. Wherefore because they cannot deny the Immortality of
the Soul Absolutely, they thus deny the same Personal future Condition thereof,
and any such Intensive, or Extensive Rewards, or Punishments, in Heaven, or
Hell; which to mitigate and moderate, they have invented and appointed a
Transmigration for all Souls into better or wors Bodies after Death, accordingly
as they have behaved themselves while they Lived in the former: Whereas they
must also affirm, that they are still Human Spirits, which are so detruded into
Brutes, or Vegetative Bodies; as the Poets plainly do acknowledge, and so the Man
in the Buck would have said to his Hounds and Huntsmen, Actaeon ego Sum -- as
the Tree did to Aeneas, Nam Polydorus ego -- which yet certainly is contrary to
all Philosophy and Nature: for every Specifical Spirit must have its own proper
Organical Body; and if any of the more Noble and Necessary Parts of its own
Body, while it Lives in it, be Discontinued, Dissocated, or Disordered, it will
Live no longer in it; much less could the Human Spirit of Actaeon Live in a
Buck, or of Polydorus in a Tree; for Bodies are nor only Vehicles of the
Spirits, but Domicils, and Officines, as I have showed; and as Sensitive
Spirits cannot Live in any other besides their own Element, so much less can
they, or the Intellective Spirit of Man, live in any other then their own
proper Bodies, which are therefore so Effigiated and Formed for them by their
proper Vegetative Spirits, as I have also showed. Or if they could be
Transpeciated into other Sensitive or Vegetative Spirits, then their Substances
being so Specificaly changed, their Faculties, and Qualities, and all their
Ideae, and Notions subsisting therein, must also be changed, and al^ered;
whereby they should no longer remember, who they were, nor what they did
formerly; and so they should suffer for they know not what, after such an Act
of Oblivion, not only of him that so forgiveth and forgets the Crime, but
also in him who forgets the Fact. And though others say, we be all born with
some Reminiscentiae, as they term them, yet certei^ly they are no such Acquired
Notions of any Matter of Fact, or thing Good or Evil, that we formerly did or
learned, but only such Common I^nate Notions which God and Nature have
Imprinted in us, and so taught us to know them, which are only Natural, and not
Sinful: and there are also certain Special Innate Notions of Specifical
Spirits, which are only proper to that Species, and to none others, as I have
showed; all which should be lost by such Transmigration, or Transpeciation;
which therefore is not, nor can there be, any such Metempsychosis, as
Philosophers would have it; nor yet any such Metamorphosis, as the Poets more
rightly term i^: and as both of them are contrary to all Reason or Sens, so we
have no other Authority but only Ipse dixit for such Assertions. And yet this
Opinion being apprehended as a Middle way between the Mortality and Immortality
of the Soul (though not according to the Excellent and Spiritual Nature of an
Intelligence) and also between no Reward or Punishment hereafter, and the true
Heaven and Hell, and all the Glorious Transactions thereof (though not worthy
the Majesty and Perfection of the Divine Creator) has very much prevailed
antien^ly among the more Learned Heathen, and generaly with the Common People;
and is still retained by the Banians, and some others. But the most difficult
Point that I know among Christians, concerning the Immortality of the Soul, is
^ha^, which is called by some, the Sleep thereof, and by others more rightly
Psych^pannychia, or the Pernoctation of the Soul, between Death and the
Resurrection; for in Sleep there is some Op^ration both of the Sensitive and
Intellective Spirit of Man, though Wild and Irregular, as I have showed; and i^
is no^ intended that in this State there is any Operation whatsoever, but a
total Vacat^on, and Cessation thereof, like Rest of the Body, or Bestial part of
Man, which is said to Sleep in the Grave, and that is therefore called a
Coemeterium, or Dormitory. But certainly the Soul, when it depar^eth from ^he
Body, carries along with it all its own Innate and acquired Notions (though as
the M^n himself, so al^ his Thoughts perish ^s to this world) and I doubt not
but that also it has others, and far higher, and better in that State; and
Blessed Souls are s^id to be in Paradise, which import Pleasure and Delight,
and that cannot be without Contemplation and Enjoiment* also they are now
styled Spirits of Just Men mad^ Perfect, which cannot be without Perfect
Operation; and since they are Separate from the Body, and all I^strumentality
thereof, we must consider how and in what manner they may probably Operate. And
here I must explicate what I intend by terming the Intellective Spirit of Man
an Intelligence, and affirming that and Angels to be in the same Intellective
Classis, whereby I conceiv, that as Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, are all in the
same Sensitive Classis, and yet very far Different one from another, not only
in their whole Composita, but also in their very Sensitive Spirits, which
Specificaly Differ; and the Piscine Spirits are much Inferior to the Bestial;
so also are Angelical and Human Spirits in the same Intellective Classis, (and
not only Spirits Genericaly as they are distinguished from Matter, and as all
Elementary, Vegetative, and Sensitive, are Spirits as well as Angels, as I have
showed) but Classicaly Coordinate one with another: and though the Spirits of
Men be Inferior to Angelical, as it is said, Thou have made him little lower
then the Angels, yet certainly they are not Subordinate unto them, as Fishes,
though Inferior to Beasts, are not Subordinate unto them (so as all the
Sensitive Classis is unto Man, and the Vegetative to the Sensitive, and the
Elementary to the Vegetative, and Matter to the Elementary;) because they are
not of an Inferior Classis, but of the same Classis, wherein all are
Coordidinate, as I have showed: and so are the Intellective Spirits of Men with
Angels; and as our Savior says, in this Future State they shall be Isangeli,
not only like, but equal to them; and indeed if we should not be in the same
Intellective Classis with them, Man should not be a Microcosm as he is, and
Christ in our Human Nature should not have Assumed all the several Classes of
Nature, as he did: And because we are so Coordinate with them, therefore we need
not their Mediation and Intercession, but only his, who is the Mediator
God-Man: And as the highest Excellence of their Nature is to Know, Love, and
Enjoy God, so we are capable heerof as well as they: and as we and they are
Moral Creatures, so we are Mutualy obliged one to another, but neither of us to
Brutes; and so the Angel said to John, I am thy fellow servants, and we are yet
more united in Christ, who shall also make us partakers of their Superaether,
and in whom all things are Recapitulated, as the Apostle says, both which are
in Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him: Whereby, as it is also said, we
Come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem; and to an Innumerable company of Angels; to the General Assembly,
and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven. Now whereas I have
showed, that in this present Conjunct State we cannot Operate without or beyond
the Body; that is, we cannot Understand without Phantasms, which we Irradiate
with the Spiritual Light of our Understanding, nor Localy Move the Body without
the Motive Spirits, which we Move by the Spiritual Power of our Will, whereby
we Command and Govern the Sensitive Imagination and Appetite Immediately, and
so the whole Body Mediately; and that Angels need no such Instrumentalitys, but
may Intuitively Contemplate all things by the Irradiation of their own Mental
Light, and Move them by the Eradiation of their own Spiritual Heat, as I may so
term them; thus our Human Spirit, as well as they, shall also then have the
same Intuitive and Motive Qualitys Actuated therein, which a^e now in it
Potentialy; for so Intelligences, as well as all other Natures, have their
proper Potentialitys and Actualitys, otherwise they should not be Mutable, (for
Alteration is by production of Potentiality into Actuality, and reduction of
Actuality into Potentiality, as I have said) and though they are not Generable
or Corruptible in their Substances, which are Simple, and without any Mistion,
or Composition; and such as always Subsist in themselves, and are neither
Generable, nor Corruptible, as I have also showed; yet they have their
Accidental Qualitys, by which they Operate, and not by their Essences or
Substances Immediately, more then other Natures; and all such Accidents do
Subsist in their Substances, and thereby, and therein, have their Actualitys and
Potentialitys, and are therefore Generable and Corruptible in themselves, and so
Mutable. Also all Simple Substances of the same Species have all the same
Specifical Qualitys thereof, either Actualy, or Potentialy; because they are of
the same Species, as they are such Simple Substances, though their Mista, or
Composita, may otherwise Differ Specificaly as such; for so though the Cortical
Stones, Metalls, Minerals, and Subcortical Magnet differ Specifically, as
Mista, yet as all of them are of the same Predominant Element, Earth, so that
being a Simple Substance in it self, has all the Terrene Qualitys in it self,
Actualy, or Potentialy; and thus the Magnetical Virtue, which is a Terrene
Quality, is Actuated in Iron; and so, as is said, may be in Brickearth, and the
like: And so though Ethereal and Culinary Fire may differ Specificaly, as
Mista, yet the Elementary Fire which is Predominant in both is Specificaly one
and the same Simple Substance, and has all the Ethereal Qualitys in it self,
either Actualy, or Potentialy, and so Planetary Virtue might be Actuated in
Culinary Fire, as well as in Comets; and so also all Simple Substances of the
same Classis have the same Classical or Generical Qualitys, as every Grass,
Herb, and Tree, has Vegetation, and the like, though in their own several
Specifical manners; and every Fish, Fowl, Beast, has Sensation, and the like,
though in their own several Specifical manners: And thus the Human Spirit, and
the Angelical Spirit, being both Intelligences, which may Live and Operate
separately, have also such Generical Q^alitys, both Intuitive, and Motive,
whereby they may so Live, and Operate Separately, in themselves, though in their
own several Specifical manner, either Actualy, as the Angels, or Potentialy, as
we also now have them: And as an Embryon in the Womb has many Facultys
Potentialy, which yet are not Actuated until it be born and brought forth into
the Light, so have also our Souls, while they are as Embryons in the Egg, as it
were, of our Bodies; and as we have now many Actual Qualitys which shall in that
Separate State be reduced to Eternal Potentiality, as Nutrition, Tasting, and
the like; so shall we then have others Actuated in us, which we never had
Actualy before. And certainly, in the Palingenesy of the Body, there shall be
such a great and wonderful change of Q^alitys, that the Apostle calls it a
Spiritual Body, as I have showed; which shall not be only a Platonical Vehicle
of the Soul, but Organical, and most Glorious; as the Apostle says, The Lord
Jesus Christ shall change our Vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
Glorious Body; according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things to himself: Whereby also we may understand that Separate Spirits are not
so vastly Diffusive or Atomicaly Retractive as some fansy, but have their
Bounds, as other Finite Natures; for so certainly our Separate Soul, after the
Resurrection, shall be confined within the Body, as well as in this Conjunct
State. And that the Separate State of the Soul is such, may somewhat Sensibly
appear in our selves, who seem to have some Common Notion thereof Imprinted in
our very Souls; which made the Heathen Philosophers so much complain of the
Prison of their Body, and Bondage of this Conjunct State, as expecting a better
afterward. And Christian Divines have a Problem, Whether if Adam had stood, he
should not have been at length Translated to a better, that is, this other
State? and if we seriously consider it, there must probably have been some such
ground of that wonderful, and otherwise inconceivable Tentation of Adam in
Paradise; which was not to any thing he then had, nor to any thing which he was
not capable to have, especialy if it were Absolutely Impossible, as to be a
God, or so to be like to God; for though now the Corrupt Mind of Man may, as I
have said, apprehend, or affect Nonentity, as Entitative and Impossibility as
Possible; yet we may not suppose any such thing of him in that State of Perfect
Understanding and Will; but it was a most obvious and prevalent Tentation, that
he having this Common Notion (which we have now only Implicitly and
Confusedly) in his Perfect Mind most Explicitly and Distinctly, and thereby
knowing that he had such Angelical Facultys Potentialy in himself, might covet
to have them Actuated, that so he might be like the Gods knowing Good and Evil.
And though this be a farther and higher Perfection of the Human Spirit, yet
Adam was not therefore made Imperfect, but Good and Perfect according to that
Conjunct State, wherein he was Created; which was his Original Perfection, and
whereby he was so made a most Perfect Microcosm, or Epitome of the present
World; as he shall be also in his future State of the other World; when not
only these Angelical Perfections shall be Actuated in his Soul, but his very
Body shall be more Spiritualised, as the Apostle terms it, or made fi^t for
that more Spiritual State of an Immortal Life: which yet shall still be a Body,
having all Corporeal Propertys and Affections; such as the Body of our Savior
was after his Resurrection; which though not Sensible, as before, to present
Sens; for so he was not Visible, or Tangible, otherwise then as he so pleased
to appear sometimes unto some; yet hereafter, when our Sensitive Bodies shall be
also refined and sublimated, and made like unto his Glorious Body, every Ey
shall see him; as Job says, I shall see for my self, and my Eyes shall behold
him, that is, Jesus Christ his Redeemer, who shall Eternaly be the Visible
Deity, and Image of the Invisible God. Nor could Christ's Spiritual Body
penetrate any other Body, as some have supposed from that Text, wherein it is
said, that he entered when the Doors were shutt (or the Doors being shutt) which
yet it does neither express nor import, but only that he did not enter into the
house, so as our gross Bodies now do, by Doors open, which is their usual Avenue;
whereas his more Spiritual Body might enter in by a Window, or other Aperture of
the house, without any Penetration. And this Renovation both of Soul and Body
shall be generaly Conformable unto his, and so made by his Divine Power, as it
is said, The first Man Adam was made a Living Soul, the last Adam is made a
Quickening Spirit: And as we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also
bear the Image of the Heavenly.

VII. Thus the Heavens and Earth were finished, and all the Host of them; which
Consummation plainly refers to the first Inception, In the Beginning God Created
the Heaven and the Earth, or, as it is Originaly, these Heavens and this Earth,
which were the same that were afterward so finished in the several Works of the
Six Days; and which, as it is also said, God Created to make; and particularly
it is so expressed, not only of Elements, but also of Vegetatives. These are
the Generations of the Heavens and the Earth, in the day that the Lord made the
Earth and the Heavens, and every Herb of the Field, before it grew, as I have
formerly observed; and now observe again, how this Doctrine of Creation of all
Generable and Corruptible things first in the Chaos of their Potentialitys, and
of their several Generations afterward in the Six Days, is so plainly and
cumulatively expressed and repeated, that none may doubt of the Truth thereof.
Again as not only Heavens and Earth here are mentioned, but also an Host thereof
or orderly Militia (and thus God is called the Lord of Hosts or of the Armies of
all the Creatures) so, as I have observed, there is both a Scale of Nature, and
also an Economy of the Composita, and Polity of the whole Univers, and that
therefore it is declared of them all, that they were Valde bona, (or as it is
Originaly Valde bonum, Singularly, as of One) and an Epitome heerof is every
Man in himself, as I have showed; and because, as I have said, he is such a
Microcosm, now in respect of this World, and so shall be of the World future,
therefore God does still continue to Create the Souls of men, from the end of
the first Created World, (which was thus consummated in Man, as the Sum of all
the rest) until the beginning of the other World. And if we rightly estimate
the many Millions of men living together on the Earth, probably he does Create
Human Souls every Minute, and so though he rested from making the great World,
yet he makes many such little Worlds continualy: for though it is said, He had
rested from all his Works which God had Created to make, that is, to be
Generated or to make by Generation, first Originaly, which was Supernatural,
and their Improper Creation, and since Successively, by Natural Generation, as
I have showed; yet he rested not from Proper Creation of Human Spirits in their
several Individualitys, according to the same Specifike kind, which he had
Originaly Instituted and expressed in the Protoplast, or first M^n, and so to
be Composited with Human Bodies, according to that very Institution and first
Law of Human Generation, as I have also showed. Nor does he so Immediately
Generate or Improperly Create the Human Compositum of any other Man, as he did
the first Adam, except only Jesus Christ; who was thereby declared to be the
Theanthropus, as it is said, The Lord himself will give you a Sign, Behold a
Virgin shall conceiv^ and bear a Son, and call his Name Immanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us. And when God had thus Originaly made Man (that is
both man and woman, as it is said, Male and Female Created he them) and
probably woman of whom Christ was to be born, and so is called the Seed of the
woman being made after man, was also the last of all these Works of God) then
he pronounced of them all Universaly, that they were very Good, not only in
respect of the Univers, but also of Man, as the Compendium of all, and
Consummation of his whole Work of Creation, in order to his ensuing Work of
Redemption. Whereupon he Instituted and made for Man his first Sabbath of Rest;
And on the Seventh Day God ended his Work which he had made, that is, as he
began in the very first Instant, so he continued to work until and in the very
last Instant of the Six Days; and therefore; he rested not before, but
proceeding continualy to work in all the Six Days (as it is said at first, that
the Spirit of God Moved on the face of the Deep) he ended, or Hebraicaly, had
ended, on the very first Instant of the Seventh Day, or Sabbath of Rest;
whereas it could not be rightly said, that he ended, or had ended, before; for
in the very last Instant of the Six Days he still continued to work: so exact
and proper is Divine Language; and though men cannot discern between Instants
of Time, or Points of Extension (which therefore are so Indiscernible, that the
Fluxes and Augments of Created Nature may appear Entire and Continuous to us)
yet known unto God are all his Works, even Instants and Points as well as
Numbers; and accordingly he does declare them in his Word, as exactly and
properly as Human Understanding can apprehend. Again though it be said, that He
rested on the Seventh Day from all his Work which he had made; yet it is not
said, that he rested in it, but this Work of Creation was Corrupted very soon
after it was finished: Wherefore as there remains a Rest to the People of God
by the Redemption of the World through Jesus Christ, so that is called also the
Rest of God himself, and shall be the Everlasting Sabbath, and Consummation of
all his Works, both of Creation, and Redemption, wherein he will rest for ever.

Thus I have delineated the true System of the World, which God himself, who
made it, has declared and reveled unto us in this Divine History of the
Creation of the Heavens and the Earth; that is, the Superaether, and utmost
Circumference thereof; and within that Concave Sphere, the Ether, and within
that, the Air, and within them all, the Orb of the Terraqueous Globe, and
inmost Center thereof: which certainly is the most Symmetrical and Uniform
Chorography of the whole Body of Matter, and of these several Members thereof*
most exactly according to the greater or Less Density of their Matter, and more
or less Activity of their Spirits. And therein I have also described the Scale
of Nature, and all the Classes thereof Subordinate and Subservient one unto
another; that is, Matter to Elementary Spirits, and Elements to Vegetatives,
and Vegetatives to Sensitives, and Sensitives to Intellective Man, and Man to
Jesus Christ, the Head of all things: and other foundation can no man lay then
that which is laid by God himself. Monendus est misellus Philosophus ut desinat
esse Conditor Mundi: and I confidently suppose, that if Plato and Aristotle had
enjoied the benefit of this Divine Light, they had far more improved
Philosophy by building upon this Foundation, then Christian Philosophers have
done by building upon theirs: and that we may enjoy the benefit of their great
Learning, and yet di^engage our selves wholly from their Errors, we must reduce
all their Opinions, and Human Inventions to this most Infallible Rule; which,
if we rightly consider it, will not only rectify their Errors, but also
instead thereof present such Divine Truths, as they did never conceiv or
apprehend: as may particularly appear by a short Recapitulation of what we have
formerly discoursed. Thus first we have proved a Beginning, and consequently a
Creation of the World; which no Heathen Philosophy so understood, as it is
declared by God in his Word; but either imagined an Eternal Creation without a
Beginning in any certain Time, removing it perpetualy backward by supposition of
many Deluges, Conflagrations, and general Devastations, and Indefinite
Revolutions: or though they may sometimes seem to acknowledge an Improper
Creation from some precedent Principles of Matter, Atoms, Men's, Anima Mundi,
Ideae, and the like; yet they do not express any Proper Creation from Absolute
Nonentity, to which Heathen Philosophy never did subscribe; nor do I know any
Word in any other Human Language, but only Hebraical, which does import such a
Proper Creation. Though if any conceiv otherwise, and can collect any such
Acknowledgment from their doubtful, and confused, and sometimes contrary,
Sentences, I shall not hinder him from subjoining their Human Testimony to
Divine Authority. But certainly Moses does most plainly and clearly affirm a
Creation of the World, in a certain Beginning, and so proceeds to declare the
first Age of the World as particularly and expressly, as if himself had been
Contemporary, and lived in the same Time and Places; and the Affairs thereof,
(which all Heathen Historiographers esteemed Fabulous, and termed Ogygia) more
exactly and truly then they do relate the Transactions of later Ages. And thus
whereas other Nations dated their Writings so many years ab Urbe Condita, or in
such an Olympiad, or the like; the Jews, both ancient and modern, date them, ab
Orb condito. Nor is the whole Age of the World so very large or vast, but that
every man may according to Divine Chronology easily comprehend it: And indeed
there are not probably above 150 Generations between us and Adam, who was the
Common Ancestor of all Mankind: for the Scripture does exactly enumerate them
all from the first Adam to the Second; that is to Jesus Christ* 76 Generations
Inclusively, (as Enoch is so reckoned from Adam, and the Brazen Lavacre so to
be measured, as I have showed) for so Luke declares his Seculum, as Matthew
does his proper Lineage: and if we allow four Generations to every Century,
since the Nativity of our Savior, yet the Total will not exceed that Number.
Nor is the whole World and System thereof so Indefinite but that the Mind of Man
may comprehend it, and by the Light of the Divine Word look through it as a
transparent Globe: for so it is said, He has set the World in their Heart; and
his Word plainly shows us how all Generable and Corruptible things were first
educed out of a Chaos of Potentialitys, wherein all their Primitive and Simple
Essences were then latent; and brought forth most orderly and successively in
Six Days, by God who Created them before by a Proper Creation from Absolute
Nothing, in a Supernatural manner by Improper Creation; which was their Original
Generation then Instituted by God himself, and by his Divine Benediction so
continuing Successively: And this is a short, plain, and evident account
thereof; whereas others, instead of such Proper and Improper Creation, have
imagined a Potentia Materiae, or Power in the Matter of producing out of itself
other Active Substances far more excellent then itself; which yet were not
before Realy in it; or that the Matter is transpeciated and converted into
them: though an Angel, who is the chief Being in the Scale of Nature, cannot so
produce out of himself any other then his own proper Qualitys and Accidents,
nor can he Realy transmute himself, or be converted into any other Inferior
Nature whatsoever; and much less can Matter, which is the lowest and basest of
all others, convert itself, or be coverted into any Superior Nature. Certainly
that which they so affirm to be in Potentia, must be either Ens, or Nonens,
while it is so in Potentia; and if it be Nonens, then Non est in Potentia (as I
have showed of Vacuity) and if it be Ens, then as I have said it is also an
Entity Created by God in its Potentiality, or Chaos, and so produced by Natural
Generation into Actuality; as if Vacuity could be any Ens, then it must also be
Created by God, or Concreated with the World, and should not be before, nor
beyond, nor any where out of the Created World, and Body of the Matter thereof,
as others have vainly supposed of such an Imaginary Space, Nor is their Forma
Misti, or Compositi, any other thing then the Result of the very Mistion and
Composition of those Primitive and Simple Entities, according to their own
Natural Coordinations and Subordinations in the Scale of Nature, which God has
so erected and ordered, that they have in themselves all the Natural Principles
thereof, and an Aptitude and Appetite to be so Mist and Composited in all
Successive Generation, according to that Law of Original Generation: and
therefore Forms are no such things as are formed or ordered by I know not what
Cholchodea or come I know not whence, aliunde and extrinsecus, into the
prepared Bodies; but, as I have showed, there are also other Substances, or
Substantial Activitys, besides the Body of Matter, Created by God, in and with
the Matter, that do Consubstantiate, Inform, or Inspirit it; and fabricate, and
fit it for themselves; and also mingle and compose themselves in and with it
into one Mistum, or Compositum, according to the Order and Economy of Nature,
by their own Internal Principles and Powers, which God has also Created in
them. Which Substantial Activitys, or Active Substances, I therefore call
Spirits (as the Scripture also does so call not only Substantial, put also
Accidental A^tivitys; as the Spirit of Wisdom, Jealousy, Meekness, and the
like) and they may well admit it, who say, Omnia Animarum sunt plena, and
particularly that there is a Vegetative Soul; which yet, as the Scripture does
not so express, I can not admit; for Soul is more special and proper to Living
Animals, but Spirit, though Eminently it signifies the chief of Spirits that is
the Intellective, and so Soul and Spirit are sometimes distinguished, yet more
generaly it signifies any Substantial or Accidental Activity whatsoever, and is
so commonly used by Chemists, Physicians, and others, as I also use it in a
more Spiritual sens. And though I dispute not about Terms, yet certainly such a
Proper and Improper Creation of the Primitive and Simple Entitys, both of
Matter, which is a Passive and Receptive Substance, and of the Accidents and
Affections thereof, and of all those other Substantial Activitys or Active
Substances, which I call Spirits, and of all their Accidents and Affections,
Created in the first general Chaos, and the Original Generation or Production
of them, by Mistions, Compositions, Actuations, and Perfections, in the Six
several Days; and accordingly all Successive Generation, by Production out of
any particular Chaos of the same Entitys or Essences, which are so Generated or
Produced, are such Real Veritys, that I am persuaded no Philosopher whatsoever
can Realy satisfy himself, or others, concerning the first Principles and
Origines of all things, and all the Alterations by Generation and Corruption,
by any such supposed Potentia Materiae, Eminenc^s, and Equivocal Causations,
Transpeciations, and Conversions, or the like; which are only Terms and
Notions, and no Realitys in Nature: nor can ever confute or disprove this
Divine History of Creation, either in the general System thereof, or in any of
the particulars, which Moses proceeds afterward to declare; And thus whereas
the Ancients generaly conceived the Ether and Ethereal Bodies to be
Superelementary, and Sacred, he shows us plainly, how Ether is one of the
Four Elements, and so was first prepared in the first Day, wherein Light,
(which is a principal Quality thereof) is said to be so produced; for the
Substantial Spirit of Fire, or Ae^her, was Created before, whereby it is
denominated one of the Heavens, and afterward termed Expansum, as well as the
Air: nor does he affirm it to be solid or firm, but such a Fluid Expansum as
A^r also is; and plainly implies that it was moved with the Light in it about
the Inferior Orb, whereby God made Day and Night, before the Earth, or Water,
or Air were so made or fitted, or that there was any Motion thereof, or therein.
And the Air, which is Naturaly an Expansum, cannot be Naturaly a Compressum,
whereby in its own Element, or Atmosphere, it should Naturaly seek to expand
itself more, and thereby Elasticaly press, as some would have it: Also both
Ether and Air are called Heavens, as one is the Fountain and Immediate Medium
of Ethereal Light, and the other the Vehicle, and Immediate Medium of Sight;
and so I suppose, that Air does Refract, or Reflect, very little, nor are
either Objects in the Air, nor Stars in the Ether, thereby seen Intersected
and Inverted, as through a Unequal Lens in the Air, nor so much magnified and
distended, as Diverse see Objects in the Fundus of Water. Again in this Second
Days Work, Moses declares Vapors in the Air to be only Waters above; and
thereby intimates the Special Instrumentality thereof in Nature; for so indeed
Vapor is almost as Chemical an Instrument, as Fire. Nor yet does he affirm
these Waters to be above all the three Heavens, or any of them, as some
suppose; but only in, or upon, or all over, that Heaven whereof he treats in
this Second Days Work; or more Criticaly, as it is Originaly, from above; and
certainly we cannot suppose any Water to descend from above, but only that
which first ascended from beneath. Nor is this ascent of Vapors the necessary
and only cause of Winds, whereof we have no mention in the Creation; and if any
Wind then were, it was probably some very tender and gentle breath, but greater
Winds and Storms, which are effects of the Curs, are also caused by grosser
Vapors; which whether moist, or dry, are not Formaly the very Wind; for that,
as such, is only Aer motus; but may be the Efficient Causes thereof, as any
other Impuls, or Ventilation, of Blasts or Ventiducts: and generaly moist
Vapors Cause more Rain, and dry more Wind, as appears by Herricans in more hot
Countries. And in the Third Days Works, he shows, how wonderfully God formed and
prepared the O^cumene, or H^bitable Globe, by causing the Waters to Subside, in
all the Chanells of Seas and Rivers, which he cut out for them; and by raising
the mighty Mountains, which may be therefore rightly termed, the Mountains of
God, and by Jacob are called the Everlasting Hills, whereof others give us no
account. Nor does he affirm Vegetatives to Live; but, as I have observed,
plainly distinguishes between Vegetative and Sensitive Spirits, which he
afterward calls Living Souls. And in the description of the Works of the
Fourth Day, we find none of those Monsters and Figments, which both Poetry and
Philosophy have introduced in the Starry Heaven: for neither does he divide it
into Spheres, having plainly showed before how the whole Ether was only one
Sphere, as well as the other Heavens; nor indeed can such several Imaginary
Spheres solv the Phenomenon of the Motions of Ae^her^al Comets, and of all the
Planetary Motions; as of the Satellites, which, as I have observed, move not in
perfect Circles in the Ether, but only about their principal Planet, whereby
their Motion in the Ether describes an Hemi^rochoid, as I said; as if a
Q^ernstone were set upright, like a Cartwheel, on a declive Hill, and a man
with his hand on the Handle should thereby move it round about the Axis down
the Hill. Nor does he assign any Intelligences, or Demons, and a Metratton,
or President over them all, to move the several Spheres. Certainly the
Scripture calls (...) Demons, Princes of the Air, and not of the Ae^her,
though they were Originaly of the same Nature, and Office with good Angels; but
as they were since ejected out of the Superaether, so now probably they are
confined within the Subae^hereal Orb, between which there is such a great
Chasm. Nor does he distingu^sh the Luminarys into Planetary and Fixed, but
calls them by one common Appellation, Lights, Originaly derived both in Name
and Nature from the Primigenious Light, whereof they were all composed. And he
particularly names only the two principal Luminarys, which so give Light upon
the Earth, and according to which, besides the common and Diurnal Motion of the
Ether, all the Sacred Feasts of the Jews were instituted. And as the Sun is
first named, so probably he was first made of that Primigenious Light, whereby
he Illustrateth all the rest: and therefore is sometimes called by the same
Name, or the Light. And as he has Light, so also Heat, which is another
Ae^hereal Quality, in himself Formaly, and not only Eminently or Equivocaly, as
some would suppose; and as indeed I conceiv that the Moon causes Moisture,
which is no Aet^ereal Quality, over which she does yet manifestly Predominate;
as may appear most notably in Tides, whether she then causes more gross
U^pors, when she is in her Apogaea, because she is farthest from the Earth; or
generaly more Vapors, because she is then more strong and Praepoent, as the Sun
in his Apogaeum; or from some unknown Influence or Power. But however those
Vapors which she causes do not make that whole Body of Water which flows and
refloweth in Tides; nor does every part of that whole Body of Water pass to the
extremitys of the Flood and Ebb; but only the Rivers in their Fall above the
Flood of the Sea are supplied by the Vapors, which causes the Impuls of the
whole Undulating Body of Water, as far as the Ebb; like the two Handles of a
Saw, in sawing forward and backward, not very far, though the Saw be never so
long: for plainly the Waters in the Flood toward the Rivers are not much more
Salt, nor in the Ebb toward the Ocean much more Fresh, but in the middle, where
they meet, and where a proportionable overplus of the River Water so caused by
the Vapors does mingle with the Seawater. Also he plainly intimates, that as
some of the Luminarys are manifestly Motive, so they are all, in that he does
not distinguish between them: and it is elsewhere expressly said of the Stars
generaly, that they militate in their Courses, or Originaly, Paths: and if the
Fixed Stars do move Uniformly together (which is the last Residuum of the
ancient Error and Opinion of their Fixation) yet however, according to their
Various Positions in the Ether, they must move Difformly in Time, in that very
Uniformity in Position; and either in Position or Motion, or both, they are all
Asymmetrous: certainly no known Motion of any of them is Commensurable with the
Motion of the whole Ether, according to which we assign the Prope^ Day
Natural to be, as I have said, four and twenty hours neither more nor less,
otherwise they should not be for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and for
Years, and all the Variations thereof. And though many of them be far greater
then the Earth, yet they all move about it, because they were made to give Light
upon it, which they could not do at such a distance, unless they were so great.
And their Number is Innumerable unto us, and perhaps not fewer then of the Host
of Israel in the Wilderness; nor of that which Ioab gave up to the King Rotunde
before he had comp^eted it; or of that which he still proceeded to complete,
until he was hindered by the Plague. Nor does Moses lay any foundation of
Judicial Astrology, which is expressly condemned by Scripture. Again in the
Works of the Fifth and Sixth Day he describes the Original Generations of
Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, and most truly terms them Living, and afterward
calls their Blood the Blood of Life, which our Learned Doctor has lately
discovered to be a most proper expression, and cites that Text in confirmation
of his Discovery; whereas formerly the Heart was termed Primum vivens, and
ultimum moriens: I have been informed by a Physician my Neighbor, that having
dissected an old Toad so far as that he had taken out the Heart, and afterward
stepping aside, before he returned again, the Toad had crept away into his
Garden, where he found it a^ive, and that it so lived some consyderable time.
In the last of all the Works of Creation, that is, of the little World, Man, he
discovers a new World of Mysterys not only as Man is the whole Scale of
Nature, and as there was another Proper Creation of his Intellective Spirit,
but also how he was made in the Image of God, in order unto Jesus Christ,
God-Man, who, by the Assumption of the Human Nature into the Divinity, did also
superadd and unite to this Scale of Created Nature the Creating Nature, God
himself; which is the Anacephaleosis, or Reduction of the Finite Creation to
the Infinite Creator. And I shall desire any Naturalist seriously to consider
this Natural Representation of the Messiah, as he is thus the Infinite
Completion and Consummation of Nature itself, and Perfection of the Univers,
and so the Mediator both of Creation, and Redemption; that thereby God the
Creator might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in
Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him: for so indeed Christ has united
in himself not only the Intellective Spirit of Man, but also his Body, yea the
very Matter thereof; as it is said, In him dwells all the fulness of the
Godhead Bodily. Wherefore all men should confess and acknowledge Without
controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the Flesh.
And these are two most admirable and amazing Contemplations, which every man
may have of himself, that he is a Microcosin or Module of the whole Created
World, and a Nature which in Jesus Christ is also Immediately united to the
Creator, and Divine Nature. And now I desire any to reflect on this whole
History of the Creation of the World, which Moses has described; and consider
with himself from whom he could derive all this Philosophical and Theological
Learning, (or as it was said, Whence has this man this Wisdom?) but only from
God the Author of all Entity and Verity: for though indeed he was learned in
all the Wised^m of the Egyptians, yet probably that was only such Improvement
of some Human Arts and Sciences, as they, and the Chaldeans, and Graecians, and
other Heathens, have made thereof, and not that Knowledge of these Fundamental
and more profound Veritys, which he delivers. Certainly Thales, Pythagoras,
Plato, and others, who purposely traveled into Egypt to be instructed in their
Learning, brought back none such into Greece: and I suppose, that whatsoever
the ancient Egytian Wisdom or Learning was, they received it first from Joseph
and the Hebrews, as other Nations since from Moses and the Jews; though indeed
they seem only to have received or retained some scattered Notions, Fragments,
or Cento's thereof, mingling them with their own Fansys and Errors; which does
also plainly appear in all Pagan Theology. But as our Savior said, even until
his time; Salvation is of the Jews; so also was their Philosophy derived from
this Fountain of Divine Truth, either by Scripture, or Tradition: for Language
and Letters are the Vehicles of all that Human Science, which we therefore call
Literature; and undoubtedly the Hebrew Language was the first and Original, and
it is said expressly, that before the Confusion, the whole Earth was of one
Language, which was Hebraical, as is proved by the Hebrew names of Adam,
Chevah, Sheth, and the rest; and so also it is said, tha^ unto Eber or Heber
were born two Sons, the Name of the one Peleg, because in his days the Earth was
divided, and his brothers Name was Jock^an: whereby it also appears that the
Hebrew Language continued after the Confusion in the family of Heber, from whom
it is so denominated; and as Shem is called the father of all the children of
Eber, that is, of his Sacred Lineage, so also from him, the Jews who were of
that Lineage, were called Hebrews, as Abraham their Father is therefore called
an Hebrew. Thus as Noah, and his Family only, were preserved from the common
Deluge, so Heber, and his family only, were preserved from the common Confusion
of Languages: and with the Original Language, the Original Knowledge which was
delivered from their Ancestors, did continue in that Family; and probably the
rest of Mankind, with the Language, lost also all those acquired Notions and
Terms, or at least could make no common use thereof for want of a common
Language; and so in Scripture we read of no great Actions performed by those
mighty Builders in many years after: and they are said to have been thereby
scattered over all the Earth; whereof such who were nearest to Heber, in
Chaldaea, and Syria, began to learn again both Language and Knowledge from him;
as may appear by their very little different D^alects. Whence afterward the
Chaldaeans by their Conquests, and the Syrians, or Phaenicians, (or
Syrophaenicians, as they are sometimes called) by their Navigations, conveied
Learning, both by Land, and Sea, to other more remote Nations. And that which
does most confirm me heerin, is that in America (whereof the Inhabitants were
farthest removed from the Hebrews) when it was first discovered, no such
Literature was found, though otherwise they were Naturaly as Ingenious as other
men, and so might have invented Human Arts and Sciences themselves, as well as
others, if they had not been so derived from this one Fountain. And as the
Books of Moses are the most ancient of any now extant, so I challenge all
Mankind to convince this History of Creation of any falsity or Popularity
otherwise then as I have declared, in any Sentence, or Syllable thereof, which
he has so truly and accurately expressed, that comparing it with all the
Discoverys of Nature which have been since made by any others, I may term his
Sentences, Ancient Noveltys, and all their Discoverys Novell Antiquitys: and I
must acknowledge my self to have been as much instructed by a more Critical
Inspection of Scripture, as by any Curious Inspection of Nature itself; though
I esteem both very needful, as they are mutual Explanations one of the other.
Thus by the Card and Compass of the Divine Word I have adventured to sail round
about the Philosophical World, and if any therefore shall call me a
Scripturist, or Ecclesiastes, I should willingly accept it, if the Wisest of
men had not assumed that Title, whereof I am not worthy to partake. However from
this Specu^a of Truth, and by the Light thereof, we may discern the Errors of
any others, who have wandered from this right Way. As first the Jews themselves,
after the Captivity, being mingled among the Heathen, learned their works, and
the very Corruptions and Prevarications of that Divine Truth, which the
Gentiles, as I have showed, before borrowed from the Hebrews, in respect of
whom all other Nations might be rightly termed Barbarous. And from this
Colluvies flowed all their Sects of Sadduces, Pharisees, and others, and that
Rabbinical Philosophy, which has perverted the Simplicity of the Text by
Cabbalistical and Allegorical Interpretations: and as they make all Scripture
such, because some parts thereof, as the Visions of Prophets are indeed
Allegorical, so others would Interpret them also Literaly as in the Vision of
the New Jerusalem, because it is described Quadrate or Square Hieroglyphicaly to
express the Immobility thereof, some have fansied the Superaether not to be
Spherical; though they might as well affirm it to be Metalline or Gemmeous, and
of no larger extent then according to the Measure of so many Furlongs. But
Philosophers have subverted the very foundation, and laid several others
instead thereof: and yet most Christians will build upon them, rather then
acquiesce in the only true and Divine Philosophy: though I also acknowledge,
that if others be reduced to this fundamental System of the World, very much
Natural Knowledge may be gained from them, and that they may help to make a fair
Superstructure. Nor have I laid down any Theses which I do not prove not only
by Authority of Scripture, but also by Philosophical Reason, and Sensible
Experiment; and if any dissent from me, I shall also desire him to oppugn me
with all the same Weapons, and as solid and firm; for if they be feint and
feeble, they will bend and recoil on him that uses them. As in that famous
Controversy concerning the Motion of the Earth, if any should urge against me
that Text, which shakes the Earth out of her place, and the Pillars thereof
tremble, I should answer him, that if I wanted a Text to prove the contrary
Truth, this alone might suffice: for both by it, and the Context, it plainly
appears, that it is spoken of a violent Commotion of the Earth by God in his
anger, and evidently imports that otherwise the Earth Naturaly rests, and
has a Place of Rest. And so their chief Reason to prove the Earth Mobile
because it is Magnetical (which I have grant^d) does as plainly prove the
Immobility thereof, as I have showed. And the Sensible Experiment of an Arrow
shot upright in a Ship sailing, is a mere Fallacy; though the Motion of the
Ship, and of the Archer in it, while he discharges it, may indeed cause some
little Impuls that way, in the very discharge, which so directs it. But
certainly no man can believ that a Fly removing from an Horses head in
traveling does follow him with any less Nisus or labor, by reason of any such
Conjunct Motion, then another Fly which freshly pursues the Horse; for let an
Horse that has been washed in a River run swiftly on the Land, certainly the
Drops that fall from him will not follow him. There are many such fond Opinions
and foolish Probations, which serve only to render Philosophy ridiculous. I am
more confident of my Theses, and hope I have offered no such Hypotheses; but
whatsoever they are, I submit them to the several Masters in the respective
Arts and Sciences; and generaly all to learned Divines, whose complete Province
it is also to inspect this Divine Philosophy, which God himself has laid as
the Foundation of Theology: and as he does delight to entitle himself the Maker
of Heaven and Earth, so Jeremy taught the Captive Jews that Chaldaike Sentence,
The Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish
from the Earth, and from under these Heavens, to discriminate the only true God
from all Idols: nor do I remember that any Heathenish Religion did ever ascribe
the Creation of the World to any of them, nor indeed acknowledge any Proper
Creation. Wherefore since Errors in Philosophy are so dangerous in Divinity,
Theologists should affect the Genesis of Creation, as well as the Exodus of
Redemption: as all the Sects of Grecian Philosophers did join Natural with
Moral Philosophy. Certainly Theology only can teach us the right use and
improvement of Natural Knowledge, that is, to Glorify God, and benefit Mankind:
and does specialy admonish us that we should not so highly prize Curious and
Costly Perierga, or any vain Philosophy or Knowledge which only puffs, and
edifieth not: for indeed whosoever does terminate in a Speculative
Contemplation of the World, is as much a Worldling, as any Ambitious, Covetous,
or Voluptuous men, who seek a satisfaction therein.

VIII. Let all men therefore prais and glorify their Creator, who has made
this whole World, and all things therein, in Order, Measure, and Weight; not
only in all their own particular Natures, but in the Univers, and Polity
thereof, since every man is himself a Created Module, and Idea both of the
Creation, and of God the Creator; who as a Melior Natura, was made to represent
God to all Inferior Creatures in his Dominion over them, and them unto God in
his Immediate Subordination unto him: Wherefore as all the Works of God do
prais him with the Echo of his own Goodness, and the whole Globe as a Cymbal
does sound forth his praises, so should we sing and chant them out with Oral
Voice, and Mental Understanding, And thus as blessed Angels, who in Heaven
behold the face of God, continualy cry unto him, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord
of Hosts; so we beholding the Reflections thereof in the Speculum of Created
Nature, should subjoin in Consort, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. And
more specialy we should prais him for our own Human Nature, which is the Sum
of all the rest, and Completion of both the Sensible, and Intelligible Worlds,
quartering all the Familys of Nature in the ^scutcheon of our Humanity: whereby
we of all others are most obliged to this Divine Service, which is the very End
of Creation, and Divine Goodness thereof. And every particular man should thus
Personaly re^lect on himself, because he is also an Abstract of Humanity,;
singing the Doxology of the Divine Psalmist. I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, and that my Soul knows right well; my
Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in se^ret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Thine Eyes did see my Substance, yet
being Imperfect, and in thy Book were all my Members written; which in
continuance of time were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. Thus I
was Created through the most free Grace of my Creator, and was not what I now
am long since the World was made, and which might still have continued without
me; who am a very Inconsyderable and Insignificant Portion of Mankind, among
all the Innumerable Millions of men, who have been before me, are now with me,
and shall be after me, and yet as much concerned in my Creator, and he as
particularly regarding me, as if there were none other man in the World, And as
I, before I was, so my Parents, or any others, could not design or desire any
such being for me, nor foretell or imagine what I should be; but only my Divine
Father, who did set down and prescribe in his Book of Eternity the Idea of my
Personality, and whole Compositum, and accordingly formed me in my Mothers
Womb, molding my Body, the Tabernacle of my Soul, by a Vegetative Plastical
Virtue, and producing my Sensitive Spirit out of the common Clay, and lowest
part of the Earth, inspired into it my Intellective Spirit, as a Light Incensed
that shall never be Extinguished, an Intelligence Ingenerable, and
Incorruptible for ever. And now I am my self, and not another, nor ever shall
be any other then my self, and so am put into the present possession of my own
everlasting Being; though my Soul living and dwelling in this Mortal Body, for
this short space of a Temporary Life, has this small Segment of its Eternity
set out and appointed to be the sole opportunity of gaining my everlasting
Welbeing: and the Intellectual and Spiritual Welbeing of my Soul is only the
Union and Communion thereof with my Infinite Creator, which is the true
Apotheosis of Intellective Spirits. In which Original State of Divine
Perfection Human Nature was first Created, but, by the Apostasy and Defection
of our first Parents, did again sink down into the Mortality of the Body, and
the self-confounded Chaos of the Soul. And now, O Mankind! admire and adore for
ever the Infinite and Incomprehensible Glory of God, and Mystery of his
Spiritual Kingdom of Redemption far exceeding all the Glory of his Natural
Kingdom of Creation, which was only the foundation or Scene of the other, being
so made in order thereunto, and wisely con^^der, how God, Infinite in himself,
looked through this Finite World, as a Bubble of Diaphanous Air; computing all
Creatures therein, only as so many Cyphars, which though more or fewer, greater
or less, before or after, in or among themselves, yet all signify the same
Nothing in Divine Account; neither adding to, nor diminishing from the Infinity
of their Creator. And therefore from all Eternity, before the Foundations of
the World were laid, he designed and decreed to Invest his own Son, the
Uncreated, Essential, and Intrinsecal Image of himself, with the Created,
Artificial, and Extrinsecal Image of our Humanity; and therein with the
Universal Nature of the Created World. By whom Finite is thus united to
Infinity, and Mutable to Immutability, and in whom God Infinitely and Immutably
enjoieth himself, in the full Embraces both of his Essence, and Operations. And
this is that new and better Creation, which shall endure for ever: whereof it is
also said, as of the first Creation. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the Beginning with God. All
things were made by him, and without him nothing was made that was made.

And now I prais thee, I bless thee, I adore thee, Lord, God, Creator of Heaven
and Earth! for thine own Uncreated Glory, Eternaly Immanent in thy self, and
for the Transient manifestations thereof in and to thy Creatures. And as I
admire thine own Infinite Incomprehensibility, so also all those Finite
Incomprehensibles in Nature, and all the Comprehensibles thereof, which may be
known by us; for whatsoever we do or can truly know of thee, or thy Works, is
most excellent; and so is all that we cannot know. And I thank thee for the
discovery of the Initial Creation, and Original Confabrication of the World, by
thy Word; and the retrospective Revelation thereof to thy Servant Moses: and for
any Revelation of that Primitive Apocalypse to me thy most unworthy and unable
Servant, by the Illumination of thy Divine Spirit. And now I beseech thee to
revele it more and more to the whole World, that we may all know and acknowledge
the only true Genesis of the World, and thee the Creator, who art both the
Author, and End thereof. And wherein I am Ignorant, still teach thou me, or
wherein I have Erred, discover it to others: that neither thy Divine Truth may
be dishonored by my Human Infirmity, nor any honor thereof ascribed to my Infirm
Humanity: but that we all, may always, and in all things, Laud and Glorify the
most Holy Name of thee, the Infinite Jehovah, and Creator, through Jesus
Christ, the Messiah, our Redeemer; whom to Know is Life Eternal, Amen.

FINIS.

