Instructions FOR MASTERS, TRADERS, Laborers, etc.

Printed in the Year 1699.

Instructions FOR Masters, Traders, Laborers, etc.
SECT. I.
Masters are to be Moderate in their Commands.
Q. ARE there not Duties, which God lays upon Masters, in regard of their
Servants?

A. Every State has particular Duties belonging to it, and none can be a Good
Christian, who is not careful in enquiring into and satisfying them.

Q. What are the Duties in particular belonging to Masters and Mistresses, in
relation to their Servants?

A. They are several: First, in the Exercise of their Authority in Commanding:
They are to command nothing that is Sinful: For Masters, in their Families,
being the Vicegerents of God, they ought to Order nothing contrary to the
Commands of God, by whose Authority they act. And if they give Orders contrary
to this their Commission, they are not only to answer for their own Sin, but
likewise for the Sins of their Servants, complying with such their undue Orders.

Again, they ought not to hinder their Servants from doing what God requires of
them. And since God has given Command to Servants, as well as to all other
Christians, to Worship him, to seek the Kingdom of God, and to work out their
Salvation, Masters are not to hinder their Servants from complying with these
Duties, which God exacts from them; neither directly, by forbidding them, nor
indirectly, by oppressing them with so much Business, as to allow them no
opportunity for satisfying the Commands of God. For this is to incurr the guilt
of Pharaoh's Sin, who, when God had commanded the Children of Israel to go and
offer Sacrifice to him in the Desert, doubled their Tasks, and by new Burdens
confined them at home.

Secondly, Where God's Service is not particularly concerned, there ought yet
to be Moderation in all Commands, so as not to burden Servants with more Work,
than they are well able to do. For though it be a great Fault, to let Servants
live without Business, so to betray them to all the Mischiefs of Idleness; yet
to be unconcerned at the Hardships put upon Servants, and not to value what
they suffer, is a great Fault too, not only in the want of Compassion, but of
Charity; which being the love of our Neighbor as of our selves, cannot allow of
this Cruelty, of laying on Burdens, without any Consideration for those, who
are to bear them.

I cannot tell, but it may look Great, to Command without Compassion; and I
know a Wordly and Covetous Spirit thinks nothing too much for Servants, when it
carries with it the prospect of Interest. But however it may look, it is
certain there is no Greatness in it, but that of Pharaoh; for there can be no
Generosity, where there is so much Cruelty; there is none but a slavish Spirit
is fit to make Slaves. And as for the Covetous and Worldly Temper, it is so Mean
and Base in it self, that there needs no more to mark the Oppression of
Servants with Infamy, than to see it the Fruit of that Contemptible Spirit.

The Rule therefore ought to be between both Extremes, so as to keep Servants
employed, for their own sakes, as well as their Masters, and yet still with
that Moderation, as to consider what is necessary for their Health and Rest,
and not to think, that because their Misfortunes make them serve, they
therefore have no Sense or Feeling. This Compassion is one Ingredient of the
Good Christian; and wherever it is excluded, either by Passion, Imperiousness,
Covetousness, or Immoderate Niceness, there is the Resemblance of an Ill
Compound, which has Gall thrown in instead of Honey.

SECT. II.
They are to be Moderate in the way of Commanding and Reproving.
AS there is to be Moderation in Commands, so likewise in the way of
Commanding; for though Servants are subject, yet they are not to be treated as
Dogs. If some are of that slavish Temper, that they will do nothing, except
they be ill treated, then it is they themselves, that make the spur necessary:
But this must not be taken up as a Plea to justify Passion or Pride in other
Cases. For certainly, there are many Servants, whose Fidelity and Willing
Temper need not Passion to push it on: And here all Peevish and Imperious
Commands, either in Words or Tone of the Voice, is an Argument of their
Weakness, who are in Power.

A like Moderation is to be used in finding Fault, and Reproving; because
Reproof ought to be ever Just and Reasonable, and it cannot be so, but by
bearing proportion with the Fault; now these being very different; as some
being the Effect of Carelessness, some of Sloth, some of Mistake, some of
Oversight, enquiry ought to be first made, before Reproof be given, for
otherwise it may do more harm than good, by creating an ill Opinion of their
Injustice, who give it.

First then, It cannot be allowed, to find fault with every thing a Servant
does; for, besides it being the certain way to keep Servants in an ill Humor,
there is nothing can more discourage them from being Industrious, than when,
notwithstanding the best of their Care, they are sure to be blamed. This Nice,
Exceptious Temper, that is never to be pleased, may easily spoil, but will
never make a Good Servant. But it punishes it self in its own uneasiness, by
many Changes bringing sometimes such Servants into the House, whose Crimes show
them the unreasonableness of their Impatience, in not bearing with ordinary
Failings.

Secondly, They ought not with Passion declaim against such Faults, which are
no more than Oversights, or the Effect of some Accident; because it is not
Just; and with those of a Good Temper, it is very unreasonable, since the very
Accident it self is Grief enough, without the addition of a Master's Passionate
Resentments, which only serve to change the Grief into Confusion, and instead
of making a Servant more careful, puts him beyond himself, and makes him not
know what he does.

But, Thirdly, If Servants are faulty through Neglect or Carelessness, I except
not against Reproof, but approve it as necessary; and think those Masters are
very much to be condemned, who passing by such Faults in silence, give their
Servants Encouragement to become good for nothing. In this Case too much
Easiness is Weakness, and Connivance is not Charity, but the Silence of an
Enemy.

But then the Reproof ought to be suited to the Person and the Fault: Some are
to be treated with sharpness, such whose Dull or Heedless Temper has no Life,
but from the Spur: And others will be prejudiced by this Severity. In all Cases
Reproof is to be reasonable, and therefore as free from Passion, as may be,
because this seeing nothing right, is not qualified either for being Judge, or
doing Justice. For which reason S. Paul cautions Masters against it, advising
them to forbear threatening, and putting them in mind, that they also have a
Master in Heaven, with whom there is no respect of Persons, Ephesians. 6. 9. Where
he disswades not Masters from giving just Reproof, but puts them in mind of
considering, how they do it; because they likewise are Servants of a Master in
Heaven, who will call them to an Account, for whatever they do against their
Servants unreasonably, and in Passion.

SECT. III.
They are to be Careful of their Servants in Health and Sickness.
BEsides Commanding and Reproving, Masters have still another Duty to their
Servants, in the Care of them, seeing that nothing be wanting necessary for
Life and Health: For since Servants spend their Lives, and often hazard their
Health in their Master's Service, both ought to have part in the Master's Care.
And therefore, as those are much to be commended for their Tenderness and
Charity, who are not only Solicitous for their Children, but likewise for their
Servants, in seeing they are provided with all that is sitting, both as to Diet
and Lodging, and sparing them in all, that may prejudice their Health, and then
expressing a more particular Concern, when Indisposition or Sickness demands
it: So those Masters are as much to be Censured, who being immoderately Nice in
whatever belongs to themselves, make their Servants no part of their Care; but
oppressing them with unreasonable Labor,

SECT. III.
They are to be Careful of their Servants in Health and Sickness.
BEsides Commanding and Reproving, Masters have still another Duty to their
Servants, in the Care of them, seeing that nothing be wanting necessary for
Life and Health: For since Servants spend their Lives, and often hazard their
Health in their Master's Service, both ought to have part in the Master's Care.
And therefore, as those are much to be commended for their Tenderness and
Charity, who are not only Solicitous for their Children, but likewise for their
Servants, in seeing they are provided with all that is fitting, both as to Diet
and Lodging, and sparing them in all, that may prejudice their Health, and then
expressing a more particular Concern, when Indisposition or Sickness demands
it: So those Masters are as much to be Censured, who being immoderately Nice in
whatever belongs to themselves, make their Servants no part of their Care; but
oppressing them with unreasonable Labor, let them want Necessaries, and
exposing their Health upon every Humor, either let them lie Comfortless, when
they are Sick, or turn them out of Doors; which is to treat them with much less
Care, than their Horses or Dogs.

This is very unlike the Spirit of the Centurion, mentioned in the Gospel, who
when his Servant was Sick, sent some Principal Men of the Jews to petition
Christ in his behalf; and this Solicitude of a Heathen is a Reproach to such
Christians, who think it beneath them, to have a Concern for their Servants,
and show their Greatness in being Uncharitable, even where Charity is so much
due, as to be within one degree of Justice, if it be not wholly so.

SECT. IV.
They are to see, that their Servants do their Duty to God.
THis Care of Masters ought to be farther extended, even to the Care of their
Servants Souls; so far at least, as to see, they perform their Duty to God, in
doing Good, and avoiding Evil, as far as falls within Family-Disciplin.

First then, They are to examine, whether they say their Prayers, and are
present at the Public Worship of God. The Ignorance or Careless Temper of too
many Servants, is proof enough of the Necessity of this Inspection and Concern
in Masters, and the Omission of this Enquiry, is enough to draw upon them the
guilt of their Servants Neglects.

Secondly, They are to see, they have time to perform these Duties; and
therefore are to take Care, they be not so oppressed with Business, as to have
no opportunity or leisure for the Service of God. Excess of Business may be
sometimes a real hindrance, and if it be generally so, there is a necessity of
considering, how it may be moderated. Necessary Works cannot be omitted; but
how many things are there in a Family, which are the Commands only of Pride,
Excess, Humor or Niceness? And is it not more reasonable in a Christian, that
some of these at least should be retrenched, than that Servants, for giving
attendance to them, should be obliged to live as Heathens? If the thing be
considered, Faith can have there no Influence, where the Decision is not in
favor of Servants, for allowing them so much time at least, that they may not
be forced to renounce the Practice of Christianity, in Compliance with the
Weakness or Vice of those whom they serve.

This enquiry again ought to be made, because many make Excessive Business
their Excuse for not Praying, and performing other Spiritual Duties, when in
reality it is nothing better than Neglect; and Sloth is at the Root of all their
Omissions. For which Reason, Masters ought to Examine their Servants, that so
they may confound the Slothful with their Neglect, and help to Contrive for
those of better Inclinaons, who have a Good Will, but for want of Management
cannot find Time to Pray.

Thirdly, This enquiry ought to be made with a stricter Eye, as to Sundays and
Holy Days, to see, if they take care to Sanctify them, according to their
Institution. The great Liberty in Profaning these Days, or at least, in
passing them over, without any Concern for answering the purposes, for which
they were ordained, ought to press Christian Masters to call their Servants to
an Account. And a Principal care ought to be, on their own parts, to see, that
by unnecessary Business they be not hindered in the Duties of those Days: Nay
more, they ought to Contrive things so, and exact so little Service from them,
that having their time at Command, the Masters may be in no danger, of their
Servants Neglects being charged upon them.

Hence it cannot but be advisable, on these Days, to dispense with that
Niceness which on other Days may be exacted, in Cleaning of Rooms. Dinner may
be so ordered, as to excuse a great part of their usual Drudgery in preparing
it, and of the Attendance in waiting unseasonably at Table. Visits may be
excluded till a fitting time, and going abroad, with Retinue, put off, till the
Duty of the Day be over. By this and other like Management, those who have the
Care of Families may show the best kind of Compassion to their Servants, in
giving them great Opportunities for Saving their Souls, and taking all Excuses
out of their Hands.

But since no part of the Duty of these Days can be well performed without due
Instruction in the Christian Doctrine, hence are Masters to see, that their
Servants have all necessary Convenience for being Taught what they are obliged
to know. Many are so unhappy, either in their Education, or the Dullness of
their Temper, that it is not a little help, will serve for their Instruction;
this Circumstance is therefore to be well considered, and Provision must be
made for every one according to their Wants: If some Service be excused for
Accomplishing this so necessary Work, the Masters will be no losers in the End;
since, besides the Reward they will have from God for this Charity, they may
Hope to be better served; there being nothing that can better sit Servants for
being every way Faithful to their Masters, than the due Knowledge of their
Duties to God. The want of this Knowledge being a general Occasion of their
failing in many Obligations, which belong to their State, and running into
Disorders.

SECT. V.
They are to reprove whatever they observe in them displeasing to God.
THIS Care again of Masters ought to have another Branch, and that is, in
Reproving whatever they observe in their Servants displeasing to God. Hence
they are not to Tolerate in them any ill Custom, as of Swearing, Lying,
Drinking, etc. but upon the Knowledge of any such Disorder, to labor for its
Reformation; and if upon sufficient Trial, there be no Amendment, to remove
those that give the Scandal; that so, Vice may have its due Discouragement, and
their Corruption may not be Communicated to those of the Family, who are as yet
Innocent.

Those Heads of Families, who are presently exasperated upon the Ordinary
Neglects of Servants in the Business of their Place, and yet know them to live
in the daily Transgression of God's Commands, without any Concern for
Correcting their Disorders, give Demonstration of their own unhappy State, in
being so Solicitous for the things of this World, and having so little Zeal for
the next. And though this may not touch them at present, yet the effect of this
Indifferency will fall Heavy at last, when they shall be called to an Account
for all the Sins of their Servants, which have been encouraged by their
Silence, and grown up under the favor of their Connivance.

Those then, who will escape the weight of this Charge, must with a watchful
Eye inspect all the Ways of their Servants, as to the Method of their
Conversation at home, and all the Circumstances of their going abroad, both as
to the Places and Company they frequent, and the Hours of their going out and
returning home. Without this care, how shall Masters be able to give an Account
of their Servants? And what will the Discipline of a Family be, when Youth are
left to the Liberty of their own Inclinations, without the Apprehension of any
to question or control them?

Whence I cannot but think those Masters much to Blame, whose Servants being
early discharged every Evening from their Business and Attendance, have some
Hours left to their own Discretion, without being called to any Account of
their Management. For those, who Reflect on the Corruption of our Age, and the
little Confidence, that can be had in unexperienced Years, must see, that this
is nothing less, than putting into the Hands of Youth daily Opportunities of
ruining themselves: And such Numerous Instances there are of this Liberty
abused, to the Irrecoverable loss of Youth, that it is a subject deserves Tears;
especially when we consider the sad Disappointment of Parents, who after a
Pious Education, having placed out their Children, and being satisfied in the
Provision they have made for their Livelihood, find them afterward lost to all
that is Good, by the Neglect, of their Masters, and the unreasonable Liberties
they have given them.

The Consequence of this Sin, both in the Affliction of Parents, and in the
Ruin of Youth, brings so heavy a Charge after it, that I cannot see, how
Masters will be able to answer it; since it is seldom in their Power to make any
Reparation for the Mischiefs they do by such Neglects; which have still a
greater Aggravation of guilt, if observing the Disorders of their Clerks or
Apprentices, they purposely let them go on, that so, when out of their Time,
there may be no probability of their taking Clients or Customers out of their
Hands; for this has such a Complication of Injustice in it, that it would be a
Reproach even in a Heathen, and therefore not to be reconciled with the
Principles of the Christian Profession All Heads of Families then, who have
Thoughts of providing for another World, must be watchful, that all those under
their Care, be a daily part of their Care, in advising and reproving, and
cutting off, as much as may be, all the Opportunities, by which the
Indiscretion of Youth is industrious in drawing Mischief on it self: For
without this Care, they cannot satisfy the Obligations they have undertaken,
either to God or Man.

SECT. VI
They ought to give them good Example, and be Just in paying their Wages.
ONE Principal part of this Care must be in giving Good Example to their
Servants; for without this the best Advice cannot be expected to be very
successful: As to all Family Duties therefore, those, who are the Heads, ought
to be most Regular, as in Prayer and keeping good Hours, etc. For since nothing
can go on well in any Family, where Discipline is not observed, this must be a
daily part of the Master's Concern, to see, that good Order be kept, and not
only, that it be kept by others, but that he be Punctual, as far as Business
will permit, in leading the way. For if he, by any Habitual Disorder, gives ill
Example, it must needs make his Advice Ridiculous, and it cannot but be feared,
but where there is so much Ignorance and Weakness, it will soon have Followers,
notwithstanding all the Care, that can be used by others, for Authority is more
prevalent in Evil, than in Good; and therefore to think, that a Family should
be Regular, and the Master only Disorderly, is a Thought without Experience,
and can give no more than groundless Hopes.

I conclude now these Duties of Masters with that of being Just to their
Servants, in the due Payment of their Wages, and of complying with whatever
other Conditions were agreed upon at their Entrance; for though they were made
only with Servants, yet Justice ought to be as strictly observed with them, as
with others, who have both Power and Money to make good their Right. God
requires this at the Hands of Masters, and it is with the Addition of such
Threats to such as fail in it, that if from them the guilt be Measured, the
Consequence of no other Sin can more justly be Apprehended, than of this
Oppression, which Cries to Heaven for Vengeance.

These Rules may serve for Masters, as far as concerns their Servants; but
there being still many other Difficulties, which these do not reach to,
belonging to their State, if they are engaged in any kind of Traffic or Trade,
therefore I must carry on these Instructions farther, so as to give some Light
in this way also, which a Universal Corruption has covered with such great
Darkness, that the Path of Truth and Justice is scarce to be discerned by those
few, who are willing to walk in it.

Instructions for Traders.
SECT. I.
The Danger of their Profession, and General Rule for avoiding it.
TRading is in it self lawful, but the eagerness of Gain and Covetousness has
mixed it with so many Injustices, that what of it self is irreprovable, is very
dangerous in Practice. This Profession was so generally Corrupt in S.
Chrysostom's time, that he sets down this as a Conclusion; That a Man of
Traffic cannot please God, and therefore no Christian ought to be of this
Prifession: I wish it were mended since his time, so as not to deserve this
Censure; but since the Improvement of our present Age, above that of his time,
is in nothing more evident, than in the Art of using Frauds, and in the
Ingenious Contrivances for Cozening one another, I fear there is no reason to
expect the Censure to be moderated. But the Evil of Trading being not in the
Profession, but in the Abuses of it, I come to those Rules, which may serve for
some help in avoiding them.

For a General Rule, I set down this Principle; That no Christian ought to do
an Injustice to his Neighbor. This is more particularly applied by S. Paul to
Buyers and Sellers, 1 These. 4. where, after this Preamble, Ver. 2. You know,
what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus: He instances several of these
Commandments, and then adds this belonging to our present purpose, Ver. 6. That
no Man go beyond and defraud (or, as in the Margin, overreach) his Brother in
any Matter; because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we also have
forwarn'd you, and testified. It is one Commandment then of Jesus Christ,
delivered and published by S. Paul to all the Professors of the Gospel: That no
Man defraud or overreach another in any Business. And I wish it were writ in
great Characters in every Shop and Place of Trade, that it might be a Rule to
all that are concerned, that, whatever their desire of Gain be, they may be
discouraged from seeking it, by overreaching or defrauding their Neighbor, of
which God has declared, that he will be the Avenger.

This then is the Rule, Plain and Positive; by it are to be examined the
General Methods of Traders, whether in Buying and Selling; and in whatever Case
there is any thing of Defrauding or Overreaching, it must, of Course be
condemned, as contrary to the Commands of Christ, as what the Gospel will not
allow, and God will revenge.

SECT. II.
Frauds and Injustice in the Goods they Sell.
IN regard of the thing that is Sold, there may be Fraud and Overreaching many
ways; as, First, If that which is Damaged or Imperfect, be Sold for Good in its
kind, for Sound and Perfect. For thus the Buyer is over-reached, in having that
put into his Hands for Good, which is not Good; and if he pays the Price of
Good, he is defrauded, since he pays for what he has not.

I do not here except against the Arts of setting off Goods, where the design
is no more, than to encourage Customers to give a Just and Lawful Price for
them, according to their true Value. But if these Arts are made use of to
deceive Customers, in making those Goods pass for Good, which are not so, and
for bringing in a Price above their real Value; then all such Arts, as far as
they serve for this End, must be condemned as Unlawful, since their whole
design it to overreach and defraud the Buyer, which is expressly forbid.

Secondly, There may be Fraud and Overreaching, as to the thing Sold, if the
Buyer declaring the End and Use of the Goods he asks for, the Seller puts such
Goods into his Hands, which are altogether unfit for that use, for which they
are bought.

Thirdly, If a Person Sells, that, which is not his own: For here, besides the
Injustice done the right Owner, he that Buys it is wronged, by paying a Price
for that, which, when paid for, is not his own, but must be restored, and may
be seized by the Owner, if ever it comes to his Knowledge.

Fourthly, If a Person Sells that, which may be Prejudicial to the Buyer; as in
Apothecaries making up their Bills with Drugs, that are either perished, or, at
least, do not answer the Intention of the Physician: For thus the Physician is
imposed on, and the Patient wronged both in Money, Health and Life.

Fifthly, If a Person Sells that, which cannot be Sold; as in taking Money for
that which is Spiritual, or annexed to Spiritual, for this is Simony.

Sixthly, If a Person Sells that, which ought not to be Sold, as being in it
self Sinful, or immediately tending to Sin; such are all sorts of Immodest
Pictures, Books, Songs, etc. as likewise all Books of Irreligion and
Profaneness, and of such Errors, as are evidently contrary to the Truth of the
Gospel. For though there be no wrong done to the Buyer, as to the Price of such
Goods, yet there is an Injustice, in thus helping to betray the Cause of God,
and directly Contributing to the Propagation of Sin, That Christians should do
this for Gain, is an Action so unworthy of what they profess, that I cannot
see, but that keeping on such a Trade, is joining with Judas, in betraying
Christ, in Selling the Gospel and their Souls; and what will be the Fruit of
such Gain, but the loss of all?

SECT. III.
In the Price.
THere may be Fraud and Injustice in the Price of what is Sold, by exacting an
unreasonable Rate. There is a Gain allowed to all that Trade, but this Gain has
its bounds; and though these cannot be so fixed in Particular, as to condemn all
Excess of Oppression; yet there is no one, who Trades, but from that Common
Light of Reason and Justice, which God gives to every Soul, may easily
discover, when he acts against that, which is Reasonable and Just. They all
know the true Value of their Goods; they know the Circumstances, which raise or
lessen their Value; they know the Rates, at which they are generally Sold, and
their own Conscience bears Testimony against them, when making an Advantage of
the Buyer, they take of him a Price exceeding both the Value and Common Rates
of such Goods.

Such is the Injustice, when a Person coming to Buy, who neither knows the
Price of the Goods, nor when they are Good in their kind, has either Faulty
Goods put upon him, or such a Price exacted from him, as far exceeds their
Value. For this is evidently overreaching him, by taking an Advantage of his
Ignorance.

Q. This is the Buyer's fault, in undertaking what he does not understand.
Caveat Emptor; It Is the Buyer's part, to take Care he be not imposed on.

A. It Is an oversight indeed for a Man, when he is amongst Pick-pockets, not to
take Care of his Purse: And would you have every Man, that goes into a Shop,
think this to be his Case? If he ought to think so, then the Fault of an
Ignorant Chapman, is in believing Shopkeepers to be Honester than they are. And
so in reality it is, if they stand ready in their Shops to overreach all they
can, and then only do it not, when a Customer's Skill and Caution will not give
them Opportunity for it.

Truly if this be all the Honesty of Shopkeepers, it is like that of Robbers,
who quietly pass by those, who seem too well armed against them: But how far is
this from the Justice required of them by S. Paul, who expressly gives them
Command, Not to overreach or defraud any? If their Duty then be to overreach
none, and this Principle of Justice ought so to possess their Souls, as to give
them a Horror of all Frauds, and to Tie up their Hands from all Deceit; and God
demands this at their Hands; how wretched must be the State of their Souls,
who, as if there were no such Command, defraud all they can, and spare only
those, who will not be deceived by them?

If this be the Method of Traders, then it is true now, that such Traders cannot
please God, and that no Christian can be such a Trader, because God's Will and
Commands are no Bar upon their Conscience, but they give themselves up to
their Covetous Desires, contrary to all the Principles of Truth and Justice.

But this is not the only Injustice in taking the Advantage of a Buyer's want
of Experience or Skill; it is much the same of any other Advantage, that is
taken, for raising the Price above what is just; as in Case of some present
Distress or Necessity observed in the Buyer; for whoever, upon discovering such
Necessity, exacts more than is due, is Guilty of Oppression and Extortion, and
overthrows, in this, all the Principles of the Gospel, by being then Barbarous
and Cruel, when Circumstances oblige to Charity, Tenderness and Compassion; and
therefore there can be no less than Infinite Woes pronounced against those, who
upon this Consideration, exact upon the Poor, or such, who by unhappy
Circumstances are brought into Streights, and God will be the Revenger of such
Iniquity.

It Is not much Inferior to this, if a Person being earnestly bent on a thing,
resolves to have it on any Terms; and this being observed, the Seller raises it
to an Extravagant Price: For though here he has the Opportunity of a good Market;
yet since the Fancy of the Buyer adds nothing to the real Value of his Goods,
he has no other Motive for setting them so high, but only the fair Opportunity
of making a Prey: And what does this betray in him, but the Disposition of
those abovementioned, who are ready to catch at all Advantages, and stand
waiting for those, who are fit to be deceived?

SECT. IV.
In the Seller.
THere may be Injustice in the Seller, if by Lying he endeavors to persuade his
Customers that his Goods are Sound and Perfect, when they are not so; or that
their Value is much above what they deserve. This is more Criminal, if he adds
Oaths and Imprecations to gain Credit to his Lies; for then there is a double
Iniquity; in the Injustice of his Price, and in his Perjury, by which he
prevails on the Customer to give it.

Lies have not that notorious Guilt, when they are only Perswasives to a Just
Price; nay, the Hardness and Unbelief of Customers is such, that they seem
almost necessary for those, who think to Sell. But however, this is not enough
to justify the Practice; for since Lies are expressly forbid by God, they must
be judged unlawful, by as many as believe in him, and make his Will the Rule of
their Conscience, and therefore are not to pass for Innocent, even when they
are to persuade a Customer to give a Just Price.

I must confess, the Hardness of Customers is a great Temptation, and the fear
of losing Trade pushes it on. And is not this a strange Character of a
Christian World, that believing Truth and Justice to be the Way to the Eternal
Truth, there is scarce such a thing to be found amongst them, as a Confidence
of any being True and Just; but in all Business there is as general a Distrust,
as if there were no Faith amongst them? The Hardness of Customers makes
Shopkeepers Swear and Lie; and therefore are Customers Hard, because they know
Shopkeepers will Swear and Lie. Both have something to Mend, and I think,
those, who keep Shop may safely begin, without danger of being much Losers by
it. For I cannot but believe, that if a Person were so exact to Truth, that
those who come to Buy, could have a Confidence in him, that he would neither
demand an unreasonable Price, nor put off things for Good, which are not so,
this would increase the Number of Customers, and by Moderate Gain come to equal
their Heaps, who use all unwarrantable Means for imposing on those, who come to
Buy: And in case it should not, yet there would be the Comfort of a Good
Conscience, which with the Hopes of God's Blessing, would make abundant
Recompense for whatever Advantage their Neighbors have over them, and is the
Fruit of their Injustice.

Another Injustice may be in the Seller, if he makes use of False Weights or
Measures; for this is nothing less than Cheating; and as God has declared this
to be an Abomination to him, so those, who make this their Gain, provoke God's
Wrath against them, and must look from him the Punishment of all the Injustice
they have done their Neighbor.

Here must have place the Monopolies and Compacts of Traders, who by these
undue Ways make a Scarcity when there is none, and by either keeping or getting
all into their own Hands, oblige those that will Buy, to come to whatever
Extravagant Rates they are pleased to set upon their Goods. This cannot be
allowed in any Trade, because there is Oppression in it; but it is most
Criminal, when the Monopoly is in things necessary for Life, as in Corn, Meat,
etc. for this is bringing Calamity on the Public, and Starving the Poor: It Is
that, which provokes the Curses of the People, at it is said in the Proverbs,
and if S. Chrysostom's Judgment be taken, he is absolutely Accursed, who
contrives to the making (...) Dear.

SECT. V.
In the Buyer, and of Stolen Goods.
ON the Part of the Buyer there may be likewise Injustice: First, If he that
undertakes to Sell, knowing not the true Value of what he Offers to Sale, the
Buyer takes this Advantage, and gives much below the real Value. For though
Tradesmen are supposed to know the Price of their Goods, and there is no need
of Scruple in the Case; yet while Servants undertake to Sell, they may be
easily over-seen; as likewise many others may be, in the case of Offering to
Sell what they do not well understand. And yet no Advantage ought to be made of
such Ignorance or Oversight; because every one ought to do, as they would be
done by; and no Body would think it Fair-dealing, to be thus Treated by
another, but would esteem it Deceit or Overreaching.

Secondly, If a Person obliges a Shopkeeper to Sell for loss; as in case he be
in Debt, and ^^^ng not ready Money, his Creditor (...) not take Goods in
Payment, except it be at an unreasonable Under-rate: The Creditor being
satisfied at the same time, that he should be no loser, if he took them at the
Common Price. Likewise if a Person knowing a Shopkeeper to be in Distress for
ready Money, presses him to Sell with loss.

Thirdly, If a Person pretends, he has no want of such Goods, knowing, that no
Body else will Buy them, that so he may persuade the Seller to part with them
with loss. Infinite other ways there are betwixt Buyer and Seller, in which, by
Dissembling, Lying, and other Artifices, they impose on each other. But
whatever they be, though Authorized by Custom, and Universal in Practice, they
must all be Censured and Condemned by the Apostle's Rule, as far as they have
any thing of Fraud or Overreaching in them.

And that Custom must be here included, which is of Buying Stolen Goods. For
this is an Injustice equal to Theft, if it be done with a Compact of taking off
the Hands of Thieves, whatever they meet with belonging to their Trade. And it
cannot be excused, if they only Buy, what is by accident Offered to be Sold at
their Shop. The Reason is, First, Because such Goods are not theirs, who Offer
them to Sale, and it is not Just to Buy of those, who cannot Sell. Secondly,
Because by taking such Goods off their Hands, they encourage Thieves, by making
their Theft an Advantage to them, and thus do Injury not only to Private
Persons, but also to the Government, in helping to support Robbers, by making
their Wickedness Serviceable to them. Thirdly, For their own sakes; because,
when they have paid for such Goods, they cannot be esteemed their own, but
theirs from whom they were Stolen; and whatever Advantage they make in Selling
such Goods again, it is not theirs, but of Right belongs to the Owners, from
whom they were taken.

Q. But if Shopkeepers Buy such Goods with a good Conscience, without Suspicion
of their being Stolen?

A. There is something so particular in Thieves Offering Stolen Goods to Sale,
both in the way of Offering them, and in the Under-rate, which they ask, that
it is easily discerned by such as are used to Trade: But if we must suppose
your Case, I answer, that if Stolen Goods are bought without Suspicion of their
being Stolen, there can be no Sin in such a purchase, because it was made with a
Good Conscience, and without any appearance of Evil. However if afterward
there be Evidence of the Goods having been Stolen, the Purchaser, though he has
paid for them, can make no Advantage of them, nor Sell them, but they are to be
returned to the Owner, who has the only Right to them.

Q. Is not this hard, when he has paid for them, and bought them with a Good
Conscience?

A. It is his Misfortune to be thus imposed on. He has been Cheated, and must
be a loser by it, as he must be in all other Bargains, where the Goods do not
answer his Expectation, but, upon Examination, prove Damaged, Imperfect or
Counterfeit; for as here, he must bear the loss, except he can recover
something of him that made the Sale; so in the Case proposed, the Purchaser of
Stolen Goods must stand to the loss, except he can find a way to make Recovery
of him, that Sold them; for the First Owner has all the Right to them; his
Title being still as Good as ever, notwithstanding the Theft and the Sale, that
has been made of them. Thus the Law decrees, and it is founded on the truest
Principles of Justice: Because no Man loses his Right by the Act of another,
who has no Right for what he does. It would be the same it an Estate, which the
Owner would not lose, though another should have paid the full Price of it, to
one, who had no Right to Sell it.

Q. But what if the Purchaser has Sold the Goods again, before he has any
Knowledge of their having been Stolen?

A. The Case is hard, but I must judge as the Law does, which making no
Distinction betwixt the Goods, and the Price of the Goods, obliges in both
Cases to Restitution. Thus, I think, Conscience obliges, since such a Person is
in Possession of what is not his own upon a just Title; and I know of no
Relief, but from the Person, to whom the Restitution is to be made, who being
assured of his Buying and Selling such Goods with a good Conscience, without
any Suspicion of their being Stolen, ought in Equity to consider him, and not
let him bear the whole Loss. This, I know, the Law will not Encourage, because
it takes no Cognizance of Conscience, but only of the Overt Act: But where
Conscience is wholly considered, the Resolution must be different, and I see
none more Equitable, than what I have here declared; for so, I think, Sincere
and Just Persons would do on both sides. And hence, if there should be any,
who, upon the Motive of Conscience, after having thus Bought and Sold Stolen
Goods, should make their Address to the Party from whom they were Stolen, I
think it would be Cruelty to take the Advantage, which the Law gives in such
Case, and Refuse the Composition here prescribed; because Equity will not allow
such Rigor, but requires Tenderness toward Persons of Tender Consciences.

These Directions may serve for Traders; but having prescribed Justice to to be
observed in the Manner of Dealing. I cannot Conclude without this Fundamental
Caution, that they consider the Lawfulness of the Trade they profess. The far
greater part are so; but some are to be questioned, especially in the way, they
are generally practiced; such, I mean, which have Oppression of the Poor, and
Extortion in them. Amongst these I reckon Pawnbrokers, and some Private
Persons, who lend Money to such as are in Distress. There are many Reasons
absolutely to except against them; but certainly, as the Common Practice is, of
Doubling the Principal, or gaining Fifty or Eighty per Cent. they are so far
from helping the Poor, as they pretend, that they Eat out their very Bowels,
and Devour them; and therefore, in this way, must be Condemned of Oppression.
And if they are any way to be justified, it must be, by bringing them to some
Regulation, by having the whole Matter laid before those in Authority, and a
Moderate Gain settled, upon a due Computation of their Expenses, Hazards and
Losses. If this were done, they might be Serviceable to the Public, and live by
the Service they do to those, who want their Assistance; but without this, I do
not see, how any, who pretend to Conscience, can live in the Profession and
Practice of so Evident an Extortion.

SECT. VI.
In Workmen and Laborers.
HAving gone thus far with Traders, as to Buying and Selling, I must now speak
to others, whose Profession is to serve their Neighbor, and take Money as the
Reward of their Labor, whether of Mind or Body. And these are to keep to the
same Standard-Rule with the former, of not overreaching, defrauding, wronging,
or doing any kind of Injustice to their Neighbor.

There is Injustice in these, if they exact more for their Labor, than what is
due according to the Common Rate, which Custom and Practice have set upon it.
But I speak not here of those, whose particular Art, as in Painting, Carving,
etc. cannot be thus rated, but must be differently Valued, according to the
Rarity of the Work.

Secondly, If they do not take due Pains, that the Work they have undertaken,
be done according to Agreement: For if they either put not in good Materials or
Ingredients, or slightly make up a Work, so as not to answer the Contract, it
is evident, they overreach their Neighbor, and take Money for what they have
not done; since the Price of Slight Work is very different from that, which is
more Substantial. In this are concerned all sorts of Working Trades; and as it
is a Principal Part of Honesty belonging to their Profession, to Finish their
Work according to Agreement, both as to the Goodness of Materials, and due Care
in making it up; so it is an evident Injustice to do otherwise, and no
Generality of Practice will excuse the guilt any more, than the Number of
Offenders does in other Sins.

Thirdly, If by neglecting to Finish their Work according to Agreement, or in
due time, they considerably injure those, who employ them. This may be in many
Cases, and is most evident in what belongs to Plowing, Planting and Gardening,
where Neglect proves the loss of the Season.

Fourthly, If the Materials or Ingredients are considerably prejudiced, and the
Work damaged by their neglecting to make it up in due time. This happens in
many Compounds, and Extracts, etc. where the Goodness and Virtue depends often
upon a Nicety.

Fifthly, If they demand more Materials, than is necessary for the Work, and
keep what remains for themselves. This is a Method of many Working Trades, but
particularly of those, who make up Clothes; but how to excuse it from Fraud, I
cannot tell; since being paid for their Work, they have no Right to the least
part of the Materials, that remain, and therefore cannot keep them, without his
Knowledge and Permission to whom they belong, but by being Unjust to him. If
any thing be due for Time spent in Buying for those, who set them to Work, this
ought to be set down and considered by such as employ them; for Time is
valuable to such as Work for Bread; but however, they ought not to be their own
Pay masters, but deal fairly, and let those, who are to pay them, know what
they pay for.

Lastly, If they do not Work the the whole time, according to Contract. In this
are principally concerned Journey-men and Day-laborers, who make no Conscience
of Neglecting their Business, and Idling away Hours, when they have no Overseer
to oblige them to more exactness. This is a Point too easily passed over
without examining by those, who are concerned in it, and it is nothing but not
thinking can give them any Peace of Conscience; for certainly there is as much
Injustice in this, as in Stealing, and for this they will be called to an
Account.

The Reason of all these Points is, because whoever Labors by Compact, is Bound
in Justice to comply with all the Conditions of the Compact, both as to Time
and Manner of the Work; and purposely, or by neglect to be wanting in any,
cannot be done, but with Injustice, if it turns to the prejudice or loss of
him, with whom the Contract was made.

SECT. VII
In Lawyers, Physicians, Surgeons.
THE same Judgment is to be made of those, who are of a more Liberal
Profession, but undertake Business by a sort of Virtual Contract, and expect
the Reward of their Industry or Labor; such are All that belong to the Law,
Physic, or Surgery.

First then, it is an Injustice in any of these mentioned, if they bring in
Bills of Charges, and either set down what is unreasonable for what they have
done, or add what they have never done.

Secondly, If they undertake the Defense of a Cause, that is evidently Unjust;
or, for their own Gain, Encourage Persons to commence Litigious Suits, to the
Prejudice of both Parties, or Ruin of either.

Thirdly, If they take no Pains to understand the Cause, in which they are to
Plead. If they make Delays in bringing on a Cause to a Hearing. If they have
been wanting either in duly Soliciting, or Drawing up Breves; if they have
purposely put off a Cause. Infinite ways there are, by which Men of this
Profession, put their Clients to unnecessary and repeated Charges, and at other
times make them great Sufferers through their Neglect Custom, and the Example of
others, may lessen the Horror of this Sin; but certainly it is so great, that
it cannot easily be equaled, since in raising themselves upon their Neighbors
Misfortunes, and increasing their Unhappiness, that they may be Gainers by it,
has so much of Hard-heartedness in it, so much Cruelty, and is so contrary to
the Spirit of Charity, that, I think, it cannot be practiced, but by renouncing
the Gospel, and all Right to Life Eternal.

The Case is much the same, when Physicians, Surgeons, etc. Neglect their
Patients, or Prolong their Cure for their own greater Advantage; for this
cannot be excused from Oppression and Cruelty; which is likewise their Crime,
when for making their own Interest another way, they prescribe more Medicines,
or more Chargeable, than the Case requires.

Fourthly, In all Professors of the Law, it is acting both against Law and
Gospel, to take Fees of the Adverse Party to betray their Clients. The like
Injustice may be in those, who sit on the Bench, if they take Bribes, if they
are prevailed on by Passion in favoring or opposing either Party, or if they
take not due Care in discerning the Justice of the Cause before them.

Fifthly, There may be the same Injustice in the Jury, upon the same Heads; for
if they give not due Attention to the Cause, if they accept Presents or Money,
if they are overruled by Passion or Party in the Verdict they bring in, they
betray the Trust reposed in them, and must answer to God for whatever wrong
they do their Neighbor, whether in Life, Estate or Reputation. The same guilt
falls on all those, who are concerned in Empannelling the Jury; for if they do
not nominate Persons of known Integrity, and such as they think most
Indifferent to Both Parties; if they are Industrious in putting those on, whom
they know indisposed by Passion or Interest for doing Justice, or if they take
Bribes for doing so, they are False to their Trust, and have all the Injustice
to answer, which is the Consequence of whatever unjust Verdict is brought in.

SECT. VIII.
In paying Wages or Hire.
BEsides the Heads already mentioned, there may be Injustice, as to the Wages
to be paid to such as are Hired to Work. First, In absolutely refusing to pay
what is thus due. Secondly, In unreasonably changing the Wages agreed upon, as
Jacob complained of Laban. Thirdly, In unreasonably delays of paying what is
due, by which such as Work Hard, come to want the Bread they have Worked for,
are forced to run in Debt, and take up what is necessary for Life at the
Highest Rates, and bring their Family into many Inconveniences.

Fourthly, By oppressing Poor Workmen, obliging them to Work at an under-rate,
or otherwise not to employ them; this is a Force upon Persons, whose Bread is
to come by their Work, and therefore must be contented to take a little rather
than Starve by standing Idle. But in this may be great Injustice, whilst their
Works being Valued at a High Rate by such as employ them, these grow Rich by
the Sweat of the Poor, without allowing them any Tolerable proportion of what
is gained by their Labors.

Here must have place a like Oppression in Spiritual Affairs; as in a Case much
practiced, of those, who having Rich Benefices, put in Vicars to bear the whole
Weight of the Duty, and scarce allow them what is sufficient for a decent
Subsistence: For since whatever Donations have been made, or whatever Tenths
are paid, are in Consideration of the Service, that is to be done the Flock,
and for their Maintenance and Encouragement, who serve it, the whole seems in
Justice their Right, who Labor in performing all the Functions due to the
Flock. Thus it was certainly intended by the Donors, and in the First
Institution of Tithes, and it was never desired, these Pious Provisions should
be made the support of Idle Churchmen, or to raise their State, whilst others
for a Poor allowance do their Work. This then must be set down as an Abuse, in
perverting the Charities of Pious Christians. But if it be considered farther,
that such Plentiful Benefices were at First designed, that the Flock might be
provided with Able Men, and that these might not only live decently themselves,
but likewise have wherewith to give relief to those of the Parish whom they
should find to be distress: This Consideration shows a double Injustice in the
present Method; First, In their Committing the Flock to the Care of such, whose
want of Experience, etc. makes them unfit for the Charge, and thus robbing them
of that help, which they want, and is their due. Secondly, In either
unprofitably Hoarding, or unprofitably Spending, what ought to be the Relief of
those Poor, whose Pastors they are.

SECT. IX.
In Governors, Overseers of Colleges, Hospitals, etc. in Trustees, Overseers
of the Poor, Masters of Schools, Debtors, Masters of Families, Gentlemen of
Estates.
HERE again may come in still other Injustices too much practiced; as, First,
In Masters, Governors, Overseers of Colleges, Hositals, Almshouses. For all
these being plentifully founded, and the express Intention of the Founders and
other Benefactors, being to provide for such, whose Circumstances answer the
Conditions by them declared; all Governors, Overseers, etc. are bound in
Justice, by their Place, to present or admit no others, but such as come
nearest to the Conditions prescribed; and thus only can they satisfy their
Trust, and answer the End of the Founders. As often then, as they are
overruled either by Private Interest, Affection, or other Considerations, in
preferring Relations, Friends, etc. to others, whose Circumstances come nearer
the design of the Founder, they abuse his Charity, and act against Justice, and
are False to the Trust they have undertaken.

Secondly, In all sorts of Trustees, Guardians, etc. For if these are wanting
to their Trust, and let those, for whom they have undertaken it, be Sufferers
through their Neglect, in not examining, how things are managed, or not calling
Stewards, etc. to an Account: Or if they make their own Advantage of the Trust,
above what is due, by turning to their own use what belongs not to them, or by
making very unreasonable Accounts, this is acting against Justice, and no Man
of Integrity or Honesty can do it.

Thirdly, In Overseers of the Poor, Collectors and Churchwardens: For if these
make undue Distributions, admitting such for Favor, into their number, who are
not in want, or excluding others through Passion, who are in want: Or if they
give in False Accounts, or turn to their own use what is given to the Poor, or
Spend any part of it in Drink, Dinners, or Entertainments; they so far Rob the
Poor, and can have no more Hopes of Mercy, without a Sincere Repentance, and
making Restitution, than they who commit Robbery and Murder on the Highway;
nay, they are in so much worse Condition, as God has undertaken the Cause of
the Poor, and declared, that he will be the Revenger of those, that do them
wrong.

Fourthly, In Masters of Schools, or others, who have the Care of Youth: For if
these have either a settled Allowance, or are paid by the Parents of those, who
are under their Charge, they are obliged in Justice, to take due Pains in
teaching such Youth, and to be watchful in every particular, as far as they
have undertaken, in order to their Education. And if they are either Slothful
or Careless in teaching them, or for want of due Inspection, give them
Opportunities of doing themselves Injury, by Idleness, or Ill conversation,
they betray their Trust, and will have all those Mischiefs to answer for, which
are the Consequence of their Neglect. And may not the Ruin of many Families,
and Loss of many Souls, be a part of this?

Fifthly, In those, who having the Money of others in their Hands, Neglect to
give them sufficient Security: For though those to whom it belongs, ought to
press it, yet there are Circumstances, where Bashfulness, Dependence,
Friendship, will not allow some. Tempers to be importune in the Case; and here
for the Debtor to omit or delay the securing such Money, cannot be cleared from
Injustice, since it is hazarding another's Right, and may easily prove his Ruin.
These Delays have often been followed with such Effects, that neither Justice
nor Prudence can expose another's Right to such Uncertainties, as are those of
Life.

Sixthly, In those, who neglect to make their last Will in time of Health, who
have Matters of Justice, Provision for Younger Children, the Peace of Family,
etc. depending on their Settlements. The Injustice of Delays in this Point is
very evident, where Justice presses so strongly for it.

Seventhly, In all those, who unnecessarily Contract Debts, which may be never
in their Power to pay; and in all those, who, being able, Neglect to satisfy
Just Debts. The Reason of the former part is, because doing Justice ought not
to be put to hazards without Necessity. And the Reason of the latter is,
becaule paying Debts is a Point of Justice, and therefore ought to be
satisfied. This is most pressing in Regard of those, who want their Money; and
the greater the Inconveniences are, which they Suffer for want of it the
greater is the Crime. It Is no less than Cruelty and Oppression, when the denial
of Just Debts streightens Families, so as to want Necessaries for Managing
their Trade, Educating their Children, and brings ruin upon them. It Is
generally injurious to all, because there are few, but what are Sufferers for
want of their Money; and sometimes those are the greatest, who seem least
Importune in Demanding their own. At least their Inconveniences are not to be
disputed, who solicit for their due; and therefore, though it be no surprise,
that Men of no Principles Contract Debts on all sides, and are not concerned in
paying; yet it is a matter of just wonder, that those, who seem serious in the
Business of Salvation, and make a Scruple of being Unjust, should be so little
Solicitous in Paying what they Owe, but let their Debts run on, with no more
Reflection, than as if no Body were injured by their Debts unpaid, or that it
was not their Duty to pay them. They seem to think little of it, and so are at
Rest within themselves; but to me their Case looks so very ill, by Reason of
the many Injuries, they may do by their Neglect; that in my Opinion, it is much
safer for them to consider it in time, than to run the hazard of the Injustice,
which may be charged upon them.

Lastly, In many Masters of Families, and Gentlemen of Estates. For when I
consider these, upon the Title of Justice, bound to provide for their Children
and Family, I cannot but conclude, that the Neglect of this is doing contrary
to Justice, contrary to that Duty, which God has laid upon them, and they by a
virtual Contract, have undertaken. And what then must I say of Tradesmen or
others, who live by their Industry, when through Sloth or Ill Company, they
neglect their Business, and expose their Children, etc. to all the Mischiefs of
Want? What of Gentlemen, who either through want of Care, or the Immoderate
Expenses of an Idle, Extravagant or Vicious Life, waste their estates, and many
ways Injure, if not wholly Ruin their Family? Can these think themselves Just,
I do not say to God, but to Men, while they Prodigally throw away their
Estates, of which, according to the Christian Scheme, they are no more than
Principal Stewards, and ought to manage for the good of their Posterity, to
whom whilst they give a Being, they ought likewise to provide a Well-being? Can
they think themselves Just, while to gratify their Humors, their Vices and
Idle Company, they are more Cruel to the Children of their own Bowels, than the
worst of Enemies? I cannot tell what their Thoughts may be, though I fear they do
not think; but to make a Judgment from the Infinite Mischiefs I have seen
brought upon Generations by this unchristian Method, I think the Violence of
Thieves and Murderers may more likely find Mercy, than the Treachery of these
Modish Parricides. And therefore, whatever their Profession be, to esteem them
for Christians, is what I cannot do, without Violence to all the Principles I
have learnt from Christ and his Gospel.

Infinite other Injustices there are, but from the Consideration of these
Particulars, I think they may be easily discovered by those, who are not
resolved to smother all the Principles of Nature, Reason and Faith, which God
has given them; and therefore I conclude with this Request to all those, who
are any ways engaged in Money-concerns, that they would be watchful against all
the Temptations of unjust Gain, and not lose their Souls for any Advantage that
can be expected from overreaching or defrauding their Neighbor; but to be
contented with the Fruit of Fair and Just dealing, hoping for the Blessing of
God on it, and esteeming a Little with the Comfort of a Good Conscience, better
than the Abundance of Fraud and Injustice; for thus only can they Act as
Christians.

THE Contents.
Sect. 1. MAsters are to be Moderate in their Commands. Page 3. Sect. II. They
are to be Moderate in the way of Commanding and Reproving. 6 Sect. III. They
are to be Careful of their Servants in Health and Sickness. 10 Sect. IV. They
are to see, that their Servants do their Duty to God. 11 Sect. V. They are to
reprove whatever they observe in them displeasing to God. 16 Sect. VI. They
ought to give them good Example, and be Just in paying their Wages. 20
Instructions for Traders.
Sect. I. The Danger of their Profession, and General Rule for avoiding it. 22
Sect. II. Frauds and Injustice in the Goods they Sell. 24 Sect. III. In the
Price. 27 Sect. IV. In the Seller. 31 Sect. V. In the Buyer, and of Stolen
Goods. 34 Sect. VI. In Workmen and Laborers. 41 Sect. VII. In Lawyers,
Physicians, Surgeons. 44 Sect. VIII. In paying Wages or Hire. 47 Sect. IX. In
Governors, Overseers of Colleges, Hospitals, etc. in Trustees, Overseers of
the Poor, Masters of Schools, Debtors, Masters of Families, Gentlemen of
Estates.
FINIS.

