Transubstantiation Defended, And Proved from SCRIPTURE: IN ANSWER TO THE FIRST
PART OF A TREATISE, ENTITLED, A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

The First Part.

S. Ignatius Ep. ad Smyrnaeos. (...) They abstain from our Communion, because
they do not confess the Eucharist to be the Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ,
that very Flesh which suffered for our sins, which the Father of his bounty
raised again: Those therefore which contradict this free gift of God, die
scrupulously Questioning the matter amongst themselves.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

The Principal Contents of the Introduction.
1. Reasons why the Discourse against Transubstantiation lay so long
unanswered. 2. The Real or Essential Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
showed to be the Doctrine of the English Church. 3. How the Catholic Church
necessarily infers Transubstantiation from our Saviors words understood in
a proper Sense. 4. The Pretended Demonstration to the contrary from the Sense
of the Word This, in those Words of our Lord, This is my Body, so highly
boasted of in the Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, showed to be a
mere Illusion.
AN INTRODUCTION To the ensuing ANSWER.
SOme have wondered, whilst others Triumph't, and a late Writer particularly
has vainly boasted, in a certain Published at Dublin.
Letter to a Friend, that Two great Doctors of the English Church, had baffled
their Adversaries of Rome even to the silencing of that Party, and all this was
because the Discourse against Transubstantiation lay so long unanswered. The
best account, that I can give of the so long silence, is, that the more
considerate knew, that the said Discourse contained no new matter, but only
what had been very often objected against us since the Pretended Reformation of
the English Church, and as often fully Answered, as also, that there have been
Mr. Arnauds two last Volums concerning the Perpetuity of the Faith, etc.
two large Volums Written by a Learned Catholic Author, and Pa. 42. Of the
Discourse against Transubstantiation.
cited by the Discourser himself, wherein the Objections against
Transubstantiation are put much further than this late Discourse urges them,
and all cleared beyond the Power of any solid Answer; and we find none for many
Years last past so much as offered at against the said Treatises, nor yet to a
more compendious one Entitled, A Rational Discourse concerning
Transubstantiation Published 1676. In which the chief Objections repeated since
by the Discourser are fully cleared. Moreover, the Doctrine of the English
Church concerning the Real Presence being no less vigorously attacqu't by the
late Discourser, than that of the Roman Catholic, it was thought more proper,
that some of them should have first returned an Answer to it, because they had
the greater Reason to resent the injury done them, since a wound from a
pretended Friend is more grievous than from a professed Adversary.

Indeed, I would not have the Genuin Sons of the English Church to think, that
we differ so much with them in this Point, as some by Misrepresenting the
thing, would make us to do, seeing that they do acknowledge with Bishop
Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. Bell. c. 7. p. 11.
praesentiam non minus quam nos veram; no less True Presence of Christ's Body in
the Sacrament, than we do, and I am sure that is True enough; our difference
with them, (who deny Consubstantiation, as is manifest from their Writings,)
being only about the not admitting the Word Transubstantiation, whereas they
have so long freely acknowledged the thing. For if the Body of Christ be Really
present in the Sacrament, and not with the substance of Bread, it must be there
without it, under the External Species only of Bread, and consequently such a
change of substance as the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation, must
certainly be made; and there can be no other Sense given of that Real Presence
which has been received in their Church.

Now, that the Real Presence of Christ's Body, together with it is Virtue and
Efficacy, is the acknowledged Belief of the Greatest and most Learned Persons
of the English Communion is Vid. Two Discourses concerning the Adoration of our
Blessed Savior in the Eucharist, etc. c. 2. of the first Discourse. Printed at
Oxford, An 1687.
certain, notwithstanding the weak endeavor of an imperfect Answerer to the
Animadversions upon the Alterations of their Rubric lately Published, to show
the contrary. Which that it may the more plainly appear, I shall add one
Observation made by a Famed Doctor of their Church, which will be the more
Authentic, because it was drawn from their Records.

It was proposed, says this Dr. Burnet in his History of the Reformation Part
2. p. 390. Of the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth. See also Dr. Heylins Cyprianus
Anglicus, p. 22. in the Introduction.
Doctor, to have the Communion Book, viz. That put forth in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, so contrived, that it might not exclude the Belief of
the Corporal Presence: ( I doubt not, but they meant after a Spiritual manner,
as Catholics do suitably to St. Paul who uses the words Spiritual Body to
signify a Real Body existing after a Spiritual manner) For the chief Design of
the Queens Council was to unite the Nation in one Faith, and the Greater part
of the Nation continued to believe such a Presence; ( which however seems to
have been determined against in their former Articles and Rubric.) Thereupon,
the Rubric that explained the reason for kneeling at the Sacrament, that
thereby no Adoration is intended to any Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural
Flesh and Blood, because that is only in Heaven, which had been in King Edwards
Liturgy, is left out -- Part 2. of Hist. Reform. p. 405.
And in the Article about the Lords Supper the Refutation of the Corporal
Presence was by Common consent left out. -- And in the next Convocation the
Articles were subscribed without them, of which, he tells us, he had seen the
Original. Now, whatsoever this Doctor (whose usual Practice it has been, like
the Snake in the Fable, to bite and betray those that have cherisht him)
pretends to know of a Secret concerning this matter, (for which he does not
bring the least proof or Authority, whereas he had seen the Original to be an
evidence of what he had before said,) yet for my part I have more Deference for
the English Church, than to believe that the Real Presence of Christ's Body in
the Sacrament was, after so much consideration about the matter, (now behold
the secret comes out,) left as a speculative Opinion, as he says, and not
determined, but every Man left to the freedom of his own mind, because an
express Definition against the Real Presence might drive from the Church many
who were still of that persuasion. For then those studiously altered Articles
and Rubric had only been made as a Trap to draw Men into Idolatry, and keep
them in it, if you will believe some of the great Modern Writers who live in
Communion, at present, with the English Church, and yet deny that Real
Presence, which was both in Queen Elizabeth's time, and ever since believed in
that Church, and tax those with Idolatry who Worship Christ thus present.
Therefore we have good Reason to allow, what he tells us afterward, that some
( we are sure that many of the most Learned amongst them) have since truly
inferred, that the Chief Pastors of the Church did then disapprove of the
Definition made in King Edwards time, and that they were for a Real Presence.

And of this we can make no doubt, when we peruse the Writings of those
Pastors, who succeeding them till this very time, have given so full an account
of their Faith in this weighty instance, and yet have past uncensur'd, nay,
have been of greatest esteem in their Church. And how indeed can we imagine,
that Men of the least sincerity would leave an Article of infinite concern to
Men's Immortal Souls in so undeterminat a Sense, that Christians might believe,
which they pleased, either that Christ's Body was thus Really present in the
Sacrament, which, if it were not, they incurred the guilt of gross Idolatry, or
that it was not so, which if Really it was, they were guilty of Infidelity, in
not believing Our Lord upon his Word; and a breach of the first Commandment, in
not Worshipping the second Person in the Trinity, presenting himself to us in
this Sacrament; according to that saying, of the Great In Psalm. 98.
St. Augustine concerning this matter; Peccamus non adorando, We sin in not
Worshipping? Such an Equivocation as this, in an Assembly of Christian Pastors,
upon the proposal of so great a Point, must needs have been of far more
dangerous consequence to Christians, than the Ambiguous Answers of the Delphic
Oracle, were to the Heathen World. This far then the business is cleared, that
the Real, and not Virtual Presence only of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, was
the Doctrine of the English Church; for what some Men amongst them of great
Latitude in Belief have maintained to the contrary, does not prejudice the
truth, which the more sound of that Communion have generally asserted.

And notwithstanding, that their Late Clergy in the Year, 1661. in compliance
to the Dissenting Party, by the chief management of the late Lord Shaftsbury's
Politic Spirit, were induced after hard soliciting to receive an Additional
Declaration, (though not Printed in their Rubric Letter,) at the end of their
Communion Service, yet, since they would not by any means be brought to receive
the former Declaration of King Edward the Sixth's time, without the change of
those words [ It is here declared that no Adoration is here intended or ought
to be done unto any Real and Essential Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and
Blood] into these which follow [ It is here declared, that no Adoration is here
intended or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there
Bodily Received, or unto any Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and
Blood] the words Real and Essential, as you see, being changed into, Corporal;
this cannot but reasonably be imagined to be done out of Caution to the Present
Church, her maintaining still a Real and Essential Presence of Christ's Body in
the Sacrament; whereas those in the latter time of King Edward seem to have
denied it. Moreover, though it be said in this last Declaration, that the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very Natural Substances, and
therefore may not be Adored, yet if by Natural Substances or Essences here is
no more meant, (as the words may very well be understood, and are shown by
Catholics to be understood in the Authorities of Theodoret, and Gelasius,) than
the external and sensible Essences, or properties of Bread and Wine, and not
the internal Substance, or Essence, this Declaration will not be repugnant,
either to the Real Presence or to Transubstantiation, and the Adoration will be
terminated neither on the Internal or External Essences of Bread and Wine, but
upon Christ the only begotten Son of God, Really Present in the Blessed
Sacrament, which the Can. 6. de Eucharistia in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento
Christum unigenitum Dei filium cultu Latriae adorandum.
Council of Trent it self has declared to be the Sense of the Catholic Church
as to the Point of Adoration.

Again, if the last part of this Declaration, wherein it is said, that the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ are in Heaven and not here; it being against
the Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at one time in more places than one, be
yet urged, to prove, that the above mentioned Real Presence of Christ's Body in
the Eucharist is not at present the Doctrine of the English Church. I answer,
that whereas it is there said, that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ are in
Heaven, and not here, meaning in the Sacrament; if by Natural Body be there
understood Christ's Body, according to the Natural manner of a Bodies being
present, and according to which, though in a glorified state, it actually exists
in Heaven, we do not say, that the Body of Christ is here in this Sacrament in
that natural manner, any more than the Doctors of the English Communion; but if
no more be meant by the words, Natural Body, but the very true and (as we may
call it) Essential Body of Christ, though present in a supernatural manner,
proper to the Sacrament, it is a very bold assertion to say absolutely, that it
is against the Truth of it to be so, or that this cannot possibly be true,
since we know so little to what the Omnipotence of God, which could convey this
very Body into the Room, where the Disciples were, the Doors being fast shut,
can extend it self, and yet the Body be the very same Body in verity of Nature
which is in Heaven; the Presence of which in the Sacrament a late Eminent In a
Treatise entitled several Conferences. etc.
Author of the English Church Page 65.
sufficiently intimates, that some (he might have said very many) of their
Divines have maintained; notwithstanding the vain endeavors, which the Answerer
to the Treatise, Printed at Oxford, to show the sentiment of the Church of
England Divines in this Point, has used to wrest them to another Sense: For
after having told us his own Opinion, viz. that all which the Doctrine of his
Church (meaning the Church of England) implies, is only a Real Presence of
Christ's Invisible Power and Grace, so in and with the Elements, as by the
Faithful receiving of them, to convey Spiritual and Real Effects to the Souls
of Men, he subjoyns, if any one yet thinks, that some at least of our Divines
have gone farther than this, i. e. do seem to speak of the Presence of the very
same Body which is in Heaven, let them know, says he, it is the Sea their 28
Art. of Religion which confirms the Body of Christ to be given, taken and eaten
in the Supper after an Heavenly and Spiritual manner, and Catec. where it is
said, the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and in deed taken and received.
The forecited Author does not well defend this Doctrine.
Doctrine of our Church I am to defend, and not of every particular Divine in
it. Now although by those wary terms, of every particular Divine, and seeming to
speak, he endeavors what he can both to diminish the number, and their clear
acknowledgment of the Presence of the same Body in the Sacrament which is in
Heaven, yet he could not but know that the Asserters of it were very many, and
still are, even since the Declaration, and such as may be presumed to know the
meaning of it, as cunningly worded as it is, as well, if not better than
himself; and for this, besides what I have had by particular converse with
diverse, I will appeal to the sincerity of those who have heard the
Determinations which have been made by their Learned Professors in the Public
Schools of both their Universities, ever since this last Declaration was
received, whether they are not fully satisfied, that they have been much more
Positive for a Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, in a further
Sense than the abovementioned Author, and others in their Late Discourses
against Transubstantiation declare themselves to be. And I have the rather
given the Sense before expressed of the last clause of their new Declaration,
which indeed is the only one it can truly bear, because the Catholic Church
Authoriseth it in the Sess. 13. c. 1. Neque enim haec inter se pugnant, juxta
modum existendi naturalem Salvatorem nostrum in coelis assidere ad dextram
Patris and nobis substantia sua^ adesse praesentem Sacramentaliter, ea
existendi ratione; quam etsi verbis exprimere vix possumus, possibilem lamen
esse Deo cogitatione per fidem illustrata assequi possumus.
Council of Trent, by Declaring there, that these two things are not
inconsistent, viz. that Our Savior according to his Natural way of Existing,
should sit at the Right hand of his Father in Heaven, and that he should be in
the substance Present to us Sacramentally, by that manner of Existence; which
although it can scarcely be expressed in words, yet our mind enlightened by Faith
can be brought to conceive, that it is possible with God.

I hope therefore, that Christian Charity may in time put a happy end to the
tedious Disputes, which have been so long held about the Blessed Sacrament;
that so the Sacred Symbols of Peace and Unity may no longer be made the Subject
of Contention. Especially when we consider, that though, when the Paschasius
Epist. ad Frudegard -- Miror quid volunt quidem nunc dicere, non in re esse
veritatem carnis Christi, vel Sanguinis; sed in Sacramento virtutem quandam
carnis and non carnem. -- concerning which Real Presence it is said: Vsque ad
praesens nemo deerrasse legitur, nisi qui de Christo erraverunt, and futher --
Quamvis ex hoc quidam de ignorantia errent, nemo tamen est adhuc in aperto. qui
hoc ita esse contradicat, quod totus orbis credit and confitetur.
strange Opinion, of there being only some certain Virtue of Christ's Body in
the Sacrament, and not that very Body it self was first privately held, about
eight hundred and eighteen Years after our Saviors time, by some Persons that
erred through ignorance, yet they were ashamed publicly to contradict, as some
in this last Age have done, that Real Presence which the whole Christian World
believed and confessed, and concerning which none had ever before erred in the
Church, but those who had erred concerning Christ himself. Likewise, that although
the fourth Great Council of Lateran, one of the Greatest which ever was held in
the Christian World, that they might put an end to the contentions then arisen,
and maintain Christian verity, and peace amongst the Faithful, did in declaring
the Faith of the Church concerning the Blessed Sacrament make use of the word
De Christo loquens Concilium, eujus corpus and sanguis in Sacramento altaris,
sub speciebus panis and vini veraciter continentur, Transubstantiatis pane in
Corpus, and vino in sanguinem, potestate Divina. Council. Lateranense 4.
Generale, Anno Christi 1215. vid. in Binnio. c. 1. p. 806.
Transubstantiated, to express precisely that Great and Supernatural change
therein made, which the Catholic Church had in all precedent Ages even from
Christ's time believed, as being necessarily deduced from our Saviors words,
and expressed by the Primitive Fathers in several other terms signifying the same
thing; yet the Catholic Church thought it not necessary to determine any thing
concerning those nicer speculations about the modes of this wonderful change,
which have exercised the more subtle Wits, even before the time of the Lateran
Council and ever since.

And of this excellent moderation used by the Catholic Church we have a clear
evidence from the proceedings of the Council of Trent in reference to this
matter which, as Historia Council. Triden. Francofurti Edit. 1521. lib. 4. pa.
367. In Congregatione mox Generali Statutum, in dogmate conficiendo verbis uti
quam paucissimis, iisque adeo universalibus, ut uirisque, viz. Scoti. and
Thomae Sectatoribus, quaent satisfacere, and ad uiriusque partis sensum commode
aptari.
Padre Paul himself, notwithstanding he was no great friend to Catholics in his
Historical Relations of the Proceedings of this Council, relates, determined to
use so very few, and those Universal terms in the Article of the Blessed
Sacrament, as might satisfy both Parties, viz. the Scotists and Thomists, and
be fitly accommodated to the Sense of each of them; but not so as to establish
their distinct private speculations. In part seconda del Istoria del Concilio
di Trento l. 12. cap. primo. Speaking of the Definitions of the Council, has
these words: Le quali tutte sono cosi circuspette che tolora paiono in cercar
form di parole lontane da ogni sembianza di pregiudicio a veruna delle Classi
Teologiche. E percio niente si volle determinare, intorno al modo della
presenza Sacramentale di Cristo.
Cardinal Pallavicino likewise tells us, speaking concerning the circumspection
of the Tridentin Fathers, that they would have nothing determined concerning
the modus or manner of the Sacramental Presence of Christ. So far were they
from prejudicing either of the Theological Classes, or from offering to declare
those things as Articles of Faith which were not the Revelations of God, but
the speculations of Men. So that, if we can agree, that this great supernatural
change is made in the Sacrament, without the admission of which those of the
English Church can never prove, that Presence of Christ's Body in the Holy
Eucharist, which they acknowledge to be Praesentiam credimus nec minus quam vos
veram, de modo praesentiae nihil temere definimus; addo, nec anxie inquiramus.
Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apoll. Bell. c. 1. p. 11.
no less true than we do, they will be yet left at liberty, and need not
determine rashly concerning the manner of it, nor so much as anxiously to
inquire into this Point.

For indeed Transubstantiation is a great mystery of Christian Religion, so is
the Doctrine of the Trinity, so is the Incarnation of our Lord, to which the
Primitive Fathers do so often compare the supernatural change made in the
Sacrament; so is the Resurrection of our Bodies; yet these Articles of
Christian Faith are to be believed upon the Authority of the Revealer, and not
too curiously to be pried into.

I shall insist only upon the Resurrection at present, to show how little
ground they have to believe this, upon the account of natural Reason, who
reject the belief of Transubstantiation, by Virtue of which we receive the
Instrument and pledge of our Resurrection Christ's Real Body in the Sacrament:
Both these indeed may seem contrary to Reason, before enlightened by Faith: For
how can that convince us, that the same Body which dies shall rise again; since
some that eat Man's Flesh in the extremity of Famine, or, as the Cannibals, out
of luxury, have the substance of the Bodies, that they eat, converted into the
substance of their own Bodies by the way of nourishment: And several other ways
there be, by which the reduced parts of our Dead Bodies are changed into the
substance of other Human Bodies, even so, that the same Bodies may be claimed
by many at the Resurrection? Notwithstanding we believe, that we shall rise
with the same Bodies we had, whilst living. Dim sighted Reason will ask, how
this can be, since it is against the Nature of a Body to be in two places at
the same time? Yet Nature and experience prepare us for the belief of the
Resurrection, which seems to be against Nature, by the example of those things,
which are obvious to Sense. Seed, as the Apostle instanceth, is cast into the
ground, it corrupts, and yet rises again, 1 Cor. 15. 38.
for God gives it a Body, and to every Seed it is own Body. So to dispose us to
the belief of the supernatural change made in the Sacrament, nothing is more
familiar than Natural Transubstantiation, for our life is sustained by a daily
change of the substance of other Creatures into that of our Bodies; we should
soon die without this: Nay we cannot breath, but the substance of our Bodies is
converted into Air; and he that denies this Transubstantiation, confutes
himself while he speaks. Thus Bread also was daily Transubstantiated into our
Lords Body, whilst he fed upon it here on Earth. All which may dispose us to
believe, that the Bread in the Sacramental Consecration, as Vt enim illic verbi
Dei gratia sanctum efficit illud corpus cujus firmamentum ex pane constabat,
and ipsum etiam quodammodo panis erat, sic etiam hic panis, ut ait Apostolus,
per verbum Dei and orationem Sanctificatur, non quia comeditur eo progrediens
ut verbi corpus evadat, sed statim per verbum in corpus mutatur, ((...)) ut
dictum est a verbo, hoc est corpus meum. Catecbet. Orat. c. 37.
Gregory Nyssen teaches us, passes into the Body of Christ the Word, not
indeed as it did by the way of manducation, and nourishment, but being
suddenly transformed into the Body of the Word, as is said by the Word, This
is my Body.

And if our curious Inquirers shall further ask; how this can be, since the
accidents or outward species of Bread still remain? I desire them to resolve
these Questions: How a thousand species can be reflected from the same Glass at
once, to a thousand Eyes at the same time? How the same Glass being whole,
transmits one entire species, and yet broken into many small pieces, every
piece reflects the same whole and entire species, there being all the while but
one subject, and what that subject is wherein these species do subsist? Or let
them but give a true account of the nature of any small Particle of that
matter, which composeth the Universe, before they pry too far into the secrets
of Divine and supernatural Mysteries, and think that God can do nothing, but in
such a manner as they can comprehend.

Therefore our Adversaries had good reason to say, speaking concerning the
Objections against the Trinity, Incarnation and the Resurrection with identity
of Bodies, Dr. Tailor of the Real Presence. pa. 237.
That if there were as plain Revelation of Transubstantiation, as of those,
then this Argument were good; and that if it were possible to bring a thousand
more Arguments against Transubstantiation, yet that we are to believe the
Revelation in despite of them all: Again, That Idem Liberty of Prophesying..
20. n. 16.
Those who believe the Trinity in all those Niceties of Explications which are
in the Schools, and which now a days pass for the Doctrine of the Church,
believe them with as much violence to the principles of natural and
supernatural Philosophy, as can be imagined to be in the Point of
Transubstantiation. And do not therefore insist upon the Point Dr.
Stillingfleet Rat. account, p. 117. and 565.
how far Reason is to be submitted to Divine Authority, in case of certainty,
that there is a Divine Revelation for what they are to believe. And, Bishop
Forbes p. 395. Vid. etiam confessionem Theologorum, Wirtemberg. in Confess. A.
1552.
that there are things, haud pauca, not few in number, which we all believe,
that, if human Reason be consulted, do not seem less impossible, and less
manifestly contradictory than Transubstantiation it self.

Now, that the words of our Lord, This is my Body, being understood in a proper
Sense, as in the ensuing Answer is proved they ought to be, do necessarily
infer Transubstantiation, is manifest. Because, as is allowed by all, that was
Bread which our Lord took into his hands, before he spoke those Words; there
must therefore a Change be made, otherwise it could not Really become Christ's
Body, nor that which he gave his Disciples, be in a proper Sense so called. And
the Accidents or sensible species still remaining as before, the change must be
made in the substance. This is what the Sess. 13. de Euchar. c. 4. Quoniam
autem Christus Redemptor noster, corpus suum id, quod subspecie panis offerebat
vere esse dixit, ideo persuasum semper in Ecclesia Dei fuit, idque nunc sancta
haec Synodus declarat, per Consecrationem Panis and Vini conversionem fieri
totius substantiae panis in substantiam Corporis Christi Domini nostri, and
totius substantiae vini in substantiam sanguinis ejus, quae Conversio
convenienter and proprie a Sanctae Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiatio est
appellata.
Tridentine Council infers in these Words: Because Christ our Redeemer did
affirm, that truly to be his Body which he offered, under the species of Bread,
therefore, it was ever believed in the Church of God, which also the Holy Synod
now again Declares, that by the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is a
Conversion made of the whole substance of Bread into the substance of the Body
of our Lord Christ, and of the whole substance of the Wine into the substance
of his Blood, which Conversion is, by the Holy Catholic Church fitly and
properly called Transubstantiation.

The foregoing Inference will evidently appear to be true, if we consider the
proper and genuin Sense of every particular Word in that Proposition of our
Lord, This is my Body.

This, here in its true and See also p. 26, 27. of the Answer.
proper Sense, signifies some Thing, Essence, Substance, or Object in general,
under such an appearance as was Demonstrated to Sense. For if by the word,
This, were expressed the whole Nature of the Predicate in such a Proposition, e.
g. as This is Bread, or This is my Body, then the Proposition would be purely
Identical, or Tautological; for it would be no more than if one should say,
This Bread is Bread, or This my Body is my Body: Whereas it is the property of
the Attribute to extend, and fully to determine the Idea of the Subject, by
adding clearness to it. And we must remember, that the English word, This, is
expressed by (...) in the Original Greek here, as also in most other Languages,
not by (...) in the Masculine Gender, so as to agree with (...) Bread. Now though
there be no distinction as to the Gender in the English word, This, Yet (...)
This Bread, as our Adversaries would have here meant, is false Grammar.

In like manner the Word, Is, has here it is proper Sense; not as it is used
sometimes, for Signifies. The Word My can have Relation to no other Person but
our Lord, who spoke it; nor consequently to any other Body, but his own, truly
so, as to it is Substance, and therefore truly expressed by the Word, Body; that,
which was before Bread, at the beginning of the Enunciation, This is my Body,
being now made to be his Body at its Conclusion, because in Practical
Propositions as this is, with God to say, and to do, are the same thing; and
thus you see, what is meant by each word in the Proposition, This is my Body,
as explicated by Catholics, though you do not believe the Mystery.

Let us now observe, what a Late See Veteres Vindicati. in an Expostulatory
Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, pa. 57.
Expostulator has said against this Explication. He undertakes to prove, that
the Words, This is my Body, cannot be taken in a literal, ( I conceive he means
proper, in opposition to Figurative) Sense, which he supposes his Enemies
themselves of our Party will grant, if he proves that the, This, here mentioned
is Bread; which he thus undertakes to do.

That, says he, which our Savior took into his Hands, (when he was about the
Institution) was Bread; that which he blessed was the same thing that he had
taken into his hands; that which he brake was the same thing that he had
blessed; that which he gave them when he said it was his Body, was that which
he had broken; But that which he broke, which he blessed, which he took into
his hands was Bread: Therefore it was Bread, which he gave his Disciples, and
by This, is meant This Bread.

This Observe that this is no Induction but rather a Sorites, although the Author
knew not how to put the Subject and Predicate in their right places. See any
Common Logic.
Induction, says the Expostulator, is so fair and so clear, that I am sure you
cannot evade it.

But what, Sir, if after all your mighty boasting, This prove to be neither a
fair Induction, nor any Argument at all, but a mere Fallacy or Illusion
proceeding from what Logicians call, Ignoratio Elenchi, Ignorance of Argument
or proof? And just such a one as This would be, if proposed to you: That which
the Butcher exposed to Sale was raw Flesh; that which you bought was the same
thing, that the Butcher exposed to Sale; that which you Eat was the same thing
that you bought; But that which you bought, which the Butcher exposed to Sale
was raw Flesh, therefore you Eat raw Flesh. The Kitchin-Boy will tell you where
the Fallacy lies, and help you out at a dead lift.

But to make the matter yet more plain, I shall give you some other instances
in your way of Sophistry, which the most ignorant at the first hearing will
discover to be Fallacies. That which the Servants at the Marriage of Cana in
Galiee, took from the Fountain, was Water; that which they poured into the
Waterpots was the same, that they took from the Fountain; that which the Guests
drank was the same, that the Servants put into the Water-pots; But that which
the Servants took from the Fountain, which they poured into the Pots was Water;
therefore it was Water which the Guests drank. Or your Argument may in a
shorter way be turned against you thus: That which Christ took into his hands,
he gave: But, that which he took into his hands was not Sacramental Bread, nor
virtually Christ's Body, therefore that which he gave was not Sacramental Bread,
nor virtually Christ's Body.

And now repeating your Argument truly, though without all your heap of words, I
shall expose it is Fallacy plainly. That, you say, which Christ took, etc. he
gave; but he took Bread; therefore he gave Bread. I distinguish the Major. That
he took, he gave; unchanged or in the same manner he took it, I deny: What he
took, he gave, changed and made his Body I grant, and so agreeing he took
Bread, I deny your Consequence. Look into your Logic again, observe it well,
and you will find, that to make a Proposition contradictory to ours, viz. That,
that which Christ gave was his Real Body, you must observe the Rules of your
Master Aristotle, so as to speak, de eodem modo, and eodem tempore, which you
have not here known how to do. Yet you for all this, would be esteemed the
Great Champion for the Protestant cause, and boast, that this your matter and
Argument is so Demonstrative, that you cannot but stand amazed that Men, who
pretend to reason, can refuse it.

This pretended Demonstration might be much more exposed, had I leisure, whilst
I am discoursing upon so serious a point, to insist upon trifles. Neither would
the Sea Expostulatory Letter, pa. 58.
Remarks, which he afterward makes, help him in the least; For though our
Savior did say, according to St. Luke and St. Paul, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood, yet this passage does not fully determine, that, by This
is my Body is meant This Bread is my Body: For the word, This, in the
Proposition, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; being joined with the
word Cup, by a known Figure, to signify in a General way, what is contained in
the Cup, only makes the Proposition to Signify, That, which is contained in
the Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; which in the Evangelists St. Matthew
and St. Mark, is expressed by these words, This is my Blood of the New Testament;
so that the word This still, although joined to Cup, has no other kind of
signification than it has in the Words, This is my Body, as I have before
explained them: Also if it had the Sense which the Author of the Expostulatory
Letter would give it, then the meaning would be, This Wine is the New Testament
in my Blood, or as according to St. Matthew and St. Mark, This Wine is my Blood
of the New Testament, which words in the Sense that our Adversaries put upon
them, would in those circumstances, wherein they were spoken, have been
contrary to the Rules of Human Discourse, suitably to what is showed in the
ensuing Page 33. etc.
Answer concerning the Words, This is my Body, taken in their Sense.

The Adversary indeed, in This Expostulatory Letter, insolently Triumphs,
because he has found out some mistakes in Translating, etc. But his Answer to
the Fathers Authorities which have been so often truly cited as an undeniable
Evidence against his Party, will easily be showed to be unsatisfactory, (when
we come to their proper place) and he so slightly attacks, as you have seen,
our main Evidence the Ipse panis and vinum transmutantur in corpus and
Sanguinem Dei. Nec quicquam nobis amplius perspectum and exploratum est quam
quod verbum Dei verum est and efficax, atque omnipotens. S. Johan. Damascen.
lib. 3. Orthodox. fidei. c. 14.
proper Sense of our Lords words as hardly to bring the face of an Argument
against it: So we Read that a Humorsom Caligula.
Emperor, when he came to invade Great Britain, only gathered Cockles, and yet
for this he demanded Triumph in a Letter to his Senators, thinking his
Shell-spoils worthy Offerings for the Capitol.

We have one Request now to make to those who oppose the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, That because it is necessary for an Answerer to know
distinctly what the Persons mean to whom he is to make an Answer, they would
deal sincerely with us; and since we have told them in what Sense every word in
the Proposition This is my Body is taken by us, and how the Catholic Church
does necessarily infer Transubstantiation from them, they would now deal as
heartily with us, and tell us, as plainly, as we have done, how they understand
each of these words. I have reason to entreat this favor of them, because
although they seem sometimes to maintain only a Vertual not Real Presence of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament, which Opinion of theirs I have chiefly opposed
in the Ensuing Answer; yet at othertimes they See p. 11. In the Discourse
against Transubstantiation, Edit. Londini, 1684.
( and even the Discourser himself) readily acknowledge a Great Supernatural
change to be made by the Divine Benediction, and the Author of the Page 102.
Expostulatory Letter has a Reserved Distinction, of Christ's Natural and
Spiritual Flesh and Blood, seeming to allow that Christ has a Spiritual Body
in the Sacrament: We know not but that he intends the same, which the Learned
Author of a Brief Discourse of the Real Presence has lately given us of two
Bodies of Christ, A Brief Discourse of the Real Presence, Printed 1686. and
Licensed by Guil. Needham Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Domest.
the one Natural in which he was Crucified, the other Spiritual belonging to
him, as he is the Eternal Logos, in whom is the (...), Life or Spirit, which
goes along with the Divine Body of this Life or Spirit of Christ, and
consequently is rightly called his Body. For this, he grounds himself upon that
earnest lofty and sublime Discourse ( as he calls it) of our Savior in the
6th. Chapter of St. John, confessing ingenuously, that it seems to him
incredible, that under so lofty, mysterious a style, and earnest asseverations
of what he affirms, though to the scandal both of the Jews, and his own
Disciples, there should not be couched some most weighty and profound Truth
concerning some Real Flesh and Blood of his, touching which this vehement and
sublime Discourse is framed. pa. 40. And than again, pa. 42. and 43. It is
plain, says he, that our Saviors Discourse in that Chapter, has for its Object
or Subject, not the manner or way of receiving his Body and Blood, as if meant
of that very Body and Blood on the Cross, to be received in a Spiritual manner,
which Interpreters several of them ( meaning of the Reformers) drive at, and
which he thinks would be a very dilute and frigid Sense of such high and fervid
asseverations of our Savior; but the Object of his Discourse, says he, is his
very Flesh and Blood it self, to be taken (as the Fish and Loaves were
wherewith he lately fed them;) or it is himself in reference to his Flesh and
Blood, which belongs to him as he is the Eternal Logos. Thus evidently did our
Savior seem to this Learned Man, to speak all along to the very end of his
Discourse, of a Really Eating his Flesh and Drinking his Blood; and not of the
manner of Eating, as if it never came nigh them, but only they thought of Flesh
and Blood, God knows how far distant from them, and so Eat the human Flesh of
Christ by mere thinking of it, and Drank his Blood after the same imaginary
manner. Thus to avoid the Catholic Tenent of Transubstantiation ( which he
could bear no more than the Jews) and yet verify the Words of Christ's Bodies
being received verily and indeed, and such other Expressions found in the
Catechism and Homelies of the Church of England ( which he thought himself
bound to maintain) he was driven to distinguish a double Body of Christ, the
one Human and Natural, the other Spiritual and Divine, but both Real, as has
been said before. Good God, what Chimera's will not a mind preoccupated with
Error, frame to it self rather than submit to the Truth!

Luther indeed tells us of about ten Opinions of the Sacramentarians in his
time; and a Book was Published in the Year, 1527, in which were reckoned no less
than 200 several Expositions of the Sense of these words; Hoc est Corpus meum;
This is my Body. What we would gladly know of our ADversaries with whom we have
now to deal, is, which of these (now two hundred and one) Opinions, it is that
they maintain, or whether they have any other yet in store (for Error has no
End) different from all these. For surely after all, they must be forced to
allow, that there is but one True Sense of our Saviors Words, viz. either that
it is his very true Substantial Body, which is taken and received, or a figure
only, what virtue soever they please to assign to it. If the former, they fall
in with the Catholics, or Viz. The Author of the Brief Discourse, etc. cited
supra.
Dr. Moors Tenet; if the latter, what Virtue soever they assign to a Figure, it
is not the Real Body, nor the Body Really Present. Let them speak plain, that
the World may understand them: The Faithful are not to be deluded with
Ambiguities in a Point of so great concern to their Immortal Souls.

Reader, be pleased to observe concerning the manner and Method of the Ensuing
Treatise and Answer, that the Discourse against Transubstantiation is
faithfully here reprinted Section by Section, and a Reply made to the Sections
in their Order. Also, that because the Discourser against Transubstantiation
would delude unwary Christians by making them believe, that Catholics have no
proof for this Doctrine from Scripture, this first Part which is chiefly
concerning Scripture Authority is published by it self, to be considered
distinctly; to which in convenient time, the Second Part is to be added.

Some ERRATA'S to be Corrected.
Page 18. in Marg. for Preface read Introduction. p. 27. last line read under
the species p. 42. in the Hebrew Citation, read (...) bis p. 60. read Relics.
Observe that in the Marginal Notes. p. 43. 56, 58, 63. the word, infra, has
relation to the Second Part of the Answer, which is not yet Published.

Transubstantiation DEFENDED: In Answer to a Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse
against Transubstantiation.
DISCOURSE.
Concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, one of the two great positive
Institutions of the Christian Religion, there are two main Points of difference
between Us and the Church of Rome. One, about the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; in which they think, but are not certain, that they have
the Scripture and the words of our Savior on their side: The other, about the
administration of this Sacrament to the People, in both kinds; in which we are
sure that we have the Scripture and our Savior's Institution on our side; and
that so plainly, that our Adversaries themselves do not deny it.

ANSWER.
COncerning the Sacrament of Union, Our Adversary does not rightly State the
Point.
the Lord's Supper; which is the chief of those several positive Institutions
of Religion which Christ has Ordained in his Church, there are many great
differences even between Protestants themselves; it is no wonder therefore if
there are as many between Protestants and Catholics: Of these the Author gives
two instances, the one about the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the other
about the Administration of this Sacrament to the People in both kinds: As for
that of Transubstantiation, he would have done well to have told us, in what
supposition he means to take the Word in his Discourse. If he suppose the True,
Real and Substantial Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and take the
Word Transubstantiation precisely, as it signifies that Presence, not with the
Bread, but by it is being changed into his Body, this is a difference indeed,
and the only proper one in this supposition, between him and Catholics, in this
matter: But then if he would have proceeded sincerely, and as one that was
really Master of so much sense as he talks of in this Treatise, he should have
held to his Point, and not impugned what he supposes; but if he suppose no such
Real or Substantial Presence of Christ's Body, and under the name of
Transubstantiation fight expressly against the Real Presence, through his whole
Discourse, as it is evident he does, (and therefore ought to have called it a
Discourse against the Real Presence, and it is consequence Transubstantiation,
and not a Discourse only, against Transubstantiation;) then the difference is
not only as he would make it with the Catholics, but with the Lutherans also,
and those of his own Communion, See two Discourses concerning the Adoration of
our B. Savior in the Sacrament Printed at Oxford, 1687.
as King James, Bishop Andrews, Mr. Thorndike, and many others who professed to
believe the Body of Christ to be present in the Sacrament no less truly than
Catholics do. But however he compose this difference with them, yet the
Catholics, as for their Tenent, do not think only, as he says, but are certain,
as I shall show in the Process of this Discourse, that they have the Words of
our Savior, which they do not doubt to be Scripture, on their side. And for
the other Point, viz. the Administration of the Sacrament in both kinds, they
are sure that neither he, nor any of his party have, or ever can prove from the
Scripture and our Saviors Institution, that he laid a Command upon all the
Faithful to receive it always in both kinds, and this they constantly affirm.
But before I leave this Paragraph, I cannot but desire the Reader to take
notice of two things, first, That how sure soever the Author makes himself,
that he has the Scripture and our Saviors Institution on his side, yet his
good friend Dr. Tillotson in his Rule of Faith, Page 1. 8.
which he makes Scripture only to be, speaking in his own Name, and that of his
Party, says: We are not Infallibly certain, that any Book (for example S.
Matthew or any other of the Evangelists,) is so Ancient as it pretends to be,
or that it was Written by him whose Name it bears, or that this is the sense of
such and such passages in it, it is possible all this may be otherwise. The
second is, how high soever he talk of the Catholics not being certain, and his
own being sure, of having the Scripture for them, yet he does not vouchsafe to
tell us what he means by that Word, viz. whether express Texts, or deductions
only. If express Texts: Let him produce one, if he can, for that new Article of
his Creed, (a Creed much younger than that of Pope Pius the fourth) I do
believe that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Lord's Supper, or in
the Elements of Bread and Wine, etc. If Deductions only, Why may not the
Catholics, who have the express Words of Scripture, that it is his Body, infer
as surely from thence, that there is a change in the Elements of Bread and
Wine, as the Protestants, who have no such express Text, that it is not his
Body, can do to prove, that there is no change?

DISCOURSE.
Of the first of these I shall now treat, and endeavor to show against the
Church of Rome, That in this Sacrament there is no substantial change made of
the Elements of Bread and Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ; that
Body which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross; for so
they explain that hard word Transubstantiation.

ANSWER.
Of the former of these I shall now treat, What is meant by Transubstantiation.
and endeavor to vindicate the Catholic Church, which declares it as an
Article of Faith, that by Virtue of Consecration in the Sacrament, there is a
Conversion made of the whole substance of the Bread into the substance of the
Body of our Lord, and of the whole substance of the Wine into the substance of
his Blood, which Conversion she conveniently and properly calls
Transubstantiation, a S. Augustine. Putaverunt quod praecisurus esset Dominus
particulas quasdam de corpore suo and daturus illis, and dixerunt, durus est
hic sermo, ipsi erant duri, non sermo. in Psalm. 98. adorate scabellum, etc.
hard word indeed to those who will not believe the great Mystery expressed by
it.

DISCOURSE.
Before I engage in this Argument, I cannot but observe what an unreasonable
task we are put upon, by the bold confidence of our Adversaries, to dispute a
matter of Sense; which is one of those things about which Aristotle has long
since pronounced there ought to be no dispute.

ANSWER.
Before I engage in this Argument, The argument from sense showed to be
senseless.
I cannot but observe what an unreasonable task we are put upon by the bold
confidence of our Adversary, not to dispute a matter of sense, (since upon this
all parties are agreed, that there ought to be no dispute;) but to Answer all
the absurdities, which the Author is engaged in by espousing false principles,
and among the rest as the chief, that Sense can judge of the internal nature or
substance of things: For, all that is the proper object of Sense, that is, the
species, or outward accidents of Bread and Wine, are allowed to be present in
the Sacrament by all Catholics as well as Separatists: And we strangely admire,
that he should not remember that Rule of his Master Aristotle, which every
young Scholar learns, in the beginning of his Logic, that Substantia non
incurrit in sensus; Substance is not the object of sense. From whence it is
apparent to all Men that have the use of their Reason, that all the Authors
cracking confidence upon this Argument, is founded upon a vulgar Error slily
insinuated, that Catholics believe that which they Quod vidistis panis est and
calix, quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renunciant, quod autem fides vestra
postulat instruenda, panis est corpus Christi, and calix Sanguis ejus.
Augustinus Sermon ad infant.
see in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, to be the substance of the Body and
Blood of Christ. But lest any should be deceived with this popular Argument,
and take up a prejudice against us as in good reason they may, since they are
made to believe that we would persuade them out of their Senses; I shall be so
far from endeavoring to do this, as the Author fondly imagins all Catholics
do; that rather out of a deep sentiment of gratitude to the great God of
Nature, who has so fearfully and wonderfully made these Bodies of ours, I
shall freely acknowledge that the Senses do not deceive us at all. For the
deception does not lie, at any time, in the Senses, but in the Judgment, and
the Senses do always give true hints to the mind, when their Organs and the
Medium are rightly disposed, and they are employed about their proper and
adequate Objects. What we may certainly conclude from the goodness and veracity
of God, is, that he will not deceive Man, the Creature that he loves, and
therefore usually those objects which are represented to him by his Senses, as
having relation to the conservation of his Body, are of such and such a
determinate substance, as the outward and sensible accidents do hint them to be
of. So that he is not mistaken in them, unless he judge rashly, and then too
there are means provided by which he may correct his Error. Thus the substance
of Fire is generally represented under the species or usual form of Fire: Of a
Dove under the usual form or likness of a Dove: (So that we may allow in this
manner, that ordinarily the substance does incur into the mind through the
Senses, by means of the accidents, but it is certain that the Senses cannot
judge either of the substance or accidents.) Therefore God who is the Author of
Nature, and can change it, when he pleases, that Man may not be deceived in
this kind, does usually inform him, when he makes any substantial change, of
this Nature, in his Creatures, which is above the reason of Man to comprehend,
from any hints made by his senses, as being truly Miraculous. Thus, when the
Holy Ghost appeared in the form of a Dove, Man was informed by God, that it was
really the Holy Ghost in substance of Nature, and not a Dove. When the same
Holy Spirit descended upon the Apostles in the Visible appearance of Cloven
Tongues of Fire; they had notice from Heaven, that this was truly that Holy
Spirit which came in this Visible shape. When Angels appeared in the forms of
Men; they had it revealed to them, that they were, notwithstanding, Angels.
When our Lord presented himself to his Disciples under the species of Bread, he
told them plainly, that it was his Body. To show which Revelation to have been
made, from the Authority of Holy Scripture and Fathers, will be the subject of
the ensuing Discourse: This which I have here said, being fully conclusive
against the Argument of sense's being properly the Judge of substance. And now
who is it that abuses the senses, the Author, or Catholics? He, by applying
them to judge of substance, which is an object that is no way adequate to them,
would make them to deceive Men. We, employing them about their proper objects,
which are here the accidents, or outward species of Bread and Wine, which, as
by them we are convinced, do still remain after Consecration, prove the Miracle
from sense; because at the same time that these appear, the understanding,
being enlightened by Faith, discerns the true and real substance of Christ's
Body, to be veiled under them, which makes the thing truly Miraculous. To
employ therefore the senses about their true and adequate objects, and the mind
about those which are proper to it, is rational: But to advance sense above
reason, and even Faith it self; the Beast above the Man, and the Christian too,
as the Author does, is such a piece of stupidity, as is not to be paralleled.

DISCOURSE.
It might well seem strange if any Man should write a Book, to prove that an
Egg is not an Elephant, and that a Musketbullet is not a Pike: It is every whit
as hard a case, to be put to maintain by a long Discourse, that what we see and
handle and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not the Body of a Man; and what we
see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood: And if this evidence may not
pass for sufficient without any farther proof, I do not see why any Man, that
has confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what all the
World sees it is; or affirm any thing to be what all the World sees it is not;
and this without all possibility of being farther confuted. So that the
business of Transubstantiation is not a controversy of Scripture against
Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the
plain meaning of Scripture, and all the Sense and Reason of Mankind.

ANSWER
Here the Author, The Catholic Faith ridiculd by the Adversary.
like another Lucian renouncing the Christian Faith, begins to ridicule the
most Sacred Mystery of our Religion. I confess I am very unwilling to follow
him in such dirty way as he takes. It is not at all suitable to the
retiredness, wherein our Devout minds should be entertained, when we conceive
of a thing so truly Divine, to speak slightly. I must entreat therefore the
Candid Reader, to abstract his thoughts wholly from the Blessed Sacrament, at
such time as any of this froth is cast back again upon the Author, which I
heartily wish he had spared me the pains of doing; and that he had kept his Egg
and his Elephant to himself: The Analogy would have been more easily made out
by those, who maintain that Grace, and Virtue are the Body and Blood of Christ
verily and indeed received (for so an Egg is vertually at least an Elephant, if
according to the principle of the Philosopher, Omnia animalia generantur ex
ovo; every Animal is generated out of an Egg) then by such as hold with the
Catholic Church, that the Sacrament is not Bread and Wine, but what verily and
indeed it is, the Real Body and Blood of Christ. Now, how to change a
Musket-bullet into a Pike, I confess I know not; The Dragoons better understand
that piece of Martial exercise. Howsoever, I must needs acknowledge with the
Author, that it seems strange, that any Man should write a Book, to prove that
an Egg is not an Elephant, and that a Musket-bullet is not a Pike; therefore it
is a thousand pities, that so curious a Wit as his, should be concerned in so
absurd an enterprise as he believes his to be. And yet, Good God, what will not
the confident presumption of some Men put them upon! he undertakes a task fully
as impossible to be performed as that; and of infinitely more dangerous
consequence, to prove that not to be, which by the power of God, is really made
to be in the Sacrament. The Author knows, that the Catholic Church grounds this
wonderful change, made in the Elements, upon Divine Revelation, which depends
upon the Veracity of God: So that it will not be so very hard a case, to
maintain by a discourse much shorter than this of the Author, even our Lords
Words of Institution, that what we see, and handle, and taste as Bread, is not
Bread in substance, but the Body of Christ; and what we see and taste as Wine,
is not Wine in substance, but the Blood of our Savior. And if this evidence
may not pass for sufficient without any further proof, I do not see why any
Man, that has confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what
all the World sees it is, or affirm any thing to be what all the World sees it
is not, (since the Word of God is more Infallible than our senses) and this
without all possibility of being farther confuted; for, he that denies the
Veracity of God, can no ways conclude his senses to be veracious. The denial
then of the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, is not a Controversy of
Scripture against Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright
impudence against the plain meaning of Scripture, and all the sense and reason
of Mankind.

DISCOURSE.
It is a most Self-evident Falsehood; and there is no Doctrine or Proposition in
the World that is of it self more evidently true, than Transubstantiation is
evidently false: And yet if it were possible to be true, it would be the most
ill natured and pernicious truth in the World, because it would suffer nothing
else to be true; it is like the Roman-Catholic Church, which will needs be the
whole Christian Church, and will allow no other Society of Christians to be any
part of it: So Transubstantiation, if it be true at all, it is all truth; for
it cannot be true unless our Senses and the Senses of all Mankind be deceived
about their proper objects; and if this be true and certain, then nothing else
can be so; for if we be not certain of what we see, we can be certain of
nothing.

ANSWER.
The Doctrine of the real Presence or Transubstantiation is a Truth that is
evident upon the Authority of the Revealer; The Real Presence depends on Gods
Veracity.
and there is no Opinion that the Author holds is more evidently false, than
this is evidently true: For Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.
1. and the best natured truth in the World it is, which conveys us infinite
blessings: Which unless it be so, we have no reason to believe any thing else
to be true; a Truth like that of the Catholic Church, which, unless it be that
which has lived in Communion with, and just obedience to her chief Pastors,
especially St. Peter and his lawful Successors in the Sea of Rome, then there
has been no true Church upon the face of the Earth: For so the real Presence
or Transubstantiation, unless it be true, we cannot be assured of any truth: It
must be so if God be veracious, that is, unless what he reveals be false; since
the very truth of our Senses, and all our Faculties, depends upon his Veracity;
and if we be not certain of what he has revealed, though it seem to contradict
our Senses, we are certain of nothing.

DISCOURSE.
And yet notwithstanding all this, there is a Company of men in the World so
abandoned and given up by God to the efficacy of delusion, as in good earnest
to believe this gross and palpable Error, and to impose the belief of it upon
the Christian World under no less penalties than of temporal death and eternal
damnation. And therefore to undeceive, if possible, these deluded Souls, it
will be necessary to examine the pretended grounds of so false a Doctrine, and
to lay open the monstrous Absurdity of it.

ANSWER.
And yet notwithstanding all this, No-transubstantiation an Article of Faith
with our Adversaries, and established with Penalties.
there is a Sect of men in the World, so abandoned and given up by God to the
efficacy of delusion, as confidently to deny this revealed truth, and to impose
this strange Negative Article of Faith of theirs, That in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at or after Consecration by any person
whatsoever, under no less penalties, than the temporal loss of their Estates
and Livelihoods, See the Penal Laws and Tests.
the loss of their Lives, the formal renouncing of the Catholic Faith and
Religion, which is dearer to them than their Lives, and consequently Eternal
damnation. Therefore to undeceive, (which we hope is possible) these deluded
Souls, it will be necessary to show the real grounds upon which
Transubstantiation is built, that so the monstrous absurdity of the contrary
Doctrine may be made to appear.

DISCOURSE.
And in the handling of this Argument, I shall proceed in this plain method.

I. I shall consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine.

II. I shall produce our Objections against it. And if I can show that there is
no tolerable ground for it, and that there are invincible Objections against
it, then every man is not only in reason excused from believing this Doctrine,
but has great cause to believe the contrary.

FIRST, I will consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine. Which must be one or more of these five. Either 1st. The
Authority of Scripture. Or 2ly. The perpetual belief of this Doctrine in the
Christian Church, as an evidence that they always understood and interpreted
our Savior's words, This is my Body, in this Sense. Or 3ly. The Authority of
the present Church to make and declare new Articles of Faith. Or 4ly. The
absolute necessity of such a change as this in the Sacrament, to the comfort
and benefit of those who receive this Sacrament, Or 5ly. To magnify the power
of the Priest, in being able to work so great a Miracle.

1st. They pretend for this Doctrine the Authority of Scripture in those words
of our Savior. This is my Body. Now to show the insufficiency of this
pretense, I shall endeavor to make good these two things.

1. That there is no necessity of understanding those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation.

2. That there is a great deal of reason to understand them otherwise.

ANSWER.
In the handling of this Argument I shall proceed in this plain method. The
Method of the ensuing Discourse.


I. I shall consider the solid grounds and reasons of the Catholic Church for
this Doctrine.

II. I shall weigh the Objections which the Author makes against it. And if I
can show that there is a real ground for it, and that the Objections against it
are weak, and inconsiderable, then every man is not only in reason obliged to
believe it, but has great cause to reject the contrary.

First, I shall consider the solid grounds and reasons of the Catholic Church
for this Doctrine. Which are at least these five. 1st. The Authority of
Scripture. 2ly. The perpetual belief of this Doctrine in the Christian Church,
as an evidence that they always understood and interpreted our Saviors words,
This is my Body, in this Sense. Or 3ly. The Authority of the Church in every
Age to declare, propose, and exhibit, when, by misinterpretation of Heretics,
they are forced to it, a more explicit Sense of the Ancient Articles of our
Faith. Or 4ly. The infinite Mercy and condescension of God to operate such a
change as this, for the comfort and benefit of those who receive this
Sacrament. Or 5ly. The just dignity of the Priest, whom God is pleased to make
use of as his Minister for the working so miraculous a change.

1st. The Catholic Church has always grounded the Doctrine of the Real Presence
or Transubstantiation upon the Authority of Divine Revelation in these words of
our Savior, This is my Body. Now to show the validity of this Proof I shall
endeavor to make good these two things.

I. That there is a necessity of understanding these words of our Savior in
the Sense of the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation. From whence it will
necessarily follow,

II. That there is no reason at all for the understanding them otherwise.

DISCOURSE.
First, That there is no necessity to understand those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation. If there be any, it must be from one of these
two Reasons. Either because there are no figurative expressions in Scripture,
which I think no man ever yet said: or else, because a Sacrament admits of no
figures; which would be very absurd for any man to say, since it is of the very
nature of a Sacrament to represent and exhibit some invisible grace and benefit
by an outward sign and figure: And especially since it cannot be denied, but
that in the institution of this very Sacrament our Savior uses figurative
expressions and several words which cannot be taken strictly and literally.
When he gave the Cup, he said, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which
is shed for you and for many for the remission of Sins. Where first, the Cup is
put for Wine contained in the Cup; or else if the words by literally taken, so
as to signify a substantial change, it is not of the Wine but of the Cup; and
that, not into the Blood of Christ, but into the New Testament, or new Covenant
in his Blood. Besides, that his Blood is said then to be shed, and his Body to
be broken, which was not till his Passion, which followed the Institution and
first celebration of this Sacrament.

ANSWER.
First, The necessity of understanding our Lords words in the Sense of the Real
Presence.
That there is a necessity of understanding those words of our Savior in the
Sense of the Real Presence or Transubstantiation, For these two Reasons. 1.
Because although there be many figurative expressions in Scripture, which all
men allow, yet this, in relation to the Case in hand, is not such. 2. Although
a Sacrament admits of Figures, which no man is so absurd as to deny, since it
is of the very nature of a Sacrament, to represent and exhibit some invisible
grace and benefit by an outward Sign and Figure; Yet the Figure does not lie
where the Author pretends it does. The Rule which men ought to observe in their
discourse in relation to Figures is this, That a Figure should not be used
which the Auditor does not easily apprehend to be so. To compare, therefore, a
Figure, which all the World can easily understand to be so, with an expression
which no man can Construe to be a Figure, according to the Rules of human
Discourse, is very absurd: Yet such is the Authors instance from Scripture.
From whence he alleges, that when our Savior gave the Cup, he said, This Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed, (or more properly poured out)
for you, and for many, for the remission of Sins. Did not our Lord plainly read
in the minds of his Disciples, that, by the Cup, they would understand, that
which was contained in the Cup? If any one should advise the Author, when he is
thirsty, to drink off his Glass, would he be so inconsiderate as to swallow it
together with the Wine? Nay further, so unhappy is the Author, as to urge this
instance of holy Scripture in the first place, which alone is enough fully to
clear the Point against him. Neither the Apostles, nor any men else could be so
ignorant of the manner of human discourse, as not to apprehend, that our
Savior, by the Cup, meant what was contained in it, which was most certainly
Christ's Blood; for otherwise it could not be said of it, as it is Luke 22. 20.
that it was then poured out for the Apostles, and for many, for the remission
of Sins: it is said, is poured out, in the Present Tense; not, shall be poured
out, in the Future; therefore here can be meant, only the Blood of Christ, as
now poured out in the Sacrament for them, not as it was afterward shed from
his Crucified Body upon the ground. Luke 22. 20.
The Original runs thus, (...): Where in construction (...) agrees with (...),
and not with (...). And Wine as a Figure only of Christ's Blood, or signifying
its virtue, could not be poured out for the remission of Sins: You might with
more congruity of Speech, affirm of an Image of the Blessed Virgin, hoc
Simulachrum est virgo quod filium Dei peperit.
This is that which conceived the Son of God; because in this there is some
plain resemblance to the Prototype. Beza a great Critic, in his way, though an
Adversary to the Catholic Doctrine in this Point, not being able to deny this
Proof, would rather have the Scripture to be thought false, although that be
the whole Foundation of their Faith, than change his Opinion; and says, that
it is a Solecophanes.
Solecism, and should be (...): He concludes that the holy Spirit, or St. Luke,
that divinely inspired Penman, the most eloquent of all the Evangelists, could
be sooner mistaken, though in a matter of so great moment, than himself; or
else he would have the Scripture to be falsified, and corrupt, in this place,
and not himself. For he acknowledges that all the ancient Manuscripts which he
had seen, and even his own, which was of great Authority, and of venerable
Antiquity, venerandae Antiquitatis, together with the Syriac Version, to which
he gives this Elogy, that it was deservedly accounted to be of greatest
authority, maximae merito authoritatis, did conspire together, to refer the
effusion of Blood to the Cup. The Author, therefore, and all that separate from
the Catholic Church in this Point, must either, at last, be forced to confess
here, as Contra Westphal: Hoc quidem saepe diximus, quod nunc quoque repetam,
retineri reipsa non posse, (...) in his Christi verbis, hoc est corpus meum
quin Transubstantiatio papistica stauatur.
Beza does concerning those words of our Lord, This is my Body, That this
saying thus expressed cannot be retained, but it must prove Transubstantiation,
after the manner of the Papists; or else that the Holy Scripture, the
Foundation of Christian Faith, is made invalid: So that it is plain from what
has been said, that the Cup is here put for what is contained in the Cup, and
that the words, so taken, do signify, and operate a substantial Change, not of
the Cup, but of the Wine in the Cup; Compare
and that, not into the New Testament, or Covenant, but into the Blood of
Christ, in which this New Covenant, or Testament is made, sealed and confirmed.
Besides, that his Blood is said, here, then to be poured out, and his Body,
then to be broken, and given for us, which they could not be unless they were
then really in the Sacrament; because the Passion, (wherein Joh. 19. 36. A bone
of him shall not be broken, with 1 Cor. 11. 24. This is my Body which is broken
for you Which gave occasion to St. Chrysostom to say of Christ, that that
which he did not suffer upon the Cross for the love of thee, he suffers in the
Eucharist: This is my Body which is broken for you.
his Body was peirced only, not broken, as in the Sacrament, and his Blood was
shed from his Crucified Body upon the ground, not only poured forth from one
Vessel to another, and drunk as in the Sacrament,) followed the Institution and
first Celebration of this Sacrament.

DISCOURSE.
But that there is no necessity to understand our Savior's words in the sense
of Transubstantiation, I will take the plain concession of a great number of
the most learned Writers of the Church of Rome in this Controversy. de Euch.
l. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmin, in 3 dis. 49. Qu. 75. Sect. 2.
Suarez and in 3 part. disp. 180. Qu. 75. art. 2. c. 5.
Vasques do acknowledge Scotus the great Schoolman to have said that this
Doctrine cannot be evidently proved from Scripture: And Bellarmin grants this
not to be improbable; and Suarez and Vasques acknowledge in Sent. l. 4. did.
11. Qu. 1. n. 15.
Durandus to have said as much. in 4 Sent. Qu. 5 and Quodl. 4. Qu 3.
Ocham, another famous Schoolman, says expressly, that the Doctrine which holds
the Substance of the Bread and Wine to remain after Consecration is neither
repugnant to Reason nor to Scripture. in 4 Sent. Qu. 6. art. 2.
Petrus ab Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambrey, says plainly, That the Doctrine of the
Substance of Bread and Wine remaining after Consecration is more easy, and
free from Absurdity, more rational and no ways repugnant to the Authority of
Scripture; nay more, that for the other Doctrine, viz. of Transubstantiation,
there is no evidence in Scripture. In canon Miss. Lect. 40.
Gabriel Biel, another great Schoolman and Divine of their Church, freely
declares, that as to any thing expressed in the Canon of the Scriptures, a man
may believe that the substance of Bread and Wine does remain after
Consecration: and therefore he resolves the belief of Transubstantiation into
some other Revelation besides Scripture, which he supposes the Church had
about it. Cardinal In Aquin. 3 part. Qu. 75. art. 1.
Cajetan confesses that the Gospel does no where express that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ; that we have this from the Authority of the
Church: Nay, he goes farther, That there is nothing in the Gospel which
enforces any man to understand these words of Christ, this is my Body, in a
proper and not a metaphorical Sense; but the Church having understood them in a
proper Sense, they are to be so explained: Which words in the Roman Edition of
Cajetan are expunged by order of Pope AEgid. Conink. de Sacram. Q. 75 art. 1 n.
13.
Pius V. Cardinal de Sacram. l. 2 c. 3.
Contarenus, and Loc. Theolog. l. 3. c 3.
Melchior Canus one of the best and most judicious Writers that Church ever
had, reckon this Doctrine among those which are not so expressly found in
Scripture. I will add but one more, of great authority in the Church, and a
reputed Martyr, Contra cajtiv. Babylon c 10. n. 2.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, who ingenuously confesses, that in the words of
the Institution there is not one word from whence the true Presence of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ in our Mass can be proved: So that we need not much
contend, that this Doctrine has no certain foundation in Scripture, when this
is so fully and frankly acknowledged by our Adversaries themselves.

ANSWER.
The Author has had very little Success yet, The Sense of the Schoolmen
corrupted and their problematical Discourse mistaken for their Conclusion by
the Adversary.
in that, which he calls, a Discourse against Transubstantiation; therefore
because he would now do some Execution, he is forced to come down to his
Adversaries to sharpen his blunt Weapons. Which, notwithstanding will prove no
advantage to his Cause. He here, then, tells us in his first Period, That he
will take the plain Concession of a great number of the most Learned Writers of
the Church of Rome in this Controversy, that there is NO necessity to
understand our Savior's Words in the Sense of Transubstantiation. But what if
it manifestly appear from the Words of these Writers, that he takes this by
force, which they never gave him; since they all thought themselves bound to
accept the Words in that Sense which they acknowledge the Church to have given
of them, as deducible from Scripture by necessary Consequence, though not so
plainly proved from the bare Words, considered by themselves, as you shall see
from their Authorities hereunder cited? Then he proceeds, like a false
Mustermaster, to make up the number of his List, by calling Men that are not in
it, to answer to other Names than their own. See all the Citations above in the
Margent of the Author's last Section as they are placed in order.
Bellarmin, Suarez, and Vasquez do acknowledge Scotus, etc. Again, Bellarmin
grants this not to be improbable; and Suarez and Vasquez acknowledge Durandus
to have said as much. Here they are wheeled about a second time to make the
greater Show; yet there are but two Men in effect after all this calling. The
Author says, Bellarmin, and Suarez, and Vasquez say, Such a Man said such a
Thing: Why, such a blundering sort of an Evidence would be flung out of any
inferior Court of Judicature; it faulters so manifestly at the very beginning,
that we may assure our selves it can never speak clearly. Let us see therefore
what Si dicas, quod Christus, dicendo, hoc est corpus meum, express instru it
panem non remanere, quia tunc esset propesitio falsa, hoc non cogit, quia dato
quod substantia panis maneret, non demonstratur substantia panis, sed contentum
sub pane; sicut modo. monstrantur accidentia, quia tunc esset propositio falsa,
sed est sensus, hoc quod erit contentum sub signo sensibili est corpus meum.
Scotus says for himself; his Words are these: If you say that Christ, by
saying This is my Body, does plainly teach us, that the Bread does not remain,
for then the Proposition would be false; this is not cogent: for supposing (so
that it is but a Supposition still) the Substance of Bread did still remain, the
Substance of Bread is not demonstrated here, but what is contained under the
Bread, as now the Accidents are showed, for then the Proposition would be
false; but the Sense is, that which shall be contained under this sensible
Sign, is my Body. Mark, how much Scotus favors the Author's Opinion of the
Senses being Judges of what is in the Sacrament. Again he says, Scotus ubi
supra. Ponitur veritas aliquorum credendorum magis explicit quam hibeatur in
Symbolo Apostolorum, vel Athanasii, vel Nicaeno, and breviter quicquid ibi
dicitur esse crederdum tenendum est de substantia fidei, and hoc post illam
declarationem solemnem factum ab Ecclesia -- Dico quod eo sensu expesitae sunt
Scripturae quo conditie. -- Et ideo hunc intellectum eligit, quia verus est;
non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere istud verum vel non verum, sed Dei
instituentis; s^d intellectum a Deo traditum Ecclesia explicuit, etc.
The truth of some things that are to be believed, is more explicitly set down
than in the Apostolic, Athanasian, or Nicene Creed; and in brief, whatsoever is
(by the Catholic Church) proposed to our Belief, is to be held of the substance
of Faith, after a solemn Declaration made by the Church; he gives the Reason
afterward, Because the Scriptures are Expounded by the same Spirit by which
they were made: And thus he concludes, telling us in plain terms, That the
Church therefore chose this Sense of Transubstantiation, because it is true;
for it was not in the Power of the Church to make it true or false, but of God
Instituting it: But the Church Explained the Sense which was delivered by God.
And if it be so, that Transubstantiation was the true Sense, and that before
the Declaration of the Council, then there was a necessity to understand our
Savior's Words in the Sense of Transubstantiation, according to Scotus, as
well before as after the Council, since 'twas the Sense delivered by God.
Therefore when the Author says he has the plain Concession of a great number
of the most Learned Writers of the Church of Rome, reckoning Scotus in the
first place, that there is NO necessity to understand our Savior's Words in
the Sense of Transubstantiation, he says that which is not true. Bellarmin
indeed grants what Scotus said of the substance of Bread remaining
(notwithstanding its being converted into the substance of Christ's Body, as I
shall presently show) that it is not ALTOGETHER improbable, Non omnino
improbabile, although there may be great Improbability in the thing
notwithstanding, (mark the Omnino, Altogether.
Word which the Author is pleased to leave out) that there is no place of
Scripture extant so express, as that, without the Declration of the Church
(which notwithstanding clears the whole matter) can evidently compel us to
admit of Transubstantiation, viz. in the Sense of the Thomists, whose way of
Explication of it is somewhat different from Scotus's. But that not being of
Faith, there ought to be no Controversy about it, and therefore the Sea the
Preface (...) this Discourse.
Council of Trent directly Condemned neither of these Ways. And Durandus Tria
solid ponit. Primo, quod substantia panis and vini convertitur in substantiam
corporis Christi. Secundo, quod mediante tali conversione corpus and sanguis
Christi virtute Divina habent talem ordinem seu harbitudinem ad species, sub
quibus fuerunt panis and vinum quod sunt eis r^aliter praesentes. Tertio, quod
quamvis ille modus sit de facto, non est tamen negan lum quin alius modus sit
Deo possibilis: concluding for the first he gives his reasons for it: 1. In his
quae sunt fidei non est semper eligendum illud ad quod sequuntur pauciores
difficultates, etc. 2. Quod illud solum efficitur in hoc Sacramento
principaliter, quod significatur per formam verborum. -- utrumque efficitur in
hoc Sacramento, scilicet Existentia corporis Christi and conversio panis.
Durandus himself after he has Discoursed Problematically upon the Point, like
a Schoolman, at last concludes solidly: That that is not always to be chosen in
matters of Faith, which has fewest difficulties consequent to it -- That the
substance of Bread and Wine is changed into the substance of Christ's Body: That
that only is principally effected in this Sacrament, which is signified by the
form of the words, viz. of Consecration. Which Argument being urged by him from
Scripture for Transubstantiation, is a plain Evidence that he did not deny the
necessity of understanding our Saviors words in that Sense: For he concludes
positively from Scripture, that both these things are made to be in this
Sacrament, viz. The Existence of the Body of Christ and the Conversion of the
Bread into it: And what is this but Transubstantiation? Therefore what the
Authors abovementioned say concerning Scotus and Durandus, is to be applied
rather to their particular manner of explicating the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, than to the thing it self, since many So he that writes the
Scholia upon this Author, ib. n. 13. Vana sunt ergo quae ex hoc Suarez and
Sotus objiciunt contra Scotum, cui falso imponit Sotas, quod asserat Ecclesiam
accepisse Transubstantiationem a Doctoribus. Vid. etiam Card. Peron. De his
auctoritatibus.
other Authors do not think them to be mistaken in the Point.

Ochamus. In altari est vera transubstantiatio corporis Christi, sed hoc potest
multis modis poni. Vno modo ponendo quod remaneat ibi substantia panis, and cum
hoc quod corpus Christi coexistit substantiae illi, ita quod prima substantia
sit deserens accidentia, Secunda non, sed tantum coexistens: alio modo quod
recedat substantia panis subito de illo loco ad alium locum, and remaneant
accidentia, and eis coexistat corpus Christi. Tertio, quod redigatur in
materiam per se stantem, viz. aliam formam recipientem, and hoc sive in eodem
sive in alio, and tunc illi materiae and accidentibus coexistat corpus Christi.
Quarto, quod substantia panis redigatur in nihil. Quodlibet istorum est
possible.
Ocham seems to allow, that the substance of Bread may remain though it forsake
its accidents, and the substance of Christ's Body does not forsake them; and
this according to him was one way of solving Transubstantiation, which he is
far from saying to be contrary either to Reason or Scripture.

Petrus ab Alliaco Card. Tertia, opinio fuit, quod substantia panis remanet;
and hoc potest dupliciter imaginari, uno modo: -- quod remaneat ibidem ubi
corpus Christi incipit esse, and sic diceretur substantia panis transire in
substantiam corporis: quoniam ubi est hoc, incipit esse illa, etc -- prior
quidem ille modus est possil illis, nec repugnant rationi, nec repugnant
rationi, nec actoritati Bibile, imo est facilior ad intelligendum, and
rationaliiror quam aliquis little.
Petrus ab Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray was of Opinion that it was possible, and
not repugnant to Reason nor the Authority of the Bible, nay that it was more
easy to be understood, and more reasonable that the substance of Bread should
remain there where the Body of Christ begins to be, and that so the substance
of the Bread should be said to pass into the subsance of the Body of Christ. So
that here is Transubstantiation still plainly maintained in his Sense; and he
does not believe that there was need of any other Revelation for it, than
Scripture.

Gabriel Biel. Quamvis express tradatur in Scripturae, quod corpus Christi
veraeiter sub speciebus panis continetur, and a side^ibus sumitur, tamen
quomodo ibi sit Christi corpus, an per conversionem alicujus in ipsum: an sine
conversione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane ^^a^^ntibus subst^ntia and
acci^^tibus panis, non invenitur expressum in Canone Bibliae.
Gabriel Biel tells us, that although it be expressly delivered in Scripture,
that the Body of Christ is truly contained under the Species of Bread, and
received by the Faithful, yet it is not found expressly in the Canon of the
Bible, how the Body of Christ is there, whether by the Conversion of something
into it: or whether the Body of Christ begins to be with the Bread without
Conversion, the substance and accidents of the Bread remaining; But he does not
deny the former of these ways to be necessarily deduced from Scripture; and
therefore this Authority makes nothing against us. Cardinal Cajetan' s words
were censured and expunged by Authority, and therefore ought not to be brought
against us.

Contarenus Cardinal. Omnes Theologi convenient, licet non sit proditum in
Sacris, rationis tamen ductum sequentes, quod fieri istud non queat motu
locali, sed mutatione quadam sub^tantiae panis in corpus Christi, quam
appellant Transubstantiationem.
Cardinal Contarenus freely declares, that all Divines agree, although it be
not plainly delivered, viz. not in express words, yet following Reason as their
Guide ( and what is this but necessary rational deduction?) That this ( viz.
which is done in the Sacrament) cannot be effected by a local motion, but by
some change of the substance of Bread into the Body of Christ, which is called
Transubstantiation?

Melchior Cenus. Nonnulla per spiritum veritatis explicuit Ecclesia, quae in
Sacris literis habentur obscura. -- Ecclesia haereticos judicat contrariorum
dogmatum Auctores.
Melchior Canus does acknowledge that the Church has by the Spirit of Truth
explained some things which are accounted obscure in the Holy Writings, and
that She does justly judge the Authors of the contrary Opinions to be Heretics.
But things may be necessarily contained in Scripture, although with some
obscurity. So that there is not so much as one of these Authors, (unless it be
that which is condemned by the Church, and therefore in that Point is none of
ours) who has told us, That there is no necessity to understand our Saviors
Words in the Sense of Transubstantiation.

Lastly, As if that true Martyr Bishop Fisher, had not suffered enough already,
the Author exercises further cruelty against him, by a false and imperfect
recital of his words, and corrupting their Sense. This Holy Bishop indeed,
speaking of the words of Institution, says: De Evangeliis loquens, ait, neque
ullum hic verbum positum est quo probetur, in nostra missa veram fieri carnis
and sanguinis Christi praesentiam. Nam etsi Christus ex pane carnem suam, and
ex vino sanguinem effecerit, non ob id consequitur virtute alicujus verbi hic
positi nos quoties id ipsum tentaverimu, idem effecturos. ib. cap. 10. not. 2.
Edit. Wirceburgi A. M. D. XCVII.
There is not one word put here, by which it can be proved, that in OUR Mass
the true Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ is made to be, which last
words, Is made to be, The Author falsely renders by these words, can be proved.
But this good Martyr does not say, that Christ's words of Institution are not to
be understood in the Sense of the True and Real Presence of his Body, as made
to be in that Sacrament which our Lord himself Consecrated; but that the Power
of Priests, NOW, to Consecrate in our Mass after the same manner, is not
expressed in the bare words of Institution; And it is evident from the
immediately following words of this Reverend Bishop, that this is his true
Sense, which words run thus: For although Christ made of the Bread his Flesh, and
of the Wine his Blood, it does not therefore follow by virtue of any word here
placed, that WE shall effect the same as often as we endeavor it: As is also
plain from the other words of this Reverend Authors in the same Chapter.
Without the Interpretation of the Fathers, and the usage of the Church by them
delivered down unto us, Citra Patrum interpretationem, and usum nobis ab eisdem
traditum, nemo probabit ex ipsis nudis Evangelii verbis Sacerdotem quempiam
veram Christi carnem and sanguinem consecrare. --
no body will prove out of the bare words of Scripture, that any Priest can
Consecrate the true Body and Blood of Christ. -- For, although we allow Christ
to have said (what Scripture says he did in this kind) to the Apostles out of
Luke and Paul, it does not therefore follow, that he gave the same Power to all
that were to succeed them, for a Power of casting out Devils was given to the
Apostles. But that this Learned and Pious Bishop asserted the change of the
substance of the Bread into the Body of Christ to be the necessary Sense of the
words of Christ, Nam ut largiamur, Christum Apostolis dixisse, ut ex Luca and
Paulo, non propterea consequitur quod omnibus eorum posteris eandem tradiderit
potestatem. Nam illis data fuit potestas ejiciendi daemones.
This is my Body, is clear from these words of his: Contra Captivitat. Babil.
C. 4. n. 11. De Patribus Concilii Lateranensis quarti loquens. Si substantia
panis in Christi corpus convertatur quemadmodum illi definerunt, non debuit
aliter dixisse Christus quam dixerit. Si maneat substantia panis, quanquam tunc
aliter dixisse Christus debuerat, tamen per unius adjectionem voculae potuisset
totam hanc discordiam sustulisse. Nam si dixisset hic panis est corpus meum,
hoc vinum est sanguis meus, Omnis omnino sublata fuit controversia.
If the Substance, says he, of Bread is changed into Christ's Body, Christ
ought not to have said otherwise than he has said: And again, If the substance
of Bread remain, then Christ ought to have spoke otherwise. We must take
notice, that this Pious Bishop was defending Tradition as necessary for the
Interpretation of some places of Scripture, and particularly such which relate
to the Power that those who succeed the Apostles have to Consecrate, and upon
very good Grounds, since without Tradition, we cannot conclude the Scripture it
self to be the Word of God; and no Church can prove the Succession of her
Pastors to this high Function, which is without doubt a Fundamental Point.
Since therefore the Protestants hold, that there is a lawful Succession of
Pastors in Gods Church, as necessary to the Salvation of Mankind, as evidently
deduced from Scripture, interpreted by Tradition, though not from the bare words
of the Institution of the Eucharist, no less than Catholics; and that they have
as full a Right to Consecrate as the Apostles themselves, they must therefore
allow that they do do so: And then there can be no doubt raised from the words
of this holy Bishop, but that Christ's Body and Blood are truly in the
Sacrament by way of Transubstantiation, which Doctrine he allows to have a
certain Foundation in Scripture. But the Author here would rather pull down the
Pillars on which the Church of Christ stands, by interrupting the Episcopal
Succession, and undermine its very Foundation, than not set a Face upon his
Argument, that he may thereby delude unwary Christians. Upon the whole matter,
it is plain from what has been said; 1. That not any of these Catholic
Authors, which are cited, held that there was no necessity to understand our
Saviors words in the Sense of Transubstantiation, but the contrary. 2. That
they indeed differed only about some curious Speculations concerning the
Dependences and Circumstances of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which they
Discoursed of in a Problematical way; as for instance; Whether this
Transubstantiation is a Mutation and Transubstantiation Productive, that is to
say, by virtue of which the Substance of the Body is produced from the
Substance of Bread; or a Mutation and Transubstantiation Adductive, that is to
say, by virtue of which the Substance of Bread ceases to be; and that of the
Body be Introdu'd in it is place: And whether in this Adductive.
Transubstantiation, the Cessation of the Substance of Bread and Wine, is to be
called Annihilation; or whether it ought to be exempt from this Name, for as
much as, although it cease to be, nevertheless this Cessation of it is Essence
has not Non entity for it is final Term, but the Substitution of the Essence of
the Body of Christ, or the like; and such kind of disputes which did not at all
relate to the Essence of the Article of Transubstantiation, but only to some
consequences, and modes of it; for all the Schoolmen agree, That the Bread and
Wine are changed and Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ, by
virtue of Consecration, the Substances of Bread and Wine ceasing to be, and
those of the Body and Blood being substituted in their place. 3. They evidently
deduce the Essential part of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation from Scripture;
and although some few of them do sometimes say, that the bare words of Scripture
do not compel us to believe the less material consequences of it, yet they do
not deny that these also may be rationally deduced. 4. The Author does not
pretend to prove from these Authorities, that these Writers did not hold the
Real Presence of Christ's Body here, but only a sign and virtue of it, as
Protestants do, since it is clear from all their Writings, that they did hold
it, as proved from Scripture. Although I might have saved my self the trouble of
clearing this point so largely, had I not thought it convenient rather for the
vindication of these Writers, whom the Author has so grossly abused, than for
the defending the Doctrine of the Real Presence or Transubstantiation. For what
if seven Authors should before the Solemn Declaration of the Church have denied
it to be necessarily proved from Scripture, though really they have not; Are
there not seventy times seven of another mind? Were not the Arian Bishops, the
Semi-Pelagians and other Heretics, who at several times opposed the Articles of
the Christian Faith, vastly more numerous? And the Author knows, that Catholic
Christians are not to rely upon the Judgment of any inconsiderable number of
private Doctors Opinions concerning the Sense of an Article of Religion, but
upon the Judgment of the generality of Catholic Fathers, which is discerned in
their Writings, and in the Decisions of the most General Councils, and in the
constant and general Tradition of the Church.

DISCOURSE.
Secondly, If there be no necessity of understanding our Savior's words in the
Sense of Transubstantiation, I am sure there is a great deal of reason to
understand them otherwise. Whether we consider the like Expressions in
Scripture; as where our Savior says he is the Door, and the true Vine (which
the Church of Rome would mightily have triumphed in, had it been said, This is
my true Body.) And so likewise where the Church is said to be Christ's Body;)
and the Rock which followed the Israelites to be Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. They
drank of that rock which followed them, and that rock was Christ: All which and
innumerable more like Expressions in Scripture every Man understands in a
Figurative, and not in a strictly Literal and absurd Sense. And it is very well
known, that in the Hebrew Language things are commonly said to be that which
they do signify and represent; and there is not in that Language a more proper
and usual way of expressing a thing to signify so and so, than to say that it
is so and so. Thus Joseph Expounding Pharaoh's Dream to him, Genesis 41. 26. says,
The seven good Kine are seven years, and the seven good Ears of Corn are seven
years, that is, they signified or represented seven years of plenty; and so
Pharaoh understood him, and so would any Man of Sense understand the like
Expressions; nor do I believe that any sensible Man, who had never heard of
Transubstantiation being grounded upon these words of our Savior, This is my
Body, would upon reading the Institution of the Sacrament in the Gospel ever
have imagined any such thing to be meant by our Savior in those words; but
would have understood his meaning to have been, this Bread signifies my Body,
this Cup signifies my Blood; and this which you see me now do, do ye hereafter
for a Memorial of me: But surely it would never have entered into any man's Mind
to have thought that our Savior did literally hold himself in his Hand, and
give away himself from himself with his own Hands.

ANSWER.
Secondly, The Disparity between the Figurative expressions in H. Scripture and
the words of Institution, This is my Body, shows that the latter are to be
taken properly.
Since there is a necessity of understanding our Saviors words in the Sense of
the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, I am sure there can be no reason
given to understand them otherwise. For if we consider the expressions which
the Author produces out of Scripture as resembling these, they are so far from
being like them, that from thence we shall prove the quite contrary to what the
Author alleges them for: Therefore, to reduce this Head of Discourse to some
Method; I shall first lay down the Principles by which it is to be governed,
that I may the better afterward draw my Conclusion.

1. Principles upon which the ensuing Discourse is grounded. See M. Arnaud Tom.
2. 1, 1. 2, 3. fuse de hac re.
Christ ever spoke reasonably, and in a manner conformable to good Sense,
nothing escaping him through imprudence or mistake.

2. His Power infinitely exceeds the capacity of our minds; therefore it is
against reason, that we should confine it to the narrow bounds of our
understanding, or pretend that God cannot do what we cannot conceive.

3. When the Sense of the words which Christ speaks, if taken properly, is not
contradictory to Right Reason, though above it, and the Rules of human Discourse
oblige us to take these words in the proper Sense, then we are not to doubt of
the Truth of them as so taken.

That we may the better apply these Principles, How Catholics Interpret the
words of Institution, and how Protestants.
and the ensuing Discourse to the Case in hand, I shall endeavor to State it as
precisely as may be, and draw it into as narrow a compass as I can. Christ in
the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament said, THIS IS MY BODY: Which words
Those of the English Church, that do not believe the Presence of Christ's Real
Body in the Sacrament, yet Attribute the efficacy thereof to the due Reception
of the Sacramental Elements (and I will Charitably suppose the Author to be one
of these) interpret thus: This thing, which you see to be Bread in Substance,
is a Sign of my Real Body, wherein the virtue of my Body, though it self be
absent, is contained; or whereunto this virtue is conjoined, or together with
which it is exhibited; which several sorts of expressions I am forced to use,
that I may by some of them reach that Sense which they have not yet
sufficiently explained. Catholics thus: This thing, which by the means of your
Senses, is represented to the mind under the Species or Appearance of Bread, is
my Body in Substance.

In these Explications, I say, that by, This, in the Proposition, This is my
Body, is meant, this thing; because this is a Pronoun Demonstrative, that does
not express any particularly determinate, and distinct Nature or Substance: For
it may be applied to any thing that is the object of Sense, or of pure
Understanding, when it is but confusedly represented to the mind: As we say
pointing to a person before us, This is John, or this is Thomas, pointing to an
Animal, we say, This is a Lamb, this is a Dove; after we have discoursed of the
nature of the Soul, we may say of Cogitation, conceiving it in our minds, This
is the property of the Soul. But because it would be great rashness of
judgment, and that which is strictly called prejudice, to conclude fully of the
nature of any thing, which another, that is presumed to know it better than we
do, should be showing to us, before he has fully pronounced his Proposition,
by which he is to discover it is nature: As for instance, if any one holding up
a Gilt Shilling, or a Counterfeit Guiny; should be about to inform us truly,
that this was but a Shilling, or a Counterfeit piece of Gold, which
notwithstanding appeared to the Senses like Gold, we should rashly conclude,
before he tells us fully, what it is he shows us, that it is a true piece of
Gold: Or on the other hand, if any one should hold up a true piece of Gold,
which is discolored so by Sulphur, that it looks but like Silver, and should
be informing us, that this is a piece of true Gold, we should, before he has
spoke his words, conclude it was but Silver: So it would have been prejudice in
our Lord's Disciples, to have concluded of the determinate nature of that,
which he held in his Hands, when he was going to tell them, what it really was,
viz. his Body, before he had fully pronounced the Proposition, saying, This is
my Body: Which the Sacramentarians and our Author do, rashly determining the
thing which appears as Bread, to be so in Substance, upon the exhibiting the
Species, and saying, This, which notwithstanding, when the Proposition is
finished, is in the Sacrament made and declared to be the Body of Christ: This
therefore being a Pronoun demonstrative, it is enough, that it exhibits
something unto us, under a certain outward appearance, without signifying
distinctly and clearly the whole nature of the thing, for it is the propperty
of the Attribute or thing, that is affirmed of another, to add clearness to the
subject, or thing of which it is affirmed, by explaining the nature of the
thing, intended to be demonstrated in the Proposition, more fully; otherwise
the Proposition would be ridiculous; as if one should say, this Bread is Bread,
or this my Body is my Body. This therefore in the Proposition, This is my Body,
only discovers some Real Thing which appears in such a manner; as for instance,
the Species of Bread, to the Senses, which our Savior, who was Truth it self,
who did know the truth of all things, and could alter the nature of any Created
thing, by his Word, declares fully unto them to be his Body, though under such an
appearance; so that, whether the change was made before, or at that very
instant of time, when our Lord spoke the words, the latter of which is the
general opinion of Catholics; the Proposition is strictly true in a proper
Sense.

I shall only premise one thing more, In what Sense Catholics allow a Figure in
the Sacrament.
before I examine the Authors pretended proofs from Scripture, because I would
by no means make the breach betwixt us wider than it is, which is this, That
Catholics acknowledge a Figure in the Sacrament, no less than Protestants. Thus
the Bread and Wine, before Consecration being distinct things, and separate one
from the other, do resemble Christ's Body and Blood separated upon the Cross,
and his Soul separated from his Body, although they could not do this in their
own nature; and till, after the first Institution, they were exposed upon the
Altar for such a use, as might make us consider them as such resemblances,
since there is not so much of natural likeness, as to call the Idea of the
Passion into our mind. We believe also, that after Consecration, Christ's Body
in the Sacrament under the Veils of the Species of Bread and Wine, is a Figure,
Similitude, or Examplar of the same Body of Christ, as it suffered upon the
Cross, in like manner as his Body when newly born, was a Resemblance, and
Exemplar, and express Image of his Body at full growth: But this we conclude,
not from those words of our Lord, This is my Body, which must still be
understood in a proper Sense; but from the nature of the thing it self, after
the Institution known to be made. From whence we firmly believe the Body of
Christ to be there; it being of the nature of a Sacrament to represent and
exhibit something more unto us, than what it outwardly appears to be.

I now proceed to consider the Expressions which the Author produces out of
Scripture, by which he would prove a Figurative Presence of Christ's Body, in
opposition to a Real one in the Catholic Sense. And this being the main Proof
upon which those, who have renounced the Authority of the Church do pretend to
build their Faith, since they allow that nothing ought to be admitted as an
Article of Faith which is not clearly deduced from hence; and consequently
nothing ought to be condemned as contrary to the Christian Faith, but what is
manifestly repugnant to this. From hence then it is, that he should bring an
evidence, which is able to overthrow the Authority of so many Councils, and
several of them General ones, as have determined this Point against him, and to
show plainly that the whole true visible Church of Christ, which has for near
MDCC years received the Doctrine of the Real Presence of Christ's Body, has
erred in so necessary a Point of Faith, and been guilty of Idolatry, even
grosser than that of the Heathen World, as the Author pretends; notwithstanding
the Evidence of the same Holy Scripture, that the Holy Spirit shall lead it
into all Truth, and that the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail against
it. Let us see therefore how well he acquits himself in this vast enterprise,
of so great concern to the Christian World. His Argument from Scripture is
this; there are other expressions in Scripture which are taken figuratively,
therefore this must be so taken. Out of the innumerable like expressions in
Holy Scripture, as he is pleased to term them, he cites two very different
sorts: The first are barely figurative, such as are used in ordinary human
discourse as well as Scripture, without preparing of the mind of the Hearer
beforehand, that he may receive them. Then he compares the words of our Lords
Institution to a Dream or Vision of the Night, that was to be interpreted,
which indeed has something more of resemblance than the former expressions
which he alleges; because it being known that the things which are
represented in Dreams and Visions are not real but imaginary; yet since they
are sometimes considered as representing real things, that are to come to pass,
they are of the nature of Signs of Institution, and so may come nearer to the
Case in hand. But he seems to be soon weary of these resemblances, which being
so different in nature, one from the other, are not like to agree to the same
third thing, the Sacrament. Then he flies from Scripture to Justin Martyr's
Testimony concerning the ancient form of the Passover used by the Jews. Yet he
knows not whether he should stick to this expression, which is Sacrifical or
Sacramental, and so most likely to resemble the Sacramental, about which he
argues; or the former, which are not so. For he begins his Periods thus:
Whether we consider the like expressions in Scripture, as where our Savior
says, etc. or, whether we compare these words with the ancient form of the
Passover: And I am sure these are not of a like nature with the other. Surely
there is no Man of common Sense that can admit of such a sort of Proof as this,
from one Author that so fluctuates in his judgment, since it has the visible
Character of Falsehood in its very Front, and condemns the Real Presence of
Christ's Body, in a proper Sense, which was never openly contested in Christ's
Church till Berengarius's time, (nor so much as privately, till the time of
Pascasius, unless by those that denied the Incarnation of our Lord it self) as
well as the more explicit Sense, Transubstantiation, against the Authority of
all the Doctors of the Catholic Church and its constant Tradition for so many
Ages. But lest any one should be deceived with such a pretended Evidence from
Scripture; I shall show plainly that never a one of these sorts of expressions,
suits with this of our Saviors in Scripture, and that therefore most certainly
all of them do not.

The first, that are mentioned, are barely figurative expressions; as where our
Savior says, I am the Door, and the true Vine (and the Church of Rome may
triumph in this, that our Lord says, that his Flesh is truly Meat (...), Joh.
6. 55.) the Church is said to be Christ's Body, and Christ is termed a Rock in a
Spiritual Sense, 1 Cor. 10. 4. They drank of that Spiritual Rock which followed
them, and that which before is called a Spiritual Rock, without doubt was
Christ. Though the Author is pleased to leave out the word Spiritual, but I
would advise him to have a care of that Curse which justly falls upon those
that diminish from Holy Scripture, to favor a Party. That I may the better
demonstrate the dissimilitude of these, and the other figurative expressions,
which are by the Author alleged out of Holy Scripture, to that proper one of
our Lord, This is my Body; I shall lay down these Rules to distinguish them by.

1. Rules to judge of Metaphorical expressions by.
The desire which Men have to make themselves to be understood, and to imprint
lively Ideas of that which they conceive themselves, in the minds of others,
and of retaining them the better, does naturally incline them to search for
Comparisons and Resemblances, which may render the Idea that they would form,
the more sensible. The reason of which is, because things of Sense do most
affect the mind, and make the deepest and most lasting impressions; and this
Rule is the ground of most metaphorical expressions, which are of so great use
and ornament in human discourse.

2. Hence it follows, that the qualities of the thing, which we affirm of
another in this figurative way, should be more plain and familiar to us, or at
least fully as plain as the thing of which we affirm it, otherwise it will not
be fit to work the effect before mentioned.

3. The resemblance lies usually in but one, or but some few, at the most, of
those qualities, wherein the thing that is affirmed is like to that thing
whereof it is affirmed.

4. The inclination which Men naturally have to abridge their discourse, joined
with the desire of imprinting things in the mind, by sensible Ideas, is the
cause they ordinarily include these comparisons in the same words that the
things they are compared to are expressed by, suppressing all the terms of
relation, and expressing them, as if the things of which they speak, were
really those things which they use as Images to express them the more clearly
by: Thus we find it said, Genesis 49. 9. Judah is a Lions Whelp. v. 22. Joseph is
a fruitful Bough. Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an empty Vine.

5. The thing from which the resemblance is taken is generally more ignoble,
and of an inferior order to that of which it is affirmed, as being more
sensible; for the objects of Sense are inferior to those of pure Understanding;
and heavenly things are of that exalted nature, that they cannot be compared to
any thing that is above them.

6. Therefore the terms are not convertible (for although we call a Man of
courage a Lion, by reason of the resemblance of the quality of boldness, yet we
term not a Lion a Man.) And the reason of this is, because in the Subject is
understood the whole Idea of the thing expressed; but in the Predicate but some
qualities.

7. Although for the explaining a barely metaphorical expression, a Parable or a
Dream, that which is properly the Predicate be put in the place of the Subject,
yet it is rarely so used but upon such like occasions as this; and then too it
does not lose its nature, but is the Predicate still; for we are not to mind
the position of the words to find out the Predicate, but the sense of the
Proposition: As in that Proposition of our Lord, Joh. 6. 33. The Bread of God
is he which comes down from Heaven, he which comes down from Heaven, is the
Subject, although put in the place of the Predicate, as is plain: So that, here
the thing which is signified or resembled, is always the Subject, and the thing
signifying or resembling the Predicate.

8. In Metaphors you cannot punctually design the thing to which another is
resembled by pointing to it, or, using a pronoun Demonstrative; as for
instance, though Christ in Scripture be called a Way, and a Shepherd, yet you
cannot say, Christ is this Way, pointing to some particular Way, nor Christ is
this Shepherd, demonstrating some particular Man that is a Shepherd; nor on the
other hand that this Way is Christ, this Shepherd is Christ.

9. None ever can pretend, that after a mere Metaphorical Allusion in way of
Doctrine, a real Virtue should be imparted by receiving that thing to which
another is compared: As when Christ calls himself a Vine in Scripture, that the
eating of the fruit of the Vine should have conveyed Christ's Blessing and
Virtue.

It will be easy to discern the great disparity between the expression of our
Lord, The Application of the foregoing Rules: By which it appears, that those
merely Metaphorical expressions of our Saviors being a Door, a Vine, etc. are
not at all like to the Form of Consecration, This is my Body.
This is my Body, and those Metaphorical ones which the Author here alleges,
by comparing them together, and examining them by the foregoing Rules. Our
Savior calls himself a Door, because of the natural resemblance, which the
Mind, casting about for the meaning of this expression, immediately, without any
difficulty finds, and he himself declares; for as by a Door we enter into the
House, so by Christ we enter into Heaven; for through him the way is opened: A
Vine, in like manner, because from him all true Believers as Branches receive
their nourishment and growth in Grace, by which they are enabled to bear Fruit:
A Rock, because from him the Fountain of Living Waters does Spring: The Church
his Body, because of the Union of the Members of his Body one with another, and
of all with the Head, and the mutual assistance which they afford each to
other, in which the Spiritual Body Resembles a Natural Body. See Rule 1.
By these sensible and easy comparisons the Idea of the thing which our
Savior expresses, by them, is more lively imprinted in our Minds, and by this
means the Memory the better retains them: See Rule 2.
These do explain the things of which they are affirmed, and render them the
more familiar to us; See Rule 3.
and yet the Resemblance lies in but one, or, at the most but some few of the
qualities; See Rule 4.
the terms of relation are suppressed in the first proposal of these
expressions, although explained afterward, and one word includes the Comparison.
It is otherwise in the expression of our Lord, This is my Body, supposing that
by the Term, This, Contrary to R. r.
Bread is meant in the Sacramentarian Sense; (1) for the Body of Christ is not
a fit thing to Resemble Bread by, the notion of Bread is not the more sensibly
imprinted, by comparing Christ's Body with it, neither does the Memory by this
means the better retain it; the applying the Idea of Christ's Body (2) to Bread
does not render the R. 2.
nature of Bread more familiar, but on the contrary more abstruse and difficult
to apprehend, R. 3.
(3) the Resemblance lies in none of the visible qualities, R. 4.
(4) the Terms of Relation are not suppressed, for no such Relation can be
conceived. Now to proceed; See Rules 5, 6:
In the former expressions, the things which are expressed, are of an Inferior
nature to the things of which they are expressed, yet more sensible; therefore
the Terms are not convertible: See Rules 7, 8.
For although it be said Christ is the Door, yet we cannot say of any particular
Door, that it is Christ; although it is affirmed that Christ is the true Vine,
yet we cannot say of any Vine, pointing to it, that it is Christ; although he be
called a Rock, yet we cannot say, designing some particular Rock, that this
Rock is Christ: For in that Proposition, the Rock was Christ, we must not
regard the order of the words, but the Sense of the Proposition to find out the
Subject and the Predicate; so that when it was said, the Rock was Christ, the
meaning is, Christ was Typified by that Rock, or Christ was like that Rock,
unless we understand, as we ought to do from the preceding words of the
Apostle, by the Term Rock, a Spiritual Rock, and so he was really such a Rock,
and not Typically so; Although it be said, that the Church is the Body of Christ,
yet we cannot affirm of the natural Body of Christ, that it is his Church. It
is Contrary to R. 5, 6, 7, 8.
otherwise in the expression of our Lord: For the Predicate is here of the same
nature with the Subject, if understood in the Sense of Catholics; it is of a
Superior nature, if understood in the Sense of our Adversaries; the Terms, if
taken in the former Sense are convertible; for as it was said by Christ, This
is my Body, meaning the thing that was contained under the visible Species, so
it might be affirmed of the same Body, that it was, this; which was thus
contained: In the latter Sense we may as well affirm, that the Body of Christ
was Bread, as that Bread was the Body of Christ, for indeed neither of these
could be truly affirmed, since these Propositions, in this Sense, would be
false, and absurd, there being no sensible Resemblance, nor no identity, for
the Terms are incompatible: And therefore we need not consider of the Sense of
them, to find out which is the Subject, and which the Predicate, for there is
no true Sense here to be found, nor no such relation, because our Lord had not
declared the Bread to be a sign of Institution, before he spoke these words,
This is my Body, and the Bread was not naturally a sign of his Body; as shall
be showed in the ensuing Discourse.

Well, but though the Proposition seem so very absurd in this Sense, where the
Body of Christ is taken for the Predicate, or thing by which Bread is
resembled; yet if This, that is, the Bread showed in Christ's Hands, according
to our Adversaries, be taken for the Predicate, meaning by the Proposition,
This is my Body, that This Bread is a Resemblance of my Body, they will say
perhaps it is not so: But I shall prove it to be so, for these Reasons. 1. See
Rule 7.
Because if the words were to be so understood, then if the Predicate were
restored to its proper place, the Sense would be clear and obvious, as in that
Proposition of our Lord; Joh. 6. 33. The Bread of God is he which comes down
from Heaven; when we change the position of the words, and say, He which comes
down from Heaven is the Bread of God; for now the Subject and Predicate have
their proper places; But it is otherwise in this Proposition, This is my Body,
meaning by, This, the Bread then Demonstrated; for you cannot say, without
absurdity, that the Body of Christ is this Bread, meaning some particular
Bread. 2. In Metaphorical expressions the Predicate is not put in the place of
the Subject at the first proposal of the Similitude, Parable, or the like; but
afterward when the Explanation is made, according to the Sixth and Seventh
Rules before mentioned. Thus it was said by our Lord, Matt. 13. 24. The Kingdom
of Heaven, (That is, Christ the Son of Man setting forth, and obtaining this
Kingdom for us) is likened to a Man that Sowed good Seed in his Field; before
he would say by way of Explication, Ver. 37. He that Sowed the good Seed is the
Son of Man, and when he had proposed the rest of the Parable unto them; then,
by way of Explication, it also follows; The Field is the World: The good Seed
are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares are the Children of the wicked
one: Which method is also used in the other Parables of Scripture, that are
Explained. 3. The Predicate or thing Resembling in these Metaphors, whether it
be put in the place of the Subject, or in it is own, is never particularised by
a Pronoun Demonstrative: See Rule 3.
For our Lord does not say, Pointing to any Husbandman, This is the Son of
Man; or of a Field that he was in, This is the World; or of any good Grains of
Corn, that he sees Sown, These are the Children of the Kingdom: So likewise it
would have been improper to have said, This my Body is Bread; or This Bread is
my Body.

Lastly, A Metaphor conveys no Spiritual virtue. See Rule 9.
Those of the English Church do pretend from these words of Christ, This is my
Body, that there is some Spiritual Blessing or Virtue of Christ's Body (though the
Body it self be not there) annexed to the Elements, or their Reception, which,
if they were but a mere Metaphorical expression, like the rest mentioned by the
Author, it is highly unreasonable to conclude. Therefore for this reason, as
also for all the disparities before showed, we may truly affirm, that there is
no such Resemblance, as the Author pretends, between the foregoing expressions
alleged out of Scripture, where our Savior is called a Vine, a Door, etc. And
that of our Lord's Institution, This is my Body. I shall now proceed to examine
the next that are Cited, which are of a very different nature from the former.

As when Joseph Expounding Pharaohs Dream to him, Genesis Pharaohs Dream does not
resemble the Sacred words of Consecration, This is my Body.
41. 26. Says, the Seven good Kine are Seven Years, and the Seven good Ears of
Corn, are Seven Years: Which expressions, as also that out of Justin Martyr
that follows, the Author compares to the words of Christ's Institution. Now,
that I may show, that there is no reason that our Lords words should be taken
in the Figurative Sense of these expressions, but contrariwise in a proper
Sense, I shall lay down these distinctions and Rules to show the disparity by.

Signs are either Naturally so, Distinctions and Rules for the following
Discourse of the nature of signs.
as black Clouds are a Sign of Rain, Smoke is a Sign of Fire; or else so, only
by Institution and agreement; concerning which latter, I again distinguish.
That of Signs of Institution, some have so much of Natural Resemblance, as that
they may fitly be chosen to signify and represent, although not enough to
exhibit the Idea of the thing upon the bare sight or mentioning, which
afterward by Institution they are to signify unto us (Thus a living Creature
Sacrificed Typifies, or signifies Christ Crucified upon the Cross;) and some
have not; Thus the word Moses does signify such a Man; where there is no
Natural Resemblance between these Letters compounded into a word, and the
person Represented by them, but this depends upon mere Institution and compact
amongst Men.

2. All rational Discourse used amongst Men is founded upon the imperfect
penetration, at least, into the Minds of those with whom we discourse, and the
presumed Knowledge of them. For we regulate our Speech, according to the
apprehension that we believe those, with whom we converse, have of it. If we
believe Men's Minds to be prepared to understand our Discourse, then we utter it
to them; if they are notable as yet to perceive what we say, then we must
either prepare them beforehand, or else give a distinct and formal explication
of our words, soon after we have uttered them, otherwise we abuse our Auditors.
From whence it follows,

3. That that sort of improper Discourse, wherein we give the Sign the name of
the thing signified, or to the thing signified the name of the Sign, being very
rare, to make it intelligible, it is required, 1. That the Sign be plainly
Instituted. 2. It must be justly presumed, that those to whom we speak, regard
the thing as a Sign, or else we ought to advertise them, that we intend to use
it as so. For there is no example either in Scripture or ordinary human
Discourse of a like expression to this of our Lords, by which, at the very
first constituting any thing into a Sign, it is called the thing signified,
without preparing the minds of the Auditors to understand it so. Application of
the foregoing Rules and Distinctions.
To apply these Rules to the case in hand, we must observe, that this Dream or
Vision of Pharaohs was a Sign of Institution, it having been appointed by God
to signify something to him: Again, indeed this Sign had some sort of fitness,
in it is own nature, to be made a Sign of what it was to represent, even more
than Bread has to represent Christ's Body, yet it could not exhibit to Pharaohs
Mind the thing which it was to signify without some explicit interpretation of
good Authority, and it was so obscure a Sign, that none of all his Magicians
could give it. Therefore Pharaoh proposes this to Joseph as a Dream, Genesis 41.
v. 22. Advertising him of what he saw in a Dream; which Joseph undertaking to
Interpret, Pharaoh could not but consider his words as an Interpretation of
this Sign of Institution; therefore by the Second, and Third Rules,
beforementioned, it was very rational for him to put the Predicate in the place
of the Subject, the Sign for the thing signified, by saying, the Seven good
Kine are Seven Years, and the Seven good Ears of Corn are Seven Years, that is,
they signified or represented Seven Years of Plenty; since it is very well
known that in the Hebrew Language things are commonly said to be that which
they do signify and represent: But then it must be known beforehand, that they
do only signify and represent; otherwise it cannot be understood when they
only express a Resemblance, and when Identity. On the contrary, if in the
expression of our Lord, This is my Body, the Bread had been a Sign of
Institution, though it have some remote resemblance, yet since it could not of it
self, before plain positive Institution, bring the Idea of the thing, supposed
to be represented, to the Mind, therefore since there was no such foregoing
Institution, or action to prepare the Minds of the Apostles to consider it as
so, and these words of Christ are no explication of a Sign of Institution, but
must be the Original Institution it self of a Sign, if any had been here made,
and the Apostles were no ways advertised beforehand to consider the Bread as a
Sign; since the Predicate therefore could not rightly here be put in the place
of the Subject, much less a Pronoun Demonstrative be used according to a former
Rule; therefore these words, This is my Body, according to the known Rules of
human Discourse, which it were Blasphemy to say our Lord would swerve from, so
as to speak absurdly, do signify that, That was his Real Body which he held in
his hands, and not a Sign only of his Body, as our Adversaries falsely pretend.
Neither do I believe, that any sensible man, who had never heard before of this
figurative Sense, which the Author and Sacramentarians have so often inculcated
into their Followers, as to make them prejudiced in the Case, would upon
reading the Institution of the Sacrament in the Gospel, or if they had heard
Christ speak the words, ever have imagined that by these words, This is my
Body, no more was to be understood, than that, this, which Christ held in his
hands was only a Sign of his Body, any more than our Saviors Apostles and
Disciples could be made to understand the like words, John 6. 51, 52. I am the
living Bread that came down from Heaven. And the Bread that I will give is my
Flesh, which I will give for the life of the world (the Jews therefore strove
amongst themselves saying, how can this Man give us his Flesh to eat?) in that
Sense: But would have understood his meaning to have been thus: This which has
the outward appearance of Bread is really my Body, This which has the
resemblance of Wine is my Blood. Not as the Author fallaciously proposes the
meaning, This Bread signifies my Body, this Cup signifies my Blood, But that he
should enjoin them to do that which they then saw him do, That is, offer up,
hereafter, his Real Body and Blood, under the Species of Bread and Wine, by way
of an unbloody Sacrifice, for a Memorial of that Bloody one of his Body and
Blood, which he was soon after to offer up upon the Cross. And in this great
Mystery, a true Christian, one that has an humble Soul rightly disposed for
the Belief of our Lords words, as St. Augustine had, Ferebatur Christus in
manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum, ait, hoc est corpus meum.
Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis. Aug. Comment. in Ps. 33.
who speaking of our Lord, says: Christ was carried in his own hands, when
recommending to them his very Body, he says, This is my Body. For he carried
that Body in his hands; such a one I say, can readily believe that our Savior
did properly, and really hold himself in his hand, and give away himself, but
not from himself with his own hands; by reason of the natural Connection and
Concomitance which his Sacred Soul and Divinity have with his Body and Blood,
under the visible Species of Bread and Wine.

DISCOURSE.
Or whether we compare these words of our Savior with the ancient Form of the
Passover used by the Jews from Ezra's time, as Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 297. Edit.
Paris. 1639.
Justin Martyr tells us, (...), this Passover is our Savior and our refuge:
Not that they believed the Paschal Lamb to be substantially changed either into
God their Savior who delivered them out of the Land of Egypt, or into the
Messiah the Savior whom they expected and who was signified by it: But this
Lamb which they did eat, did represent to them and put them in mind of that
Salvation which God wrought for their Fathers in Egypt, when by the slaying of
a Lamb and sprinkling the Blood of it upon their Doors their firstborn were
passed over and spared; and did likewise foreshew the Salvation of the Messiah,
the Lamb of God that was to take away the Sins of the World.

ANSWER.
The Author having tried several very different sorts of expressions in Holy
Scripture, The Analogy which the words of Institution, This is my Body, might
have to the Paschal form in Scripture, or to those phrases cited from Esdras,
or any of the Rabins, do not prove that Christ's words here, are to be taken
figutively and not in a proper Sense.
with which he has offered to compare the words of our Lord's Institution,
seeming not at all to be satisfied in his Mind, about their Analogy to these,
yet not able to discover any of a nearer resemblance, being at a great loss,
has recourse to the Authority of an Ancient Father, and now he will either
find one or make one, if he can, for his purpose. For considering that our
Savior had just before this Institution celebrated the Passover, it might seem
reasonable to conclude, that he should now imitate that manner of speaking
which he used so very lately. Therefore it is but finding, or coining a Paschal
Form of Institution, suitable to the saying of our Lord, This is my Body, and
he may think his work is done. What pity it is, that he could not discover one
in all the Scripture or Fathers for his purpose, but that he must be forced to
use such pitiful Sophistry as he here does to impose upon his Reader in this
manner? Whether, says he, we compare these words of our Savior with the
ancient Form of the Passover used by the Jews from Ezra's time, as Justin
Martyr tells us; But where does he tell us so? There Is not a word said, by him,
that, that which is cited here, was an Ancient Form of the Passover, or that it
was used by the Jews from Ezra's time; this is a pure Invention of the Authors,
which you will be fully convinced of, by consulting Justin Martyr himself,
about the words, which were by the Jews left out of those Interpretations of
Ezra's, or Esdras's, wherein he expounds the Law of the Passover, and which run
thus: (...).
Esdras said to the People, This Passover, Sacrifice is our Savior and our
Refuge, but if you think, and it enter into your Heart to conceive, that we
render him abject in a Sign, and afterward place our hope in him, let not this
place be forsaken for ever, says the Lord of Hosts, and if you do not believe
his words, nor hearken to his Preaching, you will be had in derision by all
Nations. This is all that the Father says of the matter, where we find not one
word said, of what the Author cites, as being an Ancient Form of the Passover
used by the Jews, but only that, in these words, Esdras expounded the Law of
the passover to the People; neither is here the least mention made of it is
being used by the Jews from Esdras's time, all this is the mere Fiction of our
Author, who did not consider, that, Holy Scripture, and Learned Authors amongst
his own party, give us an account of the Paschal Forms that were used, which
are quite different from this, which no Author gives us as one but himself. For
Exodus 12. 11. God says, It is the Lord's Passover, or more explicitly, Ver.
26. 27. It shall come to pass, when your Children shall say unto you, what mean
you by this service? That ye shall say, it is the Sacrifice of the Lord's
Passover. And Ver. 13. It is said, the Blood shall be to you for a Token, or
Sign, and when I see the Blood I will pass over you. And Dr. Hammond tells us
that the Lamb dressed in the Paschal Supper, and set upon the Table, (...)
was called, The Body of the Passover, or the Body of the Paschal Lamb, (not
the Body of Christ, of which, notwithstanding, it was a Sign and Type) another
Paschal Form he tells us, was: This is the Bread of Affliction, referring to
the unleavened Bread: Which Forms are nothing like this Expository Phrase of
Esdras cited by Justin Martyr. Well, but although this be not a Paschal Form, yet
it is a certain expression which Esdras used concerning the Passover, and I
shall now show so great a disparity between it, as so considered, and that of
our Lords Institution, as will plainly discover how falsely it is urged here to
prove, that our Lords words are Metaphorical. For, 1. These words were true in
a proper Sense, which our Adversaries will not allow Christ's to be: The,
Passover was a Savior or Salvation ((...) for (...) a way of speaking used by
other Authors and explained in the following word) and a Refuge to the Jews, in
a strict Sense, God having appointed it as a means and Instrumental cause at
least of their deliverance, at it is first Institution, and it was a Salvation
and Refuge to those who afterward used it aright. Why then may we not likewise
conclude from hence, that, that which Christ gave to his Disciples, when he
said, This is my Body, was really his Body? 2. All the Jews, who had a right
understanding of things, considered the Sacrifices, that were offered as Types
of Christ the Messiah, and this of the Passover more signally as so, as appears
from this Authority of Esdras out of Justin Martyr, in these words, If you
think that we render him abject in this Sign, and afterward place our hope in
him; Therefore it was not at all unreasonable to Attribute the thing signified
to that which they regarded in their minds as a Sign, by saying, This Passover
Sacrifice is our Savior and our Refuge: Not that they could have any ground
from hence to believe the Paschal Lamb to be substantially changed, either into
God their Savior, who delivered them out of the Land of Egypt, or into the
Messiah the Savior, whom they expected, and who was signified by it: But this
Lamb which they did Eat, being known to be a Sign of Institution, did represent
to them, and put them in mind of that Salvation which God wrought for their
Fathers in Egypt, when by the slaying of a Lamb, and sprinkling the Blood of it
upon their Doors, their firstborn were passed over and spared; and did
likewise foreshew the Salvation of the Messiah, the Lamb of God that was to
take away the sins of the World. Now the Bread, and Wine, not having been at
all discovered to be such Signs of our Saviors Body and Blood, to the
Disciples, nor consequently considered as so, it was against the Rules of human
discourse, to say they were his Body and Blood, if no more was meant, than that
they were Signs of them; and as absurd, as for Moses before the formal
Institution of the Paschal Sacrifice, recited at large in Exodus 12. to have
said to the People upon Sacrificing a Lamb, This is the Lords Passover. Or This
Passover is your Savior. For it was to be known and considered as a Passover
Sacrifice, and as a Type of the Messiah, before he could reasonably have
affirmed thus of it. 3. The Jewish Passover was a Type of this Sacrament, and
so it is generally acknowledged by the Sea in their Authorities, infra.
Fathers to be; now that there should be a Sign of a Sign only, a Type of that,
which it self was but a Type, Instituted by Christ, is very unreasonable to
imagine; especially since we do not now live under a Law of Shadows and Figures,
but of Verity and substance.

Since, therefore, the Paschal Lamb was really, and in a proper Sense the
Sacrifice of the Lords Passover according to that true Paschal Form in Exodus
1^. 27.
Holy Scripture, because a true Paschal Sacrifice was offered by the Jews as
well for a grateful acknowledgment of their past benefit, as of one that was
certainly to come; since this Passover Sacrifice was really a Savior, or
Salvation to the Jews, as well as a Type of the Messiah; since the Lamb dressed
in the Paschal Supper, was not only called, but really was, the Body of the
Passover Sacrifice, or Paschal Lamb, according to the forementioned expressions
of Esdras, and the Rabins, which, notwithstanding we can by no means allow to
be Paschal Forms of constant usage, since they so vary from one another; much
less of Divine Institution, because no such are used in Holy Scripture; since
the Bread which the Jews Eat, when they used that Phrase, This is the Bread of
Affliction, was Real Bread; and all that Eat this Bread, as they ought to do,
were really afflicted, when they seriously considered what their Deuteronomy. 16. 3.
Fathers suffered in Egypt; because they also, for their own sins, deserved to
suffer as much, this Bread also being the same which their Fathers did Eat,
viz. unleavened Bread: Surely none can be so hard of belief, as to imagine,
after serious consideration, that there was less of truth and reality in our
Lords words, This is my Body, in which, as is not improbable, he might imitate
some of these Phrases, than there was even in these expressions which were used
under the Law, of Types and Shadows. And to show the Analogy the more
perfectly, and not to represent it partially, as our Vid. A Discourse of the
Holy Eucharist. Edit. A. 1687. p. 12.
Adversaries do, we are further to consider, That as the Bread of Affliction,
which was yearly Eaten by the Jews at the time of the Paschal Solemnity, was
really Bread, and of the same kind with that which their Fathers did Eat in
Egypt; and was also a Memorial of the first Bread of this kind, which their
Fathers did Eat; As the Paschal Lamb that was yearly dressed, and really Eaten,
was the Real Body of the Passover Sacrifice thus yearly offered, and was also
to put the Jews in mind of the first deliverance wrought upon the first Paschal
Offering; so Christians, when they renew the Sacrifice of Eucharist, feed upon
Christ's Real Body, which is the Antitype of the Paschal Lamb, and at the same
time Vid. Exposition of the words, Do this in remembrance of me, infra.
Remember that first Oblation which Christ made of the same Body, although in a
different manner upon the Cross.

DISCOURSE.
And nothing is more common in all Languages than to give the name of the thing
signified to the Sign. As the delivery of a Deed or Writing under hand and Seal
is called a conveyance or making over of such an Estate, and it is really so;
not the delivery of mere Wax and Parchment, but the conveyance of a Real
Estate; as truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the very
material Houses and Lands themselves could be and were actually delivered into
my Hands: In like manner the names of the things themselves made over to us in
the new Covenant of the Gospel between God and Man, are given to the Signs and
Seals of that Covenant. By Baptism Christians are said to be made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. And by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we are
said to Communicate or to be made partakers of the Body of Christ which was
broken, and of his Blood which was shed for us, that is, of the real benefits
of his Death and Passion. And thus St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament, 1 Cor.
10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ? But still it is Bread, and he still calls it so, v. 17. For we being
many are one Bread and one Body; for we are partakers of that one Bread. The
Church of Rome might, if they pleased, as well argue from hence, that all
Christians are substantially changed, first into Bread, and then into the
natural Body of Christ by their participation of the Sacrament, because they
are said thereby to be one Bread and one Body. And the same Apostle in the next
Chapter, after he had spoken of the Consecration of the Elements, still calls
them the Bread and the Cup, in three verses together, As often as ye Eat this
Bread, and Drink this Cup, v. 26. Whosoever shall Eat this Bread, and Drink
this Cup of the Lord unworthily, v. 27. But let a Man examine himself, and so
let him Eat of this Bread and Drink of that Cup, v. 28. And our Savior himself
when he had said, this is my Blood of the New Testament, immediately adds,
Matthew. 26. 29.
but I say unto you, I will not henceforth Drink of this fruit of the Vine,
until I Drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, that is, not till after
his Resurrection, which was the first step of his Exaltation into the Kingdom,
given him by his Father, when the Scripture tells us he did Eat and Drink with
his Disciples. But that which I observe from our Savior's words is, that after
the Consecration of the Cup and the delivering of it to his Disciples to Drink
of it, he tells them that he would thenceforth Drink no more of the fruit of
the Vine, which he had now Drank with them, till after his Resurrection. From
whence it is plain that it was the fruit of the Vine, Real Wine, which our
Savior Drank of and Communicated to his Disciples in the Sacrament.

ANSWER.
Here, A Deed's being called a conveyance does not prove that the words This is
my Body, are not to be taken properly.
since neither the Authority of the Fathers, nor the Word of God can afford the
Authors cause any relief, he at length flies to the Laws of Men, for it, where
we shall see him immediately cast himself, and be nonsuited at the very
beginning of his Trial. He tells us, that the delivery of a Deed or Writing
under Hand and Seal is called a Conveyance or making over of such an Estate,
(that is, of a Title to such an Estate) and that it really is so; that we deny,
unless there be possession also given, as I shall presently show. And yet what
do we affirm more of Christ's words in the Sacrament, This is my Body which is
given for you, etc. which we have, taken from his own mouth by the Hands of
inspired Penmen, Sealed by himself with Miracles, and delivered to his Church,
than that they are a Conveyance, or making over of his Sacred Body to us, and
that they are so really, not only in Sign or Figure? He proceeds to tell us,
That this Delivery of a Deed or Writing under Hand and Seal, is not the
Delivery of mere Wax, and Parchment, but the conveyance of a Real Estate, as
truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the material Houses
and Lands themselves could be, and were actually delivered into my hands. Well,
but we say that a Deed of Feoffment takes not effect to all purposes of Law,
without Livery and Seisin, neither does it convey an Estate without that, nor a
Deed of Release neither, unless the Purchaser be put in Possession, before
hand, by a Lease, and then too, not by the Common Law; but so necessary is
Possession deemed for the through Conveyance of an Estate, that in case of
absence from the Land or the like, the Lawmakers have by a particular Statute
necessarily provided to give Possession otherwise, for it is not necessary to
the making a Man in Possession of an Estate, that he should hold his Land and
House in his Arms, or stand always upon the Premises. But I hope the Author
will not so far endeavor to invalidate the Common Assurance of the Nation, as
to maintain, that because the Man has thus a Conveyance of a real Estate to
all effects, and purposes of Law, therefore he must not enter upon it, dwell in
the House, Reap the Fruits of the ground, and nourish himself therewith, I
imagine the Purchaser will not be put off so. In like manner, the words of
Christ delivered, as his Act and Deed, by the Priest his Substitute, in the
Consecration of the Sacrament for the use of those that are to Communicate, is
not the bare delivery of so many Words only, but the making over of a real
Title to them, to the thing which is meant by them, that is, the Body of our
Lord, as truly and really to all effects, and purposes of the Gospel, as if it
actually hung upon the Cross before their Eyes, in that Form, and with the same
configuration, and quality of parts as it once did. Shall they therefore be
hindered from taking immediate Possession of what is thus made over to them? No,
this were too great a Sacrilege against God, and violation of the property of
a Christian. They shall receive Christ's Body and Blood, that they may dwell in
him and he in them. They shall partake of the Fruits of the Sacrament, as of a
goodly Heritage of their own, since Christ has given them a just Right and
Title to it, and shall cherish their Souls and Bodies therewith to Immortality.
Those who are contented only to hear of, or to see this goodly Land, and not to
go and possess it; Those who will leave their Fathers House the Catholic
Church, and go abroad to feed upon Husks, and imaginary virtue, are the objects
of our pity. So indeed there is a sort of a Fiction in Law, in the Authors way
of conveyance, of a Tenant by Deed or Lease of possession, who notwithstanding
has nothing to do to enter upon the Estate, or enjoy it; if the Author be
contented with such a Title only in the Sacrament, I am sorry for him. And thus
the Similitude is reasonably applied, as for our Adversaries way, who says,
that as the delivery of a Deed or Writing under Hand and Seal is called a
Conveyance or making over of such an Estate, (he should have proved that the
Deed is called the Estate it self, and not only the Conveyance of an Estate, if
he would have made this phrase any thing suitable to that of our Lord, This is
my Body) in like manner the names of the things themselves made over to us in
the New Covenant of the Gospel between God and Man, are given to the Signs and
Seals of the Covenant; whereas there is no Analogy between these things, nor
truth neither in this instance. It is just as if one should say, that Tenterden
Steeple were like the Goodwin Sands. I confess, I have often admired with my
self at this sort of Similitude, which Protestants are mighty big with,
pretending to Illustrate their fond opinion about the Sacrament clearly hereby,
which being examined, proves as you see, but a mere Tympany of the Brain.

The Author having before told us, Other Texts of Scripture examined, and
proved, not at all to favor the Authors Sense.
that nothing is more Common in all Languages than to give the name of the
thing signified to the Sign, proceeds now to give us examples of this out of
Holy Scripture; by Baptism, says he, Christians are said to be partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. And so they really are, and their Bodies, are his
Temples: But since Baptism is the Sign, and the Holy Ghost the thing signified,
according to him, why does he not bring us one instance out of Scripture of
Baptisms being called the Holy Ghost, as they pretend that Bread in the words
of Institution is called Christ's Body? For this which he has brought of
Baptism is no Example to his Common Rule: We may reasonably conclude, that if
the Sacrament of Baptism had been so very like this of the Eucharist, as they
would have it, it would have been Instituted in a like Form, but it is quite
otherwise: For neither Water, nor Baptism it self are called in Holy Scripture
the Holy Ghost, neither is there any Form of Cousecration of the Element,
delivered. Indeed, by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we are also said to
Communicate, or to be made partakers of the Body of Christ which was broken,
and his Blood that was shed for us; but that is his Real Body and Blood
together with all the real benefits of his Death and Passion, which do thereby
accrue to us. And thus St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The
Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?
The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? That
is, after Consecration, it really is so; although the Apostle calls it Bread by a
Metaphor (that being to our Souls what the ordinary Bread is to our Bodies,
true nourishment) so also it is said that Aarons Rod devoured the other Rods,
Exodus 7. 12. although it was then become a Serpent, v. 10. That Water which was
by our Lord converted into Wine is still called Water, Joh. 2. 9. The Angels
are called Men, Genesis 19. 8. because they appeared in the shape of Men,
according to the usual Language of Sense, very many instances of which are to
be found: For our Savior had fully instructed them before, that the Bread
which he would give them was his flesh, Joh. 6. 51. The Apostle also says
again, v. 17. For we being many are one Bread, and one Body; for we are
partakers of that one Bread, and that one Bread can signify nothing here but
the Body of Christ, which indeed is but one, although appearing in innumerable
place of the World at the same, and at several times, because it is still
animated by the same one Soul and Divinity of Christ; which cannot be said of
the Bread in the Sacrament, if but mere Bread, for then it would not be one
Bread or Loaf, but many, and of several sorts, being received at very many
places at the same time: And the true reason here, why they are called one
Bread and one Body or Society of Christians, is, because they are all partakers
of that one Bread, viz. the Body of Christ, and therefore also all inspired
with the same Spirit. But, in the Authors Sense, it would be no reason, but
they should rather have been many Bodies, because they did Eat of so many
Breads: So that we see he has still the same success, in bringing those Texts
of Scripture to uphold his cause, which are the most pregnant proofs against
him. He then proceeds to teach the Catholics how they might argue in his new
way, from a Sign already Instituted and known as so, to an AEnigma, or dark
saying, taken from things of a disparate and really different nature, and of no
acknowledged Resemblance, that is, from Chalk to Cheese; but they beg his
Pardon for that. Well, but the same Apostle, in the next Chapter, after he had
spoken of the Consecration of the Elements, still calls them the Bread and the
Cup in three verses together, as often as ye Eat THIS Bread, and Drink THIS
Cup, v. 26. Whosoever shall Eat THIS Bread and Drink THIS Cup of the Lord
unworthily, v. 27. But let a Man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of THAT
Bread and Drink of THAT Cup, v. 28. It is true it was Bread Metaphorically, but
it was still this Bread with an Emphasis, not such Bread as you ordinarily Eat,
but the Body of Christ, which he told us was truly Meat, or Meat indeed, the
true Bread from Heaven, John 6. 32. It was a Cup, but it was this Cup, that is,
his Blood, which was truly Drink, or Drink indeed, as he also has taught us,
John 6. 55. and after examination, let the true Christian Eat of that Bread and
Drink of that Cup, which will strengthen his Body and Soul both, much more than
the ordinary Bread and Wine can his Body only. Our Savior himself, when he had
said, This is my Blood of the New Testament, immediately adds, but I say unto
you, I will not henceforth Drink of this Fruit of the Vine (that is of the true
Vine, as our Lord is pleased to call himself,) or of that Wine, which by the
Words of Benediction becomes my Blood, being Originally the Fruit of the Vine;
(or possibly it may refer to the unconsecrated Wine that was left in the
Vessels) until I drink it new, that is fresh and newly Consecrated again with
you in my Fathers Kingdom, or after my Resurrection, as some, with the Author,
interpret the place; but as others more generally, till I drink of that new
Wine of another sort and nature, in the Kingdom of my heavenly Father, where we
shall drink of the River of his pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8. and therefore the
Authors following observation is nothing worth. For after the Apostles were
satisfied that they really drank the Blood of our Lord in this Sacrament, and
fed upon his Real Body, it was an easy and familiar Metaphor to call them Bread
and Wine, because the outward Species gave a sufficient hint, for the
understanding of this Figurative Speech, suitable to the Language of Sense in
the instances above mentioned, out of Scripture; and because there was true
Spiritual nourishment conveyed to the faithful by the Body and Blood of our
Savior thus received, as there is Corporeal nourishment received by the
Natural Bread and Wine, which we take for the refection of our Bodies.

DISCOURSE.
Besides, if we consider that he celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion,
it is impossible these words should be understood literally of the natural Body
and Blood of Christ; because it was his Body broken and his Blood shed, which
he gave to his Disciples, which if we understand literally of his natural Body
broken and his blood shed, then these words, this is my Body which is broken,
and this is my Blood which is shed, could not be true, because his Body was
then whole and unbroken, and his Blood not then shed; nor could it be a
propitiatory Sacrifice (as they affirm this Sacrament to be) unless they will
say that Propitiation was made before Christ suffered: And it is likewise
impossible that the Disciples should understand these words literally, because
they not only plainly saw that what he gave them was Bread and Wine, but they
saw likewise as plainly that it was not his Body which was given, but his Body
which gave that which was given; no his Body broken and this Blood shed,
because they saw him alive at that very time and beheld his Body whole and
unpierc'd; and therefore they could not understand these words literally: If
they did, can we imagine that the Disciples, who upon all other occasions were
so full of questions and objections, should make no difficulty of this matter?
nor so much as ask our Savior, how can these things be? that they should not
tell him, we see this to be Bread and that to be Wine, and we see thy Body to
be distinct from both; we see thy Body not broken, and thy Blood not shed.

From all which it must needs be very evident, to any man that will impartially
consider things, how little reason there is to understand those words of our
Savior, this is my Body, and This is my Blood, in the sense of
Transubstantiation; nay on the contrary, that there is very great reason and an
evident necessity to understand them otherwise. I proceed to show,

ANSWER.
Besides, Christ's body's being broken, and his blood being poured out for the
remission of sins, before he was Crucified, proves the Sense of the Reality.
if we consider that our Lord celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion, it
is impossible that these words should be understood otherwise than properly, of
the real Body and Blood of Christ; because it was his Body broken, and his
Blood poured out, which he gave to his Disciples, which if we understand as
figurative only of his natural Body broken, and his Blood shed, then these
words, this is my Body which is broken, and this is my Blood which is shed,
could not be true, because his natural, organized, and visible Body was then
whole and unbroken, and its Blood not then shed; yet that very Body as broken
in the Sacrament was said to be Luke 22. 19, 20. This is my Body, which is
given for you, in the prensent tense. See also the words of Institution as
recited by the other two Evangelists, all in the present tense.
then given for them, that very Blood as there poured out was said then to be
poured out for the remission of sins: Therefore it was a propitiatory
Sacrifice, although offered before, as well as after Christ had suffered, to
Pay the full Price of our Redemption, because its whole nature did consist in
the relation which it had to the Sacrifice that was offered up for us upon the
Cross, from which it received all its virtue: It was very possible therefore
for our Lords Disciples to understand these words properly, because although
they plainly saw that what he gave them had the Species of Bread and Wine, yet
they believed him, when he said that it was his Body that was given for them,
although his Body at the same time gave what was given; his Body broken and his
Blood poured out for them, although they saw him alive at that very time, and
beheld his Body whole and unpierced, because he had plainly told them so, who
had the Words of eternal Life, and could not deceive them; and for this reason
they could not but understand his words properly: Otherwise, can we imagine that
the Disciples, who upon all other occasions were so full of questions and
objections, if they could have conceived that these words were to be understood
in a parabolical or improper Sense, would not have desired an Explication of
them of our Lord, as they did of other Parables, which were more easy to be
understood, than these words, in such a Sense? nor so much as ask our Savior,
how can these things be? That they should not tell him, we see This to be
Bread, and That to be Wine, and we see thy Body to be distinct from both; we
see thy Body not broken, and thy Blood not shed; what therefore should be the
meaning of these words? or that our Savior the true Guide, and greatest Lover
of Souls, or any of his Apostles after him, should never have given any
Explanation of them?

I have already showed, in answer to the Author, that the words of our Lord,
This is my Body, could not, according to the Rules of Human Discourse, be taken
Figuratively, so as to Signify this is a Sign of my Body, unless the Apostles
had bin beforehand prepared to understand them as so: There are no words
Recorded by any of the Evangelists to dispose them to believe the words in such
a sense, nor any indeed, that relate to the matter, unless it be some sayings
of our Lord in the Sixth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, that were delivered
before the Institution of the Eucharist, which I shall now, consider, c. 22. 19.
for the further Clearing of the Point, as also those words of Saint Luke, This
do in remembrance of me, used by our Lord, at the time of the Institution; and
prove that none of these expressions do at all favor our Adversaries Figurative
Sense, but the clean contrary.

We Read in the Sixth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, The 6. of St. John's
Gospel interpreted as relating to the Blessed Sacrament.
that our Savior had prepared the minds of his Disciples beforehand, by two
great Miracles, both which tended toward the strengthening of their Faith in
the Sacred Eucharist; the From v. 9. to v. 15.
Former being a Figure of this Sacrament, since in it he multiplied Five
Loaves, so as to make them feed five thousand persons, although the fragments
which remained filled twelve baskets, and were more in quantity than the five
Loaves were at the first; so that they needed not to doubt, but he could feed
as many thousands as he pleased with his own precious Body, exhibited under the
Species of Bread, in the blessed Sacrament, and yet his Body be still one and
the same: v. 22.
The latter showing them, that he could Convey his Body how and whither he
pleased, which made them ask him, when they saw him on the other side the Sea,
without taking Ship at the shore, Rabbi, v. 25.
when came thou hither? Then he proceeds to instruct them in Three of the
greatest Mysteries of Religion. 1. His Incarnation, or coming down from Heaven,
and taking Human Flesh upon him; from verse 27. where he also gives them a hint
of the blessed Sacrament, that meat that perishes not, to v. 51. 2. The Real
Presence of his Body, and Manducation thereof, in the Sacrament (which
wonderful Presence there, the Fathers did ever compare to the Incarnation it
self) from v. 51, to v. 59. 3. The Ascension is mentioned, to Prove the two
former Mysteries. v. 62.

Our Savior, having styled himself the Bread of Life, toward the beginning of
the Discourse of the Incarnation, v. 33, and 35. after some Explication made of
this, Repeats it again twice, v. 49, and 51, to inculcate it the better into
his Disciples minds: And then instructs them how they should be partakers of
this Bread; not by believing only, that the Son of God came down from Heaven,
and was made Man, taking upon him Human Flesh, but by feeding upon his Flesh in
the Sacrament, which being a deep Mystery, that they might not doubt of the
truth of it, he explains to them what he meant, when he said. v. 51. I am the
living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of me, he shall live
for ever; not by telling them, that by this Bread is meant the Doctrine, which
he taught, or that by, eating this Bread, is to be understood, the believing of
this Doctrine, in a Metaphorical or parabolical Sense, as the Socinians, Matthew.
13. 24.
and Sacramentarians fondly imagine; or in like manner as he Explained the
Parable of the Sower that Sowed good Seed, telling them that the Field is the
World, the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; or as when he had said, I
have meat to eat which ye know not of, he explained himself by saying, my Meat
is to do the Will of him that sent me, John 4. 32, 34.
putting the Predicate in the place of the Subject in the manner before hinted,
and saying, the Bread is my Word or the Doctrine that I teach; but quite
otherwise, he assures them, John 6. 51.
that the Bread, that he will give them, is his Flesh, which he promises to
give for the life of the world, and which, by an Elegant Metaphor, Christ
calls Bread, because it was to afford nourishment to the Soul and Body both,
in a Spiritual manner in the Sacrament, as the ordinary Bread, was to nourish
the Body, in a carnal manner, by way of corporeal digestion, out of the
Sacrament: And there is no doubt but the Jews understood our Lord in a proper
Sense, when they said, v. 52. How can this Man give us his flesh to eat? Our
Savior did not answer this doubt, by telling them, (as he easily might have
done in the Sacramentarian way) that no more was meant but believing steadfastly
in his Death, and applying to themselves the merits of it, and which
Explication he would have certainly given them, then, or afterward, by Himself
or by his Disciples, if no more had bin meant than so; as he did in the case of
Parables, less difficult to understand, than this would have bin, if it had bin
by our Lord proposed as one; but proceeds, to deliver this profound Mystery to
them, in more express words, using a vehement Asseveration to confirm the truth
of it: verse. 53, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his Blood, ye have no life in you: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day: For my Flesh
is (...).
truly meat, my Blood is truly drink: He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, dwells in me, and I in him: As the living Father has sent me, and I
live by the Father: So he that eats me, even he shall live by me: This is
that Bread which came down from Heaven; not as your Fathers did eat Manna, and
are Dead: He that eats of this Bread shall live for ever: All which words,
being used by our Lord, to clear the doubt, and answer that Question of the
Jews, How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? I cannot imagine, how the Real
Presence of Christ's Body, and its Manducation in the Sacrament, could have bin
more fully Asserted, in order to the disposing of his Disciples to believe the
Sense of the Reality, when he should Institute his blessed Sacrament: And so
the Sea the Authorities, infra.
Fathers interpret this place: And do not say, that the Manna, mentioned in the
58 verse, which was miraculously sent from Heaven, was a Type of ordinary
Bread, made by the Hands of Men, and set upon the Table, which is of a far more
Ignoble Nature and less Significant, than the Manna which thus came down from
Heaven; but of the Real Body of Christ in the Sacrament, which was the true
Bread from Heaven, that nourished to Immortality: After our Savior had spoke
thus to them, many of the Disciples themselves, to whom Christ did not think
fit as yet to reveal the manner of feeding upon his Body in the Blessed
Sacrament, thinking that he meant, that his Body was to be eaten in a gross
manner, like the Capernaites, cried out, this is a hard saying, who can hear
it? To whom, as well as to the Jews, who before are said to murmur at him;
because he said, v. 41.
I am the Bread which came down from Heaven; and that ask, how this Man could
give them his Flesh to eat? our Lord replies, does this offend you, and then
clears the Doctrins to them, as far as he judged convenient for the
confirmation of such high Mysteries, about which they were to exercise a strong
and a lively Faith, by saying thus, v. 62. What and if ye shall see the Son of
Man ascend up where he was before? As if he should have said, if you do not yet
believe, that the Son of Man came down from Heaven, yet when you see him ascend
thither again, you will be more ready to believe, that it was really God who
came down, took Flesh and dwelt amongst you; which Solution had relation
chiefly to the former of the Mysteries, viz. his Incarnation; but withal
insinuates, that such as believe not his words touching the holy Sacrament, and
think it impossible for him, to give his Body to be eaten in so many places at
once, being yet on Earth, would be much more Scandalized and Tempted after they
saw or knew him to have Ascended into Heaven.

Therefore, to clear the latter Mystery, and Solve their doubt, who thought,
like the Capernaites, that Christ was to have cut pieces of flesh from his
body, and to have given them to be eaten; or that thought his Body to be that
of a mere Man, he tells them, v. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing, that is, the Flesh, which he had told them before that they
must eat, although not in the gross manner, without the Spirit profits nothing;
not but that by the Spirit quickening it, it profits very much; Suitable to that
of St. Paul. 1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, that is,
Knowledge without Charity puffs up, although when Chariy is joined with it to
enliven it, it edifies, and Charity it self edifieth by Knowledge: For if these
words of Christ were to be taken in the Sense of the Sacramentarians, they
would derogate no less from his Incarnation, Manhood and Death, than from the
Real Presence of his Body in the Sacrament, in all which, without doubt, the
flesh profits very much: Wherefore, our Lord goes on to tell them here, that,
the words, which he spoke unto them, were Spirit and Life, therefore not to be
understood in the gross carnal Sense, before mentioned, which some of his
Disciples took them in: For it is the use of the Scripture, to call Man's
natural Sense, carnal Reasoning, and resisting, or not reaching to the belief
of Supernatural Truths, Flesh and Blood, as, Matthew. 16. 17. Flesh and blood
revealed not this to thee, etc. but, the words, that I speak unto you, they are
Spirit and Life; therefore, not to be carnally understood: But as by the Word
of God, the World was Created, and Nature has been, since, often changed; so,
there is no doubt but Christ could, by it, change the Bread into his Body, as
he did daily, by ordinary Natural Nutrition; but, V. d. Gregorium Nyssen infra.
here in a supernatural way. Our Lord, therefore, said unto them, that their
Fathers did Eat Manna, in the Wilderness, which was but a Type of this Heavenly
Manna in the Sacrament, and yet they did Spiritually feed upon Christ the
Messiah; for it is said, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. That, they did all eat the same
Spiritual Meat, and did all Drink the same Spiritual Drink; for they Drank of
that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, and yet they
are Dead, all of them a Temporal, some of them an Eternal Death also; and those
of them which now live the Life Eternal, received this Life from the Son of
God, who has now given us the Antitype of that Manna which the Children of
Israel did eat, viz. his own Body in the Sacrament, something of a far more
excellent nature to feed upon, which will be to our Bodies, as well as to our
Souls the Seed of Immortality, the Instrument, and Pledge of our Resurrection,
Ascension, and Glorification. Yet as our Lord said to his Disciples, there are
some of you which believe not, so we may say still of the Sacramentarians, who,
notwithstanding all that Christ has said, will admit of nothing but Signs, and
Figures of imaginary virtue (whom nevertheless our Savior has no further
instructed in any such easy Sense, as this, which might certainly have
prevented their relapse as well as that of the Jews, his Disciples, and which
if any such Sense had been to be admitted, would most certainly have been
given) that they will not believe our Lord, and therefore they go away and will
walk no more with him in the Communion of his Church.

Having, thus, made it to appear, that these words of Christ's Institution, The
words, This do in remembrance of me, explained.
This is my Body, according to the Rules of human discourse, ought to be taken
in a proper Sense, not only if considered in themselves, but especially if we
regard what Christ has said before touching the Sacrament, to dispose his
Apostles thus to believe them; it will necessarily follow, that those words
also of the Institution, This do in remembrance of me (which relate chiefly to
the Priests Power and Duty, as the other did to the Body of Christ in the
Sacrament, and which St. Paul explains in these words, As often as ye eat this
Bread and drink this Cup ye show the Lords Death till he come,) ought not to be
considered as a determination of the former words of the Institution in a
Figurative Sense after the Sacramentarian way, but as a Declaration of one
great end of the Sacrament, viz. The calling to mind, and setting forth of
Christ's Death till he comes, which is so far from being a Reason to prove, that
Christ's Body is not Really there, that on the contrary, this Commemoration and
Annunciation is founded upon the Real Presence of Christ's Sacrificed Body and
Blood in this Sacrament; since without this, it could not be done so
effectually in Christ's Church as now it is. For, as the Jews, in eating the
Peace Offerings, did remember that they were slain for them; so by Offering
here the Real Body of Christ, after the manner of an unbloody Sacrifice, we
commemorate, and set forth, in this lively Exemplar, that Bloody Sacrifice,
which Christ himself offered in a different manner upon the Cross, and receive
the benefit thereof; which we need not to question, since he gives us daily of
this Victim to feed upon in the Blessed Sacrament, though without the horror of
Blood. Shall Christians, then, under a pretense of Celebrating the Memory of
the Passion in the Eucharist, evacuate Christ's Institution, by taking away,
from this pious Commemoration, that which, he out of his tender love, has
given us as most efficacious in it, for the good of our Bodies (into which this
Sacrifice of Christ's Body being received, Sanctifies them, and Consecrates and
prepares them for a Glorious Resurrection) as wells as for the good of our
Souls? Ought we not to consider, that Jesus Christ does, not only Command us to
remember him, but likewise that we should do this by feeding upon his
Sacramented Body and Blood, since he does not say, that Bread and Wine should
be a Memorial of his Body and Blood, but that in doing what he prescribes us to
do, which is, that in Receiving his Body and Blood, we should remember him? And
what more precious and lively Memorial could he give to his Disciples, and to
all his beloved Children, what better Legacy could he bequeath them, at his
departure out of the World, than this? If the the Primitive Christians were
inflamed with Zeal and Devotion when they approached to the Monuments, where
the Bodies only of Holy Martyrs, lay Intombed; more especially, if they could
but touch any of their precious Reliqus, being by this means stirred up to a
Pious Memorial, and imitation of their Holy Lives and Deaths; and therefore,
did Religiously preserve the smallest pieces, and even the Nails of that Cross,
upon which Christ suffered, Commemorating thereby his Holy Passion; how much
more then should our Memory, and Love be excited, when we approach to the Holy
Altar, and know, that we Receive there, though veiled under the Sacred Symbols,
the very Body and Blood of our Lord, who Sacrificed himself for us, enlivened
and quickened by his Grace and Spirit?

I could now proceed to show, The Real virtue of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
cannot be proved from Scripture unless the Real Presence of the Body be
admitted.
for the further confirmation of what I have here alleged, from the Authority
of Holy Scripture, that unless the words of St. John's Gospel above mentioned,
as also the words of our Saviors Institution, be taken in the Sense of the
Reality or Transubstantiation, that there is no promise to be found, in Holy
Writ, of any Spiritual virtue to accompany this Sacrament; so that, our
Adversaries, whilst they are so eager to oppose the Reality, do, as much as in
them lies, destroy the nature, and end of this Blessed Institution, and have no
argument at all to use against the Socinian, who denies the Real Virtue, as
well as the Real Presence of Christ's Body, in the Sacrament: Which is the
reason, why, I do sometimes term this Virtue, (which the Author, without ground
conceives to be in this Ordinance, though separate from Christ's Real Body)
Imaginary; because there is no reason to conclude the virtue of the Body to be
here, from Scripture, unless the Body be so too; not that I would derogate at
all from the virtue of Christ's Body, which by reason of the Hypostatical union
is Infinite. But this task is already performed by a Learned Modern M. Arnaul
de la perpetuite de la foy, etc. Tom. 2.
Author: And the Reader may easily discern the Truth of what I have here
asserted, by inspecting such places of Holy Scripture as relate to this
Sacrament, into the number of which they will not allow the sixth Chapter of
St. John's Gospel to be admitted.

Having therefore thus explained those places of Holy Scripture which relate to
the Blessed Sacrament, as also those other Forms of speaking, both of Divine
and Human Authority, which the Author is pleased to compare with the Words of
our Lords Institution, and showed, upon comparing them together, that they will
not at all fit his purpose, but prove the quite contrary to what he would have
them to do: I shall now sum up such of the Reasons and Arguments for the
understanding the Words, in which our Savior Instituted this Blessed
Sacrament, in a proper Sense (as the Catholic Church expounds them) as are
plainly deduced from the Nature and End of this Holy Institution, and the
Manner of expressing it in Holy Scripture (which I entreat the Christian Reader
seriously to consider of) and so conclude this Head of Discourse.

1. Reasons from Scripture for the proper sense of the words of Institution.
Because Christ the great Lover of Souls never spoke to his Apostles and
Disciples in Figures and Parables which had any obscurity or difficult Sense,
(especially, if the Discourse related to the Practice of a necessary Duty) with
an intention to keep them in Ignorance; but See Dr. Hammond in Matt. 13. 13.
that their humble and well disposed minds might be the more excited and
inflamed with a desire of inquiring into and understanding the true meaning of
what he said, and that they might the better retain it: And because in all such
cases, even of less difficulty than this of the Sacrament (as particularly in
the Parable of the Sower of Seed, although the Mystery, concerning the success of
the Gospel which was herein prefigured, was not necessary for every one to
know, as that of the Eucharist was) Christ did fully explain himself to his
Disciples, who were also to instruct others. Therefore since the words of the
Institution of the Blessed Sacrament, if understood Figuratively, as the
Protestants, and particularly the Author, would have them to be, must need be
allowed to be obscure and difficult, because they differ so much among
themselves, as well as from the Catholic Church, about the meaning of them, and
yet none of the Evangelists nor St. Paul, although varying in expressing the
Words of Institution, have inserted any words which in the least explain the
Sense to be Figurative or Parabolical; hence it follows, That the Church has
great reason to understand them properly.

2. Because now, just upon our Lords Passion, it was the Time for Figures and
Shadows to vanish, and for Truth and Reality to appear; And our Lord was
Instituting the Great Sacrament of Christian Religion, he could not therefore
speak with too much force and efficacy, especially, since he now spoke to his
Apostles in private, to whom he was used, at such times, to speak very plainly.

3. Because Christ was making his Last Will and Testament, which was to be
expressed in such plain and distinct Terms, that there might be no just reason
for his Children to contend about their Legacy: And can we be so unworthy as to
imagine, that in this his Last and Kindest Bequest, he left us no more but a
Morsel of Common dry Bread to eat, and a little ordinary Wine and Water to
drink, in remembrance of him; whereas a kind and good natured Man will leave
his most precious Jewel to his dear Friend to remember him by, when he departs
from him to take a long Journey and to make any considerable stay? A good Father
when he is to dye, thinks all his best Goods and Possessions too little to
leave his Children. He was also delivering a Commandment to observe, which that
it might be rightly executed, ought to be promulged in a manner very
intelligible.

4. Our Lord was near his Death, and therefore it was a time to avoid Obscurity
in Speech, since he was not to continue any longer amongst them to interpret it.

5. Our Savior in the choice of these words had not only regard to the
Apostles, but he likewise spoke them to all the Church in all succeeding Ages,
and knew certainly, when he pronounced them, how they would always construe
them; and yet, for the confirmation of the Sense of the Reality, did never
suffer it to be called in question so much as privately, for almost a Thousand
Years, when also the whole Body of his Pastors who were endu'd with
extraordinary Light and Assistance of his Holy Spirit, to enable them to
interpret aright the Divine Mysteries, had already just before in Viz The
Constantian^p^litan, the second General one at Nice, and that of Frankford.
Three Councils agreed upon this Sense, as that which had been constantly
received in the Church ever since our Saviors Time, and which was more
explicitly In the Council of Rome under Gregory 7. etc.
declared against that one Beren^arius.
Dissenter who sometime after appeared against it, but was ashamed of his
Opinion and recanted.

Lastly, if we consider, as has been now fully proved, That all the places of
Holy Scripture, as also all other Forms of Human Discourse which are alleged
by our Adversaries, as like to this of our Lords Institution, are wholly
different from it, showing them the quite contrary to what they pretend them
for, and that our Savior did neither before, at, or after the Institution any
ways prepare or dispose his Disciples to understand these words in a Figurative
Sense, it must needs be very evident to any Man that will impartially regard
things, that because Christ ever spoke reasonably, and in a manner conformable
to good Sense, and his Power infinitely exceeds the capacity of our Minds;
therefore there is no Reason to understand those words of our Saviors, THIS IS
MY BODY, and THIS IS MY BLOOD in a Metaphorical Sense, as the Author and the
Sacramentarins do, but an evident necessity to believe them in that proper
Sense, which See the Introduction
necessarily infers Transubstantiation, as the Catholic Church does, since
Scripture interpreted by the Rules of Human Discourse, as also the Tradition
and Authority of this Church oblige us so to do: The latter of which is to be
the Subject of the Second Part of the Answer to the Discourse against
Transubstantiation.

The Contents of the First Part of the Answer to the Discourse against
Transubstantiation.
1. IT is showed that our Adversary does not rightly state the Point. Page 1 2.
What is meant by Transubstantiation. 4 3. The Argument from Sense showed to be
Senseless. ibid. 4. The Catholic Faith is ridiculed by the Adversary. 7 5. The
Real Presence and Transubstantiation depends on Gods Veracity. 9 6. No
Transubstantiation an Article of Faith with our Adversaries, and established
with Penalties. 10 7. The Method of the ensuing Discourse. 11 8. The Necessity
of understanding our Lords words in the Sense of the Real Presence or
Transubstantiation. 13 9. The Sense of the Schoolmen corrupted, and their
Problematical Discourse mistaken for their Conclusion by the Adversary. 16 10.
The Disparity between the Figurative Expressions in Holy Scripture, and the
words of Institution, This is my Body, shows that the Latter are to be taken
properly. 25, etc. 11. Principles upon which the ensuing Discourse is grounded.
ibid. 12. How Catholics interpret the words of Institution, and how
Protestants. 26 13. In what Sense Catholics allow a Figure in the Sacrament. 28
14. Rules to judge of Metaphorical Expressions by. 31, 2. 15. The Application of
the forgoing Rules: by which it appears, that those merely Metaphorical
Expressions of our Saviors being a Door, a Vine, etc. are not at all like to
the Form of Consecration, This is my Body. 33, etc. 16. A Metaphor conveys no
Spiritual Virtue. Page 36 17. The Exposition of Pharaoh's Dream does not
resemble the Sacred words of Consecration, This is my Body. ibid. 18.
Distinctions and Rules for the following Discourse of the Nature of Signs.
ibid. 19. Application of the foregoing Rules and Distinctions. 37 20. The
Analogy which the words of Institution, This is my Body, might have to the
Paschal Form in Scripture, or to those Phrases cited from Esdras, or any of the
Rabins, does not prove that Christ's words here, are taken Figuratively and not
in a proper Sense. 40 21. A Deeds being called a Conveyance does not prove that
the words, This is my Body, are not to be taken properly. 46 22. Texts of
Scripture examined, and proved not at all to favor the Sense of the Author of
the Discourse against Transsubstantiation. 47 23. Christ's Body being broken,
and his Blood being poured out, for the Remission of Sins, before he was
Crucified, proves the Sense of the Reality, or Transubstantiation. 52. 24. The
6th Chapter of S. John's Gospel interpreted, as relating to the Blessed
Sacrament. 54, etc. 25. The words, Do this in Remembrance of me, explained. 59.
26. The Real Virtue of Christ's Body in the Sacrament cannot be proved from
Scripture, unless the Real Presence of his Body it self be admitted. 60 27.
Further Reasons from Scripture for the proper Sense of the words of
Institution, which necessarily infers Transubstantiation. 61 28. The
Conclusion of this Head of Discourse upon Scripture Authority for the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation; and of the first Part of the Answer to the
Discourse against Transubstantiation. 63
FINIS.

