Pulpit-Sayings, OR, THE CHARACTERS OF THE Pulpit-Papist EXAMINED.

IN ANSWER TO THE Apology for the Pulpits, AND IN Vindication of the
Representer against the Stater of the Controversy.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

TO THE READER.
IF to be a Papist, is to be that which is described in the following
Characters, I do here declare, that I am none: and that I am so far from
undertaking Apologies for Men of such Practices and Belief, that I here profess
a hearty detestation of all such Engagements. What kind of Religion is it then,
that is here set forth in these Characters? I call it Pulpit-Popery, and him
that professes it, a Pulpit-Papist: that is, such Popery, and such a Papist, as
is described by Ministers in their Pulpits, and which the People are taught to
pursue with Hatred and Contempt. Well, and am not I then such a Papist, and is
not my Religion such Popery? No, I profess, I renounce such Popery: and if
there be any Papists that are taught such a Religion, I here Protest against
them. And is it possible then, that a Papist can renounce Popery? Yes, any
Papist in Town may safely renounce this Pulpit-Popery, which is so unlike the
Doctrine and Faith we are obliged to learn in our Church, that whosoever will be
a good Papist must, instead of assenting to, disclaim every Point that is here
set down by the Pulpits, as Articles of his Religion.

But this is a foul Aspersion, says somebody, and a most scandalous Reflection
upon the Pulpits, to pretend, that whilst they undertake to describe the
Papists, they assert such Principles for Popery, which the Papists detest as
much as they. It Is true indeed, I confess, it is a thing in which they are
something concerned: But as long as those Chairs pretend to no more than a
Fallibility, it is a thing they themselves own, that they may be mistaken; and I
go but one Step far^^e^, and modestly say* that ^n these Points relating to the
Papists, They are mistaken. And pray now, where is the Crime in this? I hope I
may be supposed to know what my Religion is, as well as they* and if they
declare to their Congregation, that our Religion is, what I know it is not, I
am bound, in defense of Truth, to declare They are mistaken. I Will tell you, as
long as the Pulpits employ themselves in correcting the Vices of their
Congregation, in teaching them to lead good Lives, not to use Frauds, nor
Cheat, nor Lie, nor Swear, nor Blaspheme, to avoid all Excesses, etc. I
commend, I applaud them, I speak all the good things that possibly I can of
them. As long as they discourage those under their Charge, from Praying to
Images; from attributing Satisfaction and Expiation to a Crucifix of Wood or
Stone, from putting any trust in it; from esteeming every thing good and
meritorious, that makes for their Cause, or for their Church's Interest; from
changing the Scripture into Legends; from Preaching Purgatory instead of
Repentance, Faction instead of Faith; from the thought of Compounding with
Heaven for Vnforsaken Sins, of procuring Indulgences for Deadly Sins for many
Years to come; from Worshipping Bread and Wine as God himself; from appearing
before God Dumb and Senseless, and saying their Prayers without Attention; from
binding themselves to Ignorance by Vow, etc. As long, I say, as they discourage
their Flock from these Follies and Abominations, they do exceeding well, they
do like Christians, I join with them, and desire them to hold on these so
wholesome Lessons. Again, as long as they declaim against the Abuses of Relics,
of Pretended Miracles, of Confession; against the ill Example, scandalous
Lives, Pride and Covetousness of some Churchmen; against Tyranny, Murder,
Usurpation, Cruelty, Oppression, Massacres, Plots, Treasons, Rebellion, etc.
This is still all very well; it is what Catholics do, and I would do it my self,
were I to Preach; I have nothing therefore to say against the Pulpits, whilst
they are engaged in these Subjects, but concur with them with all my heart. But
when they take a Step beyond this, and lay all this at the Papists doors, and
describe all these Absurdities as the Religion of the Papists; and that to
become a Papist, is to be instructed in, and obliged to the Profession of all
these Monstrous Abominations; here I think my Self my Religion and Church
concerned; and therefore I step in with my Advice to the Pulpits: and though, I
confess, 'twould be a daring Presumption in me to pretend to direct them, how
they are to Guide and Feed their own Flock; yet I take it for no such Crime to
put them in mind, that they be not Injurious to their Neighbor: This is a
Lecture all Christians have a Right to Preach; and therefore with this Sermon
of Advice I make up to our Preachers, who are so forward in making Characters
of the Papists. I tell them, that though they may have but little Affection for
the Papists, yet they ought to be careful, not to be Unjust to them, not to
wrong them in their Reputation, not to defame them upon the account of every
Idle Story, not to promote Calumnies, Preach out of Narratives, nor to set up
every Misconstruction of their own Fancy, every Opinion of Authors, every
Extravagancy of her Members, for the Professed Religion of the Papists. This,
and much more of this kind, I put them in mind of; and though it be so truly
Christian Advice, yet I find they take it unkindly; they are not willing to be
thought Men of such Principles, as to stand in need of this Advice. Now, for my
part, I never pretended that they were of such Principles, as to proceed in
this manner, and be so unjust to the Papists designedly: But alas! there is a
great deal of Mischief done in the World, which is never done by Design. There
are some little Accidents to which Frail Human Nature is very subject, called
Passion, Prejudice, Prepossession, Disaffection, etc. These are very
insinuating things, and of a treacherous nature, which put Men upon the worst
of Engagements, and do the greatest Mischiefs in the World, without any open
Design of doing any. And therefore, since the matter of Fact to me is certain,
the Mischief and Injustice done, and we here suppose without Design, I must
desire the Preachers to reflect, whether none of these Mischievous Accidents at
least, ever went up with them into the Pulpit; whether Passion and Animosity
never crept with them into those Chairs; whether Prejudice never influenced
their Pen and Tongue; whether Prepossession never biased their Reason and
Judgment; and likewise, whether they never racked a Text, in compliance with
the Temper and Humor of their Flock. The People, we know, cannot always bear
the Truth; they sometimes say with the Jews (Isa. 30. 10.) Prophecy not unto
us right things; speak unto us smooth things, prophecy Deceits: Did the
Preachers never follow this Bent of the People? Come, I wish they would make a
thorough Examen into themselves. I fear they are Frail, are under Temptations,
and yield to them sometimes like other Mortals. Where there is so much of
Division, and different Interests, I suspect all these Evil Qualities must have
some access: 'twas ever so from the beginning; and I apprehend it is from the
ill Direction of these, our Religion has suffered so much. For my part, I
seldom hear any speak of Popery now, but presently a Sour and Peevish Temper
appears against it, and Sober Reason, which ought to guide every Christian in
the Concern of Religion, seems to be quite laid aside; and this is a sign, that
the Contention is more for a Party, than a Zeal for Truth, which needs not the
assistance of these Ill Qualities to defend or enlarge its Possessions. But
these are only the natural Consequences of Division, which under the Pretext of
Religion, puts Men upon the most unwarrantable Methods both for securing
themselves and defeating their Neighbors. And it is not we only that are
sensible of these ill Effects, but others too. And therefore let me here take
occasion more solemnly to complain, that since the Pretense to Religion has
torn Christianity into Parties, Animosities and Hatred have taken the place of
Love and Unity; Fears and Jealousies have passed for solid Reason and Judgment;
and scarce any one Body of Christians have been known by another, but under
false Colors, and a base Disguise. Hence it is, that whilst few discover
scarce any Beauty and Order, but in their own Communion; and in all others
there appears so much of the Monster, Heats every where increase, and Men as
fiercely engage each other, as if their Opposites were nothing better than
Turks or Infidels; and the Truth of Christianity which they so earnestly
contend for, is lost by their uncharitable Dissentions. The truth of this let
every one consider in their several Divisions, and when they have been serious
a while in this so lamentable a Prospect, and viewed the distracted State of
Christians, let them compare it with the Command of Christ, of Love one
another; and Be ye one, as I and my Father are one: and if the Sight does not
move to Compassion, and engage as many as behold it, to a zealous removal of
these Differences, it is because these Schisms have destroyed all Charity, and
under a false Gloss of Godliness, have taught Men to forget their Duty both to
God and their Neighbor. For my part, I have experienced the truth of this in
Men of all Persuasions in regard to the Religion I profess. I have heard and
seen it railed at, contemned, set upon the same File with Turcism and
Infidelity, abandoned even to the blackest Hell; and as many as profess it,
reputed no better than Madmen or Fools; and not made the Objects so much of
Compassion and Pity, as of Hatred and Scorn. This, I say, I have seen with a
confusion of Spirit, and deep resentment of Soul; and wondered, how a Religion,
by which I had been taught to Love God and my Neighbor, and to perform all
Christian Duties, should by other Christians be rendered so black and odious,
and her Doctrins so hellish and damnable. But this was not long a Mystery; a
little Consideration soon discovered, that 'twas none of my Religion was thus
hotly decry'd, but a Monster of Iniquity set up under her Name. And, that though
her Members were Ridiculed, Persecuted and Defamed, yet 'twas for Doctrins they
were never taught by her, and for Facts they were either not concerned in, or
not approved. And so it appeared that this great disturbance of Christianity,
this effacing its Beauty, this so wide a breach of Charity, this propagating of
Divisions, this inverting the Doctrine of Christ, and teaching Men to hate,
instead of love, one another, was chiefly occasioned by Misunderstanding, by
false Dresses, counterfeit Colors, and imagined Monsters more than real ones.
And is not this a shame to Christendom, that it should be thus torn in pieces
for Dreams and Phancies, to have its Peace broken to fight with Shadows, and
that Reasoning Men should, for Fears and Jealousies, run down the most
Fundamental Doctrins and Commands of Christ? But there is enough of this; and
it is time, that as many as pretend to be Followers of Christ, should now set
their Hand to the recovering his Glory, and the Credit of the Religion they
profess: that we, who own our selves obliged, to be of one Mind and one Spirit,
to preserve a mutual Peace and Unity, may be no longer a Scandal to Atheists,
Jews, and Turks, and by our Divisions overthrow that Kingdom, which we all
zealously pretend to maintain. Since therefore the great occasion of this
Mischief is, that Christians know not one another; that hence they raise to
themselves Adversaries upon mistake, and as fiercely engage them, as if they
were real: nothing can possibly more contribute to the Common Peace and Unity
of Christendom, than that every Division of Pretenders should fairly lay open
the Particulars in which they look upon themselves abused, show wherein they
are wronged, so to endeavor the remove of all Misunderstandings and Mistakes.
This, I don't question, would be highly advantageous, for the recovering the
Blessing of the Primitive Believers. And because amongst all other Communions,
that of Popery is become the greatest Bugbear, frights People into all the
Extravagancies of the Heathens, in defense of the Gospel, makes them trample
all the Commands of Christ under foot, for the support of Christianity; is
reputed the greatest Aggrievance, the common Seed of Divisions, and what
chiefly seems to render all amicable Compositions impossible: I Will endeavor, in
order to this General Good, to let the World see, it is only Mistake or Passion
has made her so deformed a Monster; and that though she be commonly pretended the
Occasion of many Pagan Proceedings amongst Christians, it is not for what She
really is, but what She Is made to be by such unquiet Spirits, who cannot make
good their Posts, and vent their violent Passions with Applause, unless set
forth under this Cloak of Religion: And consequently, that were She truly
known, as to her genuin Faith and Doctrine, the greatest part of our
Disturbances would be certainly prevented, the Enemies of the Common Peace
would be quite disabled, as to their chiefest Engine, and Charity and Love be
so far reestablished amongst us. This every one will conclude to be true, who
has taken a Prospect of Holland, and those Towns of Germany, in which Papists
and Protestants live together in one Corporation, under the same Laws, and
making use in some Places even of the same Churches too; and this with such
Freedom, Amity and good Correspondence, that their different Communion, cannot
be easily discovered; and a Man that should come out of England with his Head
glowing with our Pulpit-Popery, would not be easily convinced of the being of
any Papists there. Now it is certain, the Papists here and there, are of the
same Church, Principles and Faith, and it is no Difference in this kind, makes
them there like other Men, and here like Monsters; but it is because there the
Papists are what they are, and here they are made to be what they are not, but
what their Maligners please to render them. And as long as they are only looked
on through this false Glass, and shown to the People under the Deformity of
many Heads and Horns, and with the Beast all over, what hopes of their being
received into the Bond of Common Charity? Or what greater encouragement for
Feuds and unchristian Animosities, than that these should be so marked out for
Disciples of Antichrist, to be pursued with Contempt and Hatred by their
Neighbors, in the Service and Fear of the Lord? I must needs confess, that were
Popery so foul, as it is in the opinion of the Vulgar, were its Principles so
cruel and bloody, did it teach Men Idolatry, to worship any Creature for God,
to neglect the Commandments, etc. I would choose rather to be Jew, Turk, or
Infidel, than a Papist; I would willingly subscribe to all the Comparisons
betwixt Paganism and Popery; I would own, that a Man must of necessity lay by
both Sense and Reason, before he could take up such a Religion; and that to
Preach against it, and endeavor its ruin, would not be only laudable, but even
a necessary Duty. But if this black Character should no otherwise agree to it,
than by Mistake; if the Papists should not really teach nor believe those
Fopperies and absurd Doctrins, which are laid to them, but utterly abhor and
disclaim them; then it is certain our little World has been filled with
Confusions upon Imagination; it has been frighted into most unaccountable
Practices, by idle Jealousies; and there can be no surer way for retrieving the
past, and preventing all such like Mischiefs, than by more closely examining
the thing we fear, and seeing whether it be a real Monster we dread, or else
something artificially dressed up for to fright the unwary.

For my part, I am not ashamed here to own, that my Religion is Popery, as
taught and delivered by the Church of Rome; I embraced it without the influence
of any Temporal Motive, and I continue in it, upon the hopes of obtaining
Salvation, in the Profession of her Faith, and observance of her Doctrins,
through the Merits and Passion of my ever Blessed Redeemer. And 'twas no small
surprise to me, to hear this very Church, (the Purity of whose Belief and
Doctrine I admired) so positively decry'd for the Whore of Babylon, for the
Promoter of all Inhuman Barbarities, ranked with Paganism and Turcism, the
Prophaner of God's Holy Word, and Propagator of the Doctrine of Devils, etc. I
was alarmed at this Character, and immediately concluded, that if this was so,
I had been greatly mistaken, and instead of putting my self into the way of
Heaven, had certainly fallen into the very Mouth of Hell. This put me upon some
Reflections, and obliged me to enter into a more strict Scrutiny of my
Religion, and my self: I did both with seriousness, knowing that the Concern
was of Eternity, and whereon depended my Soul's Salvation or Damnation. Upon
examination of my self, I could not find that, I had been taught any of those
Hellish Doctrins charged against my Church; or that She any where delivered
them: but on the contrary, that I had been directed by Her, To worship and
adore one only Living God; To serve him with fear and trembling; To love him
above all things; To keep his Commandments; To love my Neighbor as my self, and
in all things to fulfill the Law of Christ; That nothing was so contradictory to
this Law, as to commit Idolatry, to profane the Word of God, or any ways to
propagate Superstition, or the Doctrine of Devils; And that I ought rather to
suffer Death a thousand times, than once incur the Guilt of any of these
Crimes. Now here, what could I think, finding my Church wholly opposite to the
Character given of it; and my self lying under the Scandal of such Doctrins,
which I did as much abhor, as Hell and Damnation it self? I was convinced of
the falsness of the Charge, and that the Accusation was a Calumny; but whether
proceeding from Mistake, Misunderstanding, Ignorance, Faction, Interest,
Passion, or Malice, I was not able to determine. But a farther enquiry into the
Proofs, produced for the making good this Charge, gave me some satisfaction:
For here amongst these, I found a great number of Matters of Fact, as
Massacres, Usurpations, Murders of Princes, Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies,
Persecutions, and other such unwarrantable Practices, charged against the
Members of this Church. I found again the vicious and scandalous Lives of some
of her chief Prelates, their Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury, laid home; as
likewise the ill Examples of other Ecclesiastical Dignitaries, as of Cardinals,
Bishops, and Priests; their Ignorance, Simony, Oppression, Cruelties, Excesses,
etc. Then the loose and extravagant Opinions of many of her Doctors. Lastly,
many Superstitions and Abuses found amongst the People, their being imposed on
by some with idle Inventions, the noise of Relics and Miracles, and being
Priest-ridden a thousand other ways. These I say, I found, with others of the
same blackness urged against Men in Communion with my Church. And hence a
Conclusion drawn upon the whole Church, upon her Doctrine, and all in her
Communion, of their being as foul as Hell, of the same Tincture with these
Villainies and Crimes. And here it was I began to lay aside all Troubles and
Scruples concerning my Religion, being now well satisfied, that the frightful
Character of my Church, whlch surprised me before, was not taken from her Faith
and Doctrine, but only from the Vice and Wickedness of such, who though perchance
in her Communion, yet followed not her Direction: and that 'twas rather a black
Record of as many villainous Practices, as had ever been committed by any of her
Members, Shamm'd upon the People for a Draught of such things the Church
taught, encouraged, and approved. And here upon the whole, I could not but
lament these uncharitable Proceedings, to see so great a Body of Believers,
such an infinite number of Christians, of which I was one, lie under so base, so
scandalous a Reproach, to see them condemned for the Abettors of such
Principles which they detested and abhorred; and the Crimes of their Ancestors
made to be their Religion. For my part, this Method appeared to me much beneath
all Reason and Religion. I thought, if this were once allowable and just, we
might all be Indicted for Felons and Horse-stealers, because many of our Church
had been convicted of those Crimes; that the Debaucheries of the Stews,
Whitefriers and the Mint, might be proved to be according to Precept; and the
Rules of Christianity be exactly drawn, by the Offenses of those that
transgress them. I must confess, had I, upon examination, found, I had been
taught by my Religion, or of my self approved those Villainies, for which, under
the name of Papist, I, with all of my Communion have suffered in our
Reputation, I should own all as Just and Deserved: but since we, as Papists,
have always before God, and are ready before Men, to disclaim and utterly
renounce all such Facts and Principles, without the least Injury to our
Religion, whatsoever we suffer on this score, cannot be, but as much against
Justice, against Charity, and against Christianity, as against Us: and the very
Apostles themselves might upon as good reason be condemned of all the Abuses
and Errors of their Reprobate Brethren, as we of all the Crimes and Fopperies
practiced by Extravagant Men of our Church. I cannot therefore, considering how
damnable a Sin Calumny is, and the defaming a vast Society of Christians with
the most infamous of Crimes, I cannot, I say, but have so much Charity for the
most violent of our Opposers, as to think, that did they but believe us
Innocent in these Respects, they would no longer pursue us with such Infamy and
Reproach: and consequently that a great reason why we are thrown out by so
many, from the number of Christians, and degraded by others amongst Turks and
Infidels, by others condemned for Idolaters, by others reputed as Bloody and
Barbarous, by others as Idiots and Mad, by others as Blind and Superstitious,
by others as Ignorant as Asses, Horses, and Mules, etc. is because, they know
not what we are, what we Teach, nor what we Believe; because they take the
Offenses of some of our Members, for the Religion of all; the Opinions of some
Casuists, for the Doctrine of the Church; the Vices of Men, for the Rules of the
Society; Abuses for Directions, and Superstitions for Duties. What therefore
can we more commendably do, for the Good of Christianity, than to disabuse our
Brethren, remove the occasion of our so many years Disturbances, and settle a
right Understanding between all those who believe, there is no Salvation, where
there is no Charity. This I have already endeavored in some plain and short
Tracts, not long since Published; I Will here go on to wipe off such Scandals as
have been urged against us from the Pulpit, which if done seriously, may still
contribute to the same end, and make it appear, the Papists are none of the
Monsters they are imagined. This I Will do, by Examining such Characters, as have
been of late Years given of the Papists from the Pulpits. In which I shall
show, that there are many things charged upon them, without either Truth or
Sincerity; and consequently, that it is not without good Grounds they complain
of being Misrepresented. But first I must have a word or two with a late
Adversary, and then to the Characters of the Pulpit-Papist.

Pulpit-Sayings, OR, THE CHARACTERS OF A Pulpit-Papist EXAMINED.
FOR the bringing the long Debate of Misrepresenting Pref. to Third Part of
Pap. Misrep.
to an issue, I lately made a Challenge to the Pulpits of the Church of
England, to show us the Papists to be like those Foul Characters, that for so
many years had been given of them from those High Places. And though the Preface,
wherein that Challenge was published, was pretended to be Answered by one, who,
besides the Talent he has of Railing with a good Grace, has likewise so vain a
Conceit of himself, as to think he Answers every Line Answ. to Repr. Reflect.
upon the State of Controv. p. 5.
of his Adversary; yet when he comes to this Challenge, though so Considerable,
and whereon depends the Proof of the Pulpit-Credit, after having repeated it,
and Blazoned it in Great Characters, he gravely nicknames it with the Title of
a Shout and an Exclamation, page 26. and then tamely lets it slip betwixt his
Fingers; complaining in his next Page, He can meet with nothing worth the
Answering.

How can a Man forbear standing here a little to admire the Contrivance of some
Men, who, when they are pressed with the Difficulty, have not Humility enough
to own it; but like the Executioners of S. Stephen, fly to their last Refuge,
taking up Stones to fling at their Adversary, when they cannot come up to him
with a just Reply? I appeal here to the Unprejudiced and Thinking part of
Mankind; when the Controversy of Misrepresenting was like to grow endless,
what could be more fairly proposed, than to require of the Pulpits, to make it
appear, That the Papists do in all things answer the Character they had given
of them? The bringing this Proposal to an issue, would certainly have concluded
the Point. If the Papists had appeared to have been really what they had been
rendered; the Pulpits had been acquitted of the Charge: and if it had proved
otherwise, they must as certainly been condemned as Guilty; and Misrepresenting
must have laid at their doors. All the World knows, that the only way to
discover whether those, who pretend to show Strange and Wonderful Monsters to
the World, are Honest Men or Impostors, is to go into the Booth, and see,
whether what they have to show there, agrees with their Descriptions and
Painted Cloths, which are exposed on the outside. If it be every way alike,
they must have the Repute of Fair-dealers: but, if upon the trial, it answers
not the expectation, and there is no more of Monster to be found, besides in the
outside Painting and in Words; the Shewers must certainly pass for no better
than Cheats; and that for want of an honester Livelihood, they chose rather to
Impose upon their Neighbor, than Starve. Such a Trial as this, was the only
Means left, after so much Shifting and Winding, to bring our Controversy to an
issue. The Pulpits had been for many years making Characters of the Papists,
and telling the World, how Strange and Deformed Monsters they were. The Truth
of their Characters was at length questioned, and the Papists are said, not to
agree with those deformed Features, nor be the Monsters they had been
pretended. And here began the Difference: the one Side positively denying, the
other as stiffly asserting the Truth and Exactness of the Characters. What was
to be done here, beside making the Experiment? Come therefore, said I to the
Pulpits, (and withal gave them the Challenge) Show us the Papists to agree with
your Characters; let us see them: and then without any farther trouble we shall
know, whether the Papists are really the Monsters you deciphered them; or You
Impostors, for exposing them otherwise than They were. This Challenge I made;
and though the Answerer is so thoroughly acquainted with Monsters, as to know them
to be very Remarkable things, and may be shown with a Finger, ib. p. 36. yet
ho's so far from joining issue with me here, that though the Decision depended
upon so inconsiderable a Matter, as the holding forth a Finger and Pointing,
he will not vouchsafe the trouble; but instead of that, lifts up both his Hands
against me, and by most vile and base Innuendo's, p. 27. shows how low he can
stoop, only for the poor satisfaction of taking up Dirt to throw at his
Adversary. Certainly the Cause must be very desperate, that is thus deserted,
and left only with the support of Railery and Reviling. But 'twas by the help
of these excellent Qualities, Misrepresenting at first received a Being; and
upon these Legs it is like to stand. Thus is it left by this its Present
Patron, who solemnly takes his leave, and bids the Cause farewell, as he says,
Two or Three had done before him.

The Challenge therefore I made formerly, for the ending this Controversy, I
here repeat again, not to him, but to all the Ministers, nay to all the
Protestants of this Nation: Show us the Papists to agree with those Characters,
that have been given of them out of the Pulpits. There are few Ministers, but
have some Papists in their Parish: and few Laymen of any Business, but have
some Relations, Neighbors, Correspondents, Acquaintance, or Conversation with
some Papists. What I require of them then is, to compare these Papists they
know, with the Idea's, Notions and Characters of the Pulpit-Papist, that is,
with the Notions of Popery that have been infused into them from the Pulpit.
Let 'em tell me, upon due Consideration, whether the Papists they know, are so
much worse than all the rest of Mankind, as the Pulpits seem to render them.
Let them take a view, and see, whether the Papists of their Acquaintance are so
profoundly Ignorant, so Treacherous, so Cruel and Bloody, so False and
Deceitful, so ready to take Oaths and rashly to break them again, so stupid and
senseless at their Devotions, of such profligate Lives, so stupid as to Pray to
Images or Crucifixes, so much relying on a Deathbed Repentance. Let 'em
consider this, I say; and if the Papists are generally found to agree with
these kind of Pulpit-Characters, then the Pulpits are in the right: but if it
appear, that the Papists are found as free from these Imputations, as any other
Division of Reformed Christians; then the Pulpits are in the wrong, and have so
much Satisfaction to make, as there are Papists suffering in their Reputation
and Family, for the undeserved Characters that have been thus cast upon them
from the Pulpits. This is the Challenge I make, and I beg of every
Conscientious Protestant to make the Reflection. If the Papists are in good
earnest more Wicked and Extravagant than their Neighbors, they shall not have
me to Apologize for them: but if they are really as Conscientious, as tender of
their Duty both to God and their Neighbor, and as careful of their Salvation as
other Men, it is but a Duty to speak in their behalf, and it shall not be the
Reproaches of Two or Three Abusive Writers, that shall deter me from so Just an
Enterprise.

I invite Protestants to make this Reflection now, because the Trial is not so
difficult at present, as it has been in times past, when the Pulpits, with all
the bitterness imaginable, were setting forth the Papists, under all the
disagreeing Colors of Monster and Deformity, and might reasonably then hope to
pass for True Representers, whilst the State at the same time was so severe as
to keep them under, and with especial Proviso's took care, they should be
possessed of no Puhlic Stations, wherein to show themselves to the World. At
this time 'twas safe for the Pulpits, to say any thing of the Papists; they
might set as many Heads and Horns on them as they pleased. For whilst a Man
keeps his Monster from being seen, he may set him out as incredibly Monstrous
as he will, without danger of being disproved. But now, Blessed be God, the
Times are more open; there is a Liberty for all Honest Men to show themselves to
the World: and Papists too, through the Favor of their Prince, go Sharers with
their Neighbors in every Degree; they have their Public Posts both in the
Administration of the Sword, and the Scale; and he that has a mind to know,
what the Papists are, has now, God be praised, better Opportunities of doing
it, than by going to the Church. At this time then it is, I desire all sorts of
Protestants, whether Clergy or Laity, to make the Trial, and Answer the
Challenge. There are none, but what upon a short Recollection, may remember,
what kind of Papists they are, they have seen so often buffeted upon the
Cushion; how much worse than all the rest of the World; how silly, how
Ridiculous, how Faithless, how much better Christians are the Turk and the Jew
than They. Let them take this Pulpit-Draught along with them, and compare it
with all the Papists they know, or can hear of* let them see, whether They
answer the Character. And if they find them in all things like the rest of
Mankind, without more Horns or Heads, let them then tell me, who are the
Misrepresenters.

For my own part, I have heretofore upon occasion made a like Offer to some
Protestant Acquaintance, when I have seen them come from Church, with their
Heads full of Pulpit-Popcry, and their Hearts embitter'd against it. I have
upon this took the liberty of demanding of them, Whether such Neighbors of
theirs, whom they knew to be Papists, and with whom they were thoroughly
acquainted, were in reality such Ill-men, agreeable to those Characters of
Popery they had heard in their Church-Lectures? And they answered me, No: but
that ^^ their Conscience, they judged them to be very good Neighbors, and good
Christians: and that, if all the rest were like them, there would be no reason
to complain. This Answer I have heard at all ends of the Town; so that though the
generality of Protestants are so Biased and Pulpit-ridden, that they have an
Animosity against the Papists; yet I find, it is not founded upon any knowledge
of their own, but merely taken up upon Trust; and and like all other Passions,
is blindly hurried on against such, as they know nothing of. Such a Hood-winked
Passion it was of a Person in the Country not long since, who loudly declaiming
against the Papists, for a Generation of Vipers, and a Prostigate sort of Men,
etc. after having poured forth his Invectives in the bitterest manner he could,
was asked by one of the Company, How many Papists he knew? He replied, He knew
but Two Families; such a Gentleman in such a Place, and such another. And it
being demanded, What kind of Persons they were? He said, that Those indeed were
very good Men, Just, Honest, and Exemplar: but however, that he was sure the
Papists, at least all the rest of them, were the worst of Men. How! says the
other, You that know but Two Families in the World Papists, and those Good
beyond Exception; and yet thus severely to let fly at all the rest, of whom you
know nothing, is an unpardonable Rashness. But this is to the Protestant Tune:
if a Man cannot tell how to run down Popery, though he knows nothing of it, he is
no True Son of the Church of England. So that though the Teachers of this
Communion as Established by Law, are very industrious to dissuade their Hearers
from all Implicit Faith, in assenting to Divine Mysteries delivered by the
Church; but that they must be sure, not to move one Step beyond their own Sense
and Reason, otherwise they will ^ot believe like Men, but pin their Faith on
other Men's Sleeves, and blindly be led by the Nose; Yet when they turn on the
other S^^^, and ^^e to hear what Popery and the Papists are; here they may run
o^ as blindly as they please, an Implicit Faith is now more to the purpose:
Upon this Implicit Faith they may Hate them; on this they may Rail against
them: It Is not now here, Search and Examine, and then Believe and Speak as far
as by your own knowledge you find to be True: But a Genuine Son of the Church
of England, is to have a good Stock of this Implicit Faith by him, and to
Believe and Speak, though he knows nothing at all. And this it is I have often
observed, that Those who are the greatest Begots, and rail most bitterly
against the Papists, are They that know the least of them, not so much as my
Countryman above, not Two Families.

But why this Uneven kind of Dealing in Men that pretend to so much Conscience
and Reason! If a Member of the Church of England must not assent to any Mystery
of Christianity upon an Implicit Faith, for fear of Vnmanning himself forsooth:
why should he so unworthily betray his own Reason, in taking up Calumnies upon
Trust for the ruining his Neighbor? As if the believing rashly of God or of our
Neighbor, were not both destructive, and to be avoided by every good Christian.
For my part, all that I pretend to here is, that all Good Protestant* would
observe the Rule so often prescribed from the Pulpits, of Search and Examine;
That they would Try and see, what the Papists are, before they condemn them.
But it is not in the Pamphlets, Books and Sermons of Protestants I would have
them seek for this Information; for all these I look on only as so many Painted
Cloths or Popular Harangues, designed for the making of Crowds, and increasing
the number of Admirers: No; what need of taking it thus upon Trust, when, at
this time, there are none, but who have opportunity enough, of seeing and
knowing the Papists themselves, and letting their own Eyes, their own Ears tell
them, what the Papists are, instead of going to a Lecture, and receiving it
upon Trust from those, who at the same time they are telling, what the Papists
are, are informing their Auditory, how silly and unreasonable a thing it is, to
take things upon Trust, and to be contented with an Implicit Faith, when they
may with much more Security follow their own Sense and Reason, their own Eyes
and their Ears? It Is thus then I desire Papists should be tried, after the
Protestant Way; I would have every one examine and see, what the Papists are,
with whom they Converse, with whom they Trade or have any Dealing; such as are
of their Acquaintance or Neighborhood; consider and reflect on those, who are
in any Public Post, let them use all their Senses and Reason, and strictly look
into their Way of Living, and Dying, their Conversation, the Care and Pains
they take in order to Salvation: and then let them speak freely upon their own
knowledge, whether the Papists are generally the worst of their Neighborhood,
whether they are less Conscientious, less Humble, less Charitable, etc. than
others of any other Persuasion. But especially let them have a particular
regard to such as are Converts to the Catholic Communion, and observe them with
a watchful Eye: it is certain, if Popery be as Black as it is Painted, and so
many Degrees worse than Protestantism, 'twill be impossible for a Man, of
Protestant to become Papist, but 'twill soon be discovered in the Immorality of
his Life and Actions. Let these Converts therefore be rigorously observed, to
see, whether with the change of Religion, they change their Lives too for the
worst, and appear under all those Foul Colors, that are pretended to belong to
Popery. Let them see in particular, whether, upon being Papists, and going to
Confession, they are now less scrupulous of offending God, and more Debauched
than they were before; as it is said of the Papists in Protestant Sermons, viz.
That Confession tends Good Advice to Pulp. p. 53. Answer to it, p. 21, 25.
to the Debauching both Laity and Clergy: and that the Papists make no other
use of Confession, than what professed Drunkards do of Vomiting. Let 'em see
whether they take less care of Repenting, than they did before, or Sin now more
confidently, presuming upon Popes Pardons, and Compounding with Heaven for
Money: Whether they are less Attentive at their Prayers; Dumb and Senseless,
like Idols, at their Devotions in the Church: Whether they are so stupid, as to
Pray to Images; To change Scripture into Legends; To neglect Repentance,
because of Purgatory; To esteem every thing Meritorious that is for the
Church's Interest, etc. Let all Converts be strictly observed as to these and
such like Points, which are the common Pulpit-Characters of Popery: If it be
true, what is thus solemnly asserted, with the Bible in Hand, the Truth of it
must necessarily appear; for these are not mere Speculations, confined within
the Heart and Head: but they are such Principles as influence the outward Man,
and must indispensably regulate the Actions of ones Life: so that if this be
the common Doctrine of Popery, 'twill be impossible for so many Professors of
that Religion, every where to be found, and not to discover such an abominable
Belief of their Heart, in the common Practice of their Lives.

Since therefore we are come to things of Practice and Fact, of which every
Man's own Eyes and Ears may be Judge; I challenge Protestants in their own Way:
I appeal from the Pulpits to the Pews, and instead of Implicit Faith pinned on
the Pulpits, require the People to make use of their own Senses. To these we
are contented to stand, and to their Arbitration to refer all the Debate of
Misrepresenting. If our Lives and Actions, our Conversation, Living and Dying,
are so much worse than all the rest of our Neighbors, answerable to what we are
accused of from the Pulpits; We are deservedly evil spoken of; and for my part,
I shall willingly receive the Sentence, of having my Hands tied, from ever
Penning any thing for the future, in favor of a People of such pernicious
Principles, and detestable Practices; and the Church of England I Will own
acquitted from the Charge of Misrepresenting.

Now in this Appeal, I cannot expect, that there shall be none Wicked or
Scandalous found in our Communion; it is well known, that the Perfectest of
Creatures, the very Angels in Heaven, could not pretend to this, while Pride
and Rebellion infected such vast numbers of those Celestial Spirits: a Traitor
too, we know, was found in the very School of Christ: and as long as the Church
Militant is made up of Men, it is not to be expected, that a Right Faith shall
so privilege them, as that none shall be Tempted and Misled to Evil. All that I
pretend to is, that the Papists are not so infamously worse than all other
Christians, as the Pulpits seem generally to render them: that they live as
Conscientiously, as Virtuously, as fearful of Offending, as solicitous of
Repenting, etc. as any other Division, who pretend to have Reformed them: and
consequently, that their Doctrins and Principles, by which they regulate their
Lives, are not such as they are Represented.

Neither do I expect, that amongst such an infinite number of Writers, whose
Works are extant of that Communion, there shall be nothing found obnoxious to
Exceptions of the Reader, and which may not easily, by the help of a wrested
Interpretation, be made appear, in seeming Inferences plausibly drawn from it,
as Unchristian as the Text of the Alcoran. All this, I am sensible, may without
difficulty be found. But this does not reach the Point; since, if this were a
just Method of setting forth any Body of Christians, it is certain, there is not
at present, nor ever was, any Society embodied under that Name, whose Writings
are in every Particular so Exact, and cautiously Penned, but that by the
Artifice of Envious Critics, they might be easily defamed as Profane, and
Impious. I don't question, but if those very Heads and Hands, that have been so
industrious, for these Hundred and fifty years, in sifting and raking the Books
of Catholics, had applied themselves, with the Encouragement of a like Malice
and Interest, to the Writings of the Holy Fathers, nay of the very Apostles
themselves, they had as certainly before this time have made them as Black as
the Papists; and convinced their Followers, Men of an Implicit Faith, of the
Christian Obligation they were under, of hating all alike. When once Men come
to Raise up themselves, by Running down their Neighbor, and work their Ends by
Finding fault, Censuring, Condemning, Exposing, Ridiculing, and Railing at
others, it is easy to conceive, how Ingenious Corrupt Nature will be in such an
Undertaking, especially too, when a pretended Duty strikes in with this Vicious
Inclination, and spurs it on in its own course, it is then Down-hill all the
way, and it is hurried along impetuously, carrying all before it. Now what will
not Ten thousand Pulpits, open every Week, do in this Case? What Lives so Holy,
what Doctrine so Divine, what Writings so Orthodox, as to stand this Test? When
the Business of so many Pulpits is chiefly to make Exceptions, pick Holes,
Quarrel, Ridicule: and the more excellent they are at this Work, the more they
gain upon their Auditory, the more they secure their own Interest, and prepare
themselves for Honors and Preferments. A little Stock of Consideration will
convince a Man, how much may be done by this kind of Representing: since
whosoever will but take the pains to view the admirable Effects of it, may be
satisfied, that there has not been any one thing so Sacred, no Duty so
Fundamental, no Obligation so Indispensable, but what has been vilely trampled
on, and exposed under the blackest Colors of Infamy and Irreligion. It Is well
known, how even Innocence it self heretofore appeared defiled in Susanna, by
the wicked Contrivance of the Two Elders: How the Lamb of God our Blessed
Redeemer was exposed under the Reproaches of a Deceiver and Seditious: How the
Apostles and Primitive Christians were made Odious by the malicious Policy of
the Priests of the Jews and the Heathens: From whence it is certain, there is no
Christianity, no Piety, no Perfection, whether in Doctrine or Practice, but what
may be vilifi'd and made contemptible by this Art of Deceivers.

Since therefore, as it is evident, the best of things may be thus disguised by
Adversaries, and made appear quite different from what they are in themselves,
which I call Misrepresenting; and this, we say, is the Case of Popery and the
Papists; For the clearing of this Point, I appeal from the Characters of
Protestant Adversaries, to the very Lives of Papists themselves. This will be
the fairest Decision of the Controversy, and not subject to those many Frauds,
which Interest, Ill Will and Ignorance are apt to make use of in the other way:
Which too, besides other Inconveniences, is never like to bring the Matter to
an issue. For whilst We, in our Defense, produce Instances on the one Side,
wherein we are Abused, Calumniated, and Misrepresented: and our Adversaries on
the other, are Expounding, Proving, and Shifting the Charge; what likelihood of
an end? Since he must be thoroughly dull, even a seven-fold-skull'd Man, who
when he is accused of wronging his Neighbor in an Unjust Charge, cannot find a
plausible Pretense for what he has said, and get off one way or another;
especially too, when he has so many thousand Volumes, and the Actions of ten
thousand times more Professors to search into, and make use of to his purpose:
it is hard, if amongst so many Writers and Livers there is nothing for his turn.
In this Channel has this Controversy run hitherto, and so it may to the Worlds
end: For, if all be True Representing, that may be brought off by such Shifts,
as I have met with in the Course of this Debate, it is impossible there should
have been any Misrepresenters in the World ever since the Creation; unless it
be such who have only Malice enough to raise Calumnies, but want Wit to Gloss
upon the Report, and Color the Design. Only such as these are Qualified for
the Character of Misrepresenting: for as for all others, who have but so much
of Eve in them, as to understand the Art of framing an Excuse, they may boldly
assert Falsities, raise groundless Jealousies, misconstrue the Actions and
Doctrine of their Neighbors, extend Particulars to Universals, make what wrested
Inferences they please; yet it is True Representing all the while, as long as
the Managers have but any thing to say in their own behalf, though it be nothing
but to Palliate, and divert the Mind of the Reader: Such Returns as these made
to the most Evident and Undeniable Charges of Misrepresenting, with the Title
of An Answer in great Characters, and an Imprimatur to set it out, are
Demonstrations enough to the Crowd, to pass Sentence upon the poor Papists for
the worst of Men, of whom they can hear or read nothing, but they are prepared
beforehand to believe all, and pronounce them Guilty. And then let but a Man,
who has a good conceit of himself, come after all, and call it an Impudence in
the Papists, not to make any Reply to such Answers, which are only Answ. to
Repr. Reflect. upon the State of Controv. p. 52.
too Impertinent to deserve any, and then tell his Reader, that after all this
Noise of Misrepresenting, the Papists have not been able to produce any one
clear Instance to support the Charge; the Point is clearly gained, and He that
has but had Face enough to deny all, to make a few poor Shifts and Excuses, and
call them Vindications, is brought off in Triumph, and nothing can be said bad
enough of the Representer, who is now supposed to be left without a word to say
for himself.

For my part, I was always unwilling to employ my self in stirring in the Mire:
'twas enough once to point at it, I thought, without being obliged to rake in
it as long as I lived. But it seems, now my Hand is once in, I must either
choose to dwell there, or else be shouted at for deserting the Post. Much good
may it do those, who long for so lasting an Entertainment in such kind of
Matter. However the Boasts of a Noisie Adversary oblige me something to cross
my Inclination; his clamouring Triumphs of the Cause being lost, and that we
cannot produce One clear Instance of our being Misrepresented, force me, upon
the Public Score, to return to the making good the Charge. Having therefore
here again recommended the Decision of this present Controversy to the
Observation of every sincere and unbiased Protestant, desiring them to compare
such Papists, as are of their Acquaintance, with the Character of Papist, they
have heard from the Pulpit, thereby to judge, whether we without reason
complain; whether we are in reality Misrepresented or no. I Will once more enter
upon that ungrateful Employment, of Examining some Protestant-True-Representing
Characters of Popery, to see how near they come to Truth; and whether it be
possible to find One clear Instance to support the Charge of our being
Misrepresented. But because there have been some Fresher and more Authentic
Instances published in a late Book Entitled Good Advice to the Pulpits, than
those I mentioned in my Last Reply, I Will rather choose to Examine some of These,
and consider the Vindication that has been made of them, that so we may
discover, whether not only the Vulgar among Protestants are deceived in their
Notions of Popery; but likewise, what is of more importance, whether those, who
are obliged by their Station and Character to be more Sincere, I mean their
Guides, do not most evidently contribute to the imprinting these wrong Notions
in the People, and upon such false Grounds lay the Foundation of a great part
of that Incharitableness, Animosity and Hatred, which too often they express to
Fellow Christians, more than becomes the True Professors of the Gospel of
Peace. I proceed therefore to this Examen in the Method of the Book now
mentioned: and first as to some Matters of Fact.

First Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
1. THE Papists in the Years 1679, 80, 81, were engaged in a Horrid, Execrable
and Hellish Plot; they pursued it Good Advice.
on with Insolence, Implacable Vigor and Malice. 2. The Priests abroad in
Foreign Nations procured Money to carry on that Devilish Work. 3. Being
Blood-thirsting Men, they then designed to take away the Life of our late
Sacred Majesty. 4. They treacherously murdered one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, in cold Blood, with great Contrivance and Deliberation: hoping by
his Death to stifle the Evidence that was brought against them, and prevent a
farther Discovery. And they whom his Death does not convince, neither will they
be convinced, though he should rise again from the Dead.

In these Colors were the Papists set out by the Pulpits, in the Years above
mentioned throughout the Nation, as Guilty of a most Hellish and Execrable
Design, as Thirsting the Blood of their Sovereign; As Barbarous Murderers;
Engaged in a Devilish Work; Men of Insolence, Implacable Malice; A Generation
of Vipers, Devils of Sedition and Faction, of Treason and Rebellion,
Blood-thirsty and Deceitful Men, etc. Now all this having been since proved
False, the Invention of Wicked Politicians, and supported only by the Oaths of
Perjured Men, the Question is, Whether the Papists were not in all this time
Misrepresented? And whether my Boasting Adversary has a Face to deny, that,
after all our Complaint of being Misrepresented, we cannot produce One clear
Instance to make good the Charge? Certainly, if to assert White Men to be
Black, and to set out the Innocent as Guilty, and that of the most Hellish of
Crimes, be not Misrepresenting, there is then, I confess, no such thing in the
World.

And yet however the Papists have been most barbarously used upon the supposed
Guilt of these Crimes attested only by Profligate Wretches, and asserted by the
Pulpits: Yet the Answerer in his Apology, page 5, 6. is so far from the
Humility of doing the Papists Right in the Case, and compassionating them for
the Cruelty, that by these Means was most unjustly drawn upon them, that he
only minces the matter with his Iss and his Ands; and being resolved to say
something in favor of the Pulpits, he concludes, That if They erred in
Preaching thus against the Papists, they erred with those before whom they
Preached, that is, with the greatest Tribunal, and greatest Part of the Nation.
And what is this, but only by way of Defense, in some manner to acknowledge,
that the Papists did not only wrongfully suffer in their Reputation from the
Pulpits, but likewise in the Opinion of the greatest Tribunal, and greatest
Part of the Nation. And this is the very thing I have all along pretended to
prove. So that I hope now, after the Conviction of the Evidence of Perjury, and
the Contradictions and Impossibilities of the Plot exposed by a worthy Pen, we
have One clear Instance at least, of the Papists being Misrepresented. I am not
for dwelling long upon this ungrateful Subject, only one thing I have to wonder
at, and it is, That since the Pulpits had so great a share in imprinting these
False and Unjust Notions in the People concerning the Papists; how it happens,
that there is not one word heard from those Places, in satisfaction of the
Wrong that was done their Neighbor? Those certainly, who pretend to teach
others, should not be backward in giving good Example: And especially such, who
pretend to be clear from the Imputation of Misrepresenting, ought to do
something in this kind, and declare the Innocence of those, whom they have
helped to proclaim Criminals. If they have erred with those, before whom they
Preached, it is but reason with the same to revoke the Sentence they passed, and
restore the Reputation of those, who suffered by their Error. The Judges and
Bar have done this; The great Tribunal of Parliament too has not been wanting
in Overtures of this kind; Only Tongue died without Repentance, and Oats so
lives: And excepting these, there are scarce any, that were concerned in that
Error, but what have most Christian-like, made Satisfaction, besides the
Gentlemen of the Pulpits, who should have been the first in leading the way. I
cannot tell how far these may think Satisfaction and open Repentance to be
improper in their Station; but after so clear a Conviction of the Innocence of
those, whom they then accused, they must needs conclude it a Duty: and till
they find a way to do it, one way or another, they must not take it amiss, if
as they were Misrepresenters then, they are esteemed Misrepresenters still;
since all that they asserted at that time in their Sermons, as to them, remains
still in full force, and with the Face of Truth, till it be openly revoked,
which was never done yet, as I can hear of.

Second Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THE Popish Jesuits had a Hand in that Horrid Plot of the Good Advice:
Murder of King Charles I. That Sacred and Royal Blood was not shed without the
Concurrence and Assistance of the Papists. From Rome those Dreadful Confusions
were highly fomented. The mischievous and busy Jesuit promoted the Design, and
was so Impudent as to boast of it. The Priest is well known, says one, who,
when the Fatal Stroke was given, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the
greatest Enemy we have in the World is gone. The Church of Rome is justly
accused of this Execrable Crime, and it is unjustly cast on those of the
Reformed Religion.

This is another Character of the Papists extracted out of Sermons. It Is as
Foul and Barbarous as well can be, and enough to make them odious in the sight
of good Christians. If it be True, the Papists deservedly suffer: but if False,
then certainly the Pulpits are Misrepresenters. And how far it is from Truth, I
believe there are few, even of Protestants, who know how to think without
Passion, but have already concluded. The Pulpits have a Groundless Story they
produce, in behalf of what they assert; and we show the contrary in an
undeniable Testimony written in Characters of Blood of so many Noblemen, Gentry
and Commonalty, who lost their Lives in defense of that Prince, whom by the
Pulpits they are accused to have Murdered. Strange, that the Blood of so many
Papists should be spilt, and all under the Royal Standard, and yet They to be
the Murderers, and their Church to be justly accused of that Execrable Crime!
It Is well known that the Papists ventured All in the Service of the Father: And
the Challenge has been made to all sorts of Protestants, to produce even Ten
Papists, I may say Two, that in all that Confusion of Civil Wars, ever drew
Sword against him. It Is as well known, that the Son our late Sovereign was
sheltered amongst the Papists; that neither Promises nor Threats were powerful
enough to move them from their Duty; and that even a Priest too, most Loyally
hazarded his Life to save that of his Prince, by whose Care he was secured from
the Fury of his Enemies, and preserved for the Crown. This Evidence we have to
attest the Loyalty of the Papists of those Times, and yet the Pulpits still
declare, that the Papists had a Hand in the shedding of that Royal Blood. The
Answerer has nothing to say here, but that we ought to consult, not the
Preachers, but the Authorities they went upon. The Authority they have hitherto
produced, is that of the French Preacher, which by sober Protestants
themselves, is reputed no better than a Fable. If those that lay this Scandal
upon Papists in their Sermons, think it to be otherwise, I wonder at least,
whether they can prove it to be so Great, as even to let this single Authority
by virtue of an Implicit Faith, weigh down those other Testimonies of Sense and
Reason, visible in the Blood of those, who lost their Lives in defense of their
Sovereign. Till they do this, they only let weak Probability take place of
Demonstration, to the Defaming their Neighbor; and how far this falls short of
Misrepresenting, I leave the World to judge.

Third Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THE Papists, we are satisfied, were the Instruments in that Good Advice to
Pulp. Caut. 2.
Judgment of the Fire of London, and caused London to fall just then when it
was expected Rome should; this was for the Advantage of their Cause: and we
have too many Reasons to think, they would pitch upon some such Counsel: For
such things as these are now become their last Refuge, and the Arguments in
which they expect most Success. They find all Rational Attempts against us to
be Fruitless: and therefore despairing of ever convincing us like Men, they are
resolved to beat out our Brains (if they can) like Beasts.

This is a Character of Papists insinuated into the Honorable Magistrates of
the City of London, not in the time of that dreadful Fire, when that general
Consternation might have been a good Plea for an over credulous Accusation; but
almost Twenty years after, when the whole Matter had been thoroughly considered.
And though there were no other Grounds, whereon to build this Charge, besides the
Clamor and Affected Jealousies of the People; and the Confession of a
Distracted Man, whose Religion was not much of any kind, but still professedly
Protestant. Yet upon these Grounds are the Papists represented, as the
Instruments of that dreadful Judgment of the Fire of London, a Wickedness so
Execrable, that it is not easily to be supposed the Crime of Men, but Fiends:
Yet the Pulpits are satisfied that the Papists did it, for the Advantage of
their Cause. The People are persuaded, that it is from such Hellish Means the
Papists expect most Success: and that because they have nothing of Reason
whereby to prevail upon Protestants, rather than fail, they are resolved to
beat out their Brains like Beasts. Strange Exaggerations from such weak
Grounds! And if this be not to pass for Misrepresenting, they must have hard
Foreheads, that must even pretend to discharge it from that so deserved an
Imputation. But however, to this are we forced by the Confidence of some
Adversaries, who after such Rash Assertions of theirs from the Pulpit, and the
loading us with so much Infamy and Popular Hatred, upon such light
Presumptions, are notwithstanding so far from that Christian Duty, of making
the least Satisfaction for this so considerable an Injury done both to our
Persons and Religion, that they even continue to imprint the Infamy yet deeper
in the Hearts of the People, by condemning the Complaints of our having been
thus unjustly Traduced, and pretending, that we cannot produce One clear
Instance of our being Misrepresented. Is not this to vouch for the Truth of all
that has been ever said against us, and to affirm in one Breath, that, whether
as to Oat's Plot, the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, the Firing the City,
and whatsoever else of this kind, delivered out of the Pulpits, it is all True,
the Papists are Guilty of all; and their Complaints of being Misrepresented is
but Vain and Idle. Are these Men, are they Preachers, can they be Christians in
earnest, that thus play with the Reputation of their Neighbors in the Pulpit,
blacken the greatest part of the Christian World, with the worst of Crimes,
upon such poor Grounds, such weak Evidence, and after the evident Falsity of
some of these Charges, and the great Improbability of others, still go on, and
in some manner assert them over again in Print? I question not, but they so far
indeed get their Ends in all this, as to make us Contemptible and Odious; but I
think the Actors and Promoters of such Unchristian Methods, are still more
Injurious to themselves; and that whilst they endeavor to defame the Religion
of their Neighbors by Calumnies, they at the same time prove themselves to be
no Christians. Certainly these Men are to be pitied. And I wish they would
consider, that if their Livelihood comes in by Preaching or Writing
Controversy, there are many other Honest Ways of getting a Livelihood, and no
necessity of taking this. There Is a late Adversary of mine, who has had some
serious thoughts upon this Subject, and being convinced, I suppose, of the
Unchristian Effects of such Proceedings, he makes this free Declaration for
himself in these words: I will here take occasion to say a good word of Answ.
to Repr. Restect. upon the State of the Controv. p. 27.
my self, and that is, That rather than prevaricate in things of this nature, I
would make very hard Shifts: If it were too late to apply my self to Handicraft
Trades, yet, may be, I could Dig, or the like: But if I could not Dig, I would
not be ashamed to Beg. Perhaps I might get something by turning my Pen another
way, and writing of things where I had more liberty; as by writing Almanacks,
or any such thing, where Mistakes will be committed in abundance, and are
forgiven in course, and will be sure to do no body any hurt: but to impose upon
Men in Books that treat of Divinity, or to accuse Men (from the Pulpit, he
should have added) of the greatest Villainies upon vain Reports, weak
Presumptions, or light Probabilities, is one of the last Dishonest things I
would take to: I should think of that, and taking a convenient Stand near the
Town, much about the same time; and the reason why he that does the one, does
not the other, is because all Men's Abilities do not lie the same way. Thus this
Good Man Meditates and Resolves with himself; it is pity he had not thought of
this before: for certainly, he is so far in the right, that Digging, Begging, or
making Almanacks, are much more Innocent Employments, than Deluding of Souls;
and however Murdering Men in their Reputation has been so Divine a thing of
late Years, yet certainly those, who have their convenient Stands near the
Town, are not concerned in so Extensive a Mischief. And I don't question, but
those Few, who have seriously considered the weight of this Crime, and the
blackness of the Guilt, are so far from going on in that kind of Divinity, that
they could wish all that Pains so employed, had been spent in Digging or
Begging, or making of Almanacks, though this, it may be, had never turned to so
good an Account. However, Mending is never out of Season, and I cannot but
commend these good Resolutions, though late, of our good Friend, who, by his
requiring nothing more than a Good Example to follow, I perceive, is
sufficiently sensible of his Guilt.

Fourth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THE Papists have their Emissaries up and down to Preach Good Advice to Pulp.
Caut. 5.
Schism and Sedition into Peoples Ears. By such Arts as these they insinuate
themselves among the poor deluded People of our Separate Congregations, and
joining with them in their Clamours against the Church of England, crying it
down for Superstitious and Popishly affected, they pass for Gifted Brethren,
and real Popery is carried on by such Disguises.

Here again the Papists are set forth in a Sermon before the Honorable Judges,
as great Hypocrites, Religious Cheats, and Impostors, Qualities black enough to
make them Odious and Detestable. For certainly, though Dissimulation and Delusion
be abominable every where, yet never more, than in Spiritual Matters, and
Concerns of the Soul: there being no Impiety possibly greater, than that of
Preaching Schism and Sedition, under the Cloak of Sanctity and Religion, and
thus, in Sheeps Clothing, to play the Wolves. Yet this is, from the Pulpit,
made to be the Character of Papists, and the Judges are persuaded, that the
Jesuits, under the Disguise of Dissenting Teachers, Preach to the Separate
Congregations; and by this Imposture put them upon the greatest of Evils both
in Church and State. A Foul Crime! and if True, sufficient to cast the Papists
out of the number of Christians; but if False, and not as is here set out, as
sufficient on the other side, to bring the Pulpits under that as black
Character of Misrepresenting. This Accusation was set down in the Advice to the
Pulpits, and all the Return that is made to it in the Answer, is, as above,
That Answ. to Good Advice, p. 7.
we must consult the Authorities the Preachers went upon in urging this Charge
against the Papists. Now who would not have expected, that any Answerer,
zealous in acquitting the Pulpits, would have not only produced the
Authorities, but likewise have spent a few Lines in making good such
Authorities, and proving them to be Authentic beyond exception? The Pulpits
must needs be sensible, that the Crime laid to the Papists, is of the blackest
Dye; and that Men who pretend to Conscience, and to Reforming Consciences too,
ought not to spread Reports of their Neighbor, in a Matter of the highest
Scandal, but upon substantial Grounds, and an Evidence of the Guilt; and that
it is the Concern of their Reputation thus to make good all their Proceedings in
this kind. This an Apologizer for the Pulpits should have done: But instead of
this, he sends us to consult the Quaker Unmasked, the New Discovery, and in
want of these, a Book called Foxes and Firebrands: He might likewise have added
the Preface to Dr. Tenison's late Account of a Conference with A. P. for as far
as I can learn, the Quaker Unmasked, Foxes and Firebrands, and Dr. Tenison's
Gubbards, are much of a Piece. Good God! that Men should pretend to teach their
Auditory the Gospel, and expound to them the Truth of God's Word, and when They
are thus Challenged in a Particular of this moment, then to fly to Foxes and
Firebrands, and laying by the Scripture, take refuge in Libels, and
Street-Pamphlets!

This is a most surprising way of making Apologies for the Pulpits, of such
Pulpits too, from whence there has been so many fierce Declamations made,
against reading of Legends, believing the Inventions of Men, and trusting to
Idle Stories, the Dreams of Melancholy Recluses. Upon these Topics are the
Papists run down by the Pulpits, derided and exposed as Men of a light Faith,
who exchange the Scripture for these empty Fables. And when a Preacher is warm
upon this Subject, then out come the Miracles of the Great Xaverius, the
Wonderful Life of St. Mary Magdalen de Pazzi, the Revelations of St. Bridget,
etc. And these are made use of to show, what unlikely Stories the Papists
swallow, and upon what false Grounds they build their Belief. Now, who would
not believe, that Those, who make these Invectives, should be careful in
avoiding, what they pretend to Reform; and be sure not to out-doe the Papists,
in the very thing they condemn them? And yet see their Fate. Whilst they are
drawing out the Character of Papists in these Colors, they even make a most
exact Resemblance of themselves; and Protestant Preachers are no sooner
Challenged in their Pulpit-Narratives, but we are bid consult the Authorities
they went upon; and what Authorities are these? We are sent to the Quaker
Unmasked, to the New Discovery, to Foxes and Firebrands: And these are styled
the Authorities they go upon. As if these were more Authentic than the Miracles
of S. Xaverius, which have been so strictly Examined, that even some pretended
Reformers themselves have judged them worthy of Credit. And here, while I am
upon this Subject, I cannot but admire some Protestant Preachers, Writers, and
other otherwise sober Laymen of late, who take upon them thus to Ridicule, and
slightingly to wonder at the Papists, for this their Fond Credulity forsooth,
in relation to Old Legends, and Modern Lives of Saints: Whenas, if these same
Preachers and Laymen do but look a little back over their own Shoulders, they
cannot but see yet in sight, such a Heap of Monstrous Legends, I mean the
Perjuries and Contradictory Fables of Oats and Tongue, etc. solemnly Preached up
in Pulpits, by the most Eminent Men of the Nation, and as eagerly swallowed by
infinite numbers of the People, that they cannot without Confusion censure the
Credulity of the Papists, whilst they consider how deeply they themselves have
given such Credit to Impossibilities. And this is very observable in the way,
that there is scarce any thing in all those Books objected upon this score
against the Papists, whether Ancient or Modern Legends, but however incredible
it may appear, yet generally is all in order to a good End, and to the working
Christian Effects in the Reader; scarce a Miracle related, but raises the
Admiration of God's Power, his Goodness and Mercy; scarce a Passage, but is a
Recommendation of some Virtue, an Encouragement against Vice, etc. and cannot
be read without a great Spiritual Advantage to every unprejudiced Christian. In
such things as these it is the Papists are condemned for over-credulous; though
even as to all these too, the Church lays no Obligation on any, of Assenting or
Subscribing to the Truth of them; but allows them to be read, as it does other
History, to which every one gives credit, in proportion to the Authority which
they find for what is related. But whilst the Papists are thus reproached, for
being of too hasty a Belief in things of this Nature, see which way the
Protestants lean: They are taught not to be too Credulous in things relating to
God, to the Works of his Power and Goodness, etc. No; here they are bid be
Cautious, to be Prudent, not to Trust to others; but be sure keep close to
their own Sense and Reason, and not to believe Rashly or Blindly. But then, let
them but turn on the other side, and let the Matter be nothing of God or
Heaven; but against Popery and the Papists; here They believe without
Restraint: there is no Miracle too great, no Extravagancy so Improbable, no
Legend so full of Contradictions, but it is received without scruple, and as
greedily swallowed, as easily believed; and the very Pulpits too, that know how
to cry down the Papists for an over-credulity in Matters of Piety and Devotion,
shall now in Matters of Defamation, of Malice, of Interest, tending to the Ruin
of their Neighbor, tell how to be as Credulous as any. And though they condemn
the Papists, for appealing to Councils, the Relations of Holy Fathers, and the
Examination of Commissioners, in taking up Miracles upon their Credit; yet when
they themselves are put in mind of the Improbable and Impossible Stories, they
have helped to spread from their Pulpits, they without Blushing fly to the
Authority of Foxes and Firebrands, Proclamations and Votes of Parliament, as if
these were more Infallible than those others; and as if the Preaching and
Believing Legends of Malice and Envy, were Marks of a True Christian; when to
receive Miracles in order to the improvement of Piety and a Good Life, are made
to be so Ridiculous and Antichristian. I must beg the Reader's Pardon for this
little Digression; it is a Subject of which the Pulpit often rings, and is as
often objected by Protestant Writers, and so not unworthy of a short Remark for
the showing the Perverseness of their way of Reasoning: and especially too,
because I shall have an occasion of referring to it afterward, before the
close of this Discourse

Fifth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THE different Orders of Religion amongst the Papists, are Good Advice to Pulp.
Caut. 3.
neither better nor worse than so many Sects, and several Casts of Religion;
only they have that advantage in managing their Divisions, which we have not;
to pack up their Fanatics in Convents and Cloisters, and so bring them under
some kind of Rule and Government.

Thus were the Papists set out in a Sermon at Whitehall in the Year 1675. in
which the Preacher being desirous to take off that Foul Blemish of so many
Sects and Divisions rending the Protestant Church of England, inconsistent with
the Unity of Christ's True Church, and so often objected against them by
Catholics, falls into that common Topic of covering the Defects of his own
Church by Calumniating that of his Neighbor: and therefore he boldly makes up
to his Auditory, and tells them, That the Unity the Papists boast of in their
Communion, is but a Pretense; whereas, says he, They have readly more Divisions
in their Religion, than they charge ours with; and then goes on in the words of
the Character above cited: In which he Represents the Church of Rome, 1. To be
divided into many Sects, and different Casts of Religion. 2. That the different
Orders of Religion are neither better nor worse, than so many Sects. And that
the only Advantage of that Church above Protestants, is, that they pack up
their Fanatics into Convents, so to bring them under Government. Now what
Protestant was there in his Auditory, or what such Reader of his Sermon,
reflecting what the Sects and different Casts of Religion, and what the so
called Fanatics are here in England, but would presently receive this Notion
imprinted as a Truth in his Head; that as in in England, so likewise in the
Church of Rome, are there different Sects of Religion, and Fanatics to divide
it, but only that there they are shut up in Convents for better Order? This is
what the Preacher plainly and positively asserts, and whosoever takes him at
his word, must necessarily believe so. But because this is nothing better nor
worse, than an Absolute Falsehood, 'twas therefore set down in the Advice to the
Pulpits as an unjust Character, and a Misrepresentation of the Papists; and
Caution given of it upon that score, as a thing to be avoided by all Honest,
Sincere, Christian Preachers, who desire to speak nothing of themselves, nor
against their Neighbors, but the downright Truth.

However the Apologizer for the Pulpits in his Answer, page 11. being resolved
to Vindicate, and bring off all that has been said in those Chairs, as if never
any thing had been rashly bolted out there, comes with a Let us try what ground
the Preacher had for such Assertions: And then as to that where the Preacher
says, Their Orders among the Papists are so many Sects; that is, says the
Answerer, So many distinct Bodies, that having different Founders, Rules,
Habits, and often Opinions, by which an Emulation is begot betwixt Order and
Order, they become divided among themselves. Would not a Schoolboy have been
Scourged for such a sleeveless, frivolous Excuse? The Preacher, without mincing
it, says, That the different Orders of Religion amongst the Papists, are
neither better nor worse than so many Sects; that is, says the Apologizer, So
many distinct Bodies, etc. How low are we fallen below the Pulpit-Character! As
if Divisions in Religion, and different Sects, were nothing but so many
distinct Bodies, having different Founders, Rules, etc. If a Preacher of the
Catholic Communion should in the like terms positively declare in a Sermon,
That the Two Universities, and every College in them, wherein are generally
Educated and fitted for the Pulpit all the Parsons in England, are neither
better nor worse than the Seminaries of so many different Sects and several
Casts of Religion, and the Fellows are so many Fanatics packed up in an
Enclosure under Rule; I don't question but the Town would soon be filled with
the News of such an Impostor, for being so Impudent in infusing such False
Notions into his Hearers. And would not he have an Excellent Apologizer to help
him out, if another to vindicate the Passage, should Print in his behalf, and
say, That by the Members of the Two Universities being so many Sects and
different Casts of Religion, the Preacher only meant, So many distinct Bodies,
that having different Founders, Rules, Habits, and often Opinions, by which an
Emulation is begot betwixt University and University, College and College,
they become divided among themselves, and when occasion is offered, do actually
war one upon another in their way? What would the World say of such Doings as
these, but only condemn the Preacher for rashly aspersing such Bodies of Men,
and the Vindicator for a vain Trifler, in publishing such an Idle Apology? And
yet this is our Case, it being well known to any one, that has but a grain more
of Truth than what he has learned from the Pulpits, that those several
Religious Orders amongst Catholics, notwithstanding their different Founders,
Rules, Habits, School-Opinions, and Emulation, do live as entirely within the
Communion of the same Church, embrace and teach all the same Articles of Faith,
say the same Creed, Preach, Pray, and Administer the Sacraments in one another
Churches, and are every way in as perfect a Union as the Two Universities,
which with their different Founders, Rules, Habits, School-Opinions, and
Emulation, are yet Members of the same Communion, and subject to the same
Church of England. And then let the World judge, what a great Truth that was of
this Preacher, asserting These to be so many Sects and different Casts of
Religion. Dr. Sherlock could have told him, That Schismatics (or Sectaries) in
the Church, are just as Rebels in a Kingdom, not as part of it, but as open and
professed Enemies: and consequently, that the different Corporations and Bodies
of Men here in London, under different Founders, Rules and Practices, might,
with the same color of Reason, be Preached up for so many Rebels, as the
Religious Orders for so many Sects; whilst These are only so many different
Parts of the Church, as Those are of the Kingdom. But now for the Fanatics in
Convents.

The Preacher declared, that in the Church of Rome they have Fanatics too; but
they take care to shut them up in Convents. By what is already said, the Reader
may perceive, that such as are in Convents in the Church of Rome, are Men, who
embracing a Retired Life, dedicate themselves to the Service of God, in
Praying, Fasting, Mortification, and the other Exercises of a Pious Christian,
some according to the Institution of S. Benedict, others of S. Francis, others
of S. Dominic, etc. which however different in the Practice of a Religious
Life, yet are all in perfect Obedience to the same Church Authority, and of the
same Belief; as may be seen here in England, where there are Monks of S.
Benedict's Order, Friars of S. Francis, etc. and yet These are so far from
making any Divisions in the Church, of which they are Members, that they all
acknowledge one and the same, as their Common Mother, and are only as different
Parts, not dividing, but making up the Whole. This may be seen in Queen
Dowager's Chapel at Somerset House, in which Officiate Monks, Friars,
Dominicans, Jesuits and Clergy, that is, so many different Orders of Men, and
yet without any difference in Religion, or disagreement in Faith. Now how
unlike is this, to what the Preacher delivers! How different are These, from
what is commonly here understood, and the Church of England calls Fanatics? But
however the Apologizer is to bring him off? And therefore Fanaticism, says he,
is a general Name, and comprehends in it Superstition and Enthusiasm. So that
Religious Men in Convents are Fanatics forsooth, because they are acted by some
supposed Revelations, Visions, Raptures, and unaccountable Impulses. What
Controversial Stuff is this! Why, at this rate he might make Fanatics of all
the Patriarchs and Prophets, of S. Joseph, S. Peter and S. Paul, and the rest
of the Apostles; and most of all of S. John, whose whole Book of Revelations is
nothing now, it seems, but so much Fanaticism; Marry, welfare such Fanatics:
I wish the Church-of-England-men were such Fanatics too; and were acted a
little more by such Visions, Revelations and Divine Impulses, instead of those
we have seen of late Years, when the Visions of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and the
Suggestions of Parson Tongue and Oats, with some other Helps not altogether
Divine, moved the Pulpits as strongly and Fanatically, as if all had come
directly from Heaven. But see now whither we are driven by the Conduct of a
close Vindicator. The Preacher told his Auditory, 1. That in the Church of Rome
there are really more Divisions, than they charge Ours with. 2. That their
Religious Orders are neither better nor worse, than so many Sects, and several
Casts of Religion. 3. That they have their Fanatics packed up in Convents. And
now upon the management of the whole Matter by the Vindicator, it is all sunk
into this: That the Religious Orders are distinct Bodies, having different
Founders, Rules, etc. And that in their Convents, some are acted by supposed
Illuminations, Raptures, and unaccountable Impulses. Who could ever have fallen
into this Account, without the assistance of such an Expounder! And does he
think in earnest, that the Auditory understood it, as he has now laid it out?
He knows they are not used to such favorable Constructions in things relating
to the Papists; they may make things worse indeed, but seldom, I fear, take off
from any thing they hear thus positively asserted in the Pulpit. And therefore,
considering how different this Notion is from what those Words of the Preacher,
according to the general and vulgar acceptance, do import, he must give me
leave to set down those Three Assertions of the Pulpit, for so many Clear
Instances of most Foul Misrepresenting.

Sixth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
IN the Roman Church it (the Sacrament) must now be no longer a Representative,
but a Real, Propitiatory Sacrifice; Ibidem.
and Christ's Natural Body must be brought down from Heaven upon a Thousand
Altars at once, and there really broken, -- and his Blood actually spilt a
Thousand times every Day.

Thus is this Doctrine of Catholics rendered in a Sermon at Oxford 1679. and in
these few words are Two things Falsely shown, 1. The Sacrifice of the Altar is
made to be no longer a Representative Sacrifice: whereas Catholics believe,
that it is Representative. 2. That Christ's Body is really broken, and his
Blood actually spilt upon the Altar: whereas Catholics are taught, that this is
done only Sacramentally or Mystically. And what is the Plea of the Apologizer?
Only, that this is not positively asserted of the Papists Doctrine, but only a
Natural Inference, and an Arguing against them upon their own Principles. And
this is apparent, because, says he, the words Now and Must be, show what the
Preacher meant. To such a nice Point is the Vindicator reduced, to bring off
the Preacher: so that to all such as, at that Sermon, did not understand the
virtue of that Now and Must be, there are these Two Falsities suggested of the
Papists: and Protestant awkward Reasoning is set out for True Catholic Doctrine:
which is as bad Misrepresenting as can be. It Is not my Province here to examine
the Truth of such Reasoning and Inferences: but yet, I fancy, there are few Men
of Sense, who don't see thoroughly the weakness of such Deductions; whilst it is
so easily reconcilable with Reason and Scripture, and so intelligible, that
Christ really Present in the Sacrament may be offered to God upon the Altar by
the Hands of the Priest, in Remembrance of the same Christ offering himself a
Victim upon the Cross for the Redemption of Man: and consequently, that the
Sacrifice of the Altar is Representative of that upon the Cross. Mr. Thorndike
never scrupled the least Epil. to Trag. l. 3. c. 5. p. 11.
at this, expressly owning the Elements changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ, to be truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and to be both
Propitiatory and Impetratory; and yet never denied it to be performed likewise
in Remembrance of Christ Crucified. The other is not more difficult to be
conceived, viz. How Christ's Body may be Really present in this Sacrament, and
yet his Body not Really broken there, nor his Blood actually spilt: since it is
not Present there Corporeally, but Sacramentally only; which manner of Presence
is no more consistent with real Breaking or Spilling, than are Spirits, or the
Glorified Bodies of the Blessed, which though real and substantial Bodies still,
are not withstanding not at all susceptible of those Corporeal Accidents. But
however this may be obvious to any unbiased Judgment; yet we are, it seems, to
be exposed, according to every Man's Perverse Notions; and every
little-half-pac'd Divine is to set us out under all the Grossest Absurdities,
which he pretends are in our Doctrine, but are really nothing, but the rough
thoughts of his own Inventive Brain: and if this be to pass for True
Representing in a Pulpit, God defend all good Christians from the Edifications
of such Truths.

Seventh Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
POpery puts out the Understandings of those of her own Communion, Good Advice
to Pulp. Caut. 3.
and tears out the Hearts of all others: whom she cannot deceive, she will
destroy. The Absurdity of Auricular Confession is endless, where a Man unlades
himself of all his Sins, by whispering them into Priests Ears. Likewise
Transubstantiation, where Men must renounce all their Five Senses. The Pope's
Infallibility keeps a good decorum with the rest. He alone cannot err, and all
others, without some of his assistance, cannot but err.

After this manner was Popery described in a Preface to a Sermon at Guild Hall
1679. and so much to a Protestant purpose, that were it such a Religion, as is
in these few Lines described, 'twere nothing less than the Duty of every
Reasonable Christian to protest against it. But as long as these Deformities
are only the Contrivances of her. Disingenuous Character-making Adversaries,
they only serve as an Argument to confirm her Professors in their Religion,
whilst they behold it Attaqued only by the Unchristian Artifices of Passion and
Imposture. And let the Reader see how much these are concerned in this
Character, in which there are as many Calumnies as Lines.

1. It asserts, That Popery puts out the Understanding of those of her own
Communion.

This is false; since it is certain, that Catholics have the same liberty of
using and improving their Understanding, as the Members of any other Christian
Society in the World; and there are none of her Deserters whatsoever, that have
half so many Books, Catechisms, Commentaries, Expositions, etc. for Instructing
their Members in all the Mysteries of Faith, and Practical. Duties of a
Christian, as They; and if this be putting out the Understandings of those of
her own Communion, whilst it takes so much care for the making them understand
their Religion; then certainly those that help Men to see better, may be as
truly said, to put out their Eyes. There Is none certainly but knows, that
whosoever will be a Christian, must submit his Understanding to the Belief of
such Mysteries as are above it; this Catholics are taught to do: and
Protestants too, if they have Christian Faith, must do the like. S. Paul read
this Lesson long ago to the Corinthians, 2 Ep. 10. 5. where he teaches them to
Bring into captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. This captivity
of our Understanding to Christ, and to the Mysteries he taught, is an
improving, and illuminating the Understanding, and no putting of it out. And if
it be upon this score, he lays this Scandal upon us, let him but take a Jew
along with him, and, upon the same ground, he will see as much done for S. Paul.
It Is our comfort still, that in all things touching Faith, we have God and his
Holy Spirit assisting in his Catholic Church to direct us: while we submit to
this, we go safe and Rationally, and being taught to understand all thus
proposed to the best of our Capacity, there is no danger of our Understanding
being put out.

2. Popery tears out the Hearts of all others (out of her Communion;) whom she
cannot deceive, she will destroy.

This is false too, since though Catholics are bid to go and Teach all Nations,
as Christ commanded his Apostles, and consequently their Successors the Pastors
of his Church, to the end of the World; yet where Men are so obstinate, as to
reject all Instructions, they are taught to go elsewhere, and only to pity and
pray for such blind Souls, but not to destroy them. It Is true, in the Catholic
Church care is taken, to preserve all such as are her Members, firm in her
Communion; and there are not wanting Threats to keep the Inconstant from being
Misled into Error; as likewise Punishments to reduce such as leave her, and
blindly run after False Guides. And if for this reason she must be said to tear
out their Hearts, and destroy such as she cannot deceive: what is to be the
Character of this Preacher's Church, which, by consent of Bishops, is fenced
with such Laws, as punishes with Loss of Goods, Imprisonment, and Death, not
only those who leave her Communion, but likewise those too who never were
Members of it. This is a Cruelty not to be paralelled amongst the worst of
Christians. I cannot say, but that Rash Zeal, Headlong Revenge, or Detestable
Avarice, may have hurried some of ours upon such Barbarous Attempts; but
certainly never did any Christians deliberately and with Counsel, thus deeply
engage themselves in Blood. It Is one thing to shed Blood in the heat of Fury
and Passion, another thing to do it by Law, and if ours are thus to be
condemned of Cruelty for some Rash and unaccountable Practices of this kind,
which we detest upon Reflection; certainly others have a better Title to this
Infamous Mark, who with such Severity, both in Goods, Liberty and Life, punish
those with Deliberation, who never were of their Communion; and are so zealous
in maintaining those Laws in force, by which they own themselves Bloody by
Profession.

3. The Absurdity of Auricular Confession is endless, where a Man unlades
himself of all his Sins, by whispering them into Priests Ears.

This again is a Calumny and Misrepresentation, since no Catholics teach, that
only Whispering Sins in the Ears of a Priest is sufficient for their Remission.
They own indeed Confession to a Priest in order to Absolution, and the same is
allowed by the Church of England; but besides this Whispering, they require
likewise a True and Hearty Sorrow, joined with a Firm Purpose of Amendment, and
a Sincere Resolution of avoiding, through the help of God's Grace, all Sins and
the occasion of them for the future: and this I hope, as no body will deny to
be a proper Means, in order to Forgiveness; so likewise every one will see how
unsincere this Preacher was in saying, That a Man unlades himself of all his
Sins by whispering them into Priests ears, To make his Followers believe the
Papists to be so Sottish, as to think their Sins forgiven by a Whisper only.

4. Of Transubstantiation, where Men must renounce all their Five Senses at
once.

How is this true, that we must renounce all our Five Senses in the belief of
this Mystery; since, if we follow our Hearing, which is the Sense by which
Faith comes, we are obliged to believe it? Christ's Words expressly signify and
declare, that the Sacrament is his Body. These Words we hear delivered to us by
those, whom He has appointed to Teach and Instruct the Flock, to wit, the
Pastors of Christ's Church: these Words we see likewise and read in the Holy
Scripture. So that if we follow our Ears and our Eyes directed by the Word of
God, we are bound to believe this Mystery, and consequently do not renounce all
Five at once. And thus, whilst we let both our Senses and Reason be immediately
directed by God's Word, which is Infallible, we more Reverence the Scriptures,
and Believe upon better Grounds, than Protestants, who let Natural Objects,
ever about Mysteries of their Faith, have the direction of their Senses, in
which they are so often deceived, rather than the Word of God, which cannot
deceive them. We acknowledge, that to frame a Judgment of the Nature or
Substance of a thing, we must depend upon the Information of Sense, and that
the Common and Natural way, is to Judge according to the Relation the Senses
give, from the External and Natural Accidents of the thing. But if we desire to
frame a True Judgment, of what is the Nature and Substance of such an Object,
not according to a Natural Being, but according to the Divine Power, and what
it may have of Supernatural; the Senses ought not to be laid aside, but we must
consider here too the Information These give, not now from the Natural
Accidents, but from the Word of God, and the Divine Revelation; for though the
Natural Substance of the thing be connected with, and best known by its Natural
Qualities, yet a Supernatural Being not so; and therefore This is better known
from what the Senses tell us from God's Word, and Divine Revelation, than from
the External Accidents and Natural Qualities of the thing. I illustrate this by
an Instance in another matter: If I have a Present sent me in a Letter by a
Friend, and I intend to make a Judgment of the True Nature of it, and What it
is; I cannot do this without the assistance of my Senses. But then These may
inform me Two ways; either by Looking upon the thing it self, (which at present
I suppose is a Transparent Stone) observing every Cast of the Light, how Pale,
etc. or by Reading the Letter, which being sent from an Excellent Artist, gives
a full Account of it; as likewise Hearing What the Bearer says, whom I know to
be a skilful Jeweller. Now in both these ways I use my Senses in order to Judge
of the Present, as to its Nature and Value. If I take the Information of my
Senses, from the View of the Stone in it self; I Judge it, to the best of my
Skill, to be no Precious Stone, but some Counterfeit or Peble: If I take the
Information my Senses give me from the Reading the Letter, and Hearing the
Artist; I Judge it to be a True Diamond, upon their Authority and greater
Skill, who being of known Honesty, do unfeignedly give me this Assurance. Now
in which Judgment of these ought In in Prudence finally to acquiese? Certainly
in this last. And yet in so doing, I hope I should not renounce all my Five
Senses at once. No, even in this Judgment too I should depend upon my Senses.
And if in such a Case as this I prudently form my Judgment, from the Account my
Senses give me of such Men's Authority and Knowledge, rather than from my own,
because the Nature of the Thing before me, consists in something above my
Skill: Certainly, when the Question is, What is the Substance or Essence of a
thing, not Natural, but Revealed to be Miraculous, and according to the Divine
Power and Ordinance? the Safest Judgment ought to be framed, not from what my
Senses tell me of the Natural Accidents, but from what They tell me of God's
Word, and the Divine Assurance; because, as Dr. Sherlock says, (Preserv.
against Pop. p. 25.) We may reasonably conclude, that God understands the
Reasons and Nature of things, better than we. Since therefore my Senses assure
me from Scripture and the Pastor's of God's Church, that the Sacrament is
Christ's Body: I am bound in Reason to Judge, it Is so; rather than from the
Natural Accidents, to Judge it to be Bread. So that in thus Believing this
Mystery, we do not Renounce, but Follow our Senses.

Fifthly, The Pope alone cannot Err, and All others, without some of his
Assistance, cannot but Err.

This again is absolutely False: For though Catholics Believe, that the Catholic
Church, whether Diffusive, or in its Representatives, viz. a General Assembly
of Bishops under their Head the Bishop of Rome, through the Divine Assistance of
the Holy Spirit, cannot Err in declaring Matters of Faith: and some
School-Divines are of Opinion, that the Pope is assisted with a like Infallible
Direction, even at other times. Yet never did any Catholics Teach or Believe,
that all others, without the Pope's Assistance, were under a Necessity of
Erring. No Determinations indeed of others, without his Consent, are of Force
or Obligatory on the Whole Church, no more than is a Vote of Parliament,
without the Approbation of the King, a Law to the Nation.: Yet there is no
necessity of Concluding them False and Erroneous; but only Not Authentic.
Protestants believe their own Church not to be Infallible; and yet they don't
think it to lie under a Necessity of Erring. Why therefore must it be charged
upon us, because we believe the Members of our Church, without their Head, to
be Fallible, that Therefore They cannot but Err? This therefore is a most
Illogical and Absurd Consequence, such as the Apologizer himself knows not how
to justify, and yet he has not Goodness enough to acquit us from so foul a
Calumny.

Eighth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
HE is professedly edified in Ignorance by his Church, Praying Dr. Standish
ibid.
and Prophesying in an Unknown Tongue. They make no other use or account of
Confession, than what professed Drunkards do of Vomiting.

Thus is his Religion described in a Sermon before the Judges at Hertford
1682/3. but most abusively. 1. For though the Mass is said in Latin by the
Priests, yet the People have it translated into English; they have it expounded
in several Books at large, and are taught to understand, and have a true Sense
of what is done; so that if they are Ignorant, it is to be imputed to their own
Neglect, and not to any Design in their Church, which is so careful in
providing all necessary Means for the avoiding that Inconvenience. But of this
more afterward. But his Church, besides Praying, Prophesies too, says the
Preacher, in an Unknown Tongue. Here the Apologizer p. 20. is put to it, to
save the Credit of the Preacher: He owns that by Prophesying is meant in S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14. Expounding the Scripture and Articles of Faith to the People,
and to be the same as Preaching: and knowing, that Catholics do this in the
Vulgar Language; if the Preacher be understood in this common Sense of the
Word, he cannot excuse him, from abusing his Auditory with a Calumny. But, says
the Apologizer, it does not appear to me that the Preacher here understood it
of vulgar Preaching, because he knew it to be otherwise. Marry, if They never
Preached contrary to what they knew, this would be a good Rule. But suppose he
did not; yet he imposes upon his Hearers, whilst he asserts a thing of the
Papists, which in the common acceptance of the Word is absolutely False; and
yet leaves it to them to be taken as they please. And therefore whilst he says
absolutely, that They Prophecy in an Unknown Tongue, which is the same as
Preaching, he Misrepresents the Papists.

2. They make no other use or account of Confession, than what professed
Drunkards do of Vomiting.

This is a most Putid Calumny: and the Vindicator is so sensible of it, p. 21.
that he dares not defend, what the Preacher asserts; but only, that so it is in
the Practice of many of their Church. This indeed we don't doubt, but many in
Practice abuse Confession, as they do all other Good things: but how different
is it to say, That many Papists abuse Confession, and That the Papists
absolutely make NO OTHER use of Confession, than what professed Drunkards do of
Vomiting. The former, I fear is too True, but the later is False, and a thing
that no modest Man can say, without Blushing, out of a Pulpit. It may be as
truly said, That the Ministers of the Church of England make no other use of
Preaching, than what the Professed Enemies of the Crown do of Libelling, viz.
to fill the People witb Fears and Jealousies, and disaffect them toward the
King and Government. And then after such an Aspersion, what a Come-off would it
be, to say, I mean this only of the Practice of some of that Profession? This
is the Case.

Ninth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
1. HE pays his Devotions to Saints Canonized for Money and J. Turner ib.
Treason. 2. In his Church they Pray to the Crucifix of Wood or Stone, as well
as to Christ himself, and attribute as much Satisfaction and Expiation to it,
as they do to the Blood of their Crucified Redeemer. 3. Their Confession,
instead of keeping up a Wholesome Discipline, is the way to corrupt it, and tends
to the Debauching both Laity and Clergy.

This is Popery, as Painted out at Lincoln's Inn, Sep. 29. 1683. As to the First
Point, it is only insinuated by the Preacher, with an It is not lawful to Pray,
etc. which is as good as an Assertion to the Hearers, viz. That the Papists do
Pray to Saints Canonized for Treason. The Vindicator, to make this good, proves
First, That it may so happen, that Saints may be Canonized for Treason. Which
is as much to the purpose, as for one to say, That the Church-of-England-men
are Corrupters of God's Word, because, it is possible they may be so; as being
in their Principles Fallible, as to what they Teach and Preach to their Flock.
Secondly, he will prove that it has been done; and then comes in the next Line
with an Instance, in which it had like to have been done, as he says, but was
not done. Lastly, he says, that Thomas a Becket was Canonized for Rebellion,
because he adhered to the Pope against his Prince. No, 'twas for his Virtuous
Life and Martyrdom, and the attestation of his Sanctity by undeniable Miracles.
It Is not adhering to the Pope is enough to be Canonized after Death. But if
adhering to the Pope was Rebellion in that Bishop, what does he think of a
Doctor, who adheres to a Neighboring State, against his Liege Prince? And what
of Those others here at home, who help to spread, and are so satisfied in
Seditious Libels, designed on purpose against the King and Government? Besides
their Industry to uphold, in open opposition to their Sovereign, a Device,
which was laid by ill Men, on design to exclude his Present Majesty from the
Crown? If Thomas a Becket was a Traitor, for adhering to the Pope in some
Ecclesiastical Privileges, how far from Traitors and Rebels are These, who join
Hands with declared Traitors, and espouse the same Cause against their Prince?
How might this be set out, if there were but Ten thousand Pulpits to Paint it
to the best Advantage?

2. They Pray to a Crucifix of Wood or Stone, as well as to Christ himself, and
attribute as much Satisfaction to it, as to the Blood of Christ.

This is every word an Infamous Falsehood. And though the Vindicator here to
acquit the Preacher, from casting so unworthy, and worse than Heathenish
Scandal upon us, appeals to the Words and Forms of some of our Prayers; and
then says, That if Words will make it plain, the Preacher was not mistaken,
page 24. Yet this is so childish a Plea, that methinks it ought to be beneath
a Divine, especially a Man of Conscience, to charge so Gross an Abomination
upon such a Frothy Pretext. For what if there are some Words in our Addresses,
that, taken literally, import as much? Is this any more than what is found in
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 32. 1. where Moses thus cries out, Give ear, O ye Heavens, and
I will speak; and hear, O Earth, the words of my mouth? Is Moses, for this
Form, presently to be accused of Calling upon the Material Heaven and Earth to
hear him? If this way of Arguing were enough, pray, what might be said of the
Church of England too? A Controvertist, with a Forehead to the Temper of one of
Those who makes up against us, might positively accuse her in her Solemn
Devotion, and most Religious Way of Worship, of Addressing themselves to the
Sun and Moon, Stars, Showrs, and Winds; and calling upon, to their Assistance,
the Birds, the Beasts, and the Fishes. And then for to make all this good
beyond exception, he has no more to do, than to make this Plea: that, This
being a Charge of Words and Forms, we must know, whether the Charge be True or
False, by considering those Forms; and if Words will make it plain, the Arguer
is not mistaken. For see all this in their Canticle Benedicite in the Morning
Prayer. What Stuff is this? And yet these are some of the Methods, which the
Church of England takes up to justify her self, to defame her Mother Church,
and to fill the World with Confusion.

3. Making a Particular Confession of our Sins to Men, instead of keeping up
wholesome Discipline, is the way to corrupt it, and tends to the Debauching both
Laity and Clergy.

To see whither an Indiscreet Zeal, and Blind Passion hurries Men, even to the
blackning their own Church, whilst they inveigh against their Neighbors! Thus
infamously is Confession painted out; and yet this very Auricular Confession
was allowed to all, and at all times, as a good Protestant Practice, in the
First Common Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth. And the Church of England now at
this time refuses no sort of Confession, as the Expounder of her Doctrins says,
p. 42. whether Public or Private. And even now in her present Liturgy, is the
Minister ordered, in the Visitation of the Sick, to move the Sick Person to
make a Special Confession of his Sins. Certainly if it were true, as the
Preacher says, that Confession tends to the Debauching both Laity and Clergy,
his Church is very much to blame, for appointing such a Preparative for Death,
and ordering its Members thus to be Debauched at the last hour. But this I
consider as the Preacher's Heat, who instead of reproving some Abuses, thus
blindly falls foul upon the Best of Institutions. And the Apologizer has the
Grace to follow him.

Tenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THE Churches Interest is the Center of Their Religion, and W. Wray ib.
Their Consciences turn upon the same Pin. Every thing is Pious, Conscientious
and Meritorious, that makes for their Cause.

In this Color was Popery set out in the Year 1682. A time when the Church of
England was with such blind Zeal and Devotion both in Desk and Pulpit pursuing
her own Interest in the Unjust Defeating the Papists, that if the Preacher had
turned his Eyes nearer home, he might have seen Himself, and his Hearers, an
Instance of that Crime, he was even then charging upon his Adversaries. And
though the Apologizer will have this True of the Papists, by a wrested
Interpretation of a Constitution of the Fathers of the Society, contrary to the
plain meaning of it. Yet after that, and all he can say, he cannot but own it
to be a received Maxim amongst all, even the Loosest of our Divines and
Casuists, that No Evil is to be done, that Good may come of it. And there is no
Protestant but, upon Reflection, may call to mind, how Religiously the
Catholics of this Nation have observed it, who, for so many Years, have been
excluded the most considerable Places of Honor, Trust and Profit, which might
have been so much to their own Private Advantage, as likewise to that of their
Church; and yet have quietly and constantly quitted them all, rather than do an
ill thing, take Oaths, Tests, or go to Church, against their Conscience. Thus
have they acted like the Best of Christians in the face of the World, without
respect to the Interest of themselves or their Church; and yet, upon I know not
what Speculation and Pulpit-Inferences, are they most unjustly rendered, as Men
without Conscience, as moving only upon Interest, and scrupling at nothing, nay
making the worst of things Meritorious, so it be but for the Advantage of
Mother Church. Wicked Men of his Church, as of any other, may act upon such
Principles, but to set out his Religion in these Colors, is a most Abusive
Slander, and more becoming the Rudeness of Street-Lectures, than the Gravity
and Sincerity, that ought to be in the Pulpit.

Eleventh Character of a Pulpit Papist.
1. HE changes Scripture into Legends. 2. Sacraments into N. Bisby ib.
Shows, Priests into Puppets. 3. Preaches Purgatory instead of Repentance. 4.
Faction instead of Faith; never minds the Lawfulness of the Means, provided the
thing be but done.

Thus was the Papist drawn in 1683. but without Truth or Charity: every Line
being either absolutely False, or drawn with so much Disingenuity, that no more
would be required to make the Best of things Ridiculous. For how does the
Papist change the Scripture into Legends: when he is commanded by his Church,
to own the Scripture as the Word of God, and obliged to assent to all therein
delivered, as of Divine Authority, and of necessity to be believed with a
Divine Faith: whilst for Legends, though he may read them if he pleases, as he
does other Histories, yet he is not bound by his Church or Religion, to give
assent to, or believe any one Passage, in any Legend whatsoever? This the
Apologizer understood very well, page 23. where he proves out of Bellarmine and
Canus, that according to our own Principles, all these things contained in the
Lives of Saints, though mentioned even in the Canonization, depend upon Human
Testimony, as to particular Matters of Fact, and consequently are subject to
Error. And therefore no sufficient ground for any Point of Faith, which can be
built on nothing less than Divine Authority. And though some of these are
inserted into our Offices, yet they are not there proposed (as likewise
Particular Revelations) as the Scripture is, to wit, as matter of Faith, but
only as a Relation of some History, in the Reading of which, some Spiritual
Advantage may be reaped; as is at large discoursed above. Which is very
different from what the Preacher says, that he changes Scripture into Legends.

2. How does he change the Sacraments into Shows, when in his Church the
Sacraments are not only Shown, but likewise care taken, that they be duly
Administered to all her Members? The Apologizer pretends the Charge to be True;
because the Cup is showed to the People, which they don't partake of; and the
Host elevated at Mass, and carried in Procession. And might not a Jew here step
in, and with this Argument pretend, that Christ Crucified was another Show upon
Calvary, while he was there exposed for some hours upon the Cross to the view
of the World? But all this is nothing but a Method to teach Atheists, how to
make the greatest Mysteries of Christianity Ridiculous. We know the Benefit of
that Oblation Christ made of his Body and Blood upon the Cross, and likewise of
that he Instituted at his Last Supper, where he gave his Body and Blood after
an Unbloody manner, under the Forms of Bread and Wine for the Remission of
Sins; and which is now daily repeated in the Church, according to the Command
of Christ, which he gave to his Apostles, when he said to them, DO THIS in
Remembrance of me; We know the Benefit there is in this Continual Remembrance.
And those, who make a Show of this, are within one Step of those Unbelieving
Jews, who made a Show of Christ in his Passion, when 'twas said to them, Behold
the Man.

3. As for the Third, of Preaching Purgatory instead of Repentance, it is
absolutely False, inasmuch as in the plain import of the words, it imprints
this Notion in the Hearers; viz. That the Papists don't Preach Repentance to
the People, but instead of this they Preach Purgatory. This, I say, is False,
and so evidently, that the Apologizer dares not vindicate the Preacher in so
foul a Calumny: and therefore instead of what the Preacher asserts, the
Vindicator minces the matter, and pretends only, that the Doctrine of Purgatory
invalidates that of Repentance. Which too is False in it self, since we see
Catholics both in their Lives, their Books and Sermons, urge the Necessity of
Repentance as much and as effectually as Protestants. And it is much more False
as to Preaching, since amongst so many Sermons I have been at, both Abroad, and
in our own Country, I have heard Repentance so often pressed to the People; and
Purgatory never so much as mentioned, unless it were to show the insufferable
Torments of the Place, and how great the hazard is, even of getting thither.
And amongst the Printed Sermons of Spaniards, French, Portuguese, etc. that are
extant in Latin, I challenge the Apologizer to find one that so sets out
Purgatory to the People, as to make them neglect Repentance: and if he does,
I Will be bound to show him a Hundred for his One, that enforce the Duty of
Repenting, without the least hint of Purgatory, or their considing in it.

4. He says, We Preach Faction instead of Faith, etc. This the Preacher said of
the Papists, at a time, when the Church of England had been assisting a Faction
about Four Years, with all the help the Pulpit could give them, in Consecrating
their Villainies, and finding Arguments to gain them Credit, for the deluding
the People. And though they cannot be Advised to be more Cautious for the future,
without an Apology appearing in their behalf; yet I hope, it is not without some
Sense and Shame; especially since they have seen the Cart and Pillory so often
appearing in Confutation of those Truths that were then so often Dispensed to
the People with the Gospel. As for the Faction they can discover in Our
Preaching, let them do their best, to find even half so much; we freely give
them a Thousand Years to review, for to match these Four of theirs. Let them
take in likewise the Sermons, that are now Preached in our Chapels throughout
the Kingdom. I hope they will all appear Instructive as to Faith and Manners, but
free from Faction. Can the Church of England say as much of theirs at present,
in which there are so many unworthy Reflections made upon the Religion of their
Prince; so much Animosity blown up, Fears and Jealousies insinuated into the
People, and the Government made to them uneasy, even in the very Method that
disposed them heretofore to Rebellion, and ended not, but with the Murder of
their Sovereign? I cannot imagine them to intend the like Mischief at present;
neither did they, I believe, heretofore, when they made way for it, by their
Indiscreet Preaching. But when they have seen so lately the People exasperated
to that degree by the Pulpits against Popery, as even in an Unnatural Rebellion
to take up Arms against their Prince, and never leave pursuing him under the
Pretext of his being a Papist, till they had brought his Royal Head to the
Block under the same Notion: Methinks such as are truly Loyal, and boast
themselves the Best Subjects in the World, should be more Tender of their
Sovereign, than to venture upon the same Method with the Son, which proved so
Fatal to the Father, and so Dangerous to the Brother. But I fear the Excess of
Jealousy for their Religion, puts them upon being too Bold with their Prince;
and that by a Just Judgment of Heaven, they are blindly practicing the very
Principles they have so often charged upon the Papists; Making their Church's
Interest the Center of their Religion; Preaching Faction instead of Faith;
Esteeming everything Conscientious that makes for the Cause; And not minding
the Lawfulness of the Means, provided the Thing be but done.

Twelfth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
THERE is a great noise of Alms made in his Church; but the Scope they too
often vainly aim at, is the Blessing of a Dr. Tenison. ibid.
Presumed Saint; Security from the external force of Evil Spirits, by the
Charms and Spells of Monkish Conjuration, a sort of Ecclesiastical Magic. Nay,
sometimes the Scope is that very wicked one of Compounding with Heaven by their
Liberal Alms, for their Vnforsaken Sins; and here in this Nation (whilst this
Island was enchanted with Popery) there were granted Indulgences even for what
they call Deadly Sins, for many Thousand Years to come.

In this manner did Dr. Tenison render our Religion at S. Sepulcher's 1681.
before the Honorable Magistrates of this City, in a Strain so unbecoming, that
every ordinary Reader upon the Perusal, must necessarily be tempted to turn to
the Title Page, to see whether it bears Sermon or Play. And therefore I think
the Doctor, upon Reflection, might have rather given me Thanks, than
quarreled, for my not inserting more of his Discourse; since, I am confident,
the less I put in, was more for his Credit. But however, another Author has
since done him that Right, as to transcribe him, and set him out more at
Disquisit. and Expostul. with the Church of Engl.
length: let him view himself there drawn to the full, and then let him tell
me, whether he be not obliged to me, for showing him but in Little. I refer the
Reader thither to be Judge, and in the mean time I Will throw away a Page upon
him in the Examen of his Vindication; where I no sooner cast my Eye, but I see
that being now a Doctor, he understands no more Our Doctrine or Practice, than,
when he was a Child, he knew Gubbard from a Jesuit.

1. He says, Sometimes the Scope is, that very Wicked one, of Compounding with
Heaven by their Liberal Alms, for their Vnforsaken Sins. This he positively and
solemnly declared before so Great an Assembly, but without one word of Proof in
the Sermon for so foul a Charge: and now when he takes upon him, to make his
Defense, he only proves at large the Practice of Indulgences, but not a word of
their being given for Vnforsaken Sins, which is the chief Point of his so
scandalous Aspersion. We own the Power of granting Indulgences or Pardons, as
may be seen in our Profession of Faith; but that this can or may be done,
either with Money or without, for Vnforsaken Sins, this we look upon as
Abominable and Absurd, in the sight both of God and Man. And amongst all that
List of Pardons, he has heaped up in his Defense, there is not one that he can
pretend, makes for this intent, excepting that of Boniface 9. which too has
nothing in it for his purpose, besides his own False Translation, and the
Perverse Construction he puts upon it, the Effect I hope more of his Ignorance
than his Malice. Since those words quoted by him, Omnia Peccata etiam SINE
POENITENTIA ipsis Confitentibus relaxarunt, do not signify the giving
Indulgence for all Sins WITHOUT REPENTANCE, as he translates them; but only the
granting Indulgence for all Sins, to such as Confessed to them without obliging
them to undergo the Penances enjoined by the Canons: for thus this word
Poenitentia here signifies, and not Repentance, which is indispensably implied
in their Confession, which cannot be rightly performed without Repentance. Thus
grossly does this Doctor mistake in his Defense, and upon such slight Grounds,
positively from his Pulpit, blacken us with the worst of Infamy and Scandal,
before so Great an Assembly. And the same he does in the other part, where he
says,

2. That they have granted Indulgences even for what they call Deadly Sins, for
many Thousand Years to come. And this looks like an Asserting of that Vulgar
Reproach, to wit, That the Pope can give the Papists leave to sin for many
Years to come; and is the thing he seems willing to imprint on his Readers, in
all the Instances he has brought, by the way that he handles them. And yet this
is most contradictory to the Doctrine we are taught, and to the received Notion
of Indulgences amongst Catholics, who are so far from presuming upon Leave to
sin, upon the grant of Indulgences, that they don't think, that any One Sin
that is past, can be forgiven by an Indulgence. No, we are taught, that no Sin
is forgiven, even in the Sacrament of Confession, without a sincere Repentance.
And as for Indulgences, they are only for the Relaxation of the Canonical
Penalties due to Sin; which being appointed and assigned by the Church, may
likewise, by the same Authority, be released. And therefore, however
Indulgences may be termed Pardons, or said to be granted for the obtaining
Pardon for Deadly sins; yet whoever considers, that they were many times given
for many Hundred years; nay, as the Doctor has it, for many Thousand years to
come; he must soon conclude, that this could not be giving Leave to sin for so
long time to come, which so far exceeds the term of Man's Life: but only the
Releasing of Penances, which being assigned in proportion to the Sins, for some
Sins, Three years Penance; for others, Five; for others, Seven; might with some
careless Christians amount to that degree, that for Fifty years of Life, they
might possibly have Five thousand years Penalties due to their Sins. This is it
then we understand by Indulgences or Pardons, not a Leave or Liberty to sin;
nay, not the Forgiveness of Sins; but only a Discharge from the Canonical
Penances: which is very far from what the Doctor insinuates into his Auditory,
which, as proposed by him, We acknowledge, is a Practice Unjustifiable: and if
any Prelates in our Church, have formerly made an unjust Gain of Indulgences,
we as little approve it as the Doctor: For though we may lawfully justify all
good Practices, yet for Abuses, let those Answer that were concerned in them.

Thirteenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
N. Bisby.
IF he be False and Deceitful to Mankind, yet Euge bone serve, all is well, and
he in an instant is thought worthy of a better Kingdom. Hickering.
No Man can be a Papist, but he whose Eyes are blinded by Education, or he who
puts his own Eyes out by Atheism. Dr. Fowler.
His Council of Trent expresses its allowance of Picturing the Divinity it
self; and accordingly Pictures of the Blessed Trinity (O Hateful Sight) are
ordinarily to be beheld in Popish Churches. Apol. for the Pulpit.
He Prays to Images. D. Fowler
He Worships the Bread and Wine, not as Representations of God, but as God
himself. D. Fowler
He is taught, that the Passion of Christ takes away only the Guilt of Mortal
Sins, not their Eternal Punishment. D. Fowler
Likewise the Non-necessity of Repentance before the Imminent Point of Death.
D. Fowler
And that the bare saying of Prayers, without either minding what he says, or
understanding it, is sufficient to the Divine Acceptance. Dr. Hooper. Ibid.
So is he to appear before God dumb and senseless, like one of his Idols.

In these Colors were the Papists Represented from the Pulpit by these
Preachers, in the Year 1681. when the time was, not of confuting them by Gospel
and Reason, but by barbarously knocking them in the Head like Beasts. But all
these Colors are either False or Deceitful, as might be easily shown at large;
but I am quite tired, as I fear, the Reader is too, by staying so long in this
nauscous Stuff. I Will therefore pass them over, as such Calumnies deserve, with
as short a Reflection as may be, but yet in order. And therefore as to the
First, it is absolutely False; for Falsehood and Deceit are no where recommended
or taught by his Church, and are so far from sitting Men for Heaven, that I am
certain, no Man, of what Church soever, guilty of those wicked Qualities, can
possibly have admittance there, till they have first discharged their
Conscience by a sincere Repentance, and made Restitution to the Parties Injured
to the best of their power. This is the Received Doctrine of his Church: and I
hope in their Dealing, they practice it as much as any. I don't question, but
there are still Knaves of his Communion; but then let that Teacher, who has no
such of his Coat, or in his Church, come and sling the first Stone.

The Second is False too; since it is known, that there are great numbers of
Papists, who were never so by Education. And is it not an abominable and wicked
Slander, to accuse all such of Atheism; and that had it not been for their
blinding themselves by this, they had never become Papists? Since such as have
made the Observation, find, that those, who were of a good Life when
Protestants, continue to be so when Papists: and that many, who lived like
Atheists when Protestants, become better Christians by being Papists.

The Third is likewise False; since the Council of Trent does not allow the
Picturing the Divinity it self, as the Preacher says; but takes particular
care, if it happen (says the Council) that the Histories of the Holy Scripture
be Painted or Figured, that the People be taught, that the Divinity is not
therefore Figured or Painted, as if that could be seen with Corporeal Eyes, or
represented in Colors. Sess. 25. which is just contrary to what the Preacher
delivers. And therefore though sometimes in our Churches there may be seen
Figures, to put us in mind of the Blessed Trinity; yet the like may be seen too
in the Frontispiece of some Bibles and Common-Prayer-Books of the Church of
England; to which the Preacher's Exclamation of O Hateful Sight! may be as
properly applied as to any thing of that nature in our Churches.

The Fourth, of Praying to Images, is false too; for we are taught to Pray to
none but God alone; and to desire the Intercession or Prayers of such holy
Persons, as are acceptable to God, whether in Heaven or Earth: These, we own,
may be assisting to us, by the Prayers they offer up to the Throne of God:
where St. John saw an Angel offering Incense with the Prayers of all the Saints
upon the Golden Altar, which was before the Throne. Revel. 8. 3. But for
Images, we confess them to be nothing but Wood or Stone, etc. that they can
neither Hear, See, nor Understand; they are of some use indeed, inasmuch as
they are Sacred Remembrances of Christ or his Saints; but are still devoid of
all Power of Helping or Praying for us. And we acknowledge it a like Absurdity,
to Pray to an Image, as to offer a Petition to the Statue of the King. The
Apologizer has found an odd Notion, page 32. of leaving Prayers with an Image:
which I suppose is the same, as leaving ones Grace in a Hat, when a Man gives
Thanks with that before his Mouth and his Eyes. And if this be his meaning of
our Praying to Images, I wish he would expound it so to his Hearers at his next
Meeting, otherwise I shall still take him for a Misrepresenter. If I charged
any thing farther than due, in relation to this Point, in the Advice to the
Pulpits, I ask the Preacher's Pardon, resolving to do him all the Right he
shall require; for I assure him, 'twas nothing of Design, but Mistake only: and
therefore I do not here set this Calumny under his Name, but quote the
Apologizer, who both asserts, and pretends to defend it. And I wish the Pulpits
would do us the same Right, in retracting and owning the many Wrongs they have
done us, if Repenting be not beneath their Station.

The Fifth is False; since we worship only God himself, and not the Bread and
Wine, which we believe not to be in the B. Sacrament. And therefore this Charge
is to be reckoned for Misrepresenting, by the Judgment of a former Adversary,
who gives this Sentence: If we put our own Opinions of his (a Papists) Faith
and Practice into his Character, this (says he) is Misrepresenting; because a
Papist has not the same Opinion of these things, which we have, and this makes
it a false Character. Answ. to Pap. Prot. page 17. Let the Apologizer examine
this Rule, and see whether it be not our Case, whilst the Preacher gives a
Character of us, not according to ours, but his own Belief.

The Sixth is False; for though we confess a Temporal Punishment sometimes to
remain due to Sin, after the Guilt is remitted; yet the Eternal Punishment is
released, through the Influence of the same Cause by which the Guilt is
discharged, to wit, the Passion of Christ: and whatsoever Satisfaction we
attribute to Human Means, yet nothing of this can find acceptance or prevail
with God, but through the help of his Divine Grace, and the Merits of Christ
our Redeemer, who gave himself a General Ransom for the World, and yet requires
we should apply it to our selves; which Application of ours does not at all
derogate from the Plenitude of Christ's Satisfaction.

The Seventh is absolutely contrary to the Doctrine and General Practice of our
Church, whose Members do generally go to Confession many times in the Year, and
are under an Obligation of doing it at least Once a Year, which cannot be
performed, as is directed by our Spiritual Books, but by a Sincere and Hearty
Repentance: how then is the Non-necessity of Repentance before the Imminent
Point of Death, a Doctrine of ours; when all in our Communion are bound by
Precept, not to defer it past the Year? All our Divines indeed own Repentance
to be absolutely necessary at the Point of Death; but that it is not necessary
till then, I am certain is contrary both to the Received Doctrine of our Church,
and the Practice of her Professors. And though we acknowledge, that a Hearty
Repentance even at the Point of Death, is accepted by God, according to that,
At whatsoever hour a Sinner Repents, etc. Yet this is not to be relied on: and
we hear nothing so much discouraged in our Books and Sermons, as deferring
Repentance to the last; there being but One, as S. Augustine observes,
throughout the whole Scripture, who truly Repented at the hour of Death, to
wit, the Good Thief.

The Eighth is again contrary to our Doctrine: in all our Prayers, we being
directed to preserve an Actual and Lively Attention: and the admitting
voluntary Distractions at Prayers, being one of the Sins, of which every one
that goes to Confession, is to make Examination, and to accuse himself; as may
be seen in all our Books, that give Instructions in order to Confession. But it
seems, by the Apologizer, this Saying of the Preacher is not charged upon us,
as a Professed Doctrine of ours, but only as a Consequence of his own Head: and
from whence does he draw it? From this supposed Principle, viz. The Romish
Church enjoins the saying them (Prayers) in a Language unknown to the
Generality of the People; which too is none of the Truest: for this is not
enjoined by our Church, to those that say Prayers: For the Priests saying
theirs in Latin, understand what they say: and the People have Theirs in their
own Language, as may be seen in our Manuals, and in our Chapels; where in the
Hands of the People may be found Prayer-Books as Different in Language, as
those that use them are Different in Nation. And though the Mass be said in
Latin, yet it is only as the Function of Priests, who understand it: The People
have the same in English, and are instructed to accompany the Priest with
Devotion, and be attentive to every Mystery of the Oblation: Which being a
Sacrifice rather than a Form of Prayer, the Attention and Devotion, in respect
to the People, does not fo much consist in the Words said by the Priest, as in
what is done by him: as the Devotion of those Devout Women and other Believers
upon Mount Calvary, in the time of the Passion, depended more upon being
Attentive to what Christ Suffered, and the Sacrifice he offered for the
Redemption of the World, than upon the Words that he spoke, which were not
altogether understood, as the Scripture assures us, by the Standers by. In the
same manner therefore as we should have been Attentive upon Mount Calvary, we
are Attentive here in this Oblation, that is made upon the Altar, of the Body
and Blood of Christ: and whosoever is at the time of this Service, Dumb and
Senseless like an Idol, (which is the Ninth Calumny) must be necessarily as
senseless as an Idol; since a True Believer, who has a Right Faith and
Apprehension of this Mystery, can no more be present at it without Devotion,
than he could have stood unmoved under the Cross, while his Redeemer hung upon
it. The Jews indeed were so then, and may be now, and all those who are like
them, without Faith; but for a True Believer, it is impossible. But the Matter
of Fact is the best Confutation of this Slanderous Consequence; whilst any one
that takes a view of our People in time of Mass, will find them with as much
Devotion and Attention, that is, as much unlike Idols, as Protestants are
generally at their Common Prayer. So that all this is nothing but a Deduction
grounded upon Ignorance, and consequently a Calumny, instead of a True
Character of us: but I fear whilst the Vindicator makes the Representer an
Abettor of such unreasonable Doctrine, it is not the effect of Ignorance only,
but something worse: For tho his Assertion be, That Prayers may be said Well
and Devoutly, without attending to the Words or Sense of the Prayers, BUT
RATHER PVRELY ON GOD: which last Words are fairly left out by the Vindicator;
yet whosoever considers this, will not find this makes any thing for that
Careless and Indevout way of Praying, which is here by the Preacher charged
upon the Papists.

Fourteenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Dr. Hooper.
TO cover his Idolatry, he commits Sacrilege, steals away one of the Ten
Commandments, and by the Index Expurgatorius blots the Two Tables themselves.
Dr. Wallis.
For his Absolution it is not necessary he should be sorry for his Sin, but only
for the Penance. Id.
And if this should fail, it is but being at the Charge of an Indulgence or
Pope's Pardon; that is, to purchase so many Penyworth of other Men's Merit: and
this is what is required by way of Commutation, instead of Regeneration,
Sanctification, Holiness and a Godly Life. B. E.
Auricular Confession, their great Intelligencer and Lieger-Nuncio, is the main
Curb of the Laity, whereby the Clergy hold them in awe, in being admitted to
all the Secrets of States and Families, thereby to work their Purposes and
Plots: it is a Matter of mere Interest, and were there no Gain in it, they would
be ashamed of it. Id.
Ignorance is the Mother of their Devotion, which they are bound to by Vow, and
under the severest Penalties. Dr. Sharp.
They must wholly submit their Reason to an Infallible Judge, even so far (if
one of their greatest Authors say true) to be bound to believe Virtue to be
Bad, and Vice to be Good, if it shall please his Holiness to say so. Dr. Butler.
Their Churchmen must live a Single Life, whether Honestly or no, it makes no
matter.

In this manner was the Papist described in the Years 1678, 79, 81, 82. All
Plotting Years; Years wherein Truth and Honesty acted but very small Parts, and
were not for the Turn; and I fear, had not that free access to the Pulpit, at
least unmixed from Passion and Prejudice, as became Preachers of the Gospel.
This Character may serve for Instance, in which the First Charge is not
sincere; since it is known, that Catholics have the Ten Commandments in their
Bibles and Catechisms: and if they are set in short in some little Abstracts of
Christian Doctrine, in compliance to the weakness of some Memories and
Capacities; yet his is far from what the Preacher says, of Stealing away one of
the Commandments; since this that they do to One of them, they do to more,
setting down only the Words of the Precept, without the Addition of Threats,
Promises, or Explications, as may be observed in the First, Second, Third and
Fourth.

The Second is like this: For that Sorrow which the Council of Trent requires
for Absolution, includes a Detestation of the Sins committed, and a Firm
Purpose of not Sinning for the time to come, as may be seen Sess. 14. cap. 4.
and this, I think, is little less than Contradictions to the Saying of the
Preacher.

The Third involves an Absolute Falsity, whilst it supposes, that a Papist, who
is sorry neither for his Sins, nor the Punishment that attends them, has no
more to do, than to procure or buy a Pope's Pardon; and that this is sufficient
for him, instead of Repentance, Amendment, and a Holy Life. This is a most
abominable Doctrine in it self, and most injuriously charged upon us in these
words (This is what they require) by which the Preacher insinuates it into his
Hearers, as a thing approved by our Church. Which is so far from being True,
that the only ground for it, appears only in the Practice of some profligate
Men; which is a way of Representing, that if followed, will draw even the
Infinite Mercy of God under the same Scandal; there being not wanting many
Christians, who presuming upon This, continue on in their Wickedness without
Remorse.

The Fourth is a most odious Character of an Institution allowed even in the
Church of England; a mere piece of Drollery, and a Demonstration of the
admirable skill these Men have, in making the best of things Ridiculous. And
what wonder, that We are set out thus Black and Deformed by them, who have no
more respect for their own Church, than thus to expose, what she approves? But
of this we have spoke before.

The Fifth is a great Calumny, and only an empty Consequence of the Preacher,
instead of what we Profess. And though the Apologizer pretends to make it out,
viz. That we are bound to Ignorance by Vow; and instances in the Monks, Friars,
and other Religious Men; yet every Library in the Christian World, is an
evident Confutation of this weak Pretense, whilst the greatest part of Books of
all sort of Learning, that are extant, have those very Men for their Authors,
who are thus confidently asserted, as bound to Ignorance by Vow.

The Sixth is a most gross Abuse of Bellarmine, who does not say that We are
bound to believe Virtue to be Bad, and Vice to be Good, if it shall please his
Holiness to say so, as the Preacher positively declares; but on the contrary
defends, that it is impossible for the Pope so to Err, as to declare Virtue to
be Bad, and Vice to be Good, it being his Opinion that he is thus Infallible.
This is the Doctrine this Author absolutely stands to and proves: the former
words of the Preacher are only used by Bellarmine, not as his Assertion, but
only as an Inconvenience, which he says would follow, if this Doctrine of his
were not true: Just as if I to prove, that the Scripture cannot Err in
Commanding Vice, or Forbidding Virtue, should thus argue: If the Scripture
could thus Err in Commanding Vice, or Forbidding Virtue, we should be bound to
believe Virtue to be Bad, and Vice to be Good, because we are bound to believe
that to be Bad which the Scripture Forbids, and that Good which it Commands:
And what Absurdity in thus arguing ab Inconvenienti, when I have before
positively asserted, that it is impossible it should so Err? And yet this is our
Case, in which the Preacher most abusively and falsely sets out the
Inconvenience, from which Bellarmine argues for his Conclusion or Doctrine,
which is a most inexcusable Aspersion. I desire the Reader to examine this Place
of Bellarmine (De Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 5.) to discover which Side is to be
condemned; whether Bellarmine of Impiety, or the Preacher of Forgery: and this
because I find this same thing urged against Bellarmine, not only in this
Sermon, but likewise in others, and by our present Apologizer too, page 30.

The Seventh is utterly False, it being no indifferent thing in our Church,
whether the Clergy live Honestly, or not; since for them to live not Honestly,
is certainly a most grievous Sin, no less than Sacrilege. And is it
indifferent, whether they Sin or no? The Apologizer dares not undertake to make
this good; and therefore he falls much below the Preacher, pretending only,
that more care is taken that they live Singly, than that they live Honestly;
and this chiefly, because the Punishment for a Clergyman that Marries, is much
greater, than for one that keeps his Concubine. Which is as much to the
purpose, as if I should say, that according to the Principles of the Church of
England, it matters not, whether her Members turn Turks, or no; And then should
bring this for Proof; because she has severe Penalties, even of Death it self,
for such as become Papists, but none at all for those that turn Turks: And
because it is thus evident, that she takes more care in the One Case than in the
Other; Is this enough to justify a Preacher, in declaring, that the Church of
England is careful indeed to preserve her Professors from Popery; but whether
they turn Turks or not, with her it matters not? Yet this is the Method of
setting out the Papists in their true Colors, and if you challenge them of
Misrepresenting, they take it ill forsooth, and with the Woman in the Proverbs,
c. 30. wipe their Mouths, and then ask, What Evil have we done?

For my part, I cannot tell what Evil they intend, or how far their Interest or
Passion puts them upon Arguing in defiance to their own Conscience: but this I
am certain, that they most grossly abuse us, in setting us out thus Black and
Odious to their Hearers, upon such Imaginary Grounds, and the vain
Constructions of their own prejudiced Phancies: which are so fertile in
producing Consequences, such as are serviceable to their Turn, that I cannot
imagine any thing of Christianity so Perfect and Complete in it self beyond
Exception, as to be capable of standing the Test of this
Church-of-England-Method of True Representing. The Reader may have observed in
the perusal of these Characters, and more at large in the Advice to the
Pulpits, what ways they have to run down Innocence with Applause and Triumph:
What fly Insinuations and pretty Pretenses they make use of, to work the People
into the Belief of what they please: How safely they can Practice, what they
are actually condemning in their Neighbor: What excellent Turns they can give
to Authors, bend a Text to the best Advantage: Gloss to Admiration, make the
most Sacred things look Profane and Ridiculous. These and many other such
Sleights and little Arts may be seen in these Instances and Characters, which
are so unjustifiable upon this score, that I profess I would not be guilty of
dealing thus unjustly, or wronging even the most undeserving of Neighbors in
this nature, for a thousand Worlds; since, I am satisfied, I must first lay
aside Conscience and the thoughts of Salvation, before I could enter upon so
unwarrantable an Engagement. I do not here accuse any Adversaries of knowingly
incurring this Guilt; but I fear Education, innate Animosity, Interest or other
Passion, so far biasses their Judgment, as to make the most Unreasonable of
Methods appear to them Just and Reasonable. All that I Will say at present is,
that if to be a Papist, is to be that which is here described in these
Characters, that then certainly to be a Papist, is to be the Worst of Men; that
it is but Just the Pulpit's should expose his Errors and Abominations, and the
People hate and detest them: and that it is so far from being a doubt whether he
be a Christian, that it is certain he can be none: and that if he be bound to
Believe and Live according to the Principles here laid down, he can have no
Right to Salvation.

And of this I desire the Defender of the State of the Controversy to take
notice, that in this I answer his Challenge; and here do declare to him, that
these Doctrins as here set down by his Fellow Ministers, and charged upon the
Papists, I do detest and abominate: and that since to be a Papist, according to
the Notion of the Pulpits, is to believe according to the Form asserted in
their Characters, I would be a Turk as soon as their Papist. This Declaration I
make for his Satisfaction, since he desires it; and if it be the thing I ought
to have done, as he says, I here do it now, if this will end the Controversy;
but I must caution him to be a little more Reasonable, than when he made the
late Resolution, of thinking nothing to be detestable amongst all the Doctrins
laid to us, besides such as I expressly reject; since it is impossible I should
ever sum them up, there being scarce a Sermon or Book of theirs, but what
furnishes fresh Matter; and like ill Weeds, grow every day: however, if he will
but send me word, when the Guides of his Church are become such Lovers of
Sincerity and Truth, as to leave off Calumniating and throwing Dirt against us,
I shall then be in some hopes of bringing the Detestable Doctrins into Number;
but till then, he must never expect to see it. And in the mean time, I desire
him to draw me up an exact Catalogue of all and every Sin, by which the
Commandments are broken; if he will but offer at this, he may fall something into
the account of the unreasonable Task he has put upon me.

By this time I hope the Reader is satisfied, that it is not without Reason the
Papists complain of being Misrepresented; and though some have had the
Confidence, to pretend that we have not produced One clear Instance of it, yet
that now we have Many, and Many more they may have, if it be required. And
this, I hope, is sufficient to put an end to one half of the Controversy,
which was the Subject of the First Book, to wit, that the Papist is
Misrepresented: And if any make Exceptions against the Character of him thus
disguised, as 'twas drawn there, I Will never quarrel upon that score; let that
be rased out, and these others take the Place, which it is likely are more
Authentic.

As for the other Part, to wit, of the Papist Represented, I here own it again,
that it is the Papist I am; and whoever assents to that Character, in that very
Form, has done what is required, as to those Particulars, to be made a Member
of our Communion. This Offer may be said to have been Answered over and over:
But the Matter of Fact defeats all those Answers, and is a Demonstration, that
they are nothing but Shuffling: For whilst a Man may be received upon those
Terms, and yet cannot be received unless he assents to the Faith of the Church,
it is evident, that in that Character the Faith of the Church is Truly
Represented. Our new Adversary has one Cavil here to put in, viz. That the
Character of the Papist Represented, is not a good Character, because the Faith
of a Papist, as stated under each Article, is not All his Faith. And may not
he, upon the same score, reject the Gospel of S. John, for being no True
Gospel; because it does not contain All that Jesus did or spoke? If it be true,
as far as it goes, and rectifies the most Considerable of those Mistakes, and
prejudiced Opinions, which are either designedly or ignorantly laid against
Catholics, it does as much as was intended by it: but to think, that it ought
to reach to every Particular, was more than ever I could pretend to. And to
this Difficulty I desire this Answerer to let me know his Opinion of the
Exposition of the Doctrins of the Church of England, whether it contains under
each Article, All that is of Faith in that Church? and whether if any thing be
omitted, it is to pass for a Misrepresenting Trick, as it is here termed? But
this Man has still another Scruple, page 33. That if he should come into our
Church upon the Terms I have proposed, whether I will be Security, that he
shall not be pressed to profess and practice that Popery, which I have either
denied or concealed. Marry, if he means by that Popery, the Pulpit-Popery, a
part of which is set down in the Characters above, I Will give him the same
Security I have my self, viz. the Assistance of the Holy Ghost promised to his
Church, which will never permit it to lead her Members into such Abominations:
he may have the Security too of a good Conscience, which cannot be pressed to
the profession of so much Evil. And in this he may see his other material
Question Answered, page 34. Whether he may be admitted into our Communion, with
that which he calls Old Popery? For if his Old Popery be the Pulpit-Pulpery, he
sees we reject it: and I tell him, that whatsoever Church would receive him,
with the Profession of all those Scandalous Doctrins the Pulpits charge against
us, I would be sure to be no Member of it; and if there were no other but that
Church amongst Christians, I would then begin to look toward Turkey. And here
this Answerer may now begin to perceive, how unsuccessful he is in his last
Trick, of endeavoring to make a Difference betwixt me and the Learned
Vindicator of the Bishop of Meaux, whilst he now sees, that the Popery I detest
and abominate, is this Pulpit-Popery, as described by the Parsons, in which
there is so much of Insincerity and Passionate Deductions, with other worse
sort of Dealing, that I again own it to him, that I cannot but declare against
it. I meddle not here with the Different Opinions of School-Divines, I leave
them exercising their Wits in Speculations; but when a Parson designedly enters
amongst those Niceties, and picks out such of them as he knows will look absurd
to his Auditory, and having played with them a while in the Pulpit, showing all
Sides but the Right, displaying them into most Monstrous Consequences, leaving
the People to take all according to their own Vulgar Notions, without
expounding to them the Sense of the Schools; and after all concluding, Do you
see what the Papists Believe? Do you see what they Teach? Here I step in, and
cry out, Misrepresenting: whilst it is by these Means insinuated into the
People, as if to be a Papist, were to believe all as they have laid it out in
their Pulpits.

And for the rendering these kind of Religious Frauds Unsuccessful, I in my
First Book, presented the Reader with a View of the greatest Part of our
Doctrins, as Received and Professed in our Church: And in assigning Matters of
Faith, I observed, not a different, but the same Rule with the Vindicator,
whilst I have declared nothing as an Article of our Belief, but what has been
thus positively determined by the Church Representative, or is so acknowledged
by the whole Body Diffusive, which is still equivalent to it. And the current
passing of the Book, and general Reception of it amongst Catholics, argued
strongly enough, that it was exact as to all this. But because I designed that
Book for the Public, I did not content my self with the bare stating such our
Avowed Doctrins, or Articles of Faith; but I likewise added short Expositions,
in relation to some Protestant Objections generally made to each Article, of
How can this be? Wherefore is this? etc. And the Expositions I own to be no
Articles of Faith, but only some received Notions relating to the Articles of
our Faith, as they are opposed by Protestants, or searched into by the Curious.
And these were so far from being my Private Sentiments, that the Reader may
find the same in our Ordinary Scripture-Catechisms, of which there has been
Printed, in this Nation in a few Years, not less than Twenty thousand: And I
hope so general a Reception is sufficient to justify them against all
Cavillers, and to convince any considering Men, that to Assent to the Catholic
Faith, as so Expounded (which is so contrary to what Protestants say, or to the
Pulpit-Popery) is sufficient for any Member of our Church. And if there be
other ways of Expounding the same Articles, there is no Inconvenience in this;
since where the Faith is the same, there may be variety of Opinions, as to the
Hows or the Whys. And this, I hope, the Answerer will understand, if he please
but to review The Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; in which,
though the Author undertakes to propose That Form of Faith, that is openly
professed and taught without any Disguise or Dissimulation in the Church of
England, as he says, Pref. page xvii. yet I fancy, amongst those Expositions,
he will find several Opinions of Private Doctors, instead of Points positively so
determined by that Church: Let him but look over that a while, and I believe he
may have as much reason to call in question the Title of that Book, as that of
the Bishop; and that according to his way, I think, it ought to bear thus: An
Exposition of Some bodies Private Sentiments concerning the Doctrine of the
Church of England. I leave him to consider this a while; but I beg him to be
Civil with the Author, and use him tenderly; for if he should deal roughly with
him, as he does other his Adversaries, and call him Madman or Fool, he might
take it unkindly, and tell him, this does not agree with his Coat. I believe
it is better advise him, to take some other honest Employment, as to Dig, or
make Almanacks, rather than write Controversy: for this Gentleman can tell
him, that to Impose upon Men in Books of Divinity, and to take a convenient
Stand near the Town, is much alike for the Honesty of the Undertaking. I expect
he will take some pains with him, since he is resolved to spend no more of his
time with the Vindicator or Representer: These, he says, are like to be
Priviledg'd Persons as to him, since he is resolved to Answer them no more: they
are not it seems so Good-natured, as to be Confuted by him, and he takes it
unkindly at their hands. But however, those who know how abusively he treats
his Adversaries, must needs take this for no small Privilege: And therefore We
cannot but thank him for this his Resolution, though late, of calling us Knaves
or Fools no more. Which in his Language is the short of his Making Replies.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Preface to the Reader. First Character of a Pulpit-Papist. Page 13. Second
Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 15. Third Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 16.
Fourth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 19. Fifth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
25. Sixth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 27. Seventh Character of a
Pulpit-Papist. 29. Eighth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 34. Ninth Character of
a Pulpit-Papist. 35. Tenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 38. Eleventh Character
of a Pulpit-Papist. 39. Twelfth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 42. Thirteenth
Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 45. Fourteenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. 50.


