Londinum Triumphans, OR AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE Grand Influence THE
ACTIONS OF THE CITY of LONDON Have had upon the AFFAIRS of the NATION for many
Ages past. SHOWING, The Antiquity, Honor, Glory and Renown of this FAMOUS
CITY; The Grounds of her Rights, Privileges and Franchises; The Foundation of
her CHARTER; The Improbability of a Forfeiture, and Impossibility of a Legal
Seizure; The Power and Strength of the Citizens, and the Prevalency of the
Commonalty in their Contests with the Magistracy. Collected from the most
Authentic Authors, and illustrated with variety of REMARKS.

Nullum est jam dictum, quod non dictum sit prius.

No new thing under the Sun.

LONDON Printed for the Author and are to be Sold by L. Curtis at the Sign of
Sir Edmondbury Godfreys Head, MDCLXXXII.

THE DEDICATION
To the HONORABLE SIr Thomas Allen, Knight. Aldermen of the City of LONDON. Sir
John Frederick, Knight. Sir John Lawrence, Knight. Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Sir Patience
Ward, Knight. Sir Thomas Gold, Knight. Sir John Shorter Knight. and Henry Cornish, Esquire;

And to the Worshipful Thomas Pilkington, Esquire; Another of the Aldermen of the
said City, and Samuel Shute, Esquire; The Worthy SHERIFFS for the year Past. Sir
Thomas Player, Knight. Chamberlain of the same, Thomas Papillion, Esquire; John Dubois,
Esquire;


And to all the rest of those Eminent Citizens who have so worthily asserted
the Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and Immunities of this Ancient
and Honorable CITY. This Book is most HUMBLY DEDICATED by.

W. G.

TO THE READER.
IF Antiquity and Duration, wealth and riches, strength and power, can make a
City famous: If an honorable renown, visible grandeur, and unparalled
privileges may render her glorous in the eyes of the World: If the Spirit of
her Citizens, influence of her actions, and a continued train of Successes can
justly give her the denomination of powerful; Then may this great ancient, and
renowned City of London deservedly be esteemed one of the eminentest Cities of
the Universe, unless the Lie be given to the most Authentic of all our English
Historians, and we must not, like the Papists, believe our own eyes, nor give
credit to our ears, but bid adieu to all rational knowledge, and deny the force
of true Logical Illations, inferences, and conclusions. Such being the subject,
of this following Treatise, purposely designed for a demonstration of Londons
power, and a convincing argument of the irresistible influence of her actions
over all the Nation for many hundreds of years, strongly founded on undeniable
Truths, and throughout carried on, in an uninterrupted series of affairs, by a
train of inflances and examples, and an unbroken chain of inductions: And being
conscious to my self of no base slurs nor abuses ingentilely imposed upon the
faith of any one, by false quotations, corrupting of Authors, or wilful
mistakes, as knowing my self easily disproved if guilty, and therefore so much
the more cautious, by how much the more certain, that these Papers would be
made to undergo the severe Ordeal of a strict and rigid examination from a
critical age, I am apt to flatter my self into the hopes of being accepted
among the lovers and admirers of this Honorable City, and of having presented
the worthy Citizens with somewhat grateful, pleasing, and delightful to their
palates, because treating of their Ancestors glory and renown, their own power,
and the necessary consequence thereof, the grand influence of their public
actions and fixed resolutions upon the Councils of this Kingdom. But whether my
trust and confidence in my own poor abilities, and my hopes are so good, as my
ambition is great to serve this Honorable City, and I have any sound reasons
to believe it within the sphere of my Capacity, and the power of my pen, to lay
any thing looking like an obligation upon the worshipful Citizens thereof,
others are the most proper judges, and the event will best show. If any, out of
prejudice to the subject and a censorious Spirit, shall lay it to my charge;
that the whole book looks reflective, in answer to the imputation, I shall
humbly desire this favor at his hands, that he would be pleased to give
himself the trouble of turning to the Authors, to whom I so often refer, and
thence he may be abundantly satisfied of my honesty and sincerity, if he be not
over much prejudiced already, or of so narrow a Soul, as to be wholly and
altogether biased to the interest of any one particular party against the
plainest evidence of sense, reason, and truth. Besides in my further
vindication I can assure him, that a great part hereof was drawn up the last
Autumn, and undeniably prove it too, by demonstrative Arguments, if need were.
So that if it had appeared in the world so early, as was at first designed,
though I have been unwillingly hindered hitherto, some on the other side might
have been by this time ready to have termed it predictive: Though it was never
intended as the offspring of Prophecy or Astrology, but only the result of an
ordinary judgment, and common foresight, grounded on easy unforced deductions
from plain historical truths, and the apparent consequences of things acted on
the English stage heretofore. Therefore I shall not value the impertinence of
weekly observations, nor dread the doughty remarks of the whole tribe of common
ordinary Scriblers, as thinking my self secure within the strength of the
argument, and the authorities here produced to confirm and illustrate it;
whereupon I am bold to defy the art and malice of evil minded men to disprove
me in any thing necessarily material as to the substantial part thereof, though
as to what concerns any of the lesser Errata, I hope the courteous Reader will
be so much a Gentleman, as to look on them but as venial errors, and favorably
pass over those slips of my Pen, if he apprehend any such, as unavoidable
weaknesses always incident to human frailty. For I profess my self rather a
Transcriber than an Author, and esteem this Relation the product of my reading
more than the issue of my brain: Which if it may be in any wise advantageous to
the public, and acceptable to the Learned and Ingenious, I know not but, upon
good encouragement, I may be ready enough to produce somewhat else more
extensive, than to the Rights of one particular City, though it be acknowledged
time out of mind to have been the Epitome and Abridgment of the Kingdom, as
well as the head both of King and Laws.

Londinum Triumphans.
HOW considerable a Figure the City of London makes in the present Government,
is concealed (I suppose) but from few in the Land: But the Influence its
Actions have had upon the Affairs of the Nation in past Ages, is not so
generally known. The Glory and Splendour of this Noble City, is so obvious to
the Eyes of the Curious, that they cannot rationally conceive it to be the Work
of a Day, or an Age; but that, like other Cities eminent in Story, it has
risen up by Degrees from small Beginnings, to its present Greatness, through a
long Tract of Time, and the Concurrence of many considerable Circumstances to
make it Famous. The Original of this City is sufficiently acknowledged to be
Ancient; but where to fix the true and certain Bounds of its Antiquity, is not
so easily agreed upon by Writers. What one sets down for a Truth, another many
times esteems to be Fabulous. Scarce any thing being more common amongst the
Learned, than to have different Sentiments about the Original of Things, and be
at variance amongst themselves about the first Beginnings of Times and Places.
True indeed, we can deduce the very first Origin of the World, from the Sacred
Leaves of Holy Writ; but They, who have not had the Benefit of those Heavenly
Oracles, or do not with Us believe their Divine Verity, are compelled to grope
in the Mists of Darkness and Confusion, while they search after the First
Existence of all Things in the Writings of Profane Authors. The prime Pieces
of Antiquity, that we meet with amongst the Heathens, are the Theban, and the
Trojan Wars; and those too sullied with the Fabulous Narrations of their
Poetical Writers. Besides which, we scarce find amongst them any thing
deserving Credence and Belief, except the mention of the Argonaut's Voyage, and
a few Passages more: All the rest are hudled up in such a confused Mass of
Fables and Fictions. And yet these so celebrated Pieces bear Date some hundreds
of Years after the Flood. So short do the Profane Writings fall of the Divine,
even in Time, as well as Truth; unless we account the Dynastyes of the
Egyptian Kings, (mentioned by some Writers worthily esteemed Fabulous) for
true History, and make any Reckoning of some Men's Relations; who tell us of
Chronologies amongst the Chinese, of Thousands of Years before the Creation,
according to our Account: The whole Tranfactions whereof, they would do well to
produce in our European World, that we might be able to judge, what Credit
ought to be given to their Words; and not any longer suspect, that they shield
themselves under the Protection of the Privilege anciently allowed to Poets
and Travelers.

Seeing then, in these Humane Writings, we are left so much in the Dark, in
what concerns the First Being of the Universe; we have little Reason to wonder
at the variety of Men's Opinions about the Settling of Nations, and first
Inhabiting of Countries: Much less are we to admire, that the Foundations of
Ancient Cities are involved in so much Obscurity, that we can scarce trace them
up to their Original, without being often put to the stand in our Searches; as
finding but little certain Truth, mix't with a great deal of apparent Falsehood.
Therefore, I hope, the Courteous Reader will the more readily pardon what he
meets with of Humane Infirmity and Frailty, in this Attempt; and pass over the
Errata's he finds in this Historical Relation, as Venial Faults.

SHOULD I lay the Foundation of this Honorable City in the Days of Brute, I
might to some seem a Relater of Fables. Should I not trace its Original so
high, others might be apt to think, I slighted its Antiquity. So difficult a
thing it is to please all, so in a manner impossible to displease none. Let me
do the utmost of my Endeavors to avoid the Imputation of seeming Fabulous, I
should nevertheless be in doubt, where safely to fix, by reason of the
different Esteem Men have of different Ages. One preferring This, Another That,
and a Third (perhaps) valuing Neither; as thinking the Relation of Things done
in Times, so far distant from Ours, not worth our Regard. Wherefore, rather
choosing the Part of a Faithful Historian, than courting Men's Favor and
Applause, I shall deliver some of the most material Passages, which I find of
this Ancient City upon Record: Only, with this Request unto the Reader, That as
he sees Cause, he would judge of me as an Impartial Relater, without thinking
me over ready to give Credit to all, that Authors have said of those Elderly
Times.

The Trojan War has been so Celebrated by Homer's Pen, that the Fall of Troy
may deservedly be judged to have raised it higher upon the Wings of Fame, than
if it had still continued in its ancient Grandeur. For I find it to have been
the Ambition of many Writers, in some Ages past, to draw the Original of their
own Nations, from some Warlike Hero of the Trojan Race. The Romans Glory in
the Trojan Blood, as drawing their Pedigree from Aeneas, and the Trojans, that
he brought with him into Italy. Padua is derived from Antenor, another Trojan
Leader. And not to mention any more, Brute descended of Aeneas, with his
Trojans, is said by some to have given Original to the British Nation. That
this has been the Endeavors of some Authors, is plain enough, as being Matter
of Fact; but the Reason of this Design is not so obvious, unless it may be
lawful to conjecture, That in the grosser Times of Popery, the Scriptures being
kept from the Eyes of the Vulgar, by being locked up in unknown Languages, and
the Monkish Writers lacking either Will or Ability to peruse them; and so
becoming ignorant of Divine History, thought it the readiest way to ennoble
their own Nations, by deriving them from some of the Antientest Hero's, that
they meet with in (...) Story. Or else, depending upon Rome, as their
M^^^er-Church, they were desirous to vye with her in their Original, as well as
accord with her in Religion. Whether Brute Descended from Aeneas, by a Son of
his Eldest Son Ascanius, or by his Younger Son, born of Lavina, is a Point not
fully decided among Historians.

This Brute, Exiled his Country (according to some) for having accidentally
slain his Father, with his Trojans, after many Chances, and Dangers past, is
said to have directed his Course toward this Western Island, by the Advice of
Diana, which he received in his Sleep, in an Old Temple of hers, standing in a
Part of Africa. In his Sailing hitherward, he met with (it seems) a small Navy
of Trojan Ships, under the Conduct of his Nephew Corineus; and joining
together, at length, after other Dangers over-past, he Landed in Cornwall, at a
Place since known by the Name of Totness. This was in the Year since the Worlds
Creation, 4063. according to Fabian, (who professes to follow the Account of
the LXX.) about the Time of Ely's being High Priest in Israel, Forty Years
after the Destruction of Troy, (which is held by some to have fallen out in the
Time of Abdon's being Judge in Israel) before the Building of Rome Four Hundred
and twenty Years, before our Savior Christ's Incarnation, One Thousand One
Hundred and Thirty Six. But in this Point Chronologers differ: Stow places it
Anno Mund. 2855. before Christ's Nativity 1108.

After Brute's Landing, in his Searching the Country, he is said to have
destroyed I know not how many great and mighty Giants; one whereof, named
Gogmagog, wrestled forsooth with Corineus; and having of him caught a Fall down
Dover-Clifts, left his Name to the Place. Those Monkish Writers scarce thinking
their Hero's Valor sufficiently Celebrated, unless they make them meet with,
and encounter some such Gygantick Adventures; where the little Knight shall be
sure to overcome the great Giant.

Brute having bestowed Cornwall upon Corineus, after he had thoroughly searched
the Land, for the Pleasure he took in Thames, he laid There (as we are told)
the Foundation of a City, about the Second Year after his Landing in this Isle;
and, in remembrance of Old Troy, named it Troynovant: which Name it held till
the Time of King Lud, near upon One Thousand and Sixty Eight Years; from whom
'twas named Lud's -Town, afterward London, as shall be declared in Process of
Story.

What Repute and Esteem this City was of in those Days, as being Builded by the
First Founder of the British Empire, I shall leave to the Reader's
Consideration; who may find it honored with the Sepulture of many of their
Kings, as of Brute himself, and his Eldest Son Locrine, to whom in the Division
made by his Father, fell Middle England for his Share; wherein Troynovant was
situated: To whom may be added Cunedagius, and Gorbodug the Father of Ferrex
and Porrex, the Last of Brute's Line.

But now the Coast begins to clear up a little more, after the Storms of Civil
Wars, by the Success of Mulmutius Dunwallo, Son of Cloton, Duke of Cornwall.
This Dunwallo having vanquished the other Competitors, and settled the Land,
caused a Temple to be builded in Troynovant, and named it the Temple of Peace;
the same (according to some Men's Opinions) that now is called Blackwell-Hall,
a Place well known to the Clothiers. His Fame is much increased by the many
good Ordinances he made, which were called Mulmutius's Laws, and used long
after his Decease.

That this City of Troynovant, was of Repute and Renown in this so Famous a
Man's Days, is hardly to be doubted of by him, that considers so eminent a
Circumstance, as the Building of a Temple of Peace within the Circuit of this
City, as an Effect of that Peace he had so happily settled in the Land; and, it
may be, in Gratitude to the Citizens, who probably favored his Cause, and so
might much influence his Actions and Enterprises. In the same Temple of Peace
was he laid after his Death, which he had been the Occasion of Building in his
Life.

In the Time of Belinus and Brennus, his Sons, after their Reconcilement and
Accord, we read of their going to Troynovant, with their Lords and Friends;
where, after many things ordered for the Common Benefit of the Land, they
jointly agreed to lead both their Hosts over the Sea, to subdue other Countries;
the Smart of which Voyage the Romans felt sufficiently under Brennus, and his
Gauls. By Belinus we sind, that an Haven was built in the same Troynovant, with
a Gate over it, called even at this Day, Belings-gate; on whose Pinnacle was
set a Brazen Vessel, which contained the Ashes of his Body, burnt after his
Death. In this City we likewise find, that Gurguintus was Buried, and also
Guintellius, his Son; from whose Wife Marcia came the Marcian-Law, famed long
after among the Britains and Saxons.

These being of some Eminency in their (...) Buried in this City after their
Deaths; It (...), safely be concluded, That they (...) therein, as their
Principal City, and (...) of the Realm. Yet we read of other (...) Note, in
those Times, and after; as of (...) one, where Archigallo (before deposed by
his Lo^^s, for his ill Government) was, through the Intercession of Elidurus
his Brother, then Reigning, at a Council of the Britains by him called,
restored to his former Dignity; When the same Elidurus had gained the Assent of
his Barons, and the good Will of the Commons.

However, Troynovant seems, in those Days, to have been esteemed a Place of
Security; and mention of a Tower therein we find, on Occasion of the same
forementioned Elidurus's being sent thither by his unkind younger Brothers, to
be safely kept as a Prisoner therein.

The succeeding Times are so barbarous, that but little considerable is left
upon Record, concerning any Actions then done; until we come to the Reign of
Lud, Eldest Son of Heli, which began about Sixty Six Years before our Blessed
Saviors Incarnat^on, according to Stow.

This Man is much praised by the Historian, for his Worthy Actions, and
Honorable Deeds; for his Valor, Liberality, and Hospitable Housekeeping; and
his repairing Old Cities, and Towns. Especially in Troynovant he is Recorded to
have caused many Buildings to be made, encompassing it also round with a strong
Wall of Lime and Stone. In the West-Part whereof stands a Gate by him Builded,
and known, even at this Day, by the Name of Ludgate. For his Love to this City,
he used most to abide therein; Whereupon it was called Caer-Lud, or Lud's Town:
Whence by Corruption, and shortning of Words, comes the present Name London;
whereby it shall be called for the future, and the former Name, Troynovant,
laid aside in this following Relation. Lud dying after an Honorable Reign, he
was Buried in the aforementioned Gate of his, named Port-Lud, or Lud-gate;
where are yet standing the Statues of Him, and his Sons, as a lasting Monument
of his Memory.

In Cassibellan's Reign, the next Successor, (but whether Son or Brother to
Lud, is not agreed upon by all Authors) we find considerable mention made of
London in the Story, through Occasion of Cassibellan's Victory over the Romans,
newly Landed under the Leading of Julius Caesar, and twice repelled by the
Britain's Valor. London was the Place appointed by the King, to Celebrate this
Victory, return Thanks to his Gods, and Rewards to his Valourous Knights. Here
therefore we read of a great Assembly held of his Lords and Knights, and of the
King's keeping a Noble and Solemn Feast for all Comers, and the Exercise of all
kind of Games in those Days used. But Difference arising at the Wrestling
between a couple of Young Noble Knights, allied, One of them to the King, and
the Other to Androgeus, Earl or Duke of London, (as he is somewhere called) and
from Words these Hotspurs coming to Blows, occasioned such sideing and variance
amongst the Company, that many were wounded, and the Kings Nephew slain, to the
great disturbance of the Court.

For Disgust hence growing between the King and Androgeus, (to whom the King
had given the City of London, with the Dukedom or Earldome of Kent, besides an
Honorable Education, suitable to his Birth, he being Lud's Eldest Son, and so
Heir to the Kingdom, according to some Writers, the other being but his
Brother) and this Disgust producing War, wherein the King was likely to be much
the stronger; Androgeus recalls Caesar, with his Romans, to his Aid, and
assists them in their Landing; and joining his whole Power, soon turned the
Scales, bringing Victory to the Romans, and an Overthrow and Loss of their
ancient Freedom to Cassibellan, and his Britains. So considerable was the
Assistance, that Androgeus, with his Londoners, and other Knights, brought to
the Enemy: So difficult was it, even to Caesar himself, to Conquer Britain,
having been more than once foiled by the Britains. Caesar tells us of the
Trynobants being the strongest of all those Cities (by which understand London)
which submitted to him; over whom he placed, at their request, one
Mandubratius, whose Father, their chief Lord or Ruler, Cassibellan had before
Slain. Be these two Histories the same or different; yet either, I believe,
will serve to make good my Assertion of Londons Power, Fame, and Esteem, in
those ancient Times.

Though Britain was hereby made Tributary; yet I do not find, that London lost
it is Esteem. For Tenancuis is said to be Buried here; and also Cunobelin^s or
Kymbeline, his Son, both King's after Cassibellan. In this Kymbeline's Days,
near about the Nineteenth Year of his Reign, or Fourteenth, according to Stow,
Our Blessed Savior, Christ Jesus, was Born, as is the Opinion of most Writers.
Henceforth therefore, leaving off the Old way of accounting from the World's
Creation, I shall follow the Christian manner of Computation, reckoning from
the Birth of our Lord Christ (which was in the Forty Second Year of Augustus's
Empire) as a surer, and more certain way.

Except the Crowning of Arviragus in London, I find but little mention of this
Honorable City, till the Reign of King Lucius, who being esteemed by many the
first Christian King in the World, turned the Arch-flamins-See at London into
an Archbishopric* the Names of some of which Archbishops we meet with ^ver
and anon in Story, as such who had a considerable Power in the Land.

About 226 London was of such Strength, that Alectus, with his Romans, (as
Fabian relates) being over-press'd by the Britains, under the Leading of
Asclepiodotus, chose this City for his Refuge, as being then (it seems) of
greatest Security; and he being afterward slain, Livius Gallus, another Roman
Leader, manfully desended himself, and his Romans, in the same City, then
closely besieged by the Britains; till in their entering, he was slain near a
River running thereby, and thrown thereinto; which occasioned it afterward, to
be called Gallus, or Wallus-Brook: Some Memorial whereof we find remaining at
this Day, in the Street now standing, where that River sometimes ran, and known
by the Name of Wall-brook.

After the Departure of the Romans out of this Land, many Outrages being
committed (...) by the Picts and Scots, in the Time of (...) Honorius, we read
of (...), by the Archbishop, (...) the Britains, to cons^lt of (...) many
Miseries then ha^ging ^ver (...) by reason of their Enemies Strength, and (...)
Inability to defend themselves; as being (...) no certain Head. The Result of
which Meet^^^ was to desire Aid of the King of Little Britain, which they by
Embassy obtained under the Conduct of his Brother Constantinus; and, after
Victory by him gained over their Enemies, Crowned him King of the Land,
according to their Promise before made.

Here was a turn of Affairs effected by the Consult at London. Another Change
we find, not long after, through the Treachery of Vortiger, and the Pict, who
slew Constantinus's Son, Constantius then King, and presented his Head to the
aforenam'd Vortiger, then at London. Which City doubtless, in those Days, was
of much Esteem and Regard; and thereupon Vortiger (who bare the Chief Rule in
the Kingdom at that time, though the other had the Name of King) probably was
much resident therein; expecting, it may be, and waiting for the Performance of
this Treasonable Act; that he, being on the Place, might have the better
Opportunity to caress the Chief of that Eminent City. It Is certain, we find him
afterward endeavoring to cajole the People, by the great Sorrow and Heaviness
he made show of for the Kings Death, and by putting the accursed Traitors to
Death, for their Wicked Fact, according to the Law of the Land.

Thus many Love the Treason well enough, when successful, who nevertheless hate
the Traitors, after their own Turns be served.

This is that Vortiger, so Infamous in the British Story, for his own Vices; as
Incest with his own Daughter, Adultery, etc. and the Vices of the Times under
him. For we read, that Vice was then accounted of small, or no Offense.
Leachery reigned amongst the Spiritualty and Temporalty. Every one turned the
Point of his Spear against the true and innocent Man; and the Commons gave them
all to Idleness and Drunkenness; whence ensued Fighting, Strife, and much Envy.

After the King's Ex^mple, the World runs a gadding, is a Saying commonly too
true: As this Vortiger gained his Power by Treachery, so he Reigned in a manner
Precariously. For he was so perplexed, on the one side, for fear of the Return
of Constantinus's surviving Sons, to claim the Kingdom; and the Land, on the
other side, so harrass'd by the In-rodes of the Picts and Scots, that he was
after a sort compelled to send for the Heathen Saxons, who came (under their
Leaders Hengist and Horsus) to support him, about Four Hundred and Fifty Years
after Our Saviors Birth.

The coming in of these Strangers proved but (as it were) the beginning of
Miseries. For being once let in, they soon began to Play their Reakes in the
Land; and never left, till by introduceing more Colonies, they had settled
themselves, and dispossessed the Britains of the best of the Country. Neither
was it any great wonder, that the poor Commons endured such Miseries from these
Newcome Guests, when as their Spiritual and Temporal Guides were so given up to
all manner of Debauchery. One of Hengist's Pranks we find to be, his
Treacherous slaying of the British Lords at Stonehenge, on Salisbury Plains,
under pretense of a Treaty for Peace. But the better to work out his own Ends,
he is said to have saved the King alive, whom he knew to have become his Enemy
in show, more out of Constraint for fear of his British Lords, than for any
Hatred toward him; he having him sufficiently entangled in the Snares of his
Daughter Rowens Beauty. So common a thing is it for crafty subtle Men, to serve
their own Ends, by working upon another Lusts, through the Mediation of an
handsome Face, and Prostitute Body.

We read of the Saxon's having got London under their Rule; but whether by
their own Power, or the King's Gift, I find not clearly mentioned. That he gave
Kent, and other Counties to Hengist, is declared by the Historian. It may be,
that he gave them also London to curb it; for fear least the Citizens should
join with Constantinus's Sons (whose Return he much dreaded) and assist them to
regain their Fathers Kingdom.

Henceforward, for some time, we are not to expect to find London so
Considerable in Power, under the Saxon Heptarchy, as it was before, and after.
But when all the Seven were reduced into one Kingdom, and the Affairs of the
Land settled in a little more Peace and Quietness, London began again more and
more to Flourish, and soon rose up to such an height, that it became the fixed
Metropolis of the Nation.

Yet in the Time of the Saxon's Heptarchy, we find mention made of this Noble
City several times, and on several Occasions. As upon account of Mordred's
choosing this City to be Crowned in, when he rebelled against King Arthur: The
holding of it by Mordred's Son against Constantine, Son of Cador, till he was
slain: The Flying away of the Bishops of London and York, and other Ministers,
with their Goods and Relics, for fear of the Saxon's Cruelty under
Ethelfride; Whereby the Commonalty were left without Spiritual Guides, the City
without Her chief Pastors: The setting up an Archbishopric there, by Austine
the Monk, and the making of Melitus Bishop of the same, in Ethelbert's Days:
The Building of St. Paul's either by the same Ethelbert, or else by Sigebert
King of the East Angles, as some affirm.

In this Ethelbert's Time, we read in Fabian, of the Building the First Church
of Westminster, in Honor of St. Peter, by a Citizen of London, in the West End
of London, in a Place called Thorny, (now Westminster) which before was
overgrown with Bushes and Briars. But Stow affirms Sebert, King of the East
Saxons, to have Built it.

In the Time of Ethelwolph, Son of Egbert, King of the West Saxons, London is
said to be spoild by the Danes; and so not likely then to be of any great
Strength, though we find the Danes drawing themselves thitherward, in Alured or
Alfred's Days, after an Agreement concluded between them.

But now again, begins this City to be often mentioned in Story, and grows more
Famous every Day, after that King Alured, having Victoriously repealed the
Danes, returned thereunto, repaired those Places, that before had been injured
by the Danes, and committed it to the Guiding of Ethelred, Earl or Duke of
Mercia, who was his Son-in-Law, by Marrying his Daughter Elfleda.

Hence may we date another Beginning, as it were, of it is Glory and Luster,
from this new Resurrection out of the Ashes of its former Ruins. Some of the
next News we hear of this Honorable City, is of the Londoner's beating away
the Danes; who Landing in Sussex, and comeing to the Town of Jews, and thence
toward London, had Builded a Castle near the River of Jews, the more to annoy
the Country; but the Citizens Valor, with the Countries Help, soon demolished
it.

In the Reign of Edward, the Eldest Son to the forenamed Alured, we find London
thought so considerable, that the King took it under his own Rule, not
entrusting even his own Sister therewith; thinking it probably too important a
Charge, to be committed to any Subject, never so nearly related to him; because
of the Power that would accrue to the Possessor thereof, and the Danger might
thereby happen to him (the King) in those troublesome Times, upon any the least
Difference arising between them.

When Egelred or Etheldred, Son of Edgar, ruled the Land, we read of the Danes
coming to London (they being ready enough to haunt any Place, that could afford
them Spoil and Pillage) but we find that then they were repel'd by the
Citizens. The City it seems, was strong enough to defend their own.

But soon after that, another sad Accident befell the City, against which it
was not so well able to defend it self, viz. A great Fire, whereby a large Part
of it was destroyed. So rare is it, for any thing great in this World, to
arrive at it is Greatness from small Beginnings, without being Subject to many
Mischances, and meeting with many Turns and Changes of Fortune, before it can
arrive at the height of its Grandeur.

Fabian tells us in his Chronicle, that the City had then the most Building
from Ludgate toward Westminster, and little or none where the Chief, or Heart
of it now is; except that in diverse Places there were Houses; but they stood
without Order. This he professes to have known by an Old Book, in the
Guild Hall, named Domesday. But wherever the Building stood in those Days, or
how great Harm soever the Fire did it, nevertheless it continued of such
Strength and Riches, that the Danes were willing to have got it into their own
Power; and in Order thereunto, besieged it; but that they took it at that
season, I read not. Yet some Years after, I find the Londoners sending Gifts
and Pledges to the Danes, to divert them then coming toward London.

'Twas in Egelred's Days, that the Danes thus harrassed the Land, and did
almost whatever they pleased; selling the English Men Peace for their Money,
and then breaking it again at their Pleasure, to get a greater Sum. This gave
the first Occasion to the Imposition of that Tax upon the Land, called
Danegelt. And the Pride, and Lordly Imperiousness of the insulting Danes, gave
Original to the opprobrious Name of Lurdane, as now it is esteemed; though then
it was Lord Dane; a Term the English were for fear compelled to give those
proud lazy Danes, that Ruled and Domineered in many of their Houses, at the
right Owner's cost.

Neither is it much to be wondered at, that this Land was brought into so great
Misery by these Hectoring Strangers, when as we fi^d Dissension amongst the
Lords; and such treacherous Dealing, that whatsoever was devis'^ by Some, for
the Hurt of their common Enemies, it was quickly by Others of the same Council
betra^'d, and made known to them. The King giving himself to a vicious and
incontinent Life, and, to get Money any manner of way, sticked not to (...) Men
of their Possessions for small, or seigned Causes, (according to the History)
and after cause them to redeem their own, for great Sums of Money.

In London 'twas, that I find this unfortunate Egelred more than once residing,
for his own Security (it seems) more than for any Aid he attempted to get of
the Londoners, to defend his Land. Here he fell sick, died, and was also
Buried; and with him, some of the English Men's Shame and Dishonor.

For Edmund Ironside, his Son, favored by the Londoners, and some other Lords,
was Crowned in that City; and thence departing with his Strength, so hotly
pursued Canutus, the Danish King, that he was several Times put to the worst,
and in fair likelihood to have been utterly over-thrown, had not the false
Edric (who having got an Habit of Treachery in Egelreds Days, could not so
easily for^ake his Old base Conditions) often disappointed King Edmund, by his
Treacherous Dealing. By ^his Edric's Treachery, I have read, That Edmund lost
his Life afterward; for which Fact, the ^alse Traitor expecting a great Reward
at the ^ands of Canutus, had his Head exalted (according ^o the others Promise)
above all the Lords of Eng^and, it being stricken off, pitched upon a Spear,
and after set upon the highest Gate of London.

But about the King's Death and Edric's, Authors are found much to vary.
Neither is it any marvel, that Writers differ so often, and so much in their
Relations of Things done so many Ages since; Whenas, in things but as it were
of yesterday, we may observe so much difference in the different Relaters,
especially if it concerns diverse Parties; Authors too too often Writing
partially, in Favor of their own Side.

That London was, in those Days, of very considerable Strength, we have much
reason to believe; since that by Help thereof chiefly, Edmund was able to bear
up so valiantly against the Fortunate Canutus; whom most of the Lords,
especially o^ the Spiritualty, favored. It Is certain enough in the Story, that
Canutus was not ignorant of the great Influence the City had then upon the
Nation Affairs; and therefore was as desirous to get it into his Power, as
Edmund was sure he had it at hi^ Devotion. For Canutus soon drew with his
People to London, and would have entered; but wa^ hindered by the Citizens.
Then he would have forced his Enemies; but he was quickly compell'^ to
withdraw, and go else where: Such valiant Resistance did the Citizens make
against his Assault Another time he was drawing apace thitherward but King
Edmund was as diligent in preventin^ him; and after a cruel Fight, forced him
to ^^gone. So eagerly did these two hardy Compet^tors strive for the Possession
of this Renowne^ City in Particular, as well as for the whole Kingdom in
General. The Possession and Favor of (...) One, is a good Step to the safe
keeping of the Oath* This also, I presume, was Canutus's Opinion. (...) History
acquaints us with a Council kept at London by the same Canutus, after Edmund
Ironside's Death The Design whereof (if we may Judge by the ^vent) was to
exclude the others Sons from all Claim and Pretensions to that Part and Share
of the Kingdom, that their Father once enjoyed quietly by mutual Consent and
Agreement. The very place might contribute somewhat to Canutus's Design, though
the Inhabitants should not be brought to give their Assent in open and express
Words. 'Twas done at London; a pat Answer to such as durst seem to dislike the
Kings Proceedings. What? Dare you question, what was done in the Capital City
of the Realm? A pretty Fellow indeed, to murmur at those Actions, which the
Citizens of the Head City, the Metropolis of the Nation, did not openly
dislike, nor disavow.

It is observable, in the Time of this Canutus, that in the Contest between
Him, and the English King Edmund, the Spiritual Lords especially were his
Favorers, and sided with him. A remarkable Instance of Temporizers among the
Chief of the Clergy; and that they do not always stick to that Rule of
Birthright, which they so much applaud, when they think it may turn to their
Secular Advantage; but like other poor, simple, ignorant Souls among the
Laics, can be content sometimes to squint aside upon the more prevalent Object
of prosperous Might and Power; and leave that, which they are pleased to call
Right, as forsaken and forlorn for the sake of their Temporal Concerns.

Here was, on the One side, Edmund Ironside, the Eldest Son (as far as I can
perceive by the Story) of Egelred putting in for the Crown, as his Birthright
and lawful Inheritance; but under the Pre^udice of a weak Fathers unprosperous
Reign, and his own Strength small in appearance, and of little Ability, in
Humane likelihood, to defend such as would adhere to him. On the Other side,
stands a Strong and Fortunate Competitor; his Arms in his Hands; a numerous
Attendance of Victorious Soldiers waiting on him; most part of the Country
under his Subjection, and prosperous Success attending much upon his Banners;
though a Stranger; an Enemy by Inheritance; a Dane; one that could pretend no
other Title to the Crown, that we hear off, but what his Predecessors did owe
to the Sword, and he could make good by the same Claim. Yet to this more
powersul Pretender, with a long Sword in his hand, do these
Time-serving-Priests choose to join themselves, against an Old Friend by Birth;
a Native; an English Man; with a better Title (according to their own Doctrine
at some Time;) but shorter Sword, as was them thought before sufficient Trial
had been made* But now I think on it, they have like Passions and Infirmities
with other Men, and do mind Secular Interests of their Own, as well as Others;
at the same time that they endeavor to bring the Vulgar into a belief of a
Commission (they say) they have received from an Higher Power; and so pretend
to greater Sanctity. True, it is said, They had before time sworn Fealty to
Canutus's Father. A fin^ delicate way, to defeat another's Right. Either they
had before sworn Allegiance to Egelred, Edmund's Father, or they had not. If
they had, wha^ became of their Loyalty here, to forswear Tha^ and swear anew to
a Stranger; an Enemy-King and after persist in the latter Oath, in prejudice
(...) the Former; persevering in giving away, wh^^ was none of their own to
bestow; they having a^ ready, by their first Oath, sworn away themselv^^ to
another? If they had not, how came they (...) readily to swear Fealty to their
Native-King's pr^fessed Enemy? Did they well herein, or ill? If well, what then
becomes of that darling Doctrine of Primo-geniture, and of Men's Right of
Inheriting by the Law of Nature, not to be cut off, forsooth, (under even the
freest Constitution of Government) by any Humane Law whatsoever, though never
so many urgent Inconveniences be clearly foreseen, threatening the utter
overthrow of the Nations Fundamental Rights? If ill, what made them continue
therein, when they had so seasonable an Opportunity of retrieving themselves,
by acknowledging, bewailing and forsaking their former Error? But it may be,
they knew not how to escape the Imputation of Perjury. Nay rather, did they not
lack Will, more than Power, to return to their English Sovereign, from that
more Fortunate Outlandish Prince, to whom these wiley Priests had addicted and
devoted themselves? Had they Will, they knew not (it may be) how to disentangle
themselves out of the Snare of those Bonds, wherewith they had once bound
themselves, and wanted the Face openly to break them, without some Fig-leaf
Cover or other, to hide themselves under the Shadow thereof. They had not (it
may be) heard of, or not well observed the plausible fine-spun Pretenses, that
had been used before in the World; neither had they cunning enough, to find out
those more Politic Shifts, the Wit of after-Ages have either since invented,
or much improved. Be they either the Popes Infallible Power (as some call it)
of absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, or the nice distinguishing between
the Matter and Form of an Oath: The Default of ^ome pretended necessary
Circumstances, in making, or the Train of ill Consequences suggested upon the
keeping the Oath, or Impossibility of its Observation after taking it, slily
insinuated: The picking a starting Hole out of some general Term, or dubious
Interpretation of a Word: Or the yet neater way of bribing a great Company; a
considerable Number; many Thousands of Men, out of a Common Stock, with good
Places, and Honorable Preferments, by public Subscriptions to declare the
Oath, (for some few, small, minute, petty, fancied Inconveniences) invalid, and
of no binding force.

But be it by the Power of the Sword, or by whatsoever Claim else Canutus held
the Crown, we nevertheless find him to have Governed the Land honorably after
that he came to be sole King; and, it may be, to the Content of many of his
Subjects: for 'twas the Memory, doubtless, of his Repute, that set and kept the
Crown upon the Heads of both his Sons; otherwise of themselves of little Worth
or Value, if compared with their Father.

One remarkable worthy Act of Canutus's is recorded amongst others, viz. That
in the Nineth Year of his Reign he called a Parliament (so my Author terms it)
at Oxford; where, amongst other things, it was enacted, That Englishmen and
Danes should hold the Laws of Edgar, lately King.

In the Transactions of these Times, we may believe the City of London had no
small Share, a^ being probably (at length) pretty well pleased with the
Father's Reign; whereupon the Citizem mav be supposed to conduce (at least, in
some measure) to the settling his Sons on his Throne For Harold Harefoot is
said by some to have dyed at London, after a Three Years Reign; and the other
of Canutus's Sons, Hardicanute, was joyfull^ Received, and Crowned at the same
City.

In Edward the Confessor's days, the Land being not much troubled with
intestine Broils, there happened but little Occasion for trying London's
Strength: And thereupon, I find no great mention of that Honorable City,
unless in a Passage or two; as about Edward the Outlaw's dying therein; and of
the King's being there some time before, with his Council, when Earl Goodwin
was charged to come to Court, and render into the King's Hands all his
Knights-Fees-that he, and Harold his Son, held in England. The Effect whereof,
was the Outlawing of the forementioned Goodwin, for his Disobedience, and
departure out of the Land with his Sons, by Authority of a Parliament, called
alittle after.

In this King's Reign also, we hear at both Ears of the evil Manners among the
Bishops, the Chief of the Clergy, of their Voluptuousness, Gluttony, Leachery,
Covetuousness, Wordly Pomp, etc. as also of their Endeavors to excuse their
Manners, by answering, that they were suitable to the Times: A general
Corruption among Men of a Religious Habit being the Common Forerunners of great
Turns and Changes in a Land, as it fell out here soonafter this King's Decease.

This is the King, to whom (according to the Annalist Stow) we are indebted for
the Common Law, gathered out of the Laws and Ordinances of the Mercian's, West
Saxons, Danes and Northumbers.

What Spirit was in the Men of those Times, is ^n part manifested in the
Message sent to Harola by the Inhabitants of Northumberland, when he was ^ent
thither by the King to do Correction upon those, who had risen against his
Brother Tostus their Duke, for a cruel Act by him committed, taking away what
he had, and chasing him out of ^he Country. Continuing together in a
considerable Body. they gave him to understand, that they were freely born, and
freely nourished; and might suffer no cruelness of Dukes: That they had learned
of their Elders and Sovereigns, to maintain Freedom, or to suffer Death; and to
live in quietness under an easy Duke. Upon which Message, their Pardon was
procured them of the King, and another Duke assigned.

Within less then a year after Edward the Conf^ss^r's Death, we read of the
landing of Duke W^ll^^m, with his Normans, at H^stings in Suss^x; who came with
a strong Army, to demand the Crown of Harold, who had no Title, (but what he
claimed by the Power of his Sword) and the Dukes Claim also went but upon a
limping Foot. As great as the Duke's Host was, enough it seems by the Event, to
help to win a Crown, we find London so Strong, as to hold him out (when he and
his Army came thereto) till he had given good Assurance, that he and his People
would pass through the City without tarrying; which was also observed
accordingly.

When Harold was utterly over-thrown by these Normans, and so room made for the
Title of Edga^ Atheling to take place, we find the Londoners among the chief of
those, who were upon Associating themselves each to other, to defend his Right
to the utmost of their Powers. This Agreement indee^ was afterward broken; but
by the making of it we are well enough assured that the C^tys Strengt^ was then
esteemed very considerable.

Another Argument let me produce out of Stow'^ Annalls; where it is recorded,
that Edwin an^ Marcar, both then Powerful Earls, the One ^^ Mercia, the other
of Northumberland, after Harold Death came to London, and solicited the Citizen
to erect one of them to the Kingdom. Though this their enterprise was
frustrated, yet doubtless it may prove Londons Power; otherwise it is hard to
believe, these two potent Earls would have applied themselves to the Citizens,
that they would choose one of them for King, and upon the Failure of their
Design would have quietly departed, without showing some resentment, had not
the City been too strong, easily to be dealt with, or slightly to be angered,
with Safety and Security. The other more rightful Heir was the Person pitched
upon. But the other Nobles of the Realm not powerfully assisting, and Edward
Atheling not being (it seems) of Ability sufficient to manage his own Concerns
himself, and undertake so great a Charge, it is no wonder that this Renowned
City (suffering it self to be born down the Stream with the Times) submitted it
Self (with the rest of the Land) to Duke William, who made some pretense to a
Title; Whereas Harold could show nothing for his, but his Sword; And therefore
it may be it is, that we read not in ancient Histories, (that I remember) of
this Citys assisting him, to defend himself against Duke William's Power.

Here now is a great Change indeed. The Power and Strength of the Kingdom
turned from both the Britains and Saxons, and devolved upon the Normans by
means of this King William; the Date of whose Reign begins, reckoning
immediately after Harold's Death, October the Fourteenth, Anno Christi 1066,
according to Chronology.

In this King (who himself, by the General consent of Writers, was basely Born)
is founded the Succession; for higher they care not much to go, who keep such a
stir about our Princes inheriting according to their Birthright. Though, if
this be made the fixed unalterable Rule, of Twenty Six Kings and Queens reigning
Successively, upon recourse to the History of their Reigns, we shall meet with
a dozen (at least) of them, who cannot be denied, but to have come to their
Crowns with Flaws in their Titles. Nay, if we reckon in the Number, such as may
have been controverted upon that Account, we may safely add the other Half
dozen. That from the general Rules there are many exceptions, we learnt almost
as soon as we went to our Grammar School. This King William is commonly called
the Conqueror in History; which acquaints us, That he came in with an Army,
and conquered Harold; who is esteemed little less than an Usurper. But that
from thence we should conclude him a Conqueror of the whole Land, and look on
it as a Nation totally subjected by Force of Arms, it seems to me to lack a
little better Proof, than I have yet met with.

That King William, after he was well fixed in the Government, might reckon this
Conquest amongst his other Titles and Claims, (whether by Harold's Oath, the
Pope's Gift, the King's Testament, and a little of Kindred) I shall not deny.
For I have read, that King Henry the Seventh had a mind to put in for this
Title also; but 'twas after he had well and surely gained the main point,
Possession. But upon perusal of the Histories about those Times, it appears a
little unlikely, that this Duke William should get the Land into his own Power
so wholly by Conquest, as some would insinuate, for secret intents possibly,
and purposes of their own.

Though Harold was Conquered by that one Battle, yet I do not think, the Land
was: For besides Londons Strength (where William was forced to yield
Conditions, before he could pass through, as before) the Earls of Mercia and
Northumberland, then of considerable Power, are said to have withdrawn
themselves and their People to that City, without so much as being present at
the Battle. How also the Kentishmen enclosed Duke William, and his Victorious
Army, and compelled him to grant them the continuance of their Old Laws and
Customs, is sufficiently manifested, if only by the single Evidence of their
Ancient Law of Gavelkind, yet continued amongst them.

If this be Conquest, to be forced to yield Conditions; What is it to be
Conquered? Wherefore, we may better (I believe) from these premised
Considerations conclude, That the Chief of the Nation, knowing him to be a Man
of Strength and Ability, and of great Fame, chose rather to submit to him upon
fitting (reasonable) Conditions, than hazard the running into the Miseries of
War, by committing themselves to the Guidance of so young and weak an Head, as
Edgar Atheling.

That King William made a League with such as submitted, and swore Fealty to
him, stands recorded in Stow's Annals. True indeed, after he was well fixed in
the Throne, he might not much mind his former promises; but contrary to them,
might do many irregular Acts to strengthen himself, as he thought, and settle
the Crown the surer upon his own Head. Whereof we find mentioned in Story, his
endeavor to raise his Normans, by introducing them into the chief Places in
Church and State; and impoverish the English, by setting grievous Impositions
and Taxes on them. One we read of very considerable, in the Nineteenth Year of
his Reign, when he made to be gathered Six Shillings of every Hide of Land,
which would rise high, according to my Authors reckoning; who says, an Hide
contains Five Yards; a Yard Four Acres; an Acre Forty Perch in length; Four in
breadth; Eight of these Hides make a Knights-Fee or Ploughtill. Forty Eight
shillings upon Eightscore Acres, was a great matter in those Days; though it
sounds but a small Sum with Us, who have lived to hear of the Wealth of a New
World, brought into the Old One.

To this may be added, his Craft in inrolling his Barons Land, their
Knights-Fees, Towns, Number of Men and Cattle within the Realm, in Doomsday
Book; the better doubtless to know the Strength of the Land, and be the more
able to raise what T^xes he pleased, without being very easily deceived by
concealments.

More instances of Arbitrary Power might possibly be observed, which
nevertheless are not deservedly esteemed Tokens and Marks of Conquest. That
great Persons, in the height of their Grandeur, often forget former Covenants
and Promises, is no such wonder; it is so common, so usual, for some Men to
promise more in half an hour, when they conceive it for their present
Advantage, than others find performed in Seven Years. If Arbitrary Acts of Rule
are able to prove King William a Conqueror of this whole Land, I do not know
but many others may also be esteemed Conquerours, who passed for good Ruling
Kings in the days of their Power.

Though King William held the Englishmen so low, that in his days there was
almost no Englishman that bare an Office of Honor or Rule (if Fabian may be
credited; for some others deny it, as to some particulars:) This being
certainly the too too common Effect of letting in a Foreign Power into a Land,
where those that were the Introducers of the Foreigners as Friends, have
hardly escaped Polyphemus's Courtesy, of being devoured last; Witness in this
Land, the introducing the Saxons by the Britains and the Normans upon them: Yet
the same Historian intimates, that he somewhat favored the City of London, and
granted to the Citizens the First Charter that ever they had, written in the
Saxon Tongue, and sealed with Green Wax, being expressed in Eight or Nine Lives.

This may be construed to be done, either in gratitude to the City, for giving
place so easily to his Fortune, or because he found the Citizens so pliable to
his Will, or rather in policy to have so considerable a Place the more at his
Devotion, and six it the stronger to his Interest: So subtle a King as he was,
being in no wise ignorant (I presume) of the great Impression, the Actions of
the chief City in a Conntry usually makes upon the whole Nation. So that though
London changed Masters, it changed not Fortune; but (notwithstanding it
received damage by Fire, which burnt a great part thereof, and also of St.
Paul's) rather gained more Honor and esteem under the Normans Rule, by becoming
the Metropolis of the whole Nation, and the Theater, wherein has been acted
some of the most considerable Passages, that have since happened in this Land,
whether in Peace or War. Most of our Parliaments, many of the Bishop's Synods
and Convocations, the Kings usual Residence, his Court, his Council, and Places
of Judicature, having been generally kept either in the Liberties of this City,
or not far distant from it, at Westminster; which being of a much later Date,
(as is hinted before) is nevertheless known to be a distinct City, of different
Rites and Customs, and under another Government; though the Buildings joining
both Cities in a manner together, may occasion Foreigners to give the Common
Appellation London to the Whole; and we Natives also, many times, use the same
General Term in private Discourse.

In St. Paul's in London, was kept that Synod of the Clergy, in William the
First's days; which ordered many Bishop's Sees to be translated from small
Villages, and such obscure petty Places, to the greater Cities. For by this
time, the Policy of the Popes of Rome, in diverse parts of Europe, had
introduced a distinct Government in the Church, different from that of the
State: And so founded (as it were) one Empire within another, to have the whole
the better at their Devotion. So that, if Kings or Rulers of States were not as
submissive to their Imperious Commands, as they desired, they had the Church in
the Land to overaw those, who bore the Temporal Sword; and lest the chief
Churchmen (being often preferred by the Magistrates means, through the Popes
great Condescension, as they would have it thought) should prove a little
Refractory, they had the Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Nunneries, and such
like, in a manner, under the Popes peculiar Jurisdiction, to curb them, by the
Power they could raise out of their Tennants, Friends and Kindred. Romes high
and lofty Prelates, thus striving to have their Spoons in every Ones Dish:
which Desire of theirs, we do not find at all diminished, though now their
Wings be much clipped. Nay, we find them the more eager now, in their pursuit
after their ancient Greatness, under the pretense of a former Right* which was
first obtained by none of the best and honestest ways. And so they might regain
it* Experience tells us, they would not stick at the perpetration of the most
Execrable Villainies, the Art of Man can invent, or the Hand can act. Whence
else come all those Wars, Massacres, Persecutions, Plots, Conspiracies,
Designs, Intreagues, Frauds, Deceits, raising of Public Jealousies, fomenting
of Private Fears, exasperating of Men's minds, heightning their Animosities,
debauching their Moralls, and Corrupting Religion it self, with the rest of
those Cursed Arts and Seed-Plots of Sedition, where with our Ears have been so
long filled, that the sound is not yet gone out of them; nor know we when ever
it will, as long as they can meet with so many foolish Bigots, and profane
Debauchees among the Sons of Men: The One to be gulled with the Hopes of
Heaven, for the Performance of such Meritorious Acts, as they will put them
upon; the Other to be purchased with a Bag of Money, or a Plump Whore, to
favor their Designs, falicitate their Purposes, carry on their Projects, and
protect their Crimes, if detected, from Public Justice.

As London was favored by the first William, so I find no great reason
otherwise to believe, but that it continued in favor and fame under the Second
William's Reign. Yet I meet with but few Passages of it, excepting what may
seem to tend to its disadvantage, (as the Harm it sustained from a Violent
wind, that is said to have overthrown at one time above 600 houses, and much
injured the roof of St. Mary Bow in Cheapside, as also the hurt was done
another time about it by the Inundation of Thames) unless we should think it
received some addition of honor, from the great charges William Rufus was at
about the Tower, which was to adorn it, I suppose; for that it was builded long
before, has been related above; and that it was of good strength in the
preceding Kings days, is enough evident, in that we read it was made
Marcharus, the Earl of Northumberland's Prison. This Tower having been before
times, and very often in later days, the place of confinement for great Men,
when esteemed Offenders. This is the King that built Westminster Hall; and
being after displeased at it for being not big enough to his mind, intended (as
it is said) to have built one much larger, and make the other to have served for
a Chamber. The wicked Lives of the insulting Normans; the Miseries and Vices of
the depressed Englishmen, with the depraved Manners of the corrupted Clergy,
were so notorious in this Kings days, that Writers could not well pass them
over without mention.

In Henry the 2d's Time, we read of the founding of St. Bartholomew's -Church,
Priory and Hospital in Smithfield, which was begun ('it is said) by Rayer, one of
this Kings Minstrells, but ended by some good and well disposed Citizens of
London: This Smithfield was then a Place for the casting out of filth, where
also Felons and other Transgressors were executed; and not put it seems to the
use that now it is. Length of time commonly changes the use of Places, and some
times for the better.

There are upon Record no less than Three Councills, Synods or Convocations of
the Clergy, which were kept in this City in this Kings Reign, to reform the
Church and Churchmen, was the usual Pretense; but it was commonly done in
such away, that it tended mostly to the exalting of their own Power.

We read in Stow of a Parliament of Prelates, Nobles and Commons, Assembled by
this King in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, Anno Christi 1116. This King was
the better beloved of the Englishmen, for Marrying a Wife of the Old Saxon
Line, Edgar Atheling's Sisters Daughter, for using Edward the Confessors Laws
with Amendment, at his coming to the Crown, and making some good ones of his
own, for freeing the Church, Impri^oning Ranulph, the covetous Bishop of Durham
(his Brother William's Procurator, and Gatherer of his Taxes) in the Tower of
London; and also releasing ^o Englishmen the Old Tax of Danegelt, lately
re^ived by his Father and Brother, and restoring ^o them the Use of Lights by
Night; which, with ^ire, had been by his Father forbidden to be used after the
Ringing of the Cu^f^^-B^ll, at Eight of ^he Clock.

In the time of King Stephen, we meet with an e^inent Instance of London's
Strength. M^ud the ^mpress, the Late Kings on^y S^rvi^ing Heir, ha^ing upon the
Fortune of a Battle took and Im^risoned King Stephen, and being the^ by much
^xalted in her mind, deeming her self sure of the ^ossession of the whole
Realm* would not make ^^y Grant to the Citizen's Requests: They there^pon
becoming discontented, designed to have ^^ized on her Person. Whereof she
having ^arning, fled in haste for her own Safe guard to ^xford, and her People
were divided and scatter^^; whereas, not long before, she was in a fair
^ossibility of enjoying all that she claimed; King ^^ephen's Queen promising
upon his Delivery, that (...) should surrender the Land into her Possession,
(...) become a Religious Man, or a Pilgrim, to his ^^ves end: Either of which,
at that time, was a (...) of Spiritual Death, as to what concerned ^orldly
Affairs. But her unfortunate di^ob^iging is City soon turned the Scales. The
Queen's ^^rength increases, Maud's diminishes; The King a little after is
delivered upon Exchange, and the Empress (at last) departs with a small Company
and returns into Normandy, without obtaining he Desire. So considerable then
was the City of London, as to be able to wrest the Power out of thi^
Conqueresses Hands, and return it back (at length to the same Person, whom she
had once overcome and held many Months Prisoner at her own (...) and Pleasure.

That for which the Citizens of London made (...) great Labor, was, that they
might use the Law of Edward the Confessor, as they were granted b^ William,
commonly called the Conqueror; and (...) the Laws of her Father, which were of
(...) straitness. Here, in my Opinion, seems to be i^timated, that this King
W^lliam came not into (...) quiet Possession of the Realm so much by Conque^^
as on Conditions; accordingly here is menti^^ made of one Grant.

The Occasion of Stephen's coming to the Crow^ contrary to his own former Oath
swore to Ki^^ Henry, and in prejudice to Maud's Claim, is R^corded by one
Author, to have been the Oath one Hugh B^got, sometime King Henry's Stewar^ who
swore, that the Late King, (in his presence) little before his Death, chose
this Stephen for (...) Heir, by reason that he had received some disco^tent at
his Daughters hands. Whereunto the (...) giving easy Credence, admitted him
King. (...) Favor of the Londoners did doubtless, at the time, condu^^ not a
little to his advantage, in p^^ferring him an able Man, before a weak Woman*
For Stow's Annals inform us, That he was receiv^^ by the Londoners, when he had
been repulsed at ^ther Places; certainly it redounded to his (...)* Benefit
afterward, as has been related before.

Another Addition of Strength might be, his not imposing heavy Taxes upon the
People; which, it may be, increased their Love to him, and made so many side
with him: As indeed we find upon his first Admission, that he swear among other
things, before the Lords at Oxford, to forgive his People the Tax of Danegelt.
Neither do I read of any Taxes, that he raised upon the Commons: It is affirmed
positively, in the C^ll^ction of Wonders, and Remarkable Passages, that he
raised none; with which Stow likewise agrees. So that, a King's needless laying
of many heavy and grievous Taxes upon his People, occasions him to lose much of
their Love; and his forbearing it, when he has Power in his hands, unites his
Subjects Hearts the faster to him. But instead of Taxes, we read of this Kings
permission, given to his Lords, to build Castles or Fortresses upon their own
Grounds: Many whereof we find pulled down in the next King's time, they having
been the occasion of many Miseries in the Land, and the ready means to foment
Civil Wars therein; which generally brings greater Damages to the Common^lty,
than a few Impositions and Taxes can be presumed to do.

This King Stephen was twice Crowned; but for what cause, or for what intent,
is not so easily known; whether it was, that he thought his Imprisonment had
diminished somewhat of his Royalty, or else thinking by a second Coronation to
^lude the Force of the Oath made at the first, I find not delivered. Certain it
is, soon after my Author tells of his taking away a Castle from the Earl of
Chester, who before had appeared against him on Maud's side, with a very
considerable Strength; but had been afterward reconciled to the King. But what
is much more considerable, we read not long after of the King's new danger, and
ill Success, and of his Party being weakened particularly by the loss of
London. For Duke Henry (after King) coming into England with a great Army,
after some small Success, gets up to London, and wins the Tower, as much by
Policy, and fair Promi^es, (says my Author) as by Strength. Then he had
Opportunity enough to caress the C^tizens, being so near them; and it may be,
he got not the Tower without their Consert, if not by their Affistance. Hereby
we find, that he retrieved what his Mother's Haughtiness before had lost; and
so having got the City's Affection and Power, he was in a fair way to obtain
his Desires, as he did not long after. For we quickly read of Mediators and
Treaties of Peace between these two Competitors; which took Effect at last,
though the Interest and Policy of some hindered it for a time. In Conclusion,
the King was fain to consent to the adopting the Duke his Heir, so that he
might Reign during his Life* Which justly to perform, the King being sworn,
with his Lords Spiritual and Temporal; in the next place, we hear of their
riding up to London; as if to bind the bargain, it was requisite to ask the
consent of that Honorable City, whose Favor seems to have been of so great
weight in those unsettled Times, as to turn the Scales twice; once in the
King's behalf, and erewhile on the Duk^'s* Such was their Influence, such their
Power, as to pull down and set up, in a manner, whom the Citizens pleased.

Happy was this Agreement to the Land by settling peace therein; as beneficial
likewise was it to the Duke, it being a fair Step to the Throne; whereon we
find him mounted within a little time. For not long after this Accord, we hear
of the King's Death: Whether the Troubles of his Mind, or Diseases of his Body
brought him to his End, vexation for the disappointment of his Designs, in
being (after a sort) compelled to adopt his Competitor (his Enemy) for his Son
and Heir, or Grief for the loss of London's Favor, which helped to effect so
great a Turn in his Affairs, I shall not determine. It might be one, it might
be the other, or neither, or all conjoined, that became the occasional Causes
(so to phrase it) of his Death. I like not to be very positive, where I am not
very certain.

Stephen's Death making thus way for Henry to ascend the English Throne, he
became one of the ^reatest Kings that ever ruled this Land, for the Largeness
and Extent of his Territories, if we reckon the Inheritance he enjoyed from his
Father, the Land he held by the Title of his Mother, the Dowry he had with his
Wife, and what he ob^ained by the Success of his Arms: Yet, notwith^tanding all
this, he lived not free from Troubles, and intestine Broils, which sprung much
out of his ^wn Bowels: So that the Glory of his Youth be^an somewhat to be
eclipsed by the Misfortunes of ^is elder Years. He Crowned his eldest Son
li^ing King, sometime before the middle of his ^eign; to the end (as one Author
affirms) that he ^ight have full Power and Authority to rule this ^and and
People, while his Father was busied in ^ther Countries, where some of his Lands
lay. This ^ight be one Reason; but the King (having learnt (...) experience, to
his Mother's Loss, and his own ^ost, how easy it was for Stephen to attempt,
and ^ain the Crown, being present on the Spot, while ^^e right Heir was far
distant in the vacancy of the ^hrone) may be supposed in his intent, to have
designed the hinderance of such an Intrusion for the future, by Crowning the
next Heir King, while he himself lived.

I read, that Stephen had some such design to have Crowned his Son King in his
own days, (as he declared at a Parliament called at London, An. Reg. 17) to
have fixed the Crown the surer to his Posterity. But the Bishops refused the
Deed: Which I do not find they did so much out of Conscience, or in Favor to
M^^d's Title, as by the Command (forsooth) of the Pope; who, in those days, was
very apt to be clapping his Fingers into almost ever^ ones Pie, where he
thought any good pickin^ might be had.

This King Henry got but little by Crowning hi^ Son in his Lifetime, besides
Troubles, Crosses and Vexation of Spirit. For upon one Occasion o^ other, we
find his Sons often thwarting him, an^ some times warring upon him.

Famous were those days, for the Contest betwee^ the King, and Thomas Beck^^;
which brought Beck^^ to his end, and the King to a severe Penance at the last;
though he disowned the Fact, and is no^ plainly proved to have given any other
consent t^ it, unless what may be deduced from a few ang^^ Words uttered in his
Passion. The ground (...) occasion of this Dissension between the King, an^ the
Archbishop, is declared by the Chronicle, (...) have sprung from diverse Acts
and Ordinanc^^ which the King had procured, at his Parliament (...)
Northampton, to pass against the Liberties of (...) Church; which thereupon
this lofty Prelate wit^ stood. The Pop^sh Clergy being then grown to the
height, that crowned Heads were in a manner co^pe^led for their own Security to
veil Bonnet them; and scarce durst so far presume, as but endeavor to cross
their Ambitious Designs: They could be content by their Canons, and Councels,
to encroach upon the Laity, as they termed them; but they, (poor Men) by the
Clergy's good Will, must not be allowed to vindicate their Own Native Liberty
from the Others unjust Usurpations.

This King Henry is said to have been Peerless in Chivalry, in War, and in
Leachery. This last is sufficiently notorious, in his Love to the Fair
Rosamond, and further manifested in his deflowring (as we read) his Son
Richard's intended Wife, the French King's Daughter; whom we are also told he
would have Married, could he have obtained a Divorce from his Queen: And this
he intended, it is said, to have the more favor of the Frenchmen, by their Aid
the better to disinherit his Sons; who, among other things done to his
Displeasure, had warred upon him in Vindication of their abused and slighted
Mother.

Three several Warnings I read of, that he had to amend his Life; but to little
or no purpose. Some of his Patience (or else fear of the Imperious Clergy) we
find in his forbearance, showed to Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem; who, upon
the King's Refusal to go into the Holy Land, being discontented, sharply
rebuked him, reflecting on him for the Death (or Martyrdom, as those Times were
pleased to term it) of Thomas Becket; and upon Henry's further excusing the
Voyage for fear of his Son's Rebellion in his Absence, departed in great ire,
with these words in his Mouth; saying, That it was no wonder; for of the Devil
they come, and to the Devil they shall. -- Part of his Devotion we meet with in
that Shift, he found out to fulfill the Condion of building three Abbeys in
England, enjoined him by the Pope in the Dispensation granted him, for the
Voyage he h^d before solemnly vowed to take into the H^ly Land in Person. Such
was much of the Religion t^en of those Times, e^^ner t^ b^ild (...), and the
like, (so man^ (...) Castles, or Fortr^ss^s, as it were, ready man^ed and
vict^alled at the P^p^'s Service) o^ else to take upon them the Cross, and away
to the (...) to fight for Christ'^ (...), as were the cry, Angli^e, to subdu^
more La^d to the P^pe's Obedience. A cunning crafty trick of the P^pe's, to
send away packing such Princes, whose Power they feared would grow too great at
home, that they might in the mea^ time domineer over their Subjects Purses and
Consciences, and the better advance their own Worldly Pomp and Grandeur in
their Absence. For read not of any of the Pop^s, who went themselves i^
Persons: They, forsooth, could not be spared from their Charge, al^as, their
Preferment; no^ be absent from home, out of care to the Feeding of then Fl^^k,
i. e. looking to their own Gain. So that the serding M^n (while in their
Bodies) to the H^ly Land, was almost as beneficial a Project, as long as it
lasted, as the ^reterce of Fetching their Souls out of ^^^gatory after their
Death, for a round Sum of (...), and a set of Mass^s.

The Tri^k King Henry (almost as Cunning, though not as F^rtunate, as these
subrle Priests) found out to fulfill the Condition enjoined, and which he put in
Execution, was, First, Putting Secular Cannons out of Waltham-House, and
setting Cannons Regular in their stead. Secondly, His th^^sti^g the M^rk^ out
of Amesbury-House, and placing there another sort of Religious Persons, which
he had brought from beyond the Sea. And for the Third, His coursly renewing the
Charter House of Witham, beside Salisbury.

The King having had so large Trial, and so much Knowledge of the City of
London's Power, did not very much (I suppose, at any time) disoblige the
Citizens; Especially having such powerful Enemies to deal with as the King of
France abroad, and at home the insulting, incroaching Clergy, and his own
unnatural refractory Sons; though one says, that he nourished Strife among^t
his Children with all Diligence, hoping thereby to live himself in the more
rest. But it seems, that device availed him but little.

As we have but little reason to think, that the City of London lost ground in
Henry's days; so under his Son and Successor King Richard, we find that
Foundation laid, where upon was after erected that Famous and Free Way of
Electing it is own yearly Governors; wherein she now glories. Like as William
the First gave the Citizens their First Charter; so this Noble Richard [Cuer de
Lyon] was the King, that ordained London to be ruld by Two Bailiffs whose Names
were Henry of Cornhil, and Richard Fitz Ryver; as Fabian tells us in that
worthy Chronicle, which he compiled of the English and French Nation. This
Fabian, being Sheriff of this City in Henry the Seventh's Days, by that
advantage may be presumed to have best known the Affairs of the City; and
seeming to write with a great deal of Integrity, in this Relation I chiefly
follow him, and so intend as far as he reaches; especially when I shall have
occasion to Name any of the Bailiffs, Mayors, or Sheriffs; through whose yearly
Government, in his Second Volume, he deduces the History in form of Annals,
down to the beginning of King Henry the Eight's Reign. In the Prol^gue to this
Second Part, he tells us, That the City was anciently under the Rule o^
Portgrieves; which word Portgrieve signifies in Sax on, the Guardian, Ruler, or
Keeper of a Town. Th^^ Book called Doomsday, wherein were registered i^ Saxon
the Laws and Customs then used, being lost ^^ he acquaints us also, that the
Remembrance o^ those Rulers, before this Richard's Days, was los^ and
forgotten. In the same Prologue likewise he has left us a Copy of Verses,
written in praise o^ the City; wherein we are told, That this City was never
cast down, as other Famous Ones have been; that herein Divine Service was
always continued in Religious Houses, in such an Order, that when one had done,
another began; and that it was famed also for the Mayor and Sheriffs Noble
Housekeeping; with much more; which any one that please may peruse at his
leisure, in the forecited Place.

We likewise find there declared the severa^ Wards of the City, as they stood
in Fabian's Time together with the Parish-Churches, and other Religious Houses,
within and without, summed up to the Number of One Hundred Sixty Eight:

This King Richard (in the Beginning of whose Reign we first hear of the Name
of Bailiffs give^ to the Rulers of London) having taken a Voyag^ into the
Holy Land, according to the Religion o^ those Times, and done his Devoir for
the Recovery of it, according to his Strength; the Clergymen had reason to
esteem well of him; to humor whose designs he had undertaken so chargeable
(...) Enterprise: So accordingly we find, that the Ecclesiastucks stuck as
close to him, as any of his Subjects in his Adversity. For in his Return from
the Holy War (as 'twas termed) Richard being Shipwrack't, took and imprisoned
by the Duke of Austria, and long detained by the Emperor, he was compelled to
redeem himself, after a Year and three Month's Imprisonment, at a large Ransom:
An hundred thousand Pounds were either presently paid, or good Pledges left
behind him to ascertain the full and true Payment. A vast Sum in those days,
when Wheat was esteemed at a high Price, being sold at fifteen Shillings the
Quarter; as we find it in the fifth Year of King John's Reign, about half a
dozen Years after. So that, for this Ransom, were sold the Ornaments of the
Church, Prelate's Rings and Crosses, with the Vessels and Chalices of the
Churches, throughout the Land, Wool of White Monks and Cannons, and also twenty
seven Shrines scrap't and spoiled of the Gold and Silver laid on them in former
Times: No Privilege of Church then regarded, no Person spared. A costly Voyage
indeed it proved to the Land, undertaken to satisfy the Clergy-men's Ambition;
and therefore they might well be content to bear much of the Charges, and use
their utmost Endeavors in the Imprisoned King's Vindication. And so the Pope
did, as far as Curses would go; to which was imputed those Mischiefs, that
befell the Duke of Austria and his Country a little after, as the Effects of the
Pope's Indignation.

The Power, and Esteem of this City's Favor, in those Times of the King's
Captivity, we need but remark out of Neubrigensis; who acquaints us, That when
the Chancellor, being then Bishop of Ely, and Governor of the Land, dreaded
the Force of the opposite Lords, who strove to suppress him for his Insolency,
and ill Government, he retired to London; and humbly entreated the Citizens,
not to be wanting to him in that point of time: But they being not unmindful of
his former Behavior, rather favored the other Party; whereupon the proud
haughty Prelate was compelled to resign his Office, which he had so ill
managed, and depart, to the no small Benefit to the Land in those troublesome
Times.

At London likewise was it, that the Lords consulted together, for the ordering
the Land in the King's Absence; which, after the late ill Governor had been
discarded, and after an Oath of Fideli^y to the absent Prince, was put into
another's Hands.

When King Richard was delivered; as soon as he landed at Sandwich, we find him
coming straightway to London, as the fittest Place (it seems) to receive him,
and assist him. So accordingly we read of his Reception there, with all Joy and
Honor, in so splendid a Pomp, that the German Nobles (present) beholding it,
affirmed, That if the Emperor had known of such Riches in England, he would
not have dimiss'd the Ransomed King under an Intol^erab^e Price.

A little afte^* we hear of his riding thence with a convenient ^^r^ngth, to
recover the Places that stood out (...) him.

After this, by a Council of Lords called at Winchester, having deprived his
Brother John of his Honors and Lands, for his Rebellion, he took care to have
himself crowned King of England anew. As if the Force of his former Coronation
was impaired by his Imprisonment; or else he thought, by this politic Shift,
to take off all Obligations, that might happily lie on him, for any thing done
before. As indeed we quickly after read of a Resumption of all Patents,
Annuities, Fees, and other Grants m^de before his Voyage: But then it is
affirmed to be done by the Authority of a Parliament, called after his
Coronation.

After these Passages, two State-Informers are ^oted to have ri^en up,
promising the King great Matters; the Scenes of whose chief Acts were either
laid, or to have been laid at London. One of them, the Abbot of Cadonence,
warning the King of the Fraud of his Officers, by virtue of a Warrant from him,
called diverse Officers before him at London, to yield to him their Accounts.
This Place was made choice of by him, as the fittest (it seems) wherein to
ingratiate himself with the common People by ^o plausible an Act, as bringing
offending Officers to con^igne Punishment. But Death soon cut him off, and so
put an end to all his Designs. The other Informer, call'ed William with the
Long Beard, reported to be born in London, of a sharp Wit; having showed the
King of the Outrage of the Rich; who (as he said) in public Payments, spared
their own, and pi^led the Poor; and being upheld by him, became the Patron and
Defender of poor Men's Causes; and stirred up the common People to a desire and
love of Freedom and Liberty, by blaming Rich Men's Excess and Insolence.
Hereupon he was followed with such numbers of People, that being called before
the King's Council upon suspicion of a Conspiracy, the Lords were fain with
good words to dismiss him for the present, for fear of the Multitude attending
him; and commanded certain to seize on him, in the Absence of his numerous
Abettors. But those thus commanded, mistaking the time, and so failing in their
intended Design, he escaped, and took Sanctuary in St. Mary Bow Church; where
his Strength quickly grew so great by the Access of the Multitude, that he was
not easily taken hold of, nor without shedding of Blood. However, being at last
taken, after that the Heads and Rulers of the City had diminish'^ the People,
he, with other his Adherents, wa^ arraigned before the Judges, cast, condemned,
an^ hanged very shortly after; even the following da^ says the Chronicle: so
desirous were the rich an^ great Men to have him out of the way, as soo^ as
they could. But as his Plea of Freedom was ^^ acceptable to the Commons in his
Lifetime, th^^ he became a Terror to the Great; so, after (...) Death, he
ceased not for a while to be a Dread (...) many; by reason of a Rumor raised
and banded about among the Commons, of his Innocenc^ and favorably received of
the People, even to (...) approving of him as an holy Man and Martyr, an^
making Pilgrimages to the Place of his Execution to the no small trouble of
those that had a han^ in his Death. At last, the Flame of this Dev^tion was
somewhat cooled, by the Publishing some Acts of his, with other detestable
Crimes laid t^ his Charge; whether true or false, let them loo^ to it, who
industriously spread them abroad. Y^^ it was not quite put out, till the
Archbishop ^^ Canterbury, (upon whom, among others, a gre^^ Crime was raised
for procuring his Death) ha^ accursed the Priest, this William's Kinsman; (...)
had openly divulged the Virtue the Chain (whe^^with William was bound in the
time of his Impr^sonment) had upon a Man sick of the Fever.

This Instance sufficiently proves, that the nam^ of Liberty sounds sweet; and
that such as pr^mise to procure it, shall have Admirers and Fo^lowers enough:
But that also the Favor of the Multitude is deceitful; and for a Man to put
(...) his ^^at to the People, many times is the occasion of losing his Head, is
evidently manifested by the very same Example. How small an Occasion is i^ that
sometimes raises a Man's Fame? Yet you here find as petty small Matters soon
likewise depress it. That is no lasting Name, that depends merely upon Vulgar
Breath. To Defend the Poor and Needy, and protect the Oppressed, is a plausible
Plea. Yet it shall go hard, but the Rich Oppressor will find one way or other,
to ruin that Man in his Goods, and good Name, if not as to his Life, who
undertakes so noble a Defense.

As this King Richard (under whose Reign these two Informers rose up) was
Courageous and Valiant in his Life; so, a little before his Death, an Act of
his Magnanimity and Christian Forbearance was showed by him, in his freely
forgiving and remitting the Person, then in his Power, that occasioned his
Death; after that he heard from the other's Confession, that in that Deed he
intended to avenge the Death of his Father and Brethren, before slain by the
King. But yet the Man escaped not with his Life, though forgiven by King
Richard; if that be true, which is said of the Duke of Brabant, that he after
caused him to be taken, flead quick, and hanged.

After Richard's Decease, his Brother John (being then in Normandy) seizes upon
his Treasure; and, not long after, procures himself to be crowned King at
Westminster, though in prejudice to the Title of an Elder Brother's Son:
Whereto his Mother Eleanor is thought to have contributed not a little; being
possibly desirous rather to set the Crown upon her Son's Head, under whom she
might hope to have a greater Share in the Government, than she could reasonably
expect under her Grandchild, then within Age, where her Daughter-in-law, the
other's Mother, was likely to bear the greatest sway. So that the ambitious
Desire of Rule is not incident only to Men; but invad^ even the Hearts of the
Female Sex. Here the Mother's Ambition raises up her Younger Son, even to the
Prejudice of her Eldest Son's Heir.

Though Women be born subject to Men, yet it ^^ in a manner connatural to them,
to desire the Power of commanding them at their own will and pleasure. Show me
the Land, where the Scepter hat^ not often bowed to the D^staff; and the Princ^
Power, together with his heart, been subject to ^ c^pricious Woman's Humor.
When they creep in to Men's Hearts, and lie in their Bosoms, it is (...) wonder,
that they dive into their Secrets, and swa^ their Councels. So that the Affairs
of the State often turn upon the Hinges of an Imperious Woman'^ Will. Under
even the most Absolute Despotical Government of the Turks, the Ottoman Power
man^ times lies in a Woman's Breast; and the Sultana^^ do not seldom overruled
the Consults of the Divan. Of which, let the Ambitious Roxolana, sometime
Empress to Solomon the Magnificent, suffic^ for an In^tance.

But what need we go so far, when as neare^ home our own Ears, if not our Eyes,
may serve for Witnesses of this Truth? Yet, to the Glory o^ England be it
spoken, this Land flourished in suc^ Peace and Prosperity, even to a Miracle,
under Queen Elizabeth; and the Tranquillity of her Reig^ has so Honorably
Consecrated her Memory i^ Fame's Temple, that few of our English Monarchs ever
equaled her; none (that I know) of all those* who went off the Throne,
surpassed her. The Happiness indeed of her Reign, may possibly be imputed much
to the Wisdom of her Conduct, in suffering the Affairs of the Nation to be
guided by the Councels of Men: Whereas, under some of ou^ Kings, our Governors
have had such a deal of Chamber-practice, that the State has been much ^t the
Guidance of Women, or else of such Effe^inate Persons, as were quite
degenerated from ^he Spirits, and Courage of their Ancestors; as ^ho, by their
Immoralities, Luxury, and Debau^heries, had little left in them of Heroic and
Masculine, and were scarce fit for any thing else, ^ut to be dubbed Knights of
the Carpet.

But what ever was the Title and Means, we and John got into the Throne; and,
by the aid ^e obtained of his Lords and Commons, before ^^e End of the Year, to
recover what was lost ^ Normandy; we may conclude, it was not without their
Consents. From Stow's Relation, it is ^^ain enough, that he was Elected at
London, after that Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, had ^ade a Speech to that
purport, in the Presence ^f the Bishops, Earls, Barons and Others. They, (...)
may be, preferring him, a Man of Courage and Spirit, and so fitter to rule and
govern the ^ealm, before the Title of young Arthur, then (...) his Nonage,
though of the Elder House.

For seldom it is, that unusual Changes happen, without some previous
Preparatives to make way ^^r them. And if a Nation has once fixed upon a ^ule
to guide the Succession, they do not present^^ vary from it, but upon urgent
Occasion. So find ^e in Kingdoms, merely and properly Elective; ^^ey commonly
choose the next Heir of the Blood, (...) less upon the Interposition of some
notable Im^^diment.

In Sweden, that Warlike Nation, amidst the ^^eatest Success of their Arms,
submitted them^^^ves to Gustavus Adolphus's Heir, though a Child, ^^d of the
Female Sex; and when she grew up to Woman's Estate, they would willingly have
continued her their Queen, would she but have Mar^^ed according to their
Desires.

When that great Change happened in Denm^^^ of late Years, which turned it from
an Elective (...) an H^red^tary Kingdom, we may have heard, it w^^ effected by
the Policy of the present King, wh^ made use of the Distractions of the Nation,
th^^ almost conquered by the Sweeds; and that Sca^^ing of Fame he had got, by
defending his Capit^^ City against their furious Assaults, to incline the p^^ty
Remainder of his Subjects, to give way ^^ such an universal Change in the
Constitution (...) their Government. So that, whatever Towns or C^ties were
afterward reduced, they must be content to yield to the new-made Law, as the
establis^ed Decree of the Nation. A hard thing it mig^^ possibly appear to
such, who had no hand in the making of that Ordinance, and (it may be) would
not very readily have given their Consent ther^unto: And yet it might have
seemed as hard t^ them, to have remained under the Sweeds, when they had but
little hopes of having much Share (...) the Government, or be looked upon, and
dealt with ^therwise than as a Conquered People. The Fame, (...) may be, of
this succeeding Policy of the Dani^^ King, with the Excitation of some of the
Boutife^^ of Europe, may be supposed to have put some thoughts of the like
Nature, into the Polish King'^ Head; if all be true that has been reported, o^
the Sloth and Negligence laid to his Charge, by (...) Senator of the Land, of
his Backwardness to call (...) General Diet of the Nation; and of the Purport
^^ a Speech made to him once within these few Year^ by an Ambassador from out
of these Parts of Europ^* Hence likewise may have proceeded the Fears an^
Jealousies of the Sweeds, hinted to us in Foreign News, lest their King, by
his Neighbors Example, should be encouraged to attempt the like: Which ^^ems
since to have been very much legitimated, by ^he Alteration lately made in the
Senate of that ^ingdom, if our Modern Intelligencers have given ^s a true
Account and Relation of that Affairs.

After that Elective Princes have thus obtained to ^e made Hereditary Monarchs;
one of their next de^^res is, to render themselves Absolute in their
Go^ernment: Wherein they may have received no ^mall Encouragement from the
Successful Attempts ^f some such Tyrannical Invader of other Men's ^ights, as
the present Hector of France: And no little Help, in the neat way of subduing
and insla^ing their own Country, they may have learnt from some such contriving
Pa^e, as was one of ^he Catholic Kings of Spain; who with an Army ^ut of one
of his Kingdoms, subverted the Liberty of another. So ambitious are some Men of
the so much ^nvied Honor, of ceasing to be Kings of Men, and ^ecoming Tryants
over Slaves at their Pleasure.

With some such kind of Disease, do we find King ^ohn also to have been
infected in his time: But ^ Chargeable Disease you may well call it, which cost
^im the Loss of much of his Territories abroad, the ^earts of many of his
Subjects (among both the Spi^itualty and Temporalty) at home, and his Peace and
Tranquillity within, together with a free Imperi^l Crown, and all the Regalities
attending it; and ^et he dyed at last, without obtaining his so much-^esired
Remedy, as I doubt not to make sufficient^y Evident in the following Relation.

In the Second Year of this King John, by Coun^el of the Burgesses of the City
of London, Thirty ^ive of the most substantial and wisest Men are Recorded to
have been chosen, and (after some) called the Council of the City; of which
yearly we^^ Elected the Eayliffs, as long as they lasted; an^ after them the
Mayor and Sheriffs: Which name^ we meet with, in few Years after. For about the
latter end of this King's Nineth Year, we read (...) a Grant made to the
Citizens, and confirmed by the King's Letters Patents; whereby they had Power
to choose Yearly a Mayor, and Two Sheriffs. T^^ First Mayor upon Record, is
Henry Fitz Alwi^^ sworn and charged upon Michaelmas-day, in the Tenth Year of
this King, Anno Christi 1210. wh^ continued several Years Mayor: The Sheriffs
were Peter Duke, and Thomas Neel, sworn the same tim^* And the former Name and
Rule of Bayl^ffs clear^^ discharged. St. Matthew's Day, Nine Days before
M^chaelmas, was the time the Citizens then alloted for their Sheriffs Election;
and on Michaelm^^ day, was the Mayor Ordained, by the like Orde^ to be chosen,
and charged then with the other though now this in part is altered.

This same Year is likewise noted in Fabian, as f^^ the altering of the Rulers
of the City from Bayli^^ to a Mayor and Sheriffs; so also for the changi^^ of
the Bridge from Timber to Stone; which (...) perfected about this time, by the
Aid of the Ci^^zens and Passengers; it having been Thirty (...) Years in
building, according to Stow; who pla^^ the Beginning hereof, as high as Henry
the Second days. So that, thence forward we may expect (...) find the Power of
the City, and its Glory more an^ more increasing every Age.

That the Government of the City should be the changed at the Request of the
Citizens, and in fav^^ of them fixed as they would have it, argues that the
Strength then was thought considerable, and their ^^fluence upon the rest of
the Nation esteemed not to (...) small. For at this time was K. John
over-pressed by ^he Pope and his Clergy, and reduced to so low an Ebb ^f
Fortune, that but few Years passed, before he ^as fain to buy his Peace at no
less a price than the ^esignation of his Crown. And therefore, in the ^idst of
his distress, by these Acts of Favor, he ^ay be thought to endeavor to fix
the City to his ^^terest, as hoping thereby to oblige the Citizens (...) appear
in his behalf, against the Pride of these ^^sulting Priests. An Argument,
doubtless, of their ^ower, and the King's Esteem of it.

The Occasion of the difference between the King ^^d the Pope, (which brought
such Woe to the ^and, and Trouble to the King) was the displea^^re he took
against the Monks of Canterbury, for ^^eir Electing one to the Archbishopric,
contrary (...) his Mind; together with his Refractoriness, in ^ot harkening to
the advice of his Lords and ^^iends, who would have had him have yielded to ^^e
Pope, then too potent an Adversary safely to be ^^ntested with. To which may be
added, his con^^nued Obstinacy, in not yielding to terms of Ac^^mmodation and
Accord; when as his Enemies ^^ew more powerful, and his own Strength was ^uch
weakened by the loss of Normandy. A sharp ^^rrection it proved to the King, to
have much of (...) Territories abroad, his Normans ancient Inhe^^tance, took
from him by the War, which the ^^ench King made upon him, by the Pope's
exciting, according to some Authors); to have his Land ^^d Himself accursed at
home, his Lords absolved (...) their Allegiance, that they might be enabled to
^^e against him, and depose him; and he himself ^t last) compelled for his own
security, to give a^ay his Crown and Dignity, and take it again of the Pope at
a certain Rent. As hard measure had the Kingdom, to have the Doors of Churches
and other Places of Divine Service, shut up in City and Country, in London, and
in the other Parts of the Land, that no Religious Worship might be use^
publicly; but the Dead must be buried lik^ Dogs, in Ditches and Corners; No
Sacrament^ administered; no Baptisms; no Marriages; or (...) there were in any
Places, it must be by special License, purchased (it may be) at great rates;
and all this, for the Offense of one Man, or a few (...) which most probably
did neither consent to, no^ could amend, without breaking former Laws and
Oaths, and offending against the Principles of Honesty, and the Christian
Religion. Suppose the Hea^ Shepherd had offended; yet what had the Shee^ done,
to be used thus? Sure the Pope showed himself hereby a Lord of Lords, though he
pretends t^ call himself a Servant of Servants. From such proud^^ haughty
Servants, Liberanos. His Popeship would fain be esteemed a Father of
Christians; but here (...) dealt very hardly with many of the Sons of the
Church. A sad Case, indeed, were we (poor Christians) of the Common Herd in,
should our Religion allow us at every turn to be sent to the Devil because the
ambitious Pretenses of our Governor would not suffer them to agree well
together among themselves.

But we know already, or have heard of to much of these Priest's Pride, to
think them the most humble, the most mortisied Men in the World. The professed
and avowed Principles o^ some of them tell us too too plainly, that w^ are not
to take all they say to be either Law o^ Gospel: Neither do every one of their
Action oblig^^^^ always to think, that they believ^ themselves in all they
affirm. They may indeed sometimes tell a fair smooth Tale, when they are got a
little higher than their Neighbors, unto a place where they know they must not
be presently contradicted; but when they be come down upon plain even Ground,
we find them (...) for the most part) much like other men: Nay some of them (it
may be) an Ace or two worse. More Proud, more Ambitious, more Worldly, more
Covetous; in a word, more debauched in Principles and Practices. I could
quickly name (...) if I list) among us Protestants, of the Reformed Religion,
of the Church of England (as some delight to style themselves) the Persons, the
Time, and the Place, the Diocese, the Shire, the Hundred, the Parish, where
lives a double Benefic'd-man (...) so strong an English Church man in Word and
Deed, as not justly to be taxed with the imputation of a Phanatick, by such as
know the manner of his Converse) who was not many years since deprived both of
Office and Benefice, for none of the greatest Faults that ever was. Surely the
Parish, where the Offense was not committed, deserved not so ill at the Reverend
Bishop's Hands, as to be deprived of the Use and Benefit of their Pastor.
Neither know I wherein the harmeless Parishoners of the other Place had so
highly offended, as to merit the loss of their Head Shepherd's oversight;
unless we must fancy them accessory to his Young Curate's indiscretion, in not
bowing ^ow enough at the Church door, to a stately Dame of the Parish: So, if
my Memory deceive me not, have I some where read it observed, and it seems also
verified in the History, that though the Name of King's was thrown quite out of
Rome, yet the Power some industriously strove still to retain.

The Conditions, where on King John was (...) concil'd to the Pope, were to
this purport, Th^^ he should admit the Archbishop to his See, pe^ceably to
enjoy the P^ofits and Fruits thereof permit the Prior, his Monks, and Others,
before exiled for the Archbishop's Cause, to re-enter the Land, without
trouble, or future Molestation together with Restitution to them to be mad^ of
all Goods taken from them by his Officers, (...) the time of this variance: And
that he should lik^ wise yield up into the Pope's Hands all his Righ^ and Title
to the Crown of England; with all R^venues, Honors, and Profits belonging to
the sam^ as well Temporal as Spiritual, to hold it ever after, both He and his
Heirs, from the Pope, and h^ Successors, as the Pope's Feodarics.

These Articles thus granted, and the Lord sworn to maintain them, the King
upon his bended Knees, taking the Crown from his Head, del^vered it to the
Pope's Legate, resigning it into the Pope's hands, both in Word and Deed; and
afte^ five days resumed it of the same Hands, by Virtu^ of a Bond or Instrument
made unto the Pope; which I have here transcribed out of Matthew of Paris
History; that such as care not what Religion ge^ uppermost in the Land, may
know what they are (...) expect, if Popery should once get suc^ a head, as t^
come in again.

JOhannes Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Omnibus Christi fidelibus, hanc Chartam inspecturis, salutem in Domino.
Vniversitati Vestrae per hanc Chartam sigillo nostro Munitam Volumus esse
notum, quod cum Deum and Matrem Nostram Sanctam Ecclesiam Offenderimus in
multis, and proinde Divina Misericordia plurimum indigeamus, nec quid digne
offerre possimus pro satisfactione Deo and Ecclesiae debita facienda, nisi
nosmet ipsos bumiliemus et regna nostra: Volentes nos ipsos humiliare pro illo
qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad Mortem, Gratia Sancti Spiritus inspirante,
non vi interdicti, ^ectimore coacti, sed nostra bona spontaneaque Voluntate ac
communi Conci^io Baronum Nostrorum Conserimus, and libere concedimus De^ and
Sancti^ Apostolis ejus Petro and Paulo and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Matronae
Nostrae, ac Domino Papae Innocentio, ejusque Catholicis successoribus, totum
Regnum Angliae, and totum Regnum Hiberniae, cum omn^ Jure and pertinentijs
suis, pro Remissione Omnium Peccatorum Nostrorum, and totius Generis Humaki,
ta^ pro vivis quam pro defunctis, and (...) modo illa ab eo and Ecclesia
Romana, tanquam secundarius recipiente^ and tenentes, in praesentia Prudenti^
Viri Pandulphi Domini Papae Subdiaconi et Familiaris. Exinde praedict^ Domino
Papae Innocentio, ejusque Catholicis successoribus and Ecclesiae Romanae,
secundum subscriptam forma^ fecimus and juravimus, and homagi^m ligium in
praesentia Pandulphi, si coram Domino Papa esse poterimus, eidem faciemus;
Successores nostros et Haeredes de Vxore nostra in perpetuum obligantes, ut
simili modo summo Pontifici qui pro tempore fuerit, and Ecclesiae Romanae, sine
contradictione debeant fidelitatem praestare, and homagium recognoscere. Ad
indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae Obligationis and concessionis, Volumus
et Stabilimus, ut de proprijs et specialibus redditibus nostris praedictorum
regnorum, pro omni servitio ^t consuetudine, quae pro ipsis facere debemus,
salvis per omnia Denarijs Beati Petri, Ecclesia Romana mil^e marcas
Esterlingorum percipiat an^uatim: in festo scilicet Sancti Michaelis quingentas
Marcas, et in Pascha quingentas. Septingentas scilicet pro Regno Angliae, et
trecentas pro Regno Hiberniae: Salvis nobis et Haeredibus nostris justitijs,
Libertatibus, et Regalibus nostris. Quae omnia, sicut supra scripta sunt, rata
esse volentes atque firma, obligamus nos et successores nostros contra non
venire: et si nos vel aliquis successorum Nostrorum contra haec attentare
praesumpserit, quicunque ille fuerit, nisi rite commonitus resipuerit cada^ a
jure Regni. Et haec charta Obligationis et concessionis nostrae semper firma
permaneat.

Test meipso apud domum Militum Templi juxta D^veram, coram H. Dublinensi
Archiepiscopo, Johanne Norwicensi Episcopo, Galfrido filio Petri, W. Comite
Sarisberiae, Willielmo Comite Pembroc. R. Comite Bononiae, W. Comite Warenne,
S. Comite Winton. W. Comite Arundel, W. Comite de Ferraijs, W. Briwere, Petro
filio Hereberti, Warino filio Geroldi, xv. die Maij, An. Regni nostri decimo
quarto.

In English thus:

JOHN by the Grace of God King of England, etc.
to the Faithful in Christ, that shall see this Paper, greeting.
To you all We would it should be known by this Paper sealed with Our Seal,
That since We have offended God and our Mother the Holy Church in many things,
and therefore stand in very great need of the Divine Mercy, and are not able to
offer any due satisfaction to God and the Church, unless We humble Our Selves
and Our Kingdoms: Being willing to humble Our Selves for His sake, who humbled
Himself even unto Death for us through the Grace of the Holy Spirit inspiring
Us, not by force o^ the Interdict, nor compelled by Fear, but of Our Own good
and free Will, and by the common Counsel of Our Lords We give^ and freely yield
to God and to his Holy Apostles Peter and Paul and to Our Ancient Mother the
Holy Roman Church, and to Our Lord Pop^ Innocent, and to his Catholic
Successors, the whole Kingdom of England, and the whole Kingdom o^ Ireland,
with all Right and Appurtenances thereto belonging for the Remission of all Our
sins and the sins of all Mankind, a^ well for the Living as for the Dead, and
from henceforth from him and the Roman Church as a Feodary receiving and
holding them, in the Presence of the Wi^^ Pandulphus Subdeacon and Servan^ of
our Lord the Pope. From henceforth to the aforenamed Lord Pope Innocent, and to
his Catholic Successors and to the Church of Rome, according to this Written
form, We have made and sworn Leidge Homage in the Presence of Pandulphus; and
if We could be before Our Lord the Pope, We would do it to him: Binding Our
Successors and Heirs by our Wife for ever, that in like manner to the Pope for
the time being, and to the Roman Church, they perform Feal^y without
contradiction, and acknowledge Homage. Moreover in token of this Our perpetual
Obliga^ion and Grant We will and or^ain, That out of Our proper and special
Revenues of the aforesaid Kingdoms, in lieu of all Service and ^ustoms, We
ought to do for the ^ame, always excepting Peterpence, ^he Church of Rome
receive Yearly a ^housand Marks sterling: viz. At Michaelmas five hundred, and
(...) Easter five hundred, that is seve^ hundred for the Kingdom of England,
and three hundred for the Kingdom of Ireland: saving to U^ and our Heirs our
Justice, Liberties and Royalties. All which, as abov^ written, willing to have
ratified and confirmed, We bind Us and our Successors not to do contrary* And
if We or any of Our Successor^ shall presume to attempt ought against these
Presents, who ever h^ be, unless being rightly admonished he repent, he shall
lose all Righ^ to the Kingdom. And let thi^ Charter of Our Obligation and Gra^^
remain always firm.

-- Witness O^^Self at the House of the Knights-Templars near Dover, before H.
Archbishop of Dublin John Bishop of Norwich, Jeffery the Son of Peter, W. Earl
of Salisbury, William Earl o^ Pembrook, R. Earl of Bononia, W. Earl o^ Warenne,
S. Earl of Winchester, W. Earl ^^ Arundel, W. Earl Ferrars, W. Briwere, Pete^
the Son of Herebert, Warine the Son of Gerol^^ on the Fifteenth Day of May, in
the Fourteen^^ Year of Our Reign.

And now ye Englishmen can ye be content to be (...) Popes slaves? you here see
their title, their claim, that they pretend to; and if they can but once get
(...) upper hand, assure your selves they will quickly (...) their title a
foot. Nay, may not you find this (...) groundwork of their last grand Plot, to
(...) our King, and subvert the Government, and ^ot out this Pestilent Heresy
(as they are pleased to (...) the Protestant Religion) out of this part of
(...) Northern world? Are you willing your Native ^ountry shall once again
become the Popes (...), to bear all the Burdens these unmerciful (...) shall
think fit to lay on it? If you value not (...) Christian Religion, have you so
little esteem for (...) Native Liberty, your English freedom, your ^^^thright,
as to sell it to Romes Chapmen for a mess of (...), or barter it away to your
fellow Citizens (...) the husks they feed their Swine with? If your (...) be
once compelled to become Romes Tributa^^ and here you see their Plea, you have
little (...) to expect, that you shall continue any long time (...). Look upon
your French Neighbors on the other (...) of the Sea, and see how they groan
under wo^se (...) Egyptian Bondage, enslaved both in Bodies (...) Souls? See
how lowly the poor oppressed Com^^ns go in their wooden Shoes, and Canvass
(...)* How greedily they feed upon bare bread and (...), and, amidst your
present plenty, count how (...) hungry meals they make upon that course (...),
if you have figures enough in your Arithme^^^ to number them. Amidst the
overflowing of (...) Cups, think how often they drink plain water, the small
sour verjuice of their watered Grapes, (...) the Kings Taxes have swept away
19 (...) of their Wine out of 20. To rise a little (...), give me leave to tell
you, what I have sometime heard; for here I profess to speak only (...)
hearsay, having never made Trial hereof in my (...) particular nor so much as
desiring ocular demons^^tion, hoping that none shall ever live to see the
French Fruits growing upon English ground, nor (...) of their ^eed sown on my
Native soil to prosper. (...) out of the mouth of one, who lived amongst the
many years, I shall take leave to acquaint you, (...) in the French Kings late
Wars, the Taxes rose^ high, that many would willingly have thrown their estates
into the Kings Hands, for the time (...) impositions were to last, but they
were to be ha^^ by the Kings Decree upon so doing: So that (...) must upon pain
and perils of Death manage (...) own Lands, and what the Product of their
Gro^^^ would not amount to, must be procured some (...) way toward their
appointed Payments. Whethe^ be easy to make brick without straw, judge ye.
(...) you like to have a Vapouring Gentleman, or a (...) Soldier with Pistols
in his Saddle bow, come h^^ring up to your Plow-tails, and comman^ you to leave
your work, and go along with to show him on his way, where you (...) sometimes
run along by his Horse side, two (...) three miles it may be, without a penny
for (...) pains, not so much as daring to show any the (...) of Regret, for
fear of tasting the mercy (...) of his Pistols. Will it please you do ye think,
to (...) at home by turns every day one of you, to give^ rections to every
roaring swash Buckler, that (...) with Sword and Pistols when he comes
furiously to the Village, and calls as with Authority, (...) Guide to run along
with him at his pleasure, (...) now some of you will scarce vouchsafe other
(...) rough answer, or Awkward directions to the trav^^ stranger, that civilly
desires so small a thing at your (...): Now some of you will scarce show any
(...) either to your equals or betters, but what would (...) think of it, to be
made desist from your work, (...) show obeisance, at two or three furlongs
distance, (...) those Hectoring Blades of the Country that expect (...) demand
it at your hands? And yet some such ^^ing have I heard done. What a wondrous
plea^^ng spectacle would this be in England, where the ^eanest little values
the threats and meances of the ^^eatest Gentleman, on whom they have no
depen^^nce for work or maintenance, or hopes to gain any ^^ing by him?

From the poor enflaved Peasants of France, come (...) to the Gentry of the
Land, and see how they ^eep, and cringe, and croutch to the Nobles, and (...)
humbly these must also behave themselves to^ards their Arbitrary King. And the
King him^^lf, had not the success of his Arms raised him to a ^^gher pitch then
his Ancestors, must have veiled to (...) tripple Crown, and have received the
Popes more ^^perious Commands with a little more submission, ^ould he have
lived in security, then now we believe (...) does. How will you my dear
Countrymen bring ^^ur selves to digest these compelled humiliations? ^ould any
of these servile slavish submissions go ^wn well with your free hearts? Yet
such, if not ^orse must you expect upon the introduction of Po^^ry into the
Land. Your Bodies, your Souls, your ^states, your Posterity, must then be
subjected to Ar^^trary Powers. Though the dregs of the Popes (...) might be
possibly nauseous to some of your ^^easy stomachs, yet it may be many of you
could (...) well enough contented with a refined Cassandrian ^^pery, the German
Emperors Interim, or some ^^ch motley model of Religion, as the present French
King had-contriv'd (as I have read) to have intr^duc'd into his Realms, had his
late Arms subdued (...) Refractory Hollanders; Nay, for a good need (...) Trent
Faith might have went down with some (...) less indifferents; But what would
you say to that (...) refined slavery also, which must in likelihood follo^
your refined Popery? How would you like to ha^ your Privileges, Properties,
your free English Libe^ty, your lives, estates, and fortunes, and all that is
(...) and dear unto you, to lie at other men's mercy, in (...) Power of such,
whom you have little reason to estee^ your Friends, and all this and much more
(if (...) can be) to be done by your own consents? Ho^ well would this please
you? To have a Paris Parl^^ment, French Councils, and a bigoted domineeri^^
Clergy, that shall preach you up slavery from (...) Pulpits, and make you to
taste the sweets of it in (...) Courts. When you must always speak well of ^ther
Friar, be it only for fear; And if you see (...) Priests debauching your Wives
or Daughters, (...) in distrust to your own Eyesight, you must not op^^ly
profess to believe otherwise, than that they (...) blessing them, nor so much
as dare to mutter betw^^^ your teeth, unless you will run the danger of (...)
clapped up in the Inquisition for an Heretic, or (...) to the greetings of surly
Mr. Paritor, summon^^ you to my Lord Bishops Court, for defaming (...) Clergy,
and raising a scandal upon the Church. (...) many of your Lands you hold for
your own, (...) don't you know that much must return back to once destroyed
Covents, if Popery prevails, when (...) shall be taught to believe, that
whatever is give^ the Priests, the Church, is dedicated to God, and not to be
alienated without manifest sacriled* How like ye from Freeholders to become
(...) to a Luxurious and lascivious multitude of Monks and Friars, full fed
upon the sweat of your ^abours, and good for little else but to diminish your
Estates, and bastardise your Posterity?

Look into some of the Popish Collegiate Founda^ions, and see whether you
cannot find a fixed set al^owance appointed ad Purgandos Renes? So that
Re^ainers, Dependers, Brewers, Bakers, and such like, ^ere bound (I have
sometime heard) to send their Maids and Daughters at set times to Physic these
lazy ^dle Drones. Saturdays once a month I have heard ^am'd* other days it is
likely they could come fast enough home to their Houses. Many now adays ^ave
consciences large enough, to be dealing with ^ther men's; but how would you bear
it to see ^^ur own Wives, Daughters and Kinswomen wholly (...) the Devotion of
the Pope's lustful unmarried Cler^y? Their Auricular Confession is as neat a
Device (...) command your Wives hearts, their Honesties, and ^our Purses, as
those Indian Priests the Bramins lying ^ith the new married Bride the first
night. How ^owerfully inclined the Popish Clergy are that way, (...) may learn
from the Danes and Swedes, whose ^agistrates have found Guelding (I have
somewhere ^ad) a more effectual way, to keep them from com^^g to disturb their
Country, than putting to death: (...) this is said to have been the Advice of a
convert^^ Nun. Such female Votaries being most likely (...) able to know the
Clergy's Constitution, their ^^blick Houses being set so near together in
Popish ^^untries. In some places you may find the Reli^^ous Men and Women (as
they call them) under (...) same Roof, to their frequent c^nverse. Take your
Kenning-glasses, and view some of the best (...) of ground in this Land, and
it is much if you (...) not find, that the Covents of Men had their Nun^^^ies of
Women situated near enough, to have mutual converse one with another, by secret
passag^ under the Earth. If you will not believe me, as (...) writing out of
prejudice, more than knowledge, (...) such as have lived amongst the Papists
beyond (...) under a Popish Government, and they may chance (...) tell you more
of their manners, of the Clergy's Power and Laity's Subjection, and the cruel
Mercies of (...) Bloody Inquisition. Do you think that these Ra^^nous strangers
will be more kind to you, than (...) their own Countrymen? That such as look
upon you but as Heretics, and so, little better than (...) Bastards: Your
Parents having not in their opinion been rightly Married, because not according
to (...) Constitution of their Church, who think themsel^^ highly injured by
you, in your keeping the Abb^ Lands from reverting to their ancient Use, and
(...) building anew the Old Religious Houses destroy^ in your Forefathers
days, who already gnash upon you with their Teeth, in hopes of a future (...)
over you, and have had I know not how many (...) Projects and Contrivances to
destroy you Body (...) Soul, in prosecution whereof so many of their B^^thren
in Iniquity have already lost their Lives (...) your hands; That such should be
thought by (...) Friends to England, and it is Laws? That such (...) Fantasies
should enter into the hearts of E^^lish men? Do you think they will alter their
m^ners, by shifting their Habitations? That (...) Blackamore will ever change
his Skin by com^ into a colder Climate?

Let us look a little upon the first Discoveries (...) their late grand Plot,
(so often inculcated upon (...) Nation by His Majesty's many Royal Proclamati^^
and Speeches, that no Loyal Spirits can any (...) doubt of the Truth of it, who
give any deference deferenc^ the Word of a King) and we shall find there (...)
^ain Design after our King's Murder to have rooted ^ut the Gentry of the
Nation, whose Lives should it ^^ems, have been offered up as so many Sacrifices
to ^ppease the injured Ghost of their Murdered Prince. ^ome of your Women,
perhaps they might have con^escended to have saved for their Lusts, your little
^hildren for Slaves, the Poor and b^ser sort for their ^ervants, but the Men of
Substance must in likelihood ^ave gone all to pot, as Obstacles to their cruel
in^^nded Design. And yet still it is but a perhaps; we (...) not sure they would
have spared any. Nay ra^^er, we are morally certain, that all of any tolerable
(...) must have Died, if the Deposition of Mr. Bedlow (...) often credited)
remains yet of any value amongst (...) from whose Attestation publicly sworn
upon ^ath in Ireland's Trial, we find the extent of the ^esign, (besides the
subversion of the Government) to ^^ve been, the extirpating of the Protestant
Religion (...) that Degree, (which was always concluded on in (...) the
Consults wherein he was) that they would not ^^ve any Member of any Heretic in
England, that ^ould survive, to tell in the Kingdom hereafter, that ^ere was
ever any such Religion in England, as the ^^otestant Religion. If discovered,
and so frustrated, ^^ntrivances may not sufficiently warn you, to be^^re of the
Jesuits Intentions to youward: Consider, ^atters of Fact, and see what has
already been (...) in other places, and so come from thinking what (...) been
done, to what may be done, and what (...) should be done, if some might have
their (...), minds and desires. Cast a look or two upon ^^^emia, that once
flourishing Land, under Wickliff's ^^ctrine; Famous for the Martyrdom of John
Huss, (...) Jerome of Prague; the Courage of blind Zisca (...) his valiant
Soldiers, and noted also for their ^^^erty of Choosing their Princes: See now
how much of the Bohemians Ancient Liberty or Religi^^ is yet remaining amongst
them. Enough of the p^^ctices and devices the Jesuits used to new (...) the
Nation, after they had once reduced it by (...) of Arms, you may find in the
History of the (...) Persecution, London, Printed by B. A. John Walker.

But to return to King John, whence I have (...) gressed, after his Resignation
and Reassumption of (...) Crown at the yearly Rent of 900 or 1000 (...) Silver,
the Return of the Archbishop, and the (...) Exiles into the Land, we read of
the releasing (...) annulling of the Interdiction, which had lasted years, odd
months and days, but it was not be^ that the King, according to one of the
Articles, made restitution to the sufferers, which the (...) says amounted in
the whole to 18000^ Marks would have thought, after so much trouble, the (...)
would have been weary of endeavoring after A^^^trary Power. But the Event may
make us apt to (...) that among other inducements, to yield to the (...) hard
terms of Accommodation, one might some hope to domineer the better over the
(...) he was reconciled to the Clergy, and so take a (...) revenge upon such,
as would not ere while assist against the Pope. For not long after the late
(...), we find mention made of so great (...) between the King and his Lords,
that much (...) were raised on either part. One occasion alledg^^ that the King
would not hold Edward's Laws, yet he had taken an Oath, at the Return of Exiled
Clergymen into England, to call in all (...) Laws, and put in place of them
the Law King Edward, if Stow's Annals record the (...) Another, that the King
would have Exiled wi^^ ^aw the Earl of Chester, for some Advice he given him,
relating to his Vices, which the other did not well digest. The King's Party
being then the stronger, the Lords took the City of London for their Refuge,
and remained therein. Though we read of much harm done this year in London by
Fire, and of the burning a great part of the Borough of Southwark; yet it
seems the City was strong enough to become the Barons Bulwark against the
enraged King's Ire: And siding with them, so inhanced the Barons fame, that (as
Stow tells us) all except a few went to the Barons side, so that King John
durst not peep out of Windsor Castle. At length by the Prelates Mediation a
Peace was made for a while, and to establish it the firmer, the King and the
Lords soon after met with great strength on either side on Berham Down, where a
Charter was devised, made, and sealed by the King to the Barons content. A.C.
1214. according to Falian's account. Henry Fitz. Alwyn continued then Mayor of
London, Ralph Egland and Constantine le Josne being Sheriffs in this 14th year
of K. John's Reign. Yet in Stow we read of a Meeting appointed in a Meadow
between Stains etc Windsor, where the King granted the Liberties without any
difficulty, the Charter whereof is dated, June 16. An. Reg. 17.

As for the loud and clamorous Declamations of such, who tell us, that the
grand Charter of our Lives, Liberties and Estates, our Properties and
Privileges, was gained at first by Rebellion, and would thus slily as it were
insinuate, that it was and is retained by like unlawful ways and means: We
would desire them to give us better proofs for what they say, than their own
bare Asseverations, which will not yet go for current Coin in all Markets. That
Edward the Confessor's Laws were very acceptable to the generality of the
Nation, we have great reason to believe from their continued desire to retain
them. That William the first granted the use of them to the Nation, is
sufficiently instanced above. That Henry the first used them (...) likewise
mentioned before, for so affirms the Chronicle. That King John himself accorded
to them at hi^ coming to the Crown, we may (I doubt not) reasosonably believe,
considering his Title, and the Conte^^ he was like to have about it. If a
Negative may be admitted an Argument in the case, I do not remember that I have
read of any difference between hi^ and his Lay-Barons about them, till after
that he was reconciled to the Pope, by the resignation of hi^ Crown, and
performance of the other conditions enjoined him. But after the King's giving
away hi^ Crown, and resuming it again upon a Foundation wholly and altogether
new, I know not but he might think all former obligations void, and so would
endeavor to have his Will of the Laity, when he hoped he had fixed the Clergy
fast enough on his side, by the new condescension he had lately made to the
Pope'^ Ambitious desires and pretensions. It was after this Reconciliation that
we read in Stow of the Barons coming to St. Edmundsbury, and producing the
Charter o^ King Henry the first, which they had received o^ the Archbishop
Stephen.

However, let the occasional Causes of making an^ confirming this grand Charter
of our English Libe^ties be what they will; whatever were the grounds o^ the
Barons desiring, or the motives of the King's granting it: Upon what Foundation
soever (so it be sound at the bottom) stand these Pacts and Compacts between
the King and his Subjects. For my part I know no reason why Princes and Great
men should not think it their Duty, to keep their words firm and inviolable, as
well as persons of meaner rank and quality* 'Twas a Romish Cardinal, an
Italian, a Papist, living long in the French Government, from whom I have heard
come the Doctrine, of not being a slave to ones word. As the Duty, so I believe
it the Interest of Governors, to be just and firm to their Promises, otherwise
it is a Question how long the people under them will continue firm to theirs,
when they think they have a convenient opportunity to break them. Fear may do
much, but Conscience I fancy will do but little in this Case, to keep the one
Party fixed and firm to his Bargain, when the other values not to perform the
Conditions of their mutual Compact.

Such as love to talk of nothing but Conquerours and Conquests, captivating and
inslaving men to Arbitrary Powers, as if at feud and defiance with all mankind
but themselves and their own Party: if my Advice may be taken, they would do
wisely to stifle such harsh unpleasing Doctrines in their own breasts, and not
openly produce them in public view to all without distinction, lest one bold
confident brazen-faced fel^ow or other should start up out of the Vulgar Herd,
and ask them, why the people would not have as good a Title to their Power,
when they had got the upper hand, as those Princes, who claim only by Conquest?
A Question that at first view would seem very plausible to many, if well stated
without the previous consideration of Oaths, Promises and Compacts. As for the
consequences, that some may fancy hid in the belly of it, ^ike the Armed
Grecians in the Trojan Horse, look they to them, who find themselves concerned
on either side.

It Is well enough known, what a large tract of ground, the French King has
seized in the Spanish Netherlands within these few years, and brought the
People of those Provinces under his own Subjection by force. That his title to
those lands at first was none of the best is plain enough to such, as know his
Pretensions. As for that shadow of claim, which might be fancied to accrue to
him by his Queen, the late Spanish Kings Daughter, that it is clear done (...)
as far as words and writings could go, is manife^^ by the Printed Articles of
the Pyrenaean Tre^^ The best Title, I find he had to those Countries, (...) the
Spanish Kings weakness to defend those Subje^^ himself, together it may be with
some unwillingness let them look to the payment of as great an Army, (...) was
thought needful for their defense, out of the own Money, by their own Officers.
He was made p^^haps to fear, lest the Soldiers should have been (...) at the
Devotion of such as paid them, than at his (...) raised them, though he
appointed such a (...) such Officers, and such Soldiers as he thought fit,
(...) had had the sole ordering of them, at his own (...) and pleasure, in all
other things but naming the p^^mas^e^s. Or rather was it not his prime
Councell^^ the Spaniards, loathness to lose the many picki^^ they gleaned out
of their Offices in those Count^^ by defrauding the Soldiers of their appointed
(...) and so cheating both King and Country? (...) good is much bandied up and
down among (...) words, but in truth and reality, private interest that which
most oversways. As for the rest of (...) French Kings pretenses, that he makes
use of the for mere colors, is evident by the novel inventio^ Dependencies. If
need be, we doubt not but, (...) Hamball passing over the rugged Alps with his
(...) my, he can either find a way or make one; be it (...) such a one, as his
Manifest^, at the beginning of late Wars with the Dutch, tells us of, viz. his
(...) Glory: One of the truest pretensions I believe of*

Now put the Case and suppose, that the Inh^^^tants of these late subdued
Countries (brought (...) the French Kings Subjection by the force of Arms, and
all former right and title to them (...) relinquished by their ancient Prince
the King Spain in his late Treaties) should one time or other, ^y some
unexpected, unseen, unthought of accident, ^et such power into their hands, as
to break off these ^rench Chains of Slavery, beat the French Kings Of^^cers and
Soldiers out of their Country, and keep (...) at a Bay by the strength of their
Arms: the ^uestion would be among our Politic Casuists, whe^^er they would not
have as good right and Title, to ^^ace the Government of their Country in what
^^nds they pleased, as the French King now has in ^^tual possession: My
meaning is of such, who shall (...) have passed away themselves, by Oaths,
Cove^^nts and Compacts. That they sit down quietly ^^der the French Government,
and do not publicly ^^pose, is but a silent argument, a negative proof at
(...). They do not openly declare their dissent, (...) they assent and consent,
is such a conclusion that (...) not well and cleverly follow from the premises.
that such as are for the present French interest may ^firm, let them likewise
well prove, but methinks (...) English men should not be over-ready to disclaim
(...) Netherlands right, when they call to mind, that in ^^een Elizabeth's days
our Governors thought good defend the poor distressed Provinces, against the
^yrannical Arbitrary pretenses of the Spanish King, (...), contrary to their
ancient privileges would have ^^duc'd them all by force to Popery and Slavery,
to ^^pose which, their Neighbors, especially England, powerfully assisted
them, that the Spaniard was (...) at last to declare, he would treat with them,
as ^^th free States, before he could get a treaty of peace (...) them. Such as
break ancient Covenants, and (...) the first stone, had need stand upon safe
and sure ^ound, least they find too many stones flying about (...) Ears before
the end of the fray. We moreo^^^ have found the Spaniards within these few
years coming into the assistance of these same new (...) once his old Subjects,
against the French Kings Po^er ready in a manner to overrun them. We (...)
have heard likewise of public Addresses, in behalf (...) the same side, made
of late to our present King, (...) esteemed the general Consent of the Nation.

After King John had granted the grand (...) to his Lords, and every one was
departed peaceab^^ into his own Country, there were hopes doubtless (...) a
happy peace to ensue, and long to continue. But seems those hopes were soon
blasted. For the (...) next year, viz. the 15, we read of the late agr^^
peace's being violated and broken by the King, (...) according to my Author,
persevering in his wro^^ would in no wise be induced to hold his own gra^^ but
to execute all things after pleasure, nothing ^^ter Law and Justice. These
violations produced new War between King John and his Nobles, (...) ended not
till after the Kings Death. So troubles^^ was it to the Nation, so dangerous to
the King, (...) he should have such ill Ministers about him, (...) were either
authors or followers of no better advi^^ then what could not consist with the
Kings keepi^^ his Royal Word. That the Sheep were made (...) for the Shepherd,
to clip, shear, pill, and slay at own will and pleasure, is a Doctrine that the
(...) quiet innocent harmless Sheep would no longer ^^^lingly assent to, than
while the Knife is held at (...) throat, how acceptable soever it may be to the
(...) Wolves, and the degenerate Dogs of the (...)*

When King John found himself too weak to ^^tend with his Barons, and yet it
seems by the (...) not willing enough to keep to his former (...) he sent
beyond Sea, and called in strangers his Assistance. We read that Northfolk and
(...) were the Lands promised to those strangers, (...) would come over to aid
the King, who had a little before got the Pope to disannul the aforesaid
Charter and liberties granted ere while by him, and excommu^icate the Barons.
We have mention made in Stow (...) or 3 times of strangers coming over. So many
of them were cast away at one time by Tempest, who ^ere coming over, Men, Women
and Children, that ^^'s said of 4000 not one escaped alive. So that we ^ay
observe, it is an old trick to call in Foreigners upon the Natives, when
Arbitrary designs are on (...). When the King was found to have invited
^trangers to his aid, the Lords also sent into France ^or help and succor.
When two Women fall a scol^ing, and pulling one another head-cloths, whoever
^^rst began the fray, it is much but both will be in ^^ult before it end.
London was the place, where the ^ords kept themselves together, till the
expected aid and succor from beyond Sea was brought to them under Lewis the
French Kings Son, who landing (...) England with a strong Army, came afterward
to London, and was there received. Hence he with the Lords departing, won many
Castles in the Land, and (...) their return had the Tower of London given up to
them by appointment. Tho the Tower held long for ^he King, yet 'twas the City
it seems that bare the ^way, and adhered to the Lords. What a strength ^^ey
were of we may observe out of Stow, where ^ing John is said to have made have
to besiege Lon^on, but the Londoners were hereby so little daunted, that they
set open their Gates, and were ready to meet ^im ten miles off the City,
whereupon the King with^rew, understanding their boldness, and multitude; ^hen
the Major Roger Fitz. Alwyn was accused to be ^^vourable to the Kings Party, we
find him quickly ^ischarg'd of his Office, and one Serle Mercer chosen (...)
his place; so great was the favor of the Citizens to the Barons and their
Cause, that they spared not their own head Officer and Ruler, when he lay under
the suspicion of favoring Arbitrary designs, so contrary to the mind of the
Citizens. The War still continuing, and King John being not able to prevail,
tho the Pope interceded by his Lega^e, he had at last (^^ some writes) all his
Arbitrary designs quenched with a Cup of Poison, at Swinstead Abbey about
Lincoln Tho another Author is said to affirm that he died ^^ the flux at
another place.

Soon after this unhappy unfortunate King John death, we meet with an eminent
instance of Englis^ men's Loyalty, as well as of their love of liberty an^
freedom; for though the King and his Lords were (...) so great a difference
most of the latter part of hi^ Reign, and he left the Throne and his life at
such (...) time, when his Barons were likely in outward appearance to be much
too strong for him and his, his surv^ving Heir being but then a Child of about
9 years (...) age: Yet, as if all rancour and animosity against the King and
his Party was dead and buried with him (...) his Grave, the wheel of affairs
was so turned, as (...) were, in an instant, that Lewis and his strangers we^^
disgusted, and the young Fatherless Prince was proclaimed, and Crowned King of
the Land, at an ag^ wherein he was not fit to be left to his own guidan^^
without a Tutor, It Is plain enough by this instanc^ that English hearts were
more loyal, than naturall^ to desire the ruin of their Prince and his Family;
(...) at any time they appeared in Arms against him in defense of their Lives,
Liberties and Freedoms, ho^ ready have they showed themselves to accord an^
submit, as soon as those men of ill Principles, and A^bitrary practices, were
removed from their Princ^ who had raised those clouds of discontent betwee^ him
and his People?

The chief of those that so soon returned to their Allegiance, were the
powerful Earls of Pembroke and Chester, who drew with them a very considerable
re^inue. They may be probably thought to hope, to ^^nfuse better Principles
into their young Prince in his Nonage, than appeared by former Arbitrary
actions ^o have been in his Father, and so model the Go^ernment into a better
frame in the time of that power, they were, as the chief Nobles, most likely to
^ave under the King in his younger days. Neither ^o I know but somewhat might
proceed from re^orse of Conscience. The Earl of Chester, in the 2d ^ear of the
Kings Reign, taking his journey into the Holy Land, the Religion of those times
having made that the usual way of Expiation. Some such intent of ^he Earl
stands likewise upon record in one of the Chronicles, says my Author. Another
very proba^le occasion of this sudden change of Affairs in the Kingdom, may be
supposed to have risen from the Deathbed confession of a French Nobleman, who
(...) reported to have discovered Lewis's intent, to (...), destroy, and quite
root out those English Lords that adhered to him, as if in detestation of their
dis^oyalty to their own natural English Sovereign. When ^he Barons came once to
find, that he, whom they ^ad called in to defend them against their Kings
Ar^itrariness, intended to violate and break their Co^enants established at
first between them, when he ^ould come to have opportunity, and so turn their
^^plored aid into their certain destruction, they ^ight well think they had
reason enough to disclaim (...) Alliance, and endeavor to frustrate his privy
in^^ntions, by returning to their former Allegiance as (...) as a fit season
presented it self: Conditional pro^ises not being very commonly reputed to bind
the (...) party, when the conditions required are not performed by the other.
Whatever the true occasion was, London we find the place where this turn (...)
first publicly declared, by proclaiming Henry Ki^^ throughout the City, Oct.
20. so considerable was ^^ven the reputed favor of the Citizens. Lewis abo^^
there indeed afterward a while, and the Barous (...) his side, but his
strength so diminished in a litt^^ time, that he was glad at last to take Money
and (...) away upon composition, even in the 1st year of the King, or beginning
of the 2d.

This K. Hen. being the Son of such a Father, who^ practices too much betrayed
his Principles, and (...) in so troublesome a time, as his Fathers contest (...)
the Clergy, we may be apt to believe he had a (...) of his Fathers malady. So
full of troubles do we (...) his Reign, such complaints of the Government, su^^
amendments endeavored, and reformations ma^^ one while by the peaceable
Councils of the Par^^^ment, another while by the compulsive power (...) the
Barons Swords: all which we may impute, ^^ther to his own natural inbred
disposition, or else the overruling advices of ill Ministers, so (...) working
upon the Kings Goodnature, as upon slig^^ pretenses to make his power serve
their own Inter^^^ to carry on their corrupt arbitrary designs: So ^^ny were
the ups and downs, risings and falls, chang^^ and turns of Fortune in these
times, such variab^^ness and mutability of Councils in affairs, and the (...)
of London so much concerned in most of the c^^siderable Actions then on foot,
(now in the Kin^ favor, as soon again out of it, one while enjoy^^^ their
ancient Privileges and Customs, another (...) deprived of their Liberties, and
their Franchises (...) upon slight occasions, and anon again restored all, with
addition of new grants,) that I find it c^^venient, through much of this Kings
Reign, to (...) Annals after my Author.

In the 3d of this King is mention made of a Par^^ament kept at London. In the
4th were Proclama^^ons made in London, and through the Land, that all ^trangers
should depart out of the Land, except such (...) came with Merchandise; the
intent hereof is said ^^ be wholly to rid the Land of such strangers as pos^^st
Castles in it contrary to the Kings Will and Plea^^re. This year also was the
King Crowned the 2d ^^me at Westminster. In the 6th was detected a Con^^iracy
within London, which the King is said to have ^^ken so grievously, that he was
minded to have ^rown down the City Walls, till considering that it ^as only a
design of some of the Rascality, and not (...) the Rulers, he assuaged his
displeasure taken a^^inst the City. Robert Serle was then Mayor, Rich. ^^nger,
Ioseus (...) Iosne, Sheriffs. An. Reg. 7. in a Coun^^^ kept at London, Stow
tells us, the King was re^^ired by the Peers Spiritual and Temporal to con^^^m
the Liberties, for which the War was made a^^inst his Father, and he had sworn
to observe at the ^^parture of L^wis out of England, whereupon the (...)
commanded the Sheriffs to enquire by the (...) of Twelve lawful men, what were
the Li^^^ties in England in his Grandfathers time, and (...) the Inquisition
so made up to London. Hence (...) we observe that England had Liberties and
^^ghts of their own, before the Barons War in (...) John's days, and therefore
seem injurious^^ upbraided, as if they got them first by Rebelli^^* The good
Government of England, which (as a ^^dern Author words it) was before like the
Law Nature, only written in the hearts of men, came upon obtaining the 2
Charters) to be expressed in ^^chment, and remains a Record in writing, though
^^se Charters gave us no more than what was our (...) before. The 8th is noted
for the grant made to the King, by his Barony in Parliament, of the War^ and
Marriage of their Heirs. A good advantage som^times for the King, to fix Noble
men's Estates in suc^ Families as he best pleased.

A. R. 9. A Fifteenth was granted to the King, to (...) him in his right beyond
the Seas, and he, by confirming the great Charter, granted to the Barons an^
People their rights. The 11th year is of note for many beneficial Grants made
to London by the King* The Sheriffwick of London and Middlesex was let (...)
farm to the Sheriffs of London, for 300 l. yearly. O^ Feb. 18. was granted,
that all Wears in Thames should be plucked up and destroyed for ever. On March
1^^ the King granted by his Charter ensealed, that the Citizens of London
should pass Toll-free through the Land, and upon any Citizen's being
constrained (...) pay Toll in any place of England, the Sheriffs (...)
empowered to attach any man of that place comin^ to London with his goods, and
to keep and with-ho^^ till the Citizens were restored all such Moneys (...)
from them, with costs and damages. Aug. 18. (...) granted to the Citizens
Warren, that is, free liber^^ of Hunting within a certain circuit about Lond^^
Yet notwithstanding we read in another Author, this years History, of the Kings
compelling the L^^doners to lay him down a large sum of Money, besides the 15th
part of their movables, because (...) sooth they had given Lewis (who came to
their aid^ K. John's days with an Army) 5000 Marks at his ^^parture out of
England. It may be the King (...) them some of these Privileges (which cost
him ^^thing) to induce them to give down their Money (...) more willingly, and
not too much to displease the^ whose power was so well known in those days,
(...) afterward experienced to some men's cost. Roger (...) Mayor, Stephen
Bockerel, and Henry Cobham Sheri^^ this year, and also the next, viz. 12. when
the Fran^hises and Liberties of the City were by the King ^onfirmed; and to
each of the Sheriffs was granted to ^ave 2 Clerks, and 2 Officers, and to the
Citizens that ^hey should have and use a common Seal. This year (...) read that
the King in a Council held at Oxford, ^roclaimed, that being of age he would
rule himself (...) pleasure, and forthwith cancelled the Charters of ^iberties,
as granted in his Nonage. Whereupon it ^^llowed (says my Author) that whosoever
would enjoy (...) Liberties before granted, must renew their Char^^rs of the
Kings new Seal at a price awarded: But (...) Barons shortly after declared to
the King, that ^^cept he would restore the Charter lately cancelled ^^ey would
compel him by the Sword: Such brisk ^ssertors were they (it seems) resolved to
be of ^^eir Liberties. On the 13th, while the Bishop of ^ondon was at high Mass
in St. Paul's, happened sud^enly such dark mists of Clouds, and such a Tempest
(...) Thunder and Lightening, that the People got out (...) the Church, and
left the Bishop there in great ^ar, with but a small attendance. For all the
many (...) Papists make of their Mass, and the wonder^^l power and virtue they
would fain persuade us to ^^lieve there is in it, it seems then all had not
faith ^^ough to trust too much in it, when fear and thick ^^rkness had seized
on them, though 'twas the com^on voice in those days, that a few Masses could
(...) men's Souls out of Purgatory: But you may be (...) they were well to be
paid for first. Noted in (...) 14th was the Ordinance made by the Mayor (...)
Duke, and the Rulers of London, that no Sheriff ^ould continue in Office longer
than one year; the ^use related was the opportunity some of them ^ade use of to
take extortions and bribes, with o^^er defaults, by reason of the continuance
of their Office. The 17th is not lightly to be passed over, that the K. therein
kept his Christmas at Worcest according to Stow, where he removed all his
Office^ and Councillors, Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and (...) for strangers,
viz. Pictavians, retained them in (...) Service, and committed to them the
keeping of (...) Castles and Treasures. What could hence be expect^ but
murmurings and repinings amongst the Native^ Accordingly we hear some time
after of Messenge^ sent by the Barons to the King, requesting the di^placing of
those strangers, and also threatening, the otherwise they would depose him, and
create a (...) King. A bold message from as bold Subjects. For (...) may read
of the King's Lands being invaded the (...) year, and destroyed by fire and
sword by the Earl (...) Pembroke, and the Prince of North Wales. Whereup^^ we
find in a little time the Pictavians expelled, (...) made with these two great
discontented men, (...) the King's natural Subjects recalld, and their Co^^sel
yielded to by the King.

The 19th is remarkable for the King's Marriage with the Royal Solemnity, Justs
and Tourneamen^ kept 8 days near Westminster, at the Queen's Coro^^tion. Yet
Stow places the time a year after, as (...) does also many other particular
occurrences happeing in this King's Reign. From the same Author (...) are given
to understand, that to this Coronation ^^sorted so great a number of all
Estates, that the Ci^^ of London was scarce able to receive them. Great (...)
the splendor, wherein the City appeared on this o^casion, it being adorned
with Silks, and in the nig^^ with Lamps, Cressets, and other lights, without
number, besides many Pageants, and strange devices, whi^^ were then snewn. The
Citizens rode to meet (...) King and Queen, being clothed in long garments,
(...) broidered with Gold and Silk of diverse colors, the^^ horses finely
trapped in array, to the number of 360. Every man bearing Gold or Silver Cups
in their hands, and the King's Trumpeters before them sounding. The 21th was
ominous to the University of Oxford, for the Scholars abusing Octo^oon the
Pope's Legate, who afterward accursed the misdoers, and so punished them, that
the Regents and Masters were at last compelled to go barefoot through Cheapside
to Paul's in London, there to ask forgiveness of him, which was granted, it
seems, with difficulty enough. His Master the Pope, when crossed and incensed,
is wont to be sufficiently stately, and backward in pardoning such as displease
him, and not without much ^ntercession sometimes; why then should not the
Servant Ape it after so great an Example?

In the 23d year, for that the Mayor and Heads of the City refused to obey the
King's Commandment, ^n Choosing Simon Fitz Mar Sheriff, as the King had
ordered them, which they looked upon as a derogation to their Liberties: The
King sent for them, and after words of displeasure discharged the old Mayor
Will. Ioynour, newly Elected for the following year, and charged the Citizens
to proceed to a new Election, which to content the King they did, and Choosing
Gerard Bat, by his means and policy obtained the King's favor, and frustrated
the other purpose, who had procured the aforesaid Commandment, and complained
to the King of the Citizens for their disobeying it. In the 25th the Citizens
having Chosen Gerard Bat anew for the year following, and presented him to the
King according to Custom, He, who the ^ast year had so gained the King's favor
in behalf of the City, was now so far out of it by means of some men's
Informations, that he with his company was first dismissed, and put off till
another time, and at last, for some offenses alleged, and displeasure
conceived against him, clearly put by; the King swearing a gre^^ Oath, that he
should not that year be Mayor, nor (...) any time hereafter. Whereupon the
Commons, ce^tified of the King's pleasure, Chose Remond Bengley (...) his
stead. The Citizens having the year before (...) prevailed upon to alter their
Election, that was Pr^sident enough it seems to occasion the like again.

The City having obtained great Privileges of thi^ King in his younger days,
we find already some e^deavouring to frustrate and disappoint the effect (...)
benefit of them. The City had appeared with a gre^^ deal of success, in
opposition to the last King's pr^ceedings, and therefore it is likely, such as
intende^ to attempt again for Arbitrary Power, thought the City too headstrong
easily to permit them to su^ceed in their desires, unless they could first
bring the Citizens a little under, by cunningly under mini^^ their Liberties.
Whereupon we find this year a sp^cious pretense taken to oblige the Commonalty,
b^ offering to free and keep them from being oppresse^ by the Heads and Rulers
of the City. How well (...) plausible Plea took for a while, will be manifested
(...) the sequel of the Story. That there were great hea^^ and animosities in
those times between the City (...) the Court, may easily be observed out of
Stow, wh^ tells us in the 25th years Annals, how the Citize^ were threatened,
that the Walls and Bulwarks of the Tower were builded in despite of them, to
the (...) that if any of them would presume to contend (...) the Liberties of
the City, they might there be imprisoned. And to the intent, that many might be
la^^ in diverse Prisons, many Lodgings were there mad^ that no one should speak
with another. An occasi^^ was also taken sometime after to Fine the Ci^^ 1500
Marks, for the receiving into the City a person banished from thence 20 years.
Notwithstandi^^ the Citizens had proved, that before that time the said ^erson
had been reconciled and restored to the King's ^avour. Another device to exact
Money from the Londoners, was the proclaiming a Mart at Westmin^^er, to last 15
days, with a Command that all Trades should cease in the City for that space of
time, which the Citizens were fain to redeem with 2000l. ^et they still
increast in Riches, while the King was ^ompell'd for want to sell his Plate and
Jewels much ^o his loss, which being sold and bough^ a^ London, (...) the 33d
year of his Reign, occasioned this his ex^ression upon knowledge thereof, (as
my Author re^ates it) I know that if Octavian 's Treasure were to be ^^ld, the
City of London would sup it up; and by it those rustical Londoners (quoth the
King) abound in ^ealth, and call themselves Barons. Noted is the 25th ^ear
likewise for the first Choosing of Aldermen, who ^hen had the Rule of the City
and its Wards, and ^ere yearly changed as are the Sheriffs. In the 29th ^ear
Nicholas Bat, contrary to a former Ordinance, ^eing Chosen Sheriff again, was
discharged and punished, ^s being convict of Perjury. The Mayor likewise
Mi^hael Tony, Chosen anew for the following year, was de^os'd and punished,
after that by Deposition of the Al^ermen he was found guilty in the said Crime.
What^ver were the grievances and faults committed in the ^est of the Land,
(some we read complained of, particu^arly among the Clergy) the City-Officers
shall be sure (...) be watched, if they were not of the side some would ^ave
them. In the 31th year Pyers Aleyn being Mayor, John Voyle, and Nicholas Bat
Sheriffs, the Franchises of London were seized on St. Bartholomews Eve, for a
Judg^ent pretended to be wrongfully given by the Mayor and Aldermen against a
Widow woman named Mar^aret Vyell, and the Rule of the City committed to Will.
Haveryll, and Edward of Westminster, till Lady day, when the Mayor and Sheriffs
were again admitted (...) their Offices. How ready were some to carp at the
(...) of this Honorable Society? Rather than fail of an ^casion to diminish
the Cities Liberties, we find the here wrongfully making a pretense; for upon
due E^amination afterward made, the former Judgment (...) found good and true.
In the 32th year Queen (...) Wharf was Farmed by the Commonalty of the City
(...) 50 l. yearly, and committed to the Sheriffs charge. But (...) Fabian's
time the Profits were so diminished, that (...) was worth but little more than
20 Marks one ye^ with another. That sublunary things ebb and flow, (...) no
strange thing to be wondered at, it is so common (...) observation. Though the
Citizens this year enjoy (...) their Liberties without interruption, the former
preten^ proving vain and frivolous, and falsely grounded, yet (...) King is said
to have been grieved and displeased wi^^ them, for that they would not at his
request exchang the Liberties granted aforetime to them by the King (...)
Middlesex, for others to be had in other places. (...) these Liberties were on
either hand, I have not found. (...) may be they had a suspicion they might be
trappan'd, (...) so be lo^ers by the change. They were excellent good, (...)
seems, at hold-fast, and did not like Childrens play, gi^^ and take. Though
some body should have come, (...) promised them in the King's Name, that they
should ha^^ such and such Privileges in exchange, and be gre^^ gainers by the
Bargain; yet how could they tell he (...) sufficient Authority from His Majesty
to make so larg^ a Promise? Where were his Credentials? I read of (...)
produced. Therefore in my opinion they had but (...) great reason to suspect to
have had the Die put upon them, should they have parted with present Priviledg^^
in hopes of future Graces. A Bird in the hand is commonly reputed worth two in
the bush: But when the Bird is carelessly let slip, and flown, who is that
skilf^^ Fowler, that can be sure of catching a better, or perhaps any at all?
In the 34th year Simon Fitz Mar, Alderman of London, for his disobedience and
evil Counsel given to the abovenamed Widow, with other secret labor and
matters by him intended to the City's hurt, was discharged of his Aldermanship,
and put out of the Council of the City. It behooved them to turn out of their
Society such a one, who, in contradiction to their former order, had once
before procured the King's Command to make them break it, and had given such
Advice against them, that their Liberties were seized on, and their own City
Officers for a time discarded, for no other than a pretended Crime wrongfully
laid to their charge. Such false Friends and secret Enemies are most carefully
to be watched against, as always dangerous, too too often destructive to humane
Societies.

In the 36th year was granted by the King, that an yearly Allowance should be
made of 7 l. for certain Privileges or Ground belonging to Paul's Church,
which Fabian tells us continued also to be allowed in his days by the Barons of
the Exchequer to every She^iff, when they make their Accounts. This same year
was also granted, for the Citizens more ^ase, that where^s before they used
yearly to present their Mayor to the King, in whatsoever place he was in
England, that hence^orth they should, for lack of the King's presence at
Westminster, present the Mayor, when Chosen, to the Ba^ons of his Exchequer,
there to be sworn and admitted, as before-times he was before the King. Joh.
Toleson Mayor, Will. Durham, Tho. Wymborn then Sheriffs. In the 37th ^ear was
granted, That no Citizen should pay Scavage ^that is, Shewage) or Toll for any
Beasts by them ^rought, as they before-time had. The swelling of Thames this
year drowned many houses about the wa^er side, to the damage of much
Merchandise. Thames is one of the best friends the City has, by whose means
their Riches grow and increase, by importing and exporting her Citizens Wares.
It Is also a fast friend even in adversity, which the power and malice of her
Enemies have never yet deprived her of, and yet you here find that she
sometimes receives damage even from so good a friend. If the best friends may
sometimes accidentally injure us, what would our Enemies do, were their power
as large as their malice? For these two last years past, you may here perceive
the favor K. Henry openly showed to the City, by the beneficial Grants he made
her Citizens. Yet in the 38th that Tide is turned by procurement of Rich. Earl
of Cornwall, the King's Brother, for displeasure he bare to the City, for
exchange of certain Ground to the same belonging: So that the King, under
color that the Mayor had not done due Execution upon the Bakers, for default
in their Sizes, seized the Liberties of the City. The offense pretended in the
25th year, was, that the Mayor had received a certain Sum of Money of Bakers,
Brewers, and other Victuallers, which his Predecessors also had done before
him. In this 38th year here is another pretense found out. What an easy matter
is it, for such to pretend faults, who must not be contradicted, or at least
not without a great deal of caution and circumspection?

The manner of this Seizure, according to the Author, is thus to be understood,
That whereas the Mayor and Commonalty of the City had by the King's Grant, the
City to Farm, with diverse Customs and Offices, for a stinted ascertained Sum,
the King at this time set in Officers at his pleasure, which were accountable
to him for all Revenues and Profits accruing and arising within the City. But
about the 19th of November. the Citizens having agreed with the foresaid Earl for
600 Marks, they were soon after restored unto their Liberties. Oh the powerful
commanding force of Money, that can so often make enemies friends, and friends
enemies! The Mayor this year, Rich. Hardell, being sent for, with the Sheriffs,
by the King, newly come to London, and lodged in the Tower, fared better in
this year's Mayoralty, than he did within some few years after, wherein he
continued Mayor. For being taxt by the King for the escape of one, that had
slain a Prior related to the King, he put off the charge of this matter from
himself to the Sheriffs, for so much as to them belonged the keeping of the
City-Prisons. Whereupon he returned home, and the Sheriffs, Rob. Belyngton, and
Ralph Aschewye were detained for a space P^isoners, and others chosen in their
places; but how they got off my Author sets not down. In the 39th year Edw. the
King's Son's Wife was honorably received at London by the Citizens, and the
City adorned with rich Clothes for the more state. Yet notwithstanding all this
Respect, it was not long before the King seized their Liberties anew for
certain Money, which the Q. claimed for her right of them. So that about
Martins-tyde they were in a manner necessitated to give her 400 Marks, before
their Liberties were restored them, and the King's Under-Treasurer discharged,
who for the time was made Custos or Keeper of the City. What, had she no other
way to recover her Money, if it was due, but the Cities Liberties must
presently be seized on? The King's Brother had got well the last year, by
falling out with the City, and getting their Liberties seized. Was it not then,
do ye think, cunningly done of the Queen, to try the same trick over again?
'Twas, it seems, too gainful a project, to suffer it quietly to lie still
without further prosecution, before it grew too stale. Though the Citizens and
their Franchises were thus carpt at by Court-Favourites, yet we find them still
continuing their won^ed respect to the King and Queen, when they came to
London, where they were honorably received this very same year, and so
conveyed to Westminster. When the Citizens had to do with the Court, and the
King was pleased to interest himself in the affair, History tells (...) that
they were more than once compelled to draw the^ purses for Peace sake and
Reconciliation, but when they had their other fellow Subjects to deal with,
they proved Matches hard enough; as particularly in their sui^ with the Abbot
of Waltham, which was at last accorded in the 40th year to their own advantage.

Come we now to the 41th year, a year not lightly to be forgotten by the worthy
Citizens, and such a^ bear any respect to this honorable City, by reason o^
the many troubles that the Heads thereof underwent a^ this time, through the
power and malice of some ill disposed Persons, who bore no Good will to this
ancien^ foundation. Hitherto we have met with but light Skirmishes, a few
trivial matters, in comparison of wha^ you shall here find related out of
Fabian, to have happened in the Mayoralty of Richard Hardell, and Shrievalties
of Rich. Ewell and William Ashwey. A. C. 1257* The Relation is as follows,
almost word by word.

In this 41th year, and beginning of the same, wa^ found in the Kings Wardrobe
at Windsor, a Bill or Rol^ closed in green Wax, and not known from whence it
should come, in which was contained diverse Articles against the Mayor and
Rulers of the City, and that by them the Commonalty of the City was grievously
taxed and wronged, which Bill was presented at length to the King. Whereupon he
sent John Mansel, one of his Justices, unto London, where, on St. Paul's day,
by the Kings Authority, he called a Folk-moot, or Common Hall, at Pauls-Cross,
there being present Richard d^ Clare, Earl of Gloucester, and diverse others of
the King^ Council. Whereupon the said John Mansel caused the said Roll to be
read before the Commonalty, and afte^ showed to the People, that the Kings
pleasure and mind was, that they should be ruled with Justice, and tha^ the
Liberties of the City should be maintained in every point; and if the King
might know those Persons that so had wronged the Commonalty, they should be
grievously punished to others example. That done, John Mansel charged the
Mayor, that every Alderman in his Ward should, upon the morrow following,
assemble his Wardmoots, and that all those Wardmoots should assemble in one
place, and choose of themselves 36 Persons, without any Counsel or advice of
any of their Aldermen, and present them before the Lords and him at the same
hour the next day, in the Bishops Palace at Paul's. Upon the morrow all was
done according to his Command. When the said 36 Persons were presented before
the said John Mansel, Henry Baa, Justices, and others, he said unto them, that
they upon their Oaths should certify all such persons as they knew guilty in
the Articles before showed to the Commonalty. Whereupon the 36 answered, that
it was contrary to their Liberties to be sworn so many, for any matter of
Trespass between the King and any of his Citizens. Wherefore they required a
sparing; with which answer John Mansel being discontented, warned them to
appear before the Kings Council at Guild Hall upon the morrow following, where
they kept their day. Thither ^ame the said Justices, John Mansell and Hen. Baa,
Sir Hen. Wengham, Chancellor of England, Philip Lovel, Under treasurer, and
diverse others of the Kings Council. Then the said John Mansell exhorted the
said Persons ^o be sworn by many means, as he the other day had ^one; but all
was in vain: For they excused themselves, ^at it was contrary to their Oath and
Liberty of their City. Wherefore the Kings Council departed from the Hall in
part discontented, and showed to the King the ^id Citizens demeanor. Upon
Candlemas Eve the Mayor being warned that the King would come to Westminster,
he, with the more part of the Aldermen, ^ode to Knightsbridge, and tarried
there to salute the King, and know his further pleasure. But when the King came
near that place, and heard of their being there, he sent to them an Esquire of
the Household, an^ charged them that they should not presume to come i^ to his
sight; with which message they being great^^ discomforted, returned home to the
City. Afterward^ in the Octaves of the Purification, Michael Tony an^ Adam
Basynge returned from Court, who before we^^ sent by the Mayor to such Friends
as they had in the Court, to know the cause of the Kings high displeasur^ and
brought word back, that the King was well minded toward the City, but he was
in full purpose to have such persons chastized, that had oppressed the
Commo^alty of the same. Upon the morrow following came u^ to the Guild Hall
John Mansell, with others of the Kings Council, who, to the People there
assemble^ showed many fair and pleasant words. Amongst which he declared, that
the Kings Mind and Will was, to co^rect all such persons, as had oppressed the
Commonalty of that his dearest beloved City, and asked of the Commons whether
they would be agreeable to the sam^* The which, incontinently, many such as
knew litt^^ what the matter meant, cried without discretion, Ye^* Yea, Yea,
nothing regarding the Liberty of the City After the grant thus had of the
Commons, the said Jo^^ Mansell discharged the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Chambe^lain
of their Offices, and delivered the Custody thereunto the Constable of the
Tower, and put in the roo^ of the Sheriffs Michael Tony, and John Audrian. A^
over that all Rolls of Tolls and Tallages, before mad^ were delivered unto the
said John Mansel, which (...) there sealed, and redelivered to the Chamberlain.
Wh^^ the Commons had beheld all this business, they return^^ unto their Houses
all confused.

Do we wonder at the Commons readiness in this afair, that they, who usually
have been such brisk assert^ of their Liberties, should now be the occasional
cause of bringing them into danger? We may suppose that this was no proper
Common Hall, but rather called by an order from Court, and filled with the
populace; for in those days I do not find there was any express Act made by
King, Lords and Commons, in being, to forbid the Council Table from
intermeddling in Civil Causes, and determining of the Subjects Liberties, or so
to regulate its Jurisdiction, Power, and Authority, as to leave such matters to
be tried and determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary
course of Law. Or else we conclude the Restriction of the Common Hall to the
Livery-Men was not then in use; so that the Rabble being intermixed, it might be
no hard matter to get a ^ry raised by some of them in favor of the proceedings
^hen on foot. The Mobile being as liable to be wrought upon by fear, or fair
promises, as the great and rich to be corrupted by the hopes of Honors and
Preferments, and the favor of more potent Grandees; while as the ^iddle sort
of People, like the golden mean between ^wo Extremes, are not generally so
capable of being ^rawn aside after the lure, being too many to be bribed, and
not few enough to be frighted; not so high and wealthy as to aspire after
greater Grandeur, nor so low, ^ean and despicable, as to be imposed upon by the
empty ^ames of Greatness and Honor without Virtue, sprung ^p at first from
Vice, and nourished by and amidst re^eated Debaucheries.

This matter thus ordered, John Mansell, with diverse ^f the Kings Council, kept
their Courts daily (the Sun^ays except) till the 1st Sunday of Lent, which that
yea^ ^as Jan. 25. calling before him 12 Wards of the Ci^y; out of every of
which Wards were taken 3 men, ^o that 36 men were impannelled, and sworn, to
enquire ^f the aforesaid Articles, and what Persons of the City ^ad offended in
them. This Court being thus kept and holden at Guild Hall, no man was called to
answer, nor no question put to any Person by the said Inquest, or any other.
Upon the foresaid 1st Sunday of Lent, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, with
the forementioned Inquest, and 4 men of every Ward were charged to appear at
Westminster before the King, at which appearance they were countermanded till
the next morning. At which season coming into the Kings Exchequer, they found
sitting there the Earls of Gloucester and Warwick, Joh. Mansell, Hen. Baa,
Justices, the Constable of the Tower, the Custos of the City and diverse others
of the Kings Council. Then was called by name Ralph (Richard) Hardell, that
year Mayor, Nicholas Batts, Nicholas Fiz Josne, Matthew Bockerel, John Tolesham,
and John (...) Minoure, Aldermen. Then John Mansell said, that the King by his
Laws and Inquisition of the Citizens, had found them culpable, that they had
wronged and hurt the Commonalty of his City by diverse means, as by the sai^
Inquisition appeared, and forthwith caused it to be read before them. When the
more part thereof was read, he said unto them, Thus may you see that the
Commonalty of the City has been by you grievously oppressed and by your means
and Counsel the Commonwealth (...) the same destroyed, as by altering of the
Tolls, and other good ancient Customs, turning them to your singular advantage
and lucre All which matters the said Ralp^ (Richard) and his Company denied,
and that the Commons were not grieved or hurt by them, or any of them by any
such means, and offered to be justified and judged by the Law and Customs of
the City. Then He^^^ Baa, Justice, asked of them, whether they would abi^^ the
adventure of the Inquiry that they had heard re^^ before, (...) stand upon the
saying of the other Ward that yet had not be^n sworn, but they kept to their
(...) Answer. There John Mansell asked of the Mayor, wh^^ was their Law and
Custom. The Mayor answered (...) said, that for trespass of a Citizen done
against the King, he should defend himself by 12 Citizens, for Murder or
slaying of a man, by 30 Citizens, and for trespass against a stranger by the
Oath of six and himself. Then after many reasons made by the said John Mansell,
and also by the Mayor and Aldermen, day was given them to appear the morrow
before the King and his Council.

Upon the day following, the King, with many of his Lords sitting in the
Exchequer, the aforesaid Inquisition was read. That done, the Mayor and
Aldermen were called in by name, and two Aldermen more, which before were not
called, viz. Arn^ld Thedmare, and Henry Waldmode. When Ralph (Richard) Hard^ll
had heard ^he King speak in the matter, he took such fear, that he and Nicholas
Batt, without further Answer, put themselves in the King's grace, saved to them
their Li^erties and Franchises of the City. But the other six ^esought the King
of his wisdom, that they might be ^^dged after the Laws and Customs of the
City. Then was laid to their charge, that over many wrongs by them done to the
King and the Commonalty of the Ci^y, they had altered the King's Beam, and
ordered it to ^e advantage of themselves, and other rich men of the City.
Whereupon the Parties answered and said, That ^e alteration of the Beam was not
done by them only, but (...) the advice and consent of 500 of the best of the
City. ^or where before-time the Weigher used to lean his ^raught toward the
Merchandise, so that the buyer had ^y that means 10 or 12 pounds in a draught
to his ad^antage, and the seller so much disadvantage; now for ^^differency and
equality of both persons, it was or^ain'd that the Beam should stand upright,
the cleft ^ereof inclining to neither party, as in weighing of ^old and Silver,
and the buyer to have allowed of the (...), for all things four pounds only in
every draught. after these Reasons, and others by them made, the King commanded
that upon the morning following, a Folk-moot should be called at Paul's Cross,
and so that Court was dissolved, and the Mayor and the others returned to
London.

Upon the morrow the Folk-moot being at Paul's Cross Assembled, these six.
Aldermen hearing the murmuring of the common people, and knowing that the
Aldermen, or Worshipful of the City should have little or no saying in this
matter, and fearing their Cause, they went into a Canon's house of St. Paul's,
where at that time John Mansell and others sent from the King, tarryed the
Assembling of the People, and showed them, that they intended not any longer to
plead with the K. but were contented to put themselves fully in the King's
grace and mercy, saving always to themselves and all other Citizens their
Liberty and Franchise of the City. After which Agreement John Mansell with the
others, came into the Court of Folk-moot, whereunto the people was rehearsed a
fair and pleasant Tale, promising to them, that their Liberties should be
wholly and inviolably preserved by the King, with many other things, to the
great comfort of the common people. And lastly, it was asked of them whether
the Law and Custom were such as is above rehearsed, or no; whereunto, like
undiscreet and unlearned people, they answered and eryed, Nay, nay, nay,
notwithstanding that the said Law and Custom had before-time been used time out
of mind. To this was neither Mayor nor Aldermen, nor other of the great of the
City, that might impugn or make any reason for upholding their ancient Laws or
Customs. And no wonder (continues my Author Fabian) though the King were thus
heady or grievous to the City; for by such evil disposed and malicious people,
as he had about him, the Land was ill ruled, and much mischief was used,
whereof ensued much sorrow after. Then John Mansell called the Mayor and
Aldermen before him, and charged them to be at Westminster the morrow
following, to give attendance upon the King.

Upon the morrow the Mayor and Aldermen tarrying the King's coming in the great
Hall at Westminster, the King came into St. Stephen's Chapel, where for a
season he had a Council with his Lords, and after went into the
Exchequer-Chamber, and there sat him down and his Lords about him. Anon after
the Mayor and Aldermen were called into the said Chamber, and soon after called
by name, and commanded to stand near the Bar. Then Henry Baa Justice, said unto
the Mayor and 7 Aldermen, That for so much as by form of the King's Laws, they
were found culpable in certain Articles, touching transgression against the
King, therefore the Court awarded, that they should make fine and ransom after
the discretion of the said Court. But for that they had put themselves in the
King's grace and mercy, the King has commanded the Fine to be put in respite,
that ye be not pained so grievously, as ye have deserved. After which Judgment
g^ven they kneeled down, and then the Mayor, with weeping Tears, thanked the
King for the bounty and goodness, and besought him to be a good and gracious
Lord to the City, and unto them as his faithful Subjects: Whereunto the King
made no Answer, but rose straight up, and so went his way, leaving them there.
Anon as the King was departed, they were all arrested and kept there till they
had found Surety, and every Alderman of them discharged of his Ward and Office,
that they had within the City. But shortly after they put in Sureties, and so
returned heavily to London. Shortly after was William Fitz Richard by the K.
Commandment made Mayor, and Thomas Fitz Thomas and William Grapsysgate Sheriffs.

After this, day by day the Chamberlain was called to Account before John
Mansell of all such Tolls, as were gathered in the time of the Mayoralty of
John T^lesha^, and Ralph (Richard) Hardell, there being present to hear the
said Account diverse of the Commonalty of the City, but none o^ the Heads. By
which Account no default might be laid to any of the forenamed persons convict
before the King. By reason whereof diverse of them were admitted to the King's
favor shortly after, and restored to their Offic^s again, but not without
paying of money, whereof the certain^y is not known, says my Author.

What a broil was here? What endeavors used to find faults, to set the King at
difference with his Loyal Citizens, and keep them from Reconciliation? A
Bedroll of Crimes and Ostences devised, made and formed, and none to own it,
l^st they themselves should at la^^ be punished for those wrong Accus^tions,
which they had laid to other men's charges, and could not we^ prove. What was
this but to make divisions betwee^ the Commons and their Head Rulers? To
pretend t^ oblige the one, and depress the other? Divide an^ Reign was a Maxim
put in use before ever Machiav^^ was in being. What pray now was all this for
Was it not to weaken the City's Power? To mak^ the Rich appear Offenders, and
then seem to lay obl^gations upon them, by pardoning what they were never
real^y and d^signedly gui^ty of? Or else to (...) Money out of their hands, and
yet persuade people that they were favorably deal^ with? You may he^^ see
their actions were in a manner wire-drawn to b^ made offenses, and their
Accounts s^^rcht, to pick (...) somewhat to lay to their charge. And yet how
visibl^ were all the tricks and devices of ill men frustrated and sappointed
the very sa^e way, whereby they though to have confirmed and made good their
malicious D^signs; when, after all their searches, they were in sort compel^'d
to approve the others faultless, whol^^ doubtl^s^ (...) their minds, wills,
purposes, and in^^ntions? How hard a matter had it been for the a^cured clearly
to have deseated ill men's suggestions, (...) not they themselves paved them the
way, by searching into their accounts, where it seems no faults were to be
found to make good their accusations? Let those transactions be brought into
open Court, which before were wont to be done privately, and then all the
present Auditors are made Judges of the reasonableness of the proceedings. Here
were large imputations, and yet the accused suffered to go at freedom, and not
clapped up, till they were frightened into submission. What! Could they get none
to swear roundly against them? Never an outlandish Evidence, for love nor money,
for fear, favor, nor affection, and then clap them up in Prison, not letting
them see the faces of their Accusers? Why did not they search their houses,
seize upon their Trunks and Boxes, and so rake into their private Writings, to
ferret out some Crimes out of them; or else, in defect thereof, privily foist
in something criminal and blameworthy, and afterward openly produce it, and
with full cry and ^oud exclamations, impose the belief thereof on their
credulous Partisans, as if really found upon them? We need not stay for the
revolution of Plato's year, expecting former Transactions to be acted over
again. Are any of us such strangers in Jerusalem, as not to know the things
which have come to pass there in the latter days?

As the Heads of the City in this Richard Hard^ll's Mayoralty had their share
of troubles and affl^ctions, as has been related above, so the Commons were
not without their care likewise: For Wheat is said this year ^o have been so
scarce, that it was sold at London at 24 ^. ^ Quarter. Scarcity of Corn in
those days made this a considerable sum. D^arer we are told it would have
been, had not some been brought out of another Coun^ry which made People flock
to the City, because 'twas ^heaper there than in many Shires of England.

This is the year wherein the K. kept his high Court ^f Parliament at Oxford,
which of some Writers is named the mad Parliament; because of many Acts there
mad^ for Reformation of the State, the prosecution of which proved in event the
death and destruction of many Nob^^ Men, by means of that famed strife then
begun, an^ called at this day the Barons War. True, the accidental Consequences
proved fatal to many: But if unfortunate broils give to any Laws the
denomination of evil* I know not but in time some may grow so presumptuously
bold, as upon the like account profanely to bran^ even the Christian Religion,
which we have been assured at first from the divine Oracles, should prove the
occasion of much strife in the world, and the Experience of these latter times
confirm it plain enough to our Understandings. Whether the forementioned
Parliamen^ justly and really deserves the opprobrious Title, th^^ some have
given it, I shall very willingly submit to the Judgment of any experienced
Reader, who has thoroughly perused, weighed, and considered the Equity,
Justice, and reasonableness of the English Liberties and Privileges, contained
in the grand Charter, sealed and given to the Nation by K. John, Father to this
Hen. 3d, which was confirmed in this very same Oxford Parliament, according to
Matthew Paris, as the chief thing then desired and insisted on by the Nobles,
and whereon were likewise grounded the other Acts and Ordinances then, and
there, made by the King and his Lords* For that the King, his Brethren, the
Noblemen and B^rons, took their Oaths to see the same observed, I appeal to
Stow's Annals for proof.

That these Acts might be kept firm and stable, we read of 12 Peers then
chosen, to whom Authority was given, to correct all such as offended in
breaking of these Ordinances and others, by the said Peers to be devised and
ordered, touching and concerning the same matter and purpose. It was not long
after the end of this Parliament, before strife and variance began to kindle
between the King and the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, by reason of such
Officers as the Earls had removed, and put others in their room. Amongst which
John Mansell (of whom enough is mentioned above) was discharged of his Office,
and Sir Hugh Bygot admitted for him. Upon occasion of this difference beginning
to arise between the King and his Barons, we meet with an eminent Instance of
the City's Power and esteem, for when the Peers heard of the murmur at Court,
fearing that the King would be advised to alter his Promise, to make their
party the stronger, they are said to have come about Maudlintide to the
Guild Hall at London, where the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty of the City
were assembled, to whom they showed an Instrument or Writing, (at which hung
many Labels with Seals, as the King's Seal, Edward his Son's Seal, with many
others of the Nobles of the Land.) wherein were contained the Articles ordained
and made at Oxford, willing (as says the Book) the Mayor and Aldermen,
(considering the said Acts were made to the Honor of God, Fidelity to the
King, and profit of the Realm,) that they would also in upholding of the same
set their common Seal of the City thereto. After this Request the Mayor and
Citizens at first indeed desired to be excused, till they knew the Kings
Pleasure; but no excuse at that time being to be granted, at last, by the
labor of the Lords, and such solicitors as they had within the City, the
common Seal was put to the forementioned Writing, and the Mayor, with diverse of
the City, sworn to maintain the same, their Allegiance saved to the King, with
preservation of their Liberties and Franchises.

After this obtained we find the 12 Peers assembling day by day, (as if now
they feared no colors, the City being on their side, and valued no ones
Threats,) keeping their Councils and Courts for the Reformation of old
grievances, removing from the King diverse of his Menial Servants, and setting
others in their places; and moreover a Proclamation comes forth, that none of
the Kings Takers should take any thing within the City without the owners will,
(except a small customary matter therein excepted) upon which what the Kings
Officers took, was straight paid for within the City and Liberty of the same,
and so continued to be for a while Can any one then desire a better proof of
the City's repute in those days? Yet within few years following we shall meet
with more Instances of her power in the History. In the 42d year Sir Hugh
Bygot, with Rog^^ Turkelay, and others, kept his Court at St. Saviors, and
held there the Itinerary Pleas, to the sore punishment ^^ many convicted
offending Officers. Though this Hugh Bygot was put in by the Peers to reform
(as may be supposed) old grievances, yet power seems to have made him also go
astray, or else corruption, or to collogu^ with another party. Whereof the City
in General wa^ like to have tasted deeply, could he have had his Will some of
the particular Citizens escaped him not; for h^ summoned the Citizens to the
aforesaid Court, for Toll taken on the further side of the Water: And though it
was answered, that they were taken lawfully, and they were ready to prove it in
places and Court convenien^ within the Precinct of their Liberty. Yet
notwithstanding he charged upon Inquest 12 Knights of Surry to enquire thereof,
who acquitted the Citizens, and shewe^ that the said Toll belonged to them of
Right. Afterward coming to Guild Hall, he kept his Court an^ Pleas there,
(according to my Author) without all order of Law, and contrary to the
Liberties of the City* infl^cting new punishments on the Bakers, and ordered
many things at his Will.

This year the Citizens had opportunity of showing their Respect to the Kings
Brother, Ricbard Earl ^^ Cornwall, coming over from beyond Sea (where he had
been dealing in the affairs of the Empire) unto London, where he was joyfully
received, the City being richly hanged with Silk and Arras. In the 43d year
John Gysours being Mayor, and John Adrian, and Robert Cornhill Sheriffs, Friday
after Simon and Jude's day we hear of the reading in the Parliament kept at
Westminster, in presence of all the Lords and Commonalty, at sundry times, of
all the Acts and Ordinances made at Oxford, with other Articles added by the
Peers. After which reading we find all those very solemnly accursed, that
attempted in word or deed to break the said Acts, or any of them.

The Form of the Curse which was most solemnly denounced against the Violaters
and Infringers of Magna Charta, is to be seen in Matthew of Paris; and this
here intimated was in probability much like that, which I find in a modern
Author thus Englished.

BY the Authority of God Omnipotent, of the Son, and of the Holy Gh^st, and of
the glorious Mother of God the Virgin Mary, and of the bl^ssed Apostles Peter
and Paul, and of all other Apostles, and of the holy Martyr and Archbishop
Thomas, and of all the Martyrs, and of the blessed Edward, King of England, and
of all Confessors and Virgins, and of all the Saints of God: We excommunicate,
and Anathematize, and sequester from our ^oly Mother the Church, all those
which henceforth knowingly and maliciously shall deprive or spoil the Church of
her right; and all those that shall by any Art or Wit rashly violate, diminish
or change, secretly or openly, in deed, word or Counsel, by crossi^g in part or
in whole, those Ecclesiastical Liberties or ancient approved Customs of the
Kingdom, especially the Liberties and free Customs which are contained in the
Charters of the Common Liberties of England, and the Forests granted by our
Lord the King to the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights and
Freeholders. And all those who have published, or being published have observed
any Statutes, Ordinances thing against them, or any thing therein contained,
which have brought in any Customs to the contrary, or (...) served them being
brought in, and all Writers of such O^dinances, or Councils, or Executioners
and all such as she presume to judge according to such Ordinances: All (...)
every such Persons as are, or at any time shall be, knowingly guilty of any
such matters shall, ipso facto, incur the Sentence: and such as are ignorantly
guilty shall incur the sa^^ if being admonished, they within 15 days after
amend (...) For everlasting memory whereof we hereunto put our Sea^

Thus far the words of the Curse: Nor was the manner of pronouncing less solemn
in open Parliament. (...) King with all the chief Nobility of the Realm in the
Robes, and the Bishops in their Vestments, with bu^^ing Tapers in their Hands,
standing to hear this (...) read, and immediately as soon as the Charters and
(...) were read, and signed, all throwing down their Tape^^ extinguished, and
smoking, cry out, So let all (...) who incur this Sentence, and go against
this Curse, (...) extinct, and have no better savor than these Snuffs: (...)
then the King, having stood all this while with (...) hand upon his Breast,
said with a loud voice, So (...) me help, I will observe all these things
sincerely and fait^fully, as I am a man, as I am a Christian, as I am Knight,
and as I am a King crowned and anointed.

But what could any one think these so solemn (...) would avail, without a
suitable Power and strength Arms to make them good per force? When as (...)
known, that there lived in those days a Clergyman Rome, who pretended to
dispense even with the Almig^ty's Laws, whose Power was at that time openly
pr^fessed to be believed sufficient by the ^^nerality of E^rope, to absolve all
manner of Oaths and Covenant^ and from whom Dispensations more than a good man
might be had for Money. The confirmation of the fo^mentioned Acts we may
believe well paid for by the Parliament: For we read of a Tax called Scutage,
that ^s, 40 s. of every Knights Fee through England, then granted to the King,
which extended to a large sum of Money, viz. Six score Thousand Pounds or
more* For upon occasion of this large Tax, I find the number of the Knights
Fees in England, at those days in posses^ion of Spiritualty and Temporalty,
summed up by my Author to 60000 l. and above. Upon supposition that ^he Clergy
paid nothing, it is said that the Tax would ^ot have amounted over the sum of
64000 l. where^y we may guess what a deal of the Land, even almost ^ne half,
was then belonging to the Clergy. Devotion *as the times went then) brought
forth Riches, and the Daughter since devoured the Mother. Nov. the 6th we are
told the King came to St. Paul's, and command^ng a Folk-moot to be assembled,
according to the for^er Ordinances made, asked license of the Commonal^y of the
City to pass the Sea, and promised there in ^resence of a great multitude of
People, that he would ^e a good and gracious Lord unto the City by the ^outh of
Sir Hugh Bygot, Chief Justice, and to main^ain their Liberties unhurt;
whereupon the People for ^y made an exceeding shout. Observe here the turn of
things, the Courtiers seem to have sought, not long time ^^nce to oppress the
Head Rulers of the City, by a Folk-^oot of the Commons: Now the King to prevent
the ^ffect of ill men's advice, has bound himself to ask their ^ave, before he
goes out of the Land for a season. E're while the Folk-moot or Common Hall was
abused to ^^rve for a property, to destroy their own Cities Liber^^es. Now the
conservation of the whole Nations wel^^re is put into their hands. What greater
Evidence can ^e demanded to prove this Honorable Cities Power and Influence,
than to find the Citizens entrusted by ^ing, Lords and Commons, with so high a
charge? We may presume the Reason of entrusting the Commons of the City with so
large a Grant, as the Kin^ could not pass the Sea without License first
obtain'^ of them, was to prevent the Evil and Mischief, th^^ might happen to
the Land by advice of ill Counsello^ who might be persuading the King at every
turn to g^ out of the Realm, he having also Lands beyond the (...) that they
might have the better opportunity to (...) out their own ends, though to the
Peoples oppression in his absence. What trouble, affliction and oppression the
land suffered, under this Kings Uncle Richard the first's Imprisonment, at the
Hands of the Kings Office^^ who raked and pill'd what they could of Clergy
(...) Laity, on pretense of raising Money for the Kings R^demption, I had
rather send the Reader back to page to satisfy himself, where I have related
somewhat of the charge of the Kings Ransom, than stay to repeat it ov^^ again. A
fuller description the curious may meet wi^^ in Neubrigensis, l. 4 cap. 35.
treating particularly ther^of. Some I believe may have observed in these
unsettl^^ times, that they have fared much better, and more e^sily avoided the
malicious attempts of their Fellow Su^jects, who have lived as it were in the
Sunshine of the Kings pres^nce, than such, who being many scores, ^^ may be
Hundreds of Miles distant, have lived (so ^^ phrase it) in the shadow.

I know not but (...) ^resence of the head Governor (...) as needful always
(...), as is the General in (...) Army. Cert^in enough it is by the History,
that (...) this Kin^ Henry was thus absent from his Kingdom, (...) ways in
France, that Dissension arose'^ England, between the Kings Son Edward, and the
(...) of Gloucest^r, which might have immediately broug^^ no small trouble to
the Land, had not there been gre^^ endeavors used to prevent it, wherein this
Honourab^^ City showed much of her care and vigilance. Wh^^ the occasion of
this difference was I have not yet read, ^ut to appease it I find a Counsel of
the Lords called (...) Westminster (Fabian gives it likewise the Title of a
Parliament) which continued Three weeks and more. To this Council came the
Lords with great companies, ^articularly the two contesting Parties, intending
it seems (...) have lodged within the City. So desirous, so ambiti^us of
pretending to London's favor, that such seem (...) have thought the bare
lodging therein might have ^dded to their strength. But upon the Mayors
consult^^g with such, as the King had left Rulers in his Ab^^nce, and through
the advice of the King's Brother, it ^as concluded that neither the said
Edward, nor the said ^arl should come into the City there to lodge, nor any
^^at held upon either side. And further it was provi^ed, that all within the
City, of the Age of 15 years, and above, should be in Arms, to watch and keep
the ^ity day and night, and that the Gates should be kept ^ut by day, and
certain men in Arms keep every Gate (...) the City. For the further safeguard
of the City, and (...) keeping of the Peace therein, the aforementioned ^ulers
came into London, and there lodged with their ^ompanies, and such other persons
as they assigned to ^^rengthen the City, if need required. Do people (...)
mathematical Demonstration? Look here and see, that care's taken to keep the
City safe, and harmless, and in Peace, as if then the Land must needs be in
^uiet too: Preserve the City and its just Liberties, and ^^en the Nations
Quietness, Peace, and Safeguard is ^^rongly secured. Behold here the Eyes of
the Nation (...) upon the City of London, and her Actions, and ^here's the
party that dare strike, while she Guards ^^eps and preserves the Kings Peace,
while he is ^^eased to busy himself in foreign Countries? Such as ^ill not
believe, but what they see, and so know, let ^^em here credit their own Eyes,
if they be not Popish Transubstantiators, or shut them to keep the light (...)
After the King was returned to London from (...) the Sea, by his order, many of
their lodgings (...) altered, direction was taken between the aforesaid (...)
testing Parties, and a new Assembly of Parliament (...) signed.

Anno 44. William Fitz Richard being Mayor, (...) Browning, Richard Coventre,
Sheriffs, after Candl^^^^ by the Kings Command, a Folk-Moot was called (...)
Pauls-Cross, whither he came in person, with his B^^ther Richard, King of the
Romans, and many oth^^ Nobles, and commanded the Mayor, that every str^^ling of
12 Years and above, should before his ^^dermen be sworn the day following, to
be true to (...) King, and his Heirs, Kings of England, and that (...) Gates of
the City should be kept with armed Men, (...) before was determined. Not long
after this we (...) of more suspicions of a breach between the King (...) his
Barons, which in few years broke out into an (...) War.

What did all this swearing then avail? Those amo^^^ the Children of men, who
look abroad into the world (...) take notice of the common course of the
Generality of (...) living, or are much conversant with the Monuments (...) the
dead may find it no very difficult matter to obser^^ that let men take never so
many Oaths, make never so ^^ny Covenants, Promises, and Compacts, that if they
(...) come to have Apprehensions, that those, to whom the have sworn
themselves, endeavor to make use of the religious Ties, and Obligations,
designed at first (...) mutual preservation, to encroach upon their Liber^^
deprive them of their Privileges, their Properti^^ their Birthrights, to the
enslaving of them and the whole Posterity, all former Subscriptions, Oaths,
(...) Promises, Pacts and Covenants, will scarce avail (...) with the most. But
if Experience should chanc^ legitimate their doubts and Fears by the others
actual endeavors in the open face of the World, it is rarely seen, but that,
notwithstanding past transactions, they will make the greatest opposition, they
can, against the others arbitrary pretenses: And so all former religious Bonds
are snapt asunder like Tow burnt by the Fire. They who imposed Oaths for such
ill intents, might have considered, if they pleased, that many in such cases
would not have scrupled at all to have broke them; Or if any of the more devout
had been a little ^^icer, they could not doubtless be ignorant in those days,
what Remedies might have been bought for Money out of the Popes public
Storehouse, if other common ways of Evasion would not have passed current with
them. How many of that nature have ^affed up and down in the World, it may not
be unwor^hy of our consideration sometimes to revolve in our minds, if it be a
thing feasible to bring them within that compass. True indeed, (quoth the
subtle Sophi^ter) I have sworn Allegiance, but a latter lesser Tie (...)
invalid, when a greater Obligation lies upon me. True, an Oath lies upon me;
but here is my Liberty, Life and Religion lying all at stake. I was born free,
what can dispense with me to deprive me of my Birth-^ight? Life is sweet,
Self-preservation is near and ^ear to me, by the Instinct of Nature. It Is
natural to ^reated Beings to defend their Lives against such as should destroy
them: what then can oblige me to suf^er my Life violently to be taken away by
another in^^ry, whenas I dare not deprive my self thereof by my ^wn
Endeavors, unless I will run into so foul an Of^^nce, so unnatural a Fact, as
to proclaim my self to ^^e World a Self-Murtherer, and so force my Soul to ^y
out of my Body, before I know it is my Creator's ^ill she should? My Religion is
to obey God above, ^^d before Man; my Soul is his that gave it me, and where is
the Obligation that can empower me justly (...) give away that which is not my
own to bestow? (...) my Religion, which I believe is according to the La^ of
the Almighty, stand or fall at another man's pleasure Must I take the matter,
manner, and height of my D^votions from the imperious dictates of another's
(...) and that too upon the account of my Oath? Must destroy my Religion in
effect, or else I cannot keep in show? Besides, know ye not that my Oath was
co^ditional? Mutual Bonds make mutual Obligation Service was vowed, where
Protection was promised an^ expected. Can any but an Idiot be supposed to swe^^
away himself to be destroyed instead of being defended Must I still pay
Obedience upon account of former C^^venants, where I cannot get due Protection,
and ha^^ but little encouragement to expect it, though it was (...) first
promised, since that now thence I fear utter rui^^ and infallible destruction
instead thereof? With (...) Inventions some may chance to be full, and it may
(...) to make them seem more authentic, they can produ^^ them under the
Printer's Hand. It Is in Print, an A^gument which may sometimes weigh much with
(...) inconfiderate, inobserving Persons, who consider (...) how easy, how
usual a thing it is to print Lies, as (...) as tell them. Nay, to make the
deeper impression, the may happen to proceed so far, as to show us the common
custom and practice of many Kings and Princ^ and endeavor to qualify their
own, by repeated ^^^stances and Examples of the public Conscience, there be
any such thing in nature, and it be not (...) one of the fanciful Notions much
in vogue, within the few years, among some high-flown English Clergy (...) who
ambitiously desired to glory in the Title (forsoo^^ of Rational Divines. Hereto
some may possibly furth^^ add instances out of other Countries, where Towns
(...) Cities, standing in the borders of Kingdoms and Pri^cipalities, are often
won and lost, and so pass to and fro from one state to another: And pertly ask
us, what we think in our Consciences of all those, who this year took Oaths of
Allegiance to one Prince, and the next year, being subdued by another, were
made swear themselves his Subjects, and yet, upon a new Recovery or Treaty of
Peace, being returned to their first Sovereign* could as willingly as ever
swear over again their first Oath: Are such perjured or no? A hard case, being
under such strait inconveniences. They fought, they resisted, they opposed the
Conqueror as long as they could, and when neither they could defend themselves
any longer, nor was their Prince there with power to defend them, they yielded
and submitted to the Almighty's Decree, and their own hard irresist^ble Fate.
Such it may be, and much more might a man of a ^imble Wit urge upon the
Gainsayer. But how many of these may fully satisfy a Conscience very tender
and scrupulous, seems not to me so easily resolvable.

If these suffice not your thinking Minds, your wandering roving Thoughts, take
a turn or two in the Je^uits School, and ransack the secret recesses and
retirements thereof, it is an hundred to one, but you will here meet with
Jesuitical dissimulation, doubtful equi^ocation, mental reservation, and Papal
dispensation, with much of the like trash.

To these let be added that pretty new device, the Popish Doctrine of
probability. So that when one at ^^rst dubiously propounds an unusual, uncouth
Opinion, another comes after him, and lays it down more consi^^ently, upon
supposition that the first broacher had a ^ood Reason in his view, although he
has little or none; ^^en in comes a third with a more brazen faced boldness,
and positively affirms it good Doctrine, because the others forsooth, in his
Opinion learned men, must be ^^pposed not to have wanted Reason for what they
said, and then it is no matter whether he can see a glimpse of it or no, who can
with so much facility pin his Faith upon another man's sleeve. How far this
novel Doctrine may go, if fruitfully improved, to make the shadow of Religion
fit for men's corrupt desires* (since that they refuse so many of them to be
brought up to the truth of Religion) any one may easily consider, who has any
consideration at all in him.

But whosoever has so little Soul in him, as not to endure the Solitary Company
of his own Thoughts, and is so enslaved to sense, as not to like any other
Argument, let him apyly himself to the Book called, (...) Provinciales, or The
Mystery of Jesuitism, written at first by a Papist, of the Doctrines of some
Modern, especially Jesuitical Casuists, and its truth confirmed by the
reiterated Complaints of the French Church. In th^^ Book the English Reader may
see how fruitful a man of a corrupt wit (without Truth, Honesty, Religion, or
Conscience,) may be in broaching novel Opinions, and raising strange Doctrines
upon the new invented Foundation of Probability. What a new form of manners
this new so^^ of Morality produces, in what kind of Practices the^^ Principles
end, the Deportment of the late Jesuits (...) Tyburn, has already shown how
far such debauched Principles have already went in debauching the manners of
the Age; and how far further by degrees, they may bring us in time toward
Popery and Slavery, ^ humbly offer to the consideration of the thinking (...)
about Town.

If the Society would be pleased to accept the Petition of an English
Protestant, no Turk, Jew, (...) Heathen, (as some would have us think the (...)
might import) but Christian, it should be requested that since this old World
is so already filled with (...) Doctrines of theirs and suitable Practices,
they wou^^ transport the rest of their Inventions to the new Worl^ in the Moon,
if they can find the place and the passage. I am pre^ty well assured, that
World, if any be, is so much estranged as yet to the Jesuits and their
Doctrines by reason of the distance, that there would be little room, and less
likelihood for their reception, unless they beforehand transmit thither some of
their new Divinity, to make way for gaining them some Renegado Proselite^,
weary of a good old way, and desirous of a new one, be it what it will. Why may
not the Jesuits be as fruitful in finding out new Worlds, as making new Morals,
new Saints, new Merits? What if I had also added, a new way of Atonement, a new
Savior, new Gospel? When you walk along through St. Paul's Churchyard, or by
any other noted Booksellers Shop, enquire for Clari Bonarscii Amphitheatrum
Honoris. Or if you have no other than your English Mother Tongue, ask for the
Memoirs of Mr. James Wadsworth, a Jesuit that recanted, where in the second
Chapter, besides many other Observations and collections out of Popish Authors,
you may find page 23. part of a Poem taken out of the foresaid Book, good
enough for the form, though sufficiently bad for the matter, wherein the
profane Author at least equals the Virgin Mary's Milk to our blessed Savior's
Blood, if he does not rather seem to make the Milk exceed that most precious
Blood in Virtue. You may there read it turned in part in English Verse, with
remarks thereon, together with some more of their Doctrines, and also
extractions out of the Romish Psalter: And further in the same Chapter, this
Clarus Bonarscius (otherwise called Carolus Scribonius) is said to be a Jesuit
living at Antwerp, and of much account amongst them, the Author and his Book
standing enrolled, approved, and commended for good and Catholic, in
Possevines Volumns of Writers, set out with public allowance of the Romish
State. If then this be not the bringing in of a new Religion, a new way of
Salvat^on, what is? What think ye then? Do not these Jesuits for their new
Principles and Practices deserve ^^ meet with an harder Fate, than did the
unfortunate* though ingenious Galileo, who for that famous Invention of his
Glass, and hints given of looking after a World in the Moon, was made to suffer
(as my Memory tells me I have somwhere read,) an hard Impriso^ment, under the
Notion of Heresy, on supposition th^^ a new World would imply a new Savior?

Such having been the novel Inventions of these c^^rupt, i. e. Jesuitical Wits,
what then remains, ye tr^^ hearted English Men, but that abhorring their
debau^^ed Principles and Practices, though not hating the^^ Persons, you
endeavor to keep your selves far enough off from men so much given to change?
(...) have been thus endeavoring to change the good (...) Religion and
Doctrines, by their new fangled Device and new Morals, to proselite the more to
Atheism (...) Debauchery. Who have plotted to change your Religion and your
Laws, to change Protestantism into Popery, a free Government into absolute
Tyranny; (...) change your Liberties into Slavery, and many of you^ Freeholds
into Tenant-Lands, to a vicious Clergy an^ a Popish Church. What else meant a
late Papist (...) his Trial, who has been reported, under the Liberty allowed
by our Laws of excepting against Thirty Five of the Jury without Reason shown,
to have ^^cepted only against one, and that as being an Imp^^priator, alias a
Possessor of Church Lands? If there (...) not such a Report, then my Memory
imposes on me if the Report was not true, Fame has proved dece^^ful, or else I
mistook her Relation.

So much Atheism and Irreligion having already be^^ introduced among us, and
such the Tendencies to the further debauching Men's Minds and Manners, whether
then it would not be much better (when it shall seem good to our Governors, to
King, Lords and Commons assembled in the right Parliamentary way) to casheer
all needless unnecessary Oaths, and reduce the too too common custom of
swearing upon every trivial occasion into a far lesser compass, judge ye. What
signifies so much swearing at every turn, whenas other ways might be doubtless
found out in many cases, to search out the truth with as much, if not more
certainty? Might not less swearing, and severer Penalties upon lying sometimes
serve the turn? It is plain enough, our Neighbors the Hollanders are none of
the least experienced People in the World: Among them have I read it is usual
for the Judges, without giving Oaths, to search out the truth by sudden cross
questions, wherein much practice has made them very dextrous and skilful. And
so they do as it were tr^pan the Trepanners, if I may use the Expression
without offense. What esteem can any one think an Oath is with a man, that
counts his words but breath, and his Soul Air? Will that man value the swearing
of an Oath before a Magistrate, that profanely can rap you out an hundred upon
any occasion in common Discourse, without the least Remorse; or else is of the
Popish Priest's Opinion, that swearing upon an English Bible is no more than
swearing upon Aesop's Fables, i. e. a story Book, containing Tales of Cocks and
Bulls, and the like? So likely to be true is it, that some men play with Oaths
as Children with Rattles, a saying or somewhat like to what I have heard
imputed to Machiavel. Let such sometimes seriously consider, who have had an
hand in imposing so many Oaths of late Years, whether they may not one day be
called to account for some of the many Perjuries others may have occasionally
run into thereby. The huding up of so many ^orts of Creeds and Doctrines
together into one Volumn, and then compelling men under great Penalti^^ to make
Declarations and Subscriptions to them, (...) not been the least burden,
needlessly laid upon (...) Consciences, in some places of the World. Even (...)
Creed commonly called the Apostles, though one (...) the most Authentic,
clearest and shortest, is not (...) altogether void of Scruples, witness the
difference amongst the learned about Christ's descent into Hell. (...) far
shorter Creed ushered in the Ethiopian Eunu^^ Baptism. I could name, in
fitting time and place, so^^ of the most common Oaths among us, and which man^
of the most serious would not probably scruple to (...) on good account, which
nevertheless are not so ac^^rately, exactly, and cautiously composed, but a
Conscience very scrupulous and tender, might be liable^^ doubts and fears in
taking and keeping them. Is (...) all this ado, so much fathered upon
Religion, too (...) often really designed to turn men out of beneficial
E^ployments, that others may be let in, and someti^^ proves a Snare to many
tender Consciences? If (...) matter be honest and lawful, a truly serious good
(...) will do it without an Oath: If he esteems it otherw^^^ he will not take
it, nay, he will rather throw upon than wrong his Conscience. And I think he
has (...) son besides Scripture on his side, though he should ^^pen to be in an
Error: For he that for Interest, (...) or favor does any thing wittingly
against his (...), in itself erroneous, and he not knowing it to (...) so,
seems to me plainly to manifest, that he would the same, though his Conscience
were in the right. (...) for an ill man, a profane man, an Atheist, what (...)
he how many Oaths he takes, after he is once in (...) Head and Ears, over
Shoes, over Boots, so it be his secular advantage? When Oaths, Covena^^
Subscriptions, Declarations, and such like, at (...) turn and change of the
times come thick and three ^ne upon another, thwarting and crossing each other,
what shall the real honest hearted man do but refuse them, and so turn himself
out, to the letting in men ^any times of ill Principles, and worse Practices,
into ^laces of public Trust? How then are things likely (...) go in any Land,
when they fall into the Hands of ^^ch profane Debauchees, who are too too
often thus ^^troduced over better men's Heads, and sometimes it ^ay be
designedly to serve turns? Have we never ^eard nor read of a time, when men of
debauched ^ractices and Principles were sought purposely after? When it was a
sufficient Objection against a man's pre^^rment, that he was serious and
religious, a little more ^erhaps than ordinary? Thus the wicked often plotteth
against the Righteous, who fears an Oath, much ^ore Oaths upon Oaths, lest he
should be entangled (...) ensnared by the words of his Mouth. For breaking
^^lawful Oath, solemnly taken before God and Man, to (...) English Ears sounds
Perjury, in whatsoever De^^ee, Rank, and Quality, of any Nation, Country, ^^ct,
or Faction, from the King that sits upon his ^hrone, to the Captive in the
Dungeon, not to vary ^^om a Scripture Expression in another Case. I doubt (...)
but an Oath is very lawfully imposed in some cases, (...) is of good avail
oftentimes between Man and Man; (...) whether to find out the truth thereby, is
so sure (...) safely practicable among the Men of these days, I ^^mbly propose
to the better Judgment of more expe^^^nced Heads to determine.

How happy might the times prove, were all men as (...) servant of their Oaths,
as Joshua and the Princes of (...) were of the League they solemnly made with
(...) Gibeonites! And yet they were plainly ^^apanned ^^^reunto with a
great-deal of Guile, Fra^d, and lying (...). What plausible pretenses to have
broken this (...) Covenant, might they have raised from a former Command of
their God, not to spare any of the Cana^^ites, nor league with them, from the
notorious (...) these fraudulent Gibeonitish Ambassadors put upon the^ by
their lying words, and from the murmuring of the whole Congregation against
them? Notwithstanding all this, we find they let them live, lest Wrath should
have been upon them, because of the Oath they (...) sworn unto them. And that
they did well in keepin^ this so solemn a league and Covenant, though obtain^^
by Fraud and hastily made, we have divine Authority to assure us from the Lord,
in the Three Years Famine he sent upon the Land in King David's Days for Saul,
and his bloody House, because, in his Zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah,
he sought to slay the Gibeonites, and so violated the Oath made by their (...)
Fathers hundreds of years before. We cannot, with out the greatest breach of
Charity, suppose, that (...) holy a Man as David, one after Gods own Hea^ made
use of this only as a pretense to ruin and ex^^pate Readiness Family, and settle
the Crown the faster (...) his own Head, and to fix it the surer to his
posterity after him. If any of us were so Atheistical, as from th^^ instance to
look upon Religion as only a piece of (...) Policy, our Suspicious Thoughts and
Censures would be soon answered from David's own manner of acti^^ in this
particular, who is recorded to have spared (...) Son of Jonathan, Readiness eldest
Son, and that too upon account of the Lord's Oath, that was sworn betwee^ them
many Years before. As the Scriptures plain^^ show us, that Joshua and the
Princes of Israel did we in keeping the Oath, they had sworn, though draw into
it by Fraud and Deceit, so in them we find, (...) ill it fared with Zedekiah,
the last King in Jerusal^^ after he had broken the Oath, which Nebuchadnezz^
had made him swear by God. We doubt not but the there was force enough upon him
to compel him, (...) it may be the price of a Kingdom likewise induced him
thereto, for the benefit of his present occasions; but how ill went it with
Judah for his breaking that Oath, by whatsoever force at first gained of him,
even to the destruction of the chief City, solitary desolation of the Land for
many Years, and utter ruin of the Monarchy for ever after? For after the
Captivity we find it reduced back again into a kind of Commonwealth, under
Rulers, (and but one of them of David's Line mentioned in the Scriptures, that
I remember) Governors, the high Priests, the Maccabees, the Sanhedrim unto the
coming of Shilo. So fatal to the Jewish Nation was their Princes Irreligion.
There is no respect of Persons with the Almighty, at whose Tribunal all must
once stand to be judged, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, Kings,
Princes, and People, as sure as the Scripture, which we esteem the word of the
great God, is infallibly true. But whither has the overflowing of my thoughts
carried me?

To go back again therefore into the way, from whence I have so far deviated:
In this same 44th year of King Henry, (wherein he commanded all of Twelve Years
and upwards in London to swear to be true to him and his Heirs) we read of
further grudge and displeasure beginning to kindle between the King and his
Lords. The occasion is related to be, for that the Barons, with consent of the
Peers, discharged one, and admitted another for Justice unwitting the King. The
displea^ure hence arising and increasing more and more, was ^owever a little
appeased for a while, by the Policy of the Kings Brother, and some Prelates of
the Land. ^n this Year the Chronicler thought it worthy remark ^o make mention
of the variance, that fell out between ^he Londoners and the men of
Northampton, at a Fair ^here held, for a man of that Town there slain, which
occasioned a long Suit and Plea between them, to (...) great vexation and
trouble of both Parties, wherein (...) the end the City had the better. That
City, that (...) able to make a Contest with the King's whole (...) is likely
enough to match a particular Town.

In the 45th, shortly after Alhallontide, the Baron admitted and made Sheriffs
of diverse Shires, nami^^ them Guardians and Keepers of the Counties and Shi^^
and discharged such as the King had before admitt^^ Neither would they suffer
the Justices, but such as (...) of their own admission, to keep the Itinerary
(...)* The Law allowed them power, and they were (...) it seems to use it. The
King, as any may easily suppose, was grievously discontented therewith,
insomuc^ (as says the Chronicle) that after that Season, he ^^boured what he
might to disannul the former Ordinan^^ and Statutes, and cause them to be
broken. To the end on the second Sunday in Lent was read by the King's Command
at Paul's Cross, a Bull of Pope (...) the 4th, as a Confirmation of another
Bull, before p^^chased of his Predecessor Alexander the 4th, to absol^^ the
King, and all others, that before had sworn (...) maintain the Articles made at
Oxford; and afterwa^^ the said Absolution was showed throughout Engl^^^ Wales,
and Ireland, straight charge being given to (...) that none be so hardy to
withstand or disobey the (...) said Absolution: And if any were found
disobedi^^ to this Commandment, that he should be put in Pris^^ without Ransom
or Deliverance, till the Kings Pl^^sure were further known. The Pope could
pretend (...) absolve on either side, if he were well paid. (...) then could
any Oaths be supposed to avail without s^^able Power to compel their
Observance? Yet hithe^^^ the Commons of the City held their Power forme^
granted them: For we read of another License ^^ven to the King at a Folk-Moot
to sail into (...) according whereunto he departed the morrow follow^ng from
London.

Anno 46. Tbomas Fiz Thomas being Mayor, Phi^^^ Walbrook, Richard Tailor
Sheriffs, about Martintide ^he Jews felt the Peoples Fury to some of their
costs: ^o odious was that Nation grown in many parts of ^he World since our
Savior's Crucifixion, which had been formerly the darling of Heaven, that it
must have been a very small matt^^, that would not easily have ^^rred up the
common People of the Land, where they lived, against them. In this Year is
unkindness ^oted to have arisen between the Londoners and the Constable of the
Tower, for that contrary to the Ci^ies Liberties he took certain Ships, passing
by with Wheat and other Victuals, into the Tower, and made ^he Price at his
Pleasure. Hence might great harm have ensued, had not, by the Policy of wise
men, the matter been committed to the Chief Justice and others, by direction of
the Kings Council, to set an order and Rule between the said Parties. The
effect whereof was, that after Evidences and Privileges produced to ^he
advantage of both, it was firmly adjudged, that ^f the Constable, or any other
Officer of the Tower, would at any time take any Wheat or Victuals, to the ^^se
of the King, or the Tower, he should come into the City Market, and have it two
Pence in a Quarter within the Mayors Price, and other Victuals after the ^ame
rate: And if he, or any of his Officers would (...) contrary to that Ordinance,
that then the Sheriffs should make report to the Kings Council, and with^^and
him in all that they might, so that the King's ^eace were kept. Here was
Authority given to act against some commissionated by the King. What fol^y is
it for every mean petty Officer to think to thwart ^^is powerful City, and hope
to be too hard for her Citizens, when their Liberties, Privileges, and
Franchises (...) concerned?

This year silent murmurs passed up and down the Land of War, that was too too
likely to ensue b^tween the King and his Lords in short process of time for the
Bull of Dispensation before showed in (...) Realm: But the mediation of good
and wise men appeased and stilled those Emotions for a while, that (...) King
agreed again to the maintenance of the afores^^^ Statutes, and sent his Writs,
wherein the said Articl^ were comprised, into all the Shires of England, givin^
strict Commandment to all men, to observe and ke^^ the same, and such other as
were to them joined (...) the discretion of some appointed to that end. (...)
this again was shortly after revoked and denie^ What Change in Councils, what
Uncertainty (...) Fickleness of Mind was this? Give, and grant, an^ then recall:
What could be thought the end of (...) variableness but Strife and Contention?
Hereupo^ the Archbishop of Canterbury, a Star in that co^juncture of the first
Magnitude in the English Firm^ment. proves erratick: For fearing what might
e^sue, like a cunning, subtle, worldly Politician, (...) makes an Errand to
Rome, and by License of bo^^ Parties departs the Land, and so keeps himself out
(...) the trouble was over. He had been a main Instrument a few years ago in
Cursing the Breakers of the aforementioned Acts. Should he have sided with the
Kings Party, he had openly contradicted his forme^ Actions, and in effect
declared all his so solemn Curs^^ to signify naught. Had he sided with the
Barons, (...) must have shown himself an Assenter to their dee^ partaken of all
the Changes and Chances of War, (...) publicly slighted and contemned the
Popes Dispens^^tion. A crime in those days of very dangerous Consequence to the
offending Party. Upon Midlent Sund^^ the Mayor and Commons being present at a
Folk-Mo^^ held at Paul's Cross, before Sir Philip Basset, and other of the
Kings Council, the Mayor was sworn to be ^rue to the King, and his Heirs Kings.
Upon the mor^ow at Guild Hall every Alderman is said to have taken the same
Oath in presence of the Mayor: And so likewise upon the Sunday following, we
read that every Stripling, of the Age of 12 Years and above, was a^ew charged
with the same Oath before his Alderman in his Ward.

Then (according to my Author) the Displeasure between the King and his Barons,
which a long while ^^d been kept secret, began to appear, insomuch that diverse
of them assembled in the Marches of Wales, gathered unto them strong Power, and
sent a Letter unto the King, under the Seal of Sir Roger Clyfford, ^eseeching
him to have in remembrance the Oath, and manifold Promises that he had made,
for the observ^ng of the Statutes made at Oxford, with other Ordinances made to
the Honor of God, for Faith and Al^egiance to his Person, Weal and Profit of
all his Realm, willing him further to withstand and defy all ^uch Persons, as
will be against the said Acts, saving ^he Queen and her Children. After this
Letter thus ^ent, and no Answer received, we read of the said Ba^ons going with
Banners displayed against such, as they ^new held against the Acts so often
before mentioned. The effect of their Fury at Hereford, the Bishop, and ^any of
his Canons, Aliens born, soon felt to their great cost and damage. Hence we
hear of their going to other places, where they supposed to find their Ene^ies,
keeping their course toward London, (this was the place, it seems, they
desired so much to fix to their Party) bearing before them a Banner of the
Kings Arms, and increasing with the access of much People, as they held on in
their Journey. In this March, as they found any that they knew to be against
^he Maintenance of the aforesaid Acts, they imprisoned them, and spoiled their
Habitations, were they Spi^^tual or Temporal Men, all the case to them at the
time. In diverse of the King's Castles they set in (...) Persons as they
pleased, (putting out such as were pl^ced in by the King) and gave to them an
Oath, the they should be true and faithful to the King, (...) keep those
Castles to his Use, and to the Weal of (...) Realm. Here they seem to have
outdid the Courti^^ in their own way. The Mayor, Aldermen, and others of
London, were made of late to renew the Oaths of Allegiance to the King and his
Heirs, as if (...) weaken the Barons Party, by a crafty sly insinuati^^ that
they went about to deprive the King and (...) Heirs of their Right. But as for
those suggestions (...) hold the Barons disappointing them, by giving (...)
like Oaths to these of their own Party put into (...) of public Trust, and
thereby in effect declaring, (...) 'twas not against the King, but against the
ill Minist^^ of State about him, whom they deemed the Auth^^ of iil Advice,
that they thus took up Arms, either (...) remove them, or deliver the King out
of such (...) men's hands.

About Midsummer, when they drew near to Lond^^ the Chronicle tells us, that
they sent a Letter unto (...) Mayor, and Aldermen, under the Seal of Sir (...)
Mountfold, willing to know of them whether the would observe the Acts and
Statutes made in the P^^liament called at Oxford or not, or else would aid
(...) assist such persons as intended the breach of the sa^^ and sent to them a
Copy of the said Acts, with a P^^viso that if any there specified, were to the
hurt of (...) Realm, or Commonweal of the same, that they the by discreet
Persons of the Land should be altered, (...) amended. See here the Influence
the City had upon the Land, the esteem the Barons had of London's (...) and
Authority, and how desirous they were to (...) it to their side and Interest.
The forementioned Copy was by the Mayor carried to the King, then being at the
Tower, accompanied with his Queen, his Brother Richard, Edward his Son, and
others of his Council. Then the King, intending to know the Cities Mind, asked
the Mayor what he thought of those Acts and Ordinances, who, being refused time
and leave to con^^er with his Brethren the Aldermen, and his Judgment demanded
at that present season, stands upon Record to have boldly answered the King,
that before-times he, with his Brethren, and the Commonalty of the City, by his
Commandment, had been sworn to maintain all Acts made to the Honor of God, to
the Faith of the King, and Profit of the Realm; which Oath, by his license and
most gracious favor, they ^ntended to observe and keep. One of the Ingredients
that, according to the Royal Psalmist, goes to the com^osure of a Citizen of
Zion, who shall abide in the Lords Tabernacle, and dwell in his Holy Hill, is,
that ^e changes not, though he swears to his own hurt. and moreover
(continued the Mayor) to avoid all oc^asion, that might grow, of grudge or
variance be^ween him and his Barons within the City, they would ^ut all Aliens
and Strangers out thereof, if he were so ^ontented. The King showed as if he
was well plea^^d with this Answer, so that the Mayor, with his fa^our,
departed, and sent Answer to the Barons, ac^ording to the same, their Liberties
always upholden, ^id saved. The Barons lying so near London, and ^ith so
considerable a strength, 'twas time for those ^obles, who were against those
Statutes, to be pack^^g, as fast as they could, for fear of the associated
^ords; But the King is said to have sent after them ^^vers Persons of his
Household, and of the Citizens of ^^ndon, to induce them to return, and tarry
with him. (...) that season, according to the Mayor's former words, all Aliens,
suspected of any favor owing to the one Party or the other, were put out of
the City. Impartiality is rarely found among the Children of men, though it is
so commendable a Virtue not to have respect of Persons. But not long after we
hear of their being placed in Offices, many of them in Winds^^ Castle, by
Edward the King's Son. So usual is it for contesting Parties to receive and
prefer one another outcasts. No wonder then if we sometimes see the same done
in private Families, when at variance among themselves, which is so often acted
over and over again in public differences.

Then Watch and Ward was kept daily in the C^ty, and in the night certain
assigned to ride about the Town, with some Footmen allotted to them, to search
all the Town over: But hence harm ensuing* by reason that evil disposed
Persons, under color o^ Watchmen, seeking for strangers, robbed and spoile^
many Houses in one part of the City, while the ridi^^ Watch was in another
place, a standing Watch was o^dained in every Ward. The mind of the City being
made known by their public Mouth, the Mayor, 'twas time for men of a different
Interest to endeavou^ to draw the King further off from it. Accordingl^ we find
the King departs from the City, when ^^ heard the Barons were coming into it.
The Baro^^ enter the City the Sunday before St. Margaret's day and the King
shortly after returns to Westminster wi^^ the Queen, and ohers of his Council.
Soon after (...) Hugh le Spencer is made Chief Justice, and Keeper (...) the
Tower, by consent both of the King and the B^rons. Upon the morrow following,
Maudlin Day was a Writ directed to the Mayor and Alderm^^ charging them that
the King's Peace be firmly (...) within the City, for in the same it was
expressed, the the King and his Barons were lovingly agreed. Fu^thermore in the
same Writ it was commanded, that if within the Precincts of the City were any
person or persons known, that would withstand the foresaid Ordinances and
Statutes, that all such should be attached and put in Prison, and their Goods
also attached for the King, till they knew his further Pleasure. Well had it
been for many great persons, if this agreement had lasted longer; but, like
other Worldly things, this new peace was also transitory. However here we meet
with another instance of the Cities Concern, of the Cities Power, of the Cities
Influence. 'Twas the Citizens concern to keep the Peace thus happily and
quietly made. 'Twas their Power you here find engaged to see to it. And their
Influence upon either party you may guess by the due care taken to inform them
of the late mutual Agreement. In these days of Misrule, and time of the Barons
residing in the City, we are given to understand, that many Robberies were
committed by diverse therein, and much harm done, but little corrected, they
were so born out and maintained by their Masters. Such is the too too common
effect of Civil broils. The Commons of the City were far out of Rule by the
incensing of riotous Persons, so that in the Assemblies and Courts kept at
Guild Hall, or other places, Worshipful men were little or nothing regarded,
and simple, indiscrcet persons carried away the voice.

As the City was in those days powerful, so the Lords seem well to have known
it, when, to obtain the more favor of the Citizens, they willed them to show
them, if they had any of their Liberties withdrawn, that they might again to
them be restored, and also to think of some new ones to their Weal and Profit,
and they would labor to the King to have them granted. Can any one desire
greater Evidence than Ocular Demonstration? The City had a great many good and
beneficial Liberties and Franchises already granted, to the Emulation and Envy
of many of her ill-willers. Yet here our own Eyes may easily certify us of a
large offer voluntarily made to her Citizens, by such as had Power to increase
them, had they had the discretion at that time to have made a good use of it.
For the Mayor having upon this kind offer assembled the Commons at Guild Hall,
and willed the Officers to devise such things as might be beneficial to the
City, they counselling together, are said to have made such a note of Statutes,
Provisions, and Ordinances, to their own singular Profit, and so prejudicial to
all other Foreign Merchants coming to the City, to all other Fairs, and Markets
of England, and the universal Weal of the Realm, that upon overseeing them the
Heads told them, they were neither lawful nor charitable, and such as they knew
would not be admitted. So common is it in too too many concerns for private
Interest to be brought up in the Van, while the public is left lagging behind,
as it were a loof off, in the Rear. The Heads of the City willing the Commons
to devise other Ordinances, their first being so uncharitably ordered, and
they,. I know not upon what account, nor upon whose Incitation, proving
refractory and refusing, both those and others, right necessary for the
Commonweal of the City, were rejected and put off, says my Author. For men to
go to logging of Bills, when they cannot otherwise hinder their passing, is a
known Practice.

After St. James's day we hear of the Barons departure from London toward
Windsor, where they turned out the Aliens, before placed therein by the King's
Son Edward, who thereupon, with other associates, rode to the King with
Complaints in their Mouths against the Barons, for spoiling them of their
Goods: But these being then put off by the King with a promise of Justice, till
more of his Council were with him, he, with other Attendants, sailed into
France, whence being returned after Michaelmas to London, there passed an
Inquest of Twelve Knights of Middlesex, sworn upon a Jury, between the Abbot of
Westminster and the City, for certain Privileges the Citizens of London
claimed within Westminster, where, by the said Jury, it was found before the
Chief Baron of the Kings Exchequer, that the Sheriffs of London, at those days,
might lawfully enter into the Town of Westminster, and all other Tenements,
that the Abbot had within Middlesex, and unto the Gate of the said Abbey, and
there to make Summons, and distrain, for lack of Appearance, all and every
Tenant of the said Abbot. It Is not now adays only that the Londone's stand so
strong for their Privileges, whatsoever some may think of it, as if out of
stubbornness and opposition. Their Forefathers were like-minded, and stood up
courageously in defense of their just Rights and Liberties against Arbitrary
Encroachers above Four Hundred years ago, Anno 1262. After this the former
Complaint of the Aliens, and others, was declared before the King and his Lords
in the Parliament at Westminster. This is the Term Fabian gives it, but whether
on the same account as he did before, when he expounded a Parliament by a
Council of Lords in the 43d Year, page I am not so certain as positively to
determine. Here the Chronicle tell us it was at last sentenced, (but by what
means and Inducements is not there set down) that the Barons should restore all
such Goods, as they and their Company had taken from all Persons before that
day, as well to Aliens as other men, both Spiritual and Temporal, and also that
such Menial Servants as should be daily in the Kings House, and about his
Person, should be such as the King would choose and admit himself: But the
dissenting Barons utterly rejected these Articles, whereupon the Fire of
Dissension was again kindled between the King and those his Lords.

In the 47th Year, by procurement of the Barons, we are told that the Commons
of London chose unto their Mayor for that Year Thomas Fiz Thomas, [Robert
Moumphere and Robert de Suffolk were Sheriffs] and without Counsel of the
Aldermen swore him at Guild Hall upon Simon and Jude's day, and made no
presentment of him the morrow following to the King, nor to the Barons of the
Exchequer, as had been the custom: For which we may easily suppose the King was
much discontented with the City. Whereupon the King perceiving the City would
take the Barons part, having caused his Son to seize Windsor Castle by a Train,
early in a Morning, a little before Christmas, he rode thither from
Westminster, whither shortly after came also many of the Lords that were upon
the King's party. As fast likewise the Lords and Knights on the Earl of
Leicester's side drew toward London: so that on either part was much People
assembled. In the mean time some well disposed Mediators endeavoring a Concord
between the King and his Lords, it was finally agreed by both parties, that all
matters concerning the foresaid Articles of the Statutes and Ordinances made at
Oxford, and afterward by the 12 Peers, should be referred to the French King,
to judge which should be held, and which not. Upon this Agreement were Copies
made of the said Statutes, with Letters showing the ^ffect of the former
Agreement, and sent unto Lewis the French King. Over sails the King, with his
S^n Edward, and others of his Council on one side: On the other were sent Sir
Peter de Mountford, and others, as so many Sollicitors for their mutual
Parties: So that the Statutes were strongly argued before the French King by
both sides. In the end, the French King Lewis, calling before him both Parties
on January the 24th, and sitting in Judgment, gave express Sentence, that all
and every of the said Statutes and Ordinances should be from that day forward
utterly void and set at naught, and all such Bonds and Promises, that the King
or any other had made for the maintenance of the same, should be annulled and
cancelled, and the King and all others, for any matter concerning those
Statutes, set at Liberty.

After this Sentence thus given, the King returned into England, and so to
London, February the 15th. This King Lewis is named a Saint, for that he was
not (I suppose) so bad as other Princes too too commonly are, or more probably
for some deeds of his pleasing to the Popish Clergy, as his sending to destroy
the (then accounted) Heretical Albigenses, his taking a Voyage once into the
Holy Land, and undertaking a second toward the same place at the Popes
request: For at that time the Holy War (as it is generally called) was cried up
in these Western parts of the World, as a high piece of Devotion. But whatever
esteem Lewis had got in the World, the Barons (it seems) continued not to have
the same Veneration for him, but were contrary wise much moved with his
Sentence, noting great Partiality in him, thus to disannul all the foresaid
Acts, which were at first made in Parliament, the King agreeing to them, and
had been variously confirmed, by the Kings Grant, his Oath, and manifold
Promises, together with a solemn Curse denounced against such as would attempt
in word and deed to break them. It may be 'twas the Fame of this King Lewis's
Goodness, that made the Barons consent to have him the Umpire, as one concerned
on neither party. But what could be expected in the Case? Could it be supposed,
that he, a King, would not favor his Brother King what he might, rather than
by confirming these Acts, pretended so prejudicial to all Royal Prerogative,
give Example to his own Subjects to require the like at his hands, or attempt
to compel him thereto by force? Had the Lords gotten an Umpire from among some
disinterested Subjects of some other Land, he perhaps would have adjusted the
business wholly in their favor. So hard had it been to have met with a just
Arbitrator in the case, who would not have declined to one or the other Party,
for fear nor favor.

King Henry having thus got a Verdict on his side, and the Barons noting
Partiality, and therefore refusing to stand to the Judgment, (though the
Chronicle intimates to us, that they had promised assuredly to abide the French
Kings Arbitration:) For King Lewis expressly excepting King John's Charter
before granted, the Barons persisted in defense of the Oxford Statutes, as
founded on that Charter. What then remains, but to commit all to the last
Decision of the Sword, and so the whole Arbitrament shall be cast more
immediately into the hands of Providence? Away from London go the Lords
Westward, into the Marches of Wales, where drawing to them great Power, they
war upon the Lands and Castles of Sir Roger Mortimer, to whose aid Edward the
King's Son coming, his People were distressed, and he himself almost taken. To
redress these grievances a new Parliament was appointed at Oxford, which Fabian
says never came to effect: Yet he mentions another Chronicle, which affirms
this Parliament to have been there kept, and that the King and his Lords parted
thence all at Discord. Besides the mutual Strength of People on either side,
The Barons had the Acts of Parliament made by the King, Lords, and Commons (for
of such I have elsewhere read these Assemblies were composed in those days) to
fight for, which to observe the King, and many others had been sworn, besides a
solemn Curse denounced against the Attempters to break them. The King with his
Party had the Popes Bull of Absolution, the Sentence of the Council of Lords at
Westminster, and the Judgment given on the Kings side by Lewis the French King
for their Incitement. Such then being the cause contended for, these being the
mutual advantages to strengthen either side, the difference is brought in the
Spring into the Field to be decided.

All things in a manner thus tending to War, the Barons drew toward London,
that is their Place of Rendezvous: where new Assurances by Writing indented was
made between them and the Commonalty of the City, without Consent of many of
the Rulers thereof. Whether they were swayed in their minds to the other side
by Reasons they carried in their Pockets, I find not, or thinking they had most
to lose, they feared to be the greatest Sufferers, if the chance of War should
fall cross, or else out of Envy and Emulation to the Commons, who had already
been entrusted with so much Power by the so often named Statutes, and were in
probability likely to get more, if the Barons should prevail, or at least keep
what they had gotten. Hence it is plain, that the Commons of the City were the
men that stood by the Lords in defense of the Parliament Acts: Many of the
Rulers seem not to have appeared. Wherefore the Commons, as men enraged, made
to themselves Two Captains, Thomas de Pywelden, and Stephen Bukkerel, whom they
named Constables of the City. At whose Commandment, by tolling the great Bell
of St. Paul's, all the City should be ready in Arms, to give Attendance upon the
said Captains.

About the beginning of Lent, the Constable of the Tower, Sir Hugh Le Spencer,
came with a fair Company of men at Arms into the City, and desired Assistance
of the forenamed Constables, who commanded the said Bell to be tolled. By means
whereof the People shut their Shops and came out in Arms in great Multitudes,
who, after Proclamation made that they should follow their Captains, without
knowledge what to do, or whither to go, followed them unto Thystleworth, beyond
Westminster, and there spoiled the Manor of the King of the Romans, (Richard
the King's Brother) setting it on Fire; and afterward with great noise and cry
returned unto London. This Richard, King of the Romans, appears to have been a
Mediator of Peace between the Two Parties, but after this outrage, what else
could be expected, but that he should become the Barons Enemy to the utmost of
his Power? Though it is commonly seen, that from War most come home by Weeping
Cross, yet there are still too too many found, that desire to fish in troubled
Waters. Would any, but such as were in Love with Blood and Wounds, have
counseled such a Fact as this, in the midst of Civil broils, thus to compel
the only Mediator of Peace, likely to prevail, to become a man of War, and
which was worse, an Enemy, a powerful Enemy, instead of a peaceable Friend?

In the time of these intestine Jarrs between Men of the same Country and
Religion, 'twas much if the Jews should have escaped free, who were strangers,
of different Rites and Customs, and so odious to the Common People. That they
did not escape the enraged Multitudes Fury, we find, by mention made of Five
Hundred of them said to be slain at one time in London, on Palmsunday week. The
occasion is related to be for that a Jew would have forced a Christian to have
given him more than Two Pence a Week for the use of Twenty Shillings. This
being the stinted Usury then permitted the Jews, by the King's Grant: According
to which rate they might take i^ any Sum lent, greater or lesser. A reasonable
man would have thought, this might have satisfied the greedy Minds of most
ordinary griping Extortioners, Eight Shillings Eight Pence by the Year in the
Pound, Forty three Pounds Six Shillings Eight Pence in the Hundred: Usury
unconscionable enough of any sense. While the Land stood thus divided into
Parties, the Jews felt the Peoples rage in the City, and the Country did not
altogether escape tasting the miseries of Civil Wars; King Henry by diverse
places came at length into Sussex, with a strong Power, whereof the Lords
hearing made preparation to go toward him.

Accordingly in the end of April, the Barons, with many of the Citizens in the
vaward, departed from London, taking their Journey toward the King, and
hearing he was at Jews with a great power, by common consent drawing up a
Letter, sent it in the name of all the Barons to the King: But the Answers were
so rough, and in such a style, that it plainly showed that the Sword could be
the only decider of the Quarrel, and final determiner of the Contest, so much
were their Minds exasperated each toward other, though of the same Nation and
Kindred.

The Barons well perceiving by these Answers, that there was no other way, but
to decide the Quarrel by dint of Sword, they went forward toward the King.
Wednesday May the 24th, 1263. is the day that may be writ in Red Letters, for
the great quantity of Blood spilt thereon, in the Battle fought at Jews
between the King and his Barons, wherein by the Will of Providence, the Victory
sell to the Barons, with such a total rout to the other Party, that they took
Prisoners the King, his Brother, his Son, with many other Noblemen, to the
number of Twenty five Barons and Banerets, above Twenty Thousand being slain,
according to my Author's Account. After this so complete a Victory, the other
Prisoners being sent elsewhere, the Barons kept the King, his Brother, and Son,
till they came to London. This was the place wherein they had found Shelter,
and had had such considerable Assistance from the Londoners, that there seemed
a kind of Obligation lying on them, and it implied somewhat of a Recompense due
to the City, there to show the Trophies of their Victory. Now we may easily
conclude, that the forenamed Statutes are to stand in full force even by the
Kings Consent. And so acccordingly we find a Grant made, and an Agreement, that
if any were thought unreasonable, they were to be corrected and amended by four
Noble Men of the Realm, Two of the Spiritualty and Two of the Temporalty: And
if the four accorded not, the Earl of Anjou and the Duke of Britain were to be
Judges in the case. To continue this accord the firmer, the King's Son, and his
Brother, were to remain the Barons Prisoners till it was completed. A
Parliament was also appointed to be held at London within a short space, though
my Author writes, that this never came to purpose. So it seems, that in those
elder times a Parliament was the Subjects desire, and as it were the last
Refuge, and means of Reconciliation, to establish Peace and quietness in the
Land.

Tuesday before Ascension-Day is the time named, whereon the acceptable news of
Peace were proclaimed between the King and his Barons in London, and next day
thither they came with the King, his Brother, and Son, and the Two Princely
Pledges were sent into safe Custody, first to the Tower, afterward to Dover
Castle. In the time of these civil Distractions, and before the Battle, we find
that the Wardens of the Cinqueports kept the Sea with Ships, that no Stranger
might enter the Land, to the Kings aid against the Barons. Sometime after the
Battle we hear of Soldiers coming in great numbers unto Dover, there to land:
But King Henry was induced to ride thither, with a great power, and force those
Strangers to go back again, and the Kings Brother sent Prisoner to Berkhamstead
Castle, till those Aliens were returned. It stands upon Record in my Author,
that he and the Queen had sent over the Sea for them. So that hence it had been
manifest, though the Relation of King John's Reign had not been extant, that it
is no late Device, nor new Practice, for Persons of Arbitrary Pretenses to call
in outlandish Soldiers, when they fear they cannot raise assistance enough at
home, in their own Native Country, to support and bring to effect their ill
intended designs. The Barons side stood firm for the Observation of the
Parliament Acts: The Kings party desired to have infringed them. The Barons
grew powerful and formidable, the other side seem fearful that they should not
be able to compass strength enough at home, suitable to their Designs and
desires, and therefore sent abroad. There being idle men enough to be had for
money in most places, Soldiers were waged, but there was a Sea to pass, (which
required much time, and a suitable Sail of Ships to waft them over,) and a
considerable strength lay in the way to intercept them, if they came not well
provided for an attaque. So that it was a day as it were after the Fair before
they came, and that was many hours too late, whereupon they were compelled to
return again without, and against their first Intent.

This is the inconvenience, some may think, the great advantage, others may
conclude of an Island's situation, that it cannot easily be overrun with
foreign Forces, as Lands upon the continent often are, and with more facility.
If the shooing of themselves and their Horses with Cork would do the feat, then
they might happen more easily to pass the Sea, but as things go in this Age of
the World much time as well as a great Navy is requisite to transport an Army,
though little or no oppositio^ be made. Yet how difficult would it be to
preva^^ where among One Million Two Hundred Thousand, One Million One Hundred
and Fifty Thousand are on one side, and Fifty Thousand on the other. i. e. In
Twenty four Twenty three parts against one part: What could it avail, if on
some other fine, neat pretense, a good store of Foreigners might possibly
happen to be introduced, suppose Fisty Thousand: Above Eleven to One would
still be great odds. If we should grant One Hundred Thousand could silently be
let in under another Notion, into how many little small Parcels must they be
minutely divided, at how many several Port^ must they arrive, what charge to
keep and maintain them, unless put upon present service? And yet there is still
hazard enough in the World, and to spare, One Million one Hundred and Fifty
Thousand against One Hundred and Fifty Thousands, to every man an opposite and
Ten-over: Odds sufficiently at Football, if in a lesser number. Were it not
for the Law of the Land, in how many places do you think the 9 Lay Sheaves would
not devour the Parsons Tenth Sheaf? England stands firm upon its old bottom of
Freedom; but France has had Experience more than enough of the aforesaid
truths. It Is well known the present French King keeps his poor enslaved
Subjects under with a strong Force, composed most of other Country Soldiers,
and by their assistance, with some other^ connivance, and the help of French
Money, is become the Terror of Europe. I doubt not but much of this his
present greatness sprung at first from a successful attempt made in his younger
days, to introduce foreign forces upon his less wary Nobility and Gentry, in
hehalf and by the Guidance of a great Minister of State, whom some of them had
desired to be discarded from sitting at the Helm of Government. Whereof his
present Majesty I believe had no very pleasing nor desirable Experience. 'Twas
in the time when Providence permitted our King to be injuriously kept out of
his right by an Usurper, that the French Nobles were urgent to have their King
exile Mazarine, and the better to effect it were ready to have appeared in
Arms: But their King in show granting their desires, (and it may be through the
mediation of our Gracious Prince who had too sad an Instance of his own to urge
from his Fathers unfortunate Fate) the Princes grew secure and laid aside their
combined strength: whereupon the exiled Mazarine comes out of Germany (so have
I heard) with a strong Army of many Thousands up to Paris, and then ordered
things at his own Pleasure, and the Kings. The deceived Princes could never
vindicate themselves since, and our, then almost friendless, King shortly after
thought good to leave the Country, though the Place of his Mothers Original,
lest he should have been bid to depart, and that disgusted Statesman (as may
be suspected) causes the K. to close with England's usurping Power, and desert
a poor distressed, overpowered Prince with no more regard to him or his, till
his Protestant (what if I had also added Presbyterian?) Subjects recalled him
to possess his Fathers Throne, wherein long may he live and flourish to the
Nations good, and his own continued Welfare.

An. 48. Thomas Fiz Thomas Mayor, Osbert Winter Phil, Tailor being Sheriffs,
The Lords of the Marches about Christmas assembled, and did much harm ^ the
Manours of the Earls of Leicester and Glocest^^ (the two noted Chiefs of the
Barons Party) thereabouts, which occasioned the King to ride shortly after to
Gloucester, where, by a Council there called, ^^ was enacted, that such of the
Lords, that did not come in and yield to the King by the Octaves of Hilary,
should be exiled. Let the question here be, whether these Lords, known to have
been of the K'^ Party, both before and after this Transaction, were guilty of
Treason or Disloyalty in not coming in (...) the King's Call, and yielding, as
the Barons party doub^less cordially desired, and with whom the K. was the^
personally present? Had they straightways obeyed, and come in all upon Summons,
the Barons had obtained their design; but how would the change succeeding have
been brought to pass, so much to the Courts advantage, and the other sides
prejudice? Where Is the politic Casuist, that can here slit a ha^ between loyal
and disloyal deeds, Obedience and Disobedience, the duty of subjection and open
ref^sal thereof? According to an Agreement there made* in the said Octaves a
Parliament was held at Westminster, where met (as Fabian has left upon Record)
the King with his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of the Land, to
begin that Parliament. Here was it enacted, the King being present, that he,
nor Edward his Son, nor none of them* should after that day grieve, nor cause
to be grieved, the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, the Barons, Banerets or
Knights, the Citizens of London, and Barons of the Five Ports, nor any other
Person o^ Persons of high or low Degree, that was upon the Party of the said
Earls, for any matter of displeasure done against the King and his Son Edward,
(...) any time before that day.

To uphold this, the King's Sworn before his Lords. After that was showed and
Read a Charter of Pardon concerning the said Cause, and a confirmation of the
Statutes of the Forest, with many other Acts and Statutes before granted by
the King. Here was an Act of Oblivion strong enough one would have thought to
have indemnified the offending Parties; but before the end of the Year we find
the Tide quite turned, through variance and difference arising between the Two
Thiefs of the Barons Party, and then the King's side prevailing Casheers what
was done before, Oaths held them not, and another Parliament ^^peals and
disanuls the former Pardon. So that the (...) Pardoned Offenders soon became
the (reputed) Guilty Prisoners upon the old Scores, Cancelled and forgiven as
was thought a little before. The longest Sword will make and mar Laws at
pleasure, let people say what they will. This Party's Might commonly bears
down, what the other Party calls his Right. Edward the King's Son having
likewise Sworn to perform the promises, which the King had before made in
Parliament, was delivered at liberty, and the other Pledge his Cozen, upon
assurance made ^^ abide in the King's Court, and not depart without license of
the King, and some of the Barons. What care do the Barons seem here to have
taken, to ^^rengthen and confirm their Party against any future ^^^erclaps? How
sollicitous do they appear to have ^een to prevent an after-Reckoning, and all
Tenden^ies thereunto? Nay, how conformable to them, did the King and his Son
show themselves likewise ^herein? Witness the many Instruments and Bonds ^ade
by them, for the performance of Covenants and Pactions before agreed on. And
yet all was soon destroyed and brought to none effect: One of the (...) Chiefs
helping Penelope-like to unravel the Web, they had been so long a Weaving*

The Ordering the former Statutes made at Oxford* which had hitherto so fast
united them, was the occasion of dissension between the Two Potent Earls ^^
Leicester and Gloucester, to the ruin of the Baron's Party; the difference arose
(as Stow tells us) betwee^ them, for that Leicester not only kept the King an^
others as Prisoners, but also took to himself the Revenues of the Kingdom,
which it seems should have been equally divided amongst them. So that it wa^
the Golden-Apple, that seems to have occasioned th^^ so fatal Discord. The King
indeed and his Lords labored for an Union, but it fell out well for the King's
side, and ill for the others, that they succeeded not. This happened between
Easter and Whits^^tide. In the W^^tsun-Week, we hear of Edward the King's Son
secretly departing from the Court at Hereford without License, and associating
himself wi^^ the Earl of Gloucester and other Lords at Chester, from whence he
hasts to Gloucester, breaking the Bridges a^ he went, that he might not be
followed, till he had Assembled his Power. The Earl of Leicester was to^ wife
not to guess at his Intent, and therefore in all ha^ sends to his Son to
Assemble his Forces. Simon his So^ with his Forces Assembled, draws toward
Winchest^^ and was at first kept out by the Citizens, because the^ knew not
whether he came as the King's Friend, an^ for that they had also received a
Letter from Edwa^^ to that purport. But it was not long e're the Ci^^ was
yielded, and then the Castle Besieged, after th^^ the City had been spoiled,
and many of the Je^^ therein Inhabiting Slain. They were so odious generally to
the People, that they should be sure to have their share to the purpose in the
public Calamity if the Commons might have their Will. The Papist^ after all
their discovered Plots, known Practices, an^ destructive Principles, are not in
a vast degree much more hateful to the generality of the English Nation in
these Days, than where the griping Jews in those Elderly Times.

At Kenelworth the Baron's Party received the first ^^ow under this Simon,
where they were shamefully defeated by Edward and his Host, and many Eminent
Prisoners taken without the shedding of much Blood. At E^yshum in
Worcestershire were the Barons disc^mfited, with such a total overthrow, and
the destruction of so many Men of Note on that side, that ^is no wonder that
their Interest among the People so visibly decayed for the future, and in time
was fully lost. Soon after this Victory the King and his Son Edward met, by
whose Authority, the Prisoners then in hold were released, and many others
accused, and put in for them. Not long after was held a Parliament at
Winchester, where by Authority of the same, the Statutes and Ordinances before
made at Oxford were Repealed, and all Bonds and Writings before made by the
King, or any other, Cancelled and Broken, and all such as had favored the
Barons, disinherited. A Rout indeed. A Rout first to the Men that would have
had the Laws have been kept, and then a Rout to the Laws themselves, to
Parliament Acts and Statutes. So destroy first of all the Protestant Men and
Women, the Subjects of Religion, and then the Protestant Religion falls of
course. What could it at that time avail the defeated Party, to plead a former
Obedience to the Power then Regnant, since the present Powers were otherwise
resolved? If the Parliament in Being will have Obedience paid to a former
Parliament esteemed Treason, who dare gainsay it? Little boots it the poor weak
Beast to cry the Bunch in his Forehead is no Horn, when the more powerful Lion
says it is. After these Parliament Transactions, we hear of the King's re^^ming
into his hands all grants before made and give^ to any Person. After his Sons
Victory the King calls not a Parliament at Westminster, least possibly it might
have been over awed by the City of London, but assembling it at a place far
enough distant, and things having there been carried according to the Courts
intent and desire, now have at London.

Accordingly, after the Parliament was ended, we read of King Henry's coming to
Windsor with a great Power, intending (as the Fame then went) to destroy the
City, for the great Ire and Displeasure he had unto it. We need but guess to
know, with what a wonderful fear the Mayor and Aldermen were th^n stricken at
this Report. Yet we are told that many of the Commons were in full purpose to
have defended the City against the King. So it seems there we^^ then many and
diverse opinions among them. The City being in those days Inhabited with Men of
many Nations, who were then, according to Fabian, admitte^ for Citizens. At
last the Citizens condescended to make a supplication to the King, and send it
by some Religious Person. Many are said to be sent by sundry Persons; but to
little avail: The King being so grievously incensed by some of his Counsel
against them, that he would not look upon their Supplications, and if any spoke
in their behalf, he soon would make such countenance, that even Men in his
Favor feared to speak for them. Now was the time for their Ill-willers to vent
the utmost of their Spleen against this Honorable City, formetly their Terror,
and hops to complete their full Revenge by working its Destruction. We doubt
not but Men of Arbitrary desires have always hated such sree constituted
Corporate Towns and Cities, and have little reason to believe, but that there
are Men of the like ill Principles and Practices still alive in the World, who
would heartily rejoice in their Minds to meet with the like opportu^^ty to work
out their corrupt designs. Have you never heard of such a saying, as that the
Corporations will prove England's Destruction? Out of what Mint do you think this
come^? Where was it first forged, but in some such men's Brains? We now look
upon one of these Corporations, as one of the principal Bulwarks of the
Protestant Religion, and the English Liberty: And that it may long so continue,
in defense of their just Privilege, and true Religion, in spite of all
Arbitrary endeavors and Popish design^, is the hearty Prayer and Desire (I
doubt not) of every good Protestant and Loyal Englishman. While the cautionary
Protestant Towns in France stood firm and fix, and uninjur'd in their just
Liberties and Privileges; how gloriously, and with what safety did the
Protestant Religion flourish in that Land? But when through the Force and
Violence of Arbitrary Pretenders, and treacherous connivance of some corrapt
English Statesmen, Rochel was reduced in the last age under absolute power,
what foundation was thereby laid for the Protestants future Ruin, and present
greatness of the French Monarchy? How well the Papists designs have there
succeeded, since the utter subversion of the Protestant Towns, is not unknown
to their Neighbors: Such sad Reports have not long since pierced our English
Ears of the Barbarous usages the Protestants there have lately undergone,
whereof some sorrowful Spectacles may have possibly presented themselves of
late to some of our Eyes. What further Progress the Jesuits may happily make in
their cursed designs, by sending into England bloody Papists, in the form of
distressed Protestants; We have but too just Cause to fear. Especially if all
be true, that has been Reported, of the going of some of these suspected
Strangers to a Popish Habit^tion, and of others being seen going to Mass. How
well would it be for the Land, were all these Report^ undoubtedly false, and
our Fears, Jealousies and Suspicions, altogether causeless.

When the Citizens Supplications were thus rejected at Court, the History tells
us, that they were counseled by their Friends to make a Writing, and Seal it
with their Common-Seal, whereby they should offer to put themselves wh^lly in
the King's Grace and Mercy, touching their Lives and Goods. This we may easily
suppose, much more Irksome, than a bar^ Surrender of their Charter, yet this
was at length done, and Eight Persons of the City, who had Friends at Court
chosen and sent toward Windsor; But up, on the way encountering with Sir Roger
L^yborn, on^ of the Kings Knights, he turned them unto the City* Riding with
them till he came near it, and then departing from them Rode upon the back side
of the Town unto the Tower. But at his departing from them, he willed them, to
warn the Mayor with certain of the City to meet him to morrow at Berki^^
Church, standing near unto the Tower. Upon their meeting next morning, Sir
Roger, after a long preamble, showed them the Kings grievous Displeasure, which
he bare toward the City, and the means that had been used by their Friends, to
obtain Grace for it. In fine he expressed, that no Grace for them might be had,
except they would by their Common-Seal bi^^ themselves fully and wholly to
stand at the King'^ Grace, and to put in his Mercy their Lives and Goods* This
being in the end granted by the Citizens, and the foresaid writing delivered to
Sir Roger, with entreaty that he would be a good mean for them to the King* He
departed upon the morrow to the King, and returned again in Six Days, and
willed the Mayor and Aldermen to meet him again at the foresaid Church. There
he showed them, that the King* by great Instance of their Friends, had received
their writing, and would f^^st, for the beginning of the content of his mind*
That all the Chains, which stood in every Street and ^^ne's and within the
City, should be loosed from their Posts, and the Posts also drawn out of the
Earth, and all be brought into the Tower So belike upon apprehensi^^ of great
danger, to set up Posts and Chains in the (...) an ancient Custom* He also
further ordered, That thi^ being done, the Mayor with about Forty of the (...),
should the Day following be at Windsor, to (...) the Grant of their Writing*
And that they ^ight come and go in safe and sure wise, he delivered them the
Kings Letter and Seal for the term of Four Days.

All this being done, the Mayor with other Person^ were ready at Windsor on the
morrow, being Sunday* (...) One of the Clock, ar^ tarried there till Four; At
which season the King coming from his Disport, (as says my Author) enters the
Castle without counte^ance or casting his Eyes upon the Londoners. The king and
his People being entered, the Londoners would have followed, but they were
warned to abide without* Then in short time after the King caused a
Proclamation to be made, that no man of high or low degree should make any
sayings of displeasure or ^uarrel to the Londoners. In the Evening Sir Roger
and another Knight came to them, and brought them into the Gastle, and said,
The Kings pleasure was not to speak with them that Night; And after delivered
them to the Constable of the Castle, who Lodged them all that Night in a large
Tower, to their small Cheer and worse Lodging: Upon the morrow being Monday,
toward Night, they were taken out of the Tower, and delivered to the Bailiff of
the Castle, and Lodged by his Assignment, except these five Persons, viz.
T^^mas Fizt Thomas Mayor, Michael Tony, Steven Bukker^^ Thomas Pywellyson, and
John D^flete. These five (...) the King given to his Son Edward, at whose
commandment they remained in the said Tower long ^^ter, notwithstanding the
King's safe Conduct to (...) before made. What became then of the King's wor^*
But who durst oppose a waking Lions. The (...) Hunter in the fable liked not to
deal roughly wi^^ him, till his long Teeth were broken out, and his (...) cut
off. When, upon the bruit of Queen Mary'^ (...) with Child, King Philip of
Spain her Husband (...) to be chosen the Child's Guardian, if the (...) should
Decease, and offered the Parliament great ^^surances and Bonds of Security for
his redelivery (...) the Kingdom at the appointed time, that Gentlem^^ showed
himself no Fool; who, when the assuranc^ were likely to find acceptance, stood
up and inq^^^ed who should (...) the Bond; And the Parliame^^ enough approved
him, when they immedintly the^^ upon rejected the King's specious offers. It Is
very d^^advantagious, and often injurious to the Weak, to (...) making of
bargains with the more Powerful, who (...) strong enough to break their
Promises and Covena^^ with Impunity, or keep them but even as they pleas^* When
the tidings of the usage of the Mayor and the rest at Windsor came to London;
whereas many (...) fear had absented themselves before, upon this new^ many
more conveyed away themselves and their good secretly into diverse parts of
England, so that many of them are said never to have returned after.

In the 49th. Year, November the 6th. We find tha^ the King came to
Westminster, and shortly after gave to diverse of his Houshold-Servants, near
about sixty Houses and Households within the City, so that the Owners were
compelled to redeem their Houses and Households, with all the goods in them, or
else to depart and suffer such Persons to enter to whom the and Houses were
given. This grant is said to have ^^^ended likewise to all the Lands,
Tenements, Goo^^ (...) Chattels, which the said Citizens had in any other
^^^ces of England. Riches have often made Persons (...) singled out for
offenders, while the poor Man ^^ the mean time scapes free, few envying him his
Pove^ty. After this was (...) Constable of the Tower ^^de Custos or Guardian of
the City, who chose (...) Adrian and Walter Hervy Citizens to be Bailiffs (...)
him, and to him to be accountable to the King's (...)* Then took the King
pledges of the best Men's (...) of the City, that (...) peace should be surely
kept (...) the same. These were put into the Tower, and (...) kept at their
Parents cost. Shortly after (...) Labor and S^it made, the foresaid Londoners,
^^ the keeping of the Bailiff of the Castle of Windsor, (...) delivered and
came to London, except (...), viz. Richard Bonaventure, Simon De'Had^st^k,
William De Kent, and William De Gloucester, who with (...) other five before
excepted were still kept in the Tow^r of Windsor. Then daily Suit and Labor
wa^ made to the King, to have his Gracious Favor, and ^o know his Pleasure,
what fine he would have of the City for their Transgressions, and Displeasure
by them ^o him done. The former Transactions seem to bea^ a Tendency hereunto.
The Citizens were prevailed upon to resign up themselves, their Lives and
Goods, into the King's hands* submitting all to his Mercy, that a good large
fine might be the easier levied of them, and the Nation the better made to
believe, that the City was well dealt with for paying no more, when as the King
might have seized upon all, they having surrendered in a manner wholly upon
discretion. To what else tend the many preparatives before rehearsed, but to
make this bitter Pill go down, (...) smoother and quieter with them? The Book
^^quai^ts ^^ that the King asked 40000l. and (...) stood at ^0000 Marks* I But
the City alleged (...) themselves, that the poor Commons of the City, (...) of
many were gone away, were the Trespassers, (...) that the best of the City by
these riotous Person were robid and spoil^^ and had lost a great part o^ their
Substance in this (...) some time, by the R^vers of the Sea; as the Wardens of
the five Ports and others. For these and many other considerations (...)
Citizens besought the King, of his most Gracious (...) your and Pity, to take
of them as they might ^ear.

This matter thus, depending, the King depart^^ (...) Westminister to
Northampton, having a little (...) his departure Ordained Sir John Lynd, and
M^* John (...) Clerk to be Guardians of the City and Tow^^ they ^eing named in
the King's Writing, (...) Stewards of the City* Upon the Day after the King was
gone, these Two Stewards sent for Tw^^ty Four of the most notable Men of the
City, an^ warned them to appear the Day following before the King's Council at
Westminster. At their appeara^^^ it was shown unto them by Sir Roger Leyborn,
that t^^ King's mind was, That they should have the Rule o^ the City in his
absence under the foresaid Senescha^^ and for to see good Rule kept in the
City, they should be sworn there before his Council. They were there* upon
sworn and countermanded unto the City. The City's fine was inagitation till
about Christmas, (...)* End was made with the King, by such friends a^ the City
had about him, for the Sum of 20000 Marks for all transgressions and offenses
by them before done, some Persons excepted, whom the King had given to his Son
Edward, being those before named kept in the Tower of Windsor. For the payment
of this Sum at Days by agreement set, where Sir. (...) and Mr. Robert Wareyn
Clerk assigned to take (...)* After Surety by them received, and sent to (...)
King at Northampton* the King sent immediately (...) to the Citizens a Charter
under his Broad (...) may be seen in Eabian my Author in these (...).

(...) needless to make many comments (...) upon this affair. Through the whole
it is ^^^ifest, that the City was of considerable Power and (...), so that the
King thought not good to exaspe^^^ the Citizens too much, least evil should
have (...) of it. To make a Bridge of Gold for a flying (...) is no mean
Policy. Doubtless it was well (...) Court that they used not the (...)
violence, (...) Baron's Party was not wholly destroyed as yet in (...) hand,
though it was very much crushed* How (...) the whole City joined therewith,
might have (...) poised, if not turned the Scales, had she been (...) ^ar^hly
dealt with, I rather crave leave to (...) the Readers consideration, than
hastily presume (...). It Is certain enough, that within less than (...) Years,
the Cause was in great likelihood to have (...) revived to purpose, had not
convenient course (...) taken to ^ush it a sleep again, without rashly
^^^ceeding to the highest extremities, as you may find (...) the sequel of the
History. After the aforesaid (...) was received by the Citizens, the pledges in
the (...) of London, and the Four last mentioned to be (...) in the Tower of
Windsor were delivered. The (...) renam'd Stewards were also discharged, and
the (...) chose of themselves for Mayor, William Fiz (...), and for Sheriffs
Thomas de la Found, and Grego^^ de Rokis^y, as Fabi^n acquaints us. For
Levying of (...) foresaid Fine were set as well Servants, and Cove^^nt-men, as
Householders, and many refused the Liberties of the City to be quit of that
charge* (...) which we may give some part of a guess at the (...) of the fine,
what a considerable summ^ (...) marks was in those days, before the ^^dies were
(...) into Europe, some hundreds of years.

This controversy with London being thus (...) toward an end, the King had
leisure to mind (...) suppressing the remains of the Baron's Party. (...) de
Mountford upon certain conditions was (...) be at large in the Kings Court, and
so (...) a Season. But when the King was come to London* suddenly departed to
Winchelsea, where he accomp^nied with the Rovers of the Sea, till after some
(...) taken he departed from them into France, and (...) himself into the
Service of the French King. So (...) an end of the Potent Earl of Leycester's
Family in E^^land: This Powerful Earl bid fair for the Rule of (...) whole
Kingdom, but had he revived the Battail^ (...) a Conqueror, how much further he
(...) have gone, I may think but not positively (...) mine.

Another Act of the Kings this year, in order to (...) total rooting out of the
Barons remains, was his ^^ing a Seige to Kenelworth-Castle with a mighty (...),
but this proved a task not quickly at an end. Now (...) time comes to revenge
old slights and neglects. (...) sides Strangers prepared to come over into
Engl^^^ the Queen had also purchased a curse of the (...) (a woman's aid) to
accurse all the Barons, their (...) and helpers; and Commissions were directed
to (...) Bishops of England to execute, but they for fear (...) the Barons, are
said to have denied, and deferred (...) Execution and Sentence of the said
curse. Wherefo^^ she made new labor to the Pope, and had it gran^^^ that the
said Bishops should be corrected for their di^^bedience. Whereupon Octobon the
Pope's Legate, (...) Council by him and the Clergy held this year at Paul's
^^ch in London, suspended those Bishops, and sent (...) to Rome to be absolved
of the Pope. A pretty (...) to go nine Miles with Waltham's calf to Suck a
(...).

In the 50th year about Christmas was Kenelworth (...) yielded, after near half
a years Siege, upon (...) of life, Limb, Horse, Arms and all things (...) in
the Castle to the defendants belonging, and (...) to carry them away, and not
to be disinherited (...) is it any wonder, that they had such (...) granted
them, if that be true, which Stow relates, (...), that at the King's coming to
besiege the Castle, (...) force was so great, and those in the Castle so (...)
daunted at their Enemies presence, that they (...) ^pen their Gates, and never
closed them day no^ (...), and come whosoever would, they came to their (...)* Thus
you see the King found it no easy matter (...) to suppress the remainders,
though he had (...) power'd the heads of the Baron's party. About (...) were
the Wardens of the five Ports reconciled to (...) King by favor of Edward the
King's Son. Observe (...) by the way his policy. In his Father's time he (...)
to crush that power, which might have (...) him in his own Reign, and having
pretty well (...) it, he after seems a pretender to Popularity, (...) mediating
with his Father in behalf of many, that ^ddressed themselves to him for
reconciliation. It much ^ails to apply our selves to a fit Intercessor. So have
known a Stepmother, when requested, prevail with (...) Father her Husband in
her Son in Law's behalf, (...) he himself could not.

The Conditions of this reconciliation of the Barons ^^que Ports are not
unworthy of the remark. We (...) that in Anno. 47. these Wardens of the five
Ports (...) the Sea with Ships, that no Strangers should enter the Land to the
King's Aid. In 48, we are told (...) they robbed and spoild all men that they
might (...) sparing neither English Merchants nor others, (...) which preys, as
the Common Fame-went, the (...) of the Land had a good part. In 49. we find
(...) Londoners alleging for themselves, in mitigation (...) the great Fine
required of them, that they had (...) great part of their Substance by the
Rovers of (...) Sea, among whom are named the Wardens of (...) Cinque Ports.
And yet notwithstanding all these (...) Harms done, they are Recorded to have
had all (...) former Privileges confirmed to them, and (...) was Granted, That
if any Englishman, or (...) would Sue for Restitution of Goods, by them (...)
taken, or for the Death of any of their Friends ^^fore Slain, that all such
Complaints should (...) Sued in their Courts, there to have their (...)
determined, and not elsewhere. What great Assurance could these Barons desire
for their own ^^curity? They might well promise themselves imp^nity, when they
were in such fair probability to (...) their own Judges in their own Cause,
unless we (...) suppose Juries were to be chosen elsewhere. (...) we might in
good reason, that the King would (...) to such Terms of Accommodation, had we it
not upon Record, that the common Fame at that Day ran, (...) the said Wardens
of the Five Ports had then the D^minion of the Sea: Whereupon the King was
after sort compelled to follow their Pleasures. When Man is to take an
unpleasant Potion, after he (...) drunk up the greatest part thereof, it not
rarely ha^pens, that the Remains in the bottom are harder (...) get down than
was all the rest.

About the Feast of Philip and Jacob we hear of (...) King's holding a
Parliament at Northampton^ (...) which were confirmed the old Franchises and
Libert^^^ by the King's Progenitors before Granted in the City ^f London, with
a new Grant for the Shire of Mid^lesex. It Is good to make things as sure as we
(...) this Parliament were likewise disinherited many Noblemen of the Land,
who before-time had taken the Barons Party. For which cause they accompa^^ed
together, Robbed in diverse parts of the Land, ^ook Lincoln and spoiled it, and
after Ransomed many of the Rich Burgesses of the Town: And taking the ^sle of
Ely, so strengthened it, that they held it long (...).

Anno 51, At the choosing of the Mayor of London, ^ Controversy arose between
the Rulers and Com^ons of the City. Wherefore by advice of the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen Sir Roger Leyborn (a Courtier plain enough by his Actions related
before) with others ^ame to Guild Hall, being Armed under their Gowns, and upon
Friday following Alhallon day, called the Commons to the Election of the new
Mayor. How ^^ee was this Election likely to be, whither men came ^ecretly Armed
to assist their Party? Fabian tells us that the best of the City gave the
Nomination to Aleyn ^^wch, and diverse of the others cried upon Thomas (...)
Thomas, at that time Prisoner in Windsor Castle, therefore the said Sir Roger,
with the Assistance of ^he Mayor and others, took those Persons, and sent
^^emun to diverse Prisons. So that what they could not ^o well get by fair
means, some seem resolved to ob^ain by force. And yet it is not unlikely, but
they ^ould be ready enough to bear People in hand that ^uch was a free
Election. The Act against Disturbance (...) Free Elections (wherein the King
commands upon Forfeiture, that no man by force of Arms, nor by ^alice or
menacing, shall disturb any to make Free ^lection) was not at that time
dreaded, as not being (...) yet enacted (for it is placed in the third of
Edward the First, the following King) wherefore the Dist^^bers might not then
think they had such cause (...) having the Court also on their side, as (...)
must have had since, as soon as ever they should (...) acted so imprudently, as
to bring themselves (...) the la^h of that standing Law. Observe we here (...)
Power and Esteem, that usually accompanie^ (...) Mayoralty of this Honorable
City, since that (...) Faction were for choosing one of their own (...) Shall I
further remark upon the whole of this (...) what Party in a Nation it is, that
sticks not at (...) nor force to effect their Designs, when fair (...) is too
weak to compass them? But who will (...) me that this will not be offensive?
Therefore to (...) In this Year the Gentlemen, who kept the (...) Ely, and
lived there like Outlaws, broke out (...) times and did much harm in Norfolk,
Suffolk, (...) Cambridge Shire, took Norwich, and after spoiling (...) carried
away with them many of the rich men, (...) ransomed them at great sums of Money.
This (...) occasion, the story says, to Thieves and other (...) disposed People
to do many other hurts and (...) in diverse places of the Land, and the blame
was (...) to those Gentlemen. Then the Pope's Legate labou^^ with the King,
that those disinherited Gentlem^^ might purchase their Lands of him by Fine and
(...) some. Whereupon it was agreed that they (...) have their Lands again at
five Years value, some (...) excepted, and others of small Possessions to (...)
Fined at the discretion of the King's Council. (...) this took no conclusion
says my Author.

Anno 52. Aleyn Sowch being Mayor, Thomas ^^sing^ and Robert de Cornehyll
Sherists, we read of another broyl beginning, which was like to have crea^^ no
little disturbance in the Land, had it not (...) timely appeased, and brought
to an end by the inte^cession of wise Mediators For Gilbert de Clare, Earl
(...) Gloucester, formerly a powerful Man among the, B^rons Party, by reason of
difference and disgust ^^ising between him and the no less Potent Earl of
(...), of the same Party, having turned to the King's side, adding to it such
considerable strength, that it soon over powered the weakend Barons; but ^^w
upon what occasion Fabian expresses not, he refused the King, and gathered to
him a strong (...) in the Marches of Wales. To him likewise drew* Sir John
Eyvile, and others of the disinherited (...). So that after Christmas; he comes
with a ^ear Host near unto London. When the Mayor and Aldermen of the City were
aware of the Earls ^^ming with so strong a Power, and not knowing (...) he were
the Kings Friend, they shut the (...) against his Fore-Riders. And for that
neither (...) King, nor any of his Council were then near (...) City, they went
unto the Legate, at that time ^^dged in the Tower, and required his Council,
^hether they should suffer the Earl to enter into the ^ay or not, whereunto the
Legate answered, that (...) thought not the contrary, for the knew well that
(...) was the Kings true Subject and Friend. Not (...) after came a Messenger
from the Earl to the ^ayor, to have License to pass through the City (...)
Southwark, where he intended to lodge with (...) People: which was granted, and
so the Earl ^^ssed through the City, and was lodged in South^ark: To him came
shortly after by Surry-side, (...) John Eyvile, with a great Company. Then the
^ayor kept the Gate of the Bridge shut, watch^^g it daily with armed Men, and
every night (...) the Drawbridge to be drawn, and the Waterside daily and
nightly to be watched with Men in Arms. In short time after the Legate and the
Earl agreed in such wise, that the Earl by his advice was suffered with certain
of his People to be lodged in the City: By means whereof he daily drew more and
more of his People into it, so that finally many things were ordered by him,
and many of the Commons took his part against the Mayor and Aldermen.

The Commonalty of the City had had great Power put into their hands by the
Statutes made at Oxford, as appears before in the Meeting of the Fol^moot at
Paul's Cross; they had been lately fined, after the Barons overthrow, for their
standing in defense of those Parliament-Acts, and but the last year had been
disturbed by the Mayor in their Election of a new Mayor, by force of Arms, and
therefore now we may believe it all remembered* What, shall we loose so
seasonable an opportunity, (we may suppose they might then think) if not to
regain our former power, yet at least to vindicate our selves against future
affronts? Here we may note not a little of the Earls policy. After he had
gathered together his People, he comes away to London, and getting leave to
pass through it (...) part of his Forces, he settles himself as near the City,
as he might, in Southwark, and then by degrees gets himself and his Power into
the City* hoping doubtless to find a Party therein willing to second him, which
hopes we perceive by the sequel were not ill grounded. Is not this a plain
instance of the Cities Power, Esteem, and Influence in these days? If any can
produce plainer proof hereof, let them as soon as they please. I think here
(...) Mathematical Demonstration: matter of Fact not of Fancy.

In Easter week we read that the Earl took the Keys of the Bridge, and of the
Gates, from the officers of the City, and delivered them to such as pleased
him, and received into the City many of the disinherited Perfons, and gave them
free liberty to pass the Bridge at all hours of the day and night. Of all this
the Mayor sent word to the King, who then was gathering of this Power in
Norfolk, and made hasty speed toward London. In the mean time the Earl with
his Company made Bulwarks and ^^^bicanes between the Tower and the City,
casting (...) and Trenches in some places thereof, and forf^ited it wonderfully
says my Author. Then many of the Citizens, fearing a new Insurrection,
deparred from the City as secretly as they could, whose goods the Earl seized
to his own use, or suffered his men to spoil them at his pleasure. Then the
Commons f^^getting their late punishment, or rather too much remembering it and
intending revenge, without fear or dread of their King took certain of the
Aldermen, and cast them into Prison, sequestring their Goods, and spoiling much
thereof: And thereupon ran to Guild Hall, and chose for their Mayor, (...), or
Ruler of the City (take which name you please) Sir Richard de Culworth Knight,
and for Bailiffs Robert de Lynton and Roger Marshal, and discharged the old
Mayor and Sheriffs. These the fruits of Civil Broils. This being done, we read
in the next place, that all such Prisoners, that were in Newgate, Ludgate and
Criplegate, or in any other Prisons within the City, because of the Baron's War
before passed, were delivered and set at liberty. Thus each Party when in
Power, strives to weaken and suppress their opposites, and strengthen the^^ own
side. What avails Laws, Customs, and Ordinances in the midst of Armies? How
suddenly ^ how unexpectedly is the wheel turned? who kno^^ how soon the
Barons War had been anew revived had not Powerful Mediators interceded to the
p^^vention of more blood shedding. The Oxford S^^tutes stood in deed repealed
by the Winchester Parliament, but who can divine what new devices the wit of
men backed with Power might in time ha^^ found out, to retreive their late
overthrown cause had not Providence so disposed men's minds to peaceable
Councels, as to bring these new troubles to (...) quicker end.

When the Legate beheld all this Discord, we are told, he repented him of his
former Counce^ given to the Mayor, which we may easily belie^^ without looking
for any proofs thereof. For the Legate might well think himself accused in man^
men's thoughts, as one of the occasional Causes (...) much of this disorder,
though it may be they mig^^ not be so uncharitable, as to believe him any
othe^^ then an accidental not designed Causer thereof. (...) seems by the
History to have endeavored somewh^^ to vindicate his Reputation, when he saw
he could not reform the Earl, by threatening him with (...) Censures of the
Church, and to accurse him as the Disinherited were. For that was always one o^
the best Weapons the Popish Clergy were most de^trous at. If any grievously
displeased them, no ma^ter what the cause was, good or bad, allowable by the
Divine Laws or not, to Curse him with Bell, Book and Candle, was their usual
accustomed Practice. Whosoever believes me not, let him go to the
Martyrologies, and see whether he can then believe his (...) eyes. Yet I do not
find (let the instance here (...)) that this their Cursing had so general an
(...) upon all men, as they would have had it, (...) they got it well backed by
the Civil Magistrates ^^thority. Therefore their common use was, as (...) had
opportunity, to inch out the Spiritual (...) with the Temporal. What did many
value (...) have their Souls given away to the Devil, if they (...) keep their
Bodies out of Prisons from being ^^livered over to the Secular Power by the
Clergy, (...) seem thus as it were by craft to call the Ma^istrate the Devil? A
plain case, when Men to exalt ^^eir own Worldly grandeur, or out of Animosity
to ^^venge a particular private peek or quarrel, under ^^^tence of Religion,
usurp a Power over Men's (...) and Consciences, which belongs not at all to
(...), or else turn the Edge of it to a use quite ^^^trary to the Primitive
Institution, it quickly (...) its Ancient Vigor and Esteem, and from a ^^error
it becomes a scorn to persons of understan^^^g, able enough to discern men's
wicked preva^^cation from true Religion. Were it not for the (...) De
Excommunicato c^piendo in some Cases Men (...) little value Excommunication, or
look upon (...) otherwise than a Scarecrow to fright Children and Fools,
what is hanging, were it not for choak^^g.

To proceed after this menace and threat of the (...), we are told that he
commanded Divine Service to be said without Note, and the Church doors to be
shut in time thereof, and that no Bell should be rung unto it, to the Intent
that the disinherited, who stood accursed, should not enter the Churches to
hear it. Upon three Weeks after Easter we hear that the King came to Ham, a few
miles from London, whether likewise came the Legate soon after. Then the King's
host made diverse assaults upon the City, but it seems with little or no hur^to
the Town, it was so strongly fortified. My Author makes mention of Guns and
other Ordinances, but I question whether he speaks not rather after the
fashion of the Age he lived in, than after the true use of arms in those more
elderly times. For the first invention of Gunpowder by Bertholdus Swart, the
G^rman Monk, is placed by Chronologers a considerable time after.

In this time of variance the Legate upon his Party, and the King of Romans
upon the other party* for alliance between him and the Earl of Gloucester,
labored so to the King, that Peace was spoken of During the Treaty the
Soldiers lying in Southwarke made many Robberies in Surry and other places.
Neither did the King's Palace at Westminister escape, for we hear that some of
them rowd over thereto, and Spoiled it, drunk up the Kings wine, brake the
glass of the Windows wasting and destroying other Necessaries thereunto
belonging, and came likewi^^ sometimes into London and Robbed there. Disorderly
unruly Soldiers little regard any one, unless they be kept under Strict
discipline. Sacred or Propha^^ much the sameto many of them. Some of these
^avenous Spoilers being taken, are recorded to have had a severe Punishment
inflicted on them, through the Earl of Derby's means, whose. Body or C^g^zance
they bare viz. bound hands and legs, put into a Sack and ^o cast into Thames.
About (...) day was the Peace between the King and the Earl c^^cluded. After
this Conclusion the Earl removed out of the City and was lodged again in
Southwark. The King entered the City the Sunday before Mids^^er day according to
the Book: And forthwith the King's Proclamation were made through it, of the
peace made between the King and the Earl. Af^^r was liberty given to the
disinherited Persons of Eleven Days respit to shift for themselves, either to
depart to such Places, where they might be in some Surety, or else to agree to
the former Composition made by the Legate, viz. To pay the Fifth part of the
Yearly Value of their Lands, certain Persons only excepted, as is before
related. As touching the Earl, and such other as before were not disinherited,
together also with the Citizens of London, they were clearly to be forgiven and
Pardoned. Then were restored to their Offices Aleyn Sowch Mayor, Thomas Basynge
and Robert de Cornhil Sheriffs. And the Aldermen, before deposed, were again
likewise restored to their Wards and Offices. A happy Reconciliation.

Next comes the relation of the Legate's interdic^ing all the City the
Wednesday following, which endured from six of the clock in the Morning, till
three the next day in the Afternoon, and then was discharged upon the Oath of
two Commons sworn in the name of the City, that the City should stand to the
Ordinance and Judgment of the Church. So Eabian informs us, but he likewise
telis us of another Chronicle which affirms, that this Interdiction should have
continued longer, had it not been for the sternness of the Londoners, who held
the Legate so straight, that they enforced him to withdraw that sentence upon
the foresaid Condition. So that is seems the Legate had not strength enough to
(...) with the Londoners so roughly and harshly, yet s^curely, as otherwise he
might perchance have do^^ with lesser Places and Parties. His reverend
Lega^^ship seems not here to have went so cunningly (...) work; as did a Legate
much of the same Name, i^ not the same Man, in the twenty first of this Kin^^
Reign, with the Oxford Scholars. He first got (...) enough off from them to
Wallingford, and then accused the misdoers, that had put him into such a (...),
that for his Safeguard he took the Belfry of Osney, (...) abode there, till the
Kings Ministers coming from Abbington, with strength mixed with fair words,
de^^vered him, and conveyed him away, as is in (...) before shown. No, no, the
Londoners were too stron^ and stern, so to be fooled and used. They would
^^ther, we perceive by the story, compel him, th^^ sawningly crouch to him.

After this the Bulwarks, and Barlicarnes, made by the Earl in the City, were
plucked clean up, and Ditches filled, so that no part of them was see^ Good to
destroy all the Monuments of civil Broils and Discord. When the Citizens should
have had their new Pardon granted, an obstacle was mad^ for so much as they as
yet had not recompensed the King of the Romans, for the Subversion of hi^
Manor of Thistleworth. Well remembered and as seasonably put in. A good
convenient opportunity to put in for his share; when he knew all the other
differences were pretty well quieted in the L^^d, and might reasonably
conclude, the City would rather wisely part with a little Money, than begin a
new trouble for a small matter, and so hazard all. For his Reparation was asked
(we find) six thousand (...). But finally, with great Labor and Freindship
(...) was made, to give him for amends one (...) ma^ks to be paid in two years.
Thus you (...) observe, some will be sure however to ask (...), where they know
there is good Ability to (...), though they take at last much less: Like the
(...), that requested five hundred Oaks of the King (...) ^uild him an House,
when as one hundred was enough, and it may he too much.

After these Transactions, the King accepted and (...) to his Grace, Sir John
Eyvile, and several (...), some of them named before among the (...) Party.
Accord was also made between (...) the Kings Son, and the Earl of Gloucester.
Ther^ (...) all Fortresses and other Defenses, before made (...), and the
places adjoining, pulled up ((...) my Author) and destroyed, and the Earl with
all other Soldiers departed After things thus set (...) and Rest, except that
some yet kept the (...) of Ely, the King Rides to Shrewsbury, and (...) there a
Season to commune of matters between him and Lewellin Prince of Wales. While he
there (...), I find that a Writ was directed to Sir Aleyn (...), Mayor of
London, eight days before Michaelm^^, from the King, charging him that the
Citizens should not proceed to Election of new Sheriffs, till (...) coming to
London, but to suffer the old to abide still in Office. By this we may guess at
the honorable Sheriffs Power, even in those days, and believe that the Court
thought it convenient for their interest^ in those unsettled times, to influence
the Election what they might. What else means the Kings command to defer the
Election till his coming to Town? And indeed we may perceive by the History,
th^^ there was meddling to the purpose the following year, for the King himself,
instead of permitting (...) free Election, did in effect put in two Sheriffs,
of (...) own nomination. For the Mayor was commande^ to present to the King six
Persons able to be (...) (it may be it was also privately intimated to hi^ whom
they should be) and out of them the (...) chose two to be Sheriffs,, William de
Durham, (...) Walter Henry, and caused them to be sworn, (...) they should
gather the profits of the City, and give a true Account before the Barons of
the Excheque^* But for this, the Court seem to have had a (...) plausible
pretense from some disorders lately committed in the City. As indeed they
appear by the History of this Kings Reign very ready, either ^^ find occasion
for pretenses, or else to make (...) that they might seize the Cities Charter,
and after restore it again for a good round sums of Money.

The Disorders in London above mentioned were occasioned, through variance
falling out between the Fellowships of Goldsmiths and Tailors in November* in
the fifty third year of this King, reckoning with my Author from the usual time
of the Mayors e^tring into his Mayoralty. This variance was so great, that it
grew to the making of Parties, so that with the Tailors held the Craft of
Stainers, with the Goldsmiths held another Fellowship or Craft. By means
whereof much people nightly gathered together in the Streets in Arms. At
length, as if before appointed, there met one night of the said Parties upon
the number of five hundred Men on both sides, and ran together with such
violence, that some were slaim and many wounded: To this purport I find it
related. Then upon outcry made the Sheriffs with a strength of other Commons
came to them, and took certain of them, and sent them to the Prisons: Upon the
Morrow such search was made, that most of the chief causers of that Fray were
taken and (...) into Ward. Upon the Friday following Katherines (...), at the
Sessions kept at Newgate by the Mayor, (...) de Broke Justice and others, were
many of (...) Persons Arraigned of Felony, and and some of them cast and
hanged. Among them was likewise (...) one Godfrey de Beverlay, who had helped
to (...) of them. Thus the Accessory is not seldom thought a^ guilty as the
Theif.

On the Morrow after St. James's day, the King d^^charged (as writes my Author)
Sir. Aleyn Souch ^^yor, and made Stephen Edworth Constable of the T^wer, and
Custos of the City of Londrn* Fabian (after whom I most write) has left us the
Names of a Mayor, and Sheriffs, affixt to every year of this Henry's Reign, yet
he likewise gives us to understand, that of these Rulers of the City, after the
year that Thomas Fytz Thomas was Mayor, there are diverse opinions. For after
some Writers (continues he) from that year, viz. forty eight till the fifty
fifth of King Henry's Reign, in which year. John Adrian, Draper, was Mayor,
they were all Guardians and no Mayors, and who so was then Constable of the
Tower, the same was also Custos of the City. So that, according to this
Account, there passed about seven years, wherein the Londoners had not the full
and free use of their Privileges and Franchises. If this be allowed for a
Truth, we have but little Reason to marvel, that we find the Commons so ready
to adhere to such, as they might hope would vindicate their former Liberty, and
the Rulers so averse from joining with such, in diminution of that Regal Power,
to which they seem wholly to have owed theirs, and not to any Interest and
Favor they had among the Commons of the City. Who knows, if those Writers
words be granted, but this might be some Reason of the Earl of Glocester's
stirring again against the Court designs, (with a little perhaps of Jealou^y,
of the Kings Son Edwards overmuch familiarity with his Wife, in a Court hinted
to us by Stow, but played by him an year later, In Reg. 53.) when (...) saw the
City, which had formerly took part with the same side he once was of, deprived
of their ^^berties and Franchises, with little hopes of (...) them, much
through his means, by his late (...) with Edward the Kings Son, to the weakening
and overthrow of the Barons Party, to which the City had so firmly adhered? In
this year, by Mediati^^ and means of the fame Edward, all such difinne^ited
Persons, as kept the Isle of Ely, are said to be reconciled to the King, and
all Fortresses and De^ence^ therein by them made, plucked away and destroyed.

In July, Octobon the Pope's Legate, who had interested himself so much in the
late Transactions* departed toward Rome, but not without a great Treasure,
Levi'd, we hear, of the Church. My Author intimates, That he made many good
Rules therein; if they were not only Rules, but an^ good Rules, why should he
not be well paid ^or them? I don't think these kind of Men did very often
Ordain such extraordinary good Rules, unless you will call those good, which
tended to the satisfying the Pope's Avaricious Mind, and exalting his, and the
Clergies Temporal Grandeur. Other might be their Pretenses, but Money doubtless
was (...) of their aim, when they sent their Legates (...) this Land, or into
other Countries owning the Pope's Jurisdiction: and the Event proves it too
(...). Without all Peradventure, it was not for nothing, that England was
called the Pope's Packhorse. Annals, Peterpence, Tenths, F^rst-Fruits, and the
like, were good Pickings, that were drawn hence, to Rome: And that the Popish
Clergy know full well, and therefore their fingers are Itching to be Trading
here again. If the Pope's Mule could once more set his Foot safely on English
Ground, there (...) doubt but they would make us pay for old (...) new, it
should escape them hard else.

'Twas about Four Years before, even in 49, that the Citizens of London
compounded with the King (...) a Fine of Twenty Thousand Marks, and yet in this
Year 53, there is another mention made of it, as it were hinting to us, that it
was not yet all Raised, or at least, that all such, that were Assessed toward
it, had not returned in their demanded Assessment, but to avoid that and other
Charges, had rather chosen to depart from the City with their Households and
Goods, and Inhabit in diverse other places of the Land. Whence we may without
doubt well and truly conclude the scarcity of Coin in those Days, and greatness
of that Imposed Tax, or elfe the Paucity of the Inhabitants of London, and
smalness of the City, in comparison with what it is at this present time. If
then the City was of such Power and Esteem in those Days, as the former
passages seem strongly to prove, how great and considerable an Influence, have
we reason to believe it has at present upon the rest of the Nation now it is
grown by far more Populous, and (...) more Splendid in Riches, Trading, and
Building^ Though many of the Citizens thus fled the City, thinking thereby to
be acquitred of the Charge of the aforementioned Imposition, yet find not that
this availed them ought. For the others of the City remaining made (we are
told) Instant labor to the King, and had it Granted, That all such, as for the
aforesaid cause had carri^d their Goods out of the City, should be Distrain^^
by the Sheriff of the Shire, where they then dwelled, and forced to pay all
such Sums, as they ^^fore were Assessed at. Why should not Men (...) the Bad
with the Good? If they desire to enjoy the City's Privileges in the Day of her
Prosperity, there is but little reason, why they should not lik^wise partake
with her in the common Calamity and Adversity.

In September, The Five Citizens, viz. Thomas (...) Thomas, etc. sp^ken of
before in the Forty (...) Year, who had hitherto remained Prisoners in
Windsor-Tower, made an end with Edward the King's Son, for great Sums of Money,
and were delivered. It would have but little availed them, to ha^^ pleaded the
Kings safe Conduct before sent the^ under his Seal. It Was money it seems that
must b^y their Deliverance, Money they had doubtless, and therefore it is money
they must produce, and so they were ^ain to do; or at least agree to pay it,
before they could get quit out of Edwards Power.

The 54th year began (according to the Chronicle) with so hard a frost, that
the frozen Thames was passable for men and Beasts in diverse places, and
Merchadize was thereupon brought to London by Land. This Forced was not so
prejudiaial to their Trading, (...) the rising and flowing of Thames sometime
after (...) as injurious and hurtsul about London, to the ^^owning of Cellers
by the waterside, and spoiling (...) much Merchandise lying in them. But these
are ^^^asters we know Commonly happening in this tran^^^ry World, witness the
late Inundations through ^he great Rains this Spring, and the damage sustaind
^^ereby in Fleet-ditch, Hockly in the Hole, and many ^^her places. In this year
about the beginning of (...) we find that the King gave the Rule of the City
(...) London to his Son Edward, with all Revenues and Pr^fits thereto
belonging. Whereupon he made Hugh (...) son of Othon Constable of the Tower,
and Custos (...) the City, About the End of April he commanded ^he Citizens to
present to him six Persons able to be ^^^riffs; Of whom he admitted to that
Office William (...) Haddystoke, and Anke^yl De Alvern, and swear them to be
Accountants, as their Predecessors were. These we read presented in May
following at the G^ild-Hall, and there charged a new. At these days a new
Custom or Toll used to be paid the King by ^he Citizens, which having been let
to farm to a Mar^hant Stranger by Edward the Kings Son for 20. ^arks yearly,
the Citizens unwilling to be under a ^^^angers Rule, upon great suit made to
the same Ed^ard, agreed with him to buy the said Toll free for ^000 Marks.

In this year the King had granted toward his ^oyage into the Holy Land (which
was the name ^hen usually given to Canaan the Land of Promise, wherein our
blessed Savior was Crucified, to complete the works of our Redemption) the
(...) penny of every man's Substance moveable throu^^ out the Land, of the lay
fee, and of the Spirit^^^ty by the Pops Assent three Dysmes to be (...) three
years. A politic pretense used in those days get money, An invention somewhat
suitable here (...) to have latter ages found out, and sometimes as b^neficial,
viz. To pretend war with a neighbor N^tion, and then get money toward the
raising an (...) to carry it on. If they could afterward compass (...) take
money on both sides to lay it again, that (...) good advantage; but to get money
twice to (...) it was double gain, Much about this time it is, that (...) read in
Stows Annals of a Quo Waranto set on foot, (...) an Assembly of Nobles met at
London by the Kin^ Command, where, by many, to their no small (...), were
called before the Justices to show by (...) right they held their Lands. But it
was thought (...) afterward, to cease any further prosecution there^^ After
that, John Warren Earl of Surry, (being deman^ed on that writ, what right he
had to his Land^ boldly drew out his Sword, and said, that there^^ he held his
Grandfathers Lands, and by that (...) keep them, Wherein doubtless he would
not (...) failed of many Powerful Abettors and assistants, (...) the Kings
Justices too, rigorously proceeded in (...) a^^air. We find it cost the Lord
Chief Justice of (...) Allen dela Z^nch his life, and the Earl only a (...) of
money, notwithstanding that he made that alla^^ upon the other before the other
Justices of the (...) He having affirmed by the Oath of 25. Knights at
Wi^chester, that he committed not that Fact upon any p^^tended malice, nor in
contempt of the King, this (...) the Issue of the Quo Warranto in those days.

55 was the year, wherein my Author acquaints (...) that the Citizens so well
contented Prince Ed^^rds mind, that he labored to the King his Father for
them, and procured their Charter in such (...) confirmed, that they should
after their Ancient ^riviledges choose of themselves a Major and two Sheriffs,
which Sheriffs were to have the Offices thereunto belonging to farm, as before
had been ^ccustomed, except that instead of 350 l. paid a^^retimes, for the
Fee-farm, they should then pay 450 l. But that a quam diu placuerit was then
thought of, I don't find. After this Confirmation thus granted and passed by
the Kings broad Seal, upon July the 14th. we find the Citizens assem^led at
Guildhal, where they chose for their Major, John Adryan (...), and for Sheriff,
Walter (...) and John (...)* And upon the 16th. Presen^ed them to the (...), at
Westminster, Edward being ^resent, (...) ^^ey were admitted and Sworn, and Hugh
Son of Othon discharged of the Rule of ^he City. Then the Citizens of their
free Will ^o writes Fabian) gave unto the King an 100 Marks, and to Edward 500
Marks, which the King well ^ccepted. And soon after they received their
Char^^er of Confirmation bearing date July 21st. and ^5th of the Kings Reign.

The Annals of this year my Author ends with (...) mischance happening in London,
viz. The fal^^ng down of Saint Mary Bow Steeple in Cheapside, ^o the slaying of
Women and Children.

In the next year 56 he gives us the Relation of ^n other unfortunate accident,
that fell out in Nor^ich, through occasion of a fray between some Ser^ants of
the Monastery there standing, and some of ^he Citizens. This was carried on to
such an height ^^ violence and fury, that many of the Town were wounded and
slain, and the Abbey with all it is buildings, except a little Chapel, burnt
down and destroyed. But this afterward cost the place the death of near upon
30 young Men of the Town, who were Indicted, Judged, Cast, Hanged and Burnt as
Occasioners and Executors of that Deed, to the great sorrow of the Citizens,
and so much the rather, for that they thought, the Prior of the place was the
Occasioner of all that mischief, but he was born out, it seems, and defended by
the Bishop of Norwich. Hard meddling in those times with any of the Churchmen,
they were grown so powerful and high Crested: What, destroy goods of the
Church? hah! In days much later what a difference arose between Pope Paul and
Fumed the Commonwealth of Venice, upon their Imprisoning an offending
Churchman, guilty (...) less an offense than Murder? The Thunderbolt o^
Excommunication had been but a small matter had his Popeship but had power to
have vented his Rage in an higher manner. If the Romish Clergy so domineer over
those Countries, which have for many ages continued in Popery, can we
Englishmen rationally hope to be free their utmost revenge, if they can but
once get such an head over us, as they have long desired and hoped for? No, No,
the thinking part of the Nation are all pretty we^ satisfied of their purposes,
Plots, and designs. Le^ them do their worst, gnash upon us with their teeth and
think to eat us up as bread: Let them begi^ a Massacre, if they durst, as soon
as they pleas^ it is much but they will find, to their cost, free Englis^ Spirits
in English bodies, who will not so easi^ be brought to their lure, as they may
perhaps ha^ foolishly persuaded themselves, from their conver^ with a few
debauched unthinking men amongst (...)

King Henry dies in the 57th. year of his (...) while his Son Edward was absent
in the (...)* But upon notice hereof he returns for (...) and in Augu^t comes
to London, where of the Citizens he is received with all Joy and hono^^, and
so conveyed to Westminster. He had newly got for the Citizens their Privileges
restor^d in his Fathers days; let us now see how matters were carried in his
Reign between the City and the Court. We shall find the City a powerful match
still, tho she met with many troubles and Enemies, yet she weathered them out
in spite o^ all attempts. In the second year of this King Edward there was a
great contest at Guildhal about the Major. Certain attempts we hear of made the
year before by some of the Citizens, to have made such a Major as they listed,
but being then disappointed of their Accessaries, it was hindered for that
time, but in this years beginning took further effect. On Simon and Jude's day,
when Philip le Tailor, before chosen Major, should have taken his charge at the
Guildhal, diverse Citizens put him beside the Majors seat, and set therein Sir
Walter Harvy, who the year before had been Major. This contention being brought
before the King, upon hearing the reasons of both parties, when he could not
bring them to an agreement, he took occasion to put both the Candidates aside,
and chose Henry For^ick for Custos of the City, who so continued for a time. So
ready were some always to deprive the City of the use of her Liberties upon her
Citizens dis^greement. But if such was the effect of the Ci^izens contest, what
then may we think of those who ^urposely create those differences, and stir up
danger^us animosities among them, upon slight, trivial, ^orn out pretenses,
that from the like cause or occasion the like effect may follow?

At Candlemas, by discreet and wise peaceable means, the forenamed Sir Walter
Harvy was set in Authority as Major, and so remained the whole year after. In
the third year the King confirmed the Liberties of the City, and granted some
new.

Thus you see after a storm comes fair weather. In this year we meet with a
Relation concerning Walter Harvy, how that in the first year of this King,
after long controversy and strife with the Aldermen, he was made Major of
London, at a Folkmoot or Common Hall at Pauls-Cross, and so continued that
year; but in this third year occasion was found to remember, and (as the event
seems to intimate) revenge it. For being accused of diverse perjuries and other
detestable deeds contrary to his Oath, for them and for making Assemblies of
the Commons, who favored him, he was deprived of his Aldermanship, and turned
out of the City Council for ever, and for keeping the Kings peace within the
City for the term of his life, was bound to the good behavior upon the
suretiship of twelve persons. It Is not unusual for the Commonalty and heads of
the City to be at difference each with other. Here Is one, who seems a promoter
of the Commons power, overpowered himself by his Enemies, for making
assemblies of the Commons, and other Crimes objected to him, true or feigned I
know not, however thence was taken a pretense to thrust him out of his former
power. These Folkmoots or Assemblies of the Commons seem to have been very
unpleasing t^ the chief Rulers of the City, and their power disgusted, as may
be guessed from the fore-pass'd transactions in King Henry's days, where we may
remember that the Commons were the men, wh^ had power allotted them by the
Parliament, at their Folkmoot or Common-hal, to grant the King License to
depart out of the Land for a Season: 'Twere they, who most firmly adhered to
the Barons standing up in defense of those Parliament Statues made at Oxford,
but few of the chief Rulers of the City comparatively are noted to have
appeared openly in that famed contest of the Barons War.

In the fourth year occasion was taken against Michael Tony, upon some
demeaours of his in the Welsh War, to accuse him of Treason, of which he was
arraigned, judged and condemned, and after drawn, hanged and quartered. This
man doubtless had been a noted stickler in the Barons War, for I find one of
that Name among the five persons so long kept in Prison in Windsor Tower after
the Barons overthrow, till money bought them out, as is before related. Princes
once highly offended may openly profess to forgive the offending party, but
they do not however so soon forget him. Tho David pardoned Shimei during his
life, and swore to him not to put him to death with the Sword, yet as good a
Man as he was, he charged his Son Solomon to bring down his hoary head to the
grave with blood; and so accordingly we find an occasion was afterward taken
by Solomon to revenge his former cursing his Father David, by commanding
Benaiah who went out and fell upon him that he dyed. This year was the famous
Statute of Mortmain first enacted, that no man should give Lands or Rents to
the Church without the Kings Special License, which Statute had afterward many
additions annexed to it to make it the stronger. For the Lay-fee was in great
danger to be devoured by the Spiritualty, such Arts did the Clergy use on men's
minds to augment their power and Riches. Tho now our Courts of Law are fixed at
Westminster, yet in these Ancient times it was not so, for we read that this
King in his sixth year removed his Courts of King's Bench, Chancery,
Common Pleas and Exchequer, to Shrewsbury, and afterward returned them back
again, to the no small damage of the Records thus carried to and fro. This King
held his Parliament at London, in his seventh year, for Reformation of his
Coin, much clip't and diminished. This storm fell chiefly upon the Jews, by
reason of the Inquest charged in London to enquire of this matter. Whereupon
were cast two hundred and ninety seven persons before the Major and other
Justices sitting at London, and afterward Executed at sundry times and places.
My Author has left upon Record, that among these there were but three
Englishmen, all the rest were Jews or Jews born in England. Famous is the 12th.
year for the Conquering and sub^^^^ing of Wales to the English Scepter, and
div^sion of it b^ King Edward into Shires, whereupon were ordained Sheriffs and
other Officers therein, as were then used in England. David Brother to
Lewellyn, late Prince of Wales, who was condemned to be drawn hanged and
quartered, as a chief ^^irrer and beginner of the Welsh War, in time of a
Parliament held at Shrewsbury, was shortly after Executed, and his head sent to
London to be s^t by his Brothers, which had been ordered to be placed the ^ear
before on London-Tower. In this year was Edward of Carnarvan born, the first of
our English Kings, since William the first, that I read of publicly unking'd,
and deposed by his own Subjects. The great Conduit standing against Saint
Thomas of Acres in Cheapside owes his foundation to this year.

The 13th. year may be noted for the Kings seizing the Franchises and Liberties
of London into his own hands, on the day kept in Memory of Saint Paul's
Conversion, so that he discharged the Major Gregory Rokisle, and admitted for
Custos or Guardian of the City, Stephen Sandewich, who continued till the
Monday following the Purification of the Virgin Mary, when being discharged,
Sir John Breton s^ands upon Record charged for the residue of the year. My
Author writes that the cause of this displeasure, the King bore to the City, is
not shown of a certainty. He mentions an old Pamphlet, whereby it appears that
the Major took bribes of the Bakers, and suffered them to sell bread lacking
six ounces in a penny Loaf, for which the King was sore displeased, but to him
this seemed no convenient cause, that the Liberties of the City should be
seized for one man's offense: Wherefore he rather supposes it was for a more
grievous cause. However it is observable from History, that it was a Common
thing in Elder times to seize the Cities Charters on pretenses slight enough of
any sense, till the Citizens grew so wise, as at convenient seasons to procure
new grants and graces, to prevent such seizures for the future: And that it is
not still so feasible and practicable, is the grief, I believe, and
heart-burning of some in the world.

The 14th. year of this King may be accounted famous for the Statutes, called
Additamenta Gloucestriae, made at a Parliament holden at Westminster. But in
these present papers I think it may be more noted, for what I am going now to
relate verbatim out of Fabian. In this year a Citizen of London, Named Thomas
Pywelysdon, (the which in the time of the Barons War, before in the story of
King Henry showed, had been a Captain and a great stirrer of the Commons of the
said City, for to maintain the Baron's party against the Kings,) was newly
accused, that he, with others of evil disposition, should make Conventicles and
Assemblies to the new disturbance of the City, whereof Report was made unto the
King, the which remitted the inquiry thereof unto Sir Ralph Sandewych, then
Custos or Guardian of the City. Then the said Thomas with others was put in
sure keeping, till the matter was duly enquired of. After which Inquisition
made and found, report was made unto the King. Then the King sent down a Writ,
and commanded it to be proclaimed shortly after within the bounds of the City,
whereof the Effect was thus, that the said Thomas Pywelysdon, William de
Heywood, Richard de Coundris, Richard le Cofferre, Robert de Derby, Albyne de
Darby, William Mayo Mercer, and Ivo Lyng Draper, with diverse others, to the
number of fifty Persons, should be banished out of the City for ever. And if
any of the said fifty eight Persons were at that time of the Proclamation
voided the City, for fear or otherwise, that they should so remain, and not
return unto the City upon pain of Life losing. These being thus discarded, and
exiled the City, who it may be would have stood firm to the City's old
Liberties and Privileges, the rest of the Chief remaining might perchance hope
the eafier to keep the Commons in aw, whatsoever new Customs they should
introduce for their own lucre and advantage, the to other men's damage. Here
you may perceive, ^ow jealous Governors are of all Meetings and Assemblies,
but what are of their own constitution and ordering. The Caviliers doubtless
can relate many Stories of their own experience hereof in Olivers days. Neither
are many of our Coffeehouses, and Cl^b meetings (I believe) very grateful to
some persons in the World, though their open business there is mostly to drink,
smoke, talk, trade and the like. By the aforesaid relation we may likewise
observe; Once counted an Offender and ever thought so. Here Thomas Pyweldon or
Pywelysdon (for his name I find diversely Written, though the same man be meant)
a noted man in the Barons War, for which he had suffered deeply after their
overthrow, by long imprisonment, and the charge of redeeming his Liberty for a
great Sum of money of this same King Edward, then only Prince, was
nevertheless, after about sixteen years respite, banished the City for ever, on
an accusation of attempting a new disturbance. That any thing was proved
against him, I have not read, besides the mention here of making Assemblies or
Meetings. Had there been any thing material found against him, I scarce believe
he should have escaped so well with his Life, seeing old Crimes seem to have
been remembered, though new faults were pretended. An Act of Oblivion is a very
good Plaster in a public Universal Offense. But whatever Offender of Note,
thus pardoned, out-lives the greatest number of those qually reputed guilty
with him, and times be so much turned, that the balance of the Nation leans
very much on the governing side, I think that man's life hangs but by a very
slender thread, whose safety and security depends only upon Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and not upon the Governors natural inclination to justice and honesty,
in the constant keeping and observing of his word and promise. When in the late
Wars on this side the World, Messina in Sicily was reduced under the Spanish
government, by the French's forsaking it, to whom the Messineses had before
subjected themselves, tho a general pardon was by the Spaniards publicly
granted, whereupon many returned to the City^ yet, if my memory deceive me not,
there passed no long time, before the public news told us of the accusing and
(I think) condemning of a Principal Man of that City, for a new endeavor to
stir up another Rebellion and Revolt therein. New accusations and new offenses
pretended, how unlikely soever, may sometimes serve to blind the unthinking
vulgar Herd, but a man of thought doubtless will be apt to suspect, that the
old grudge lies at the bottom. How easy and usual it is to suborn false
Witnesses against a Man, Jezabel^ practice, and the endeavor of the Chief
Priests, Elders, and Council of a much later date may inform a Protestant
Reader, if he has no experience in the world to instruct him.

The Citizens were accustomed, before this year, to make good advantage to
themselves by lodging Merchant strangers, and selling their Merchandise for
them, for which they received so much in the pound. But at this time, by means
of those Merchant strangers, it was brought to pass, that they hired Houses for
themselves and their Wares, so that no Citizen should intermeddle with them,
which was to the damage of many particular private men, as well as to the
hindrance of the Kings Custom, and prejudicial (as affirms the Book) to the
Realm in general by many deceits and frauds used by them. Here was a new Custom
disadvantagious to many of the Citizens introduced, but for what reason at
first permitted, whether to advance Trade by drawing more Foreigners to the
City, or else to weaken their power, and bring down lower the Citizens high
stomachs, by cutting off some of their gain, and parting their Trade with
others, I pretend not to deliver, until I meet with better Information my self,
than hitherto I have in the point. Certain it is from the story, that the King
much advantaged himself by searching into their fraudulent and deceitful
dealings, and punishing them for those offenses by a considerable fine. The
15th. year was chargeable to the Jews, who were fain to pay great sums of money
to the King, which they were assessed at, says the Chronicle; but out of an
other Author it is recorded, that the Commons of England granted to the King
the fifth part of their movables, to have the Jews banished out of the Land,
which to prevent, the Jews of their own Wills gave the King great sums of money.
Here then was taking money of both sides: A subtle Court way of Trading. This
year there was such a plenty of Wheat, that (according to my Authors
Computation) it was sold at London for Ten Groats the Quarter, five pence the
Bushel: But the next year, through distemperature of the weather, we find the
price raised up to 14 d. the Bushel, after to 18 d. and increasing yearly
du^ing this Kings Reign and his Sons, so that it stands upon Record to be sold
at last for 40 s. the Quar^er and above. The 18th. may be remarked by ^s for
the Kings Honorable reception at London, and the punishment of diverse
offending Justices, Sir Thomas Weyland, Adam Stretton and others, who being by
the Kings order Examined, and found guilty of the Trespasses laid to their
Charge, were ^ither out-lawed and lost their goods, or else long ^mprisoned and
deeply Fined. A large Catalogue ^f them and their Fines are to be seen in Stows
(...), whence it is observable how suddenly venge^nce over-takes Oppressors,
let them be never so Rich, High, and Mighty in Office, Power, or Authority, as
soon as ever the Kings mind is inspired from above to inspect their actions,
and punish their crimes. Remarkable is the 19th. Year for the Jews Banishment,
which we find bought of the King by the Commons at the price of a Fifteen.

In the 21st year we hear of a Parliament held at London, and of the King of
Scot's coming thither with diverse of his Lords. The punishment inflicted on
three men, for rescuing a Prisoner from an Officer belonging to the Sheriffs of
London, by striking off their right hands at the wrist in Cheapside, is noted
for one of this years actions. Hence let us leap to the 24th. year, and there,
among tha^ years deeds, we find mention made of a new subsidy, levied by the
King upon Wool, going out o^ England, Fels, and Hides, for his War with the
French King; of his Commanding the Money, before granted by the Clergy toward
the defense o^ the Holy Land, to be brought into his Treasury upon the Report
he had from Rome of Pope Boniface the 8ths manners; of the grant he got of the
Clergy of half their Spiritual and Temporal Lands from a Benefice of 20 Marks
and upwards, to b^ paid in three years: And of the Tax he had also granted him
by the Lay-fee, viz. the Tenth penny of their movables to be paid in two years
time* If any one be desirous to certify himself, wha^ Relation Scotland stood
in toward England for many ages before, let him read through the Relation of
this years actions in Fabian's Chronicle and there he may be satisfied, if it
will conduce to his satisfaction, to find, that Scotland, even in Elder times,
in a sort depended on England, and wa^ so far from giving Laws, or an Example
and Pattern thereto, that it is Nobles were fain to submit themselves to the King
of England's Judgmen^ and decree, and do him Homage and Fealty in effec^ by the
submission of their King, whom King Edward had appointed and set over them.
Memo^able is the six and twentieth year, for that there^n the Londoners
obtained of King Edward (new^y come from beyond Sea into England and so to
Winchester) a grant of their Liberties and Franchises, which had in some part
been kept from them by ^he term of twelve years and more, so that they ^gain
chose a Major of themselves, whereas in ^he aforesaid time their Custos or
Guardian was appointed by the King, or by such as the King would assign. But we
are to understand by the Chronicle, that this was not redeemed without a great
Sum of money. Some Writers it seems fixing it at three thousand marks. As this
King had many Wars, especially with Scotland, which put him to great charges,
and had much money granted him by his Subjects, so he ceased not to devise
other ways to raise more, and get what was denied him. For as much as diverse
men, ^ichly beneficed in the Land, refused to aid him with their Goods, as
others had, and for that end had purchased from the Pope an Inhibition, that
they and their goods should be free from the King's Taxes, he put them this
year out of his protection, a strain of State policy beyond some other Kings,
and seized their Temporalties, permitting them to enjoy their Spiritualties,
till they agreed with him. Though this was a warlike Prince, and often successful
in his undertakings, yet the Clergy's power so over-top't the Laity's, that he
chose rather to make use of his Wits, than his Arms in dealing with them. So
have I read in William the Second's days, how when his Uncle, being both a
Bishop and an Earl, grew troublesome to him, he seized upon the Earl and clapped
him in hold, whereby he caught and revenged himself on the Bishop too, without
openly pretending to meddle with a Clergy Man. An offense esteemed piacular in
those days; to such an height of Pride were the Popish Clergy grown. An other
practice of King Edward, was his sudden Condemning certain Coins of Money
called Pollards, Crocardes and Rosaries, in his twenty seventh year, and
causing them to be brought to a new Coynage to his great advantage, as
testifies the Historian* Among others may be also numbered that Inquisition, he
caused to be made throughout the Land in the twenty eighth year, which was
after named Trailbaston. This we find made upon Officers, as Majors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Escheators and many others, who had misborn themselves in their
Offices, and had used Extortion, or treated the people otherwise than was
according to the order of their Offices. So vigilant appeared this Prince, and
careful of his people, that they might not be abused nor oppressed by their
fellow Subjects, when got into power, under pretense of being his Majesty's
Officers, a thing we know common enough in the world.

In the twenty eighth year, we have mention made of the City of London's
Splendour and Magnificence, upon the account of their receiving the new Queen
Margaret, Sister to the French King. Thus runs my Authors short Relation
hereof. The Citizens to the number of six hundred Rode in one Livery of Red and
White, with the Cognizance of diverse Mysteries broidered upon their sleeves,
and received her four Miles without the City, and so conveyed her through the
City, which then was garnished and hanged with Tapestry, and Arras, and other
Cloths of Silk, and Riches in most goodly wise, unto Westminster. This is the
year, wherein Fabian makes the first mention of Pierce of Gaviston in his
Chronicle, upon Occasion of the Bishop of Chesters complaining to the King of
him, his Eldest Son Edward, and others, for breaking the Bishops Park, and
riotously destroying the Game therein. For this was the aforesaid Edward and
his Accomplices Imprisoned. So that under this famous King, the very next Heir
apparent escaped not the Lash of the Law, when he had offended, even to an
actual Imprisonment; so far were men in those days from asserting him to be
above the Law, and not Liable to condign punishment, because the next Heir.
Afterward the King Banished the aforesaid Gaviston out of England, for fear
lest he should debauch his Son: But this Banishment was after his death
annulled by his Son Edward, when King, to the great trouble and vexation of the
Land afterward. The twenty ninth may be esteemed not unworthy of remark, for
the Kings giving to Edward his Son the Principality of Wales, whereunto he
likewis'd joined the Earldom of Cornwall, newly Vacant, and returned to the
Crown.

In the 33d. year we read of the taking, arraigning, drawing, hanging, and
quartering of William Waleys, who, of an unknown low birth, became the head
Leader of the Scots against the Kings Power, and had Created him no little
trouble in Scotland, but now in revenge was his head set upon London Bridge,
and his four quarters sent into Scotland to be set upon the Gates of some Towns
in that Land. About this time we hear likewise of several Nobles of Scotland
coming to the Kings Parliament, at Westminster, and there voluntarily Sworn, in
the Presence of the King and his Lords, to be true to the King of England, and
to keep the said Land to his use against all other Persons. Among these is
named Robert le Bruce, who not long after sends to the Pope for a dispensation
of his Oath, raises more Commotions in Scotland, and gets to be Crowned King
thereof at Saint Johnstons: Anno Thirty four. But when King Edward had
overthrown the Scots Army, and taken many of the Nobles, he sent the Bishop of
Saint Andrews, and Bastoon, with the Abbot of Scoon, to the Pope, with report
of their Perjury, and how they were taken Armed in the field to shed the blood
of Christian men. And the Temporal Lords he sent into England to the Tower of
London, who were afterward Arraigned at London, and put to death, and their
Heads set upon London Bridge. The longest Sword carries away the Bell. If the
Scots had prevailed in the like sort against King Edward, it is a question
whether they would not have done much after the same manner. How would they
have then vaunted themselves and their Cause for the most rightful, whereas
being Conquered they suffered as Rebels? That the weakest goes to the Wall, is
a known saying. Yet as strong, powerful, and succesful as this King Edward was,
we find he cared not to meddle himself with the Spiritual Lords taken in the
field fighting against him, but rather chose publicly to send them to the
Pope, with an high offense laid to their charge, to be punished at his
pleasure. Whereby we may presume he gratified the Popes Ambition, in making him
as it were the sole Judge of their offenses, and yet thereby doubtless
sufficiently secured himself against those men of the Church, his late Enemies,
for the future. Could the Pope in Civility and Gratitude refuse to revenge the
King in punishing these Clergymen for fighting against him, who had thus
highly mounted the power, and Authority of the Triple Crown above his own, in
this matter, to the public view of the world? If the Popish Clergy in those
times were grown so formidable, that this Triumphant King, in the midst of his
Victorious Arms, thought it safer to remit these Clergy-men's offenses to the
Popes Correction, than punish them himself, (for I think it was policy more
than zeal that made him act thus) what weak matches were the other Puny Princes
to them in those days of their worldly Prosperity Pomp and Grandeur? Now their
wings are pretty well clipped, by the escape of so many people, Nations, and
Countries out of this Popish House of Bondage, let Crowned Heads and free
States be careful, that they suffer not the Popes wings to grow again, or
permit their Sworn Vassals the Jesuits to imp them anew with fresh Feathers,
lest they mount up again over their heads to their Ancient greatness, or take a
flight higher than ever they did. Now the French King through the base
connivance of some, others Treachery, and many great Men's careless negligence,
is become Europe's Terror, if Popish Plots and designs should ^nce so far take
effect, as treacherously to de^rive our present King of his life and Crown, and
^ntroduce a Popish Successor into the English Throne, how far they might in
time proceed toward the extirpation of that pestilent Northern Heresy (as Mr.
Coleman out of his Extraordinary ^^ndness to the Religion, from which he
himself ^postaliz'd, has been pleased to term the Protestant Religion) o^t of
these parts of the world, I submit ^o the better Judgments of more able
Politicians.

Have we now hence from this Edward the first (who died in the five and
thirtieth year of his Reign, after a charge given to his Son in diverse points
upon his blessing, and Oaths taken of some of his chief Nobles to keep the Land
for his Sons use, and to Crown him King as soon as they conveniently could
after his death, at Burgh, upon the Sands beyond Carlisle, in his return into
England) unto Edward the Second, where I could find matter enough to exercise
my Pen, were I minded to describe all the disorders and troubles, that happened
throughout the Land, under his unprosperous Reign. We need not wonder, that
this Prince met with so unhappy a fate at his End, when as we find him at the
very beginning immediately transgressing his dead Fathers commands, by
recalling Gaveston from his Banishment, (contrary to his Father's charge on his
Death Bed, he entailing his curse on him, if he should presume it, as Stow
tells us) governing himself wholly by his advice, affecting him so much, as to
affirm, that he should succeed him in the Kingdom, if he could effect it. If I
should endeavor perfectly to delineate the many Crosses, Losses, Battails, and
Bloodshed, tha^ fell out in the Land under this King, and to Writ^ in a style
and manner suitable to the matter, ^ know not but I might well dip my Pen in
Bloo^ instead of Ink, such were the misfortunes of the Land, and unfortunate
fates of many Nobleme^ thereof. For in his Reign there were Beheaded an^ put to
death by Judgment upon the number of eigh^ and twenty Barons and Knights, (as
Fabian Co^putes) besides the Noble men slain in Scotland* The number whereof
one Author expresses to ^ mount to two and forty, besides sixty and sev^^
Knights and Barronets; and two and twenty (...) over that of name taken in that
one Battle of Bannocksborn. Unsteadfastness of manners, and vileness of
Conditions, the refusing the Company of Lords and men of honor, and haunting
the Society of Villains and vile Persons: The being given to great drinking,
and lightly discovering therein things of great Counsel, with many other
disallowable Conditions related by Historians, were blots in this Kings
Scutcheon. Scarce was old Edwards Obsequies fully finished, according to my
Author, but the young King sends in all have for his old Companion Piers of
Gaveston, receiving him with all joy and gladness, and advances him to much
honor, gives him the Earldom of Cornwall and Lordship of Wallingford, rules all
by his wanton Council, and follows the appetite and pleasure of his body, not
guiding things by order of Law or Justice. Then he Revenges himself, and his
favorite Gaveston, on the Bishop of Chester, (who had before complained of
them and their Outrages in his Fathers Reign) by commanding him to the Tower of
London, and keeping him there strictly many days after. When by the means,
motions, and words of many potent Lords of the Realm, Gaveston was again sent
out of the Land, though contrary to the King's pleasure, and banished into
Ireland: Yet thither we hear of the Kings sending him oftentimes secret
Messengers, and comsorting him with many rich gifts, and the next year we read
of his being fetched home again to still the grudges springing up between the
King and his Nobles, and continue amity amongst them, which proved but so much
the more mischievous to the Realm: For this exorbitant Favourite's power more
and more increasing, he, having the keeping of the Kings Treasure and Jewels,
conveyed many of them, some of great value, out of the Land, and brought the
King by means of his wanton Conditions to manifold Vices, as Adultery and
others, whereupon by the Lords Counsel and Resolution taken at Lincoln, he was
shortly after exiled into Flanders to the Kings great displeasure. In comes
Gaveston again, though he had before abjured the Realm, with this condition by
the Barons added, that if he were found again in any Lands subject to the
King's dominions, he should be taken as a Common Enemy and Condemned. But being
recalled by the King, he ventures on his favor, and afterward demeans himself
worse and worse. In so much that we read, that he disdained the Lords of
England, and of them had many spiteful and slanderous words, so that there is
the less wonder, that the Queen and the whole Court were sorrowful, because
they saw the King (as Stow words it) not very sound, so great was his Joy and
Jollity for his receiving him in safety. Whereupon the Lords of one mind (says
my Author) consented to put him to death, which they soon after effected by
taking the Castle wherein he was, and so having him in their hands smote off
his Head. For this was the King grievously displeased with those Lords, and
vowed, we hear, to revenge his Death, so that after this he sought occasion
against them, to grieve and displease them. If the forementioned disorders,
with many before expressed by Authentic Writers to have fallen out under this
King: If Treachery, Robberies, Rapes, Extortions, Divisions, Civil discords at
home, slights, contempts, and losses abroad, and much bloodshed in Battles,
fought and lost, both at home and abroad: If murrain of Beasts and scarcity of
Grain, dearness of Victuals, sickness and mortality of Men, ravages and
outrages of cruel insulting Enemies, and almost a general desolation, in
several places of the Land, be glories, that can eternize a Man's memory to
succeeding Generations, I know not whether this Kings Name and Reign may ever
be forgotten, as long as England stands a fixed Island in the midst of the
Ocean. In the midst of these troubles and crosses, you are not to suppose, the
City of London escaped free from partaking in the Common misery of the Land. In
the first of this King's Reign, I find that he, and his new Married Bride were
received joyfully by the Citizens, and so conveyed to Westminster, but the
times afterward grew so cloudy, and full of storms, that I don't think they
had over much reason to rejoice, more than the rest of their poor distressed
fellow Subjects. Yet Providence in good time delivered the City out of these
troubles, and with advantage too, as may be observed and remark't in the end of
this, and beginning of the next Kings Reign. Twice more particularly, in this
Kings Reign, do we read of a breach made on the Cities Privileges, by
constraining the Citizens, at their own charges, to raise and maintain a
certain number of Soldiers, and send them whether they were appointed, but the
last time, it seems, it was conditionally, that it should not be made a
President, which possibly was to appease them, when they refused to go out of
the City to fight, unless they might according to their liberties (as Stow
says) return home again the same day before Sunset. For it is plain, how great
soever their respect was toward their Sovereign, that they had no great
kindness for some about him: And therefore, when aid and assistance was
requested of them against the Queen, who with her Son Edward was newly Landed,
and pretended Reformation of abuses, they made this plea or excuse, as
favoring rather Reformers than makers of Grievances, yet with profession of
due obedience and Honor to the King, the Queen, and their Son, who was after
his Father the Right and Lawful Heir to the Crown.

At the Parliament of Whitebands, held in the twefth of this King, whether the
Barons came in Arms, the Citizens were the Keepers of the Kings peace in the
City; a thousand of them well Armed, by the Majors order, watching by day, and
as many by night, in diverse Wards, and at several Gates thereof, under the
inspection of two Aldermen, with Officers assigned to Ride about every night to
oversee them, and the rest of the Citizens were enjoined to have their Arms in
readiness upon a very short warning for more surety. And what pray now was the
effect of all this, but that the peace was kept, the City guarded it, and no
disturbance happened that I read of, notwithstanding there was so great an Army
then on foot? Ill men were removed, several things were ordained for the good
of the Realm, Transactions were carried on without violence, or bloodshed, the
Parliament was peaceably dissolved, and every one returned home in quietness,
safety and security. But on the contrary, afterward, in the later end of this
Kings Reign, when the Courtiers were much disgusted in the City, by reason of
many violences committed, and much harsh dealing used by some toward their
fellow Subjects, in the time of their power, under the wings of Authority, and
pretense of Law and Justice, the Citizens were so far from keeping the King's
peace, as before, that they soon showed openly their favor, good will, and
kindness for the Queen, who, under the glozing pretense of reforming the ill
Government, was come into the Land with a considerable force of Soldiers, and
had sent to the Mayor and Commonalty for their aid, help, and assistance in
carrying on this her pretended Reformation; A work generally highly acceptable
to all such, as think themselves oppressed, and glorious in the Eyes of the
people; but such is the misery, fate, and infelicity, the frailty and
imperfection incident to all sublunary attempts, that it very seldom, if ever,
fully answers the expectation of every one concerned. Neither was the Citizens
affection to the Queen, and her Party, barely shown in words and expressions,
but it went much farther, and was publicly brought into Act by beheading such,
as they took to be the Queens enemies, not so much as sparing the Bishop of
Exeter himself, a great man among the spiritualty, who had been there left by
the King to have the Rule of the City in his absence. The occasion is said to
have sprung from his stiff and peremptory demanding of the Keys of the City
Gates by virtue of his Commission, which highly exasperated the Commons against
him, and so much the more, because (as was the saying) he had raised an Army to
withstand the Queen, a fault then thought unpardonable by the Londoners, who in
words and deeds espoused the Queen's Cause, seized on the Tower of London, and
kept it for the Queens use, and not long afterward received her into their
City with great Joy and Honor. A demonstrative evidence in my opinion of the
City's strength and power. For if London, when she pleased, could maintain the
King's peace in the midst of Arms (as was shown above) so inviolably, as that
none dared in opposition to break it, and afterward, in the very same age, and
within the compass of half a dozen years, did actually assert the Qeens cause,
and assist her in her proceedings (as was pretended) for Reformation of the
Realm, tho the Consequence thereof was in truth the unfortunate Kings
resignation, what greater instance can there be, to show her great influence
upon the whole Nation in those unsettled times?

London having so visibly appeared in favor of the Queen, the Prince, and his
party, and contributed so much toward this notable revolution of affairs, we
have no reason to think, but that, out of Common gratitude, her Citizens were
to be abundantly rewarded, and that they themselves, out of self interest and
natural Prudence, would so well and wisely look to their own affairs, as to
make hay while the Sun shines, to the procuring new grants and Graces, and so
accordingly we find the event. For in the first year of Edward the third,
Fabian tells us, he confirmed the Liberties and Franchizes of the City, making
the Major Chief Justice in all places of Judgment within the same, next the
King, every Alderman, that had been Major, Justice of Peace in London and
Midlesex, and such, as had not been, Justice in his own Ward: Granting them
also the Fee-farm of London for three hundred pounds, and that they should not
be constrained to go out of the City to ^o fight, or defend the Land for any
need. A privilege greater, than what was claimed, as their liberty, in his
Fathers days, when unwilling to engage against the Queen and Prince, they
refused not to go out, on condition of returning the same day, as is related
before. But the most beneficial of all the grants was, that the Franchises of
the City should not be seized into the Kings hands, but only for Treason or
Rebellion done by the whole City. It having before been a Common thing to have
their Liberties seized on, (as has been plainly manifested in the Precedent
Relation) on almost every petty disgust, conceived by the Court against them,
were it but for the pretended offense of a particular Officer, or for money
alleged to be owing by the City to some great ones at Court, or some such like
small trivial pretense. But now at this time they took such care, to have their
Liberties settled and secured by this Royal Grant, that it may be thought
almost, if not wholly, a thing impossible for the City to forfeit her Charter,
and have it justly, according to that grant, taken from her. The bringing of
Southwark under the Rule of the City, and the power allowed their Major to
appoint such a Bailiff there, as liked him best, was a very advantageous
favor, at the same time, by this King Edward bestowed on London, but not
comparable with the former grant, which may most deservedly be esteemed
Paramount to all others. A particular Officer may offend, and oftentimes does,
nay many may; but for a City, a whole City, so great and glorious a City, as
London, Traitorously to Rebel, and so forfeit all her Liberties, Privileges,
and Franchises at one clap, seems to me so great a contradiction, as to imply
little less than an Impossibility in Nature, not to go a step or two higher.

This King being one of the most powerful Princes of his time, and in the
strength of his age very succesful in his Wars against the French King, it is
not for us hastily to imagine, there was any occasion given for so wise and
good a King to contest with his Subjects, much less with his Loyal Citizens. We
are rather to expect to hear of the City's Triumphs and glory, the Joy and
rejoyceing, wherewith she often received her Victorious King returning
Conqueror from France, the frequent Justings, Tiltings, and Tournaments shown
thereat for his Recreation and entertainment, the Wealth, Riches, and Ability
of her head Officers, (whereof one, to Londons great glory, is said to have
sumptuously feasted four Kings at once, in the thirty first of this Kings
Reign, besides the famous Black Prince, many Noble Knights and others, to whom
with the King he gave many Rich Gifts) the splendour of the Citizens in general
o^ public occasions, and the harmonious concord of all in their own private
and particular concerns, relating more especially to the Cities good order and
Government. This King may be supposed too great and too good, either to create,
or to permit differences and discord at home. He had wherewithal to exercise
his Wisdom and valor abroad in foreign Countries, and such success too in his
Enterprises, as might make him, both feared, and beloved, by his Subjects, at
one and the same time. Yet notwithstanding, such still was Londons power,
strength, and resolution to maintain her Liberties, that this Victorious
Prince, Conqueror over others, having sent out Justices into the Shires, to
make enquiry about his Officers offenses, and delinquences, and the City of
London not suffering (as Stow tells us) any such Officers to sit, as Justices,
in their City, as Inquisitors of such matters, contrary to their Liberties, he
thought good rather to appoint those Justices their Sessions in the Tower, for
Inquisition of the damages of the Londoners, and they refusing, unless
conditionally, to answer there, and a tumult thereupon arising among the meaner
sort, claiming their Liberties, he esteemed it greater prudence, to wave the
Justices sitting, as to that place, and forgive all offenses, than to enter
into a contest with such powerful, tho Loyal Subjects, as the Londoners were,
and such undaunted assertors of their own rights, privileges, franchises and
liberties. For as it is plain the City was very potent, so we may, as certainly
perhaps, conclude the Citizens no less suspicious of any thing done, under the
shadow of this Kings Authority, if but looking toward the least breach of
their Privileges, as the Commons of England in general seem to have appeared
jealous of their Common liberty, when, upon this Kings laying claim to the
Kingdom of France, they procured a Law, whereby it was enacted, that the King
should not Rule England as King of France, and so Subject them to the
insolences of a Fellow Subjects Deputyship.

Would you know, what esteem and respect the house of Commons, in this King's
reign, had for ^he City? Look in Cotton's abridgment of the Records ^n the
Tower, and there you may find the Commons, ^ver and anon, petitioning the King,
that the City ^f London may enjoy all her Liberties, and the King's ^nswers
generally to such petitions seem rather to ^rant, than deny, such their
important Requests. ^o glorious and gracious did the City appear in the ^^ght
of the good people of the Land, or rather ^^ch was the influence she had upon
the Nations re^resentatives. As to the Common's Desires, that (...) the
Counties might conform themselves to the ^eights and Measures made in London,
and the ^^der there made against Usury might be observed ^^oughout the Realm,
as if they would have this so famous a City more particularly give Law, as well
as example, to all England, I pass them over, without pretending from thence to
draw an Argument of the City's Grandeur; and likewise Wave the privilege, by
this King, granted the Citizens, that the Officers of the Mayor, and Sheriffs
should, from that day forward, use Maces of Silver parcel gilt, as not
intending to insist thereon, as a more especial mark of honor designed the
City above the rest of the Nation in those days; And choose rather to pass on
to the last part of this King's reign, wherein, I must needs acknowledge, there
was a strong, though short, contest between the King and the Court. But when
was that, and how happened it? 'Twas when the King was grown old, near to dotage,
after his good Queen Philippa was dead, and he himself, amidst the Infirmities
of sickness and old age, indulged his own lustful pleasures in the lascivious
Embraces of a wanton Miss, leaving the guidance of his Realm, and all things
about him, to so ambitious a spirit, as, under the Wings of his Authority,
durst aspire so high as to the hopes of the Crown, against the good Will of the
people, and the Title of a person much more affected and beloved at London. The
contest was short and sharp, as may be seen in Stows Annals, where it is placed
in the fifty first, i. e. the last year of the Kings Reign: So short, as not
taking up the whole space of time, between Christmas and the latter part of
June, wherein the King died; and yet so sharp, that the Cities Privileges were
in great danger, menaces there were of deposing the Major, (which was at length
actually done,) and of Creating a Captain in his Room, with many other things
threatened against their Liberties: And all by the arts* devices, and
contrivances of the aspiring Uncle, who would fain have mounted up into the
Throne of the Kingdom, over his young Nephews head, but that the Londoners
opposed him in his designs, both honorably, and succesfully too. So far were
they from being Hectored, or trapan'd, into a base Compliance with this
Ambitious pretender, and his flattering favorites desires, who thought to have
carried all before 'em, because they esteemed themselves sure of the Kings
Authority, and so looked upon the principals of the opposite party, if not under
a Cloud, at least under a great disadvantage comparatively, such were their
fond hopes and pretensions.

In the good Parliament, (as it was commonly called) held in the fiftieth of
this Kings Reign, several Reformations had been made, and diverse, at the
Commons suit, removed from about the King, as evil Counselors, by the
Mediation of the Black-Prince; but the Parliament being ended, and he dying,
the old King, contrary to his promise, soon recalled the former persons, before
removed, and Committed the Government of the Realm again to his third Son; John
of Gaunt, that aspiring Duke of Lancaster, whereby the Tide being turned at
Court, the storm fell heavy upon some Patriots of the late Parliament, who had
been the greatest promoters and occasioners of ^he before mentioned change, so
lately made, of the Ministers of State. Now was the time to remember, and
revenge, all things about the King being managed by the Dukes order, who,
making use of the Kings Authority, turned out and put in at his pleasure, the
more easily to bring about his designs, (by his own Creatures now ^rought in
again into the Government and man^gement of the affairs of State) which tended
to no less, than the putting his Nephew, the young Prince Richard, (an Orphan
by the Fathers side though not the Mothers) from the Crown, and settling himself
in the Throne, upon the old weak Kings decease. This it seems had been intended
by the Duke for some time, but now carried on more vigorously with all the art
imaginable.

A Parliament is summoned to meet at Westminster after Christmas, honor is
openly shown to the young Prince, and his name made use of, by his crafty
Uncle, to further and promote his own privy intentions and intreagues; The name
and power of the French, (as that they had raised great Armies, and made new
Confederacies to blo^ out the English Tongue and Nation) is likewise made use
of, for a stale, to induce the Commons the more readily to part with a good
round sum of Money, to put the King into a good posture of defense, to speak and
act as a King; And the old Knights, who in the last Parliament had stood up so
courageously in behalf of the Commonalty, are by the Dukes means for the most
part removed, and Creatures of his own are made the chiefest managers of
Parliament-business; so that now he seem^ ready to carry almost all things
before him: Bu^ only there lies a rub or two in the way, that might spoil his
bowling, if they were not timely removed. London was not, nor would be at the
Duke^ beck, and therefore 'twas thought dangerous to attempt publicly, what
was privately and principally intended, as long as the Laws and Customs o^ the
City were in force. Moreover the Church o^ England, it seems, in those days was
looked upon by the Duke, as none of his best friends (thoug^^ I don't find but
he might have been before, an^ was a Churchman good enough afterward, as to
outward appearance, whatever he was in his heart) and therefore (if Stow may be
Credited, who writes after Walsinghams Pen) he attempted to overthrow it, for
that end favoring Wickliff and his Disciples, who went then under the name of
L^llards among the Commons, and were as much hated in those days, for pretended
Heresies laid to their charge, (for at that time you must know the Nations
Religion was Popish) as the Papists are now adays for repeated Plots, and
Conspiracies proved upon them. Whether or no it was to pull down the English
Bishops, the better to facilitate his own intents and purposes, that he was a
favourer of the famed John Wickliff, (as Walsingham, a great Papist, and also a
Monk, affirms) Providence out of the Dukes sinful Ambition raising Protection
for the Maintainers of the true Religion, or else that being convinced of the
Conformity of Wickliffs Doctrine to Truth and Godliness, He, like Herod, heard
John gladly, and did many things at his instance, I shall not now pretend to
determine. But most certain it is from the story, that 'twas London, not the
English Clergy, that put the greatest stop to the Dukes aspiring designs, and
dashed all his Ambitious Intreagues in pieces, to his, and his Favorites no
small Disappointment.

For the Londoners being enraged at the Dukes threats, and their fury increased
against him, for that in the Parliament, the Duke being President, a motion had
been made in the Kings name, (over whom at that time it is well known how great
an ascendant the Duke had) that there should be no more Major of London,
according to the Ancient Custom, but a Captain appointed over it, and the
Marshal of England might therein arrest Offenders, as in other places, (so that
'twas in the Military Officers that the Duke seems to have placed most of his
Trust and Confidence, as doubtless his Creatures and Favorites in esse aut
posse) with many other things manifestly contrary to the City's Liberties, at
the encouragement of the Lord Fitzwalter (who claimed to be their Standard
Bearer by inheritance) they put themselves in Arms, and acted with such an
excess of rage and violence, that had it not been for their own Bishop, who
pacified them for the time, the Duke and his great favorite Piercy had that
day (says the book) lost their lives. But they having timely notice, fled from
the people, and applied themselves for safety to the young Prince, and his
Mother, who undertook the business, and sent to the Londoners, to make peace
with the Duke; so kind and gracious was the good Princess, as to mediate in his
behalf, who desired in his heart to dispossess her own Son of his right. To her
Messenger Answer was returned by the Citizens, that for her honor, they would
perform her Commands, but as to what concerned the Duke, injunctions were laid
on them to will him, that he should suffer the Bishop of Winchester to come to
his answer, and to be tried by his Peers, and also permit Peter de la More
[Speaker of the last Parliament] then by the Duke's means imprisoned to answer
for himself, after the Custom of the Law; and as for the third, they said they
would account a Traitor, wheresoever he should be found. So run the words in
Stow, which being to the Duke reported, he became not a little troubled, and
not without reason in my opinion, at the Citizen's Answer, and their
indignation conceived against him, since that he interpreted, what they had
spoken of a Traitor to be meant by them of himself, though as to that
particular he denied himself to be one. He had been mad, I should have thought,
or foolish, if he had presently confessed, and owned the imputation. However,
from the Citizens message, and the Dukes interpretation thereof, it is easy to
conclude, how little they loved him, and he soon found it to his trouble and
vexation. Jealousies and suspicions generally go a great way among the common
people, and are almost as prevalent as proofs, especially when there is a great
man in the Case, whom they dare not openly accuse and impeach, and cannot try
for lack of safety and a good opportunity, and he himself is not very willing
to put himself upon a fair trial, and thereby wipe-off all aspersions in the
common legal way of his Country. All his Tergiversations do foment, rather than
diminish, the Heats of the people, who have but the more opportunity and
occasion to think, (and will commonly too think scurvily) the less they have to
act.

The rough Message, the Londoners sent the Duke, we have heard, but that was
not all: They would away to the King too, and acquaint him with the late
proceedings. And so accordingly, upon a Council held thereabouts, they sent
some of their chief Citizens, either to justify (says the Annalist) or excuse
what had happened. Long were these a suing to come to the Kings prescnce, the
Duke keeps them back: For they might be apt to ^o tell Tales, or at least
remove the prepossessions, wherewith the Duke and his party doubt-less had
filled the credulous King's Head. The Duke would fain have stopped their
entrance, and put them off, but they would not be so served. The Duke tells
them, that the King was very ill at ease, and his sickness might be encreast,
if he were moved to anger by their Speech. A fine excuse, but 'twould not pass.
The Londoners were resolved on it. They were not come to increase, but mitigate
his grief, and their Commission from their fellow Citizens, they said, was not
to be Communicated to any, but to their Liege Lord the King himself. They were
for no Proxies, Advocates, nor Attorney-Generals of the Dukes providing: They
would be their own Spokesmen. Well then, at last after much ado they gain
access, and show the King, what had been published in Parliament, as his Will,
against their Liberties and privileges: They excused likewise themselves of
some of the Commonalties behavior in the late Commotion, as being the effect
of some ill men among the rabble, whereto they were, neither privy, nor
consenting; whereupon the King, a little cheered up with their coming,
answered, that he would not the diminishing of their Liberties, No, he was
rather ready, if need were, to augment them, neither did any such Resolutions
ever come out of his Mouth, and therefore willed them not to fear, but to
return and appease the Citizens, and to keep them in Peace. The Dukes faction
would have made use of the Kings Name and Authority, to deprive the City of her
Charter of Liberties, and endeavored to persuade the Parliament Men, that it
was the Kings good Will and pleasure to have it so; but, upon the Citizens
application to the King, they hear an other tale, the King owned no such thing,
never any such thing came out of his Mouth, he tells them expressly. Set a mark
here. Observe likewise the conseq^ence of the Citizens coming to the King, he
was alittle cheered, somewhat better in mind possibly, when he heard the truth
of the matter. Before perhaps he had heard strange tales of seditious meetings,
Insurrections, Riots, Tumults, and the like, as if none were for keeping the
Kings Peace but the good Dukes good party, such stories had they buz'd i^ the
ears of this weak, old, infirm, sickly King, and he as ready to believe all,
till disproved by the different Relations of as Credible witnesses. To hear one
side only, and stop ones ears to the others defense, is not only a manifest
sign of extreme partiality, but also the ready way to be imposed upon by the
deceit of lying Tongues, and to be kept always from the knowledge of the truth,
where those near us think it their interest to have ^t so.

About the time of the late uproar, it is said that, ^he Duke's arms were hanged
up reversed in sign ^f Treason, in the principal streets of the City, ^^ch was
the hatred the Londoners had conceived against him; but 'twas in those days as
unknown ^ho did it, as it is at this time uncertain, who cut ^e Picture of his
Royal Highness the Duke of (...), the other day at Guild-hal. Whether there
^ere any Proclamations, with promises of re^ard, emitted, to find out the
Author and Actor ^f that deed, I know not of a certainty, as not ^^ding it
mentioned in the History: Possibly there ^ere none, or at least they proved
very ineffectual, which I the rather conclude, because that, when (...) had
made malicious Rhymes upon the Duke, (...) fastened them up in diverse parts of
the City, ^^other remedy was found out against them, but happily as
inefficacious, viz. a Sentence of Excommunication, at the Dukes request to the
Bishops, pronounced against them publicly by the Bishop of Bangor, the
Aldermen of the City assisting him. To be Excommunicated did carry somewhat of
terror with it, in England, in those Popish times, among the vulgar, and might
probably again, should Providence, for our offenses, ever suffer Popery to be
brought back into the Land; but among Protestants, and knowing understanding
men, Excommunication upon every slight account, and trifling pretext, is of
little value, esteem, or regard, and no more dreaded perhaps by some, than
'twas by Rablais, when he begged it as a great boon of the Pope, because the
poor Country Woman thought her Faggot Excommunicated, when she could not make
it burn. Besides these Indignities put upon the Duke at London, in, at, and
after the aforesaid Tumult of the Common people, we are told also, that all
such, as wore the Dukes Sign or Colors, were fain to hide them, conveying them
into their bosoms, so great a fea^ and dread had seized upon their Spirits.
Whether these Colors were Parsons Black, True Blew Flourishing Green, Orange
Tawny, or Blood Red the Historian has not so far gratified us, a^ punctually
to set down in his Relation of the^^ transactions. But if I might have leave to
pas^ my Verdict herein, I should be apt to conjectur^ them to have been, at
least for the most part, (...) by the Red-letter'd people. What sad
Prognostics may we think our Almanack-makers a^ star-gazers then gave of the
times, when the saw England so likely to fall into such Feuds, Faction^ and
disorders as those of the Guelphs and Gibeline^ But one good turn it is, that
Astrogolers Prognostications use commonly to be, like the Popish Oracles old
Almanacks, soon out of date. The City could much sooner influence the Nation,
than they could make the Stars influence the City, in favor of the Dukes cause.

How the Citizens of London opposed the Duke, we have seen, but he is resolved
it seems to show his bitter resentments upon the next opportunity, and
accordingly, after the Duke had obtained his desires of the two Houses of
Parliament, viz. A Poll-Bill or Tax of all the heads in the whole Realm, he
caused the King to send for the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, who
soon came before him, then very ill at ease, as they were ordered, into his
Chamber of Presence; where, after the usual Ceremonies over past, a certain
Knight of the Court endeavored, by his Ciceronian Rhetoric, and the Eloquence
of his Oration, to persuade the Citizens, to confess their great and heinous
offenses against the King and Duke, and to submit themselves to their Mercy.
See here the Kings Name must be brought ^n, right or wrong, or else the Dukes
cause, and ^retensions, would signify little. But the Londoners were not so to
be caught. For they answered, they had not Conspired against the Duke, neither
had there been any shameful thing spoken or done against him, that they did
know of, or con^ent unto, which they were ready to prove before their Sovereign
Lord the King, and the Duke himself. The folly of the Common people they
^ffirm'd they could not stay, and therefore request^d of the King, that he
would not punish those that were innocent, and ignorant of the Fact, but withal
promised the Duke, for Reverence of the King, (observe this) that they would
endeavor to bring in the Common people, and compel them by Law to make due
satisfaction, and more (said they) we are not able to do for the Duke, that may
be to his Honor. Not able to do more, why? What would his faction have had
them to have done? Was his favor to have been purchased at no less a price,
than an entire Resignation of all they had, Bodies and Souls, Lives, Liberties,
and Estates at Discretion? Must they have denied their senses, and their reason
too, in charging themselves with what they neither said, nor did, felt, heard,
nor understood, to avoid Scandala Magnatum's and the Arbitrary Fin^^ of biased
Juries? Leave we such Terms of accommodation to the insulting power and Pride
o^ Prelatical Consciences, to impose upon their underling Curates. Such is the
continued cause of difference between the Molinists and Jansenists in France,
while one side fairly offers, to disallow certain displeasing Propositions,
either by themselves, or as Jansenius's, if shown to them in hi^ works, and the
other party, as pertinaciously* insists upon their rejecting them as his,
because the Pope has so condemned them.

Glad we may easily suppose the Londoners were* when dismissed upon their
aforesaid Answer^ But it seems the Court was not yet satisfied: (...)
afterward we read of the Kings sending them (...) Command secretly, to call
all the Citizens together, and, having made a Wax Candle with the Dukes Arms in
it, to carry it solemnly in Procession to Saint Paul's, there to burn
continually (...) the Cities charges, which was accordingly performed by the
chiefest and richest of the Citizens, the meaner commonalty disdaining to be
present at such a procession, and therefore with indignation departing home,
when they heard the business, and knew the occasion of their being called
together. But neither did this condescension of the greatest give the Duke
content; he threatened them, looked upon it as a reproach, and took it in great
scorn, that they had offered thus his Arms in a Wax Taper while he was alive,
and in good health; notwithstanding they affirmed, they had expressly done that
which his Father, the King, had Commanded them, and would have done any thing,
that might have pleased him, i. e. in reason. For peace and quietness sake
possibly, and out of respect to the Kings Majesty, they would not have refused
the trouble of putting forth a few honorary Proclamations, nor denied him the
Complement of a volley or two of Holla's and Huzza's, if that would have
pleased. But this did not answer the Dukes Expectations, nor satisfy his
Ambitious desires, they knew, he said, his mind, and were not ignorant how to
make satisfaction. Ay; there 'twas: He would have us, said the troubled
Citizens amongst themselves, Proclaim him King, but this shall never be done,
and so they parted worse friends than they were before. So much ado was there
with one proud, haughty Duke, most injuriously aspiring to the Crown, to the
prejudice of his better beloved Nephew, whose claim, title, and right had been
sometime before (if I mistake not in my reckoning) settled expressly by the
Parliament, or at least he had been declared by his Grandfather his Heir and
Lawful Successor; Yet this the Ambitious Uncle thought probably easily to have
evaded and deluded, though besides the affections, and contrary to the
inclination of the rest of the Nation, could he but have prevailed upon the
Londoners, by threats, or fair words, to have sided with him; But their
opposition quite spoiled the Game, and kept the Duke off the Cushion, a Duke
still, so Tryumphant were they in Power, Prudence, and Loyalty. Wherefore to
satisfy his restless reven geful Spirit, the Duke ceased not, till he had got
the old Major put out, and a new one Elected, the Aldermen deposed, and others
set in their places: So little did their late Complicance, and humble
Procession, avail them, while the Commonalty remain stiff, firm, and unshaken,
as well by the Dukes power and greatness, as by his Threats and Menaces. He had
gained a great Ascendent over the weak Kings affections, but yet for all that
could not sway this Honorable City to his Interests, and the Interest of his,
then prevalent, Faction at Court.

The Citizens Loyalty is plainly shown, beyond denial, in Courageously adhering
to the Juster claim and Title of the abused Nephew, and preferring his
Birthright before the Pretensions of his Uncle, who, Ruling the King and those
about him, thought also to have overruled the City too. Their Prudence is
manifest, in that they wisely chose to yield many things to the times, for
peace sake, but when neck and all was in danger, they would not budg a foot,
nor stir one step further, to humor all the Dukes in Kent or Christendom:
Neither is their power less conspicuous, who not only dared, but did oppose
this high minded Duke in the Days of his Visible Grandeur, and proved a match
by far too hard for him. For in a short time comes the News of the Old Kings
^^ing at the point of Death, and presently we have the Londoners sending the
chiefest, and worthiest, of their Citizens to the young Prince, and his Mother,
then Resident not far from the City, declaring their ready minds, and good
wills, to accept him for their true and Lawful King, upon ^is Grandfathers
Decease, beseeching him, on the behalf of the Citizens, and City of London,
that he would have the City Recommended to his good Grace, submitting
themselves only to ^is Rule, and bowing to his Will and Pleasure, under his
Dominion to serve, in Word and Deed, as being known to be so much at his
Devotion, as not only ready to spend their Goods and E^^ates for his sake, but
also to jeopard their lives ^n his behalf, as Stow expresses it in John
Phil^^ts Oration, in the beginning of the life and Reign of King Richard the
second, who was thus ^o undeniably settled in the Throne of his Fore-^athers, by
the Cities apparent interest, and vi^ible influence upon the Councels of the
Nation, in that great turn and change of affairs.

The Cities power seems plainly demonstrated, give me therefore leave to bring
one instance more of their wisdom, caution, and prudence in these dangerous,
because unsettled, times, before I pass ^n to other particulars. The young King
being ^hus entered upon the Government, it was thought good by the King, or
those about him, to have ^ome care taken to accommodate former differences,
especially such as had happened between this potent Duke and the more powerful
City. Wherefore several persons of Eminency were speedily sent to London, to
salute the Citizens in the new King's name, and acquaint them, how the Duke in
all things had submitted himself to the Kings will, ('it was time, for it is
certain he had lost the day, though not perhaps his high-tow'ring Ambition) and
that they should do so in like manner, and then the King would endeavor a
Reconciliation to the City's honor and advantage. Fair words and large
promises. But the worthy Citizens were not Birds to be caught with chaff, much
less to be hampered in a Noose of their own making. They were for no
Resignations it seems at Discretion, though to the dearest Friend alive. They
knew the King to be but young, and weak to help them in such a troublesome
business, if they should so heedlesly desert their own Cause, and put the staff
out of their own hands, by their own Consent. They had enemies enough still,
they might think, at Court, as long as the Duke was there, and his flattering
favorites, who might possibly overruled at least, (if not over-aw) the King to
their prejudice, should they render all they had at pleasure into his hand, by
their own voluntary Act and Deed, when as they knew themselves well able to
defend their liberties and properties in a legal way, without hazarding them
upon so entire a submission, as was required, without Reserve. Wherefore, upon
consultation, this Medium was at length found out, that if the noble persons,
sent to them with that message, would be bound to the Citizens, that their
submission should not redound to the temporal loss or bodily harm of any
Citizen, or prejudice of their City, they would gladly obey the King's
Commandment. This those eminent persons of quality undertook by Oath, and upon
their Knighthood: And so, upon this surety, away go the Citizens to Court, and
being soon brought before the King, besought him (as the Annalist words it) to
reform the peace betwixt the Duke and them, affirming that they were ready in
all things to submit themselves unto his will and pleasure, not as though they
confessed they had made any fault against the Duke, (consider this) but as men
that came at this time for the benefit of peace, and honor, as well to the
King, as the Duke, to pacify the hearts, and mitigate the pleasure of both.
That this was their intent is evident enough from their own request before made
to the King, that he would vouchsafe to make a good and profitable end of this
discord. For that they feared not the Duke, is most certain from the precedent
passages, and that they were all of a sudden fallen deeply in love with him
and his party, I can hardly believe. No, no, They love the Nephew too well, to
dote upon the Uncle; and may they always be so minded upon a good account. The
Citizens having thus prudently (though we see not without great caution)
referred themselves to the King, the Duke readily accepted of this form of
peace (as not hoping possibly for such an other opportunity, nor expecting so
honorable Conditions a second time, if refused the first); and upon his knees
became Intercessor to the King, to take the cause in hand under the form by the
Londoners expressed, and so a Reconciliation was made between these two
contesting Parties, the Duke with an Oath promising them his friendship for the
future, and in token thereof bestowing a kiss of peace upon each of them before
the King at the same time: Whereupon the Citizens returned home with joy and
gladness, rejoicing that the Duke was brought to such humility, who a little
before had, in great Pride, demanded of them, for his favor, an hundred
Hogsheads of Wine, and an infinite number of precious Stones. So great a value
did this high-flown Duke set upon his grace and favor, till the Citizens of
this honorable City, by their power and prudence, had brought down his haughty
spirit a Peg or two lower: and that visibly too* For we don't find him, as
ambitious as he still continued, so openly aspiring to Englands Crown for the
future, how successfully soever his Son made a Rape thereon at the end of this
Princes Reign, under the pretense of I know not what hidden right accruing to
him from his Mother. We read indeed, I confess, in Cotton's Abridgment of the
Records, that, in the seventeenth of this King, the Earl of Arundel laid
several things to the Dukes charge, as not honorable for the King to suffer in
him, nor fit for him to do, being a Subject, as that he went Arm in Arm with
the King and his Men wear the same Livery the Kings did, (which seems to show
much of Arrogance, and Ambition, to say no more) besides some other Objections,
but herein he was so far justified by the King himself, that the Earl was
ordered to crave the Dukes Pardon in full Parliament, in a certain form of
words appointed him. In Stows Annals also we meet with an Accusation brought
against him, in the seventh of this Kings Reign, tending to prove his intent
and design suddenly to oppress the King, and take upon himself the Kingdom,
but it seems little notice was taken of it by the King himself, who was to have
lost most, had it been attempted Successfully, and doubtless as little
believed; otherwise surely the Schedule, containing the time, place, and other
Circumstances, had not been presently delivered into the Dukes hands, nor the
accuser committed at his request to the charge of his near Kinsman, nor the
occasion of his violent Death so little inquired into afterward. The Duke was
not so powerful, nor so great a Terror, but the City was as well able still to
deal with him, and his whole party, and make as vigorous opposition, as ever,
in defense of their Sovereign Lord the King, if occasion should have offered it
self. This we have reason to believe was known in those days to all the Nation,
much more to the Duke himself, from former experience, who therefore may be
supposed not any more to have aspired openly, whatever secret fires of Ambition
lay hidden within his breast; whether or no he designed and attempted ought by
unseen Plots and Conspiracies, I leave to the Judicious Reader to believe or
not, as he pleases, without speaking to or for in the case. Besides the decree
of an overruling Providence, Common equity in siding with what was reputed the
juster title, natural humanity in defending the young and weak, and a well
grounded affection to the Prince, for his Father and Grandfathers sake, (one
the famous Black Prince, the other the Glorious Edward the third their King and
Sovereign,) we may conclude the generality of the Citizens had the greater
aversion to the Duke and his faction, because he was a known favourer of
Wickliff and his Doctrines, (whether on a good account or only out of any
Ambitious Design, I shall not determine in this place) and so looked upon
perhaps as little better than another Juli^n the Apostate. For we are to know,
that Londons Religion, and consequently the Nations, was at that time Popish,
and the generality of the People in Town and Country Romes Votaries, who had
Wickliffs Doctrine in as great detestation then, under the Notion of Heresy, as
we Protestants have it now in esteem, under the Seal and assurance of Truth. As
indeed for many of the ages past, from our ever-blessed Saviors Birth, through
which I have drawn the thread of this discourse, and under the succeeding
Kings, for above an hundred years, Popery continued the National Religion,
under the power and prevalency of which persuasion was the body of the Citizens
bred up, who proved so famous in their Generations for their powerful influence
on the grand concerns of the Nation, in every considerable turn and change of
the times before the Reformation: And when England was made happy with this
blessed alteration, the Cities Power, Strength, and Esteem remained the same in
effect, as ever, the change of her Religion introducing no change therein,
unless for the better, she increasing proportionably in every age in Wealth,
Riches and Honor, as the Nation grew stronger and stronger: And still
continues as visibly conspicuous under Protestantism, as before under the
Romish Faith; a thing easy to be demonstrated in due time and place.

How influential the Cities actions were upon the Nations affairs, and her Love
advantageous to the Orphan Prince, in securing his Claim, Right, and Title to
the Crown in his Grandfathers life time, and settling him quietly on the Throne
at his Death, in spite of all the opposition, the deep designs, and daring
Spirit of his Aspiring Uncle, John of Gaunt, and his faction could make, when
they had got the reigns of public Government into their own hands, through the
Old Kings Connivance, has been the subject of several of the aforegoing pages.
The next thing of course falling under present consideration is to observe, how
this Honorable City of London behaved her self, after she had lent her
^ssistance to raise this Young Prince, from the ^eanness of a Subject, to the
Royal Dignity and Grandeur of a King, under the Name of Richard the Second;
what place she held in his affections, and of what esteem in the eyes of all
the rest of ^he people. But where shall I begin, and when shall I end? Sooner
may I be wearied with read^ng, and tired with writing, than fail of matter ^o
exercise my Pen, so copious is my Subject and ^o full of Variety. For, in my
searches into the Histories of this Kings Reign, I find it plain to a
^emonstration, that the City carried a great sway amongst all Ranks and
Degrees, from the Prince ^o the Subject, from the King, the Supreme, to ^is
subordinate Magistrates, and Ministers, and was highly Honored, Revered, and
Respected among the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty ^f the Land, both in the
calm of peace, and the ^oisterous storms of civil distractions.

I begin first with the Honorable House of Commons, the known representative
of the Commons of England, and concerning them ob^erve, out of Sir Robert
Cotton's exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower, revised by William
Prynne Esquire;, that, in the first Parliament of this King in his first year,
among other Petitions of the Commons, there is to be found one particular
division, under the Title of Petitions for the City of London, wherein the
House of Commons become express Petitioners (so great was the Cities influence
over their Debates, and so high a respect had they for her) to the King for
many considerable Grants in favor of the Citizens, and to them very
advantageous and beneficial: As that all their Liberties may be confirmed with
a Non obstante: That they attend upon no Commandment of any of the Kings
Officers, but only at the Kings Suit, Sealed with the Great or Privy Seal,
except the Kings Justices, according to their Charter: That they shall by
themselves enquire of Customs and impositions happening or arising within the
City: That the Major and Chamberlain for the time being shall have the keeping
of the City Orphans Lands and Goods; [No small advantage in those times, when
the Court of Wards was in being, and greatly beneficial still, by reason of the
Deceits many poor Orphans meet with from Cheating, or Insolvent Guardians and
Trustees, whereas the City's security is unquestionable and her Credit not in
the least to be doubted of:] That the Interpretation of any word or Sentence
touching their said Liberties, which may severally be taken, may be taken
according to the intent and Claim of the said Citizens: That the City may enjoy
all such Liberties as any other Town in the Realm, if they have any other than
the Citizens have; That no protection Royal be allowed in Debt, Account or
Trespass, wherein a Freeman of London is ten pounds, with several others: By
the Answers whereunto we find the Kings Will was, that the Citizens of London
should in no wise be restrained of any of their Liberties or ancient customs
approved: Such as were most useful, and advantageous at the present time, were
by his Majesty granted, and if any appear to have been denied, the denial seems
rather conditional, than plain and direct in down right terms: So cautious was
the King in his Answers, so careful not to displease this powerful Coporation,
and so well advised, as not to show himself Ungrateful at his first coming to
the Crown, to those, who had so Cordially erewhile espoused his interest, and
so stoutly defended his cause but a little before.

In the sixth of this King, at the request of the Commons the Abridgment tells
us, it was enacted, that the City of London should enjoy all such Liberties, as
they had in the time of King Edward the third, or as were to them confirmed by
the King now; and that Victuallers particularly should be ^under the Mayors
Rule, and have no particular liberties by themselves. In the seventh we find it
among the Commons Petitions enacted, that the Citizens of London shall enjoy
all their whole Liberties whatsoever, with this Clause, licet usi non fuerunt,
vel ^busi fuerunt, notwithstanding any Statute to the Contrary. Whether then
it is possible for any Corporate body, endowed with so transcendent Privileges
by the public Act and Deed of the known Legislators of the Land, to forfeit
and lose them all of a sudden, Judge ye. At the same time we read of a grant
made by the same Authority, that the Mayor and Aldermen should take no other
Oath in the Exchequer, than they did in the time of King Edward the third. How
careful were the Commons, do we see in this Age, to prevent the Citizens from
being enslaved in either their Bodies or their Souls? They shall not be imposed
upon, by their good Wills, in so much as an Oath, much less have Creeds,
Articles and Oaths, by the dozens thrust upon them to Swear and subscribe to.
In the same year we have the Commons petitioning the King again in the Cities
behalf, (so Sollicitous were they for her good and welfare) That free choice
may be made of the most able men for Aldermen, as well of such as were the year
before, as of others yearly. See we here the House of Commons pleading for a
free choice, an Election without disturbance, threats, or menaces, and that
particular Citizens should not be imposed upon, nor overaw'd: And if they had
formerly chosen good Men, and found them so by experience, that they should not
be obliged next year to pass them by, and choose others, such as possibly might
prove friends to them the backward way, and over the left shoulders. The
Electors might pick and choose as they please, which is the benefit of a free
Election. And as the Commons pray, so the King grants, as long as there is good
Government in the City thereby* What could be desired more? As long as the
Aldermen were liable to be passed by every year, as well as the
Common-Council-Men, it is very unlikely that they should displease the City,
much less thwart and contradict the Common voice o^ her Citizens for a few
sprinklings of Court Holy Water. Observe, this was at the Parliament hel^ at
Salisbury, some scores of Miles from London, yet 'twas not the distance of
place that could breed distance of affection. Remove the national assembly to
the other end of the Land, to the utmost Coasts of Great Brittian, yet Londons
Name reaches thither. It Is not the place that makes our Westminster Conventions
so mindful of her, but her Merit, her Power, her Influence, the respect and
esteem they have for her Glory, Honor and Renown, to see her ever continue,
the fixed unmovable Defendress of the Protestant Religion, under the Defender of
the Faith.

In the Ninth, the Commons require, at the petition of the Mayor and Commonalty
of London, that the Patent lately made to the Constable of the Tower may be
Revoked. The reason is plain, 'twas prejudicial to the City, to have the
Victuals brought to her, upon her dearest and best beloved Thames, made to pay
Toll and Custom to another. How Glorious and Gracious must we needs think that
City to be in the peoples Eyes, when we find their Representatives, not once
nor twice, but so constantly, almost at every (...), pleading her Cause,
vindicating her Liberties, and asserting her Rights? And these we know are part
of the Legislative power. A general act of Oblivion is a Royal Grant not every
day bestowed upon the Subject, and a grace not often obtained without much
importunity and intercession. We have reason therefore to believe the Londoners
looked upon it as no small favor, that at the Common's request the King
granted a Pardon to the Citizens of London, in the Eleventh of his Reign, of
all Treasons, Felonies, and other offenses of loss of life. For so Pardons run,
whether the parties were guilty of such crimes and delinquences, or not; and
it is a salvo that Wise men disdain not sometimes to make use of, and why should
they not, unless a Pardon must of necessity imply a Crime?

We have heard how careful the House of Commons were, under this King, to
secure the Cities Liberties, ascertain her Rights, defend her Privileges, and
keep off encroachments, that she might not be abused nor imposed on: Let me
next have leave, before I pass forwards, to give a hint or two to intimate, how
ready the Commons were to free the City from Annoyances, in order both to the
Citizens health and the Cities Ornament, that nothing offensive, either to the
Eyes or the Nostrils, might be found therein. It Is to be seen Enacted, among
the Commons Petitions in the sixteenth of this King, that all the filth upon
Thames side, in a certain place there mentioned, be utterly removed against a
short time particularliz'd: That the Butchers of London build convenient
Houses, to hold whatsoever they had noisome in their Calling, thence in due
time to be carried in Boats into the middle of the Thames at high water, there
to be cast at it is beginning to Ebb, so to be born away with the Tide. And that
no Rubbish or the like be cast into Thames between Westminster and the Tower on
a considerable forfeiture. Small slight trivial matters some may happily think
these to be, and not worth perhaps a remark: Yet to me it seems a manifest sign
of the Citizens care and esteem, the House of Commons respect for them, and the
influence the City had upon their debates, that they showed themselves so
willing and ready, at all times, to take into more especial consideration the
slightest and minutest things, so it came recommended to them from the City of
London, or appeared in their Eyes advantageous to her Inhabitants: And that
these had an equal share in making Laws with the Lords, or even with the King
himself, is as evident as the shining of the Sun in a hot Summers-day.

From the Commons let us pass to the King and Lords jointly considered. For the
esteem the Lords had for the City, when looked upon as single in themselves, and
not expressly united with the King, may best be shown either when we come to
touch upon the Civil distractions of these times, whereof the whole Nation were
partakers, or the more immediate afflictions of the City in particular, (as
some we may be sure they had in a General Del^ge of miseries) my Subject being
as yet principally of Proceedings and Transactions carried on in a
Parliamentary way, that is or ought to be, in meekness and calmness. What I
have chiefly to observe here is in plain words out of the Abridgment of the
Records Relating to the Parliament of the seventeenth of this King, where we
read it enacted, that it is not the Kings meaning or intent, nor meaning of the
Statute made in the twenty eighth of Edward the third, (touching Errors and
misprisions in the City of London) that the Mayors, Sheriffs and Aldermen of
London, that now are, heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be, should
incur, or bear the pain contained in the said Statute, for any erroneous
Judgment given, or to be given in the said City. This is one of the three Acts
there noted, to be enacted by the King, by the assent of the Lords only: And
therefore makes good my assertion of the respect shown the City by the King and
Lords, as may be made to appear more obvious by giving the Reader the substance
of the forecited Statute, still to be seen, among the Printed Statutes, in the
twenty eighth of Edward the third, Chapter tenth, where we find it ordained and
established, that the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, which have the Governance
of the City of London, shall cause to be redressed and corrected the defaults
errors and misprisions above named, and the same duly punish from time to time
upon a certain Pain: That is to say, at the first default a thousand Marks to
the King, and at the second default two thousand Marks, and at the third
default that the Franchise and Liberty of the City be taken into the Kings
hand: And it is likewise enacted, that enquiries shall be made of these
defaults by Enquests of people of these Foreign Counties, Kent, Essex, Sussex,
Hertford, Buckingham and Berks: And the receiving and execution of the Writs,
as well Originals as Judicials, is committed to the Constable of the Tower, or
his Lieutenant, in place of the Sheriffs of London; so runs the Statute: Whence
occasion might seem likely enough to be taken, one time or other, by the Cities
designing adversaries, to Hector the Mayor Sheriffs and Aldermen into
compliance, by threatening to sue that Act upon them, or opportunity given to
treacherous friends, (fostered within her Walls, bred up under the shadow of
her wings, raised and enriched through the benefit of her Franchises and
Privileges, and crept into Authority by the overflowings of her favor) for a
lick or two at the public hony-pot, wilfully to incur the forfeitures, that
her Liberties might be seized, and her good old Charter, as far as in them
lies, wholly lost. But such an Honorable respect had both the King and his
Nobles at that season for this most deserving City, and so glorious appeared
she in their Eyes, that they seem in a manner resolved, as well as highly
desirous according to their power, to prevent the very possibility of such ill
consequences by this favorable interpretation, that after-ages might not rue
for the oversights of former times, if they could help it. For this rather
looks like an explanation of the Statute than a Repeal, an Act Declaratory of
their good Will and intentions, more than a result of the whole Legislative
power of the Nation; here being only the King and his Lords assent mentioned,
and not a word of the Commons. And yet possibly this Declaration may amount to
little less than a vertual, tho not a formal repeal, if it be jointly
considered with what has been before related, in the seventh of this Kings
Reign, concerning the Clause, licet usi non fuerunt, vel abusi fuerunt,
notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, to be found enacted among the
Commons Petitions of that year, in favor of the Cities Liberties. So that upon
this account we find Authority in every part of it concurring in the point. And
that it was in favor of the City in General, as well as in behalf of
particular persons, is plain from the sense and substance of the original
Statute, and the consequential adjuncts thereto belonging. But if any one shall
think this conclusion will not clearly follow from the premises, I don't think
but I am able to prove it undeniably (as to the part at least of several of the
Lords) from Statute Law: As strong an assurance, as we Englishmen can expect,
as being the boundary of our Lives and Liberties, and giving us the security of
all we enjoy, or can properly call our own. The Statute is to be found in the
first of Henry the fourth, Chapter 15th. where after a recital of the
beforementioned Statute of 28 Edward 3. (though through a mistake or misprint,
it is said there to to be made in the seven and twentieth year) we find as
follows; Our Lord the King considering the good and lawful behavior of the
Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and all the Commonalty of the City of London
toward him, and therefore willing to ease and mitigate the Penalty aforesaid
by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons
aforesaid, has ordained and established, that the penalty aforesaid, as well
of the thousand Marks, and of the two thousand Marks, and of the Seizure of the
Franchises comprised in the same Statute, shall not be limited in a certainty,
but that the Penalty in this Case be by the advice and discretion of the
Justices thereto assigned. To mitigate it doubtless, not inhance it at
pleasure, to ruin particular persons and annihilate the City's Liberties, by
pretending the loss of her Charter.

How respectful King, Lords and Commons, in Parliament assembled, showed
themselves to this honorable City has been sufficiently declared, proved, and
made manifest, I presume, already in the foregoing Relation. Let us now call
off our Meditations from this particular point, and fix our thoughts upon an
other Argument, highly demonstrative of the City's power, drawn from no less
uncouth a Topic than tumults and disorders, insurrections and Outrages of
unruly people. There having passed an Act of Parliament in the fourth of this
King, to empower him to Collect and Gather Poll money throughout the Land, and
many exactions thereupon, and incivilities being committed by the new
Collectors and other Officers, (some of the Courtiers having procured the Kings
Commissions for a review, and a more exact Collection, under the notion of the
Kings being cheated and defrauded through the unfaithfulness of his former Tax
gatherers) the Commons thought themselves so abused and oppressed, that in many
places they took Counsel together to make resistance, and in several Counties
assembled themselves in great numbers, to the no small disturbance of the Land.
Amongst these the Commons of Kent and Essex are reckoned the greatest bodies,
gathered together under such heads, as Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, and the like
obscure Fellows. These we find quickly coming to London, where they soon obtain
entrance, notwithstanding the Mayors intended opposition, and then quickly
carry all before them, behead whom they thought good, do what they would, burn
great men's Palaces at their Pleasure, the Gates of the Tower are set open to
them, the King rides to'm in fear, unarmed, and ill guarded, at their sending
for, and grants them as large Charters as they desired, none of his Courtiers
daring to oppose or resist their Insolences, so that they seem to have had all
things for a small season under their sole Power, Direction, and Command, as
remaining Masters of the Field, without a stroke stricken by any opposite
Party: such a terror did their numbers and boldness strike into men's minds at
the first, and so effectual was their success in getting within the Walls of
London: either through the joint assistance of many Commons there inhabiting,
or else rather under the repute of having the whole City at their beck. But
when the first brunt was over, and it was visible, that the greatest, best, and
most of the Citizens joined not with the Country Commons, to approve or abet
them in their furious outrages and violences, the tide was soon turned, and
deliverance brought, both to the King and Court, by the courage of this Loyal
City. The Mayor himself, as their Head, made the first open beginning, was
seconded by his Brethren the Aldermen, and quickly followed by the worthy
Citizens. He being a man of great boldness, by the Kings permission, first
arrested, and afterward grievously wounded one of the chiefest of the Rebels,
Jack Straw, says Fabian, Wat Tyler, says Stow, to the great encouragement of
those about the King, (among whom this Arch Rebel received his death) and
daunting of the Rebellious Commons; to which valiant Deed the City is indebted
for Walworths Dagger, some say, inserted upon this Account in her Coat of Arms.
After this Act away rides the Mayor with one Servant only (the Annalist tell
us) into the City, and crying out to the Citizens to come speedily to the Kings
assistance, raises a considerable strength, who well armed, under the leading
of Sir Robert Knowles, came in good time into the Field, where the King was,
among the tumultuous Commons, not so well attended, but that the unexpected
coming of the Mayor, and the armed Citizens, is expressly said to have caused
rejoicing in the minds of the King, and those few Knights and Esquires then
about him; and the Issue acquaints us with the great consequence hereof, when
we read of the Commons throwing down their weapons immediately, falling also
themselves upon the ground, and beseeching pardon, who but a little before
gloried, that they had the Kings life in their own power, and so possibly might
have continued boasting, had not the Citizens thus roused up themselves to the
Kings relief, and timely dispers't these seditious Rioters in the midst of
their insulting Pride. That this was a piece of Loyalty, as well as valor,
most timely and seasonably shown, is evident, from the great influence what was
but barely done at London, though without London's consent, had upon the
Country. For from the Annalist we are given to understand, that there were the
like Insurrections in Suffolk and Norfolk and in express words told, that these
overthrew House and Manors of great Men, and of Lawyers, slew the Students of
the Law, etc. according to the manner of them at London, having for their
Captain an ungracious Priest, named John Wraw, who had been at London just
before, had seen what was done there, and came thence with Instructions from
Wat Tyler. So that what is done in the City is very likely to be imitated in the
Country. A disorderly Rout of people were got together round about and within
the City, and committed many unsufferable Outrages, and several parts of the
Country were resolved to follow the Fashion, and do the like. The Citizens
courage quel'd these Tumultuous Commons in London, and then they were quickly
suppressed, we hear, in other Places. Then had the King reason to reward the
Mayor, and several Aldermen, with the honor of Knighthood and other
recompenses, and time to assemble an Army of his Loyal Friends and Subjects at
London, to guard him, till the Principals of these dispersed Rebels were
brought to condign Punishment by Law, which was quickly done, thanks to the
worthy Londoners, who had thus vigorously asserted the Kings Right, defended
his Royalty, rescued his Person, and regained him the exercise of his Kingly
Power, well near lost before, through the Rebellion of his meaner Commons, and
cowardly Faintheartedness of his Courtiers; Men it seems that could speak big
at the Council Board, and talk high upon the Bench, under the shelter of the
Kings Authority; but when they were to come into the Field of War, to fight for
their Prince, they proved mere Courtiers, all words and no deeds. The Citizens
were the Men of valor. They lay still, the King was like to be undone, and the
Court ruined. They appeared to oppose the vaunting Enemies, they fled before
them, and the King regained his own.

This one famous City, the terror of her Enemies, the joy of her Friends,
cooperates in the grand turns and changes of affairs in the British world, or
else such attempts, for the most part at least, if not always, prove vain,
fruitless, and insignificant. And where is the wonder of this? The whole City,
as a compact Body with Strength and Beauty fitly united, may well be esteemed
most amiable, and counted highly powerful, since she is to be admired for the
goodness and greatness (under which comprehend the large Riches, Power and
Spirit) of particular Citizens incorporated into Her. For the first, let me
instance in the commendable diligence of her Mayor Adam Baume, who, upon a very
great scarcity of Corn in the fifteenth of this King, providently took care to
have Corn brought to L^^don from foreign Parts, to the relief of the whole
Realm; and add hereunto the Charity of the Aldermen, who, for the furtherance
of so good a Work, laid out each of them a sum of money, in those days very
considerable, to the same purpose, and bestowed the Corn thus procured in
convenient places, where the Poor might buy at an appointed price, and such, as
had no ready money, upon Surety to pay the year following, besides the common
Act of the Mayor and Citizens in taking two thousand Marks out of the Orphans
Chest in Guildhall for the same intent. In Proof of the later, viz. The
Greatness, Riches, Power and Spirit of particular Citizens, I challenge all the
Cities in the world besides, to show me such another Example, as that of John
Philpot Citizen of London, the Citizens Orator to this King in the beginning of
his Reign, who in the second year, observing the young Kings inability, the
Nobles neglect, and the oppressions of the poor Commons; voluntarily hired
Soldiers with his own money, rig'd out a Fleet at his own charge, and hazarded
his own Person, to defend the Realm from Pirates, Robbers, and incursions of
Enemies, and therewith successfully took in a little time Mercer the Scot with
all his Ships, which he had before violently taken from Scarborow, and fifteen
Spanish Ships besides laden with much Riches, which came to his Aid. Can Rome
her self show me a like Parallel? As for the Fabij, they were a whole Family
among the Patricians, and Crassus himself a great Magistrate in the height of
that Commonwealths Grandeur amidst Equals and Inferiors, whereas this
publick-spirited Person lived still a Subject, under a limited Monarchy, none
of the greatest nor the strongest then in the World. This noble Act some would
have thought should have deserved great praise and commendation, and so it had
among the Common People, but among the great Lords and Earls it met with
Reproach and Detraction, as being a manifest reproof of their carelessness and
negligence, and he himself was endangered thereby, they speaking openly against
it, as done unlawfully without the Council of the King and his Realm* though
his design could not be denied to have been very honest in the general. Had he
suffered for that unpresidented Act, because it was deficient in some
formalities required by Law, the Statesmen of the times, therein instrumental,
without all peradventure had appeared as odious in the Eyes of the Commons, as
some of the chief Episcopal Clergymen, in a Protestant Country, within the
Memory of Man, would have made themselves obnoxious to the Peoples Censure,
should they have publicly burnt Vindiciae Pietatis, i. e. a Vindication of
Godliness from the imputation of folly and fancy, (which I have heard intimated
as if thought of) because it wanted such an Imprimatur as the Law demanded, and
was writ possibly by an Author not altogether Episcopal in his declared
Judgment.

But to pass on, If such were the superemient and supererogating Acts of
particular Citizens so many Ages ago, to what an height of Wealth, Greatness
and splendour must we needs think the City to have arrived at this day, some
Centuries of years since that time? If ten thousand Pounds was a Mayors Estate
heretofore, we may give a shrewd guess at the Cities advancement and increase
in Riches since, now that the same is made the limited sum, for the Citizens to
swear themselves not worth, who desire to avoid the chargeable Honor, and
Honorable charge, of the Shrievalry. Nay, to go a step or two further, now
adays we find her Sheriffs Revenue commonly reputed at double the value, and
others of her Citizens thought able to number their thousands by scores. What
if I had also added, that some are esteemed so wealthy, as not to know an end
of their Riches? Certainly such, if any, must needs come under the denomination
of men vastly rich in worldly goods. So that this glorious and Triumphant City
seems in many things able to vy with, if not out-vy, the Quondam Mistress of
the World, Rome her self. She exceeds her in Antiquity, as being founded (in
Fabian's Compute) above four hundred years before her, and has this advantage
of her now, that whereas Rome is confessed and acknowledged to be in the wane of
her power and Greatness, both as to her Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority,
London still continues on the rising hand. Rome it is visible has suffered a
considerable diminution, as to her former extent and Jurisdiction, in both
capacities, whether she be looked upon, as, once head of the world, or now
pretended head of the Church, but London plainly appears to be daily getting
ground both in Fame and Reputation, as well as building: And whereto she may
come in time, belongs to a Prophet not an Historian to declare. She is already
become the Famed Metropolis of this our little World, and Rome was but Empress
in a greater: Neither was she anear so influential over the greatest part of
that, how much soever thereof she had under her Dominion, as London is known to
be at present over all ours.

Having thus shown the influence this Honorable City had upon the Commons of
this Land in Peace and amidst tumultuous disorders, and the great respect both
King and Nobles in Conjunction had for her, I should now proceed to disengage
my self of an obligation, I presume, lying on me, from part of a promise before
made, to declare the esteem the Lords, when singly considered, had of her
strength and power. But before I pass on more immediately thereto, I crave
leave to observe the great variety and difference in Parliamentary transactions
and proceedings under this King, within the compass of whose Reign we find but
two years on Record, viz the nineteenth and twenty second, wherein there was
not a Parliament called and assembled in one place or other by his Authority,
sometimes oftener, and so those Acts of Edward the third were exactly kept for
eighteen years running, wherein it is ordained and established, that a
Parliament shall be holden once every year, and more often if need be, which
being omitted but one year in twenty one, and not observed in the twenty
second, we may easily think it proved fatal to the unfortunate King, that in
the next Parliament he should be deposed by his own Subjects and the Crown set
upon another head. And is it any wonder, to see things so injurious and unjust
sometimes done in National Assemblies, when in a vein of contradiction they
make Ordinances so diametrically opposite each to other, as was done in this
Kings time? For we find parties mutually clashing in public, and what was
ordained in one Parliament for the Commons good (as was then pretended) by an
other repealed in favor of the other side, former Laws Annulled, Pardons
revok't, Grants recalled, and new punishments inflicted for o^d offenses. And
yet in an other Revolution, within a very small space of time, the last
Parliaments Acts were casher'd and thrown out of doors to make room for the
revival and Establishing the Elder Parliament Statutes. Such changes were then
Rung, and so much contesting between Privilege and Prerogative, as if the
differences were wh^lly and altogether irreconcilable, or at least made to seem
so by some men's poli^ies, the better to carry on their own more particular
Intreagues. And therefore, when fair words were feared not likely to prevail,
Arms were prepared to force, and there was danger o^ h^ving Swords drawn, Bows
bended, and Arrows shot for the promoting the designs on foot.

But of all Statutes, Acts, Ordinances, Laws, and Grants, most memorable and
observable is the Petition of the Commons, and the Answer thereto given, in the
Parliament begun at Westminster, April 25th. in the second of this Kings Reign.
The Petition is to be seen among the Commons Petitions in Cottons Abridgment of
the Records in the Tower, so often mentioned, and Printed 1657. page 169. Tit.
28. in these words, That Answer reasonably may be given to all their Petitions
now, or hereafter to be moved; and that Statutes be thereupon made before
departure of every Parliament. The Answer hereto runs thus, such Bills as
Remedy cannot otherwise be had but in Parliament, reasonable Answer shall be
thereto made before such Departure. Now we are to understand, that Petitions,
in the old, are Bills, according to the new Style, which in this Parliament
were thus ordained to be produced at least for the Royal Assent, if not to be
passed formerly into Laws. So that if the Houses were so minded, by straining
this grant to its utmost bounds (though perhaps further than was designed at
the first) 'twas no hard matter for them to sit e'n as long, in a manner, as
they pleased; and the old King of late Memory, his present Majesty's Royal
Father, may hereby very easily be vindicated from the Censures of those
undutiful Subjects, who pretend to blame his conduct, and Arraign, if not
condemn, his Judgment for passing the continuing Act in the Parliament of
forty, whereby he more plainly and immediately put the dissolution thereof out
of his own hands; whereas before he had been happily liable to have been trickt
out of it, with greater affront to his Prerogative, by the quirks that nimble
wits would have been apt enough at that conjuncture, to have started out of
this Grant. For what would not they have attempted in that posture of affairs,
who actually did so much afterward by the noise of an Ordinance, a term new to
the vulgar, but weil enough known (though possibly never in that use and extent
before) to the Learned Lawyers, who can easily inform the Questionist, out of
the Records in the Tower, that in the thirty seventh of Edward the third they
met with the name and nature in a demand of the Chancellors to the whole
Estates, whether they would have such things as they agreed on, to be by way of
Ordinance, or of Statute; and in the Answer thereto made, by way of Ordinance,
with this reason then and there given, that they might amend the same at their
pleasure.

If we wonder at this grant, which seems to trail after it such inconveniences
to the Regal Power, as were before hinted, or at least might be made an Inlet
to pretenses, as prejudicial to the Royal Prerogative, we are to understand,
that this was obtained in the Kings Nonage, though not perhaps in times
absolutely factious, for I don't read but that things were carried then calmly
and quietly enough. But when the King came to full Age, then we may observe
that he or his bosom Favorites, were not well pleased with this or other
Grants, that confined the Regal Power within stricter Boundaries, than their
own desires pe^mitted them to like, and therefore there was striving amain to
remove the ancient Landmarks, and the Court effected it at last for a short
space, but with so ill an event, that the issue proved as fatal to the King
himself, as th^s counterplottings had been d^structive to many others before.
People hereupon may say what they think fit, and pass their Verdicts as they
please: But can any blame that man's Will and Desire, to disintangle himself
from Fetters and Chains, who thinks himself born free, and so would fain live
according to his own pleasure and good liking? It Is his Judgment rather, that
is to be quessioned, when it suggests to him, that he may command, and ought to
be obeyed, in such things where no obedience was before due, by nature, or
consent; and the goodness of his Intellectuals are liable to be doubted of,
when they make him to fancy he may be absolute, where known Laws and long
continued Custom has authorized the contrary.

Such seems to have been Englands Case of old, where the Subjects have often put
on Arms to prevent encroachments upon their dearly beloved, and many times
dea^ly bought, Liberties. And such the Nations State under this King, he being
come to his full Age, when several of the Barons, headed by the Duke of
Gloucester his Uncle, thought it their main interest and concern, to speak high
and look big, with Armor on their backs and Swords by their sides, though it
subjected them to much ob^^quy and displeasure at Court, and brought themselves
and all theirs into much hazard and danger. But this it seems they little
thought of, or as little valued: That the Court highly resented the actings of
such, as endeavored in Parliament time to bring some o^ the Prime Favorites
to Judgment ^or Crimes laid to their Charge, is evident, in that they had laid
a Plot to invite the Principal Lords to a Supper in London, and there murder
them, as such who crossed the King's cours^s: But the present Lord Mayor
utterly refused to do it, though moved thereto (says my Author) by the King
himself, and thereupon this design miscarried. But then other Rodds were laid
in Lavender, and contrivanc^s secretly carried on, to entrap and suppress the
Country Lords. The King calls all the High Sheriffs of the Counties before him,
and demands, what strength they could make for him against the Lords, if there
should be occasion? But they answered, that the Common People did so favor the
Lords, as believing them to be loyal and true to the King, that it was not in
their power to raise any great Force against them. Then they were commanded to
take care, that no Knight nor Burgess should afterward be chosen to any
Parliament, but those whom the King and Council should name; whereto they
replied, It was an hard matter, in those times of Jealousy and Suspicion, to
deprive the People of their ancient Liberties in choosing their
representatives. Then were the Judges consulted, (Men, as my Author writes,
learned chiefly in one point, that is, without consid^ring Truth or Falsehood,
to please those in high places) who gave several extrajudicial opinions in
favor of the Prerogative upon some Queries propounded to them, by one of
which, viz. Whether the King might not at his pleasure dissolve the Parliament,
and command the Lords and Commons to depart, we may guess what Exceptions and
Resentments were taken against the Commons Request, in the Second of this King
before mentioned, that the Parliament should not be dismissed before a reasonable
Answer was given to all their Petitions.

After this was my Lord Mayor of London required to give an account, how many
able men he could raise in the City? who answered, that he thought they could
make fifty thousand men at an hours warning: But when he went about it in good
earnest, the Citizens cried out, they would never fight against the Kings
Friends, and the Defenders of the Realm. Then were there endeavors privily to
apprehend the opposing Lords singly by themselves, but this design was
disappointed, and the Lords were quickly up in Arms to defend themselves. When
these devices would not hold water, by the interposition of Mediators it was
ordered, that the Lords should come to Westminster to the King upon a day
appointed them, some Persons of Quality and Credit taking Oaths on the Kings
part, that no fraud or deceit should be used, whereupon the Lords prepared
themselves to come up according to agreement, but soon stopped their Journey, upon
notice given them of an Ambusment laid for them in the Mews, which made the
King ready almost to tax them of breach of Covenant, till he was told the
reason, viz. the Ambusment laid for them, and then to clear himself (as Stow
relates it) swear he knew of no such thing. He might possibly be as innocent as
the Child unborn, as to any particular knowledge of this matter, but certainly
his Courtiers were much to blame, and very bold, thus to act in direct
opposition to the former Agreement; for that there was such a treacherous piece
o^ Service intended, the Annalist assures us, but that any of the prime
Engineers and designing Actors were punished, for acting thus without the Kings
more especial Warrant, Knowledge, or Commission, I do not find.

When these tricks would not do, then fair words and promises were come in
fashion again, to sooth up the angry Lords, who at last were come to
Westminster with a sufficient Guard of Attendants, and in the upshot the speedy
calling of a Parliament was concluded on, where the Accusers and Accused might
meet face to face. But the favorite Lords durst not attend the consequence of
such a Meeting, and therefore the Duke of Ireland, and the rest of the Faction,
left the Court to be out of the way, and an Army was after raised to conduct
the Duke up to Court, with which he hasted as fast as he could toward London,
but was miserably overthrown at Radcoat Bridge in Oxfordshire by the contesting
Lords, and so e^ded all his glory, and a few years after his life. Upon this
defeat the Lords thought they had matter enough to justify their Arms; with
forty thousand men up come they to London and were there received, the King
then keeping his Christmas in the Tower, to whom they show the Letter he had
sent to the aforesaid Duke to raise an Army for their destruction, and the
Letters the French King had written to him to come into France, there to do
acts to his own dishonor and the Kingdoms. These things we may well conclude
bred a great deal of ill blood between the King and his Lords, and that their
Pulses beat extraordinary high is plain from the peremptory message they sent
the King, when they understood his mind was altered as to keeping his promise
before made to them, That if he came not according to his word, they would
choose another King, who should hearken to the faithful Counsel of his Lords.
This, it is easy to be thought, touched the King to the quick, but being not
then strong enough to oppose, he esteemed it his safest and securest course to
condescend to the Lords desires, and order the calling of a Parliament. A
Parliament comes and then it wrought wonders.

In Stow we meet with a Story, coincident with these times, concerning the
Londoners, how that they understanding, that the French King had got together a
great Navy, assembled an Army, and set his purpose firmly to come into England,
trembling like Leverets, fearful as Mice they sought starting holes to hide
themselves in, even as if the City had been ready to be taken, and they, that
in times past, bragged they would blow all the French men out of England,
hearing a vain Rumor of the Enemies coming, ran to the Walls, brake down the
houses adjoining, destroyed and laid them flat, and did all things in great
fear, not one Frenchman having then set foot on Shipboard. But there is not one
word of the Author, whence this was extracted, which we commonly find in the
Margin in other Relations. What ground now there was for this pannick fear, I
cannot devise, or rather reason, for the relating of such a heedless story,
looking more like a conjectural report, than an historical relation, as if the
Writer himself had been frenchified, or imposed upon by some French Translator,
who was desirous to render his Country m^n terrible to the English by the Pen
of an English Historian since they have been so ill able to do it by their own
Swords. For that the English neither overmuch loved nor feared the French
Nation, is evident from the Histories of ancient times, and the occurrences of
later days and from the Commons Address to the Purb^ck Alarm. How then the
Londoners should come to be afraid of them so all of a sudden is a Riddle to
me. It Is certain enough of late years, that, when they were burnt out of house
and home, and had little more perhaps to lose besides their lives, upon an
Alarm of the French coming and Papists rising, they were like enraged Bears,
robbed of their young Ones, much more ready to fall on than the others to set
upon them, so far were they from standing in fear of the whole power of France,
though it should have been united with all their Popish Friends, Favorers, and
Pensioners in England. And that they had little or no grounds for such fear in
those elderly times, the long train of Victories gained heretofore in France
puts us out of doubt. Besides methinks the Instances in this Story, which the
Writer sets down as Arguments of fear, are rather proofs of a provident care
and foresight. For what else can the running to the Walls, and breaking down
the Houses adjoining import, but a design and resolution to stand upon their
own Guard, which is the property of Courage not of Cowardice. That there were
intentions, suitable to men of valor, of standing up vigorously in their own
defense against the foreign Enemy, may be proved out of the some Author, from
the great numbers of armed men by the Nobles brought to the Parliament then at
London, and the Lord Chancellors calling men of Arms, out of almost every part
of the Realm, to the Marches about London, to beat back the Frenchmen with
their King, had they come. Let this therefore serve to disprove the Annalists
suggestions out of his own mouth, and show the Nobles care for the Cities
safeguard, in drawing such forces thitherward, and their hopes of considerable
assistance from the City to help them in the Common cause of self-preservation.

But suppose, without granting it, that there were some sparks of fear amongst
them, it is questionable, whether they did not spring from the mistrust of their
principal Magistrates, not out of any diffidence and distrust of their own
strength, or dread of a Foreign Enemies power and puissance. For to me it is an
Argument that the Major of London this year looked Courtward, since that we
read of an endeavor to engage him in such an horrid design, as has been
before spoken of, to destroy the principals of the opposite party at a private
Supper in London. Certainly the King would not have uttered a syllable of an
intreague of this importance to so powerful a Magistrate; as my Author affirms
he did, had there not been hopes of prevailing on him in Reverence at least to
the Kings word and desire: But upon the Trial it seems he proved himself an
honester man in that point; (whatever his principles and inclinations otherwise
were) than his Predecessor, whom we read of as deeply concerned in that Plot.
Much about this time it is likewise that a Modern writer tells us, that the
Londoners incurred much obloquy, for that having before been Pardoned by the
King of some Crimes laid to their charge, (but what nor when committed I find
not by him mentioned) they were ready to comply with his d^sires, and a Jury of
them being Impannell'd, indicted some Lords of many Crimes objected against
them. But this also is to be imputed to the Magistrates influence and power in
calling out men fit for the purpose, and not to the whole body of the Citizens.
For we read just after, that when the Mayor thought to have raised them against
the contesting Lords, they resolutely, refused, and absolutely rejected the
Motion as is before related. So that 'twas not having the Mayor at their Beck,
nor the Power, they thought, they had among the high Sheriffs of the Counties
to procure such men returned up to serve in Parliament, as were nominated by
the King and his Council, that could shelter the guilty favorites at Cour from
the censure of that August Assembly, well known afterward by the name of the
Parliament that wrought wonders.

For on the very first day thereof all the Judges, but one, were Arrested as
they sat in their places, questioned for their extrajudicial opinions and
Arbitrary actings, and severely punished by Banishment and Confiscation of
their Estates: The Lord Chief Justice Tresilian lost his Life at Tyburn, and
the rest, my Author says, had all dyed, had it not been for the Queens
intercession. As the Judges were thus brought under the Lash of those Laws,
which before they had so much abused to humor Arbitrary men's designs, the
better thereby to secure to themselves their own Stations and Offices of
Judicature, so the Patrons themselves, and reputed promoters of these Arbitrary
and illegal Actings, were reduced into the same Predicament, Several of the
chief were impeached of no less than High Treason in open Parliament, the
absent for ever banished, and many of them in hold either Hanged, or Beheaded,
upon Tower-hil, or at Tyburn, notwithstanding they had been ere while Men of
Name, Power and Authority, and in great favor at Court but just before. So
uncertain is the State of Mortality, and so slippery is walking in high places.

But amongst all those, who fell under the stroke of an angry Deity, and so
shamefully lost their lives by the hands of Justice, most memorable is the
fate, that befell Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer, late Lord Mayor of London, who,
for many oppressions, and seditions by him caused in the City, was Beheaded (as
Stow informs us) the Morrow after the Execution of the Lord Chief Justice
Tresilian, and, which is more remarkable, with the same Ax, he had before
prepared for others of his fellow Citizens. So just is Providence to suffer the
wicked to be ensnared by the devices of their own hearts, and to fall headlong
into the Pit they had dig'd for others. Stow tells us the King had ofttimes
made him Mayor of London against the mind of the Citizens. But in Fabian (who
methinks, being once Sheriff of this Honorable City, should know best what had
been formerly Transacted in that City, of whose good order, Policy, and
Government he has expressly Treated in his Chronicle) I don't find but that he
was Elected and Chosen. Possibly there might be an order made at Court, Present
the King, and sent into the City to further and promote his Election, which by
the one might be esteemed an imposing him on the City, while the other only
took notice of the meeting of the Citizens in order to an Election, without
relating how the matter was carried, or whether he came in fairly by a
Majority, or else by a strong hand, through the working of Court Favorites,
who influencing the Judges might make that pass for Law, which was contrary
thereto, let the difference of voices be never so great on the other side. So
have I heard of a place, where it was carried by thirteen against twenty one,
and when the business came to be scanned over anew, it was adjudg'd by vote
against the Majority: But this was rather the effect of Greatness and Power,
overruling, than the result of Equity and Justice dividing to every one his
right.

That this Man, when Mayor, met with great opposition from the most eminent of
the Citizens, I presume concludable from his Resentments, and what is in plain
words delivered of him by the Annalist, how that, whilst he was in the full
Authority of his Mayoralty, he caused a Common pair of Stocks in every Ward,
and a Common Ax to be made, to behead all such, as should be against him, and
had Indicted eight thousand and more of the best and greatest of the City, so
resolved was he to carry on the design right or wrong to please his Masters and
Abettors. What kind of principled Man he was we may easily guess, as from the
aforementioned passages, so from the Historians Relations before hinted of him,
as being deeply concerned in the Plot, before intimated, to assassinate the
contesting Lords, and also afterward one of the Chief Men, that had a hand in
laying the Ambuscade, spoken of above, unwilling the King, (as he swore) to
entrap them, who, upon promise of safe conduct, confirmed by the Oaths of some
persons of Quality, were coming up to Westminster to the King, which he and Sir
Thomas Trivet privately sent away to London upon the discovery thereof. That he
was a suitable Tool to carry on great men's intreagues, or at least thought fit
enough to be made a Property to work upon, why may we not conclude, in that we
find him elected, at the latter part of the last Kings Reign, and admitted at
the Tower of London into the Mayoralty, when the proud haughty Duke of
Lancaster had got the other Mayor put out of his Office, as not quick enough it
seems to run along with that aspiring Dukes designs, who aimed at that time to
have put by his Nephew from the Throne, and have intruded thereunto himself,
contrary to right, reason and justice, and the public interest of the Nation?
Who knows likewise by whose influence, and for what intents, he was kept in the
Office of Mayor for three years together,, in the seventh, eighth, and nineth
of this King? What a vast difference was there, as to Principles and Practices,
between this man and the famed John Philpot, his fellow Sheriff in the forty
sixth of the precedent King? The one proved as great a Patriot to his Country
before, in, and after his Mayoralty, as the other showed himself an ambitious
Courtier under a Gold Chain in the City. But what great wonder is this, to see
men once join Partners in an Office, vastly differing each from other in their
Judgments and Actions, when raised to places of higher Dignity and Pr^ferment?
I don't think but it is easy enough to find an instance at present, if there
were any great occasion or necessity thereof.

It Is said of this Sir Nicholas Brembar, that if he had lived, he had been
created Duke of Troy, or of London by the name of Troy. What a pity 'twas that
he had not had a Patent, ready signed and sealed lying by him, to have shrouded
himself and all his old crimes, under this new Dignity upon Occasion? But this
I Fancy would never have past upon that Parliament, either Lords or Commons, to
have sheltred him from the Law of the Land, though he had become really, in
act, as well as desire and design, a Peer of the Realm. However this intention
of his, if truly related, sufficiently shows us his Ambition to become a
Titulado, unless we shall venture upon a conjecture, that some of the Courtiers
shamed upon him, with the empty promise of this titulary honor, when they
wheadled him out of the directions they had before sent him, for the better
management of their designs, which they were unwilling to let remain in his
hands, (after they had made as much use of his Place and Power, as opportunity
would permit) that they might not be produced as Evidences against them in a
day of Trial, which they, probably feared, might one time or other come upon
them, and did it seems in this Parliament with a Vengeance. For I will take the
boldness to conclude, that it was some other more skilful hand, hid behind the
Curtain, that ordered the Scenes, and managed the Machines, though he was made
the public stalking horse, to deceive the vulgar Herd, the Skreen, to shelter
other men's heads from the violence of popular fury, the open Actor in the face
of the world, the common Engine, to set the Wheels of more politic men's
contrivances a going, though against Water, Wind, and Tide: It being very
unbecoming the Apes subtilty to put her own foot into the fire, when she may
make use of the Cats. But if the Worshipful Sir Nicholas suffered himself thus
impolitickly to be trapann'd, whom had he to blame but himself, if he were made
at la^^ to pay so dear for his own folly and imprudence? And that such is the
ominous fate of less wary men, who venture upon Actions, not warranted by Law,
to serve a present turn, and humor their own ambitious desires, or other men's
greatness, is evidently demonstrable, as in general from History and
Experience, so more particularly from an instance in Spain, under one of the
Philips, of a certain Officer of that Kings, who having by the Kings Order done
an Act, for which he was afterward questioned and thrown into Prison, and upon
fair words and promises parted with the Kings Letter, which he could have
produced for his Warrant, was soon after left in the lurch, and suffered to
fall a Sacrifice to his own imprudent Credulity, and the Law of the Land.
Whether I have been exact, as to all circumstances of the story, I shall not
positively affirm, as not being fully sure, but my Memory may deceive me in
twelve or thirteen years space, and being uncertain in what Book to look for it
now, or where I read it at first, unless in some of the famous Fullers works,
perhaps in his holy or profane State; but as to the substance and truth
hereof, I dare aver it from Historical Relation, and leave the Application to
more Philosophical Logicians, that I may press further forwards toward the
mark, the end, intention and scope of this my present undertaking, viz. To show
the respect and esteem several of the Nobles in particular had for this
honorable City, and their solicitous care for her welfare under this King
Richard.

How that, before the Parliament, that wrought wonders was ended, particular
care was taken expressly to have the Citizens of London included in ^ general
Pardon, (to prevent doubtless new exactions upon old pretenses) has been
before related amongst the Commons requests as a sign of their good will, and
therefore now to be waved, though it would not be impertinent in this Point to
show the Lords affection, if that be a truth, which is delivered by a modern
Writer, that in our Ancestors time, most of the Members of the house of Commons
thought it an honor to retain to some great Lord, and to wear his blew Coat,
to make up his train, and wait upon him from his own house to the Lords, and
make a Lane for him to enter thereto; which argues how much the Lords did, or
might, overruled them, in their frequent Petitions on the City's behalf. But I
shall pass over the consequence of this Conclusion, as an Argument depending on
the Readers Will and Choice, which he may grant or deny at pleasure, and
produce an instance or two less dubitable, and not left so much at discretion.

How hard a matter it has generally proved, to bring Offenders, if great in
Power, Place and Authority, to Justice, is plain from History and Experience:
As evident likewise is it, that the Offenses, to such imputed, have been
Exactions, Extortions, oppressions, corrupt Abuses of the Law, Illegal
Principles, Arbitrary Designs, Unjust Actions, and the like National Grievances
(ordinarily comprehended under the name (...) ill Government) daily heapt up
under wea^ or negligent Princes by the exorbitant Power o^ headstrong
Favorites, who, through the excess of their Sovereign's kindness, the easines^
of his Nature, the mildness of his Disposition* weakness of his Judgment, or
fondness of (...) Affection, (grounded mostly on humor an^ fancy) having
grasped all public affairs in, Church and State into their own hands, too too
often make no better use thereof, than to Hector over those, who were before
their Superiors, suppress their Equals, oppress their Inferiors, and inslave
the poor Commons, the easier thereby to raise themselves and their own Families
upon other men's ruins. When these things happen, and the reins of Government
fall into such men's hands, the rich are sure to be the greatest sufferers, and
such, as have most of this Worlds goods, are certain to be most watched and
carpt at, and all opportunities greedily laid hold on to bring them under the
Lash, that they may be squeezed like Spunges, and large sums exacted of them to
buy out their Pardons, and procure forgiveness, till another occasion offer it
self to make them be thought Offenders anew: of this London sufferings in the
fifteenth of this King are attesting proofs.

For the Londoners having refused to lend the King money, as was requested, and
some abuses being offered to the Merchant Stranger, that proffered to lay it
down, Stow tells us the King was marvellously enraged hereat, and, calling a
Council of his Nobles at Stamford, causes the Mayor, Sheriffs, and best of the
Citizens to be Arrested, and afterward (the Mayor and Sheriffs being deposed)
sends them to several Prisons there to be kept, till he and his Council had
considered and decreed, what should be done with them, and it was also further
determined, that from thenceforth the Londoners should not chose, nor have any
Mayor, but that the King should appoint one of his Knights to be Ruler of the
City; their Privileges were revoked, their Liberties disannulled, and their
Laws abrogated. Neither was this all; The Terms likewise, and the Courts of
Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Chancery, etc. Were removed from London to York,
such was the displeasure conceived against them by the King, or the ill Offices
done them by some busy Courtiers about him. For Fabian gives us another
account of this affair, and says the occasion arose from a contest, between the
Citizens and the Bishop of Salisburies Servants, about one of their fellow
Servants (who had taken a Loaf out of a Bakers basket, openly in the streets,
and then broke his head with his Dagger for attempting to regain it) which grew
so high, the Citizens striving to have the offender seized on and Committed to
Ward, and the Bishops Servants rescuing him, and shutting up their Gates, that
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs had much ado, by their persuasion, presence,
and Authority, to stop further outrages, and contain the multitude within
bounds, though at last they effected it, and dismis'd the people home in peace
and quietness: But the angry* Bishop so highly resented this business,
notwithstanding the fault sprung Originally out of his own House, that he and
the Archbishop of York incensed the King all they could against the Londoners,
even so far, that one expressly affirms, he was once resolved to have utterly
ruined and destroyed the whole City. A very sharp punishment certainly for such
an offense, and for a City, publicly endowed with such transcendent Grants and
Privileges, as not to be liable to a just legal seizure of her Liberties and
Franchises, unless for Treason or Rebellion done by the whole City, as has
been before observed in the first of Edward the third, and the seventh of this
present King. Now how Treason or Rebellion could be justly charged upon the
whole City, at this time, and in these instances, which soever of them we give
credit to, I cannot well conceive. The most methinks that could be made of it,
in the worst construction, could amount no further than a Riot, notwithstanding
the great and heinous matters laid unto the Mayors charge, though not a
syllable proved that I read of, as that he no otherwise Ruled the City, but
suffered the Citizens to make such assaults upon the Kings head Officers, to
the Kings great dishonor, and hazard of the Kings Treasure then in his
Custody. The Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, which makes it
Treason to slay the Treasurer, must surely have been very far stretched, to
have brought the whole City within the compass thereof, because some of the
meaner Citizens assaulted the Treasurers House, (upon an injustice first done
by one, and ^n affront afterward offered by others of his own Servants, in
refusing to deliver the Offender, or ^uffer the Constable to enter to seize
him) he himself being as many Miles distant at that time, as Windsor is from
London, and so not capable of receiving then the least injury in his own
person, ^uch less to be killed outright, without which no Treason lies in the
Case upon this Act. But if ^he King and Council would have it so, or at least
^ct, as if it were so, contrary to an established ^aw, and his own
Grandfathers grant, who ^ould, who would, who durst contradict? Here ^as no
Parliament then Sitting, that I read of, ^o House of Commons in Being, nor
Lords erough present, their Friends, to stave off the first brunt, though at
length we hear of a Reconciliation depending before a Parliament was called,
and that too by the mediation of powerful Friends, some of them no less than
the Principal Lords, besides the Queen her self.

Baker and Stow name the Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle, who was ever
reputed by the Commons a great Friend and Patriot to his Country, and his
untimely end afterward severely revenged on the Actors and Contrivers thereof,
and made the occasional cause of enraging the People against the King himself,
who, within few years after the aforesaid Dukes violent Death, was publicly
dethroned by such, as, under the popular pretense of reforming ill Government,
aimed at their own Advancement to the chiefe^^ Honors, Preferments and
Dignities in Church and State. Through this Noble Peer's Suit and Mediation,
among others, we hear the King was somewhat pacified, and by little and little
abated the rigor of his purpose, calling to mind the diverse honors, and great
gifts he had received of the Londoners, (as certainly the securing his right to
the Crown against the ambitious pretensions of his aspiring Uncle, and the
defending his Life and Person from the furiou^ Outrages of his mutinous
Commons, were no mean pieces of Service done him by them) whereupon he
determined to deal more mildly with them, and gives them hopes of Grace and
Pardon.

Fabian tells us of a Reverend Bishop, a Spiritual Lord, that joined with the
Queen (...) procure the Kings favor for them, and (...) their Liberties
restored them again, That the Queen did successfully interceed in their behalf;
we may perhaps, not without some show of reason, conclude from the many great,
rich and costly Presents made her by the Citizens, at the Kings public
entrance into the City, about the latter end of August in the same Summer. Nay,
one Writer goes so far as to acquaint us, that even the Duke of Lancaster, John
of Gaunt, appeared likewise in their favor, an Intercessor unto the King.
Whether out of respect to them, or secret dislike of his Nephews proceedings,
forgetfulness of Londons past opposition, or his desire at last to become
Popular, and to ingratiate himself with the Citizens, whose power he had before
tried to his loss, I dare not venture to resolve, upon such unsure grounds as
my own bare surmizes. But this I presume may easily be granted me, that he was
then grown ancient, and the burning fires of his Ambition were much ^abated, if
not altogether quenched, through for^^er disappointments, length of time, and
the visible increase of years, old age growing fast upon him. So that, the
first heats being over, he might probably be inclined to try his fortune in
foreign Countries, and content himself with the titulary honor of a King
abroad, now that he had long (...) the smart of a frustrated expectation at
^ome.

London having then such powerful Friends, of ^ame and note, in the time of her
adversity par^icularly expressed in History, how many more may (...) presume she
had, not expressly mentioned, of (...) same, or somewhat inferior rank and
quality, ^ho, either out of their own affection and particular respect, or
through the prevalency of these great Examples, engaged themselves in the
Cities interest, and became Reconcilers and Repairers of her late Breaches? But
if the Readers candor will not yield me this, not irrational, supposition,
these doubtless in themselves are enough to make out the truth of my assertion,
and free me from the undesirable imputation of a vain pretender, when I offered
to show the esteem the Lords, singly considered in themselves, had for this
great and honorable City. The aforementioned passages show their good will,
yet, all this notwithstanding somewhat else was expected at Court, which the
Cities Enemies mainly drove at, and seem resolved by one means or other to
compass and bring about. The City was Rich in Privileges, Rich in Glory, Rich
in Coin, besides the Spirit and Courage of her Citizens; all which conjoined
made her powerful at home and abroad, famed in Foreign Countries for Trade and
Commerce, and highly honored within the Circle of the Brittish-Isle, through
which she was known I lanet-like to dart her overruling influences. Among
Arbitrary Designers these have been generally looked upon as Malign, and
therefore no wonder if at Court ill-affected. Their Liberties and Privileges
are thought too great, let us then have 'em les^ened now time serves: And so
they were. For the Londoners being Commanded to come to Windsor, there to show
them, and product then Charters, both old and new, some of them ar^ ^atified,
some condemned, some restored, others detained. Their Glory likewise is to be
made to suffer, if possible, a diminution in the eyes of the world, and
therefore almost all the Lords are gathered together at Windsor, against their
coming thither, and also a great Army, that the people might think them
terrified thereby, and frighted into submission, and so have the less esteem
for them hereafter, as such as may easily be accused of offenses, and as easily
be made to undergo grievous penalties for them, whoever was originally in
fault. These Preparations must needs occasion considerable charges, but the
Londoners must pay the shot, if they are Covetous of peace and quietness: And
so they did at last, to their no small expenses.

'Twas not the Honorable Cavalcade of principal Citizens sent out in one
Livery, to meet and Conduct the King and Court through the City; 'Twas not the
Triumphant Reception of him in his passage, through a lane of Livery-men lowdly
ecchoing forth his Name, the running of Cheapside Conduit with more than one
sort of Wine, the adorning the Windows and Walls of the Streets with Tapistry,
Cloth of Gold, Silver and Silk, nor other gaudy shows, to entertain him; 'Twas
not the Rich and Chargeable Presents made to him and his Queen, as they passed
along, or afterward the next day, (the Costly Crowns and Tables of Gold,
Horses with their Noble Trappings, Plate of Gold and Silver, Cloth of Gold,
Silk, Velvets, Buttons, and Ewers of Gold, Gold in Coin, Precious Stones, and
Jewels so Rich, excellent and Beautiful, that the value and price was
inestimable) that could fully appease the Angry King, or rather satisfy the
ravenous Courtiers Covetuousness, until they had laid* down also Ten thousand
pounds in ready money: And this did the feat for that time. And but for that
time as far as I can find. For new Lords new Laws: New Favorites produce new
Changes, and old ones being cast out of Doors, they are for finding out new
Crimes, Pretenses and Devices, to empty other men's Purses and enrich
themselves, under the common notion of levying Fines and Amercements for the
King.

King Richard had received Royal Gifts, and Noble Presents, of his truly Royal
Chamber of London in the sixteenth year of his Reign: Yet within less than half
a dozen years space, this was forgotten and quite out of memory, or else so
well remembered, as to make some heartily desirous of more such Boons, as hoping
that some of Da^ae's showers might descend also into their own laps. These
being the true Chemical Drops to restore, enliven, and invigorate the tired
spirits of such hunger-starved Expectants. And where, throughout the whole
British World, are they to be had in greater plenty than at London? And by the
sequel of the story, we may believe this was an approved Recipe in those days.
For some Informations had been given in against the Londoners, which incensed
the King to such a degree, that the Commonalty, Fabian tells us, was indicted
with other Sheriffs, and therefore consequently their own likewise, which might
have brought great damage afresh to them, but that Providence then raised them
up two Potent Friends and Favorers among the Spiritual Lords, by whose advice
they made an humble supplication to the King, and so by their aid and
assi^^ance, with help of other Lovers of the City, the Kings anger was much
appeased; But yet nevertheless Blank Charters were brought into the City, and
many of the most substantial me^ thereof forced to seal them, highly to their
disadvantage, which was likewise soon after put in practice in many other
Counties. So fatal was the Citizens Example to the rest of the Land, and so
little gained they themselves in these Conjunctures by their Submissions,
Resignations, and other like compliances to the Court, besides expense, charge,
and much trouble, and the continual fears of greater molestations for the
future.

But when was this and how was it brought about? If we trace the Serids of
times and affairs a little backwards, by the unerring Clue of Authentic
History, we shall find these transactions to bear date some years after the end
of the Parliament, that wrought wonders, when possibly 'twas almost forgot, and
it is Statutes, by some Men's Artifices, slighted through disuse and inexecution.
Neither were indeed these latter proceedings attempted, till after that, by
several tricks and devices (as naming Sheriffs fit to serve turns, and imposing
such Representatives on the Borough Towns, as would be biased to betray their
Country, besides a violent seizure of the Country Lords likely to oppose) the
Court had got a Parliament to their minds, that would do their own business,
not the Nations, and prefer the private gain of some few, before the public
benefit of the whole Commonwealth.

What sort of Parliament this was, and how fairly things were carried, we may
inform our selves out of Stow's Annals, where we find it upon Record, in the
twenty first year of this King, how that all of a sudden, in the midst of a
great calm and outward serenity, the King caused the principals of the party,
thought most opposite to Court designs, to be feiz'd on and imprisoned, and
among the rest his own Uncle, as Chief, (so unsecure is Kindred and Alliance
among Kings and Princes,) tells the Commons by Proclamation that their
apprehension was founded on new Transgressions not old Crimes, (though these
afterward were the great offenses laid to their charge) procures their
Indictment at Nottingham, suborns several Nobles to impeach them in the next
Parliament, Assembles many Malefactors of the County of Chester in the nature
of a Guard, and then summons the Parliament* Thither came the Nobles with an
Armed Retinue, for fear of the King, such Knights are chosen Prolocutors, as
are described to be void of all manner of goodness, as in whom naught was to be
found, but a natural Covetuousness, unsatiable Ambition, Intolerable Pride,
and Hatred of the truth, and the Clergy, upon pain of losing their
Temporalties, enjoined to chose them a Common Proctor, who thereupon appointed
Sir Henry Percy, Steward of the Kings Household, to assent in their Names to all
things done in the Parliament. How then things were likely to be ordered in the
two Houses, it is no hard matter for us to guess, especially when we remember,
that the Annalist tells us, the Parliament House was compassed about with four
thousand of the Kings Archers, who seem to have been ready prepared on all
occasions for an Onset, and once more particularly, mistaking the noise,
usually made at the Parliament's Men coming out of the House, for a Tumultous
Broil and Contention, with their Bows bent, Arrows fitted, and drawing, they
were upon the point of shooting, to the terror of all present, till the Kings
coming rectified their mistake and pacified them.

To tell of recalling of Pardons, disannulling of Charters, making void of
Commissions, revoking former Judgments, impeaching, arraigning, condemning, and
actually punishing the opposite Party, some with loss of Estates, Lives and
all, others with forfeitures of all worldly Goods and perpetual irrevocable
imprisonment, I esteem a needless labor. Suffice it therefore to remark, how
sollicitous the Court was, at this juncture, to render their own Party as
Saints, and the others as most guilty Criminals, to take off the contesting
Lords, as disloyal Traitors, and restore in the Eye of the Law the Reputation
of Courtiers formerly condemned, in the eleventh year of this King, as if they
had been the honestest and loyallest Subjects in the Nation, and undo, as much
as in them lay, what ever was then done in the Parliament that wrought wonders,
not withstanding that in many things they imitated that Assembly, when they
thought it for their peculiar advantage, as in Lords Appellants, Oaths to make
all the Judgments, Ordinances and Statutes unrepealable, and Excommunication of
the Breakers or Impugners of them, but in others far out did it, as in revoking
all Pardons pleaded by the opposite Lords, (under the notion of being
unlawfully made, or so by the King granted unto them as not to be against
himself) and excusing those equally guilty of the same actions, because looked
on at that time as useful Instruments in carrying on the Court Intreagues, viz.
suppressing the principal Assertors of Liberty and Property, in passing a
general Pardon with the Exception of fifty Persons not expressed by name,
(whereby any one at pleasure might be made liable to censure, as one of the
Persons excepted, if thought a Favourer of the contrary side) and conserring
the whole Power of the Parliament upon certain Lords and Commons, fully to
answer all Bills, and wholly to determine all other matters moved in
Parliament, and not determined, with all their Dependants (as mischievous a
President as Sylla's Proscription, though it is hoped not as practicable)
besides the prejudging and confining of Parliament Debates by the Judges
Opinions, That when Articles are propounded by the King to be handled in
Parliament, if other Articles be handled before those be first d^termined, that
it is Treason in them that do it.

Such being the Acts of this Assembly, and the consequences of the Courts
present success (in taking off the Heads of the other Party, who durst at every
turn contest therewith in behalf of those freeborn English Twins Liberty and
Property) under which the Nation with silent murmurs languished and lamented,
when they so soon, after the end of this Parliament at Shrewsbury, and the
Kings Progress into the West, saw no less than seventeen Counties in East
England indicted by the Kings command, and as a grievous offense laid to their
charge, that they had been against him with the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of
Arundel and Warwick (the late Principals amongst the contesting Lords, but now
secured fast enough, the two first under the undissolvable Bonds of Death, the
other, under the Chains of a perpetual Imprisonment in the Isle of Man) and
several honorable Persons sent to induce the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, to
make a Submission by Writing, sealed with their own Hands, acknowledging
themselves Traitors to the King, though they never offended him in Word or
Deed: Besides the compelling all the Religious Gentlemen, and Commons, to set
their Seals to Blank-Charters, that they might be oppressed severally, or all
at once, at pleasure, some being made to pay a thousand Marks, some a thousand
Pounds: And an Order issued out, through every Shire in England, that all
Gentlemen and Men of Substance should be sworn firmly to maintain, according to
their power, all the Statutes, Articles, and Constitutions ordained in the last
Parliament. We may easily conclude the Court, thought the Citizens of London
were not over much in love with these enslaving Statutes, unaccustomed Oaths,
insnaring Blanks, and enforced Submissions, and suspected them ready enough,
upon occasion, to oppose, and withstand these manifest encroachments of
Antinomian Prerogative upon the Liberty of the Subject, and strive to strike
off these Fetters, and Shackles of Slavery upon the next opportunity, before
they were thoroughly rivetted by Time and Prescription, and therefore esteemed it
their wisest Course to begin with them first, by the usual Method of
Indictments, while they had the Reins of Government in their own hands, and so
consequently power enough to manage the Law, as they themselves pleased, to
wind and turn it about to their interests, and bend it to their own irregular
Desires and Designs, since that they liked not to have them confined within the
limits and bounds thereof.

This manner of acting however, by the by appears to me the most beaten Path to
Destruction, and the high way to the Actors unavoidable Ruin, and I think I
have reason, History and Experience all on my side. This the City seems well to
have understood, and therefore with Prudence chose rather to yield to the times
for a season, than presently to strive against the running stream, and
immediately to fall a rowing against high wind and Tide; but as soon as ever
the flowing waters began to Ebb, and the tide was a turning, the City Barge
struck in with the returning waves, and assisted to steer the Ship of the
Commonwealth to a quite different Haven from that, whither the Court was
furiously driving her before. And then for the most favorable of the Citizens
to show themselves but faint Regardless friends, was far less beneficial to the
desolate forsaken King, than for others of them to appear earnest Enemies in so
critical a Juncture, was disadvantagious to this unfortunate Prince, as he may
well be termed, either for having none but ill Counselors and faithless
Trencher-friends about him, and harkening so much to their pernicious and
destructive advice, or else for the defect of his Judgment in not discerning
between their private self ends, and his own special and particular interest,
viz. Impartiality in doing Justice to all States and Persons, from the highest
to the lowest, squaring all his own actions by the known Rules of the Law of
the Land, to the pleasing of his people, not by the compass of other men's
unstable fancies and anomalous Plat-forms, to the loss of his Subjects love and
affection, and the unhappy fate, that attended him upon this his ill conduct,
when he was violently thrown out of the Chair of State into a profound Abyss of
miseries and infelicities, and irrecoverably cast out of a Regal Throne into an
unavoidable Prison, between which and his grave he had but few steps to make.

For we are to know that, as in the tuming of fortunes wheel the spoke, that is
got upermost, presently begins to decline, and so runs downwards, till it comes
to be the under-most of all, or like as Sysiphus stone forced up; even almost
to the very top of the Hill, presently tumbles down again to the bottom with a
swiftness and violence not to be stopped, by the strength of art or nature, so
this Prince, arrived in a manner to the height of his desires, by the Caprice
of fortune, or rather by the overruling power of a superior Being, was
suddenly, and unexpectedly, beyond Recovery hurled down, from the Grandeur of a
Potent King, into the lowest Station among Men, the Confinement of a Prison,
and that too occasioned by the very same way and means, whereby he thought to
have secured to himself amore fixed and settled enjoyment of his greatness, as
comes now of course to be shown in manner following.

After the suppression of the opposite Party, under the shadow of Law, and
Justice, diffention happening between the two Dukes of Norfolk and Hereford,
both then great at Court, to the mutual accusation of each other, the King
greedily lays hold on the opportunity, and instead of permitting them,
according to the Custom of those times, where clear proofs were wanting, to
make good their accusations by the Sword in a single Combat, as had been also
before appointed, unadvisedly banishes them both the Land, the first for ever,
and the latter for a term of years, with this hard measure into the bargain,
that they should not sue for a release of their Judgments on pain of Treason,
whereby he made both his Enemies, and the latter so much the more dangerous,
the nearer he stood Related to the Crown, and the more inveterate, in that the
King had procured the Letters Pattents, before granted him, to sue by Attorney
for Lands descended to him, to be revoked by Assent of Parliament, and declared
to be against Law, and had afterward, upon his. Father John of Gaunts death,
violently seized on all his Estate, whereto Hereford was Heir. Then, amidst the
murmurs of the People for misgovernment and ill guidance of the Realm, away
goes the King for Ireland with a puissant Army (when he thought he had left all
things secure in England, by the advantage he had made of the last Parliament,
by engrossing whatever he pleased into his own hands, by the tricks found out
to raise Money of the Subject by Blanks, etc. and the Subsidy he had gained in
Parliament, during his Life, upon the continuance whereof without molestation
he openly declared his general Pardon should stand and no otherwise) and
managed his Arms therewith success enough, but ill news out of England, that
the Duke of Hereford (by his Fathers death Duke of Lancaster) was landed in
England under color of claiming his Inheritance, and raised people as he went,
alarmed him, and bad advice afterward, which detained him longer than his
promise in Ireland, (so loath were his Counselors to spare his company, under
the shelter of whose Person and presence lay their greatest hopes of
protection) quite ruined him. For coming over and finding the Army gone away,
which the Earl of Salisb^ry had raised against his coming, and had newly
voluntarily disbanded it self, upon the Kings tarrying too long behind the Earl
in Ireland, his courage failed him, and he trusting more to flight than
fighting the treachery of his Principal Officers deceived him, and he himself
also, by soothing words and fai^ promises, was decoyed into the Duke of
Lancaster's hands, who soon secured him fast enough, without any intent to let
him loose again in haste.

Now the King is in hold, let us see how the Citizens behaved themselves in
this great Turn and Change of the Times. They had in this Kings Nonage, in his
Grandfathers days, appeared the undaunted Assertors of his Right and Title;
and in the beginning of his Reign contributed much to his Security and
Settlement on the THRONE: But a new Generation being sprang up in Twenty Years
space, and their old Services at last so ill requited, by new attempts on their
Liberties, by Inditements and blank-Charters, instead of standing up with their
Lives and Fortunes in the Kings Defense and Vindication, they openly devoted
themselves to another Service, and became the known Favorers of that Party,
which assisted to Depose this unhappy Prince, and set up in His Room the Duke
of Lancaster, under the Name and Title of Henry the Fourth. As is provable,
both from Statute Law (viz. the Act made in the First of this New King, to be
seen in the Statute-Book, Cap. 15. An. 1. H. 4. Where we find express mention
of the good and lawful behavior of the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and all
the Commonalty of the same City of London toward him) and Stow's general
Chronicle of England, wherein we read, at the latter end of the Life and Reign
of King Richard the Second, That after the Duke was come from Coventry to St.
Albans, about five or six Miles before his coming to London, the Mayor, and the
Companies in the Liveries, with great Noise of Trumpets, met the Duke, doing
more Reverence to him, than to the King, Rejoicing that GOD had sent them such
a Prince that had Conquered the Realm, i. e. the Court-party, within one Months
space: Whereupon, when the Duke was come within two Miles of the City, he stopped
his Army, as if out of Reverence, and Acknowledgment, and in Submission
thereto, and ask't Advice of the Commons thereof, what they would do with the
King; who Answered, they would He should be led to Westminster; upon which, to
them He was delivered, and they led him accordingly to Westminster, and from
thence by Water to the Tower. Nay, some of the Londoners publicly showed
themselves so much His Enemies, as to Assemble together with an intent to have
met Him without the City, and there to have Slain him for his former
Severities: But the Mayor, and Rulers, and best of the Commonalty, upon
Information hereof, with some difficulty reclaimed them therefrom. After the
Citizens had thus received the King into their Custody, and in effect thereby
made a public Declaration of their Minds and Opinions, as to the great Change
succeeding the Duke, we are told, entered London by the chief Gate, and Rode
through Cheapside to St. Paul's, and there Lodged for some time; so secure was
he of the Citys good Will and Affection to him, and afterward in October held a
Parliament in Westmimster-Hall, where the old King's Deposition, and the new
King's Election were completed.

I shall not stay to make a long Paraphrase upon the Cities proceedings in this
Affair, it being Matter of Fact, and undeniable, that the City consented
hereto, from the aforesaid passages, which may be likewise thought very much to
have influenced the Nation in their Elections to that Parliament, if, from the
Annalists Computation, we may safely and truly aver, that the Parliament Men
were chosen after these Transactions at London, because Forty days at least
intervened between this time and the first Wednesday in October, whereon he
says the Parliament began. If any be desirous of another Observation, I leave
them to their own Liberty to infer, from History and the Premises, that it much
conduc't to facilitate the King's Deposition, that he had no known, and
generally acknowledged Heir, of his own Body lawfully begotten, boldly to stand
up for Him, and strongly plead his Cause in Armor, for his own particular
Interest, as well as out of a due sense of his Duty. Neither indeed do I well
see how he could have any, since that he had none by his first Wife, that I
read of, his second Queen was too young, another Heir was publicly pointed out
to the Nation, and he himself was also loosely addicted, as seems plain beyond
dispute. His Lascivious living being hinted to us in Burton's Historical
Remarks of London, among the Articles drawn up against him; and we have great
reason to think it was an imputation too true, when we read of several Ladies
expelled the Court in the Eleventh of his Reign, by the Procurement of the
contesting Lords; and a little before the sitting of the
Wonder-Working-Parliament; and take Notice, out of Cotton's Abridgment, of the
House of Commons Request in the Twentieth Year, for the avoiding the outrageous
Expenses of the King's house, and namely of Bishops, and Ladies, and the King's
Answer thereto made, That he would be free therein; and that the Commons
thereby had offended against him, his Dignity, and Liberty: Such was his
Indignation against them for desiring to control him in this Point; and so
highly incensed was he thereat, that, to Appease him, the Exhibiter of the Bill
was adjudg'd to dye as a Traitor, though, upon some great Ones importunity, his
Life was for that time spared, and he himself at length restored in Blood, and
to the recovery of his Goods, Livings, Lands, and Tennements, at the next
King's coming to the Crown. But how, I trow, come the Bishops to be complained
of by the Commons among the Misses? Were they such Courters of Ladies, as,
instead of rebuking, to follow, or rather give bad Examples to the King and
Country? Yet now I think on it, these were Popish, not Protestant Bishops:
Though I scarce believe, every one of them, that, to the view of the World,
gives himself a Protestant Title, is able well and truly to plead not Guilty:
If Noli-fet-ole-chery, be a Motto rightly fathered upon one of our Western
Diocesans.

How all things in a manner concurred to further King Richard's Deposition, and
that he was actually deposed, has already been spoken of, which nevertheless
barely did not content the Party, but they would needs have it done in a formal
and solemn way: First, the King must make a public Renunciation of all Right,
Title and Claim to the Crown, then Commissioners are by the States appointed in
their Names to pronounce the Stentence of his Deposition from the Throne, and
make to him a Resignation of their homage and fealty; for their Loyalty seems
plainly enough to have been gone before. Neither did they think this enough,
but were resolved over and above to leave Articles against him upon Record,
wherein are expressed the ill things done by others in his Reign, and as they
say, by his Authority, whereby they designed to justify what they had done
toward the unhappy Kings Deposition, which visibly paved the way to his Grave.
So pernicious is it for Princes to suffer their Authority to be abused, to
shelter other men's Crimes, or their Names to be made use of, without a Present
Resentment, to carry on Designs hateful to the People, though they never
consent thereto themselves as their own Act and Deed. For I hope we may
charitably Conclude what the worshipful Knights, Sir Mayor and Sir Haughty, the
other-ill beloved wight, did, in laying a trap to catch the Contesting Lords in
the 11th. year of this King, was without the Kings privity because he swore it,
as in page (...), though possibly they shrouded themselves under the shelter of
his Authority, and pretended his Warrant and Command for what they designed and
endeavored. And perhaps they had (as Sir Richard Bak^r words it) a warrant
Dormant, to prosecute the Kings Ends without the Kings Knowledge.

The Articles and Objections laid against the King are to be found in Cotton's
Abridgment. 1. H. 4. whence I trust I may securely transcribe them, without
hazarding the Courteous Readers Displeasure, to show him the grievances of the
age, as they are there expressed in this form of words; Besides the Kings Oath
made at his Coronation,

First, for wasting and bestowing of the Lands of the Crown upon unworthy
Persons, and over-charging the Commons with Exactions. For that the King by
undue means procured diverse Justices to speak against the Law, to the
Destruction of the Duke of Gl^ucester, and the Earls of Arundel and Warwick at
Shrewscury. For that the King against his Promise, procured the Duke of Ireland
sundry Rebels about Cheshire, where diverse Murders by him were committed. For
that the King against his own Promise and Pardon, at the Solemn Procession
apprehended the Duke of Gloucester, and sent him to Callice, there to be choked
and murdered, beheading the Earl of Arundel, and banishing the Earl of Warwick
and the Lord Cobham. For that the Kings Retinue, and rout gathered out of
Cheshire about the apprehension of those Nobles, committed diverse Murders,
Rapes, and other Fellonies, besides refusing to pay for their Victuals. For
that the King condemned the Nobles aforesaid, for diverse rodes made within the
Realm, contrary to his open Proclamation. For that the King doubly Fined Men
for their Pardons. For that the King to oppress his whole subjects, procured in
his last Parliament, that the Power thereof was committed to certain Persons.
For that the King being sworn to Minister right, did notwithstanding enact in
the last Parliament, that no mediation should be made for the Duke of
Lancaster, contrary to his said Oath. For that the Crown of England being freed
from the Pope, and all other foreign Power, the King notwithstanding procured
the Popes Excommunication on such as brake the last Parliament, in derogation
of the Crown, Statutes and Laws of the Realm. For that the King banished the
Duke of Lancaster for 10 years, without any Cause, as the same King openly
affirmed. For that the King unlawfully revoked the Letters Patents made to the
said Duke of Lancaster, in An. 21. For that the King contrary to the Laws and
will of the Justices, suffered Sheriffs to continue longer than one year, and
placed such therein, as were unfit. For that the King repayed not to his
Subjects debts of them borrowed. For that the King in the time of Truce and
Peace, exacted great Subsidies, and wasted the same about frivilous matters.
For that the King refused to execute the Laws, Saying that the Laws were in his
Mouth and Breast. For that the King, by procuring by Statutes that he might be
free as any of his Progenitors, did under color thereof subvert Laws according
to his Will. For that the King procured Knights of the Shires to be made to
serve his own will. For that the King enforced Sheriffs to be Sworn to execute
all Commandemens, under the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Signet, contrary to
their accustomed Oaths. For that the King to wrack money from his Subjects,
procured 17 several Shires to submit themselves to his Grace, whereby great
sums of money were Levied. For that the King being Sworn to observe the
Liberties of the Church, notwithstanding, at his Voyage into Ireland, enforced
diverse Religious Persons to give Horse, Armor, and Carts. For that the
Justices, for their good Council given to the King, were with evil Countenance,
and threats rewarded. For that the King of his own Will, in passing into
Ireland, carried with him, the Treasures, Relics, and other Jewels of the
Realm, which were used safely to be kept in the Kings own Coffers from all
hazard: and for that the same King cancelled, and razed sundry Records.

For that the King by writing to Foreign Princes, and to his own Subjects, is
reputed universally, a most variable and dissembling man. For that the King
would commonly say among the Nobles, that all Subjects, Lives, Lands, and
Goods, were in his hands without any forfeiture. For that the King suffered his
Subjects to be condemned by Marshal-Law, contrary to his Oath and the Laws of
the Realm. For that the Subjects being only bound by their Allegiance, were yet
driven to take certain New Oaths, for serving the folly of the King. For that
the King by his private Letters, would charge the Ecclesiastical Ministers in
any new Canonical matter, to stay, contrary to his Oath. For that the King by
force in his Parliament, banished the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, without any
good Ground. For that the King by his last Will passed under the Great Seal,
and Privy Signet, gave unto his Successors, certain Money and Treasure, upon
Condition to perform all the Acts and Orders in the last Parliament, which
being ungodly and unlawful, he meant as ungodlily to die in. For that the King
in the 11th. of his Reign, in his Chapel, in the Manor of Langley, in the
presence of the Duke of Lancaster and York, and others, received the Sacrament
of the Lords Body, that he would never impeach the Duke of Gloucester his
Uncle, for any thing before done; and yet to the Contrary procured him to be
murdered. For that the King most fraudulently and untruely against his own
Oath, Banished the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and wasted his Goods: in which
Article* in private Conference between the said Arch Bishop, the King in a
manner prophesied, and doubted that the like would happen of himself; and
thereupon showed a special Token to the Arch Bishop, That if he sent the same
at any time, that the Arch Bishop should look that the King would come to him.

These were the Imputations laid to his charge, and that they were then thought
true, or at least not contradicted, is self-Evident, all seeming highly
desirous of a Change, and few disposed to espouse the deposed Kings Cause and
Interest, so furious and violent was the Current of the Times, as to bear away
well nigh all before it: That Parliament being so full of the new Kings
Favorers, and so empty of the old Kings true and cordial Friends, that I
remember to have read of but one, viz. the Loyal Bishop of Carlisle; who, after
a little Demur of a few days time, upon a Motion made in Parliament about the
disposal of King Richard, stood up boldly, and undauntedly, for his old Lord
and Master, in the midst of his professed, and declared Enemies, and known
Deserters. His Speech (as a rare Example of Fidelity giving us the very
Quintessence of Loyalty) I shall venture to set down out of Sir Richard Bakers
Chronicle, with the Consequents as follows.

My Lords, The Matter now propounded, is of mavelous Weight and Consequence,
wherein there are two Points chiefly to be considered; The First, whether King
Richard be sufficiently put out of his Throne; The Second, whether the Duke of
Lancaster be lawfully taken in. For the First, How can that be sufficiently
done, when there is no Power sufficient to do it? The Parliament cannot, for of
the Parliament the King is the Head; and can the Body put down the Head? You
will say, but the Head may bow it self down; and may the King resign? It is
true; but what force is in that which is done by force? And who knows not that
King Richard's Resignation was no other? But suppose he be sufficiently out,
yet how comes the Duke of Lancaster to be lawfully in? If you say by Conquest,
you speak Treason; For what Conquest without Arms? And can a Subject take Arms
against his lawful Sovereign, and not be Treason? If you say by Election of the
State, you speak not reason; for what Power has the State to Elect, while any
is Living that has Right to Succeed? But such a Successor is not the Duke of
Lancaster, as descended from Edmund Crouchback, the Elder Son of King Edward
the Third, though put by the Crown for deformity of his Body; for who knows not
the falseness of this Allegation? Seeing it is a thing Notorious, that this
Edmund was neither the Elder Brother, nor yet Crook-Back't (though called so
from some other reason) but a goodly Personage, and without any deformity. And
your selves cannot forget a thing so lately done, who it was that in the Fourth
Year of King Richard was declared by Parliament to be Heir to the Crown, in
case King Richard should dye without Issue. But why then is not that Claim
made? Because silent Leges inter Arma, What dispu^^ng of Titles against the
stream of Power? But however it i^ extreme Injustice, that King Richard should
be condemned, without being heard, or once allowed to make his Defense. And
now, My Lords, I have spoken thus at this time, that you may consider of it
before it be too late; for as yet it is in your Power to undo that justly,
which you have unjustly done.

Much to this Purpose was the Bishop's Speech; but to as little purpose as if
he had gone about to call back Yesterday. The Matter was too far gone; and
scarce a Person there present, that had not a Hope of either a private or
public Benefit by that which was done. Yet against this Speech of the Bishop,
there was neither protesting nor excepting: It passed in the House as but one
Man's Opinion: And as for the King, it was neither fit he should use much
Severity against any Member of that Parliament, which had so lately showed so
much Indulgence toward him; nor indeed safe, to be too hot in his Punishment,
when he was yet scarce warm in his Government. Yet for a warning to use their
Liberty of Speech with more Moderation hereafter; the Bishop was Arrested by
the Marshal, and Committed to Prison in the Abbey of St. Albans; but afterward,
without further Censure, set at Liberty, till upon a Conspiracy of Lords,
wherein he was a Party; he was Condemned to Dye, though through Extremity of
Grief he prevented Execution. Thus far the Chronicle.

King Henry is now got into the Throne, (Richard being thrust into a Prison,
and afterward into his Grave) and yet I don't find him so secure and well
settled, but that he had many (...) Enemies ever and anon to Contest with, and
(...) a few secret disguised Ones to fear and suspect, with so many prickly
Thorns was his newgotten Crown lined. Therefore we have little reason to
believe, he would ever wilfully disoblidge that City, whose Power and Strength
he so well knew. The Mummery designed by some discontented Lords to be acted
upon him at Twelfthtide at Windsor, in the First of his Reign; The Battle
fought between him and Sir Henry Hotspur, at Shrewsbury in the Third: The
Rising about York in the Sixth: And the Battle of Bram^am Moore in the Eighth,
besides several other secret Attempts and Conspiracies, were as so many
Admonitions to him to Fortify himself, what be could, with the Citizens love
and affection, as his surest earthly Bulwark and Defense, next to his
prosperous Success in the aforesaid Contests, which prevented the discontented
from coming near enough to London, to attempt the raising there of new Broils
and Commotions to disturb his Repose, and the Cities Peace, if he had any
Evil-willers therein capable of receiving ill Impressions. As perhaps he had
but few there, such Care he took to oblidge them, and scarce any occasion given
to breed Murmurs and Complaints among them. For He, who merely at the Commons
request, in the Fifth of his Reign, removed Four of his Menial Servants out of
his House, when he openly declared in Parliament, he then knew no cause
thereof, but only for that they were hated of the People; and so often
gratified his House of Commons in their Petitions about his prime and principal
Officers, and privy Counselors, must needs be thought more ready to increase
the Number of his Friends, than to make himself more Enemies, especially in a
City of such (...) Riches, Power, and Strength, as London was (...) known to be
beyond denial, dispute, or contradiction.

The City flourished under this King in the Renovation of old, the Guildhall of
London, and the Erecting of new public Structures, the Conduit upon Cornhil,
and the Stocks-Market-House; was famous abroad for the abundance of her
Traffic, and number of her Traders; and increased at home in Repute and
Renown, by the prevailing of her Mayor, and Commonalty, in their Contest with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Lords, and Knights, about pulling up
the Wares in Thames, (over which by their Charter they claimed a large Power as
Conservators of that their beloved River) besides the many grounds and reasons
the King had to Glory in his confidence of the Love and Loyalty of her
Citizens, and rejoice in the continuance of their Affection to him and his
Family. As is evident from the timely Advertisement the Mayor brought him, in
the First of his Reign, of the Conspiracy of the discontented Lords (who, under
the color of Christmas Pastimes, as Mumming, etc. designed Treacherously to
have Slain him) to the forcing him very seasonably, as incredulous as he was
before, into a belief of the reality of the Plot, and accompanied him the same
Night from Windsor to London; whereby he purchased to himself Security,
disappointed the Conspirators, and got time and opportunity to punish the
Plotters. And may also be inferred from the successful care the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and other Citizens took in stilling the midnight difference happening
in Eastcheap on Midsomer-Eve, in the Twelfth of his Reign, when two of his
youn^^^ Sons Sup't there late at Night, and might (...) have been greatly
endangered, had the (...) lasted any time. These are Instances I (...) expressly
mentioned in History; and who knows ^ow many more there might be, that were
never so ^uch taken Notice of by the Writers of that Age, ^s to be carefully
transmitted to Posterity by their (...)? Peradventure there were many more
Eviden^^s. But I will not so much insist upon an Argument, that is but barely
possible and probable, nor, with ^^lly and impertinence enough, stay to beg the
^oint of the Reader upon an uncertain surmise and ^^njecture. Though it would
be as absurd in him (...) affirm, That all things ever done in the World, (...)
the Invention of Letters, have been commit^^d to Paper, as it would be
monstrously Ridiculous (...) to pretend, to have seen and read all things
remarkable, that ever were Wrote of this Honorable City, and her praiseworthy
Actions. It Is enough for my weakness and inability if I can tolerably make out
what I have here designed, concerning the Honor and Renown of this so famous
and powerful a City, without offering at all the attesting Proofs, and
confirming Evidences, that are to be found on Record. And if this Attempt shall
be well accepted, it may happily be an encouragement to some more Learned, more
Able, and more Skilful Pen, to produce the other more convincing Arguments,
scattered up and down in the Annals, Chronicles, and other Monuments of
Historians, and by gathering together all the divided fragments of Remark,
reduce them into one solid, firm, and lasting Piece, or make better improvement
of the Arguments and Evidences here produced.

Come we now to Henry the 5th. A Prince not so wild in his Youth, when a
Subject, and by his Father supsected of ambitious designs, (though^ Causlesly,
and on no better grounds and reaso^^ than the Calumnies, Slanders, and
detractions o^ evil disposed persons about the Court) as celebrated, when King,
for the prudent Reformation o^ his own Person, wise Conduct of his affairs, and
happy Government of the Realm, for his Valor* Magnanimity, and Heroical
Actions, and the (...) Glorious Achievements of his Reign, being one o^ the
most Martial Princes, that ever sat upon the English Throne, and beyond all
his Predecesso^^ Succesfull in his French Expeditions. So that (...) Cressy and
Poictiers have highly advanced (...) Name and Renown of the famous Black Prin^^
Agincourt shall eternize Henry of Monm^^^^ through all Generations, and with
this addition (...) unparalleld Glory, That he lived and dyed in the height of
Grandeur, and his Victories were not sullied with after Reproaches. Under
therefore so Renowned a Conqueror, and so Good a King, it is no marvel that we
read of no troubles in our English Jerusalem, nor hear of Complaints in her
Streets. We may expect rather to hear of the Gallantry of Rareeshews and fine
sights, Pageants and Presents, the harmonious concent of Trumpets and Drums,
and the tunable Music of Bells, the loud sounding Acclamation of People, and
the unaccountable Number of Bonfires, and fireworks, the Common consequents of
Victories, and Tryumphs, and the usual Entertainment of Conquerours.

Wherefore I should now pass on of course to the next Kings reign, but that by
the way I shall venture to trespass a little upon the Readers Patience, and to
make an Observation or two upon the grounds and occasional Causes of reviving
the War with France, which was under this King attended with such a Train of
Victories. We are to know then from such Authentic Authors, as ^abian, Baker
and the like, that the Commons ^arping upon the same string, they did in Henry
the 4th. days, viz. the Clergies Temporaltyes, by bringing in a Bill to take
them away, the Bishops, to divert the storm, put the King upon claiming France
as his Right, and offered him considerable sums of money to engage and assist
him ^herein, whereby the Cloud, before hanging over their heads, was made to
break upon the French Coasts, and they, who by their Office should have
ap^^ov'd themselves the Peacemakers of the world, (...) up the Furies of War
and destruction, and inci^^d their Countrymen to sheath their Swords in their
Neighbors Bowels, to preserve to themselves ^^eir large Revenues and worldly
grandeur, their much envied Lands, Honors, and Preferments.

Another advantage they likewise laid hold on, to Promote their own Earthly
advancement, by making use of this opportunity, to suppress the growth and
increase of the Wicklivists, the Puritans and Presbyterians of the age, whose
Numbers began now more and more to increase in City and Country, and grew
formidable to the whole Popish Hierarchy. These men, whom they could not
vanquish by dint of Argument, so conformable were their Doctrines to the
Scriptures, they thought it easier to oppress by the Civil Authority, and the
Power of the Magistrates Sword, whereon they had of late set a keener Edg, by
procuring some laws to be made against them, under the Name and Notion of
Lollards. And yet, such was the ill fate of opposing the spreading of the
Gospel, that these Assertors of it is verity, like the Primitive Christians of
old, daily encreast in Numbers and Repute under their oppressions, and grew
every age more mumerous in spite of all the malice and opposition of their
cruel and blood thirsty Enemies: and much too by the same way and methods, the
Evidence of truth, and influence of good lives and Exemplary Conversations.
Like the ancient Christians they were driven into holes and secret places, into
private Conventicles and separate Assemblies. And though they were not, like
them, at every turn called upon to be cast to the Lions, for disobeying the
Emperors Edicts and Commands, yet away with them to the fire, and to burning
of the Heretics, or in a little softer phraise, to putting the Kings Laws in
Execution, were the common outcryes made against them.

But because the diversity of their Religion and their difference in opinion
from the rest of the Nation, were not thought Incentives strong enough to stir
up the popular Rage and Fury, a more Compendious way was found out, instead of
charging on their account all the Mischiefs, Miseries, and Disasters of the
Times, to lay the detestable Crimes of Treason and Conspiracy at their doors.
Hence may we conclude sprung the Informations, given into the King, of some,
that had conspired suddenly to have Slain Him and his Brethren, and of numerous
Assemblies meeting in St. Giles's Fields to that End. Hereon possibly may we
ground the Rumor spread abroad of great offers made of Money by Sir John
Oldcastles Favorers to the Scots, to invade the Realm in the Kings absence in
France, of the meeting of Sir John himself (who was a known Wicklivist) with
Douglas the Scot at Pomfract, on the same Errand, and of Indentures and other
Writings made betwixt him and the Duke of Albany, containing Instructions to
the Scots to besiege Roxborough and Barwick. Such Stories may we look upon, as
Reports likely enough to have been purposely spread abroad, to stir up the
Peoples Animosities against the Dissenters of the times: Hitherto likewise
happily may we impute the Original of the Schedules, said to be nailed upon the
Church doors in London, with threats of an hundred thousand Men, ready to rise
upon Occasion. Stow indeed, out of Walsingham the Monk, charges them upon
Wicklists favorers; yet have we reason to suspect the first Author, as too
partial in the Case, and question whether these were not Popish Shams put upon
the Nation by the Wicklivists Enemies, to raise a color for an Outcry against
them. For at the Parliament of the Fifth of this King, we read, in Cotton's
Abridgment, of an heinous complaint against Insurrections; and in the end (mind
this) they suspect they were Lollards and Traitors; which made a way for a
Request that Commissions at all times be granted to enquire of them. Whoever
was Originally in fault, we may see from this where the blame should light, and
the severest Prosecution too, could the Popish Prelates have had their Will,
notwithstanding the slightness of their thin-spun pretenses, and weakness of
their groundless Imputations. A pretty device, to make Riots and Insurrections;
and then accuse the contrary Party of them, as if they had been so Fanatical,
as tumultuously to meet together, vi and armis, without any Arms about them, or
Weapons in their hands, to disturb the Kings Peace; and with no worse design,
than the Warrant of annual Customs, whereon some, in an unheard of manner,
without Law or Reason, and contrary to common sense, intruded, to deprive them
of the benefit thereof.

Out of the forementioned Monkish Writer, Stow tells us of an Army of Twenty
Five Thousand, that were to have met Sir John in St. Giles's Fields; and yet
for all this great Cry we find not One Hundred taken, though he affirms Sixty
Nine of them to be condemned of Treason (upon such kind of proofs perhaps, as
these, whereon the Composer of Sir Walter Rawleigh's Life makes him to have
been found Guilty of Treason in the First of King James, for which he had the
honor to be Beheaded about Forty Years after, upon his Return from his
unsuccessful Guyana Voyage) and Thirty Seven Hanged. But the Record out of the
King's Bench, the most authentic Evidence, mentions only, That Sir John
Oldcastle, and others, to the number of Twenty Men, called Lollards, at St.
Giles, did conspire to Subvert the State of the Clergy (this it seems then was
the principal Offense; the rest Aggravations, without which the Scales could
not have been well weighed down) and to Kill the King, and his Brother, and
other Nobles, as any English Reader may see in Cottons Abridgment at the
afore-cited Parliament of the Fifth of this King. Where now are any good
grounds for this malicious Outcry upon the Dissenting Wicklivists for
Traitorous Plotters and Conspirators: And what is become of the great Army that
Fame and Report had Raised? But perhaps the Innkeepers, in the adjacent
Hamlets, and neighboring Villages, were not only their familiar Friends, but
intimate Acquaintance; as Mr. Bags ingenuity (to the elevating, and surprising
of our Minds) has taught us to express it; how otherwise this Achilles, and
his dreadful Army of Mirmidons, could have continued thus unseen, and slipped
away in Disguise, seems not reconcilable to Sense and Reason. And yet how such
great Numbers could have lain hid within the compass of a Readmote, or have
been put like Homers Iliads in a Nutshell, is a thing that passes all my
understanding to conceive. If ever such a thing was, as doubtless it never
happened in Europe, nor amongst either our ancient or modern Reformers; certainly
then this unconceivable Wonder must have fell out in the Reign of Queen Dick,
King of no Lands, upon the Terra incognita of some other of the Fairy Islands,
bordering upon Vtopia; where Prince Oberon and Queen Mab lived in daily dread
and fear of King Arthur, Sir Lancelot, and Sir Tristram, and the rest of the
Knights of his round Table, or miserably perplexed themselves every hour and
minute with needless Scruples, Jealousies, and Suspicions, about the unimagin'd
Designs of the Noble Duke Ogier, to advance himself and his little Mervine, who
afterward did such heroic Exploits upon the Souldan of Babylon, and his
bloody cutthroat Army of Sarazens, when he turned to the Assistance of the
famous C^arlemain and his Peers.

But laying aside these idle Stories of the Monkish Romancers, I pass on, from
our famous win-All, Henry of Monmouth, to the unfortunate English lose-All,
Henry of Windsor, a far better Man than King, as being more intentive upon the
Devotions of the Times, than the Government of his Realm; and better skilled in
his Beads, than his Scepter: and therefore seems rather cut out for a Priest
than a Prince. In this Kings Minority, while such great Statesmen and
Patriots, as his most renowned Uncles, Bedford and Gloucester, sat at the
Helm, and steadily Steered the Ship of the Commonwealth, one by his Arms, the
other by his Arts, Honor, and Renown attended upon the English Banners in
France; and the Land at Home in peace and quietness Flourished under the benign
Influence of their successful Councels, for the most part free from civil
Broils and Commotions; King Henry being in actual Possession of both Crowns,
under the conduct of such noble and worthy Directors. But when Death had
snatched away one from his Regency in France; and the other was dismissed from
his Protectorship in England through the course of time: The King being grown
in Years, and come to ripeness of Age, though not it seems to such a degree of
understanding, as might capacitate him to act the part of a King, further than
in Name and Show; his Affairs in foreign Parts soon went miserably to wrack;
and being turned out of almost all beyond Sea, deadly Fewds and Annimosities
(the usual attendants of ill Success abroad) encreast so fast at Home, between
the Nobles and great Persons of the Realm, and such intestine Jars sprung up in
the Nation, that after many Battles fought, and much Royal Blood spilt, the
York Party prevailed over the Lancastrians; and the poor King himself, though
the Miracle of Age for Devotion, lost his Crown, Life, and All at last.

Whether 'twas purely the ill success abroad, or the ill management of the
State at home, the unhappy Fate attending the Kings Matching with Queen
Margaret, to the breach of a former Contract, or the unseasonable stirring of
her and her accomplices to Suppress, Ruin, and Root out the other Party,
whereby they were compelled for their own Security to link themselves together
in the strictest bonds of Confederacy, and stand continually upon their own
Guard: Whether the weakness of the King, or the restless Spirit of the Queen
(too Active for her Sex), The much resented Death of the Duke of Gloucester, or
the subtle Arts and Devices of the Duke of York (into the particulars whereof I
will not now descend, as being the Subject of a distinct Treatise by it self)
and the Popularity of the great Earl of Warwick. Whether 'twas any of these
single, or all of them jointly concurring, or rather the overruling Providence
of an Almighty Being, that made this strange Alteration in the Face of things,
to the dethroning of one Prince (the most devoted of his time to religious
Exercises) and exalting of another, as much given to Women, as the former to
Religion, whereby the White Rose overtopt the Red: Certain it is, the City of
London had a great Influence upon these Transactions, and the favor the
Citizens bore to the Duke of York, and his Party, contributed highly to the
advancing of his Interest above the King Regnants, if they were not the only
grand causes under Heaven, that produced such wonderful and stupendous
Effects. This the more clearly to demonstrate, I shall not oblidge my self
exactly to trace the whole Series of State affairs, through the following
Princes Reigns, nor over-scrupulously confine my self to the Life of this or
that King distinctly and apart. But design to view the differences between York
and Lancaster in the lump, considering them under the Notion of one particular
Contest, though of a long and large durance, and throughout with all plainness
and perspicuity, I can lay claim to, show what powerful Rays of Influence from
London were shed abroad upon the Face of the Land. For I intend not to Write an
Abridgement of Englands general History, as having only undertaken a particular
Argument relating to this Honorable Cities Fame, Renown, and Glory abroad;
Strength, Riches, and Power at home within her self; and the various Influences
she cast all over England in the more special turns and changes of Affairs: For
the rest, the Curious may peruse the laborious Works of our English Historians.

Therefore, choosing my own Method, I shall make a division of what I have to
produce in this place, into two Parts or general Heads, under which I hope to
comprehend the most material Passages I meet with suitable to the design and
purport of this Attempt: The first containing Instances of Lon^ons affection to
the Red Rose; and the other showing the sollicitous care and regard she had for
the preservation, growth, and advancement of the White.

First then and foremost, to begin with the Citizens respect to the House of
Lancaster, who bore the Red Rose for their Badg, of their continued Favor and
Affection thereto, in the prime of its flourishing condition, while the many
and great Victories gained in France were yet fresh in their Memories, and
Henry the Sixth enjoyed the Fruits of his Fathers Labors, and retained the
English Conquests therein; there is no doubt to be made. But I presume I have a
much stronger proof to produce, from no less convincing an Argument than
Statute Law (as authentic an Evidence in the Case, as the Subject is capable
of) to be found Anno octavo Henrici sexti. cap. 11. where we have express
mention made of the entire affections and great kindnesses done, and showed to
the said King, in all his Affairs, by the Citizens of the City of London; which
to reward, and for the future the more to encourage, the King was induced by
Authority of Parliament to give them leave to put and take in Apprentices
according to their ancient manner, form, or custom; of which they had some time
before been abridg'd by a former Statute, to the great hindrance and damage
likely thereby to redound to them.

If any shall require further Instances hereof, let them but have recourse to
the Annals of this Kings Reign; and there I doubt not but they will have their
Expectations answered, and their Curiosity highly satisfied, when they shall
have carefully and thoroughly boserv'd the Noble Equipage of the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Citizens in the Tenth Year, when they rode forth to meet the King upon his
return out of France, the Pomp and Gallantry, wherewith they received him at
London, and entertained him in his passage through it, and the costly Present
they made him afterward at Westminster: And take Notice of their splendid
appearance in Scarlet, blew Gowns, broider'd Sleeves, and red Hoods, to convey
his Princely Bride, Queen Margaret, through the City in the Twenty-Third of his
Reign.

But, when this Daysy Flower of France being thus linkt to the Red Rose of
England, the Queen, and her Creatures ruled all about the King at home, and
things went every day worse and worse abroad, through Envy and Emulation among
the Nobles, and negligence of the Kings Council, ill conduct and management of
State Aff^^rs by the new Favorites at Court; and the good Duke of Gloucester,
greatly beloved and adored among the Commons, was privily taken out of the way
in a clandestine manner, to the great and bitter resentments of the People; the
Citizens soon began to alter in their affections and inclinations, and look
with favorable Eyes upon the opposite Party, then springing up under Richard
Duke of York, the chief and principal Head thereof, whose Sails, upon the
aforesaid Dukes death, being full blown with fresh Gales of Ambition, He became
a secret pretender to the Crown, and privately among his Familiars whispered a
more plausible Right and Title thereto, than the King Regnant himself had,
though in actual Possession. Yet they did not so soon forget their old Love, as
presently to side with the Yorkists against the Lancastrians, but seem for a
while to have continued, as it were, in a state of indifferency, sometimes
favoring the one, sometimes the other, as if uncertain with whom to side, till
the Number of public Grievances being greatly encreast, or else more eagerly
and plainly remonstrated to them by the other Party; they more openly at length
shifted all their Sails, and with fixed Resolutions espoused the Yorkist
Interest, and so that Family got Possession of the Throne thereby. Then which,
what greater Evidence can there be of the Cities Power and Influence in those
Times? And yet in this interval and space of time, which I venture, and I hope
with truth enough, to term the State of her indifferency or neutrality, several
other Instances of her Power are produceable for the further illustration of
the Point in hand, to demonstrate beyond dispute, that the variation,
alteration, and change of the Citizens Minds overruled the Affairs of the
State in each turn and change of Things, though as mutable for a season, as the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea; yet likewise as succesful as the turning, or
returning of the Tide, in bearing all before them.

The first Instance that comes to my hand, shall be that of Jack Cade, Captain
Mendal, who calling himself Mortimer Cousen to the Duke of York, upon the
specious promises of reforming grievances, and freeing the Commons from
immoderate Taxes and Impositions, the fame of keeping good Orders among his
people, and his successful overthrow of the Staffords with other Hotspurs of
the Court, at Seven-Oke-Wood, had so strengthened himself, (the City of London
being at that time says Stow full favorable to him) that, upon the King and
Queens remove from the City to Killingworth Castle, distrusting their own
Servants and Soldiers, he came to Southwarke and marched over the Bridge in good
Order into the City, with such Confidence and assurance that passing along by
London-Stone, he struck it with his Sword and said, Now is Mortimer Lord of
London; and so possibly might have continued (he had so won the Hearts of the
Commons by his orderly behavior, and got such an increase of Power, as to give
the Mayor Orders how he would have his People disposed of, they coming and
going freely as they pleased) had he but followed the Mayors Advice, who bad
him take ^eed, he attempted nothing against the Quiet of the City, and made
good his own Reply; Let the Wor^^ ^ake notice of our honest Intention by our
Actions.

But when he once grew so inconsiderately Insolent, as to fall a robbing the
Citizens themselves, he presently lost their Favor and good Will; the honest
and wealthy Commons disliking such extravagant Proceedings, and then the Mayor
and Aldermen, with their Assistance took Council together, to drive him and his
Adherents out of the City, and oppose his further entrance thereunto. The
effect whereof in the Issue was, that, After a sharp bickering and contest upon
the Bridge, the Mayor and the Citizens got the better, the Kentish-Men were
worsted, a truce for a few hours was concluded on, whereof the Lord Chancellor
took the Advantages by a general pardon to disperse the malecontent, and Cade
himself was within a little time after Slain in a Garden in Sussex, So fatal
was it to him by this his Robberies thus to have displeased the Citizens. For
Fabian tells us expressly, that had it not been for that, he might have gone
far, and brought his purpose to good effect, if he had intended well. And so
Prejudicial might it have been to the Court, had he not by these extravagancies
forfeited that favor and respect, which had before been shown him at London to
such a degree, that the Commons were very highly incensed against Alderman
Horn, for opposing the admission of him and his company thereinto, at a
Common Counsel held by the Mayor a^ Guild Hall, and speaking vehemently against
such as were for his entrance, and ceased not, says the Annalist, till they
had him committed to Newgate* But now the tide is turned again, and the King
himself is joyfully received by the Citizens of that very same place, from
whence ere-while he though^ it his best security to depart. As the Citizens
Favor ebbed and flowed, such was the posture of his affairs, in the wane or
the full, so stoo^ his fortune, either increasing or decreasing: where of here
is a demonstration, that no body can deny tha^ has but an Historial Faith,
unless he would have us believe, that the many Historians, th^^ writ hereof,
could join altogether in an unusual confederacy, at several times and from
several place^ to impose a manifest falsehood upon posterity. An Opinion almost
as absurd, (pardon the compari^on) though not to that degree, as theirs, who
^s foolishly as profanely fancy the original Pen^en of the Scriptures made a
mutual agreement (though in several ages and from different parts of ^he
Universe) to obtrude those writings upon the World for the Word of the Eternal
God, (...) of I know not what design of State Policy to keep (...) Common
People in greater aw and subjection to ^^eir Governors.

How fair a Cast the Yorkists lately had for the ^ame through the City's
Favor, till their own (...) management lost it, we have seen. But that as not
all. It left such a rub in their way, that may be supposed to have spoiled
their bowling upon the next open adventure. For in the thirtieth (...) the Duke
of York in Person having raised an ^^my, upon disgusts and pretenses, and the
King ^^ing in the Head of another to oppose Him, He (...) out of the way, and
eschews the Kings (...), and hastens as fast as he could up to London, ^^ping
doubtless for assistance or recruits thence, (...) being deceived in his
expectations, upon notice ^^en him that the Londoners would not admit his
^rance, to refresh himself or his People, he ^^ightwayspasses away from London
over the Thames (...) Kent, and what pray now was the event (...)? Not
according to his wishes successful we may (...). For from the History we may
easily (...), he thought it his greatest interest to come (...) terms of
accommodation with the King (had (...) such been his apprehensions, doubtless
he would (...) have yielded thereto) dismisses his Army, and (...) in Person
into his Majesty's Presence, where (...) with the Duke of Somerset, he (...)
was accused of conspiring the Kings Death, and usurpation of the Crown, and
sent before the King as a Prisoner to London, where he was kept a while, till
upon a Report of his Sons coming with another Army toward London, the Queen
and Her Council thought it convenient to set him at Liberty, upon taking openly
his Oath of Submission and Allegiance, at the High-Altar in St. Pauls-Church,
before the King and great part of His Nobility.

To what a plunge was the Duke and his party here driven, and with how many
difficultyes did the King and his side likewise contest, while neither of them
were absolutely sure and certain of the City, that she would cordially assist
the one against the other. York was disappointed in his Hopes and Confidence of
the Citys favor, and thereupon had run himself into great danger, for which he
knew at that Instant no better remedy, than to swear over again his Allegiance
to him, whom he had intended and designed for a long time to depose. The Kings
Party heard of an Army marching up toward London against them, and rather then
venture to throw themselves upon the hazard of a battle, without better
assurance of the Citys Love and affection, they consented to set at Liberty the
Head of the opposit^ Party, then in their Hands a Prisoner, and permi^ him to
go whither he pleased, notwithstanding they had so much reason to fear and
dread his Designs And possibly they esteemed it greater wisdom to Temporise for
a Season, till they had made their Party visibly stronger in London, and more
able to cop^ with that secret reserve of favorers, which they might fear the
Duke of York had still in the City, as concluding him and his party a little
better advised, than to break out into open Arms against the present
established Government, without some probability of help and assistance thence,
or at leas^ some suggestions thereof before they put on their Armor. This
seeming not an irrational supposal, appears to me to carry the face of another
argument of the Citys Power. For it is undeniably plain, that the Yorkists
carried the day, when she afterward within a few years declared her self
openly for them, as I shall come by and by to show, when I have produced two or
three passages more, as further evincing proofs of this Honorable Citys
Strength and Influence.

One is noted in Fabian in the Thirtyfifth year, upon occasion of dissension
and unkindness happening between the young Duke of Somerset and the Earl of
Salisbury's Son, both at that time lodged within the City. For the Mayor,
having notice hereof, is expressly said to have ordained such Watches and
Provisions in the City, that if either had stirred, he was able to have subdued
both Parties, and kept them in duress till he had known the Kings further
Pleasure. And the Event was answerable to his Intent. For the Friends on both
sides, being well aware of the strict Watch and Ward, and the Consequents
thereof, labored so effectually for an Accommodation, that they concluded an
Agreement between them for that time, without any further disturbance for the
present that we read of: So well able were the Citizens to keep and preserve
the Kings peace, whether they would or no. They durst not provoke each other to
open Hostilityes in that City, whose Power and Arms they had most assuredly
raised about their ears, to their mutual disadvantage, had they been guilty of
such unadvised rashness and daring presumption, as to slight and contemn her
Magistrates Order and Resolution. An other stands on Record, in the same Author
and other Writers, among the next years transactions, under the Ma^oralty of
Godfery Boleyn and Shrievalries of William Edward and Thomas Reyner. For upon
the Kings Calling of a grand Council at London, to accommodate differences, and
the Lords of each Party coming up thereto with great Retinues, they having from
Four-hundred to One-thousand-Five-hundred in a Company, and lodging some within
and some without the City, holding their Consultation apart each from other, as
if at mutual defyance, and ready to put all to the decision of the Sword, the
Mayor kept Five-thousand Citizens (as Fabian Numbers them) daily in Arms,
riding about the City and Subburbs to preserve the peace, and for the night
Watch provided Two-thousand to give Attendance upon three Aldermen till Seven a
clock next morning, that the day Watch was set, by reason whereof (continues my
Author) good order and rule was kept, and no man so hardy once to attempt the
breaking the Kings peace. The Council was held in quietness, and a
Reconciliation patched up for the time. For who durst move when the City says
nay?

Several such Instances are to be seen in the Chronicles, and have been hinted
before in the precedent Relation: And if need were I might produce the
Disturbance likely to have happened in the Fourth year of this King, by the
Bishop of Winchesters means, then at Variance with the Protector the Duke of
Gloucester, when upon strict Commandment given to the Mayor, he set a sure
Watch by night, that kept out the Bishops Servants by force, and would not
permit them to enter the City over the Bridge, whereupon a pacification was at
length concluded between these two great Men, their differencies in time
amicably adjusted, and the City seems to have protected the Protector himself:
But that I hasten to the fecond general Head, before proposed, under which I am
to make out the visibility of the City's affection to the house of York,
distinguished from that of Lancastor by the white Rose, their particular badg,
and thee ffect thereof her influencing the nation in their favor, in behalf of
the Yorkists Interest, to the raising it up above the Lancastrians. And this
may be demonstrated, beyond contradiction, both from the suspicions fears, and
jealousies of the Queen and the Court, that in their Hearts the Citizens bore
too great Respect to the other side, and would assist them upon Occasion, and
from their actual joining at last openly with the Yorkists in word and deed, to
the visible exaltation of that Family above the other: whereby the White Rose
grew up amain, and flourished not only above the rest of the flowers of the
field, but also above the Red, though it is whiteness was first tinged with a
Scarlet dye, and the Red had lost much of it is, before lovely, ruby Color, so
much blood was there shed in this unhappy Contest. It being related out of
Philip de-Comines, that, within his Remembrance, in the Civil-Wars of England
dyed above Eighty Persons of the Blood Royal.

For the proof of the Queens Suspicions, or others Apprehensions, Instances
more than one or two, and a triumvirate of Witnesses may be brought. Stow tells
us before the battle of St. Albans, how that the King having assembled his
Power to oppose the Duke of York, then marching toward London at the Head of
an Army, his meaning was rather to meet the Duke in the North parts, than about
London, where it was thought he had too many friends, and therefore departs
with speed from Westminster on the same ^ntent: And afterward acquaints us,
that upon the difcharging of York and Salisbury of their high Offices and
Places of Government about the King, This change among the Nobility caused
sudden alterations and attempts (which he calls Seditious) to spring in the
Commonalty, especially in the City of London. Fabian informs us that the Queen
caused the King to remove in his Thirty-fifth from London to Coventry, and
their held him a long season, as suspecting the City of London, and deeming it
to be more favorable to the Duke of York's Party, than to Hers. Baker gives us
much the same Story, under the Notion of the Queens persuading the King, for
his Health and Recreation, to make a Progress into Warwickshire, as finding the
little Respect the Londoners bore to Her Party, or the Kings. And Stow shall
here bring up the Rear, to back their Informanions, with this expression, that,
because the Duke was had more in estimation among the Citizens, than either the
King or Queen, she caused the King to make his Progress, as perceiving she
could attempt nothing against him near to the City of London.

If we consider Actions, and respect Matters of Fact, we shall find the
Yorkists often received at London, when the Lancastrians were either expressly
refused, or at least compelled to get further off into other parts, for their
better security and safeguard. After the Yorkists had won the Battle at St.
Albans; London was the place whereto they presently removed, carrying the King
along with them, and kept there their Whitsuntide with great Joy and Solemnity.
When an Assault was made at Court upon the Potent Earl of Warwick, a great
Yorkist, as he was coming from the Council Table, by the Kings Servants with
Intentions to have Slain him, London was the place, whereto he Rowed in all
have, as soon as got into his Barge; and thereby escaping the danger intended,
he Consults with the Principals o^ his Party, and retires afterward to
Callice. Thi^ was the place, to which the Chronicle says the Earl of
Salisbury, his Father, was coming up with some Thousands of Men, when he was
necessitated to Fight his Way through his Enemies i^ Bloreheath Field.

Here likewise was Warwick received, encouraged, and refreshed, in the 38th. of
Hen. 6. before the Battle of Northampton, when the Lord Scales, appointed by
the other side with some Troops to go and secure the City, was directly refused
admission by the Mayor, and being received into the Tower, he was besieged by
Land and Water, and they of the City planted great Guns against it, and break
the Walls in diverse places: And, after the fatal overthrow of the Lancastrians
at the aforesaid Battles, hitherto was the King conveyed by the Party, (a
Prisoner in effect, though in show a King) as if eager there to show their
Triumphant Success, or else further to secure to themselves the Londoners good
will, love and affections, by their Presence. For Fabian tells us, they
returned hither in haste, upon their obtaining this Victory, the Duke of York
comes out of Ireland to them, and after a Report banded about the City, that
King Henry was to be Deposed, and the Duke to be made King, (to make Trial
doubtless of the peoples mind, and sound the Citizens temper and inclination)
he lays Claim to the Crown in open Parliament, and had it at last Entailed upon
himself and his Heirs, King Henry to retain the Name and Honor of King during
Life, if he did not voluntarily Resign, and the Duke of York to be Declared
Heir Apparent to the Crown, and Protector of the King's Person, Lands and
Dominions, with some other Conditions, Exceptions, and Reservations.

This we may suppose was as much as they then ^ound the Citizens willing to
agree and consent to ^or the present. For we have it from Stow on the ^ne hand,
that the Duke of York when he Challenged ^he Kingdom as right Heir, (which
Cotton's Abridge^ent fixes upon the 16th. of October) purposed to have ^een
Crowned on Allhollan-day next following: and, ^n the other side, that the King
was very much fa^oured, and highly honored by the common People for his
Holiness of life, and abundant Clemency. Whether the Citizens would have
yielded to more or not, I cannot be positive, but this I am sure of, that they
so far gave way, that now the York Party had got much the better end of the
Staff by an Act of Parliament, as well as by Arms, Title, and the Cities
Affections, and made use of it accordingly to the Old Kings actual Deposition,
and the setting up of a New one at London, before the next Spring was over, by
the concurrent consent of many substantial Citizens thereof.

This the Yorkist Faction had reason enough, notwithstanding their prosperous
success in the Country, to acknowledge as a great favor of the Commonalty of
London, and impute the following success to their Corstancy, in adhereing to
their Party, after a double overthrow given the Yorkists by the Lancastrians,
when the Magistracy seemed, in part, at least, to have altered Opinions and
Resolutions, if not their Affections. For, would but the Commons have sat
still, and continued Neutral in the Contest, the other side was in a fair way
to have made their Party good against the Yorkists: but the Commons opposition
to their Mayors Proceedings, stem'd the Current, to the others benefis, and the
manifest disadvantage of the Queen and the Court. Whereby we may observe where
lies the orength of the City, and who are likeliest in the end, to carry the
day, the Mayor, or the Commons; when they vary in their Sentiments, and as
different Parties pull two contrrry ways.

The whole Story, the Occasion and the Consesequences are to be seen in our
English Historians; who, among the diversity of their Relations in many things,
and wonted variety in expressing the Transactions of the Times, concur
nevertheless in the Issue and Event of the Actions then i^ hand: For let any of
them write never so partially out of Favor and Affection, the Truth will out
at last, and shall prevail against all opposition.

The Queen with her Northern Army had overthrown and slain Richard Duke of
York, and routed his Party at Wakefield, and afterward discomfitted the Earl
of Warwick and his Power at Saint Albons, upon Bernard Heath, and so delivered
King Henry out of their hands, who pretended to be his Life Guard, but were in
reality his Keepers, Observes, Overseers, and Governors, or, in an yet harsher
term though as true a sense, his Jaylors, upon which important Successes, the
Queen sent to the Mayor of London, willing and commanding him in the King's
Name speedily to send her Victuals without delay, for her Army: which Command
the Mayor strove presently with great diligence to put in Execution, by
preparing several Cart-Loads of Lenten Provision, and sending them to
Cripple-Gate, toward the Lancastrians Camp at Saint Albans. But there the
Commons unanimously withstood their further passage, and by strong hand kept
the Carts from going out of London, saying, It did not behoove them to feed
their Enemies, who intended to Rob the City, and having repulsed the Northern
Horsemen robbing in the Subberbs, upon their attempt to enter that way into the
City, and slain three of them, continued so firm and fixed in their Resolutions,
that let the Mayor do what he could by Exhortation and Arguments, to show them
the danger, that might ensue by stopping the Carts, he could neither reclaim
nor alter their minds, nor by any means prevail upon them, but in the end was
fain to send the Recorder and some of the Aldermen to the Kings Council, to
request the Northern Men's Dismission, besides two Female Mediators to interceed
for him to the Queen, and excuse his not using force in those dangerous and
doubtful times, against the Commons opposition, least their fury being once
stirred it might not so easily have been allaid again. Whereupon the Queen was
sending some of the Lords, with 400 Soldiers to the City, to take a view of the
peoples demeanor, but having her hands full, upon certain notice that the Earl
of March, Yorks Eldest Son, and the Earl of Warwick with joint Forces were
coming up in all haste to London, she departed with the King, her Husband, and
Son, into the North, her only refuge, having little trust in Essex, less in
them of Kent, but least of all (says Stow) in the Londoners; so little availed
it to have the Mayor and some of the chief Commoners on her side, (as Fabian
intimates) when the Commonalty, i. e. the vast majority, held with the Duke of
York and his party, wherefore, upon the Courts departure from St. Albans, the
Earl of March with his Yorkists entered the City in Lent, with a great
Attendance, and was joyfully received, the people resorting to him in great
numbers out of Kent, Essex, and other parts, to see, aid, and assist this lusty
Prince, (as the Annalist words it) in whom the hope of all their joy consisted,
as soon as his coming thither was known, where he was quickly Proclaimed and
acknowledged King by consent, in the beginning of March, and after eight or ten
Battles, actually Crowned in June with great Royalty, and a splendid appearance
of Lords and Commons, Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens. In so high a degree did
the Cities actions sway the Country, and such an advantage was it to the
Yorkists, to have gained her over to their Party.

I need not here remark the prevalency of the Commonalty over the Temporising
Mayor, and his time-serving Interest, (the event plainly she wing in these
particulars, Vox Populi to have been Vox Coeli) because I have touched upon
this string already. But this however I am warranted from History to observe,
that the Londoners, after they had once thoroughly placed their hearts upon the
House of York, they continued so fixed and firm to their Interest, that no
shocks of Fortune, nor the Troubles and Commotions about the middle of King
Edwards Reign, could shake the firmness of their adherence to him, so fast was
he Rivetted in their Affections: nor yet the Popularity of the great Earl of
Warwick himself, so much greater than a King, as that which makes is greater
than that it makes: whose Hospitality may be supposed to have redounded so much
to his own advantage, and the Interest of the York Family, which he had for a
long time before espoused, by the favor he gained thereby among the Commons of
the Realm in general, and of the City in particular: For when he came to
London, the Analist informs us he kept such an House, that six Oxen were eaten
at a Breakfast, and every Tavern was full of his Meat, and whosoever had any
acquaintance in his House might have had as much Sodden and Roast, as he might
carry upon a long Dagger. All this notwithstanding, when upon disgust and
discontent he had turned to the other side, and became a favourer of the
Lancastrians, he was never the less disappointed in his aims and expectations
from the Londoners. For though by his turning sides the York Party had been
once routed, King Edward taken Prisoner, and King Henry resettled once more on
the Throne, and he had in a manner the whole power of the Land in his hands,
besides the general Love and Affection the Commons bore to him, and the dread
and terror the sound of his Name often struck into his Enemies Hearts, it having
in effect altered the Fortune and turned the Scales in two Battles, one in King
Henry's days for the Yorkists, another in King Edwards for the Lancastrians,
yet upon the return of King Edward from beyond Sea (whither he had some time
before escaped out of Custody) into England, to recover his Inheritance, and
regain his Crown, and the News of his Marching up to London, both sides (says
Baker) seeking to make the City their Friends, the Citizens backwardness to
take up Arms in Defense of Old King Henry, his Crown and Dignity, and
inclination to Young King Edward, was so apparent, that Warwicks, own Brother,
the Archbishop of York, distrusting the Event, secretly sought King Edwards
Favor; he himself was received into London, King Henry was redelivered unto
him, and the Great Warwick slain not long after at Barnet in a pitched Battle,
to the utter Ruin of the Lancastrian Party for that Age, the consequence of
this overthrow being enough to read them their succeeding ill Fate at
Tewksbury: they themselves having sufficient Cause to be daunted, with the loss
of their most powerful friends and favorers, and the Yorkists to be flushed
with their Success in gaining so important a Victory.

As the Citizens continued thus favorable to the King, so I don't find them
them changed and altered in there Inclinations to the other side, till some of
the Yorkists themselves, by their own hands, began to loose and untye those
Bonds of Amity, Friendship, and Fidelity, the Late King's Children being
dispossessed by his own Brother, the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of
Richmond, the surviving hopes of the Lancastrians, had openly declared his
Intentions, and solemnly Sworn, to marry King Edward's Eldest Daughter, the
rightful Heir of all the Yorkists Greatness, which afterward was as honorably
as honestly performed: whereby both Families became united in one Line, and the
two Roses happily inoculated each upon the other. The expression I hope the
ingenious Society of Gardiners and Florists will pardon me, if harmlesly guilty
of an absurdity in translating the term from fruits to flowers.

Did the Citizens of London appear so zealously on the Yorkists behalf, and
yield such powerful assistance to carry on their designs? What other than can
we expect with reason, but that King Edward behaved himself very gratefully
toward that City, which Espoused his flaughtered Fathers Cause, against even
the Governing Party, and contributed so considerably to his own Restoration.
Though it is but too commonly seen that as mean services are but meanly
recompensed, or else wholly' slighted add forgotten, so an excess of merit too
great to be rewarded, brings oftener danger than advantage to the party
concerned. Evident examples whereof our own and Foreign Histories can
abundantly afford us, and it is well if the City of London could produce no
experience of her own in confirmation of their verity and validity, while some
others having gotten well by their services, to the facilitating their ascent
into high Places, have no better improved them in the Eyes of the World, than
in keeping their Coaches, their Horses, and their Misses, and made little other
returns of thanks and gratitude to the City, but some small slight
acknowledgments and concessions, and perhaps a few verbal promises and
assurance, or else forgetting their former needs and necessities, have
endeavored, most ungratefully, to turn their power upon her, which they may be
thought to have gained chiefly and principally by her means. But King Edward it
seems, or those about him had honester Principles in them, or were better
tempered: For we find in Baker, that he furnished his Council Table for the
most part with such as were gracious among the Citizens; and we Read in Stow of
no less than eleven Aldermen, besides the Lord Mayor and Recorder, Knighted by
him at one time in the Highway betwixt Islington and Shoreditch, upon his
return from the Battle at Tewksbury, in reward of the good service the
Londoners had done him. As for the jovial Entertainment of the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons in Waltham Forest, by the Kings express order and appointment, in
his presence, about an year before he dyed, it is a Subject Treated on by more
English Historians than one, with the circumstances and consequents thereof,
the pleasant lodge of Green boughs set up on purpose for them, the Complemental
condescension of the King, in refusing to go to his own Dinner till he had saw
them served, the Hunting sport he showed them, the plenty of Venison he gave
them at their departure, and the noble Present of two Hearts and six Bucks, with
a Tun of Wine, he sent to the Lady Mayoress, and her Sisters the Aldermens
Wives, to make merry with, which they did afterward at Drapers Hall: where
without all peradventure, the Kings Health went all round the Table, if it was
then in Fashon, but for this I will not put one finger in the fire.

If we dive into the reasons of the variation of the Pole at London, and search
into the occasional Causes of the manifest change and alteration of their
Affections, from thr Family of Lancaster to the House of York, we may impute it
partly to the losses, crosses, and unsuccessful management of Affairs, under a
weak King and a self seeking Court of Lancastrians, but chiefly to the increase
of National grievances, without timely care taken to redress them, and the fixed
Resolution of the Court Party to oppress their opposites, the Yorkists, any
manner of ways, by right or by wrong; for we may easily observe from History
and experience, such to have been the usual motives to disgusts, and the common
incitements to discontent. Therefore I presume I may draw hence better grounds
and reasons of the Cities Love to King Edward, than those alleged by Baker out
of Comines, (viz. that he got the Love of the Londoners by owing them Money,
and the good will of the Citizens, by lying with their wives) as looking at
first appearance too Comical and Jocular to be sound, when sifted to the
bottom. Why else did this Experiment never succeed before nor since? I don't
think but there have been other Princes, besides this Amorous Yorkist, sitting
upon the English Throne, whose Consciences would never have boggled at
borrowing Money, and then Cornuting their Creditors, if this Recipe could have
shown its Probatum est. But whatever Reasons History or Fancy suggests, this
is most undeniably certain, as being matter of fact, that the City was visibly
engaged in the Yorkists Interest, before ever that Family could attain to the
height of their desires. From whence I doubt not to conclude, that had the
Citizens been otherwise inclined, and continued firm and fixed to the House of
Lancaster, the Duke of York might indeed have laid his Claim, and pleaded
Title, with many other fair-spun pretenses, (as the Prerogative of Birth,
Privilege of Law, the impossibility of altering a Native Right by previous
Contracts, Vows, Oaths, or Prescription, and the Injustice of breaking the
Thread of an Orderly Succession) but, all this notwithstanding, he might still
have remained for ought we can be sure of, far enough off from compassing his
Ambitious Desires, or from the possibility of coming within view of his
Journeys End, the City standing between him and the wished for Haven. The
Observation is obvious from several passages aforegoing. The City in it self is
too great to be over-awed, and her influence over the Country consequently too
powerful, to have it long quietly overruled by any Party whatsoever, with whom
she refuses to concur.

Another Observation give me leave to make en passant, and that shall be upon
the time and season, not of the Citizens manifesting their Affections, but of
their actual appearance in behalf of the Duke and his Party. This I observe to
have been, not presently and immediately in the forefront, and the very first
beginning, but upon the coming up of the Yorkists to London with Swords by
their sides, and resolution in their minds: So that they seem first to have
been approvers, and then Seconds to the Dukes Party in their designs upon their
open Declaration. Before that the Commonalty so openly and resolutely refused
to let Provisions pass to the Lancastrians Camp at St. Albans, the Duke of York
had declared himself in the midst of his Friends and Adherents at London ready
to assist him, and though he was then dead, having been slain in Battle, and
the Lancastrians so near the City at that very same time, yet his Eldest Son
being in the Head of an Army in the Country, was soon come to London, received,
Elected, approved, and set up for King by their approbation, consent, and good
liking. This likewise may be observed to have been the common custom and usage
of the City, as an ordinary English Reader may easily find in several places of
this Relation upon a review, or careful recollection of what has been before
set down: or else to satisfy his Curiosity, without trusting to this
Transcription, he may search after the passages himself in such Authentic
Authors, as Fabian, Stow; Speed, Baker, or the like Chronicles of the English
Affairs, which being easier met with than the Original Writers of these times,
he will be put to the less trouble, upon any doubt occurring in any things here
delivered for matter of Fact, in that I have chose to draw up this Treatise for
the most part out of these laborious Collectors. Where it is observable that
the Cities inclinations being by some one or other overt act, as manifestly
declared, or else plainly perceived, or shrewdly guessed at, by the industry
and vigilence of the discrning Spirits of the Age, the discontented Nobles were
quickly encouraged thereupon, and inclined to withdraw into the Marches of
Wales, or the Borders of Scotland, and there gathering together their Party,
and Raising as great Forces as time and opportunity would permit, away they
come in all have, as fast as they can, up to London, where being joyfully and
gladly received, with great applause and approbation, the Courtiers were often
compelled to fly for their safety, and the Governing Party desperse elsewhere,
to try it out by dint of Sword, (at which they were commonly worsted) or else
quietly yield to such conditions, as would be approved in the City, and were
acceptable to the Party, the result whereof generally was the calling of a
Parliament, as the desire of the Subject, though the dread and fear of the
Court. But for the better illustration of this remark, I shall produce modern
experience, and instance in what has happened within the memory of thousands yet
living.

That under the late Usurpation the City was very desirous of a Free-Parliament
is not to be doubted of. And yet we find she sat still quiet, and pretty well
contented to outward appearance, (amidst the various changes from an Old
Protector, to a New one, from that to the Rump, and thence to the Committee of
Safety) as if over ridden, or like a wearied Beast, silently couching down
under her heavy burdens, almost wholly insensible, and as one unconcerned. But
as soon as General Monk, out of Scotland, had openly declared his dislike of
the Armies extravagancies, and was come up from Coldstream, amidst the Visits
of the Gentry, and Acclamations of the people, so near the City as Harbrow, we
hear presently of Commissioners come thither to him from the City, and their
proposing a readmission of the Secluded Members, that the Parliament might be
made full and free. This was the first Public Address I meet with looking that
way, but after this we read of many from various parts of the Land, and almost
all Counties of the same Nature with that from the Capital City of the Nation,
as if all had been animated by the influential Rays of her Inclinations, and
her Results were the superior faculties of the Soul, ove-ruling the inferior
Members of the Body. But the City staid not here, for as she addressed, so she
was resolved for a full house, before she would pay any public Taxes. And though
Monk upon stricter declared Resolutions put her into a great Consternation for
a time, by pretending to over-aw her with his Soldiers, which was not in any
wise expected at his hands, yet upon his application to her Common Council,
when he returned the next day with his Army to regain their almost lost favor,
(and what then might not they have done of themselves, when their amazement,
sprung from the suddenness of the unexpected surprise, was abated?) they
approved of his Intentions to have the House of Commons filled up, demonstrated
it with Bells and Bonfires, persuaded and procured his continuance amongst
them; whereby his own Security was consulted, and those Designs most
successfully carried on, which laid the way open to his present Majesty's
Peaceable Restoration. For this Concurrence of the City with General Monk's
Resolutions, brought about the Restitution of the Secluded Members, that
procured a free and fuller meeting of the Lords and Commons, and soon after the
King was recalled from his forced Exile, to the open Exercise of his Royal
Power and Authority over these his Three Nations, and made his Public Entrance
in the greatest Calm of Peace and Tranquillity imaginable. Thanks to the
Honorable City for concurring so unanimously to the Revival of the remaining
part of the Old Parliament, which brought forth so Miraculous Effects, as to
have an Injured and Exiled Prince fully restored to his Throne, and yet the
Glory of the Action not tinctured with Blood. Such was the Influence of Londons
concurrence, of Londons Power, of Londons Prayers.

If then the many instances hitherto related, being conjoined, rise not up to a
demonstration, as much Mathematical, as the subject can bear, I know not what
will. As for the truth of them, I defy any one to disprove me, who has but
the least grain of sense and reason in him, and as much Historical knowledge as
may amount to the sixtieth part of a scruple. The particular reasons of the
Cities Potency have been shown, and the general ground thereof is as plainly
evident. For how can it otherwise be, but that a City endowed with such Royal
Grants, fortified with so many and so great Privileges, and exalted to the
height of Grandeur, by the vastness of her Trade; multitude of her Merchants,
Wealth and Riches of her Inhabitants, Spirit and Courage of her Citizens,
Stateliness of her Buildings, Preheminances of her Antiquity, Convenience of
her Situation, and Regular Order of her Government, so Ennobled with the
highest Courts of Judicature for the Law, adorned with numerous Churches for
the Gospel, and frequented by Strangers from all parts of the habitable World,
the Receptacle of all Arts and Sciences, the Haunt of the Commonalty, the
Delight of the Gentry, the Habitation of the Nobility, the Residence of the
King, and Glory of the whole Nation; so pleasant to Admiration; and so populous
to a Wonder, where many Scores, if not Hundreds of Thousands, can be Raised and
Armed in a few Hours Warning. How, I say, can it otherwise be, but that such a
City must needs highly influence, overruled and overawe the Counsels of the
Nation, and turn the Inclinations of the People whithersoever she please? For
Nature generally uses the common ordinary means and methods, and I do not see
that the All-powerful God of Nature often diverts her Course, or works Wonders
and Miracles in every Age and Season. Now that London is such a City, I appeal
to History and Experience for my Witnesses.

These are the Observations I had to make concerning the Glories of the City of
London and the Influences she had upon the grand Concerns of the Nation, in
that great and famous Contest between the two Houses of Lancaster and York
(through the most considerable part whereof I have hitherto traced her Actions)
wherein finding her most triumphant, amidst the great variety of the public
Transactions of these times, I think it not much material to give so distinct a
Relation of her private Affairs, though among them I might likewise find many
things most worthy of Remak, as hastening apace toward the Conclusion of this
Treatise, that it may not swell into too great a bulk, to the Reader's
Discouragement, and the wearying out of his Patience, I fear, already almost
tired. Wherefore, as to what concerns the private Troubles of the City, the
Tumults, Riots and Insurrections sprung up out of her own Bowels in these
perilous Times, and happily suppressed by the Power of her Majestrates, and the
accidental Casualties happening within her Liberties: or else the many Benefits
accruing to her, by the Care and Vigilance of her chief Officers, the good Rule
and Order of her Government, the strict Observation of her particular
Ordinances, and putting in Execution her Injunctions: Or as to what relates to
the external Augmentation of her Honor, her Splendour and Renown, by the
Reparation of her Walls, Renovation of her public Structures, founding and
erecting of new Fabrics, I pass them all over without a more particular
mention, (sending the curious and inquisitive to the Chronicles, Baker's
especially, who has treated purposely of such remarkables in distinct
Sections, at the end of the Kings Lives) as not so pertinent to my present
design, though in other Kings Reigns I may have here and there touched upon some
such Remarks: And shall direct the Reader with an Instance of the Courage of
some bold spirited women of the City, having hitherto entertained him with the
Heroic and Illustrious Acts only of the other Sex. The Relation I have out of
Stow, who places it in the Seventh of King Henry the Sixth, Anno 1428. where,
after mention made of a Parliament Asiembled at Westminster that Year, he gives
it us in these words.

In this Parliament there was one Mrs. Stokes, with diverse other stout Women of
London, of good reckoning, well Apparelled, came openly to the upperhouse of
Parliament, and delivered Letters to the Duke of Gloucester, and to the
Archbishops, and to the other Lords there present, containing matter of
Rebuke, and sharp reprehension of the Duke of Gloucester, because he would not
deliver his Wife Jaqueline out of her grievous Imprisonment; being then held
Prisoner by the Duke of Burgundy, suffering her there to remain so unkindly,
and for his public keeping by him another Adultress, contrary to the Law of
God, and the honorable Estate of Matrimony. Bold words and bold women. For
this Duke was then Lord Protector of the Realm, and so confequently of great
Power, Place, and Dignity therein. But these were Londoners that durst be so
courageous, as to say, to Princes, Ye are Wicked, and then the wonder is not
altogether so great, on one hand, that they dared to reprehend the great ones
of the Age, and on the other, that we still find such Heroical Spirits in the
City, since they spring from such a Race both by the Fathers side, and the
Mothers. The Roman Historians celebrates the Memory of that Noble Matron, who
came into open Court, and with so undaunted a spirit of boldness, pleaded her
own Cause, to the great amazement of the Senate for the present, that they made
an Order to forbid the like for the future. What Viragoes then were these
English Matrons of London, that in open Parliament durst reprove the Nobles to
their faces, and were not afraid to attempt to teach our Senators wisdom?
wherein they may seem to have out-did that famed Roman Matron, in that what she
did may be thought to have proceeded from self-love and self-defence, whereas
these with a greater Courage espoused another Cause, an excess of Charity and
Humanity, and, instead of staying for an opportunity of defending their own
Interest upon occasion or necessity, durst voluntarily make an onset on the
more powerful with sharp rebukes, for neglecting the distressed, and refusing
to assist the poor, weak, and disconsolate. So that the Royal City of London
appears emulous of the Old Imperial City of Rome, both in the Courage of the
Women, and valor of her men: as if resolved not to yield to her Fame on any
account in Glory and Merit, nor come behind her in the Heroic Acts of either
of the Sexes, while one continues as potent in the British World, by the
Spirit of the Citizens and influence of her Actions, as the other once was
famous for her Arms all over Europe, Asia and Africa. And who knows whitherto
she may come in time, as how far the Fates, or rather Providence, have decreed
to advance her? Was she so powerful so many Ages since, what is she now, since
that she is very much increased in the Strength and Number of her Inhabitants,
and her private Buildings are reformed from Wood and Earth into Brick, and
public into Stone, low humble Cottages into stately Edifices, and who dares be
so positive to aver, that they may not in time, be changed into Marble?

Hitherto have I treated the Reader with variety of Proofs and Evidences
sufficiently (I hope) demonstrative of the Repute, Fame, Honor, Glory, and
Renown, Magnificence, Grandeur, Strength, Power and Influence of this so
Triumphant a City, whose Approbation and Assistance, has settled Kings upon
their Thrones, and the dissatisfaction of whose Inhabitants has sometimes left
the way open to the ruin of Princes; In the Examples and Instances whereof,
the Concurrence of her Citizens was, for the most part, general and universal,
at least so far as concerned the Majority. But now I shall produce an Instance
(and not easy perhaps to be paralleled, from either Divine or profane
Writings,) to show, how influential the bare shadow of her Name has been in
State Affairs, and how contributary to the transforming of a Subject into a
King, without any apparent assent of the Main Body of this ancient Corporation;
which I am so far from thinking a diminution of her Glory, that I rather look
upon it, as here circumstantiated, to be an Argument of the City's great Power,
Reputation, and Esteem, under this Consideration;

That if that aspiring Protector, the bloody Duke of Gloucester, better known
by the Name of Crookback'd Richard the Third, could do so much by the shadow,
what might he not have done, could he have but enjoyed the substance? As in
Divinity, Circumstances make many an Action good or bad: so in History, the
Design and Event not seldom ennobles or debases an Enterprise. It Is not so much
the bare Act, or thing done, in this particular, that is to make good my
Assertion, as the Deduction from the Consequences thereof, whether real or
designed, which come now to be related in this manner following:

When that ambitious, Crook-back'd Duke, upon his Brother's Death, had got his
eldest Son and Heir, and the rightful King, into his hands, and by treacherous
Plots, devised Crimes, and false Calumniations, taken away the Lives of those
true and trusty Friends of the old King, that were most likely to continue
faithful to his young Son and Heir in his Minority, and loyally stand by him
with their Lives and Fortunes, against the open Attempts or secret Designs of
his Treacherous Uncle, and thereby removed many of the Rubs out of the way to
his aspired greatness. His next Care was to get the Peoples Consent to the
turning of his Ducal Corronet into a Regal Crown, and their Concurrence to
acknowledge him for their King, whereas before he was but Protector. But how
should this be done? A Pretense must be found to cajole them, seeing that he
had so little Equity and Justice on his side to confirm them to him. The City
of London was known to be powerful and populous, and their Example was thought
to do much with the rest of the Nation, to make them, if not approve, at least
connive at his Nephew's Deposition, and his own Exaltation, therefore the
Citizens were to be Caressed, and their Approbation to be sought. Whereupon he
seeks for and procures Instruments fit for his turn, that, to honor his
ambitious Desires, stuck not openly to turn Renegado's to Truth, Honesty and
Loyalty, so that they might get Worldly Honor and Preferment thereby. Among
whom none of the less noted, nor least useful, are reckoned the present Lord
Mayor of London, (a Man of a proud Heart, and highly desirous of Advancement,
how little soever he deserved it) and two brazen-faced Sons of the Church, both
great Preachers, of more Learning than Virtue, of more Fame than Learning. So
useful has the Pulpit in the Church been always thought to carry on Intreagues
in the State. The Contrivance was first to prepare the People and break the
Matter at Paul's-Cross, and then Motion it to the Citizens at Guild Hall, to
accomplish which, and bring his purpose to perfection, the Duke cared not, so
his dead Father were thought, or called, a Cuckold; his Mother, a Whore; his
Brethren, Bastards; and his Nephew, illegitimate; to the shame of the whole
House of York, such Fires of Ambition ruled and raged in his Heart. The
flattering Clergymen readily did their Parts in the Pulpit, as far as they
were able, but with so ill success to the Duke's Cause, and their own
Reputation, that he was wholly disappointed of the desired Acclamations, and
they lost their Credit and Estimation among the People ever after. One lost his
Life after his Sermon, the other his Voice in the midst of his Preaching, and
so was forced to leave off and come down.

From Paul's Cross away go we, the Tuesday following the Doctor's Sermon, to
Guild Hall, and there we find the Mayor upon the Hustings, and all the Aldermen
assembled about him, and the Commons of the City gathered before them. To whom
the Duke of Buckingham, newly come thither, attended with diverse Lords and
Knights from the Court, makes a long and large Oration about the Grievances
under the late King, his many unnecessary Taxations, great Severities, and the
looseness of his Life, (to cast dirt thus upon the late King's Government, was
thought then, it seems, an effectual Means, to make way for this Popish
Successor) (...) them of the Doctor's Sermon, and desires them to join with
him, and others, in a Petition to the Duke, to take upon him the Name and
Office of a King, hoping by his many Arguments and Persuasions, with the
volubility of his Tongue, to obtain the Citizens Concurrence in a full Cry of
of King Richard, King Richard. But they were, it seems by the story, very deaf
of hearing on that Ear, to his no little wonder and amazement. Wherefore, upon
further consultation with the Mayor and others privy to the Design, Buckingham
resumes his Discourse, and rehearses the same over again with a louder Voice,
as if the Citizens had not all heard, or not well understood the meaning of his
former Speech. But neither did this move their Affections, nor produce a Word
in favor of the Motion from the Auditors. Then Mr. Recorder, by the Mayor's
Advice, was pitched upon to second the Duke, upon hopes that it might be better
accepted from him, as the public Mouth of the City. Full loath, we may well
think, was he, an honest Man, and newly come to his Honor and Preferment,
having never spoken to the Citizens before from that place, to begin upon so
harsh and unpleasing a Subject* But however the Mayor's Commands must be
obeyed. He therefore makes a Rehearsal of the Duke's Words, but so far from
being transposed* altered, or augmented, that he plainly showed wha^ he did was
in Obedience to the Lord Mayor's Commands, not out of affection or good will to
the Cause, or the Duke. What then could it avail the Mayor and his Party, that
Mr. Recorder was compelled to be their Mouth, when it is plain from hi^ Speech,
that he spoke others Sentiments, not hi^ own? And this was easily perceived on
all hand^ For the Citizens stood still as mute as Fishes, or dea^ as Adders,
that would not hearken to the Voic^ of the Charmer, nor tune their Pipes to the
Son^ of a base flattering Courtier. Well then, conse^^ they could get none?
Hitherto not a word of approbation, what must be done next? Why? when we
despair of Citizens Words and Wishes, we'll even pretend to reject them, as
useless and unnecessary, seeing they will not be modeled to our minds. And
therefore at last the Citizens are plainly told, that all the Nobles of the
Realm are resolved already upon the Point, (a thing as true, as the Mayor was
Honest, or the Duke Loyal) and their ultimate Answer was demanded. Upon which
followed secret Whisperings, and a confused Bur, among the People, till at last
some of the Duke's Servants, and others of their procuring, (Prentices, and
other Lads, thrust into the Hall among the Press) set up their Notes at the
lower end, threw up their Caps in token of Joy, and loudly cry out upon King
Richard. This the Duke and Mayor, seeing they could have not better, take
advantage of, and would have it forsooth pass for an unanimous Consent, and the
universal Approbation of the City, though the whole multitude of Citizens
answered them not a word, only cast back their heads, and marvelled what those
meant behind them, with their whoopings and hollowings. A goodly Cry, quoth the
Duke, and thanks them, and so departs.

The next News we hear is of a Petition immediately made, the Morrow after, to
the Protector at Baynard's Castle, to take upon him the Rule and Government of
the Realm, as rightful King, to which, with much ado and entreaty, (poor Man!)
he at last yielded, as if altogether compelled, through mere necessity, and
others importunity, the Duke of Buckingham coming in the Name of himself, the
Lord Mayor and his Brethren, as indeed we find them there amongst others, to
see this notorious piece of dissimulation acted over. So slips this dissembling
Yorkist into the Throne, over his young Nephew's head (whom afterward he
cruelly caused to be murdered) is Crowned, and Reigns as King for a time, the
Holla's and Huzza's of a few Courtiers and Prentices being imposed upon the
Nation, for the Universal Consent of the City of London, though the Duke's
Party could not obtain so much as that Complement from the Citizens themselves.
Seeing therefore they could not embrace the Substance, they were resolved, I
would say, to grasp at the Shadow, were I sure the Critics would not Censure
the Expression. For being not able to prevail upon the Masters, they
endeavored to try Experiments on the Apprentices, and failing of the Majority
of the Men, are content to be playing with the Boys: And if this now may be
called the Concurrence of the City, it is easy doubtless to be had at any time
with Feasting and Fudling. Let the distrustful, or evil thinking person,
consult Mr. Stow, about the Life and Reign of King Edward the Fifth, and then
he may see Authority enough for the precedent Relation.

Thus we see the Duke is mounted at last up into the Saddle, and from a
Protector, that might have been legal, he becomes a King most unlawfully, by
very unjust Means and indirect Methods, by defrauding his poor innocent Nephew
of his Birthright, and afterward depriving him of his Life, aspersing his own
Mother with Adultery, imputing Bastardy to his Brethren, and bringing a
dishonorable Reflection upon his Father. But can we think such an ill-gotten
Crown could ever prosper with him? No sure: 'Twas improbable, and impossible.
The Furies are stirred up to torment him, for Providence sleeps not, nor could
Vengeance lag long behind. The City never gave her full consent,
notwithstanding all the endeavors of that false Knave her Mayor, therefore she
had reason and occasion enough for the deepest Resentments, to see her Name
without her Authority basely abused by Treachery and Deceit, to promote other
Men's corrupt Designs, and the Duke so lately transposed into a King, sufficient
Grounds for continual Fears, Jealousies and Suspicious, about the fickleness
and unsetledness of his own State and Condition, being so insecure and
uncertain of the City's hearty good will and affections, as knowing the Cheat
he had newly put upon the Nation, and the Affront he had offered to the whole
Body of the Citizens, in making use of their Names without their Consent and
Concurrence, to settle himself in his intended Usurpation. Bosworth-field also
is drawing nigh a pace, where he shall be forced to pay Nature her last Debt,
Justice shall have her due, and a full period shall be put to all his villainous
Acts and Enterprises, after a short Reign or Usurpation of two Years, two
Months, and a Day or two, the shortest Term by far of any Kings Reign since the
first William, unless we admit Edward the Fifth, for Method and Customs sake,
into the Number of our Kings, who for Ten Weeks space bore the Name, though it
may be more properly called the Tyranny of the Duke, than the Reign of the King.

Enter next the Earl of Richmond, a Lancastrian, (a Family directly opposite to
the House of York, till now in Combination against Crook-back Richard, that did
endeavor to destroy them all, and on a design of a union of both Interests, in
the persons of the Heirs on both sides) with a few Friends and foreign
Mercinaries, at Milford-Haven in Wales, and the hopes of a considerable Number
of Auxiliaries ready to join and assist him in his March up directly toward
the City of London. For this seems to have been his main aim, and intended
purpose, from his Letters sent to his Friends, to come in with all speed to his
Assistance, as in whose Affections doubtless he put much trust and confidence;
neither was he deceived therein, in that, after his successful Victory over his
Enemies at Bosworth, (where we date the first beginning of his Reign, under the
Name of Henry the Seventh) upon his remove toward London, and his near
approach to the City, we find the City so far from the least shadow of
opposition, that on the contrary, they prepared to receive him with
Demonstrations of great Joy and Gladness, for his safe and happy arrival there.
The Habit of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, were either Scarlet or Violet,
and his Reception was in great State and Pomp, they meeting him in orderly
Array without the City, and so conveying him through it to St. Paul's. Neither
may we think him insensible of their Favors, if Baker records the truth, as
indeed I am not able on any good grounds to contradict him, when he says, that
the City of London was this King's Paradise, nor provably consute the Reasons
he gives for his Assertion, viz. That what good Fortune soever befell him, he
thought he enjoyed it not, till he acquainted them with it. And can we fancy he
had not good Grounds and Inducements, for this honorable Acknowledgment of
their Kindness and Goodness shown him by them, besides the first Expressions
thereof in the beginning of his Reign, when he was so far from being well
warmed in his Seat, that he was not yet entered upon the Throne by the
Solemnity of a Coronation, nor had taken possession of the Government with the
usual Ceremonies and Customary Formalities?

Certain it is, that I read in Fabian, Sh^riff of London in his days, that he
had considerable Sums of Money of the City, more than once, twice, or thrice,
an Assistance as requisite often times, as Men in Arms, and not seldom more
difficult for Princes to obtain: There being idle men enough generally at all
times ready to come in at the Sound of Trumpet or Drum, if there be but an
Assurance or Probability of good Pay: which to compass, is commonly a
difficulty not so easily surmounted, even by great Kings and Princes, so scarce
a Commodity is Gold and Silver Coin. Neither do I find the City at any time
complaining, or opposing, or joining with his Enemies: For notwithstanding his
settlement on the Throne, and his uniting the two Families into one, by
marrying Edward the Fourth's eldest Daughter, he had a Lambert and a Perkin to
disturb his Quiet and Repose, about Title. A Favor therefore doubtless this
was not inconsiderable in those days. For the City of London is known to have
been able to do much, had she been so inclined. Whereof we may well believe the
King was very sensible, and so were the opposers of his peaceable tranquillity,
were it only from this consideration, that when, in the Second of his Reign, it
was bleer'd about by his Enemies, that the Earl of Warwick, George, Duke of
Clarences Son, was escaped out of the Tower, and a counterfeited Earl was
provided to act the part of the true one, to draw People to their Assistance,
(which might have created no little trouble to the King, and greatly endangered
his Person and Dignity) to disappoint and frustrate their Designs, and fully
lay open the Cheat, of all Parties and Places of his Kingdom, he chose London,
to show therein the right Earl of Warwick to the People, though the principal
Scene of those Affairs were then laid in Ireland. And the other side appeared
so fearful of the Effect thereof upon the Londoners, and their Influence
doubtless upon the rest of the Nation, even Ireland it self, though so far
distant, that to buoy up the Spirits of their own Party, they thought it most
effectual to report about the Island, that that was a Counterfeit purposely
trained and taught by King Henry, and showed by him in London, to blind the
Eyes of the Simple and Ignorant. So sollicitous were both to increase the
number of their Adherents, and draw the People of the Land to a belief of the
honesty and sincerity of their Intentions, and Equity of their Actions, among
whom the City of London is certainly the greatest Body, fitly joined together
by good Laws and Constitutions, greatly confirmed by an orderly succession of
her Magistrates, and much strengthened by a long and large train of continual
Successes. But the City continued fix to the King's Interest, and therefore the
others Devices and Pretenses worked little or nothing upon the Citizens. They
were rather ready to rejoice on all occasions for his victorious Success, than
pron^ to take part with his Enemies against him, whereof they gave him
sufficient Testimonies at several times and seasons, when they had opportunity
to express their Affections, in a more free and open way, at such glorious
Solemnities, as Coronations, Installations, public Receptions, and Royal and
Princely Marriages.

It Is confessed, that, toward the latter end of this King's Reign, some of her
principal Officers, her Mayors and Sheriffs, were sore troubled and vexed in the
King's Courts, and large Sums of Money demanded of them, for things pretended
to be done by them illegally in their Offices, and such of them imprisoned, as
refused to pay those Arbitrary Fines, as may be seen in Stow's Annals; but
these were Troubles only of particular Men, and common also to many others of
the King's Subjects, when Empson and Dudley were got into Authority, and, to
humor the old King's covetous itch after Riches, (a Vice incident mostly to
Old Age) revived old forgotten Laws, and raised large Sums of Money upon
Offenses against Penal Statutes; wherein they acted so exorbitantly, and took
such arbitrary, illegal and unjust Ways, (many whereof Baker reckons up in his
Chronicle) to compass their Ends, that they themselves at length were become
the principal Grievances of the Nation, and suffered accordingly in the
beginning of the next King's Reign, both of them by the hands of Justice, being
made to pay their Heads for satisfaction to the People, and their Promoters
most shamefully Pillory'd and Imprisoned. So little did it avail them, to
pretend they put the Laws in Execution, or to call themselves the King's
Promoters or Informers. King Henry the Eighth, as soon as he came to the Crown,
more regarding the Commons Cries, and the Complaints of his People, than he
valued the pretended Loyalty of such profligate Villains, as had no other way
to pick up a Livelihood, than by raking it out of other Men's Miseries and
Troubles.

This Prince in his youth was so much addicted to Pleasures, and Pastimes, fine
Sights and Shows, Masks, Justs, and Tournaments, and in his elder years to
Cruelty and Tyrannical Oppression, that one might be apt to expect, and perhaps
with some color of reason, that little was to be found in London, in the
beginning of this King's Reign, but Jollity, Joy, and Rejoicing, gaudy Shows,
and pleasing Objects, delightful to the Eye, and grateful to Sense, a King's
Example commonly drawing along with it his Subjects Imitation; and that in the
latter end, scarce any durst presume, to make opposition to a Man of so
domineering a Spirit, as, by his own deathbed Confession, never spared Woman
in his Lust, nor Man in his Anger: And yet notwithstanding we meet with, under
this Prince, Instances of the City's Power, Boldness, and undaunted Resolution,
and of the King's Favor to the Citizens.

The last may happily be concluded, even from the Effects of evil May Day, when
we read of the King's pardoning the many hundreds Indicted for that day's Riot
and Insurrection, at the three Queens intercession, upon Cardinal Woolsey's
Advice, and perchance in Complaisance to the City. Not to mention that eminent
Instance, of the King's Charity, Love, and Affection to the City, when, in so
great a scarcity of Bread therein, that many died for mere want, he freely and
frankly sent thither, out of his own Provisions, 600 Quarters of Corn, which
served for a very seasonable Supply, till more could be brought from other
Parts. But as to the former, I dare aver it from the consequence of the
Contest, between the City and the Cardinal, in the 17th year of this King, out
of Stow, and thence prove, beyond denial, how like her self the City always
continued, in opposing the Arbitrary Power and Exorbitances of over grown
Favorites.

Commissions were sent forth, by Order of the Council, into every Shire, to
Levy the Sixth Part of every Man's Substance, toward the King's passage into
France, but this was so vehemently opposed by the People, as contrary to
ancient Laws and Customs, and not granted by the Paliament, that the King
thought good to deny, that he ever knew of that Demand, and, by soothing
Letters, sent to London and elsewhere, he requested only his Subjects
Benevolence. This was a Term more plausible, than a set Demand, and a fixed
Contribution, and the Cardinal forsooth would needs undertake personally to
induce the City's consent thereto, and therefore sent for the Mayor, the Almen,
and the most substantial Common-Councel-Men, to Westminster, thinking by fair
Speeches, good Words, and large Promises, to have overperswaded them. To him
indeed they lent their Ears, but we don't find them over hasty to part with
their Purses. However they sent Deputies to him, Four Aldermen and Twelve
Commoners, to return him their thanks, and every Alderman assembles his Ward,
and makes a Motion for a Benevolence, which was openly denied them by the
Commonalty. Then the Cardinal sends again for the Mayor, and his Brethren, who
informs him what they had done. Whereupon he would have examined them apart,
and demands a benevolence of them in the King's Name: But for Answer, was told,
by a City Councellor, that the Motion was against an Act of Parliament, which
could not be disproved, though it was in part gainsaid. Thereupon the Mayor
resolutely denies to grant any thing; so that upon his coming home to London,
all public endeavors were laid by, and it was declared, that every man should
come to the Cardinal, and grant privily what he would. This was so little
grateful to the Citizens, and upon the Mayor's endeavors to qualify them, by
promising they should be gently treated, and exhorting them to go when sent
for, they were so highly offended thereat, that in their fury, they would have
had several expelled the Common Counsel, and so without further answer, angrily
departed home. Whereby we may be well assured of the truth of Hall's
Observation, that though the Mayor and Aldermen had granted the Demand, the
Common Counsel would never have assented; For we must know, this was done at
the Common Counsel called the next day after my Lord Mayor came from Court. The
Result therefore of all was in the Issue, that the King openly protests, in a
great Council, called at York-place, now White Hall, that his mind was never to
ask any thing of his Commons, that might sound to the breach of the Laws, and
so this Project was rejected, and laid aside, by order of the Kings Letter sent
into all Counties. For seeing that the City refused, how was it possible to
persuade the Country, who look upon London as their principal Guide and
Directress, and so generally square their Actions by the Citizens Rule? Does
not then this seem a clear Example of the Londoners constant fixedness to their
old Principles of Liberty? And if the Reader likewise please, it may pass for
an Instance of the Citizens disclaiming their Mayor's Resolves, and the
prevalency of the Commonalty over the Magistracy, when resolute in their just
opposition.

As an Overplus, I shall cast in a Passage out of Baker's Chronicles, where we
find it upon Record, under the Title of King Henry's Taxations, how that, when
in the Fourteenth Year, a Tenth Part of all Men's Substance was required by the
Cardinal, toward the Charges of the King's Wars, and he would have had every
Man sworn to tell what he was worth. The Londoners thinking this very hard,
they were thereupon excused for taking the Oath, and allowed to bring in their
Bills upon their Honesties: from whence may be argued, either the Strength,
Greatness and Power of this honorable City, whom the Court, nor the Cardinal,
durst not displease, or the great respect then shown her, in regard of those
many glorious Rays of Influence she sheds all over all the Land, when the Word
of a Citizen went as far, and was as well accepted, as another Man's Oath.

If such then was the Honor and Respect of the City heretofore, what may we
think it to be, now that London has since received so considerable an
Addition, and Augmentation, in several respects, by the happy concurrence of
many more Circumstances to render it eternally famous.

Was this City able to hold a Contest with so grand a Favorite and potent a
Courtier, as Cardinal Woolsey, and at last to come off with flying Colors, to
the vindicating her own Rights, and the Liberties of all the Nation besides,
and the forcing King Henry in the strength of his Age, as stout as he was, to
so great a Compliance, as has been hinted before? It Is plain then, she was
strong, and her Citizens not destitute of Spirit. Did the King, as cruel as he
was to others of his Subjects, show himself favorable to London? It Is evident,
he had great cause and reason so to do, unless he was desirous to be taxed with
ungratitude, so un-Prince-like a Crime. For we may observe the Citizens were
ready enough to please him in any thing, wherein their All was not concerned,
and in that I never yet found them ever prone to humor the Follies of any King
living. Witness their readiness on all Occasions for the Honor of the King, to
appear in the most splendid Equipage on public Solemnities.

Among which, the most remarkable, in my Opinion, were the Coronation of Queen
Ann, Mother of the never to be forgotten Queen Elizabeth, of blessed Memory,
with the Preparatives thereto, the Celebrity of her Attendance by Water, from
Greenwich to the Tower, and her honorable Conveyance from thence through the
City, amidst the great variety of pleasing Shows, and delightful Objects, to
Westminster, particularized in Stow, and the glorious appearance of the
Citizens, at the great Muster in St. Iames's-Park, May the 8th, Anno 31. to the
Number of Fifteen Thousand, in bright shining Armor, with Coats of white Silk
or Cloth, and Chains of Gold, where the Citizens strove in such sort to exceed
each other in bravery of Arms, and forwardness of Service, as if the City had
been a Camp, and they not Men of the Gown, but all professed Soldiers, which
they performed to their great Cost, but greater Commendation, says Sir Richard
Baker. But the greatest Inducement may be supposed to have been, that they
never appeared prone to join with the King's Enemies, of which he had good
store abroad, besides Domestic Troubles and private Insurrections at home,
especially toward the latter end of his Reign, when he had taken away the
Pope's Supremacy, excluded his Authority, and suppressed the Abbeys and
Monasteries, the chief Fortresses and Pillars thereof, either by force of an
Act of Parliament, or by virtue of the Resignations of their Governors, either
over-awed by fear, or bribed with Pensions: Not long after which there were
several Commotions in the Land, which might have much shaken the Throne, had
the Citizens openly showed any inclination to join with these disturbers of the
Kings rest and repose, but they continuing quiet, th^se troubles were quickly
composed, and so the foundation, undesignedly doubtless, was laid for a public
Reformation, which was more vigorously carried on in the next Kings Reign,
though I hardly think it has yet arrived to such perfection, as to render it
so complete, as might be piously desired.

Short was the Reign of this pious Prince Edward the sixth, yet not so short,
but that it gave such an Addition of strength to the Protestant Religion, by
removing out of the way many of the Relics of Popery, and openly encouraging
the Preaching of the Gospel, that hitherto it could never be rooted out of the
Land, notwithstanding the damage it sustained under the next Successor, a most
violent and rigid Papist, and the many secret Plots and practices of Popish
Emissaries, to undermine it, and introduce Popery again into England, proved
upon them.

Thus was the outward face of Religion visibly changed in the City, under this
Religious King, but yet her power we find not in the least diminished, nor the
esteem our great men had thereof, of which we meet with an evident instance in
History, on account of the difference arisen between the potent Earl of
Warwick, and some of the Privy Council, on the one hand, and the Lord Protector
Seymour, the Kings M^ternal Uncle, on the other. The Privy Counselors, having
designs upon the Protector, and withdrawing themselves from Court, got to
London with their attendance, and taking possession of the Tower, made it their
business to secure the City to their side, by sending for the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen to Ely house in Holborn, where they were assembled, and entertaining
them with a long Oration, about the ill government of the Protector, and the
many mischiefs, that came thereby (as they affirmed) upon the Kingdom, attended
with a request of their joint assistance, to help them to remove him, wherein
they were so successful, that, upon the arrival of two Letters almost at the
same instant to the Common Council held at Guildhall, one from the King and
Lord Protector for a thousand of the City to be armed in defense of the Kings
Person, and the other from the Lords to have two thousand men to aid them, with
the same Plea, for defense of the Kings Person, and that the City should be
well kept with Watches day and night, the Citizens showed themselves so
inclinable to the Lords, that they armed an hundred horse men, and four hundred
foot men, in defense of the City, suitable to the motion of the Lords, and sent
no Assistance to the Protector, though it had been desired in the Kings Name,
but rather suffered a Proclamation, containing diverse Articles against him, to
be made in several Parts of the City, and the Lords were entertained with a
Dinner at one of the Sheriffs, the eighth of October after they had been
themselves in Person at Guildhall, and on the tenth they dined at the other
Sheriffs; after that by a Common Council the same day, in Stows Computation,
five hundred men of the City had been granted to be ready on the next morning.
Evident marks, signs, and tokens doubtless which way the City bended, and the
event is a sufficient confirmation thereof. For the next News, we hear, is the
removal of the Protector from about the King, and the sending him to the Tower,
within two or three days after, where an humble Confession and Submission was
his best security for that time, by which he got his Liberty some time after,
and was sworn again a Privy Counselor, but no more a Protector.

Had the City sent him the Aid requ^sted, he would possibly have had little
reason to have stood infear of the combined Lords, or had but her Magistrates
continued Neuters in the Case, and not been so openly favorable to his
Enemies, he might perhaps have been able enough to have cop't with them, with
little or no bazard, for he had raised much People about Hampton Court in the
Kings Name, and conveyed him to Windsor with a great number of Horsemen and
Footmen; But the Strength and Authority of the City was not to be contradicted,
much less opposed. Thus the Protector lost his Place, and well it might have
been happily for the King and Nation, if that had been all. For his Enemies
having removed him from his Protectorship, and thereby gained the greater
access of Power to themselves, and the Principal of them the politic Earl of
Warwick, lately created Duke of Northumberland, advanced in Title and Honor
equal with, and in Authority and Power above the highest, whereby his aspiring
thoughts were grown ripe to be put in execution, they were resolved to have the
other touch with him for his Life, wherein they made use of the Cities Power to
secure them for his Trial, by ordering every Householder in London to take care
of his own Family, keep his house, and have one ready in arms upon call for the
day time, and that by Night a sufficient Watch of substantial Householders
should be kept in every Ward. So litte durst they attempt without engaging the
City therein, and so frail and transitory had been their projecting designs,
had she refused. But with her concurrence what could they not do? So then at
last tried the late Protector was, acquitted of Treason, and condemned for
Felony, and afterward beheaded on Tower Hill, much against the Kings Will, the
Constables of every Ward in London (by virtue of a Precept directed from the
Council to the Lord Mayor) strictly charging the Citizens not to stir out of
their houses before a prefixed hour, for fear perhaps of a Rescue, for 'twas
known he was well beloved generally by the People, and plainly evidenced, when,
upon a mistake thinking him acquitted, they gave so great a shout for joy, that
it was heard (Stow tells us) from Westminster Hall to Long-Arce, to the Lords
astonishment. So fell Sommerset by the malice of his Enemies and weakness of
his Friends; and we may easily believe 'twas not designed the King should be
long lived, if some could prevent it, For they, that shot off his good Uncle's
Head, would hardly stick at attempting secretly upon his health and security,
who otherwise might have lived to avenge the Protectors Death.

But the chief Projector Northumberland had but little joy of his ambitious
designs, though King Edward was dead and he had got his two Sisters put by, and
the Lady Jane his Daughter in Law proclaimed Queen of the Realm, by sound of
Trumpet, through London. For when he might have thought himself most secure,
then was he most disappointed, and he, that could do so much in the City with
the Magistracy, either for fear or love, quickly lost that branch of his Power,
when he was gone from the City, though at the head of an Army, and thereby, in
effect, his Life. The same Mayor who had before consented in appearance to
secure the City for the Lady Jane, a little after, upon a motion from the
Council, going straight ways and proclaming the Lady Mary Queen: And then she
was quickly acknowledged for such all over the Land. So that here we see two
Queens proclaimed in London within a very short space of time; but she, who was
last proclaimed and the Citizens stuck to, continued Queen, and the other was
laid by as useless, and afterward brought to the Block as a guilty Criminal.
Had the City stuck to the first, the other probable had still been counted the
Offender, and might perhaps have suffered accordingly: But the Stream was
turned with the Tide, and it was hard rowing against the Current. Queen Mary at
first had addressed her self by Letter to the Lord Mayor to proclaim her, and
the Cities affections may be thought inclinable from the beginning unto her, be
it only from Northumberland's expression of his thoughts to the Lord Gray, in
his passage through Shoreditch with his Army against her and her Forces, who
observed that the People pressed to see them, but could not hear one that bid
them Gods speed. Is it so considerable to have the Voice of the Citizens, how
much more than their Hearts? Thus came in Queen Mary, and with her Popery upon
the Protestants shoulders. For the Suffolk men were the first, that espoused
her Interest, upon Condition, that she would make no alteration in Religion,
which she then most readily promised, but kept it afterward like a Papist, i.
e. broke it; and it is somewhere observed, that many more of that Country
suffered for Religion in the Marian Persecution, than of any other. So suitable
she acted to that avowed Principle of her own Religion, that no faith is to be
kept with Heretics, a position publicly authorized by the Council of
Constance, and often since confirmed by many undeniable Instances and Examples.
But 'twas well for her that the City of London (whose concurrence with the rest
of the Nation first mounted her up into the Throne, and from whose Citizens she
received so great respect the day before her Corononation by costly Pageants,
those dumb shows, of respect and other honorary expressions of their
affections) continued firm in their Allegiance, otherwise she might perchance
have paid dear enough for the breach of her promise upon Sir Thomas Wyats
insurrection. For could he but have got into the City, either by the Bridge or
by Ludgate, how much of his purpose he might have brought to effect, is easier
to be guessed, than declared in so uncertain a matter. But he was repulsed at
both places, and deceived in his expectations and hopes of aid from London, he
himself was taken, his party routed, and all his designs vanished into smoke,
to the loss of his own life and ruin of many of his principal Friends and
Followers. So unsuccessful is an enterprise (on what grounds soever and
appearing likelihood of success at first undertaken) wherein the Londoners
refuse to engage themselves; whereas had but the City joined her Forces to
Wyats, let him in within her Walls, and not stood firm to the Quens Interest,
he might perhaps have been able to have commanded what Conditions he pleased.
Of this we may well believe the Queen and Court were extremely sensible. For we
find the Queen her self, her Lords, and her Ladies, came from Westminster to
Guildhall, where the Commons of the City were assembled in their Liveries,
before Wyat drew near to the City, and by fair words and promises endeavored
to confirm the Citizens minds, and satisfy them of the sincerity of her own
intentions, and the insolent behavior of her Enemies: Which I think was no
more than the case required, and the necessity of her affairs obliged her to
for her own security. The five hundred Men, which the City, at the Lord
Treasurers request, had sent out ready Armed to oppose that insurrection,
having turned to the other side at the persuasion of their Captain and Leader,
and there being so great a Consternation at Westminster upon Wyats approach,
that the Sergeants at Law, and other Lawyers pleaded in their harness. But the
Queens Speech having secured the generality of the Citizens affections, strict
Watch and Ward continued to be kept in London, the Mayor and Sheriffs Commanded
each Man to shut down their Shop-windows, and stand ready Armed at their Doors,
they themselves being likewise in Armor, the drawbridge was cut down, the
Bridg-gate shut, and convenient forces sent to keep it, and others set in fit
places of the City, whereby Wyat's purpose was defeated, and his expectations
of assistance frustrated, as he himself complained in the Message he sent the
Londoners by Merchant Dorell, upon his March out of Southwark toward Kingstone.
For before he came with such confidence toward London, that he hoped for
present entrance. An eminent instance doubtless of the Cities great power and
the influence it had on that bold undertaking, which seems to have stood and
fallen even as London stood affected and influenced.

But though the Queen prevailed thus upon the Londoners, yet death could not be
bribed, nor shamed, by any promises or pretenses, for die she must, and die she
did, after a short, though bloody Reign, of five years and somewhat better, and
so way was made for the famous and ever Renowned Queen E^izabeth, of blessed
Memory, in whose entrance into the Throne we find the Londoners interesting
themselves, notwithstanding she was publicly known, to be of a quite different
Religion from that at present Established; she being forthwith Proclaimed in
London, upon knowledge and notice given of her Sister Queen Mary's Death, and
coming from Hatfield within three or four days after, Stow tells us, she was
very dutifully and honorably met by the Lord Mayor, and the whole estate of
London, and so conducted to the Charter House; and some time after Rode through
the City in great Majesty to Westminster to her Coronation: At which Solemnity
the Citizens gave her ample demonstrations of their affections, by the stately
Pageants and sumptuous Shows, wherewith they entertained her. Her settlement
caused the Reduction, increase, and progress of the Protestant Religion in
England, and under the auspicious influence of her Reign the City flourished to
such an height of Grandeur, whether we respect the concourse of Foreign
Merchants from abroad, or the stateliness of her public buildings at home, the
freedom and security of Traffic, and the flowing in of Riches and Wealth
thereby, the famous exploits performed by her Citizens in other Countries and
Climates, and the foundation in those times laid for much greater
achievements, by the necessary preparatives of skill and knowledge in Military
affairs, gained by the more frequent Musters, and Warlike ex^rcises of her
Inhabitants, than in former times, or learned at that Grand Nursery of
Soldiers, the Artillery Garden, that it is easy to conjecture how secure her
Majesty was in the Ctiizens love and loyalty, and how happy they thought
themselves in the favor and protection of so good, great, and gracious a
Princess.

It Is not therefore to be expected, that such turns and changes should occur in
her days, wherein the City might have occasion to interpose her Authority, to
settle and secure the Nation against the furious attempts of arbitrary
Pretenders, or lie under any unavoidable necessity of showing her Power and
Influence over it, in contradiction to other men's aspiring and ambitious
Designs. However I am not destitute of an Instance, to demonstrate the
consequence of her Example, and how much all England was influenced thereby to
the manifestation of their zeal, love, and duty to their Sovereign. In 88. a
year so famous for the Spanish Invasion, the Queens Counsel had demanded, what
the City would do for her Majesty and their Country, and the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen had referred it to their Honors to make their Proposals; whereupon
fifteen Ships and five thousand Men being required, and two days respite at the
Cities desire granted for Answer, they returned in convenient time and season,
and entreated their Lordships, in sign of their perfect love and loyalty to
their Prince and Country, (they are Stows words) kindly to accept ten thousand
Men, and thirty Ships amply furnished, double the number of what was asked, and
even as London (says my Author) gave President, the whole Nation kept rank
and equipage; so ready were the other Cities, Counties, Towns and Villages to
follow where London went before. A plain instance of her powerful influence,
deny it who can.

As to what concerns the frequency of the visits the Queen made to London, and
the great splendour, wherewith they commonly welcomed her home at the end of her
Country progresses, I pass them all over, though undeniable demonstrations of
the present content and satisfaction they took in Queen Elizabeth's good
Government: Neither shall I take notice of the many Companies of Soldiers she
several times raised at her own charges for her Sovereigns Assistance, it
having been commonly done before, under Princes in whom she took delight,
because I would hasten to King James, the first Monarch of great Britain, in
whose Person England and Scotland were first united, though his present
Majesty, King James's Grandson, was the first born Heir of that happy Union,
that was Crowned King of both Realms, and the first English King by Birth of
the Scottish race, that ever sat upon the English Throne that we read of.

To tell how this City flourished under this Prince in wealth and riches, in a
general increase of trade, by foreign Merchandises and home-made Manufactures:
The great ornament she received from her public and private buildings, the
strength that accrued to her by the numerousness of her Inhabitants, and the
enlarging her borders, the conveniences procured her for water by Midleton's
River, for Recreations by Morefields, and pleasantness by pa^'d Streets, and
the various expressions she made of her glory in the many noble Entertainments
of King James and other great personages, Foreigners and Natives, and the rich
presents she frequently gave, besides the renown she got abroad by sending
greater Numbers of her Ships, than formerly, into all trading Parts of the
World, and planting Colonies of her own people in Ireland and Virginia, would
be tiresome perhaps to the Reader, and needless for the Writer; since that in
Stows Chronicle, continued by How, these particulars have been so largely
treated of, whether the curious and inquisitive may apply themselves for
further satisfaction. Neither shall I trouble my self with making large remarks
upon the great honor and dignity, for the City's sake, belonging to the Lord
Mayor thereof, of which we seem to have an Instance in the beginning of this
Kings reign, when Sir Robert Lee, then Lord Mayor of London, subscribed in the
first place to the invitation sent the King to come into England, before all
the great Officers of the Crown, and all the Nobility; This great Magistrate,
upon the Kings death, being said to be the prime person of England, than which
what greater honor can there be appertaining to a Subject? I have indeed read
in Cotton, that upon a Poll Bill the Lord Mayor paid four pound as an Earl many
years ago, in King Richard the second days, when but few of the Nobility, if
any besides the blood Royal, bore any higher title: And find since at our Kings
Coronations that he has had a principal place and part assigned him,
particularly at his present Majesty's, April 23d. 61. and in the honorable
Cavalcade made from the Tower to Westminster the day before, in order
thereunto, where the Suppliment to Baker's Chronicle, out of Elias Ashmole the
Windsor Heralds Copy, has placed him between the principal Officers of the
Crown and the Duke of York, a place doubtless designed him as most suitable to
his Dignity, and the high Office he bore; and yet I count none of these Honors
comparable to that before mentioned, which seems paramount to all others. To be
the highest by place in the Kingdom of course for a season sounds greater, than
to be a Second, a Third, or a Fourth, and is more doubtless to the Honor,
Credit, and Reputation of the City, that conferrs this place as she pleases.

But the chiefest point I intend here to insist on, with all convenient brevity
and perspicuity, is the Declaration of the Cities love and affection to King
James, and the requital made her by him in return. The first I know not how it
could be better expressed, than by the wonderful readiness, and hearty gladness
(as the Annalist words it) of the great City of London, where the Magistrates,
and all other inferior Citizens showed all possible signs of perfect joy and
contentment, amidst the general applause of the whole English Nation, when he
was first proclaimed King of the Realm; and we have further demonstrations
thereof from the Kings honorable Reception, when he came near to London, by
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet Robes, and five hundred grave Citizens
in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold, all very well mounted like the Sheriffs and
their train, one of which had threescore men attending him in fair livery
Cloaks. Another instance may be the care taken in London to watch and guard the
Gates, upon the first discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, and the great joy
and rejoicing manifested therein soon after, upon its further detection, by
filling the Streets with Bonfires, and the Solemn Assemblies with public
praises and thanksgiving to the Almighty for the Kings happy Deliverance. This
Gunpowder Treason (so to observe by the way) was one of the seven particulars
the Intelligencer tells us were sometime since set up in a Table in St. Martins
Church at York, under this Title, Things never to be forgotten by Protestants.
The other six were, The bloody Reign of Queen Mary. The many Plots in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. The Massacre in Ireland in Forty one. The horrid Murder of
King Charles in One thousand Six hundred and Forty eight. The burning of London
in One thousand Six hundred and Sixty six. And the horrid Popish-plot in One
thousand Six hundred and Seventy eight. An Inscription, that some harmless well
meaning persons would have been apt doubtless to have thought very honest in
its self, and deservedly written in Letters of Gold, till an Order came to one
of the Church Wardens to take it down, or appear at the Spiritual Court to
answer the Contempt: For 'twas above the ordinary Capacity of a Common
lay-Protestant to apprehend any thing ill or offensive therein, till such wits
among the Clergy, as had far more sagacious intellects, perceived the drift and
design thereof, and judging it perhaps to be part of the Presbyterian Plot,
might think fit to have it thrown down, that the Vulgar might be no more amused
with the dreadful remembrance of such things.

But to return to the Cities Love and Loyalty to King James, another remarkable
proof thereof may be deduced from the double Guards set in all places about
London, the Precept issued out by the Lord Mayor to the Wards to raise the
Train Bands, and the unexpressible distraction of Men's minds, upon a flying
rumor suddenly spread about the City March 22d. (somewhat above four Months
after the Powder Plot was discovered) of the Kings being slain that morning at
Oking, some twenty Miles from London, which occasioned great weeping and
wai^ing and much lamentation in old and young, rich and poor, till in three or
four hours time all these Clouds were happily dispersed by better and more
certain news brought of the Kings safety, and his return to Whitehall thereupon
the same afternoon, where the peoples hearts were as much raised with joy, as
before they had been drowned in grief, and the Lord Mayor and Aldermen went to
congratulate his Majesty upon the assurance of his continued Health and
Security.

Such were the expressions of the Cities affections, let us now see the return
of Kindness on the Kings part, and his Princely acknowledgment of their
singular love and loyalty to him. Much doubtless of the Kings mind in this
particular may be guessed at from the frequent Visits he made the City, but I
presume by no one Act of his better known, than by his repaying the Citizens of
London, in the seventh of his Reign, the Threescore thousand pounds they had
lent Queen Elizabeth three years before her death. An Act of the greatest
Justice and Equity, and whereby likewise he got more love, says the Chronicle,
than he paid money. This may pass both for an Example of the Kings Goodness and
Prudence, and an Instance of Londons Power and Esteem, since his Majesty
thought it good to be at such charges to oblige her. For to pay their
Predecessors Debts is so rare among Princes, that many of them hardly ever pay
their own.

Hitherto have I presented the Reader with variety of passages out of our
English Chronicles, to demonstrate the Glory, Honor, and Renown of the City of
London, and the Courage of her Citizens, the Power of her Magistrates, the
Strength of the Commonalty, and the undeniable Influence of the whole
Corporation upon the rest of the Kingdom; and have given him here and there the
words and expressions of private men, as so many illustrative Arguments on the
Points. Wherefore now I shall produce no less than what I account a Royal
Testimony, in confirmation of the many demonstrative Evidences already brought,
and that of no less a Prince than his present Majesty's Royal Father, King
Charles the First, and out of an Author so little partial to the City, that the
very name of Peter Heylin, and the diligent perusal of Archbishop Lauds Life,
by him writ, may sufficiently convince an indifferent Reader, that he was none
of Londons greatest Favorers or Admirers, since 'twas looked on as the Retreat
and Receptacle of the Grandees of the Puritan faction, as he is pleased to
style all those he thought contrary to that Party of Men, he will needs call
the Church of England. A Proof therefore out of such an Adversary's mouth, as
Heylins, seems a very convincing Argument, when he himself is forced, merely by
truth and matter of fact, to confess and acknowledge the influence of London on
all parts of the Kingdom, in that passage, where he intimates it to have been
generally looked upon as the compass, by which the lesser Towns and
Corporations were wont to steer their course, and to plead it is practice on all
occasions.

What I conceive to be the Kings Testimony by that writer delivered, is by him
brought in, as the reason of his Majesty's preferring Laud to the Bishopric of
London, viz. For that he was a Man of a more active Spirit than the former
Bishop, and so fitter to carry on the design of rendering the City conformable
to that proposed Model of Church Government, which was intended for the whole
Nation, and therein therefore principally to be promoted, because of the
Influence it had, by reason of it is wealth and trading, on all parts of the
Kingdom, and that upon the correspondence and conformity thereof the welfare of
the whole depended. This Testimony doubtless is of great authority, because
proceeding from so Judicious a Prince, and related by an Author not to be
supposed over ready to write any thing in favor of this City, to which he
seems to have born a very great animosity, because the Citizens would not be so
thoroughpac'd Episcopal, as his Reverend Doctorship would have had them to have
been. But now methinks it should be of greater prevalency than ever, since that
King Charles himself, before he dyed, out of his own experience knew much more
of the Cities strength and Power, than many of his Predecessors did for some
ages before. For it is plain beyond denial, dispute, or contradiction, out of
the memory of Man and the everlasting Records of time, that in the late Wars
between him and his two Houses of Parliament, 'twas the Cities power and
influence, that raised them to that height of Grandeur, which made them so
formidable to all the Royal party. Whereas, without her help and assistance,
how little able they had been to have long subsisted, or held up their heads
above ground, is evident from the many supplies they had from London, of Men,
Money, and Arms, the frequent applications they made to her on all extremities,
and the constant endeavors they used to cultivate her friendship, and preserve
her affections. But over these Transactions I shall choose rather to cast a
vail of silence, than industriously endeavor to lay open the bleeding wounds
of the Nation in those days, as being fully assured of the impossibility of
guiding my pen so dexterously in delivering the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, as not to subject my self to censure, nor incur the
anger, displeasure, and indignation of any one. Suffice it then to say, that,
in the long Vacation of Parliaments under King Charles the first, such seeds of
discontent were sown, in City, as well as Country, that upon the first
opportunity, they sprung up into bitter herbs, and sour fruit, and who tasted
most thereof, I think all the European world knows sufficiently by this time of
day.

But if any in this age is so ignorant as to wonder how it was possible for the
two Houses in forty one to bear up against the King, without being dismis'd
from Westminster by virtue of the Kings Prerogative, the usual method of
ancient times, and the known practice of later days, he is to know and
understand, that his late Majesty had formally passed away his grand Power of
Prorogations, Adjournments, and Dissolutions by an Act of Parliament, and so
put the staff out of his own hands, that he could never recover, as long as he
lived, by force nor entreaty. An act of Grace this was, that is hardly to be
paralleled, and yet perhaps it may be lik^ned to the Statute made in the second
of Richard the second, of which I have made mention before, against abrupt and
untimely dismissions, only that this is plainer worded, and seems enlarged to a
further extent. Otherwise, considering the use that might have been possibly
made of the former, it might have looked like the same book with additions new
Printed in Octavo, which before was bound up in decimo sexto. Neither of these
are to be found in our New Printed Statute books, they pretending not to set
down all the Antiquated, Repealed, or expired Statutes, that ever were in
being. Therefore if any one desires to humor his curiosity, he must apply
himself to Cottons Abridgment of the Tower Records for the one, and search
after the other in some of those books, that treat of the affairs of the late
times. Now the Observator in such a case tells us of Scobel and Husbands
Collections: Upon which so Authentic an Authority, as some esteem it, if we
have recourse to Scobels Collections of the best Edition, it is ten thousand to
one but we shall there find the Statute in this manner following. Whereas great
sums of money must of necessity he spe^dily advanced and provided for the
relief of His Majesty's Arm^ and People in the Northern parts of this Realm,
and for preventing the imminent danger t^^s Kingdom is in, and for supply of
other His Majesty's present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so timely
effected as is requisite, without Credit for raising the said moneys, which
credit cannot be obtained, until such obstacles be first removed, as are
occasioned by fears, jealo^sies, and apprehensions of diverse his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, that this present Parliament may be Adjourned, Prorogued, or
Dissolved, before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents, public
grievances redressed, a firm Peace between the two Nations of England and
Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the repayment
of the said moneys so to be raised: All which the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, having duly considered do therefore humbly beseech your
most excellent M^j^sty, that it may be declared and Enacted; And be it declared
and enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That this present Parliament now Assembled shall not be dissolved, unless it be
by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose, nor shall be at any time or
times during the continuance thereof, Pr^r^gued, or Adjourned, unless it be by
Act of Parliament, to be likewise passed for that purpose: And that the House
of Peers shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament, be
Adjourned, unless it be by themselves or by their own Order: And in like
manner, that the House of Commons shall not any time or times during this
present Parliament be Adjourned, unless it be by themselves or by their own
order: And that all and every thing and things whatsoever, done or to be done,
for the Adjournment, Proroguing o^ Dissolving of this present Parliament
cont^^ry to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of none effect.

This Act in G^neral proved the destruction of that branch of the Royal
Pr^rogative, which related to calling or dissolving Parliaments; and that
particular clause in the end that all and every thing and things whatsoever
done or to be done, for the Adjournment, Proroguing or dissolving of this
present Parliament contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void, and of none
effect, was, we may believe from subsequent passages, a Plea, the wits of the
age durst have ventured to have stood by, against any attempts to discontinue,
disappoint, or frustrate the meeting of the two Houses of Parliament, if they
had Spirit and Courage enough to have owned any thing of the Law. So that upon
a ground work so firm, and a foundation so sure, the Parliamentarians valued
not all the subtle Arts and devices of their Enemies, nor stood in ^ear of
those Mercu^ial Engines, Pen Ink and Pap^r, so they could b^t defend themselves
against those Martial Arguments, the bright-shining Sword, and the thundering
Cannon. By virtue of this Clause we may conclude, that, after the House of
Commons was violently deprived of many Members thereof, the House of Lords
wholly put down, and that small remainder of a Parliament forced out of Doors
by O^iver and the Soldiers, after two Protectors, and several Assemblies, that
took on them the venerable Name of Parliaments, and some of them too chosen by
the People, part of the Commons House nevertheless again got into power, and
being once more thrust out by the Army, afterward Recovered possession, and
the whole House was in a fair likelihood to have been filled up by the
Readmission of the secluded Members, till they, to make way for a greater turn,
did all, that lay in the power of a single House, to dissolve the Parliament,
which with us consists of the King and his two Houses.

Treating now of the late times, and having drawn a vail over the Transactions
in the last Wars, wherein the City was more particularly concerned, (though
it is well known, that her power and Influence was very considerable in the many
turns and changes, through which the State was then hurried) I shall not stand
to show, how much she was Courted by Oliver and the rest of the Usurping powers
on all emergencies, and the great care was taken to secure her to their
interest and party, though both are touched upon in the supplement to Bakers
Chronicle; but passing all over I come now to demonstrate, the great influence
she had upon the Nation in that remarkable turn of the times, which produced so
unparalled a wonder, as the peaceable Restoration of an exiled Prince to his
Father's Crown and Kingdom without blood: Which to prove I need go no further
than the aforesaid supplement, where several evidences and convincing
circumstances are to be found, (besides matters of fact already else where
related) and I doubt not but sufficiently demonstrative. These to Marshal in
their order, I begin first of all with the Citizens discontentedness at the
Committee of safety, and Fleetwoods doubtfulness of them, and proceed to
General Monk's Letter sent to the Lord Mayor and Common Council (some time
after he had declared his Resolution to reduce the Military power under the
Civil, though principally intending, we are since told, the Kings Restoration)
to heigthen their diff^rences, wherein, upon a Declaration of his open
inten^ions, he expresses his Expectation of their Assistance, lest it should be
too late for them by their own strength to assert their freedom, if he
miscarried through the want of their timely aid, and dishonorable, if he
succeeded, for so Famous a City and so much concerned, that it is Liberties
should be asserted without its own help. In the next place comes the
encouragement, the Letter sent from some of the old Council of State privately
met at London, (among whom we find Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, that Famed Earl
of Shaftsbury, a Principal Agent through the whole course of those affairs, and
an active Instrument in bringing in the King) to Monk, brought his Officers in
Scotland, and the reason given thereof, viz. That the wisest of them did
conclude from these appearances of action at London, that their party was
increased in England, imagining that otherwise they durst not have so openly
acted. Then follows the Intelligence he received, when at Coldstream, from his
Brother Clarges, that there were many great differences in London, between
Fleetwood and the City; that the Prentices, and several others in favor of
him, had many Consultations to make disturbances, and were framing a Petition
to the Lord Mayor and Common Council, to press their interposition for the
restoring the Parliament, and preservation of Magistracy, their rising in a
Tumultuous manner, upon a Proclamation emitted by the Committee of Safety to
prohibit all gathering of hands to Petitions, and the shutting up of Shops upon
Hewson's coming to suppress them, the affronts put upon his Soldiers by
scornful reproaches and Hissings to that degree, that they were ashamed to
March, and many Officers, when they went into the City, durst not wear their
Swords, for fear of the like; and, which was as material as any* that the Lord
Mayor and several Alderm^n had had many ineffectual Treaties with Fleetwood and
the Chief of the Army, and Committee of Safety; the City de^anding the
mannagement and conduct of their own Militia, and the instant Restoration of
the Parliament, or the calling another, which being refused, much augmented
their discontents. These were Preparatives to the resitting of part of the
Commons house, which soon after was invited to reassume their former power.
Enter next to General Monk at Morpeth, the Sword bearer of London, with a very
respectful Letter from the Lord Mayor and Common Council. After this we hear of
Clarges's Advice to Monk, to get the Parliament Soldiers removed out of London,
and to march his own men in thither, so to be Master of the City, with the
reason laid down, that otherwise he could never expect to do any good for his
Country; since in all those times it had been experienced, that to whatever was
done at London, where they h^d nine or ten thousand men to justify their
actions, all the rest of the Regiments submitted. Now follow Commissioners from
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of London to the General, and
their Proposition for the readmission of the s^cluded M^mbers that the
Parliament might be made full and free. Then the discontented carriage of (...)
City, the high debates in the Common Council about the Government, and their
resolution to pay no public Taxes, till the House were filled up with equal
Representatives. After this the Generals intercession to those then of the
Commons House for a mitigation of their Commands laid on him, among other
severities, to take down Londons Gates and Portcullices, for this reason, that
such s^v^re acting would highly incense the City, and the Compliment of thanks,
to please the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, sent them from the House for their
moderation in that time of disorder in the City. But to close all with a
suitable instance, Clarges's Counsel to General Monk* to endeavor the speedy
recovery of the City's good opinion, almost lost by his rough actings therein
just before, brings up the rear, wi^h the effectual representation he made him
of the ill Consequences of his proceedings in London, and the prevalent
motives, urgent reasons, and good grounds laid down by him, to back his Advice.
As, that the influence the City had by commerce, and other Occasions, all over
England, would quickly diffuse the Infamy of the Fact: And all the Cities and
Towns would be alarmed, believing, if that great City should be made a Village,
that all their Franchises and Privileges would be quickly subverted. So that
he had no way to redeem his Reputation, but the very next morning to return
into the City with his Army, and declare for a free Parliament. This Counsel
presently followed terminated in a successful event, and very happy to King and
Kingdom, by the Miraculous Restoration of his most gracious Majesty, Charles
the Second, to his Patrimonial inheritance, and the Throne of his Father.

Thus have I mustered up my Evidences in Rank and File, all which conjoined,
like the old Countryman's rods in the Fable bound up together in one bundle,
will make doubtless a very convincing Argument of the great power and influence
London had upon the Nation in this grand turn of the Times. I shall therefore
leave it to the Reader to make suitable remarks thereon, it being so obvious to
an unprejudiced Person, that great was the encouragement General Monk and his
Officers received from London, considerable was the hope and confidence he put
therein, when he undertook so Heroic an Enterprise, as the freeing his poor
Country from the Tyranical exorbitancies of the unruly Soldiers, and thought of
marching up thither in Arms with all convenient speed to that end; and most
highly advantageous to his Designs was the unanimous concurrence of this great,
honorable, and powerful City, which was not so furiously rash, presently to
attempt to run down the encroachers upon their dearly beloved Liberties, when
they might with greater ease, and as effectually, gently walk them down, as a
certain Person is said to have expressed it on a much later Occasion. The City
petitioned and addressed, and she was followed by the Country: She waited a
while with patience, and the secluded Members, that were chosen in forty and
from forty eight kept out of the house till fifty nine, for almost twelve years
space, were restored in peace and quietness, though under some few Obligations;
And so there was again the face of a House of Commons: Being restored, they
dissolved themselves in a short time after, to make way for another ass^mbly,
called a Parliament, though some thought in th^se times that the Parliament of
Forty had been dissolved long before by his late Majesty's death, and so might
happily think this a needless Ceremony. It being most certain, that that
Parliament owed its beginning to the Kings Writ, although its continuance was
thought to depend on the continuing Act, as long as the King lived. Yet,
notwithstanding the House of Commons had actually dissolved themselves, and it
was become the received opinion that the Parliament of Forty was in Law
dissolved before upon the old Kings death, the next Assembly, Stylo Communi
Parliament, would not barely stick to either of these ways, but thought good
likewise themselves, by virtue of their Authority to declare that Parliament of
Forty dissolved. Whether or no they thought, that the bare Act of a single
house of Commons, without King and Lords, could not in Law be took for a formal
Repeal of the former continuing Act, made by King, Lords, and Commons jointly,
and so rejected it, as really insignificant in its self, though made use of for
the time; and out of a Cautious foresight dreaded some ill consequences
attending the received opinion, [of the long Parliaments being dissolved by the
Kings death, whether or no the continuing Act were formally repealed by as good
Authority as made it] lest thence in time, no body knows when, occasion might
be taken to argue, that if a Kings death repeals one unlimited Act, it may
likewise on the same ground vacate all by him made, and so, by affirming the
same of all other Princes since the first William, a foundation might be laid
for the Introduction of Arbitrary Power, when evil minded Pretenders are
absolute enough to attempt it with hopes of Impunity, I pretend not to
determine. For I remember my self to be a Relater of matters of Fact, not a
Reader of Law Cases.

Therefore I proceed to acquaint the Reader, that that Assembly (though called
without the Kings Writ, yet by his Majesty afterward most Graciously owned and
acknowledged for a Parliament) thought it fitting and convenient, to declare
and enact, that the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the third day of
November, in the sixteenth year of the Reign of the Late King Charles of
blessed Memory, is fully dissolved and determined. They are the words of the
Act to be seen in the Statute-book, Cap. 1. 12 Car. 2. This was the Assembly
that blessed us with his Majesty's actual Restoration, toward which there had
been made so many steps a little before by the Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonalty of the Land, and the Worthy Citizens of this Honorable City: Whose
public Reception, and Triumphant Cavalcade through the City of London to White
hill was very remarkable, for the splendid appearance of the Citizens to
conduct him, the Gallantry shown by them on so acceptable a Solemnity, and the
many demonstrations of joy and gladness they gave him, worthy themselves, and
that glorious day, which they had so long expected, and contributed so much of
their assistance to hasten. For which I have a passage or two more to produce,
besides what has been already brought. For the first, out of the supplement to
Baker, I quote his Majesty's most Gracious Letter, To his Trusty and well
beloved, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London,
wherein he Honorably acknowledges the public and frequent Manifestations of
their affections to him, and the Encouragement and good Example ^hey gave the
Nation to assert the Ancient Government, and thereupon concludes with large
Promises of Extraordinary kindness to this his Native City, to the Renewal of
their Charter, Confirmation of all privileges granted by his Predecessors, and
the adding of new favors to advance the Trade Wealth and Honor thereof The
next is a Commemoration of the Cities Joyful Resentment of this Letter, and the
Kings Declaration enclosed in it, as it was was expressed by the Grateful Duty
of the Common Council, who immediately, upon the reading of them, ordered a
Present of Ten thousand Pounds to be made to His Majesty, and a thousand pounds
to each of his Brothers: And likewise deputed several of the Aldermen and
worthy Citizens to attend upon His Majesty from the City, with a Presentment of
their most Dutiful acknowledgments for his Clemency and Goodness toward them.
So desirous were they to give him the greatest demonstrations of their
affection and Loyalty before his Return, and Judiciously Wise, as well as
Loyal, to set all parts of the Nation a good Example to imitate in a ready
manifestation of their Duty and Allegiance to him after his Return. Neither in
this would they be behind hand with any of them all. For the City of London, as
being the first, the richest, and most Honorable, and the Seat of Kings for
many ages, might Judge it self obliged (as the Supplementer insinuates) in
point of duty and Reputation, to exceed all the rest in the Glory of their
performances toward their Sovereign. But whatever the Citizens did think of
the Obligation on either side, certain enough it is, that the reiterated
expressions of their Loyalty to the King were Honorable, and Meritorious to
the highest degree. For to the splendour of their former Preparations at his
first Reception and Triumphal Entrance, they added the cost of a most
magnificent Entertainment at Guild-hal, (for that very purpose richly
beautified and adorned) whither the King, his two Brothers, the Lords of the
Privy Council, the two Houses of Parliament, and the chief Officers of State
were conducted (July the fifth, 1660.) in great Pomp by the Lord Mayor, and the
Grandees of the City and treated in a Royal manner with the choicest of
Delicacies, with excellent Music, and whatever else could be thought on, or
delightful for so Illustrious an Assembly. As if the Citizens thought it not
enough to entertain the King, but for his sake were resolved to put themselves
to the charge of gratifying others for their Loyalty. Where Is now the Man can
bring me a parallel hereto? General Monk appeared, and London concurred, and
then the House of Commons of the Parliament of forty is immediately revived, a
face of the Ancient Government restored, a new Parliamentary Assembly called,
the King sent for home to enjoy his Fathers Throne, and most peaceably settled
therein without the noise of War, or the cries of the wounded in our streets. A
Miraculous effect of the Cities influence. For what parts of the Land are so
inconsiderate to oppose, when London is engaged and resolved? Former Examples
may teach them future wisdom.

These having been the necessary preparatives, in sixty one, on Saint Georges
day, April the 23. comes the Kings Coronation, (the fairest day except the
Preceding, in which he made his Cavalcade through London, the Nation enjoyed
both before and after, if the supplementers Observation be well grounded,
notwithstanding it began to Thunder and Lighten very smartly toward the end of
Dinner time,) and soon after that another meeting of King, Lords, and Commons
at Westminster, whither the Kings Writs had Summoned them to make a New
Parliament, the former Assembly having been dissolved the December before by
his Majesty's Order and Command. How acceptable the Actions of that Assembly
were to City and Country has been hinted before, and the concurrence of the
King, when restored, was not wanting to Authorize their proceedings; yet this
new Assembly, notwithstanding, thinking the manner of it is Assembling not to be
drawn into Example, and that therewas some defect, as to the necessary point of
Legality, in the Statutes then made, or at least desirous to remove all doubts,
fears and scruples about them, would not let several of those Acts pass without
being formally ratified, and confirmed anew by it is own Authority. And
therefore consequently, not trusting to the received opinion of the dissolution
of the Parliament of forty by the late Kings Death, nor relying on the House of
Commons Act to dissolve themselves in fifty nine, nor the dissolution of the
Lords and Commons in sixty, another Declaration was made in the point, in these
word. To the end, that no Man bereafter may be misled into any seditious or
unquiet demeanor, out of an opinion that the Parliament begun and held at
Westminster, upon the third day of November, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred and forty, is yet in being, which is undoubtedly dissolved
and determined, and so is hereby Declared and Adjudged to be fully Dissolved
and Determined. And it was further Enacted, by the same Authority, That if any
Person or Persons at any time after the four and twentieth day of June, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred sixty and one, shall Maliciously and
Advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, Express,
Publish, Utter, Declare or affirm, that the Parliament begun at Westminster
upon the third day of November, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred and forty, is not yet dissolved, or is not yet determined, or that it
ought to be in being, or has yet any continuance or Existence, that then every
such Person and Persons so as aforesaid offending shall incur the danger and
penalty of a Praemunire mentioned in a Statute made in the sixteenth year of the
Reign of King Richard the second.

Thus then were all disputes upon this point effectually styled and suppressed
by this Authority and Command of King, Lords and Commons, and the greatness of
the penalty incurred by the person offending, which amounts to no less than to
be put out of the Kings Protection, and have his Lands and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, forfeited to the King, and his Body Attached, if to be found, and
brought before the King and his Council, there to Answer the premises, or that
process be made against him by Praemunire facias, and if returned non est
inventus, than to be Outlawed.

Next I proceed to observe, that 'twas Petitioning and addressing, that
prepared the way for His Majesty's Restoration, and therefore doubtless the
remembrance thereof should be always grateful and acceptable to the Loyal. Such
preparatories to great turns and changes being always preferrable to the other
rougher methods of drawn Swords and loaded Pistols, which are the general
effects of Civil Broils and Commotions, while these are the rational results of
Wisdom and Prudence.

With the King was that part of the English Clergy likewise restored, which
appropriates to it self the name of the Church of England. A Term much gloried
in by many, as if none but themselves were the constitutive parts thereof, and
which some now adays pretend freer from Ambiguity than the more general Name of
Protestants. What we understand* by that Term we know very well, and are not
ashamed thereof. Yet, by the way, I don't think but it is as liable to
exceptions, where Cavils take place, as the other title of Protestants, so much
of late turned into ridicule by some few pretenders to wit and sense above the
vulgar. For if by Church we understand barely an Assembly of Men met together
in one place, then doubtless, without any incongruity, it may be applied to
many a civil meeting of Men together about their own private concerns. If by
Church we mean a society of Men conjoined in Spiritual duties, or the
Ordinances of Divine Worship, then I hope it will be no Solecism in common
Speech to affirm, many of the Dissenters meetings may reasonably lay claim to
the Name. And if a due Celebration of the Sacraments will make a Church, why
then may not the Denomination as well belong to some private Conventicles, as
to the public Oratories? If it should denote only the Association of many
distinct Assemblies under the same Ecclesiastical Government, what should
hinder the Presbiterians from enjoying the Title in those places, where they
are allowed to exercise their power in Classical, Provincial, or National
Synods? Which Power they once exercised in England publicly within the Memory
of Man. But if the Law of the Land makes the difference, and the established
Government of the Country, in Ecclesiastical affairs, as with us in England,
then I am apt to believe this Expression, the Church of England, is not without
it is Ambiguities, and may be a denomination comprehensive of Men of as many
different modes and forms, as some would fain have us think the word Protestant
admits of.

Heretofore at the first planting of the Gospel in this Isle among the
Britains, we may call it the British Church. When Austin the Monk came in,
bringing with him the Customs and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and
introduced them among the converted Saxons, then we may term it the Romish
Church. When the Monks and Friars, like the Frogs in Egypt, had overspread the
whole face of the Land, then we may give it the Epithet of Monkish. In
succeeding Generations, when Popery was arrived to its height, we may name it
the Popish Church. In King Edward the sixth days it may properly be called
Reformed. Under the Marian Persecution 'twas certainly Popish. Queen Elizabeth
brought back the Reformed Religion under an Episcopal Government, and therefore
I venture to give it the Name of the Reformed Episcopal Church. A little before
the late Wars, when the Hierarchy was arrived at its highest pitch of Pomp and
Grandeur by the Laudean principles and practices; It was certainly then
Prelatical. In the late times 'twas once the Presbyterian, then the Independent
Church, and other Sectaries were putting in a pace for a share, and then, had
they succeeded, it might have been, without much impropriety, entitled to the
Epithet of Fanatical. King Charles brought back the Bishops, and so now it is
again Episcopal. Should Popery come in, it would be Popish. Were there any
likelihood of so great an Impossibility, as the prevalency of Judaism, then it
would be the Jewish Church. If Mahomets Religion, which has been publicly
professed in the Pulpit preferable to Presbiteriansm, why might it not be
allowed the Title of Mohammedan? And if we should revert to the Ancient
Barbarity, where would the impropriety be, should we term it the Heathenish
Church? For the Heathens heretofore had the thing, though not the Name, Temples
instead of Churches, and bloody Sacrifices to make up the greatest part of
their Devotion.

What a fine Company then of different Epithites, of different signif^cations,
would these be for an impertinent Caviller to prefix before that so much
applaud'd expression, the Church of England, in reply to his impertinence, that
would persuade simple ignorant people, that they know not what they say, when
they call themselves Protestants? British, Romish, Monkish, Popi^h, Reformed,
Episcopal, Prelatical, Presbyterian, Independent, Fanatical, Jewish, Mohammedan,
Heathenish, and what not? To such a fine pass would people once be brought,
when they fall to wrangling about words and terms, at the same time, that they
know one another meaning well enough, yet will pretend not to understand each
other: We may have happily reason enough to approve of, and glory in the Name of
Church of England men, though not perhaps in such a restrained sense, as some
do, yet our grounds, without all peradventure, are as good to apply to our
selves the glorious Title of Protestants, and we can as properly distinguish
our selves thereby from Papists, as if we termed our selves only Sons of the
Church of England; under this consideration, that Protestants at first were
such, Baker tells us, as made a Protestation in defense of their Doctrine, and
now we are such as protest* against Popery and Slavery.

But to return, how contributory this Honorable City was to his Majesty's
Restoration, and how Loyally affectionate her Citizens showed themselves to
him before and after, has been already instanced: Let us then in the next
place take a short transient view of her actions, and the accidents happening to
her, under King Charles the second, and see whither she has not continued
still the same, as of old, a City of high Renown, Fame and Power, and of great
sway and influence all over the Kingdom.

First then let us consider her misfortunes, that we may the better contemplate
her glories. In sixty two her Parishes lost many of their beloved Pastors in
that great ejection of public Ministers, among whom were some that had
declared in Print against the pretended high Court of Justice in the time of
his Late Majesty's Trial. In sixty five the great Plague swept away her
Citizens by thousands, tens of thousands, and scores of thousands. In sixty six
the fire burned almost all the Remainder out of House and home, and laid in a
manner the whole City in Ashes: So that, if ever, she feem'd then near to a
very dismal Catastrophe. And yet we see now Providence has delivered her out
of these her Calamities, and she is become more glorious than ever in the Eyes
of the Nation. The number of her Citizens is so increased, and her streets
filled with such multitudes of people passing to and fro, that those who dyed
in the sickness are neither missed nor wanted. The fire has made such a
Reformation within her Walls, and the new buildings, public and private, have
been raised up, to the admiration of all, in so small a space of time, and in
so pompous and stately a form, that she may be thought, like the old Phaenix
burning in her nest of odoriferous Spices, only to have shaken off her old
decayed feathers by the fire, and out of her own Ashes, Phaenix like, to have
risen up with more Splendour and Gallantry than ever.

Come we now to the late Discovery of the Grand Popish Plot, and the times
succeeding, and therein also we meet with instances of Londons influence and
Authority with the rest of the Nation. She guarded her self with her own Arms,
and how soon was she followed in other places? After the dissolution of some of
the National Assemblies, (which we English men call Parliaments, and firmly
believe the greatest liberty of the subject to consist therein) upon a new
choice, when her Citizens made a public promise to their chosen
Representatives, that they would stand by them with their lives and fortunes:
Such a Copy was set the Nation, that most places strove to imitate it, and the
Example was as influential, as when before, upon the Cities Petitioning for the
sitting of one of those before mentioned Parliaments, Petitions of the same
nature came thronging in amain from several parts of the Land in imitation.

Look we now upon the City, and see how intent the eyes of the Nation are fixed
upon her actions, and the great contest about the Sheriffs. How all the Land
seems concerned on one side or the other, and think their own welfare wrapped
up in her security. Such sollicitousness of a whole Nation for one particular
City must certainly denote some what extraordinary therein: And what is it, can
more interest the Nation in her concerns, than the great Influence it is known
she has upon all their grand affairs, be they more or less public? Even the
very business of the Quo Warranto, now depending, will administer an instance
of her Power and Greatness. How do all now stand ready waiting the Event,
depending upon her success, or ready to follow her fate? When the Writ was
brought against her Charter, how great was the Expectation of the people, and
their longings to know what would be the Issue? Some Resigned, but when London
appeared to Stand up in her own Vindication, what a stop was there put to
Resignations, and how rare have been surrenders since? Most seem now ready to
defend themselves by Law; Nay, Oxford has pitched upon the same way and method
with London: Whereas had this Honorable City, but surrendered calmly and
quietly, it is a question whither any would have stood out, or whether rather
all Towns and Corporations would not have strove to have out run each other to
the Throne of Majesty, there to have made an entire Resignation of all their
Charters, Liberties, Privileges and Franchises, notwithstanding the hazard
they might have run, by dissolving their Ancient Corporations, to have lost
back all the Estates, given to them as Corporate bodies, to the Donors Heirs,
suitable to the Reply said to be made to the Burgesses of a Certain Corporation,
when they asked advice in the Case.

Such having been the influences of the City of London all along upon the
Nation, and such the undeniable proofs thereof, what then remains, but that we
must needs acknowledge and confess her to be a City most Triumphant? Triumphant
in the Antiquity of her Foundation, the continuance of her ancient renown, and
the Glorious Acts of her Citizens: Triumphant in the Freedom of her
Privileges, the Honorable respect shown her Magistrates, and the Combined
strength of her Commonalty: Triumphant in the Prevalency of her Power,
Victorious success of her Arms, and unavoidable Destruction of her Enemies. Let
us therefore with an united consent prostrate our selves before the Throne of
Grace with this Petitionary request, that she may continue ever fixed and
unmovable in her Duty to the Almighty, firm in her Loyalty to the King, and
secure in an uninterrupted enjoyment of her just Rights, Liberties, Privileges
and Franchises: A Prayer, whereto I doubt not but every Loyal English Man, and
honest well meaning Citizen will readily from his heart say, Amen.

FINIS.
The Courteous Reader is desired to pardon the faults, that have escaped
through inadvertency, either in pointing or spelling, and with his pen to men
the following Errata, as the more material ones.

Page 2. l. 21. r. hundreds. p. 14. l. 32. r. more frequently. l. 35. r.
repelled. p. 15. l. 30. r. it is. p. 29. l. 9. r. lines. p. 44. l. 4. r. of l.
ult. r. called. p. 48. l. 4. r. elder. p. 68. l. 4. r. might go. p. 69. l. 31.
r. placed under. p. 7^. l. 2^. del. in. p. 73. l. 2. r. digest. l. 18. r.
Fabian's. p. 75. l. r. came. 76. l. 1. r. it is. l. 7. r. let them. p. 77. l.
6. r. bay. p. 79. l. ^. r. 40000. p. 83. l. 26. r. Englishmen. l. 32. r. came
only. p. 89. l. 29. r. are. p. 97. l. 11. r. we may. p. 101. l. 6. r. held. l.
21. r. his. p. 110. l. 15. ad. 43. p. 112. l. 27. r. yet. p. 116. l. 5. r. of
a. l. 24. r. How. p. 117. l. 27. r. into. p. 124. l. 4. r. hold. p. 132. l. 27.
r. clogging. p. 133. l. 27. ad. 111. p. 140. l. 18. r. Brothers. p. 143. l. 27.
r. his. p. 145. l. 10. r. chiefs. p. 147. l. 3. r. were. p. 152. l. 8. r. Iyon.
l. 20. r. immediately. p. 155. l. 1. r. were. p. 156. l. 31. ad. it. p. 157. l.
33. ad. of the. l. 34. r. our remark. p. 159. l. 33. r. great forfeiture. p.
161. l. 6. r. added. p. 163. l. 10. r. his. p. 164. l. 15. r. quieter. l. 18.
r. with. l. 32. r. badge. p. 167. l. 6. r. was. p. 168. l. 11. r. accursed. l.
20. r. ha^bicanes. p. 170. l. 8. r. who. p. 172. l. 10. r. sort. l. 11. r.
placed. p. 173. l. 8. r. ann^tes. p. 175. l. 2. r. prejudicial. l. 22. r. In.
p. 176. l. 28. r. Zouch. p. 178. l. 15. the famed. p. 181. l. 10. demeanours.
p. 185. l. 24. r. equally. p. 203. l. 13. r. than. p. 21. 5. l. 33. r. in. p.
241. l. 2. r. old. p. 242. l. 1. r. formally. l. 27. r. meet. p. 248. l. 8. and
from. d, and. p. 250. l. 7. r. culling. p. 252. l. 32. r. unwitting. p. 253. l.
26. r. joint. p. 255. l. 24. r. for an. p. 262. l. 23. r. Planet-like. p. 263.
l. 28. r. Basins. p. 265. l. 11. r. series. p. 266. l. 30. 31. r. Parliament
men's. p. 273. l. 8. r. sprung. p. 277. l. 11. ad. 246. p. 284. l. 33. r.
wears. p. 288. l. 12. r. suppre^^. p. 290. l. 2. made a. d. a. l. 2^. r. those.
l. 30. r. fourteen. p. 291. l 13. r. Poet Bayes's. l. 28. r. one or other. p.
293. l. 5. r. the Age. p. 294. l. 5. r. all the. p. 298 l. 11. r. Robbery. l.
34. r. Historical. p. 304. l. 10. r. Informations. l. 13. r. this. p. 305. l.
8. r. brake. l. 10. r. Battle. p. 306. l. 13. r. their opinions. l. 25. r.
benefit. l. 27. r. strength. p. 307. l. 12. r. Observers. p. 308. l. 29. r.
after Yowton Battle. p. 311. l. 13. r. and. p. 312. l. 14. d. had. p. 314. l.
33. r. chosen. l. 36. d., as. p. 315. l. 1. r. vigilance of the discerning. l.
10. r. depart. p. 316. l. 11. r. these her declared. p. 119. l. 7. r. divert.
p. 320. l. 1. r. Historian. l. 14. r. another cause. l. 21. r. he^. l. 29. r.
or. p. 322. l. 27. r. humor. p. 325. l. 3. ad. the. l. 11. r. Bu^. p. 329. l.
26. r. blazed abroad. l. 34. r. Parts. p. 340. l. 3. r. little. p. 355. l. 3.
r. at any. p. 363. l. 21. r. neither then. p. 365. l. 20. r. Declaration.

There may possibly be found here and there a word or Letter redundant and
deficient, which upon the review have been let pass without a Mark, but it is
hoped none have passed unobserved, which may prove injurious to the sense, or
justly occasion any mistake, but what an ordinary Reader may easily see and
Correct, a confidence in whose candor and good nature is doubtless a far
better Apology in this case than to lay the blame at other men's doors.


