GRAND-JURORS OF THE City of Bristoll, THEIR ADDRESS To the General Sessions of
the Peace, There Assembled: WHEREIN Are showed their Reasons for the putting
the Laws in due Execution against the Phanaticks and Papists.

And likewise showing The Fears and Jealousies that they are daily in, if the
same be neglected.

Humbly offered to Consideration.

Printed with Allowance, 1675.

Civit. Bristoll. Epiphany Sessions, 1674.
To the Right Worshipful, the Mayor and Aldermen, His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of and for this City and County, in this their General-Session s of the
Peace now assembled.
WE the Grand-Jurors for the body of this City, being moved with a due sense of
our Duties toward Almighty God, our zeal for the Church, and the Honor and
Interest of the true Reformed Religion (as being Christians) Our Loyalty and
Allegiance toward our Sovereign Lord the King, and the peace and prosperity of
His Majesty's Kingdoms (as being His Subjects) and especially of this City,
whereof we are some of his Natives, all Citizens, Burgesses, and Inhabitants,
And considering the sacred and solemn Obligation, not only of the Oath by us
taken when we entered upon this Service, together with the charge and directions
given us by this Court, but also of our Oaths of Burgesses, Do humbly crave
leave, as has been usual, to present and recommend to this Court, and to every
of your Worships in particular, our sad apprehensions of the present State of
this City, so far as His Majesty's Peace, relating to the Government, therein,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil, is concerned. Hoping your Lordships will not
think it improper for us, or besides our present Duty, to give you an account
of the true reasons and occasions of those great Divisions, Disturbances,
Tumults, Routs, Riots, and Breaches of the Kings Peace which have been lately
amongst us; and have raised just cause of fears in all His Majesty's Loyal and
Interessed Subjects within this City, That if these disorders be not prevented,
and the Offenders therein punished by your Worships speedy care and activity in
putting the Laws in Execution, they will end in the final ruin and desolation
of this City, and probably in a new Rebellion, (which God forbid) For we see by
experience, that the impunity of Offenders, and connivance at their evil
practices, serves only to encourage them in the disobedience of good and
wholesome Laws.

The Persons of so many of the Offenders, and the matter of their several
Crimes and Offenses (as we have had knowledge thereof) are set forth in the
particular Indictments and Presentiments against them hereto annexed, which if
informal, or defective, for want of being in Latin, by reason of false Latin or
otherwise; we humbly desire such defect or want of Form, may be supplied by
order of this Court.

The greatest number of our Indictments, and Pesentments, are against
Schismatical, Seditious, and Disloyal Seducers and Sectaries, who are the very
Pests and Firebrarnds of our City, and the principal (if not only) disturbers
and breakers of the Peace therein. The heads of these Seducers are diverse
Strangers, who, pretending themselves to be Ministers of Jesus Christ (but in
truth were never in Holy Orders, as we believe) are lately come to settle in
this City, and have made it their business to impose Doctrines of Disobedience
on the weak understandings of the ignorant and credulous Multitude, to Form the
People into several Parties and Factions, to Seduce them from their due
Allegiance to His Majesty, and to withdraw them from the Churches, and the
public Worship and Service of God by Law Established (which these Impostors
call Antichristian) unto unlawful Assemblies and Conventicles, set up by
themselves (which they call Churches) and to unite them into several
Confederacies, to separate from the Church, and forsake their lawful Pastors
and Ministers (who are by them called Dogs) and to substract from them their
due maintenance, and apply it to these Seducers (who, at their Conventicles,
style these kind of practices, Holy Combinatious) And at these unlawful
Assemblies and Conventicles, these Seducers have taken on themselves, of their
own Authority, to Pray and Preach as they list, most commonly on Lords-Days, at
times of Divine Service, and at other times, whereby they have so increased the
number of Disloyal, Antimonarchical and Seditious Sectaries amongst us; and
have so tampered with too many others of the ignorant and ill-principled
Multitude, and those of the younger sort, and have by their Doctrine and Evil
Examples, so inveighled them into Disobedience, and contempt of the Laws and
Constitutions of this Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and the
Government and Magistrates of this City, that unless your Worships shall
effectually exert your Authority for the restraining and reforming of these,
and other such like their licencious proproceedings, it may justly be feared,
by the sad experience of the late troublesome times, that (if it lie in these
men's power) not only the Peace and Safety of this City, but also a total
su^version of the present Establishments, both in Church and State, will
inevitably ensue: Which is the more evident, by their shutting the Doors of a
Conventicle in the Castle, against several Justices of the Peace, who went
thither in Person, with the Lord Bishop, to disperse it, and denying them
entrance, till they had called Constables to break the Doors. By their raising
Tumults and Riots in the principal parts of the City on every light occasion.
By their pursuing with Staves, and assaulting by throwing Stones at diverse of
those, who are bound in Duty, or are commanded to go to their Conventicles, in
order to their Suppression, or the Conviction of such as they find there, with
such great numbers, that many sober and loyal People are in great Terror and
Dread of sudden insurrections. To so great a height of Insolency are these
Seducers and Sectaries now grown, as not only to frequent Conventicles, but
also to challenge of the Magistrates Tolleration and Allowance for Congregating
them without control, when, where, and as often as they please, whereunto they
draw great numbers of People, designing thereby, to increase and strengthen
their party, and to appear the more formidable. Insomuch, that within this
City, to be reputed Loyal, begins now to be accounted matter of scandal and
reproach; and schism, sedition, and faction, has the boldness to outface
Authority.

And we cannot but take notice, That some men, who were very active against His
late Majesty (of glorious memory) in our late Civil Wars; and others, who owe
their Lives and Estates to His now Ma^esties Clemency and Acts of Indemnity,
are now the chief Countenancers and Supporters of these schismatical Preachers
in their seditious practices; and are so far from being obliged to Subjection
and Obedience to the Laws, by His Majesty's Grace and Goodness, that they are
thereby encouraged to be the more Disobedient and Disloyal, and to seduce
others to be so also. So that this City, which was formerly famous for true
Religion and Loyalty, and for unity within it self, and natural love and amity,
is now rent and torn with Schism and Faction: And unless there be effectual
care taken by your Worships, for the exterminating hence these kind of
Impostors and Seducers, and for suppressing of their Conventicles, by putting
the Laws to that purpose in due Execution, Our City will shortly become a
Sanctuary for Disloyal and Turbulent Spirits, and contemners and breakers of
all Laws and civil Sanctions, Our Religion and Government will be prostituted
to the Humors and Lusts of unreasonable men, to be obeyed or disobeyed at their
Wills and Pleasures, and the Authority of our Magistrates trampled under the
Feet of such as despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities, which must needs
introduce remediless disorder and confusion; and may at last, for ought we
know, mould the Vulgar into a willingness to embrace Popery.

But we are heartily glad to see the ready and active concurrence of your
Worships, with the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop, in the
preventing of those growing mischiefs, and humbly entreat both your Worships
and his Lordship, to persist unanimously in so necessary a work. And we have
reason to rejoice and bless God, for the great care and vigilance of so good
and faithful a Shepherd, as his Lordship is, over this part of his Flock, and
for his indefatigable care and endeavors to secure it from being invaded and
devoured, hoping that all the hard censures he has; or shall meet with; from
any Seducers Sectaries, or Disloyal Persons, or their Favorers, will not at
all discourage him in the prosecution of so honorable and worthy an
undertaking.

And we do hereby engage, in the name of our selves, and all others the Loyal
Citizens, Burgesses, and Inhabitants of this City, that we are, and shall be
ready, to sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes with you in defense of His Majesty's
Person, Crown, and Dignity, and the Established Laws.

And Lastly, We thank your Worships care for the preservation of the Liberties
and Privileges of this City, in not admitting any to be freed, without their
first taking the Oath of a Burgess, which care we humbly desire may be
continued.

And we do here humbly present to the Right Worshipful Sir John Knight, now
present in Court, as being one of our Representatives in Parliament, as well as
one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this City and County, these our
common grievances and complaints to be by him communicated to the Right
Worshipful Sir Humphrey Hook Knight, the other of our Representatives, and the
Colonel of the Militia and Trained Bands for this City; and do make it our
unanimous request unto them both, to endeavor the redressing the same, and to
secure the Peace of this City, by all the ways and means they can, according to
their best prudence and discretion, against the grow wing evils and dangers,
arising from the practices of such as are Disloyal Obstinate, and Seditious,
That so true Peace, Unity, and Charity, may be restored and re-established
amongst us. To which end, we all heartily pray,

God Save the King. Richard Daw. John Napper. Richard Wellichapp. Richard
Clifford. John Estwick. John Whiting. William Bush. Samuel Rogers. John Minor.
Richard Smith. Walter Gunter. John Warren. Thomas Davidge. Walter Steward.
Thomas Green. Ambrose Hancock. Edm. Arundell. Robert Thorn. George Hearts.


FINIS.

