THE Primitive Christian JUSTIFIED, AND Jack Presbyter REPROVED; OR, A
Scripture Demonstration, That to be Innocent and Persecuted, is more Eligible
than to be Prosperously Wicked. Delivered in a SERMON IN THE Abby-Church of
BATH.

By WILLIAM GOVLDE.

No Flames of Civil Dissentions are more Dangerous, than those which make
Religious Pretentions, Grounds of Factions. K. CHARLES the First. LONDON,
Printed for R. Royston Bookseller to the King's Most Sacred MAJESTY. 1682.

TO THE READER.
THIS Discourse following had never seen the light, if Jack Presbyter would
have permitted the Author to be quiet; the Principle here defended is a plain
Truth, justified by our Savior's life, That an Afflicted, is more Eligible
than a Sinful state, which I presume was sound Primitive Doctrine, and will be
always so esteemed by the Regular Protestant: Notwithstanding it gave great
Distaste to the Presbyterian Brotherhood. One Gentleman would have had me Whipped
for saying it was Irrational and Irreligious to commit a Sin that Good might
come thereof. Another told me I forgot to Preach Jesus Christ and him
Crucified; and yet (if I mistake not) he was a man of Sorrows, and acquainted
with grief, yet knew no sin, niether was guile found in his mouth. A third
Zealdrunk Monseur Complimented me in the Queens Bath, that Mr. Topham (a
Sergeant at Arms, I think) was my very good Friend, and desired a Copy of what
I delivered, and that if I had any Service to him, he would effectually present
it; my Answer was very sharp, and being publicly known abroad, needs not now
be repeated. Hang the Rascal, said a fourth, He Preached for a Cardinals Cap at
the coming in of the Pope; by which you may guess what will become of William
Goulde, if these Gentlemen once give Law to the Church and State. But I have
however printed it, to show I dare be honest, and will not be huft out of my
Integrity by Noise and Tumult, for I have learned to fear him who can cast body
and soul into Eternal torment, more than a Speaker, or a Pope, or the Reprimand
of either or both.

In this Discourse I affirm and will prove it, that by the Laws of God, by the
Principles of the true Protestant Religion, publicly Professed in the Church
of England, the Bill against the Duke of York is not to be Justified, and my
Reason is grounded in the Text, It is not lawful to choose Sin to avoid being
Persecuted; and that Bill which renders a man dead in Law for want of Grace,
will bring more Confusion unto a State than it pretends to avoid, and
approaches too near the Doctrine of the Conclave, of the Popes power in
disposing the Kingdoms of an Heretic.

I declare my self as free from Popery, as any Zealot of the Kirk, and in two
great Points, the Regal and Episcopal Government, I have a greater Value for
these than any Presbyterian or Independent either Rigid or Moderate. He that
shall consider how the Jesuitical Party in the Conventicle of Trent, undermined
the Power of King and Bishop to give the Jurisdiction of both to their Lord God
the Pope, and compare it with the practices of the Covenanting Presbyter
against Prince and Bishop, to make them both Truckle under the
Lay-Elder-Government, will think it unreasonable to excuse these later, whilst
the others are subject to the Penalties of the Act of the 35th. of Queen
Elizabeth. If Jack-Presbyter think any Injury done him, I hope the two
following Arguments will clear me from his Charge in all moderate Men's
Judgment. First, The Votes of Non-Addresses to, or receiving any Messages from
the late Martyred Monarch, was certainly Cozen-German (if not more nearly
related) to the Bull of Pope Pius against Queen Elizabeth, be it remembered that
those Votes were never recalled, till the King was under the Armed Power of the
Independent. Secondly, The Bill against Bishops root and branch, solemnly
attending upon the League and Covenant, was as much prejudicial to the
Episcopal Government of the Church of England, as any thing said or Acted
against that Ancient order, by any Jesuit Papists in the Council aforesaid. Of
these two Arguments (if the Reader dares be Honest and Candid) he is left to be
the Judge between the Presbyterian Brotherhood and

William Goulde.

JOB xxxvi. 21. Verse. Regard not Iniquity; for this thou have Chosen rather
than Affliction.
TO have the favor to receive Commands, and the Meekness to obey them, is the
satisfaction of Angels: and it is hence concluded by Gerson (the late learned
Chancellor of Paris) that if an Angel were to set out himself in luster and
triumph in a Magnificat, it would be rather in the blessed Virgins style as a
servant of God, than a Prince of so many Myriads of Subjects: would the
Scripture allow me that kind of Idolatry, the binding my Faith or obedience to
any one infallible earthly Judge or Prince, were it reconcilable to my Creed,
it would be certainly with my interest to get into that posture of Obedience;
yet we find Subjection so hard a lesson to the Sons of men, that neither Wrath
nor Conscience can prevail with us to obey God, (or for his sake) to submit to
our lawful Superiors: This is so well understood by wise Princes and States,
that they have invented new ways to entertain busy and active Spirits, to keep
them from tampering with their public Laws and Constitutions. The body of a
Flea or an Ant, will afford a Vertuoso many choice Observations, demonstrating
Problems, solving Phaenomena's and drawing Schemes and Diagrams, may divert
your busy Mercurial Wits, from making new Ideas and Platforms for Churches
and Kingdoms: the ground of which Aversness is the want of a right
understanding of that great principle of our Christian Religion, the going the
highway of the Cross to the Kingdom of heaven; and hence it comes that
Christianity is scandalized by Recusants, Popish and Puritan, who prefer
Rebellion before Martyrdom, and so are liable to Elihu's reprehension for
choosing iniquity rather than affliction. I shall sum up the substance of the
whole Text into one plain and Genuine Observation, That Sin is neither eligible
in its self, nor to be chosen to avoid the suffering of Persecution.

Sin I say cannot (properly taken) be the object of a rational man's, or true
Christians choice; First, if considered in its self or Consequences; Secondly,
if we look on Sin as opposite to Gods Essence and Attributes; Thirdly, if we
consider it as the transgression of Gods Laws; Fourthly, as destructive to our
own Souls; Fifthly, as the Original of all the distempers of our Bodies; and
Sixthly, as the occasion of Death in all kinds, Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal, as Divines distinguish according to the Scriptures; Lastly, (which
includes the second branch of the Thesis,) it cannot be the object of a
rational choice as put in the balance with the greatest Pressures, Afflictions
and Difficulties. None can deny (considering the present juncture of Affairs)
but that I have pitched on a seasonable Subject of Discourse, and (if you will
pardon my hasty Conceptions) I resolve to speak what is very Plain, Innocent,
and Honest; consonant with the primitive rule of Reforming, and preservng
Churches recommended by Christ and his Apostles, and their immediate and best
Successors.

First, Sin is not the object of a Rational man's choice considered either in
its self or Consequences. 1. Not with respect to its self, for it is de numero
ineligibilium (as the Schools speak.) There is no Form nor Beauty in it that we
should desire it: Election is the act of the Will, whose adequate object is
good; and so Sin, which is malum in se, evil in its self, cannot be properly
said to be elected: hence it comes to pass that such who have not their Senses
exercised to discern between Good and Evil, choose Sin by a mistake, thinking it
to be good, putting light for darkness and darkness for light ( Isaiah 5. 20.)
thus Saint Paul (rather Saul) before he was Converted, verily thought with
himself, that he ought to do many things against Jesus of Nazareth; and Christ
tells his Disciples, that some that Killed them by a mistaken zeal, should
think they did an acceptable service unto God: thus Iniquity in practice
passes for Duty, and Error in opinion for Truth, and Evil is chosen sub
ratione boni, not for its own sake, but under the notion of being at least
seemingly good. Others choose Sin that good may come thereof, that God may have
glory or themselves advantage by it: This was objected against St. Paul and his
Doctrine, which in great Disdain he rejected, not as we are slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, that good may come:
whose damnation is just. (Romans 3. 8.) Others choose evil, to escape Danger by
it, elect the evil of Sin to avoid thereby the evil of punishment; So Demas
resolving to sleep in a whole skin and not to be persecuted for Christ's sake,
forsook St. Paul and embraced the present world: now in all these three
respects, whether Sin be chosen under the notion of good, by a mistake, or that
good may come thereof, or that Danger be escaped by it; each of these single,
and much more united, are a clear demonstration that Sin is not eligible for
its self. Sin indeed is the worst of any thing that is enemy to God or man, it
is very much worse than Hell, not only as its cause or parent, but considered
in its self; for Hell is good for something, even to glorify God's Justice,
but Sin serves only to abuse his grace and goodness; Hell was of God's making,
Sin of the Devil's; Nay God made Hell as well to terrify men from coming
there, as to punish the willful intruders into that place of torments: And
hence the chief end of Christ's taking our flesh, was to save us from our sins,
(our worst kind of enemies:) Hence in Scripture when God is said to be angry to
the highest pitch, the style runs thus; I will give him up that is filthy, to
be filthy still; I will choose your delusions, give them over to their
iniquities; so that were there no Hell, 'twere in this sense a kind of
Damnation to be sinners: Of all sorts of punishments sin it self is the
greatest, and so not the proper object in its self of a Rational man's, or true
Christians choice.

Secondly, As Sin is not to be chosen in and for its self, so neither with
respect tothe Consequences thereof. The first and most immediate fruit of Sin
is ignorance, man was first tempted by the promise of Knowledge, and fell into
darkness by believing the Devil holding forth his new lights; Adam and Eve knew
what was good before the Devil promised them the knowledge of evil, and had
they not embraced this temptation they had continued in their happiness: This
knowledge of evil was the introduction of ignorance, the Understanding being
baffled, the Will became foolish, and both conspired to ruin each other; for
the Will beginning to love Sin, the Understanding was set on work to commend
and advance it, and so became both Factious in approving their new miserable
Purchase: for ever since Adam and Eve yielded to the Tempter, who told them
they should be as Gods in knowledge, Man has a double disadvantage; for the
Devil is hence grown more quick-sighted to abuse us, and we the more blind by
his opening of our eyes, as is sufficiently manifest by the prevalence of
Atheism, and Idolatry in the world, than which nothing can be more ridiculous,
occasioned originally by the Fall of our first Parents from their native
paradise.

A second effect of Sin, is Shame, which is an immediate consequence of all
sort of wickedness, what fruit had you then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? Romans 6. 21. We see the truth of this by a too sad Experience, what
Arguments, what Preaching, what Necessity can persuade men to confess their
sins, how do men choose to involve Sin in excuses and denials, in the clouds of
Lying and the white Linen of Hypocrisy, to show that a man's spirit is amazed
and his face confounded when he is dressed of so shameful Disease? It was the
unhappy Patrimony which our first Ancestors bequeathed us, first to Sin, and
then to be ashamed of our selves and Actions; The woman which thou gave me,
said Adam, charging his sin upon God; The Serpent beguiling me, said Eve,
imputing it to the Devil, both betraying the nakedness of their Souls, as well
as bodies, and proportionably making Aprons of Excuses as well as Leaves: And
you may read the Character of the Parents in the Childrens foreheads, for Shame
makes us as backward to reveal our sins as we are forward to confess our
Sicknesses, and less desirous to trust God with the diseases of our Souls, than
the Physician with those of our Bodies. None will own sin amongst all its
acquaintance. If a man pursue Vengeance he will Christen it Justice; he that
hates another man's person pretends enmity to his sins, and the theft of Rachell
shelters its self under the modesty of her sex, Genesis 30. 34, 35. he that
designs to play the Devil, first personates the Saint, and Rebels call
themselves the people of the Lord; thus Sacrilege and Schism are a godly
thorough Reformation; popular Fury is Zeal; Obstinacy against Laws, tenderness
of Conscience; Treason and Nonsense, praying by the Spirit; to dye in
Rebellion, a glorious Martyrdom; and the madness of the Commons against the
King and the Priests, is courage in the cause of the Lord Jesus Christ;
oppression of our brethren Subjects, calls its self a High Court of Justice;
and such as seize our Estates, were the Keepers of our Liberties; and Doctors,
Elders and Deacons, the only Scepter of Christ; and (to avoid Arbitrary
Government) we kneel at the bar of our Fellow Subjects, and are imprisoned for
new unheard of Crimes, to preserve our Properties and Privileges: A clear
Argument that Sin dares not appear in its own colors, and that Shame is its
never failing consequence, and so ineligible in both respects. Absalon's
Rebellion was covered over with a fit of Devotion; one Herod murders with
worshipping the blessed Babe, and another Herod strikes off the Baptists Head,
to avoid being perjured; Saul excused his sin by bringing it to the Altar, and
the worst of men (incarnate Devils) of whom St. Paul speaks, 2 Timoth. 3. chap.
from the 2. to the 7. ver. had a form of godliness. Now were Sin an eligible
thing, the proper object of a rational Choice, what need were there of excuses
or denials, after the commission of any wickedness, or giving it glorious, or
borrowed titles to cover its deformities? And so Sin is not to be chosen,
either for its self, or with respect to its immediate fruits or consequences.

Thirdly, Sin is not the object of a rational Man's, or true Christians choice,
because every way opposite to all Gods glorious Attributes, and his very Being
and Essence: If we consider Gods sovereignty, Sin is Rebellion; if his Justice,
it is Iniquity; if his Goodness, sin is Unkindness; If God's holiness and
pureness, Sin is defilement: Consider God's holiness as a Rule, Sin is a
Transgression; if as an Excellency, Sin is Deformity: Thus it is contrary to
the whole nature of God, and strikes at his Attributes and Essence. As God is
every way in himself good, so Sin is evil in its self, and good in no respect;
and as God is to be loved for himself, because the chiefest good, so Sin is to
hated for it self. The holy Ghost could not call it by a worse name than its
self, as Romans 7. 13. Sin that it might appear sin, and Sin by the commandment
appeared exceeding sinful. Again, God is the great reward of himself, and Sin
the punishment of its self, (Dyametrically opposite.) We are hereby enemies to
God, Coloss. 1. haters of God, Romans 1. 30. Sin is contrary to the glory of God
essential, and manifestative; it denies the glory due to God, Romans 1. 21. Titus
1. 16. despises and reproacheth his glory, and misimployes it, by giving it to
men, to our selves, or to the Devil, (as they who told our Savior that he cast
out Devils by Belzeebub.) Sin wrongs God in his very Nature and Being, as Psalm.
14. 1. every sinner wishes there were no God, and says it in his heart (as
David observes.) Upon each of these Heads I might insist very largely, but to
avoid trespassing on your patience, I pass to the following particulars.

Fourthly, Sin is the transgression of God's Laws, and so not the object of a
Christians Choice: In the Law there is a Rectitude, every thing in God's
Commands is just, and right, Sin is crookendness: the Law teaches wisdom, Sin
is folly, and the Wicked man a fool, and both in Scripture (and very frequent
in the Proverbs) made convertible terms: God's Commands are pure, Sin is
filthiness, Romans 7. 12. there is liberty in the Law, James 2. 8. Sin is a
bondage, 2 Timothy 2. 26. the keeping of the Law brings a reward, but Sin shame
and death, Romans 6. 22, 23. but that which aggravates the sinfulness of Sin upon
this account is, that it is the transgression of such Laws as are not grievous.
1. Laws reasonable and suitable to our nature, and advantageous to our
interest; 2. Such Laws as the Author of which has given us sufficient power
and strength (if not wanting to our selves) for the performance; 3. Such Laws
by obedience to which we arrive at an Eternity of happiness.

1. The Laws of God (of which Sin is a transgression) are reasonable, suitable
to our Nature, and advantageous to our Interest; He has showed thee O Man,
what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
Justice, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? This is the sum of the
natural Law, that we behave our selves reverently and obediently to the divine
Majesty, and justly and Charitably toward men; and for the better discharge of
both, to govern our selves in sensual delights with Temperance and Moderation;
and what is there grievous in all this? That we inwardly reverence and love
God, and express it by external worship and our readiness to obey his will
revealed, testify our dependence on him in all Dangers and Wants, by offering
up to him our constant Prayers and Supplications, and acknowledge our
obligations by continual Praises and Thanksgivings for all his mercies; to
entertain of God no unworthy thoughts, nor give to others that honor and
reverence, which is only suitable to his Excellence and Perfections, carefully
to avoid the profanation of his Name, and take heed of the neglect and
contempt of his Worship, or any thing belonging to it; this is the first part
of Natural Religion, the generals of those Duties which every man's reason tells
him he owes to God; and here thus far there is nothing commanded but what
agrees very well with the reason of Mankind. As for the six last precepts of
the Decalogue relating to the good order and government of our Selves, with
respect to our selves, Equals, Inferiors or Superiors; these are such Laws as
tend to our own peace, and the happiness of humane Socieites, and as expounded
in Christ's Sermon on the Mount, nothing more can be devised for the welfare of
Mankind, by sweetning their Spirits, and allaying their Passions and
Animosities.

2. The Author of those Laws (of which Sin is the Transgression) has not left
us destitute of Strength or Power for performance; it is true, We have
Contracted a great deal of Weakness by our wilful Degeneracy from goodness, but
that grace which the Gospel offers to us for our Assistance, is sufficient for
us; greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world, 1 John 4. 4. and
if so, then it clearly follows, that such as apply themselves seriously to
Religion, and yield themselves tractable to good Motions, will find the Spirit
of God more ready and active for their Encouragement, than the Devil to pull
them back; unless we think God has given a greater power and a larger
commission to the Devil to do us mischief, than to his holy Spirit and his
holy Angels to do us good, which were Blasphemy to assert, and the calling in
question the goodness of God. Some say we cannot keep the Commandments, and its
true, of our selves (as of our selves) we are not able to think a good thought,
much less to do a good work. (As of our selves. Note that) for the same
Apostle says, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, and
these two must be reconciled, we cannot, and we can keep the Commandments; that
is, we cannot of our selves, but we can, through Christ that strengthens us,
and whose grace is never wanting to us, unless we are wanting to our selves: To
say we cannot keep the Commandments without adding Saint Paul's Comment (as of
our selves) I look upon as a Crude position, incourageing Idleness, for God
inquestionably offers us an assistance equal to the difficulty of his
Commands, or else St. John was in an Error, (which may not be supposed) when he
tells us that his Commandments are not grievous, (1 John 5. 3.) and grievous
they must be, if Gods grace (we being weak of our selves) be not sufficient for
the performance in such Evangelical measures and degrees as God expects from
us. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Philip. 4. 13.
Observe here three things, 1. The strength of Christ is the original and
fountain of all ours, 2. The strength of a Christian, derived from Christ, has
a kind of Omnipotence, sufficient for the whole duty of Christians, ( it can
do all things.) 3. The strength and power thus bestowed, is the work of a
Christian, (the man strengthened by Christ) I can do all things: I Paul can
(through Christ's strength, and assisted by grace) keep the Commandments in the
Gospel sense. If this be not the Apostles meaning, I must even go to School
again to understand English. Through God who strengthens us, we are able to
perform what he is able to enjoin; we can suffer by his Patience, what in his
Wisdom he can inslict; choose, by his direction what in his goodness he can
propose. In short, we can believe his promises and do his will; we can resist
his enemy and drink his Cup; but by his Wisdom, and by his Grace, by his Power,
and by his Patience; and if Arminius say more than this, or Calvin less, with
submission to better Judgments, the middle way between both extremes, is
certainly the safest, and proves God's Commands, the only measure of our
Obedience, not to be Grievous; and consequentially to choose Sin, which is the
transgression of such just and reasonable Laws, must be Irrational and
Irreligious.

3, That Law of which Sin is the Trangression, is such a Law by obedience to
which we attain ( through Christ) Eternal happiness; and well did David speak
upon this account, Thy Commands, O God, are Righteous, and in keeping of them
there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. An exceeding Eternal weight of Glory, such
as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to
conceive, (as St. Paul speaks) a happiness that does silence invention,
nonplus Hyperbolies, exceeds all our Conceptions, and Imaginations, and the
Oratory of Men, or Angels. Now to choose Sin, which is the transgression of such
Laws as are suitable to our Natures, advantageous both to our Temporal and
Eternal Interest; Laws, Holy, Good and Just in themselves, and not Grievous to
us; to choose Sin, which is opposite to such Laws as these, is the greatest
folly and madness, we hereby degrade our selves from our very Essences, and bid
defiance to our understanding (the candle of the Lord in our own breasts.)

Fifthly, As Sin is not eligible for its self or Consequences, not with respect
to Gods Attributes and Essence, nor with reference to his Laws, so not the
object of a rational Choice, because it is destructive to our own Souls; As 1.
to the purity of the Soul, (Sin takes away its beauty.) 2. to its Dignity, (so
sin casts down the Soul from its Excellency.) 3. to the Souls Liberty (Sin
makes it a Captive.) 4. to the strength of the Soul, Ezekiel. 16. 30. Impotens
libido, (Sin makes us weak, and Impotent.) 5. to the peace of the Soul, ( ubi
peccatum ibi procella,) there is no peace (says my God) to the wicked; and
Lastly, to the safety and life of the Soul, (2 Thessal. 1. 9.) there are known
Topical heads which may be enlarged upon in your private Meditations. Sin is
Expoliatio gratuitorum, (say the Schools) a stripping of the Soul of all those
supernatural Excellencies that God gave men when created after his own image;
and it is Vulneratio Naturalium, Sin wounds the Soul as to its Naturals and
Morals, as well as Spirituals.

In short, Sin is the disease of our Souls, and no rational man that knows what
Health is, will choose a sickness, and be in love with a Disease: Sin is as
destructive of the Souls health, beauty and safety, as distempered Humors
defect in any Member, Solution of Parts, or Dislocation of a Joint can be to
the Body: An ignorant Mind is equivalent to a blind Eye; a Will disabled worse
than a lame hand; and vile Affections more ugly than deformed Members; an evil
Conscience is more afflictive than a Cancer in the Breast; Pining Envy, more
vexatious than the knawing of our Stomachs; the furies of Lust, Rage and
Intemperance, are as unnatural Distempers, as Feverish heats, and the
insatiable desire after Worldly Wealth; and Greatness is an Hydropique thirst;
and hence in Scripture the sicknesses and diseases of our Bodies, are used to
represent those of our Souls, which he that attentively reads and meditates on,
will furnish himself with many Instances of great usefulness and advantage: our
First Parents got this disease by eating of an Apple which the Devil had
poisoned, and infected all their Posterity with the Venom of it; Adam fell in
Paradise, and all his Offspring are Mephiboseth's line from their Mothers
Womb. Sin now runs in a Blood, and flies higher and higher instead of abating
its first Vigor, it is Morbus epacmasticus, epidemicus and contagiousus; as
Symptoms still heighten, it is a catching and contagious Disease seizing upon
those that come near such as are infected with it, Flee from Sin
(Ecclesiasticus 21. 2.) as from the face of a Serpent, for if thou come near,
it will bite thee, the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lion slaying the
Sons of men; This was the poison that lay under the teeth of the old Serpent
the Devil, when he bit our first Parents: Nay Sin is ( Morbus compositus) so
complicated a Disease, that all other diseases are indeed but the Symptoms of
this: Which brings me to the Sixth Particular, That Sin is not only the Souls
Sickness, but the sourse and fountain of all the Maladies and Distempers that
happen to our Bodies, and so an enemy to Body and Soul at once; and as so, not
the proper object of our Election or Choice: Have thou a (...)? Does thy head
ache? it is Sin, it may be, Pride, or Self-conceit have distended the membranes
of thy Brain. Have thou an (...)? are thine Eyes inflamed? Sin is the cause
thereof; perhaps thou have been too vain, in gadding after sinful Objects. Have
thou an (...)? -- is thy Speech taken from thee? it is Sin has struck thee
dumb; perhaps thy harkening after Lies, profane, idle and libidinous
Discourses. Have thou an (...)? do thy Loins chasten thee in the night season?
Sin is the occasion; perhaps thou have given thy youth and thy strength unto
strange women. Have thou a Volvulus intestinorum, a miserere mei, and forced to
cry out, Oh my bowels, my bowels, (as it is expressed Jer. 14. 19.) it is Sin,
perhaps thy Gluttony, Riot, and Debaucheries. Have thou a (...)? -- is thy Body
turned black and sallow, and thy beauty faded? it is probably occasioned by a
too great delight and content in admiring the excellency of thy frail
Complexion. Have thou a Paralysis? is the use of thy Limbs taken from thee?
it is Sin is the cause; perhaps thy Hands have been shut to the Poor, or thy
Feet swift to shed Blood, or to walk in the paths of ungodliness. Sin therefore
is not the object of a rational man's Choice, because it is the Souls Sickness
and the sourse of all bodily Distempers and Diseases.

Seventhly, Sin is not a sit Object to be elected, because it is the unhappy
parent of Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal Death.

By Sin, Death entered into the World, Romans 5. 12. Death is the Child of sin,
not of Nature; Nay, it destroys our Souls as well as our Bodies, The Soul that
sins shall dye; the death of Nature and the death of Grace, Sin occasioned
both; and not only so, but the death that never dies is sins Wages; it is Sin
keeps in the fire of Hell to all Eternity, that lays on those everlasting
torments prepared for the Devil and his Angels; it is sin that not only feeds
the Worm with our Bodies, but the never-dying worm with our Souls likewise; it
kindles the slames of Lust here in our hearts, and blows the coals in Hell to
torment both our bodies and souls to eternal Ages; and who can dwell with
everlasting burnings?

Lastly, Sin is not the object of a rational Man, or good Christians Choice, if
put in the balance with Afflictions, and that is the last Branch of the
Thesis, which I laid down at the beginning of my Discourse, occasioned by
Elihu's Reprehension of Job, under the notion of choosing wickedness rather than
sufferings, and this I shall demonstrate briefly and plainly, and make
Application to our selves.

My Position is this, without any Equivocation; it is the property of a good
Man to choose the greatest Affliction before the least Sin, or there is more
evil in one sin, than in all whatsoever Suffering. This appears in ten
Particulars, 1. Sin separates from God, but Affliction not. 2. Affliction is
not, Sin is evil in its self. 3. A sinful state cannot, but an afflicted may
consist with the love of God. 4. The evil of Suffering is but momentany, of Sin
everlasting. 5. We are called to Suffering, commanded by Christ to take up our
Cross, and to follow him, but not called to sin. 6. The end of Suffering is
glory, of Sin shame. 7. By suffering we lose some outward good, by Sin the
soul. 8. Suffering speaks our conformity to Christ, Sin to the Devils. 9. God
is the Author of Affliction, not of Sin; Lastly, Afflictions may be good if
sanctified to us, but not Sins. I shall not observe a strict order, as to every
one of these Heads, but single out the chiefest and most useful for a mixed
Audience.

1. To choose Affliction is a hard choice, for Affliction is not good in its
self, but however it may be useful to us; happy is the man that endures
temptations, and chastnings, the Scripture speaks in many places; but happy is
the man that commits Iniquity, has not the patronage of one single Text: David
could say upon trial, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes; but he never said, It is good for
me that I have sinned, unlearned thy Precepts, or broke thy Commandments: David
pleased himself in being afflicted, but not in thinking he had sinned, as is
visible enough in his seven Penitential Psalms; and particularly if we compare
the 2 Samuel 10. chap. 11. ver. with Psalm 51. we shall find David reckoning his
sins. as the 1, 2, 3. greatest punishment in all the World; David did not first
pray, that his House might be delivered from the fury of the Sword, or that his
Wives might not be violated before his face, his Children might not be Rebels;
the good man passed by these things as temporal and trivial punishments, but he
cries upon his Sins, his Sins, his Sins, three times in a breath, Psalm. 51. 1.
as so many haunting Devils that disturbed his rest. When Paul, of a Persecutor,
became a persecuted Apostle, and was delivered from his sins, he was
immediately so ravished with the love of his deliverer, and the joy of his
deliverance, that he cared not to be delivered from any misery besides; he even
gloried in tribulation, as very useful both to exercise and feed his patience,
as Romans 5. 3. Acts 21. 13. he was ready, not to be bound only, but dye for the
Lord Jesus. Sickness and Plunder, Banishment and Bonds, and every kind of
Persecution, are heavy burdens to the Flesh, but light, being wighed in the
balance with the pressures and miseries of Sin and Wickedness; when God the
Father of Spirits afflicts his Sons and Daughters, he does it that they may be
partakers of his Holiness, as Heb. 12. 10, 11. but Sin is the sting of all
afflictions, it is the suffering as Evil doers that keeps men from being
Martyrs, but they are happy who suffer in a good cause, for even hereunto are
ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we
should tread in his steps who did no sin, neither was guile found in his lips.
Moses well understood himself when he chose rather to be afflicted with the
people of God, than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25. So
the old Martyrs, Will you have a Prison, or deny your Savior and your Lord?
Will you burn in this fire, or commit that Idolatrous Act? Will you dye by a
Halter, or forsake the Faith? Oh, say they, give us Prisons, Fires, Axes,
Gibbets, Wheels, Lions, all the Torments invented by Men or Devils, rather than
we will comply with Sin and Wickedness.

This is a Point necessary in all, but especially these Times, wherein men
boast of a Zeal for God, but not according to Knowledge; and seek to avoid
future possible Afflictions by present unlawful Actions: As in the Duke of
York's Case, no man that understands the Scriptures, and will not suffer his
Reason by passion to be ecclipsed, can believe it lawful by Gods Laws, to bar
any man of his Right of Succession to a Crown (of all temporal Rights, the
greatest) to avoid future probable Inconveniences, in Sacred and Civil
Administrations; nor do I believe that any the framers of this Bill would think
it a piece of Justice to have their Children (or in default of Issue) their
Brethren in the flesh, thus debarred of their Rights, for different modes of
Worship from what is now Legally Established.

That which is simply evil, may not for any good be done; (the Case we are now
upon) if Saint Paul, or the Holy Ghost (speaking by him) understood the
Christian Religion, it is not lawful to tell an officious Lie for the glory of
God, as Job 13. 7. Will ye speak wickedly for God? or talk deceitfully for him?
If not for the glory of God, then not for an inferior End, not for the saving
of a Life, or the peace of a State. Nay, (as Anselm, Austin, and others
observe) we should rather hazard the Salvation of mankind than commit a sin to
save it: If St. Paul say true, (and it is hard to say he does not) Damnation is
due to such as do a present evil, upon the prospect of a future good, Romans 3.
8. Suppose there were Presidents to justify a Bill of this nature by the Laws
of England, shall humane Laws evacuate the Laws of God? How often has
Jack-Presbyter (the framer of that Bill) pleaded that God must be obeyed rather
than man, etc. Let him stand to his own Argument, or give a Reason for the why
not? it is strange to me, that men calling themselves Protestants -- can be
guilty of such Votes as these, which are disowned by the true Protestant
Religion by Law established in this best of Reformed Churches. I am neither
Papist nor Popishly affected, but I assert a true Protestant Principle founded
on Holy Writ, that Sin is not to be elected if there be no other expedient left
to avoid being Persecuted: As for the distinction which some make, that we may
not do evil that good may come, that is not for a private good end, but we may
for a public benefit; I have not so learned Christ, I thank God, and I desie
the Jesuitical, and Presbyterian Brotherhood, to give me one Scripture Text, or
any one sound Reason to justify that Distinction aforesaid; and till that be
done, let the lawful Successor be Zealot for the interest either of Kirk, or
Conclave; as I will not read Mass, nor swallow the Covenant, so I will not
Rebel against the Ordinance of God, but leave God to govern his own World, Who
restrains the spirit of Princes, and is wonderful among the Kings of the earth.
God, who turns the hearts of Kings as the rivers of Water, as it pleases
himself: the God who remembers mercy in his wrath, and punishes less than our
sins deserved; and this was the judgment and practice of the Saints and
Churches Apostolically Primitive. A Parisian Masacre, a Guiscan League, a
Powder Treason, a Covenant Reformation, a Spanish Inquisition House, and an
English High Court of Justice, the fighting for Reformation, and bidding
Defiance to Heaven, by whom Kings reign; these are Abominations so scandalous
and Antichristian, as do nonplus Hyperbolies, and silence Invention; and next
to these there is scarce any thing more Criminal than the equally sinful and
ridiculous Bill against the Succession of his Royal Highness, (in case he
survive the King) to the Crown and Scepter of this Nation. I wish the King may
outlive his Brother, and put a Period to this Question; but I believe the
framers of that Bill had a farther Design than the Dukes person, and am clearly
of opinion, that there is both a Popish Plot, and a Presbyterian one at this
time against the Church, or the King, or both in Conjunction, and has been
more or less so, ever since the Reformation; and I am heartily sorry, that
since Papists and Presbyterians call themselves Christians, that by their
Seditious Principles and Actions, they should rather seem Proselytes to
Mahomet, (the Victorious) than to the Humble, Innocent and Persecuted Jesus;
and yet that the latter Saints should be so far insensible of this, as to call
all that will not concur with them in their actions, Tantyvies, and Tories, and
French Pensioners, is very insolently Ridiculous.

2. Afflictions are the Exercises of our Graces, as Faith, Patience, Humility,
and Charity, in which Christ in his life ( who was a man of Sorrows and
acquainted with Griefs) was pleased to be exemplary to us, and we should and
ought to look up to this Jesus who endured the Cross, etc. Heb. 12. 2. it is an
excellent Expression of Charles the Martyr to his Son, (our Sovereign) this
advantage you have above other Princes, that you have begun, and now spent some
years in the experience of Troubles, and exercise of Patience, wherein Piety,
and all Virtues are commonly better planted to a thriving, as Trees set in
Winter, than in the warmth and serenity of Times: He gives instance in David
and Rehoboam, the one prepared by many Afflictions for a flourishing Kingdom,
the other unsoftned by the unparalled prosperity of the Court of Solomon; and
this is indeed the great advantage of Afflictions above earthly Greatness, that
this last makes us Proud, and Insolent, and to say, who is the Lord? and by the
other our graces are exercised and increased; Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, says St. James, but we had never heard of any such thing but for his
afflictions, and we have heard of Job, says, though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him; but this was the fruit of his patience in suffering. St.
Stephen's Charity had never been upon Record for our imitation, but for his
Persecution. Had the old Army of Martyrs took up Arms against their Emperors
(being Heathens) instead of being Patient, and Charitable, and Humble, and
Meek, like men that understood Christ's Religion, they had neither been
Presidents to us, nor found for themselves a place in Heaven. The assaults of
Affliction may be terrible, like Sampson's Lion, but they yield much sweetness
to those, who can encounter, and overcome; who know how to outlive the
witherings of their Gourds, without Discontent or Peevishness whilst they may
yet converse with God, as the Royal Martyr Charles the First, rarely expresses
it.

3. Afflictions wean us from the World, and bring us nearer to God, and Sin
makes us earthly minded, and makes a separation between God and us: The
sufferings of the Saints are the sum of Christian Philosophy, they are sent to
wean us from the vanities and affections of this World, and create in us strong
desires after Heaven, whilst God here treates us rudely, that we may long to be
in our Country, where God shall be our Portion, and Angels our Companions, and
Christ our perpetual Feast, and never ceasing Joy the entertainment of all
injured and patient Sufferers. Oh Death! how bitter art thou to a man that is
at ease and rest in his Possessions? but he that is uneasy in his Body, and
unquiet in his Fortunes, vexed in his Person, and discomposed in his Designs,
who here finds no pleasure or rest, he will be glad and rejoice to fix his
heart where he shall have the full of his desires, and what can only make him
partaker of real Happiness. As long as the waters of Persecution are upon the
earth, (the Allusion is pardonable I conceive) so long we dwell in the Ark, but
where the Land is dry, the Dove its self will be tempted to a wandering course
of life, and never return to her house of safety; this blessed effect
afflictions had upon Job, in making him bid adieu to the World, Naked came I
out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither, etc. and the same
effect Affliction wrought in the late Martyred King of England (who as he
imitated the Piety, so he had the troubles of David (I shall not want (says
he) the heavy and envyed Crowns of this World, when my God has mercifully
crowned and consummated his Graces with glory, and exchanged the shadows of my
earthly Kingdoms among men, for the substance of that heavenly Kingdom with
himself. Thus Afflictions wean us from the World and bring us nearer to God,
but Sin and the World, are a Kin, and of a blood, and Sin is a departure from
God; the Lord says to sinners, you are departed and gone, your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it.

4. We are full of Worldly mindedness, adhaesit pavimento, as David spoke; but
in another sense, our soul cleaves to the dust: we all complain the World is
naught, and so it is, the whole World lies in wickedness, and yet as bad as it
is, it finds an entertainment in our hearts proportionably to our outward
Prosperities; the faster Riches, and Honors, and other Vanities increase, the
more eagerly we pursue and dote on these Transitory things. It Is Affliction
that takes off their seeming pleasantness, and imbitters the lusciousness of
them to our taste; that we have any apprehension at all of the Vanity of the
World, is due to those vexations of Spirit, that are interwoven with it.

5. To be innocent and to be Afflicted, is the body and soul of Christianity
its self; I John your Brother, and partaker of tribulation, and in the kingdom
and patience of Jesus, said good St. John. These were the Titles and Ornaments
of his profession, that is to say, I John your fellow Christian, for the former
descant this is the plain Song. Love is the Soul of Christianity, and the soul
of Love is Suffering; God has given a single Blessing to other graces, but a
double to this; it is a double kindness we receive at Gods hands, first to be
Innocent, and then to be persecuted with Jesus Christ. The Church is like Moses
his Bush, when it is all on fire it is not at all consumed, but made full of
Miracle, full of Splendour, and full of God; and unless we can find something
that God cannot turn into Joy, if he so please, we have reason, not only with
the well instructed Heathens, to be patient under, but (with St. Paul) to
rejoice exceedingly in Tribulation, not to think a Fiery Trial strange, but
rejoice that we are partakers of Christ's Sufferings; as St. Peter (Paul's
beloved Brother and our fellow Soldier under the banner of the Cross,) exhorts
us, and proportionably his brother James, My Brethren, Count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse Temptations. Take the Prophets, says St. James, as an example
of Suffering Afflictions; but Jesus Christ is beyond all these, for he suffered
for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. These things
considered, is it not a barbarous thing, for a grave Society of men to press
their Sovereign wholly to lay aside the Rightful Successor of his Crown, by the
Laws of Heaven, which is the doing evil, to commit a known Sin, to secure
thereby the Protestant Religion, that is, (that good may thence come) or rather
that the Zeal-drunk Presbyterian, who prefers Rebellion before Martyrdom, may
not run the hazard of showing himself no Christian, by remonstrating against
suffering Persecution? A Papist cannot be a worse King than a Nero, or
Dioclesian, and when St. Paul said we should stand to our Faith, to imagine he
intended we should stand to our Arms, is a new and strange Interpretation. But
the Mischief is deeper yet, for we cannot Disinherit this Gentleman but by a
known Principle of the Court of Rome, That Grace gives a a title to Dominion,
and accordingly the Pope disposes of an Heretic Kingdom, and bars the
Successor, and gives it to another Man of his own nomination, and to the next
of the Line, if he be of the Romish Persuasion: and with what Conscience can
these men ( mutatis mutandis) press the King to an imitation of the Pope of
Rome, whilst they condemn in this very point his unjust Usurpation? When St.
Paul preached Obedience to the Higher Powers, and the Primitive Christians
prayed that the Father might be succeeded by the Son, or the next of the Blood,
and Line; could they be supposed to mean unless he were of this or that
Religion, and then it should be lawful to Disinherit them? He that maintains
such a point in a Parliamentary Session, and at the same time calls himself a
Christian, is not so well qualified for Westminster as Bedlam. The Doctrine of
taking away the Right of Succession came from Rome, the Pope had it from the
Devil without question, for St. Peter his pretended Predecessor, taught no such
thing, but quite contrary exhorts all Christians (and so includes the
Presbyterian) to endure the Fiery Trial, and rejoice in being partakers of
Christ's sufferings; now Christ came to give us an Heavenly, not to take away
any man's earthly Crown, and accordingly, as he knew no Sin, so he underwent all
sorts of Affliction. He that says I will not have this man to Reign, because a
Papist, or a Puritan; or says, this is the Heir, let us by all means bar him
of Possession, is a much worse Christian than he that says, It is the Lord,
let him do as it pleases him, I will bear his Indignation because I have
sinned against him; This is the present Question under debate, with reference
to the Succession, and not the Fighter for Reformation, but the Patient under
God's Correction, is the best Defender of Christ Religion, I can, and will
prove against all the Papists and Sectaries in Christendom. I ask the
Presbyterian these Questions, and request an Answer to them. 1. Does the wrath
of man work the Righteousness of God? 2. Does the Savior of the World (who
came to save us from Sin, not from Affliction) stand in need of the sinful man
to promote his Religion, or the Interest of his Kingdom? 3. Did Christ teach us
by his Example or Doctrine, to prefer Rebellion before Martyrdom, and is not
the contrary Position equal to a Mathematical Demonstration? 4. Can the Pope in
Cathedra, or Pope Populus in Parliament, by voting Evil good, and Good evil,
sanctify an unlawful action done with a good intention? If these things be so,
I require him to prove it, if not, St. Paul's Doctrine will be found Billa vera
in the Court of Heaven, That we may not commit a present known Sin to avoid a
future probable Persecution, all the Bills, Votes and Resolves of Froward men
to the contrary notwithstanding. I understand not the over-looking the
lawfulness to pass to the expedience of the thing, for Strafford lost his Head
to please the Faction, and then it was Voted on again, by making it no
President for the Peers of the Kingdom. Suppose it be his Majesty's judgment,
and persuasion (as he has declared) that he cannot give consent to the Bill of
Exclusion; Is it either Religion or good Manners (my Brethren) to persuade our
lawful Sovereign against St. Paul's advice (which the Presbyterians quote
sometimes to serve their own Interest and Turn) Whatsoever is not of Faith is
Sin? Have not Princes Consciences as well as other men, and may they not as
well plead their Judicium discretionis, who are only responsable to the God of
Heaven, as any private person, who is, and ought to be accountable both to God
and Man. Is it not sufficient for his Majesty to say (what his Father
Exemplified) better one Man unjustly perish, than the People be displeased, is
a fallacious Maxim, especially considering the late King's conclusion hereupon;
I see it a bad exchange to wound a man's own Conscience, thereby to salve State
sores, to calm the storms of Popular Discontents, by stirring up a Tempest in a
man's own bosom. I hope the Commons of England will never arrive to that
Insolence, as to answer with Bradshaw to their Sovereign, your Reasons, Sir,
are not to be heard against the Supreme Jurisdiction of this Nation; and yet
they have lately huss'd their Brethren, and made them do Penance for being
Jurymen, and pay excessive Fees for no crime, under the notion of Abhorrers of
Petitioning. And now we are upon the Petitioning point, I remember a passage in
Mr. Calamies Sermon Preached in 1645. at Michael Basing-Shaw London, to the
Lord Mayor, and his Brethren, when the Solemn League and Covenant was Renewed
with Prayer and Fasting.

You have (says Holderforth) shot one Arrow already, shoot another, and if
that miscarry, shoot another; He that cuts down a Tree, though he cut it not
down at the first or second blow, yet the first and second blow, prepare to the
speeding blow that cuts it down: You have delivered one Petition, deliver
another; if that miscarry deliver another, the speeding Petition will come at
last. That is in plain English, Worry out your Prince with perpetual Noise and
Clamours, give him no rest till he submit to your Requests. What this Fellow
Preached in 1645. has been practiced for two years past, yet must not I say
so, during the sitting of the Commons, for fear of a Reprimand in such language
as was never given a Priest by Imperial Princes. But I bless God, I have the
spirit of an English man, and my Knees, due to God and the King, shall never be
yielded up to Usurpers, come what will, come Hanging, Burning, or any other, or
all the Torments that exercised the Patience of the Primitive Christians, and
herein I show my self a Protestant, whose great Principle it is, rather than
Sin, to choose Affliction.

FINIS.

