THE QUAERIES Examined, OR, FIFTY ANTI-QUERIES Seriously Propounded to the
PEOPLE called PRESBYTERIANS.

Occasioned by The Publication of FIFTY QUERIES, Gathered out of the Works of
Mr. RICH. BAXTER.

By J. B.

Wherein the Principal Allegations usually brought to support Infant Baptism
are Discovered to be Insufficient.

By T. G.

PROVE. XIX. 21. There be many Devices in a Man's heart, nevertheless the Council
of the LORD that shall stand.

Mr. Baxter more Reas. p. 69. The true Method of one that would Arrive at
certainty, and not deceive himself and others, is to begin at the bottom, and
discern things in their nearest and most certain Evidences, and afterward to
try the By-Objections as he is able: And not t^ Por^first upon the Objected
difficulties, and judge of all the cause by those.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord 1676.

The QUAERIST Examined. OR, Fifty Anti-Queries seriously Propounded to the
People called Presbyterians, etc.
Presbyterian. Query 1. WHether under the Covenant of Works, if Adam had not
sinned, Innocents should not have been holy to God, and so Members of the
Innocent Church or Kingdom of God?


Baptist. Antiquery 1. Whether this be not a groundless and unlearned Query?
for seeing the word Church, as used in the Holy Scriptures, signifies A People
Called out, namely, from another people, out of what people should they have
been called, had the whole world been in the state of innocence? And seeing no
man can tell whether any man should have had Authority committed to him in
matters of Religion, or whether God should immediately have exercised his own
Government; Neither yet in what capacity children should have come into the
world, whether endowed with knowledge or otherwise; whether therefore it
concern or become any man, to let his fancy rove about in such an unknown and
unknowable case. And thereupon, 1. Suggest how Infants should be concerned or
not concerned in matters of Religion? And how can any thing be concluded from
such an imagination, as imitable for us about Infant Church Membership? And
whether we are not like to have a bad superstructure, when the foundation is a
mere fancy?


Presbyterian. Query 2. Whether God was any more obliged to order it so, that
the Children of Righteous Parents should have been born with all the
Perfections of their Parents, and enjoyed the same Privileges, than he was
obliged in making the Covenant of Grace, to grant that Infants should be of the
same Society with their Parents, and have the Immunities of that Society.


Baptist. Antiquery 2. More obliged: Whether it be not in vain to suppose, that
God was obliged at all in either of those cases, seeing he is absolutely free
to do whatsoever he pl^aseth with his own? And what ground have you to believe,
that some Infants were more concerned then others in m^tters of Religion, by
virtue of any Covenant made with Adam? And what society was Infants capable of
with Adam, by virtue of any Covenant made with him after his fall? C^rtis the
Scripture is silent as to these matters,


Presbyterian. Query 3. Whether we have any reason, when the design of
Redemption is the magnifying of Love and Grace, to think that Love and Grace
are so much less under the Gospel to the Members of Christ, then under the Law
to the Members or Seed of Adam, as that then all the Seed should have partaken
of the same Blessings with their righteous Parents, and now they shall all be
turned out of the Society, whereof the Parents are Members?


Baptist. Antiquery 3. Whether you your selves do not lessen the magnifying
Love of God in Man's Redemption, whilst in respect of Infants you would
restrain it to the seed of such Parents as are in Covenant with God, yea to
such Infants as partake with them in Practicals of Religion, which you seem to
intend by the Blessings you speak of. But who denies any Blessing to Infants
under the Gospel, which was their portion under the Law made with Adam? And how
were Infants Members of the society of the seed of Adam, more then of the
society of the Baptists? show the difference if you can.


Presbyterian. Query 4. Whether though our Innocence be lost, Parents be not
Parents still, and have not as much interest in Children, and whether God have
reversed this natural Order? and if God change not his Order therein, whether
Parents be not as capable of consenting to grace for their children, as they
were of being innocent for them?


Baptist. Antiquery 4. Whether there be any that question whether Parents be
Parents still, or what need of such Enquiries? Or what do you mean by Gods
natural Order? If you mean natural Religion, then show us what Infants are
bound to in matters of Religion by nature, or what this natural Order ties
Parents to do to their Infants, upon the account of Practicals in Religion,
which we omit? And whether Parents could be innocent for their Infants, if
their Infants were not innocent as well as they? and if not, how should their
consenting to grace be the Child's consent? And whether it will not as well hold
retro, that the Parents consenting to wickedness is the Child's consent? And
whether this do not give the Parents the power to save or damn their Infants?
And can such Councils stand with the Wisdom, Justice, or Mercy of God?


Presbyterian. Query 5. Whether Infants be not included in the first Edition of
the Covenant of Grace made with Adam? (Genesis 3. 15.) Whether unless it can be
proved that Infants are none of the Woman's S^ed, we must not take that
Fundamental Promise to extend to Infants? And was she not thereby obliged to
l^st her self, and all her Infant-Progeny in the Redeemer's Army, against the
Proclaimed Enemy, and to teach her Posterity to do the like; And did they not
continue visible Members of Christ's Army and Kingdom, till such time as they
violated that Fundamental Obligation, and as the Seed of the Serpent, fought
against Christ and his Kingdom, for Satan and his Kingdom?


Baptist. Antiquery 5. Whether the Baptists do not as clearly assert Infants
Right to the Grace of God in the first Edition of the Covenant, made with Adam,
as any whatsoever? And if by the Seed of the Woman you understand all that are
saved, who then questions Infants belonging to that seed? But where is the
Woman bound to List her Infants in the Redeemers Army, or where shall we find
them visible Members of Christ's Army in the first Edition of the Covenant? Are
not these mere words without Authority of Scripture? or where did Infants ever
fight for, or against the Serpent? and if not, why do you make them the Seed of
the Serpent, and Fighters against the Kingdom of Christ? And if you say, you
speak not these things of Infants quatalis; Then whether you have not
transferred the Question, and so it is impertinent?


Presbyterian. Query 6. Whether in that first Proclamation of Grace to fallen
man, or in the first Promise of Redemption to sinners, Genesis 3. 15. An Infant of
the Woman be not Promised to be General, and Head of the Church? And whether
the Promise of an Infant Head, does not declare Gods Mind, that he will have
Infants Members, because the Head is the principal Member, etc.


Baptist. Antiquery 6. Whether Christ in his Infancy was not as truly God as
Man? and whether there be any Parity between the Infants you speak of and
Christ, seeing he was able even then to vanqu^sh the greatest Adversary?

And if by the Redeemed Church, you mean the whole number of the saved, who
doubted but Infants were of the Redeemed Church? But how does it follow, that
all that are to be saved, ought to be mitted to practical Ordinances in the
visible Church? seeing then all Infants (for ought you know) have the same
right, which yet you d^ny; but why so? are you sure they are not within the
verge of Christ's Redemption?

And though Christ was once an Infant, yet where do you find tha^ he was then
a Member of the Gospel Church? Was he not born under the L^w? Gal. 4 4. and
born King of the Jews, Mat. 2 2. and according to the state of the Jew^sh
Church, an Infant migh be both a Member and a Prince; And was not the Ki^gly
Office in Israel a Type of Christ? But what is this to he order and state of
the Church under the Gospel? And fur^her, though Christ an Infant was bo^n Head
of the Church as aforesaid, yet in (...) Infant st^te, he did not intermeddle
with the exercise of the least part of h^s Authority. And then whether it be
not more r^tional to say, that seeing Christ the Head of the Church did not
act^ally poss^ss, or at least not use any part of that Power, as an Infant, or
while he was an Infant? Its therefore unreasonable, that Infants (supposn ^h^y
were as truly bo^n Memb^rs of his Church, as he wa^ born King of the Jews)
should be concerned in the actual possession of Ordi^ances in Infancy?

And what if we grant that Infants may be disciples by designation, a Christ
was King, Priest and Prophet by designation, (^ho^gh the Cases not al^ke easy
to prove) yet seeing Christ was not a Prophet (as you confess) in actu
exercito, how came you to be so bold to bring Infants to the ex^rcise of
Baptism? And why can you not rather content your selves with the designation or
ded^ca^ion of your Infan^s to God by Prayer, and make them disciples in actu
exercito, when they are able? And whether you may not as well repute them thus
among disciples, and as safely conclude them to be in the Covenant of Grace,
and of the Redeemed Church without Baptism, as without the Lords Supper? Since
its said, Except ye eat of the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you; as well as it is said, Except a man be born again of
water, etc. he cannot enter in^o the Kingdom of God. And whether Dr. Tailor, a
Learned Pedobaptist do not ingeniously confess, That the Wit of Man is not able
to show a difference in these cases?


Presbyterian. Query 7. Why are those two Titles put on those two distinct
Generations. (sc^l. the Posterity of Cain, and the P^st^rity of Seth) calling
one the Sons of God, and the others the Daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2. But that
the one was a Generation s^parated from the Church from their Birth, (their
Progenitors being cast out before them) when the other was the seea of Saines
not cast out, etc.


Baptist. Antiqu. 7. Whether this Text Genesis 6. 2. be not ambiguous, insomuch
that your own Doctors are not agreed about the Exposition thereof? But
supposing it to respect the Posterities of Cain and Se^h, yet whether it can be
meant of Infants, seeing they committed none of these si^s, in taking Wives,
etc. And whether your Exposition do not damn all Infants proceeding from Cain^s
Posterity, and consequently all the Infants of all Nations which profess not
the true Religion?

And supposing that the Infants of godly Parents are in some sense more
immediately related to the Church, then the Infants of Pagans by reason of the
Prayers and Designation of their Parents, and the opportunities of Education?
yet what makes this for any actual Participation of Ordinances in the Church,
and what one Ordinance did the Infants of these Sons of God partake of? And
Since the Scripture is wholly silent of any such thing, whether this do not more
strongly conclude against Infant Baptism then for it? And whether it be needful
to say any thing to the latter part of this Query, seeing we grant all, and
something more then this Text will prove, though we deny them actual right to
Ordinances? And whether the common or equal overthrow of these Generations, in
respect of the Infants of both, do not evidently show, that as to the business
of their salvation, they were in the same condition? And then whether it be
safe for us to conclude, that the wickedness of any Progenitors have any
further effect upon the Infant-ch^ldren then to expose them to external
calamities, seeing Christ died to redeem them from the condemnation brought
upon them by Adam? Romans 5. 18.


Presbyterian. Query 8. Whether it was not the same Church be^or^, and after
Abraham's time; that was called the Tents of Sem? Genesis 19. 27. Was not the
Jewish Church denominated the Tents of Sem? And does it not hence appear, that
the Church Priviledges of that People did not begin with or from Abraham, but
that they were b^for^? And how was it the same Church that was of S^m, and of
Abraham, if it had not the same sort of Members or Materials? etc.


Baptist. Antiqu. 8. Though it be true, that the Church is the same in some
sense, from the beginn^ng of the world to the end; yet whether it may not truly
be said also, not to be the same in diverse respects? And whether the Cov^nant
as made with No^h, Genesis 9. do not differ from the Cov^nant as ma^e with Adam,
though both was made with all mank^nd, and is affirmed to be the C^venant of
Grace by Mr. Baxter. And whether there was not yet a further difference b^tween
these and the Covenant as made with Abraham? Genesis 17. the former being made
with all manking, and never yet abrogated, (as says Mr. Baxter). The other was
made with Abraham and his Seed, distinct from the rest of Mankind, but as they
should be Profelited thereto? And though the Church may be denominated the
Tents of Shem, b^th before and after Abraham, yet whether this conclude there
was to be no alteration of the state of the Church under these times
respectively? And whether in any of the Tents of Shem, before Abraham's time, so
much as any one Infant can be found admitted to the Practical Part of any
Ordinance in the Church, which was peculiar to her as such (for as touching
Prayer, it is a moral duty, and to be made for all men.) And whether thus
boldly to suppose a thing without the least show of proof, be not a plain
begging the main thing in Question?

And though it be never so true, that the universal redeemed Church consist of
the same Materials in all Ages, yet whether it be not evident that that God
made a difference, as to the time of dispensing Ordinances to them? As first no
Practical Ord^nance or (...) dispensed to any Infant that we read of till
Abraham's time; and though then Circumcision was ordained for Males, yet not for
all the Male Children, for all under eight days of Age were prohibited, and yet
you grant they were in that Covenant, nor any Rite at all for the Females, who
yet were of the same Church? And whether under Moses they were not admitted to
other Rites also, as the Pass^over, Sacrifices and other holy Feast, of the
Jews? We therefore ask you why the Infants of converted Gentiles are not in as
good a condition, without any Rite or Ceremony, as the Infants of all the
faithful from Adam to Abraham? And whether those Infants before Abraham were
not a happy as the Infants of Abraham? And then does it not follow, that the
Infants of faithful Gentiles, are as happy without Circumcision, or any other
Rite or ^eremony whatsoever, as Abrahants was under a Ceremony, seeing God has
not ohliged them to any in the days of the Gospel, o^ since the Ab^ogation of
the Law and Circumcision?


Presbyterian. Query 9. Whether if we could show no written Law or Promise at
first constituting the Duty, or granting the Privilege of Churchmember ship,
it were the least disparagement to our Cause, as long as we can show those
following, Laws which presuppose this? If Moses at the end of that 2000 years
the Church of God had bin without any written Law, found all the Infants of
Church Members in Possession of this b^n^fit (...) what n^ed was there of a new
Law about it? Or why should God promise it as a new thing?


Baptist. Antiqu. 9. Whether if there be any such Law, you would not have she
wed us where it is, longere this day? and whethen you do not now grant in
effect there is no such written Law? And what n^ed you thus to query, seeing we
deny no lawful thing to Infants, to be done for them by their godly Parents,
but only oppose your doing that for which you have no Law?


Presbyterian. Query 10. Whether there being certain Proof in Scripture of
Infants Church Membership, but none except that before, alleged from Genesis 3.
that makes any mention of the beginning of it, but all speaking of it as no new
thing; we have not great reason to assign its beginning, which from Genesis 3. is
before spoken of?


Baptist. Antiqu. 10. Why do you say that Genesis 3. 15. makes mention of Infants
Church Membership, (otherwise then what we allow) Is here the least hint of
your mode of making Infants Church Members, that is, does this place bid you
admit them to any Ordinance? As for the gracious Covenant here made with Adam.
do we not grant that it extends to Infants, yea, we say with Mr. Baxter, it was
never abrogated?


Presbyterian. Query 11. Is it not unquestionable, that the Covenant of Grace
made to Abraham the Father of the Faithful, comprehended Infants for
Church Members? And was (...) not the same with that Genesis 3. 1. 5. But in some
things clearlier opened? Were not both these the Covenant of Grace and free
Justification by Faith in the Redeemer? And did not the Covenant made to
Abraham and his Seed, comprehend Infants? And should not the same Promise,
expressed more concisely be expounded by the same expressed more sully?


Baptist. An. 11. Though it be unque stionable that the Covenant of Grace did
extend to Infants, Genesis 3. 15. as well as in Abraham's time, yet there was a
vast difference in respect of ceremonies. And whether the difference between
the Baptists and P^dobaptists be not chi^fly (if not only) about imposing
Ceremonies upon Infants? And whether it be not evident that what Ceremonies the
Word of God did even assign to Infants, we allow them, respecting the time of
their duration, and only oppose your imposing Ceremonies upon Infants, for
which you can assign no Authority in the Holy Scriptures, as is confessed by
many Pedobaptists. See Mr. Baxters Cure p. 7.


Presbyterian. Query 12. Whether (though the Hebrews had their Peculiarities)
it be at all credible, that the Infants of that one small Country only should
be so differently de^lt with by God, from all the World else, even Enoch's,
Noah'^, Sem's, and all from Adam to the end of the World, that these Infants
only should be Church Members, and n^ others.


Baptist. Antiqu. 12. Whether this Query (as indeed almost all the rest) do not
mis the true state of the Case, seeing the Baptists may and do in a good sense
acknowledge Infants to be related to the Church. viz. by Redemption, Pious
Dedication to God. etc. And seeing you grant the Hebrew, had their
Peculiarities, in what thing could it be but in external Rites and Ceremonies,
especially concerning Infants; And show us, if you can, any one Nation under
Heaven, from the beginning of the World to this day, to whom God gave any Law
to bring their Infants to any Rites either Legal or Evangelical. And since
Circumcision was forcibly put upon Infants, we ask whether you be able to
prove, that any Person whatsoever are to be forced to Baptism, which Augustine
tells us. Infants do strive against with great crying, from whence he infers
they have no Faith. Lib. de Pe^cat. Mer. and Remis. chap. 28.


Presbyterian. Query 13. What can be more absurd, then to maintain a Transient
Fact (as Mr. T. has done) making Infants Church Members, without any Law,
Promise, ^r Covenant-Gra^t of God giving them R^ght? Whether a Gift that was
never given be not a contradiction? (V. p. 32, 35* 39 44, 45, 151.) And if
there was any such Promise, or Covenant-Grant of Infant's Church Membership,
when, or where was it revoked?


Baptist. Antiqu. 13. Whether these things be surely suggested against Mr. T,
and whether you ought not to have set down his opinion in his own words? and
whether he does not mainly oppose himself against Mr. Baxter's Pretended Law
for Infant Church Membership and Baptism, whiles yet he denies not Infants a
saving Promise, or the Promise of saving Prepriety in God. Antipedobapt. 3.
Part. p. 33. And whether that Book was ever answered by Mr. Baxter, or ever
will by any other?


Presbyterian. Query 14. Was it only the Infants of the Hebrews, or of those
that were at their absolute dispose, that were Church Members? Were not the
Infants of free Proselites Church Members too?


Baptist. Antiqu. 14, What need of this Query? who doubts but that as many
others as became Jews by being Proselited to the Law, were Circumcised
according to the Law? But where do yo^ find, that any, either Jews or Gentiles,
when they were baptized, had any, obligation to baptize their children and
servants also?


Presbyterian. Query 15. Was it not then the Duty of all the Nations round
about, that could have Informati^n of the Jewish Religion, to engage
themselves, and their Children to God by Circumcision?

And did not many of the People in Hester's time become Jews, Hest. 8. 17. who
yet were not under their Government? And is it not well known, that this was to
be circumcised, they and their little ones, (as the Proselites were) and so to
keep the Law of Moses?

And whether the circumcised Servants of Israel, sold away to another Nation,
and so separated from the Civil state of Israel, did eo nomine cease to be
Church Members, though they for sook not God? And ^o of the Infants, if they
were sold in Infancy? And so whether Infants might not be Church Members, that
were not of the Jews Commonwealth?


Baptist. Antiqu. 15. Although other Nations had the liberty to become Jews,
yet whether they were under such an obligation, as that they must become Jews,
or else not be saved, is worthy consideration; and whether the contrary will
not be found true, when the case of Cornelius, Act. 10. and of the Gentiles,
Romans 2. are duly considered, whereas the one is accepted as fearing God and
working Righteousness, as much as the Jew upon the account of his Jewish
Worship? And the other Gentiles generally, who did by Nature the things
contained in the Law, were counted the Circumcision, so as to judge the Jew,
who only had the Circumcision in the flesh? and not only so, but so as to be
accepted of God, as far (at least) as the Righteousness of the Law would avail
the Jew? And whether the Infants of these devout Gentiles was not free from any
obligation to Circumcision, or any other external Ceremony? And whether there
be not an evident difference between the Law and the Gospel in this, the one
being fitted to the Jewish Nation only, so as to be capable of an orderly
observation there only? And the Gospel fitted sor the observation of all
Nations equally, and consequently all Nations equally obliged to the full and
orderly Profession thereof?


Presbyterian. Query 16. Were not the Israelites Children Members of the
universal visible Church, as well as of the Congregation of Israel?

As he that is a Member of the City is a Member of the Kingdom and a part of a
part, is a part of the whole; so was not ever member of the Jews Church also a
member of Gods universal Church?


Baptist. Ant. 16. Whether it be well said to call the universal Church
visible, And whether the universal Church did not contain many thousands such,
as Job, Cornelius, etc, who were neither Jews by Nature nor Religion? And
whether no Infants might be said to be Members of the universal Church, who
were not Members of the Jewish Church? and if not, how shall they be saved,
seeing Christ is only the Savior of his body finally?


Presbyterian. Query 17. Was there ever any true Church, or Ecclesiastical
Worshipping Society appointed by God in all the World since the Fall, but the
Church of Christ? Were not Infants therefore either Members of Christ's Church,
or of no Church of Gods Institution? Was not Moses Christ's Usher, and Moses
Church and Christ's Church one according to God's Institution?


Baptist. Antiqu. 17. Whether this Query be not either captious, or else
impertin^nt? for though it should be granted, that the Church of Christ was the
same in some sense from the beginning, yet who knows not that the time and way
for admission of the Members thereof to external Ceremonies, was not always the
same? And who doubts but the Church was always of Gods Institution? But does it
therefore follow, that the Ordinances Instituted therein, belongs to Infants?
might they not have the Passover, as well as Circumcision, in the Mosaical
Church, and yet have neither the Lords Supper nor Baptism in the Christian
Church? you deny them the one, why may not we as well deny the other?


Baptist. Query 18. Whether was Abraham made a Member of the Church by
Circumcision, or circumcised because a Member of the Church? The like of
Infants born in his House?

And how can the ceasing of Circumcision prove Infants Church Membership
ceased, any more then it can prove their Church Membership began with
Circumcision; or that Women were not Church Members, because not circumcised;
or that all Israel was unchurched in the Wilderness, when they were
uncircumcised for forty years?


Baptist. Antiqu. 18. Although Abraham was in the Church of God essentially by
faith, yet whether formally in that Church-st^te, which God was then about to
settle, till circumcised, will not, I suppose, be hastily affirmed? and how
can Infants be said to be in the Church, as Abraham then was, seeing they have
no faith as he had? And whether the Jewish Church State did not cease de jure,
when Circumcision so ceased? And then whether that state of Infant
Church Membership did not also cease? And like as the ceasing of the Passover
de jure, was the ceasing of Infants right to any such Ordinance, even so we ask
why the ceasing of Circumcision de jure, is not as truly the ceasation of
Infants right to any such Ordinance? certainly, if Gods Word assign any
Ordinances in lieu of the former, the place where it is written would have been
known to this day?


Presbyterian. Query 19. Whether the blessing of Abraham consists not chiefly
in this, that God Promised to be a God in Covenant with him, and his Seed? And
how are the believing Gentiles blessed with faithful Abraham, and Heirs of the
same Promise, if their Infants are not also comprehended in the same Covenant?


Baptist. Antiqu. 19. Whether the blessing of Abraham, (if you understand it of
eternal life) were not the blessing of the Fathers that were before him? And
whether that blessing did not belong to their Infants? And whether their
Infants were Partakers with them in any Rites or Ceremonies of instituted
worship? And if not, then, why may not the Infants of the Gentiles partake of
the blessing of Abraham, though not concerned in Rites or Ceremonies? or
whether you think the blessing of Abraham is confined to Ceremonies in respect
of Infants, if so, show us what Ceremonies these are?


Presbyterian. Query 20. Whether in that great Promise, Genesis 12. 3 Tribes,
Kindreds, Families, do not most certainly comprehend Infants? As it was to such
Families that the Promise was made before Christ, as to the Jewish Church?
What warrant have we to understand Families or Tribes otherwise, when the same
Promise is made to the Gentiles?


Baptist. Antiq. 20. Whether you ought not to distinguish in this great
Promise, the things which are eternal from the things that were but for a time?
And then whether you can ima^in^, that all the temporal blessings, rites and
ceremonies, ^oncern^d any Nation, as it concerned the seed of Abraham after the
flesh? But if by this Promise you understand it as the Apostle Paul does, Gal.
3. 16. th^n we doubt not but all the Kindreds of the Earth are con^^^n'd in it;
and then whether we do not sufficiently comprize the ^^ntiles therein? But how
can Abraham's Rites and C^remonie^ be part of this blessing to the Gentiles,
which are abrogated long ago?


Presbyterian. Query 21, Whether the second Commandment, Exodus 20, 5, 6. does
not contain a standing Promise, and discove^y of Gods Resolution, concerning
the children of all that love him, whether Jews or Gentiles, to whom this
Commandment belongs? whether God means not that his Retribution to Parents
that love or hate him, shall extend to their children as such; unless they
interrupt it at Age by their own Acts; and if to their children qua tales, then
whether not to Infants?


Baptist. Ant. 21. Whoever doubted but that Infants are advantaged many ways,
in the blessings which God bestows on them that fear him? and accordingly
greatly disadvantaged by the wickednefs of their Pa^^nts, even so as to bear
their Fathers iniquities many times, as is evident in the overthrow of the old
world, the Cities of Sodom and Samorrah, etc. yet whether the blessing or mercy
of eternal life to ^nfants, depend upon the Parents love to God? And whether
the ^amnation of Infants depend on the wickedness of their Parents? and whether
the bless^ngs of the second Commandment belong (...) to the Church as such, or
whether all men that follow the ^ules of Morality, are not within the reach of
these blessings also? and then how should Infant Church membership and Baptifm
be (...) blessings of the second Commandment seeing this Law concerns (...) men
as m^n being part of the Moral Law, and is not proper to ^he Church only?


Presbyterian. Query 22. Whether any without the Church are secured of Gods
mercy by P^omise? And whether mercy be not Promised to the children of the
F^ithsul as such? (See P^al. 102. 28. and 103. 17. Prove. 20. 7. Isa. 61. 8, 9
and 65 23 etc)?


Baptist. Antiqu. 22. Whether God has not said that his ways are all equal?
And whether this do not secure Infants of Gods mercy, though not baptized? (for
otherwise we say Infants are of the Redeemed Church? when God says, That the
Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, and every one shall bear his own
iniquity, whether this be not a promiss of mercy to Infant Children, and that
in respect of Etern^l Life? And whether the Query be not near a kin to that
position of the Papists when they say, Out of the Church there is no Salva^ion,
Restraining that word Church to Visible or Actual Professors only? And why must
these five quotations be applied to Infants only, since the things spoken of
these Children, Seed, or Offspring, are mostly such as are exclusive of
Infants?


Presbyterian. Query 23. Whether these Promises in the making of them were
limited to a certain time when they were to cease? Or whether they have been
since revoked?


Baptist. Suppose these Promises yet remain, as we doubt not but they do, since
they are not entailed upon the Jewish Nation, (at least the three first
Quotations,) How will this avail to the point in hand? Are all the blessings of
God to the Infant Offspring of those that fear him, etc. bound up in your
supposed Church Membership and Baptism?


Presbyterian. Query 24. If it was on the Jews Rejection of Christ, that they
were broken off from being Gods People, were those thousands of Jews that
believed in Christ so broken off? If not, then whether were not the Children of
all believing Jews Church Members in Infancy? Or otherwise, was it not somewhat
else then Unbelief that brake them off?


Baptist. Antiqu. 24. Whether was those that cried, His blood be upon us and
our Children, thereby rejecting the great Mess^nger of the Covenant, ^ustly
broken off? And whether the renting of the Vail of the Temple, did not show the
abrogation of the Covenant and the Legal Ministry? whether was Saul broken off
when he persecuted the Church causing many to blaspheme? And how could the Jews
lawfully be married to Christ, if Moses was not now removed, without being
called an Adulteress? And then whether those thousands of Jews which believed
were not first broken off, so as to plead no longer upon this issue, We are
Abraham's Children, we are freeborn, etc. And to look upon Circumcision and
whatsoever was gain to them on a legal acco^nt, to be loss for Christ? or is
there any other way to be graffed in to the Church of Christ, but by faith?
Nowtherefore seeing the Jews were in no better case then the Gentiles,
Circumcision being now nothing, even as uncircumcision was nothing, b^ta new
creature? then whether all the Infants of the Jews now ceas^^ to be m^mbers of
any visible Church, seeing their Parents had de jure lost their Memb^rship?


Presbyterian. Query 25. Were not the Infants of the Christian Jews the day
before their Conversion Members of the Jewish Church, and of Gods universal
Church, (of which the Jews were but a part? and does it not sound strengely,
that such Infants as were the day before Members of the Jewish Church, and of
Gods universal Church, should be put out of the Jewish and the whole visible
Church, by the faith of their Parents, or without unbelief? Either it was a
Mercy to be a Member, of the Church, or not: If it was no mercy, then will it
not follow, that the unbelieving Jews lost nothing by being broken off? If it
was a mercy, how did the Christians Children forfeit it?


Baptist. Antiqu. 25. Whether we have not sufficiently showed, that the Infants
of the Jews were now no Members of the Jewish Church, that being now abrogated,
and the Gospel Church state confirmed by the death of Christ, and the pouring
out of the Holy Ghost; neither could two distinct Church states stand together
de jure. And then whether it be not a great mistake for the Q^aerist to suppose
the Jews were a part of Gods universal Church, when in truth they were no
Church at all? and therefore whether the wonder which he makes about the Jews
Infants which believed, be not groundless? And yet whether the Infants of the
believing Jews were not in a far better estate, then when their Parents were
unbelievers, since the Curse they then had imprecated, was now removed? Also
whether it was not a mercy, that both Parents and Infants were set free from
Circumcision, which whatever it was before, now ceased to be a mercy to any
man, because it was an obligation to the yoke of bondage, and rendered Christ
unprofitable to such as should now receive it; and consequently a Release from
that Church Membership according to the Law, was a great mercy to Infants, who
still retain Membership in the invisible Church, as they did before
Circumcision was in being?


Presbyterian. Query 26. Whether it be credible, that he who came not to cast
out Jews, but to bring in Gentiles, breaking down the Partition Wall, and
making of two one Church, would have a Chureh of so different form and
constitution, that the Church at Jerusalem should have Infant-Members, and the
Church at Rome should have none? That the Jews Infants should be Members, and
not Gentiles?

If the Jews were broken off by unbelief, should they not be graffed in again
upon their Repentance of Faith? And so should not every repenting believing
Jews Infants be Church Members? Or otherwise how would their graffing in answer
to their breaking off, should they be but in part graffed in?


Baptist. Antiqu. 26. Whether it be not a great mistake to say, that Christ
came to make the Jew and Gentile one Church, otherwise then by taking away the
Jewish Church, and making all things new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. etc. And whether this
might not be done without settling any of the Practical Ordinances upon Infants
as under the Law? If otherwise, why have you not showed us where Christ has
required Parent^ to get their Infants baptized? and where he forbade them to be
brought to Imposition of Hands, the Table of the Lord, etc. If the denial of
the first make our Infants no Members of the Church, does not your denial of
the other two, which do as generally pertain to Members of the Church, make
yours none also? And if the Church at Jerusalem, Rome, etc. had any
Infant-Members therein, in the sense wherein you would have them Members, why
do you not name some one Infant so made a Member, since you know it would
suffice,

Wherher if the Jews grafting in, must in all Points answer to their breaking
off, their Infants must not come to other Ordinances as well as Baptism? or
will you say Infants cannot partake with their Parents of salvation without
Baptism? or whether was the Infants of the Jews exposed to damnation by their
Parents unbelief? And if so, what is become of all their Infants ever since?


Presbyterian. Query 27. Was not Christ Church Spiritual before his Incarnation
(when it took in Infants) and gathered in a spiritual way? Was not ^he visible
frame of the Jewish Church set up and erected by the Father of Spirits, and
were not spiritual Duties commanded then* upon Promises of spiritual blessings,
even lise eternal?

How will any prove that it was a blemish to the old frame, that Infants were
Members? What was the Church the worse for Infants Rights? If it be no blemish,
why must it be done away?


Baptist. Antiqu. 27. Though it be true, that Christ's Church was always
spiritual in some measure, and his services such also; yet whether it be not
also true, that the Church under the Law of Moses was carnal, in respect of the
spirituality of the Church under the Gospel? Does not the Apostle say, 2 Cor.
3. These two Ministrations differ as much as Letter and Spirit differs; and
that the glory of the one had no glory in respect of the glory which excels?
And is it not then rational, that the Churches concerned under these
Ministrations respectively should differ aecordingly? And though it was no
blemish to the Jewish Church, to have Infants Partakers of their Ordinances,
which are called carnal, yet whether it be not a more perfect state, when the
Church do al^ know God, from the least to the greatest of them? And whether
this be not the state of the Church under the Gospel, according to Gods
Appointment? Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13. And whether that which is less perfect
ought not to vanish away when that which is more perfect is come. In that he
says a new Covenant, he has made the first old, now that which decays and
waxes old is ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. 13.


Presbyterian. Query 28. In what regard were the new frame better, supposing
the casting out of Infants, which were in the old? How does Infants Relation
detract from its Spirituality? Do not the adult come in by ^he same kind of
consent for themselves, as they make for their Infants? And do not the Adult
blemish the Church with more carnal sins then Infants do? Would any Kingdom be
more excell^nt, if all Infants were disfranchised? Does not Nature teach all
Kingdoms on Earth, to take them f^r Members, though but Infant-Members?


Baptist. Antiqu. 28. Whether it be necessary to say Infants are cast out of
that whereof they were never possessed, to wit, the use of Ordinances in the
new frame of the Church? Or how can Infants be said to be a spiritual seed? How
are they living stones, built up a spiritual house; to offer spiritual
sacrifices in a Gospel sense? Or how are your Infants a more spiritual seed
then our Infants? And whether any other are by Christ's Order to partake in
Gospel Ordinances, then such as therein worship God spiritually? And whether
hence it be not clear, that the way of making Infants Church Members do not
detract from the spirituality of the new frame of the Church? Also where has
God required the Adult to consent for their Insant Church m^mbership in this
new frame? And whether the comparison between an earthly Kingdom and the Ghurch
of Christ be any way fitting, seeing Infants have as much need of the
privilege of humane Laws, for the preservation of their Lives and Rights as
grown persons? But how stand they in need of the Laws of the Church, (and
particularly Baptism) for the preservation of their souls. And whether this
similitude may not be emproved against you, seeing Infants, though Members of
Kingdoms, yet are excused from all duties personal wbatsoever, and then why
may they not be reputed of the Kingdom of God, and yet exempt from the duties
of his Kingdom? or how come they to be concerned so much in that one duty of
Baptism, and no other whatsoever?


Presbyterian. Query 29. Whether any Jew at age was a Member of the old Church
without professing faith, (in the Articles then necessary to salvation)
Repentance and Obedience? And wherein the supposed new call and frame does in
this differ from the old, save only that a more full and express Revelation of
Christ requires a more full express Faith? Is it not evident, that they were
to profess consent to Gods Covenant, which who so denied Asa would put to
death? And was not circumcision a covenanting Act? And did they not thereby
prosess to take God for their God? Or would God else have taken them for his
People? And would not renouncing God have cut them off?


Baptist. Antiqu. 29. What is become now of your Infant Church Membership; if
when grown up they cease to be Members upon that account? Were the Jews Infants
twice made Members of their Church? Or is every renewing the Covenant, (as in
the case of Asa,) making men Members of the Church? But where did the Church
ever admit one Member to her communion by Baptism without Profession? or where
did she ever decree, that those who would not submit to her new frame should be
put to death? And whether in this the new frame of the Church do not greatly
differ from the old?


Presbyterian. Query 30. Whether Gods Law obliges not Persons to devote
themselves, and their Infants to God, by consenting to Gods Covenant for
themselves and them? Whether it was not the duty of the Israelites to engage
and devote their children to God in Covenant? Whether this be not evident from
the Penalty (even to be cut off from his People) annexed for the
Nonperformance? (And whether this be not as much our Duty still?) Does not the
Law of Nature bind us to give to every one his own due? and are not Infants
God's own due? Does not the Law of Nature bind Parents to give them up to God
by acknowledging his right, with a free resignation and dedication of the
Inf^n^ to God as his own?


Baptist. Antiq. 30. Where are Christian Parents required to devote their
children by consenting to any Covenant for them (or in their stead, as the Jews
were in matters of Religion: and what penalty has God imposed on them that
devote not their Insants by sprinkling them as you do? And whether we do omit
the duty of devoting our children to God in any thing wherein the Law of God or
Nature obliges us, (abating us all what must be abated)? And who denies
Infants to be capable of Infant-relation, obligation or right, or who opposes
their being devoted to God in their capacity? and whether this be not a mere
noise of words, as if all that do not as you do, do lay a side their care and
duties toward Infants? And where is the institution of your public way? Have
we not a more certain instituted way to devote them to God by Prayer, and to
educate them in his fear, as they are capable, then you have to cross or
sprinkle them?


Presbyterian. Query 31. Whether Anabaptists themselves, all of them that are
truly pious, do not vertually (though not actually) devote their children to
God, and consent to their Covenant Relation, while they vehe^ently plead
against it?


Baptist. Antiqu. 31. Whether you do not greatly wrong your self, and those you
call Anabaptists, in saying, they vehemently plead against devoting their
children to God; yea sure, they do it actually as far as Gods Word requires?
And can you believe, that there is no way to devote children to God but in your
way? How then did Adam, Enoch, Scth, Noah, etc. devote their children to God?
And it would do well also if you could show us how they consented to any
Covenant for their Infants, more then we do? or prove if you can, that you your
selves do consent to the Covenant of Grace for your Infants, more then we whom
you call Anabaptists?

Does not Eusebius Pamphilius count Christianity as old as Adam? l. 1. c. 1.
And does not Tertullian say, Enoch justissimum non Circumcisum nec
Sibbatizantem, etc. Enochan upright man was translated by God, though he were
not circumcised, neither yet did observe the Sabba^h. -- - Vt aeternitas
candidatis, etc. To the end, that he who did aspire to Eternity might show us,
that we might please God without the burden of Moses Law. And what Law (save
the La^ of Circumcision) did ever require Infants to be brought to Practical
Ordinances in the Church of God?


Presbyterian. Query 32. Is it not a desperate undertaking, and dare any
adventure on it, to justify all the World before Christ's Incarnation, except
the Jews, from the guilt of not dedicating their children to God? And do not
they that say there is no Law in this case, say there is no Transgression? And
dare any in like manner undertake to justify at the Bar of God all the World
since Christ's Incarnation from the guilt of sin, in not dedicating their
children'to Christ, and entering them into his Covenant as Members of his
Church? Dare any maintain that all the World is sinless in this respect?


Baptist. Antiq. 32. Whether this be not a very unwise Query? As if none of the
Fathers did dedicate their Infants to God, unless they brought them to some
Practical Ordinance in the Church, which is the only thing you do so complain
of? And how, I pray you, did Abraham, Isaac and Jacob dedicate their female
Infants to God, since we find no Practical Ordinance for them in Infancy? or
who goes about to justify the World, if they do not as the Law of God and
Nature wills them to do for their Infants? And may we not well justify all
men, for not doing that which the Law of God never required?


Presbyterian. Query 33. Is it not a great Benefit and Privilege to be a
visible Churchmember of Christ as Head of the Church, and of his Church as
visible? Is it not abenefit in it self (besides the Consequents) to be visibly
united and related to Christ and his Body? Is not such a Relation to God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and to the Church, an honor? And how great is the
misery of a contrary state?

And if Infant Church Membership were no benefit, then how were they that had
it, (when they came to Age, or their Parents in the mean time) obliged to any
thankfulness for it? Will any say, that neither they nor their Parents were
obliged to thankfulness upon this account?


Baptist. Antiqu. 33. What benefit is it to bring Infants to that which God
requires not of them? or whether it be any loss to them till God requires it?
And seeing you make your Pedo-rantism this all in all, show us what benefit or
privilege you had when sprinkled, more then the Infants of a pious Baptist?
And what is that benefit that all who are sprinkled by the Papists* do receive,
which you ratify for good Baptism? Or how are their Infants Church Members
more then ours? And whether our children when grown up, have not a fairer way
to the Purity of Christianity, in that they are not entangled with such
Traditions?


Presbyterian. Query 34. Is it not certain that Infants are capable of this
benefit, if God deny it not, but will give it them as well as the aged? And is
it not certain, that they are actually Members of all the Commonwealths in the
World? (perfect, sed imperfecte membra) And does not Nature seem actually to
have taught most people on Earth, to repute their Infants in the same Religiou^
Society with themselves, as well as in the same Civil Society?


Baptist. Antiqu. 34. That Infants are capable of what God will give them is
very true; And we therefore ask, whether Infants be not as capable of the Lords
Supper as Baptism, if the Lord will give it them? And as far as Gods Will is,
that Infants should be related to his Church, we doubt not of their capacity
for it. And why is the order of Commonwealths so much insisted on in this case?
Are we to fetch our Rules for dispensing Ordinances in the Church, from the
Civil Policy of Nations? We desire you still to show us what the Law of Nature
obliges us to do for our Infants, which we do not? Is both the Law of God and
Nature broken by all that bring not their Infants to be crossed or sprinkled as
you do? sure you can never make this good.


Baptist. Query 35. Whether according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace,
God will not vouchsafe to be their God, and take them for his people, (that are
in a natural, or Law-sense) willing to be his people, and take him for their
God? And whether the Infants of believing Parents are not thus willing? When
Infants cannot be actually willing themselves in a natural sense, must not the
reason and will of another be theirs in Law-sense, that is, of the Parents,
have the full dispose of them, and are warranted by the Law of Nature to choose
for them (for their good) till they come to the use of reason themselves.

Whether in Gods acceptance the Child does not thus truly consent by the
believing Parents, and does not Covenant with God, as a Child covenanteth and
consents reputatively among men, who by his Parents is made a Party in
Contract, as in a Lease for his Life, or the like?

And so granting the Relation of Church Membership, to be founded in a mutual
contract, covenant or consent betwixt God and us, yet must not this consent on
our part differ according to the different age and capacity of Infants, and the
adult? Were not the Israelites Infants Church Members, who consented not
actually in their own persons, but virtually, and reputatively?


Baptist. Antiqu. 35. We still require you to show where this Law is, that
obliges Christians to will the baptizing of their Infants, and that will
warrant the baptizing of one Person by virtue of another will? And why may not
a reputative Baptism serve as well as a reputative Covenant, since the Covenant
is greater then Baptism? And whether this be an advised speech, that the Parent
has the whole disposal of his Child in matters of Religion? And who must judge
what is good for his Infant in religious matters? Must not Gods Word do this?
And show us what command we have omitted, in not bringing our Infants to the
Font as you do? Or do you think that your instance of a Lease, is sufficient to
rectify men's consciences in matters of this nature? And what if some of the
Jews had failed to consent for their children, were they therefore not in
Covenant? sure it was the Law, not the Parents consent, that regulated these
matters. Neither do we find, that the Israelites were bound to repent and
believe in the Person of the child, and accordingly to make profession in his
Name, when circumcised, as you do at the Font when you pretend to baptize your
Infants, when yet you baptize them not, seeing Sprinkling cannot be truly
called Baptism?


Presbyterian. Query 26. Whether it be not the duty of Parents by the Law of
Nature, to accept of any allowed or offered benefit for their children? the
Infant being not sui Juris, but at his Parents dispose in all things that are
for his good, have not the Parents power to oblige their children to any future
duty or suffering, that is certainly for their own good? And so may they not
enter them into Covenants accordingly? And is it not unnaturally sinful for a
Parent to refuse to do such a thing, when it is to the great benefit of his own
child? And does it not deserve to be called the unthankful Error, that opposes
Childrens Rights, and Blessings?


Baptist. Antiqu. 36. Whether this Query be not the same in effect, which we
have had again and again? And we would know what offered benefits the Infant of
the Pedobaptists meet with, among the Papists, or your selves either, which we
received not, merely for this cause of not doing to our infants, as they and
you are pleased to do? And whether it were not as reasonable for Parents to be
baptized in the child's stead, as to profess faith and repentance for him? And
whether it be reasonable for a Parent to oblige his Infant to be of his opinion
and practice, and to suffer for the same? And what Law of God requires this,
and whether this may not be called the unreasonable error?


Presbyterian. Query 37. Whether it may be thought, or any dare maintain, that
the Covenant of Grace gives no conditional Right to any Infant in the World?
Are they all excluded? And why? Are they worse then their Parents? If it give
any Right to Infants conditionally, as it does t^ Parents, must it not be on a
condition to be performed by the Parents, or such as are so far entrusted?

Or can this be called a Covenant, for God only to say [I will save all such
Infants as I elect] and yet offer Salvation to none of them in the World on any
condition, nor give a title to any Person that can be known by themselves or
others? Would it not be to confound the Decree of God with his Covenant? And
what Right or Hope does this give to Christians for their children more then to
Pagans?


Baptist. Antiqu. 37. Whether it may be thought that God should require the
conditions of the Covenant of grace on them, which he knows can observe none at
all; or whether it be his will, that the grace of that Covenant should depend
upon others observation of the Conditions for them? And whether this be not to
put the salvation of Infants out of his own hand, and into the hand of such as
commonly neglect their own? And is not this to expo^e poor Infants to ruin,
whose Parents generally are so far from keeping, that they are strangers to the
Conditions of this Covenant?

And where are we taught to doubt the salvation of the Infants of Pagans? or to
conclude ours only are in the state of salvation?

And is it not much more secure to hope the salvation of Infants on the Ground
of Christ's dying for them, and rising again for their Justification* then upon
any Practical in Religion? And where did God ever since the beginning of the
World, give any Ordinance to be necessary to the salvation of any Infant in the
World? Can you believe that the cutting off of the uncircumcised Man-child, was
a cutting off from salvation? how then were all the Infants saved which were
born to the Israelites for forty years together, such of them, I mean, as died
during that time? And why may not Infants as well be made righteous without any
thing done on their part, as they were made sinners without any thing done on
their part? Will not the second Adams obedience salve the first Adams
disobedience? And may not poor Infants better plead in the day of Judgment
what Christ did for them, then what your Godfathers or Proparents did for them?


Presbyterian. Query 38. Though all that are saved, are saved by the
meritorious righteousness of Christ, by way of free Gift; yet whether the
condition be not a suitable acceptance? And why may not a Parent accept a
Donation for his Child, who has no will to accept it for himself? Shall he be
certainly shut out unto damnation? Or shall he have that gift absolutely which
is conditional to all others? Or is he not concerned in the Donation at all?
And have not Infants guilt and misery from their Parents? And though Life and
Pardon be by Christ only, yet is it not congruous, that the mere condition of
acceptance may b^ Performed by the Parents, (while they cannot accept for
themselves?)


Baptist. Antiq. 38. Whether the meritoriousness of Christ is not as available
to save Infants without any man's acceptance thereof for them* Or whether has
God tied the salvation of any person to the acceptance of another? And whether
these be not unreasonable and unscriptural conceits? And whether it be not for
want of better Grounds for Infant Baptism, that you thus continually
tautologize, varying little from that which you have said once and again?


Presbyterian. Query 39. (Whether it be no advantage for children to be under
an early engagement to God, and Jesus Christ?) Whether to dedicate them betimes
to God, does not tend to secure God's right and childrens good, and to prevent
their sin and misery; they being thus under a double Obligation, which they may
be minded of betimes, and which may hold them more strongly to their duty, and
disadvantage the Tempter that would draw them off from God, etc*


Baptist. Antiqu. 39. Who is against as early an engagement of children to God
as can lawfully be made* and do not the Baptists engage their children to God
as soon as they can, by Prayer and Supplication whiles Infants; and then by the
best education they are able when docible? But whether any thing be done to
purpose in your judgment (when yet all is done that can be done) unless it be
rantized in your way? And whether it be not b^tter to leave the event of their
accepting Baptism to the wise dispose of God, then to do it per force in
Infancy, without Precept from God? Also whether the Infant Baptism be such a
means to propagate Religion as you suppose, may be seen, when you consider how
in the darkness of Popery, Pedobaptism was more common then now, but
Christianity much less? And name one if you can, that was bettered in Christian
virtue by Pedobaptism? we think we can name one, and that your self, which is
worse for it, for had you not that to rest on, you would probably desire to put
on Christ in baptism? whether it be not the fittest time to be buried with
Christ in baptism, when we are dead with him from the rudiments of the world,
or whether it be reasonable to bury sinners therein till they be dead to sin?
and whether it can profit any person to be baptized, unless he have the answer
of a good conscience, by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 3.
therein?


Presbyterian. Query. 40. Whether it can be proved, that ever there was one Age
or Church (particular) on Earth since Adam, till about 200 years ago, that the
Anabaptists rose, wherein Infants de facto were not Members of the Church?


Baptist. Antiqu. 40. Whether in your sense of making Infants Members of the
Church de facto, it can be proved there was any one so made a Member from the
beginning of the World till Abraham's time? and whether John Baptist, Christ, or
any by his order, did receive Infants into the Church de facto.

And whether the Baptist do not better prove the Antiquity of their faith and
practice in baptism then any Aedo baptist in the world? and does not your
conscience tell you, that the baptism of Men and Women, upon profession of
faith and repentance, is beyond the reach of contradiction? whilst M. Baxter
himself confesses Infant Baptism to be so difficult, that many of its
Assertors, both Protestants and Papists, are forced to confess it cannot be
proved by the Scriptures? See his Cure p. 7. And seeing you and we are
generally agreed, that our way both for subject and manner is out of dispute,
clear in the Scriptures; and you confess by the Pen of Mr. Baxter, that yours
is very difficult, is it not reason the difficult way should give place to the
clear and evident way?


Presbyterian. Query 41. Whether it can be proved, that ever there was any one
I^fant of true Church Members, that was not rightfully a Churchmember himself
from the Creation till Christ's days? Or from the Creation till this day;
except the Anabaptists, who reject the benefit, whose case we will not presume
to determine?


Baptist. Antiqu. 41. Whether this Query be not the same we had before? and
whether what is said to it, may not also suffiee to this?


Presbyterian. Query 42. Seeing that Infants have been de facto Church Members
from the Creation to this day (as far as any Records can lead us) Is it likely,
that the Lord, and Head, and all-sufficient Governor of his Church, would have
permitted his Church till now, to be actually made up of such subjects, as in
regard of Age be disallowed, and suffered his Church to be wrong framed till
now? Or is it a reasonable, modest and lawful undertaking, to go about now in
the end of the World to make God a new framed Church. as to the age of the
Subjects? And is it not more modest and safe, to live quietly in a Church of
that frame, as all the Saints of Heaven lived in, till the other day, as a few
Anabaptists did attempt an Alteration?


Baptist. Antiqu. 42. Whether it be not utterly untrue, that Infants were
Members of the Church de facto, i.e. to be brought to partake of Ordinances
Practical in the Church, save only from Abraham to the end of the Law? And
whether all the Pedobaptists in the world have not hitherto been unable to show
any one instance before Abraham, or since the Law was abrogated, so much as one
Infant admitted to any such Ordinance in the Church of ^od, according to what
the Scriptures afford in thi^ (...)? And ^^^her it be not as modest in us to
labor to restore ^^ptism to its pure use in the Church, both in respect of the
subject and manner of Administration thereof, as it was for the Protestants to
do the like in respect of the Lords Supper? Also whether your pretending the
Authority of the universal Church, be not the same figment, with which the
Papists deceived themselves and others? And how can you pretend the universal
Church, when the Primitive Church is on our side?


Presbyterian. Query 43. Whether considering Christ's own Infant-Mem^^rship, and
his kind reception of Infants, and his chiding those that would have kept them
off, and his offers of taking in all the Jewish Nation, (Matthew. 23. 37.) and
that they were broken off by unbelief, and consequently the Seed of Believers
broken off from the Church Universal, and that whole Households are often said to
be baptized, and that Paul pronounces Believers children holy, and that Christ
(Mat. 28.) commanded his Ministers, as much as in them lies, to disciple all
Nations baptizing them, etc?


Baptist. Antiqu. 43. Whether Christ's Infants Church Membership did not pertain
to the Jewish Church only, Gal. 4. 4. born under the Law only, etc. And whether
he was not about 30 years when he entered in our Profession, Heb. 3. 3. The
Apostle and High Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus. See Luke 3. And then
whether his example be not flat against you?

Also whether Christ's only praying for Infants, and not baptizing them though
brought to him, neither ordering any other to do it that we read of, do not
show us that Infants may be under the blessings of Christ without baptism? And
whether you may not tremble to presume to do more then he did, or appointed to
be done? Are you wiser then he?

Also whether it lies within the power of any Minister to disciple an Infant;
or show us one Infant with you, or any Pedobaptist ever made a disciple? or be
pleased to come and make my Infants disciples if you can, and I promise you I
will assist you what I can in the baptizing them? and not only so, but do my
best to employ you elsewhere, I speak it seriously. And whether this would not
do more to decide the Controversy, then all the Books that are written by any
of you? and if you cannot do this, how will Matthew. 28. 19. warrant you to
baptize Infants, since its plain that discipling goes before baptizing? and how
disciples are to be made we think it best to learn of Jesus, John 4. 3. How
think you? Do you indeed believe, that any person being of the Nation, entitles
them to^ b^ptism? why then who is not a fit subject, seeing all Infants and men
too are of one Nation or another? and if there be other Qualifications
necessary, whether to be taught be not one of the chief of them? and why do you
say we take Infants away from Christ's Church, because we baptize them not; are
they in it before baptized? if so, how do we take them away?


Presbyterian. Query 44. In sum, whether 1. God would not have Parents devote
their children to him, and enter them according to their capacity in his
Covenant? 2. Whether also he does not accept into his Covenant all that are
faithfully thus devoted to him, and be not peculiarly their God, that such
children are holy? 3. Whether they are not as certainly Members, according to
an Infant-capacity, of the visible Church, as they are of all Kingdoms under
Heaven? 4. Whether there be not far more hope of their salvation, then of those
without? 5. Whether the Covenant does not make their salvation certain, if they
so die? 6. Whether the Invest^ure and Solemnization of their Covenant with
Christ should not be made in Infancy, etc?


Baptist. Antiqu. 44. In sum, 1. Whether we do not as much to our Infants (in
our capacity) as Christ did to the Infants which were brought to him? and will
not that sati^fie, unless we go from him to follow you? And as to the business
of the Covenant, let us hear what Mr. Baxter says, More R^^s. p. 86. All
Mankind is brought by Christ under a Covenant of Grace, which is not vain or
repealed by God, but as their abuse of the grace of the Covenant may cast them
out; for as a Covenant of entire Nature was made with all mankind in innocent
Adam; so a Covenant of grace was made with all mankind in lapsed Adam, Genesis 3.
15. in the Promised Seed; and renewed again with all mankind in Noah, etc. And
now we ask whether our Infants according to this account of the Covenant of
Grace be not in it without bapti^m, fith they have not abused the grace of the
Covenant? and whether baptism be not far more proper, when after they have
corrupted themselves by sin, they come to humiliation, and so to enter into
this Covenant upon the terms of the Gospel?

Whether your Exposition of the universal Church, upon Mat. 28. 19. do take in
the Practice of the Apostles in pursuance of that Commission to the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Exposition of the Baptists? and if not, then you either deny
us to be of the universal Church, or else you have not the Exposition of the
Church universal?


Presbyterian. Query 45. How inconsiderable a Part of the universal Church do
the Anabaptists hold Communion with? And do they not unchurch almost all the
Churches on Earth? (may we not think, that they rob Christ of more them nine
Parts of ten of his Kingdom, or Church universal? V. p. 305.)


Baptist. Antiqu. 45. Whether upon Luthers revolt from the Pope, you were not
upbraided with holding communion with an inconsiderable part of the universal
Church? why do you take up the Papists weapons? Did not that pious man that
succored Athanasius in the time of the Arrian persecution answer the Objection
well, when he said, The cause of truth is not therefore empaired, because I am
alone; -- -Glory not therefore in multitudes, for it is not the multitude but
the cause that justifies or condemns? Also whether we may not also conclude,
that many are of the universal Church, which do not communicate with us or your
selves? and yet whether the separation from many Pedobaptists will not justify
our separation from you more clearly?


Presbyterian. Query 46. Whether they can possibly hop^, that ever the Church
on Earth will unite upon their terms, of rejecting all their Infants from the
visible Church, and renouncing all our Infant-Rights and Benefits conferred by
the Baptismal Covenant of Grace?


Baptist. Antiqu. 46. Whether this be in effect to say, What will these feeble
Jews do? And why may we not hope that this great mistake of yours may vanish,
as well as that great mistake of Austin, and the generality of men prosessing
Christianity, who brought Infants also to the Lords Table, and that for many
hundreds of years together, and defended it by as plaufible reasons as any you
have for baptizing them? Could God reform so great and general an error,
forced on by Learning and Authority of eminent men; And shall we think this
thing only too hard for God* our small number shall not make us doubt, for we
know God does great things by small means. And what Baptismal grace do we
desire you to renounce, when we only defire you to mend an error; Did the
twelve disciples, Acts 19. renounce any baptismal grace, when (according to the
Interpretation of the Ancients) they were baptized again? Surely Reformation is
no error.


Presbyterian. Query 47. And whether if they continue to the Worlds end to
separate from almost all the Churches and unchurch them, their Employment will
not be still to serve the great Enemy of Love and Concord, against the Lord of
Love and Peace, and against the Profperity of Faith and Godliness, and against
the welfare of the Church and Souls, and to the scandal and hardening of the
ungodly?


Baptist. Antiqu. 47. Whether the separation is not justly chargeable upon
those which cause divisions and offenses, by asserting and maintaining such
errors, as being admitted, the way of God must be corrupted, or laid aside?
and whether these are not the men, that (at least unawares) serve the design of
the great enemy, and whether you are not guilty of the fault wherewith you
would charge us?


P^esbyterian. 48. Whether too many well-meaning, but weak Christians, are not
disaffected to lawful and warrantable things in the Worship of God, merely
because they see such as are ungodly use and own them? And whether if God
should but let us have a King and other Rulers, that were against
Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms, etc. and would make Laws for their own
way, and impose it on others, so that the ungodly multitude should fall in with
them, it would not presently cure many that are now for such Opinions?


Baptist. Antiqu. 48. Whether many, but weak Christians, would hold to the
errou^ of Infant-sprinkling, but merely because J. B. and Mr. Baxter, etc. do
so. And whether this be not as much weakness of the one hand, as the case put
by you on the other? and whether both ought not to be amend^d? And whether the
latter part of this Query do not show, that to follow the greatest number is
not always the best way? And why then would you discourage us by our Paucity?
And whether such Confiderations might not have discouraged the Apostles, seeing
they were to alter the state of Religion in the Jewish Church, yea, throughout
the whole world?


Presbyterian. Query 49. Whether Mr. Baxter in the second and third part of
that his second defense of our Infants Rights, have not sufficiently detected
the great and notorious untruths in Fact and History, wherewith Mr. H. D.
Treatise of Baptism, and Reply to Mr. Wills is fully stuffed.


Baptist. Antiqu, 49. Whether Mr. D. and Mr. Tombs have not sufficiently
detected Mr. Baxters mistakes in many of his Works (...) Infant Baptism. and
particularly in Mr. Tombs his Felo de se. Also whether Mr. Wills exceptions
against Mr. D. are not well foiled by Mr. D. in his twofold Defense of his
Treatise of Baptism; And whether Mr. Baxter did ever yet, or ever will accept
of Mr. Tombs his serious Challenge lately made in these words.

I Challenge him to set down distinctly his Theses, concerning the Grace he
means, the Covenant of Grace, what and whose it is, how it is bap, iswal, what
are the rights and benefits conferred to Infants by it, using words in their
proper sense and genuine notions, and then without Questions, Exclamations,
Flirts, Suppositions improved, set down his Scriptures, and form his Arguments
substantially -- -and then I doubt not but learned and accurate Disputants will
see his folly, etc. Postscript to Mr. D. second Reply p. 267.


Presbyterian. Query 50. Whether the Anabaptists schism, or separation from
Communion with our Churches be not worse yet then their simple Opinion? And
whether it be not desirable, and possible, that some may be found out, and
terms laid down, in which good and sober men on both sides would agree and hold
Communion?


Baptist. Antiqu. 50. Whether the Papists may not on fairer Grounds Query thus
with the Protestantt, then you can do with us, especially when the Cause you
manage against us is so doubtful in the judgment of its best friends* as we
showed in our Preface; and here we shall further add what Mr. Y. notes in his
first Reply, p. 126. Mr. Chillingworth (says he) in his Answer to Knot's
Charity maintained, part. 1. c. 3.. 44. p. 152. says, The doctrine of
Infant Baptism is of that sort, of which the Scripture is silent. And the
Oxford-Divines, in their Reasons os the present Judgment of the University,
etc. June 1. 1674. Do. sect. 4. p. 9. say, That without the Consent, Judgment
and Practice of the universal Church, (which they distinguish from the
Scriptures) they should be at a loss when they are called upon for proof of the
baptizing Infants. Now this considered with what Dr. Tailor says, Dissuasive
from Popery, p. 118. That it is certain, there is no universal or prime
Tradition for baptizing infants, then whether you may not more securely forbear
baptizing your Infants, till endowed with knowledge and faith, then to do it
without. And in the mean time retain your opinion about their being in the
Covenant of Grace, and let Christ's Ministers or your selves pray for them after
the example of Christ. And whether this might not be a more likely way for a
lasting Peace between the Baptists and the Pedobaptists, and more consonant to
the Scriptures then the way propounded by you?

And seeing it shall come into your hearts to make some Overtures for peace, we
desire you would prosecute that needful Work. And whether it may not better be
done by personal Conference in a friendly and Christian manner, then by writing
Books one to another. And whether the Baptists have not offered this, and bin
rejected by you in such their tenders of friendship?

May these Queries and Antiqueries have an effectual tendency to the increase
of Love and Chirstian Friendship, and if not, whether it had not been better
they had been unwritten?


FINIS.
The Postscript.
Showing that Infant Baptism is contrary to the Command of Christ.
REceiving lately in Writing a Proposition from a Minister of the Church of
England, to which I sent him certain Arguments, to prove what is denied in the
said Proposition; I shall here offer the same to Consideration. The Proposition
is this,

Prop. Infant Baptism is not contrary to the Command of Christ.

Contra. Infant Baptism is contrary to the Command of Christ.

Arg. 1.
If Infant Baptism be not contrary to the Command of Christ, then it is of
divine Institution, From the institution of baptism.
But Infant Baptism is not of divine Institution, Ergo, Infant Baptism is
contrary to the Command of Christ. The Major is true, because there is only one
Baptism instituted by Christ. The Minor is true, because no man can show any
divine Institution of Infant Baptism.
Arg. 2.
If infant baptism be not contrary to the Command of Christ, then it agrees
with Christ's Commission From the institution of Bapt^sm
for the perpetuity of Baptism, Mat. 28. 19. But Infant Baptism is not
agreeable to the Commission from the perpetuity of Baptism, Mat. 28. 19. Ergo,
Infant Baptism is contrary to the Command of Christ.
The Major is true, because Christ commanded nothing contrary to his own
Commission. The Minor is true, since no man can show any Agreement between the
Commission and Infant Baptism.

Arg. 3.
If infant baptism be not contrary to the Command of Christ, then it is
agreeable to the practice From the practice of the first Church.
of the Apostolical Churches, But infant baptism is not agreeable to the
practice of the Apostolical Churches. Ergo, Infant Baptism is contrary to the
Command of Christ.
The Major i^ true, because the Apostolical Church did observe all that Christ
commanded in the case of baptism. The Minor is true, because no man can show,
the Apostolical churches did baptize so much as one Infant.

Arg. 4.
If infant baptism be not contrary to the Command From the necessity of
Repentance, where sin is washed away baptismally.
of Christ, then it is the baptism of Repentance for Remission of sin. But
infant baptism is not the baptism of repentance for remission of sins; Ergo,
Infant Baptism is contrary to the Command of Christ.
The Major is true, because christ commanded no baptism, but the baptism of
repentance for Remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. and Ephesians. 4. 5. The Minor is true,
because Infants have all the Remission needful in Infancy, without repentance,
else they can have no Remission.

Arg. 5.
That which has in a great measure, and naturally From the ill consequence of
Infant Baptism.
tends wholly to make void the baptism commanded by Christ, is contrary to the
Command of Christ. But infant baptism has in a great measure, and naturally
tends wholly to make void the baptism commanded by Christ. Ergo, infant baptism
is contrary to the Command of Christ.
The Major is true, because Christ commands nothing to make void his own
command. The Minor is true, for where Infant Baptism is generally rcceived,
there believers baptism cease.

Arg. 6.
If infant baptism be as unreasonable, as to baptize For the unreasonableness
thereof.
persons when they are asleep or dead, then it is contrary to the Command of
Christ. But infant baptism is as unreasonable as to baptize persons when they
are asleep or dead. Ergo, Infant Baptism is contrary to the command of Christ.
The Major is true, because Christ commanded nothing that is unreasonable, I
mean, that which is really so according to truth, and not in man's judgment
only. The Minor is true, first becaufe those who baptize Infant^ do usually do
it when they are a^leep; Secondly, because the Grounds usually insisted on for
infantbaptism, will as well justify the baptizing Persons asleep or dead; ^
mean, such only as have known and believed in the Lord Jesus; yea, the
Scripture may seem (according to Interpreters, to hint some such thing to have
been done in the Christian Church, and he not approve it) but no such
intimation touching any Infant.

Arg. 7.
That practice which renders the practice of Christ and his true followers,
(who were From the dishonor i^ offers to Christ's practice.
baptized in Rivers, or much water) superfluous or ridiculous, and which
agrees not with the word baptize, when used in the New Testament to express
the Act done in that Ordinance, is contrary to the Command of Christ. But the
sprinkling of Infants now used by the Presbyterians, renders the practice of
Christ and his true followers, (who were baptized in Rivers or much water)
supersluous or ridiculous, and agrees not with the signification of the word
Baptize, when used to express (according to the New Testament) the Act done in
that Ordinance. Ergi, Infant Baptism is contrary to the command of Christ.
The Major is evident, because Christ would command nothing to reflect
dishonor upon his own practice,

The Minor is true, because if sprinkling a little water on the face only be
su^ficient, then immersion or dipping in the River must needs be superfluous,
etc. neither can the word Baptize and Rantize, with any equity of speech or
good sense, be used to ezpress the same action.

Thus, though we justly refuse infant baptism, because no man can prove it
commanded by Christ, yet that we may more effectually persuade our Countrymen,
to admit of the restoration of this Ordinance to pristine integrity, we have
offered these Arguments to show how contrary to Christ's Command is that darling
Tradition os Pedobaptism.

FINIS.

