The Gracious ANSWER of the most Illustrious Lady of Pleasure, the Countess of
Castlem -- To the Poor-Whores Petition.
Right Trusty and Well-beloved Madam Cresswell and Damaris Page, with the rest
of the suffering Sister-hood in Dog and Bitch Yard, Lukeners Lane, Saffron
Hill, Moor-fields, Ratcliff-Highway, etc. We greet you well, in giving you to
understand our Noble Mind, by returning our Thanks, which you are worthy of, in
rendering us our Titles of Honor, which are but our Due. For on Shrove-Tuesday
last, Splendidly did we appear upon the Theater at W. H. being to amazement
wonderfully decked with Jewels and Diamonds, which the (abhorred and
to-be-undone) Subjects of this Kingdom have paid for. We have been also Serene
and Illustrious ever since the Day that Mars was so instrumental to restore our
Goddess Venus to her Temple and Worship; where, by special Grant, we quickly
became a Famous Lady: And as a Reward of our Devotion, soon created Right
Honorouble, the Countess of Castlemain. And as a further addition to our
Illustrious Serenity, according to the ancient Rules and laudable Customs of
our Order, we have cum privilegio always (without our Husband) satistied our
self with the Delights of Venus; and in our Husbands absence have had a
numerous Offspring, (who are Bountifully and Nobly provided for.) Which
Practice has Episcopal Allowance also, according to the Principles of Seer
Shelden, etc. If Women have not Children by their own Husbands, they are bound
(to prevent their Damnation) to try by using the means with other men: Which
wholesome and pleasing Doctrine did for sometime hold me fast to his Religion
But since this Seer has shown more Cowardice, than Principles or Policy, in
fearing to declare the Church of Rome to be the True, Ancient, Uniform,
Universsal, and most Holy Mother Church; Therefore we tell you (with all the
Sisterhood) That we are now no longer of the Church of England, which is but
like a Brazen-Bason tied to a Barbers wooden Pole, ( viz.) Protestant Doctrine
and Order tied by Parliamentary Power to Roman Catholic Foundations,
Constitutions, and Rights, etc. And are become a Convert to, and a professed
Member of the Church of Rome; where the worthy Fathers and Confessors, as
Durandus, Gentianus, with multitudes of others, (who were not, neither are, of
the Protestant, Puritanical, and Fanatical Conventicling Opinion) do declare,
That Venerial Pleasures, accompanied with Looseness, ^^^^uchery, and
Profaneness, are not such heinous Crimes and crying Sins, but rather (as the
old Woman of Loven said) they do mortify the Flesh. And the general Opinion of
Holy Mother Church is, That Venerial Pleasures, in the strictest sense, are but
Venial Sins, which Confessors of the meanest Order can forgive. So that the
Adoring of Venus, is by the Allowance of Great Authority, Desirable,
Honorable, and Profitable.

But when we understood, in your Address, the Barbarity of those Rude
Apprentices, and the cruel Sufferings that the Sisterhood was exposed unto;
especially those which were in a hopeful way of Recovery, and others that were
disabled from giving Accommodation to their Right Honorable Devotaries, with
the danger which you convinced us our own Person was in, together with the
remembrance of our two New Corivals, with Little Miss: We were for many hours
swallowed up with sorrow, and almost drowned in Tears, and could not at all be
comforted, until the sweet sound of the Report came to our Ears, That the L. C.
J. K. and his Brethren, with our Counsel learned in the Law, had Commission and
Instruction given to frame a Bill of Indictment against those Traiterous and
Rebellious Boys, And to select a Jury of Gentlemen that should show them no
favor: At which our Noble Spirit revived, and presently we consulted how we
might express our Grace and Compassion toward you, and also seasonably provide
for the future safety of your Practice; and exercise our Revenge upon those
that so grossly abused you, and therein offered such an insufferable Affront to
our Eminency, that we cannot bear without great Indignation.

Imprimis, We engage to contribute to your Losses, either out of the Annual
Rents, which we have begged, (...) out of the next Moneys which shall come to
our hands by our own Practice, or as soon as our standing Revenue shall be
established: For should we part with a hundred thousand pounds worth of our
Jewels, since so much English Money has crossed the Narrow Seas, we fear that
our Goldsmiths will not be able to raise it upon them.

Item, For your Safety, we do conjure all French, Irissh, and English Hectors,
to be a Guard to the whole Sisterhood, and to take up their Quarters with them
for their better security; and if they want Money for their subsistence, let
them put on Courage, and take it up on the Highways; and if any of them should
be taken in the Fact, we shall, upon our Honor, procure them Pardons: Or else
let them cheat and cozen, and they shall have Protections.

Item, For your Honor, doubt not of having what countenance Authority of holy
Mother Church can give you. And for the increase of our Practice, the Master of
our Revels shall give License for the setting up as many Play Houses as his
Holiness the Pope has Holidays in his Calendar, that the Civil Youth of the
City may be Debauched and trained up in Looseness and Ignorance, whereby the
Roman Religion may with ease be established in Court, Church, City, and Nation,
the most effectual means for the accomplishment of our Designs.

Item, We have taken special care that our Sisterhood, and the whole
Corporation, may be restored by Charter to all their former Liberties,
Privileges and Immunities whatsoever.

Item, That Sir -- Berkenhead and Sir -- Charlton, two worthy Patriots,
together with Sr. W. M. lately become zealously tender of our Honor, be
appointed to bring in a Bill upon Wednesday next, for a full Toleration of all
Bawdy-houses, Playhouses, Whore-houses, etc. that all the Adorers of Venus may
come to their Worship without Molestation: And that this Previso may be
inserted, That all Preaching, Printing, Private Meetings, Conventicles, etc.
may be forthwith suppressed; except those that are Connived at, as Members of
Holy Mother Church.

Item, We have appointed the Right Reverend Seer of Canterbury, with other
Reverend Seers, ( viz.) the B. of Rochester, the B. of Gloucester, and Dean
Hardy, the E. of Loutherdale, Mr. Brounkerd, and Bab May, or any three of them,
to be a close Committee to consult the Grievances of the Sisterhood, and to
remove all things that may hinder their happy Restoration with all Freedom,
Safety, and Honor.

Item, That all Members of Parliament, of our Religion, during this Session,
and no longer, may use their Privilege, in sending for such of our Sisterhood
to their Chambers, as they have a Mind to, upon their own terms; considering
they have so Freely and Unanimously Voted Taxes, till their Own Revenues will
not maintain them: That the Ingenuity and Gentility of the Sisterhood may
appear to all the World, That we are better bred, than to slight those that
have so Nobly provided for us.

Item, We charge that none of the Sisterhood take any more Cirsingles or
Cassocks to pawn, of any Churchmen either Romish or English, when they reel
into their Quarters, because they turn not to Account.

Item, That if any Alderman will Eat Flesh in Lent, or deal in Prohibited
Commodities, Our pleasure is, That they pay and be paid soundly for it, least
they build London-again; contrary to the intent of those that burnt it: Only
let Sir T.B. That would Piss out the Fire, and Lieut. Col. Rouswell with their
Brethren, that took care, That the Fire should not be quenched, and also
withstood the Common Council, in sending their Petition to the Parliament,
(when such full and pregnant proof was made, that the City was burnt by the
Good Roman Catholics) have all the Courtesy Immaginable. But above all, We
desire them to be kind to those, who have (to this day, out of their good
affection to the Roman Interest) prevented by several Artifices, the putting of
the aforesaid Petition into the Hands of Sir Thomas Allen, that Fanatic Zelot,
who was appointed by the Court of Common Council to deliver it to the
Parliament, who now (to our great Joy) will be Prorogued before they can do any
thing in it. Neither let those Worthies be forgotten who (in despite of the
Importunities of several busy Citizens) have till now hindered the preparing of
a most necessary Additional Bill, for the Rebuilding of London: Which Work it
is hoped will now cease, there being no time before the end of this Session, to
carry that Bill through all the Formalities of Parliament.

Items, That the same Kindness be showed to all Officers, both Civil and
Millitary, that came to the Relief of the Sisterhood in the time of their
necessity. And let those Papists which are now drawing from all parts of
England and Wales to this Place, be acquainted with the Habitations of the
Sisterhood, and delight themselves together, and consult the weighty Affairs
now in hands. But for our Adversaries, with the Rebellious Citizens, Let them
look to it when the French are ready (who as yet drop in by small Parties, and
lie incognito with the rest of the Catholics) we shall deal with them, as we
did with their Brethren in Ireland.

Item, To any other then ^ere directed, give no Entertainment without Ready
Money, lest you suffer Loss. For had we not been careful in that particular, we
had neither gained Honor nor Rewards, which are now (as you know) both
conferred upon Us.

Given at our Closset in Kingstreet Westminster, Die Veneris April 24, 1668
CASTLEM --


