TRUTH and PEACE: OR, The Last and most FRIENDLY DEBATE CONCERNING
Infant Baptism. Being a brief Answer to a late Book, entitled, The Case of
Infant Baptism; [Written by a Doctor of the Church of England.] In which Answer
is showed, I. That the Covenant of Circumcision (strictly taken) was not the
Covenant of Grace for the Salvation of Mankind, many being not bound to observe
it. II. That Circumcision was no Gospel-Ordinance, (as is affirmed by the
Doctor) but a part of the Yoke of Bondage. III. That the Jews had a Tradition
to baptize Infants, is either a Fable, or destructive to the Christian Baptism,
if grounded thereon. IV. The Doctor's five comprehensive Questions particularly
answered. V. From the whole it is made evident, that the Restoration of Sacred
Baptism, in respect of the true Subject, and due manner of Administration, is
the only true method to revive the Ancient Christian Religion in all Nations,
where it has been corrupted by humane Innovation.
Whereunto is annexed, A brief Discourse of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism
and of the use of the Ring, and bowing at the Altar, in the Solemnization of
Marriages.

By THOMAS GRANTHAM.

The Custom of baptizing Infants was brought in without the Commandment of
Christ.

Curcelleus Disserta. of Orig. Sin, n. 56. London, Printed for the Author, 1689.

The PREFACE.
THAT Prophecy of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 4. That Men shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, had too much of its
Verification in the early Times of Christianity; and as in other respects, so
in the case of sacred Baptism, both in respect of the Time and Order in which
it should be performed. 1. From a Fear that Sin committed after Baptism should
hardly (if at all) be remitted, many did delay their Duty, being desirous to
have the full remission of their Sins near their Death. This scandalous delay
of Baptism proved pernicious to the Church of Christ, as well as to the Persons
thus neglecting their Duty, and seems to have been the occasion of altering the
manner of the Administration of Baptism. For many of these Delayere being
surprised with Sickness, and afraid to die without Baptism, requested that it
might be administered to them in their sick Beds, which was endulged to them
without any Warrant from Heaven, which in such cases should always be enquired
for. Yet this Custom was so doubtful to them that did allow it, that they
required such Chinicks, that in case they recovered their Sickness, they should
be had to the River, and there be baptized. Cyprian Epist. ad Magnum.

2. Others did as much outrum the Rule of this Duty in preposterous S. Fisher*
Bap. ^^^. p. 311.
haste, even to baptize Infants as soon as born, and sometimes before; and this
Error sprang from this apprehension, that God had tied the Solvation of all
Flesh to Baptism, that even Infants dying without it, could not be saved: Yea
so powerful was this Error, that its Assertors did Anathematize all that held
the contrary. The Council of Afric decreed, That all that affirm young Children
receive eternal Life, albeit they be not by Baptism renewed, they are accursed.
Sure a more unreasonable Decree was never made by Men.

Now this Leaven of false Doctrine has so prevailed, that scarce any but
Infants came to be concerned in obeying Christ in Baptism; nor could poor
Infants obey him therein; for Austin confesses they did not willingly receive
Baptism, but strove against it with great Crying. So that neither Young nor Old
(in a manner) were found in some Ages to put on Christ in Baptism, seeing that
cannot be done without the free Consent of an Heart enlightened by Faith; Gal.
3. 26, 27. Acts 2. 40.

It is therefore the work and proper business of the Restorers of holy Baptism
to do what they possibly may to remove this Stumbling Block out of the way, I
mean this Doctrine which would damn to Hellish Torments all Infants dying
unbaptized. Concerning which I have wrote several Treatises, and could be
content still to be an Advocate for all dying Infants, as being through the
Grace of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, discharged of the condemning Power of
Original Sin, and having no Actual Sin, the Infirmity of their Nature shall not
damn them, but the Mercy of God shall save them all. And were Men's Judgments
clear in this Point, the Controversy about Infant Baptism would naturally
cease, and all Men would see it the only safe way to refer Baptism to the time
wherein through Repentance and Faith it might, according to the Will of God,
interess them in the remission of their Sins, and in the Privileges of the
Church of the Living God, in order to Life eternal.

I shall therefore once more endeavor to take away this false Covering, which
is not of God's Spirit, I mean the Doctrine of Infant-Damnation, by proposing a
few things to this Generation, as an Introduction to my Reply to the Case of
Infant Baptism. And,

1. Seeing it cannot enter into the Heart of any Christian (I hope) that God
does create Infants on purpose to damn them, and to show them no Mercy (seeing
he is very merciful to the chief of Sinners) if we can find out a just cause
for the damning of them, it must be either, 1. From themselves, from their
Parents, from the Devil, or from Christ's not loving them, so as to redeem them
from the Fall which they had in Adam. But none of these things can be the cause
of Infants Damnation. 1. They cannot damn themselves by sinful Courses, and it
is certain our gracious God will* damn none, who do not first destroy
themselves by their Wickedness. This is evident by his unwillingness to destroy
those who had destroyed themselves, Hosea 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thy* Help. How then can it enter into any Christian to
think that God should have no pity for innocent Babes who never offended him?
Is he thus compassionate toward great Sinners, and is there no Help in him for
poor Infants?

2. No Man can damn Infants, because if any have power to damn his Infants, all
Men have it, it is no Man's peculiar Power (whether good or bad) to do this; and
if any say, all Men have this Power, he reflects upon the Goodness of God for
giving such power to Men, and contradicts the Word of God, Jer. 31. Every one
shall die for his own Iniquity -- the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the
Father. This is only true in the case of eternal Death: for Children, even
Infants, often die for their Fathers Sin a temporal Death, as in the old World,
in Sodom, yea and in Jerusalem too, Lam. 2. 11. Yet who can think that our just
and merciful God should now after their swooning in the Streets, cast them into
Hellish Torments. It was not the Iniquity of the Infants, but of the grown
Persons which cried for Vengeance.

3. The Devil cannot damn Infants, because they are out of the Reach of his
Temptations* They know not to choose them, nor refuse them; they know not their
right hand from the left* they know neither Good nor Evil; whom the Devil
cannot tempt, them he cannot damn. A learned Protestant tells us, God will not
damn any Person for that which they (...) help. This Sentence must needs be as
true in the case of Infants as any (...) World. And indeed the Equity of that
merciful Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26. may suffice to convince any Man, that in the
Judgment of the Almighty there is no Sin in Infants worthy of Damnation; seeing
what Sin soever is upon them, it was impossible for them to avoid it. They
therefore shall not be damned for it.

When Christ puts the Question, How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? He
speaks to incorrigible Sinners, that the Fear of Damnation should not overwhelm
weak Persons; but never did he speak a Word against poor Infants. He never told
them they were of the Devil. Satan is not the Father of Infants. Ergo, they are
not his Children.

4. Christ loved and gave himself for all dying Infants; therefore not one of
them shall be damned. Christ gave himself a Ransom for all: He loved, and dyed
for the chief of Sinners. Therefore he loved and died for the poor innocent
Babes: He bought them that deny him, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. How should he despise the
helpless Infant?

Object. If God be so good to all Infants, why then is he not so good to let
them be baptized. I answer; God is good to Infants in that he accepts them
without Baptism. And I appeal to any considering Man, whether he was not as
good to the Infants of the Righteous before Abraham, as he was to the Infants
of Abraham? and whether God was not as good to an Infant in Israel of 7 days
old, as to an Infant of 8 days old? And whether God be not as good to us, in
that he accepts us in the use of a very few Ceremonies, as he was to Israel,
accepting them in the use of many Ceremonies? And whether if he had pleased to
accept of us upon Repentance and Faith without Baptism, he had not been as good
to us, as now, that together with Repentance and Faith he does require Baptism?
The Truth is, Baptism is therefore good, because it is commanded. It is not
good in it self, no more was Circumcision, nor indeed any Ceremony. Now
Repentance and Faith are good in themselves, it is absolutely necessary, that
those that sin, be humbled for it and forsake it. It Is absolutely necessary for
the Creature to believe, and to depend upon the Creator.

Now Baptism though it be not good in it self, yet Heavens Authority enjoining
it, and Divine Mysteries being contained in it, and Privileges conferred by
it, it is therefore good to those to whom it is appointed. But where God
requires is not, but extends his Goodness without it, it is a like Vanity in us
to give it where he does not appoint it, as it would have been in Abraham to
give Circum^^^^^^ to every Male Child as soon as it was born, or at 6 or 7 days
old (...) to his Females also, because it was a sign of a great Covenant (...)
to whom it did belong by Appointment.

And therefore I consider further, that as those had no Loss of any Privilege
that was necessary for them in Israel, who by the Law were not required to be
circumcised [as in the case of all Females] So neither shall any lose God's
Favor for not being baptized when he requires it not. The Danger lies on the
other side. For had Abraham out of a conceit of making Infants [Male] of 7 days
old, and all his Females also Sharers in the Covenant, equally with those of 8
days old circumcised them, he had hazarded both his own and their Loss of the
Covenant. In like manner, whoever will (presumptuously at least) baptize any
Person whom God does not require to be baptized, is so far from bringing him
into Covenant, that he runs the hazard of losing his own part in the Covenant:
Rev. 22. For I testify unto every Man. - If any shall add unto these things,
God shall add to him the Plagues which are written in this Book. But,

4. All dying Infants are under the Blessing of the Covenant* of Grace,
therefore no dying Infant shall be damned. This, how strange soever it may
seem, must be a Truth, or else poor dying Infants are the worst of Creatures.
When therefore we say all dying Infants are in the Covenant of Grace, we mean
it, as God has vouchsafed to interess them in his Mercy by Christ; That as
Condemnation came upon them by Adam's Sin, so Justification of Life has
abounded toward them by the Obedience of Christ; and he himself that best knew
God's Design concerning them, has declared, without excepting so much as one of
them, that to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. And what then is he that
should except them, as the manner of some is, and in their cruel Judgment send
them by Millions to Hell Torments? Now either Infants (even all of them) are
thus in or under the Blessing of the Covenant through the Mercy of God, or they
are not concerned in any Covenant at all: for the Covenant of pure Nature, as
made with Adam in Innocence, concerns not Infants, but as the Breach of it is
imputed to Mankind; but here they are lost. The Covenant of Works concerns them
not, it cannot be said of them, the Man that does these things shall live in
them. And to say that Infants are under the Blessing of no Covenant, is to rank
them with the vilest of Men, yea which the Devils themselves, who are therefore
most accursed, because there is no Savior, no Mercy for them. They are shut up
in Chains under Darkness to the Judgment of the great day. Now far be it from
all Christians to have such Thoughts of God, whose tender Mercies are over all
his Works. The very Devils had a State wherein they might have been happy, but
presumptuously fell from it, Jude v. 6. But poor Babes before they had a being
were exposed to Condemnation through the Offense of another. Shall these
Objects of Pity perish eternally too without Remedy? O God forbid; let them be
pressed with all the Inconveniences consequent to Original Sin, yet either it
will not be laid to the charge of Infants, so as to be sufficient to condemn
them; or if it could, yet the Mercy and absolute Goodness of God will secure
them, if he takes them away before they can glorify him with a free Obedience.
Dr. Tailor.

5. No Man is able to prove that any Infant ever was or ever shall be damned to
hellish Torments; therefore none of them, dying such, shall be damned. We
should hold nothing as a Point of Faith, but upon clear Proof, and especially
things of so high a Nature as this is. Some Men talk of some Infants as if they
were little better than Devils. But could never yet bring a just charge against
any one of that innocent part of Mankind. The Instance of Esau is all that
looks like an Enemy to Infants, but mind it well, there is no such matter in
it. God knew that Esau should not die an Infant, he knew he would be a bad Man,
and is judged as such. Esau is not to be ranked with dying Infants; and this
Instance failing, there is not the Shadow of any Proof that God will damn poor
dying Infants.

But because the Doctor, whose Book we are to examine, has some Kindness for
all dying Infants, as I conceive, though the Quality of his Subject does
sometimes enforce him to drop such Sentences as may seem to deny all Mercy to
unbaptized Infants, yet he corrects all such Passages, by saying they may be
saved by uncovenanted Mercy, etc. A strange Speech it is, but there is some
Kindness to poor Infants dying without Baptism; I shall therefore insist no
farther at present upon the p^int of Infants Salvation; but make my way to the
Book itself, by premising a few things.

Our late Assertors of Infant Baptism seem to me to be ready to yield that
Christ has not commanded to baptize Infants, yea some of them grant it in
totidem verbis; yet they think themselves safe, because (in their Judgment)
Infant Baptism is not forbidden. And with this Apprehension away they go to the
Jews for Relief, who out of their Talmud, Gemara, and Maimonides give them an
account of some such Usage among the Israelites. And now from Dr. Hammond (who
has searched much into the Rabinical Doctrine) they grow confident that Baptism
was a Jewish Ceremony originally, though they grant it was but of humane
Institution, and that the Christian Baptism is but the Copy, which is taken
from that Original. Yea the learned Author of the case of Infant Baptism does
tell us boldly; That our Savior being obliged to lay by Circumcision,
consecrated this Custom of the Jewish Church to be the Sacrament of Initiation
into his Church. But certainly John's Baptism of Repentance for Remission of
Sins, which was from Heaven and not of Men, was more fit to be established by
our Lord Christ, for a perpetual Ministry in his Church, than such a Jewish
Custom.

Pity it is that we should yet be contending about Infant Baptism from this
supposed humane Institution of the Jews. When our needful Work is to do our
Endeavor, to prepare our Youth (and many aged Persons too) for an orderly
Admission to that Holy Laver for Remission of Sins, and not to blind their Eyes
by fabling to them that they were regenerate and born again* as soon almost as
they came into the World. We have certainly as much need of good Schools to
catechize our Youth, and to prepare them thereby for the Profession of the most
sacred Religion, as the ancient Christians had.

This is the way to have our Posterity to receive the Truth in the Love of it,
when their Judgments are informed to understand it in the Beauty and Excellency
as well as to see the Necessity of it. This is the way to have them stand fast
under all Revolutions, when they have been radicated in the first Principles of
Cathechism, Heb. 6. 1, 2. These Principles of Christianity are plain and easy
to be understood, and yet God knows there are but a few that have a competent
Understanding of them in this Nation. And it is but a bad way to promote
Christian Knowledge in Principles of Catechism [as that of Baptism is such] by
Stories out of the Talmud, or other Jewish Books, which if we had them we
cannot understand them, why then are we sent unto them? Is the Holy Scripture
less able to make us wise to Salvation than the Talmud? Let us take to the good
old way, and diligently teach our* Youth the Rudiments of Religion; so shall
Goodness and Mercy follow us all the days of our Life, and we shall dwell (by
our Posterity) in the House of the Lord for ever.

One main thing in the Book now under Consideration is the Covenant of
Circumcision, which the Doctor will have to be a Gospel Covenant, and
Circumcision a Gospel-Ordinance. Now as all this were true, it would come short
of proving it our Duty to baptize our Infants. For seeing there is a proper
time for our Participation of all Gospel-Priviledges, so we must learn what
time this is, not from Circumcision, (for then the 8th day must precisely be
the time) but from Christ and his Apostles, who are our only infallible
Instructors herein. But that the Doctor is mistaken in this thing which he
makes a Pillar to his Building, is (I hope) sufficiently made manifest.

Nor shall it be amiss in this place to give you the Judgment of a very learned
Jew, lately converted and baptized in the City of London, because he may
rationally be thought to understand the Nature of the Covenant of Circumcision
(being a great Student in all Jewish, as well as Christian Theology) as any
other Man. And this is the account we have from him of this matter, in his
printed* Exposition upon the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 2. 40. The Jews (says
he) who were circumcised in Infancy, before Circumcision was abrogated, were
here baptized, by the order of Peter: from whence it appears that by Baptism
and Circumcision, two Covenants altogether differing, were to be sealed, of
which the one was with those who by the Law of Nature were born of the Seed of
Abraham, the other with those who were spiritually reborn by the Gift of Faith.

And whereas one main hinge upon which the Doctors Discourse for Infant Baptism
is supported, is the Custom of the Jewish Church, and the Custom of the ancient
Christian Church, the said learned Jew speaks very well to that Plea in these
Words: The Customs of Churches ought to submit to the Words of Christ, not the
Words of Christ to be wrested to the Customs of the Church; in regard the Words
of Christ are the Foundation upon which all Church-Customs are to be built,
that they may be safe and laudable. Whatsoever savours against the Words of
Christ, savours against the Truth; and, as Tertullian says, what ever savours
contrary to Truth, is Heresy, though it be an ancient Custom. It is in the
Power of God to pardon those that err out of Simplicity; but because we erred
once* we are not always to go on in our Errors.

The Doctor divides his Book into a previous Discourse, and into the Resolution
of five Questions. In stating and resolving his Questions, he repeats much of
the previous Discourse: I have endeavored to take his sense, and have set down
many of his Words; and my Reply to his previous Discourse may serve as a
Supplement to my Reply to the Resolution of his Questions, because the same
Arguments are handled in both.

What I have added about the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, I have collected
chiefly from a learned Protestant Writer, in a Book entitled, A Scholastical
Discourse against Symbolizing with Antichrist in Ceremonies.

I have intituted my Book (as you see) The last and most Friendly Debate
concerning Infant Baptism. And glad should I be to see an end of the
Controversy, by an Agreement in the Truth, or a brotherly Condescension in such
things on either part, as may be without Sin.

That I have undertaken this Task was, not the Fruit of my own Choice, but
indeed I was particularly desired by Letter from some Persons of Quality and
Learning to give a brief and distinct Answer to the Contents of the Case of
Infant Baptism; which they commend for the temper (...) which it is framed, and
for that it is very nervous in Argument; insomuch that till it was answered, it
was so satisfactory, that more need not be said on their part. And now, I hope,
they will do me the Justice, as to read me with Patience, and to judge without
Prejudice, knowing that shortly we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and receive from him the things done in the Body, whether they be good
or bad.

The Last and Most FRIENDLY DEBATE CONCERNING INFANT BAPTISM.
CHAP. I. That the Covenant, Genesis 17. (strictly taken) was not a
Gospel Covenant, nor Circumcision a Gospel-Ordinance, as is affirmed by the
Doctor.
THE Learned Author of the Book now under Consideration, may rationally expect
some Reply from those whom he calls Anabaptists, or else interpret their
Silence to be either a sullen slighting of his Endeavors to convince them, or
that they are not able (in their own Judgments) to show the Insufficiency* of
his Arguments; and the rather, because he has more obliged us to consider his
Writing, by his modest and friendly management of the Controversy, than many of
his Brethren who have bent their Style against us.

We shall therefore (God willing) with no less Modesty and friendly Demeanor,
show our Reasons, why in our Judgment his Labors have not only come short of
proving the baptizing of Infants to be warrantable by God's Word, but has
rather given us great cause to think, that the Case of Infant Baptism cannot be
made good by all that Learning and Art can do, it being wholly without Divine
Authority. And to make this good, we will now consider the chief of his
Strength, in the several Pages of his Learned Treatise.

In page 1, and 2. he would have it believed, that the State of the Church from
Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Christ was paralleled by the differing
State of the Christian Church from Christ to Constantine, and from Constantine
onwards. For (says he) there is ground for this distinction in the reason of
the thing, as is evident to any Man who is capable of considering the
difference betwixt the Church Christian, before and after its Union with the
Empire.

But here seems to be a very great mistake in the very entrance of his Book,
for it is certain that the Jewish Church from Abraham to Moses, had very little
of the Face of a Church State till his time, being as yet destitute of most of
her Laws, both for Constitution and Government. Abraham himself owning a Priest
superior to himself, even after he was called of God, and had received the
Promise both of being that Person in whose Seed all Nations should be blessed,
and that to his Seed God would give the Land of Canaan, as will appear to such
as shall peruse these Scriptures; Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3. and 13. 15, 16. and 14. 18,
19, 20.

Now this Covenant which God made with Abraham, that in his Seed all Nations of
the Earth should be blessed, Genesis 12. which was indeed an Evangelical Promise
or Covenant, (and in the Faith of which Abraham was justified, near thirty
Years before Circumcision had any being in the World) cannot be called the
Covenant of Circumcision. Neither yet when Circumcision was instituted, was the
Seed of Abraham formed into a Church State, in contradistinction to all the
World beside, for still Melchisedec was Priest of the most High God, and many
righteous Men were then living, who outlived Abraham himself, and were truly
Church Members, yea and Governors of Churches too, as well as Abraham, and yet
they were not at all concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision: And hence it is
evident, they being under the Covenant of Grace* the Covenant of Circumcision,
and the Covenant of Grace were then distinct, and not the same Covenant, so,
but that the one might and did subsist without the other.

This then may serve to show the Doctor's great Mistake, in making the Church
of Christ, from Christ to Constantine, parrallel to the Church from Abraham to
Moses, when in Truth a greater Disparity can hardly be showed: For though the
Seed of Abraham till Moses was in a State of Peregrination, as also was the
Church of Christ till Constantine, yet the Church Christian was then not only
in her Purity, but also both for Constitution and Government, as complete as
ever she was since, having received from Christ and his Apostles all the Rules
of his holy Word ( even the whole Counsel of God) necessary to her
Church State; and therewith all the Gifts of the holy Spirit, in most plentiful
manner, by which to stand perfect in all the Will of God.

And on the other side, the Seed of Abraham, till the Times of Moses had
neither Law, Priesthood, nor Sacrifice, in a settled Churchway, only they were
distinguished by the Covenant of Circumcision, as a People from whom in time
the Savior of the World should proceed, and that they should be separated from
the Nations, and settled in a plentiful Country, with Laws and special
Protection from the Almighty till Shiloh should come; and when the Messiah was
manifested to Israel, the Covenant of Circumcision ceased, and the glorious
Gospel Covenant was now plenarily to be made known to all Nations for the
Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. And here we will take notice of that excellent
Passage in Mr. Baxter, The Jews (says he) were not the whole of God's Kingdom,
or Church of Redeemed Ones in the World, but that as the Covenant was made with
all Mankind, so amongst them God had other Servants besides the Jews, though it
was they that had the extraordinary Benediction of being his peculiar Sacred
People. Now as this was true all along, so it was more particularly manifest in
the times of Melchisedec and other holy Men that outlived Abraham.

What the Doctor means to compare Constantine with Moses, is very doubtful: Is
it to make Christian Magistrates Legislators to the Church of Christ? We know
indeed Moses was a great Prophet, and appointed of God to give Laws and
Statutes to Israel; but Constantine was not his Antitype, but Christ only: and
whosoever will not hear him shall be cut off, but not by the Imperial Sword, as
God knows since the uniting of the Church Christian to the Empire, viz. the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Power for the management of Church Matters, there has
been a very bloody Scene of Affairs in most Places where such a kind of Unity
of the Church with the Empire or Worldly Government has been found, and for the
most part those who held to the Truth in the greatest Purity and Power of it,
became a Prey to that Church who obtained that Grandeur and Advantage, of which
England has of late, as well as formerly, been a terrible Instance.

Another remarkable difference betwixt the Church Christian from Christ to
Constantine, and that of the Seed of Abraham from his Days to Moses, was this,
The latter so far as it may be called a Church in that time was National, and
dependant on the Family of Abraham, none being permitted to dwell in the same
Family unless circumcised. But the Church Christian from Christ to Constantine
was not National, nor dependant on any Family, as such, but consisted only of
such in any Family as feared Ged, and wrought Righteousness, Acts 10. 34, 35.
And this being considered, will show that the Church from Abraham to Moses was
not so Spiritual and Evangelical, as the Doctor would have it, but were rather
natural Branches of Abraham's Family, and the greatest part of them grossly
ignorant of the Evangelical Covenant made with Abraham before he was
circumcised, which plainly appeared, not only in that they understood little of
Moses, as he foreshewed the Coming of Christ, but also when Christ the true
Seed, to whom the Promise was made, came to accomplish it, they knew him not,
nor the Voice of their own Prophets.

The Doctor brings Gal. 3. 17. and Romans 4. 13. to prove that the Jewish Church
was founded upon an Evangelical Covenant, for substance the same with that
which since is made betwixt God and us through Christ. And he gives a
Paraphrase upon Rom* 4. from ver. 9 to 15. and Gal. 3. from v. 5 to 10. to
prove that Faith was the Condition of the Abrahamical Covenant, which being
understood of the Covenant or Promise, Genesis 12. of the blessing all Nations in
the Seed of Abraham, and the Obligation or Condition of believing that Promise,
to extend only to such as had Means and Ability to believe it, is not denied by
us; nor can it signify any thing to the Doctor's purpose, for sure he cannot
bring Infants under this Condition, which is the thing he drives at.

But for a more full Answer, Let us consider where the stress of the matter
lies between the Doctor and us: He would have this Evangelical Covenant to be
the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. We say, It Is the Covenant or Promise,
Genesis 12. Now in the Doctor's Text Abraham is promised, that Nations shall come
out of him, and that he shall be a Father of many Nations; but not a word of
the Blessing which concerns all the Nations of the Earth. Now in our Text we
have it full, In thee shall all Families of the Earth be blessed. But the best
way is to let St. Paul resolve this Doubt, even as he is quoted by the Doctor,
Romans 4. The Promise that he should be Heir of the World was not given to
Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law. And what Law was Abraham under, but
the Law or Covenant of Circumcision? The Apostle adds, But through the
Righteousness of Faith; and yet more plainly, Romans 4. 10. How was it then
reckoned? when he was in Circumcision or in Uncircumcision? Not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision. St. Paul most clearly refers to the
Promise made Genesis 12. near thirty years before Abraham was circumcised. Now
whether Circumcision be of the Law, or whether it was a Gospel-Ordinance, is
the business to be considered.

The Doctor does expressly affirm, that Circumcision was a Gospel-Ordinance, p.
24. And we say directly contrary, that it was a Legal or Jewish Ceremony. To
prove that Circumcision was no Gospel-Ordinance we argue thus, That which could
profit no Man, except he kept the whole Law, was no Gospel Ordinance, etc. The
Apostle proves the minor, Rom 2. 25. Circumcision verily prositeth if thou keep
the Law; but if thou be a Breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made
Uncircumcision. And we argue further from Gal. 5. 2. If Circumcision bound Men
to keep the whole Law, then it was no Gospel-Ordinance, etc. The Assumption is
proved by the Text; I testify again to every Man that is circumcised, that he
is a Debtor to do the whole Law. Circumcision therefore could never be a
Gospel-Ordinance: for as the Gospel frees us from the condemning Power, and
from the Servitude of the Law, so every Gospel-Ordinance holds forth that
blessed Freedom to all faithful Men in both Respects. And hence it is clear
that howsoever Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to
Abraham, it could not be so as a Gospel-Ordinance (for he was a Breaker of the
Law after this) any more than his Offering his Son Isaac upon the Altar, Jam.
2. 21, 22. In which he was justified by Faith. And so was Abel in his
Sacrifice, Genesis 4. Heb. 11. Yea these were evident Seals and Pledges of their
Faith, as much as Circumcision was to Abraham, yet none of those can hence be
proved to be Gospel Ordinances. For indeed at the rate of the Doctor's arguing,
all the Sacrifices propitiatory, performed by faithful Men in the time of the
Law, may be proved to be Gospel Ordinances as well as Circumcision. And by his
Consequence all that took part in these Sacrifices, have a right to participate
in all Gospel Ordinances which hold forth Christ and him crucified, as well as
in Baptism. And because the Doctor builds much upon this Topic* we will further
try the Strength of it; That which was always in Comparison of the Gospel, a
weak and beggarly Element, was never a Gospel-Ordinance. But such was
Circumcision. The Major is clear, because it is the Property of all
Gospel Ordinances to represent those that are under them, perfect in Christ
Jesus, Gal. 1. 28. So that the Gospel Ordinances are neither weak nor beggarly;
but as they are a part of the Gospel it self, are said to be the Power of God
unto Salvation. The Minor is true, because the Ceremonies of the Law made
nothing perfect; for if they had, then they had not ceased, Heb. 7. 18, 19. and
10. 1. And it is evident St. Paul calls the whole Ceremonial Law (a part
whereof was Circumcision) beggarly Elements, Gal. 4. 9. And they are all
equally ceased.

And seeing upon this Ground the Doctor boldly affirms the Covenant of
Circumcision to be an Evangelical Covenant, because Circumcision did initiate
thereinto, p. 5. My next Undertaking shall be to prove that the Covenant of
Circumcision (strictly taken) was no Gospel Covenant, though called so very
frequently by the Doctor, as p. 3, and 4. all which he would make good, because
St. Paul calls Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, and because
it signified the Circumcision of the Heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. and 30. 6.

The contrary will appear from the very Recital of the Covenant it self, as set
down Genesis 17. from the Nature of Circumcision being a Legal Ceremony (as we
have proved) and chiefly because the Covenant of Grace was not peculiar to
Abraham and his, but common to others, though they were not circumcised.

To begin with the very Expressions of the Covenant, Genesis 17. from ver. 4 to
15. Whosoever shall diligently read it, will not find one Word of the Promise of
Blessedness to all Nations: But that Promise of the Messiah in whom all the
Nations of the Earth should be blessed was made (as we showed) near thirty
Years before this Covenant of Circumcision was made, But it was rather a Mr.
Cox on the Covenants.
Recital of God's Promise to Abraham, Genesis 13. when Abraham and Lot parted
asunder. And indeed of all the eight times which God spoke to Abraham, we find
the Promise of Blessing to all Nations in the Seed of Abraham, only expressed
in the first time, Genesis 12. and in the last time that God spoke to him, Genesis
22. And yet it is also true that St. Paul does include Abraham's Fatherhood
over the Faithful in that Covenant, Genesis 17. 5. and 15. 5. And so Circumcision
was to him a Seal of the Faith which Abraham had, with respect to the Promises
made at the former Appearings of God to him: But then it is as true that of
this Faith it could be no Seal to any other Person, no not to Isaac himself,
because it was Abraham alone that should have this Honor to be the Father of
the Faithful.

After this manner the ancient Christian Church seems to have understood the
Covenant of Circumcision, as appears in Chrysostom and Theophilact as
translated by two learned Writers in these words: Circumcision was called a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, because it was given to Abraham as a Seal
and Testimony of the Righteousness which he had acquired by Faith: Now this
seems to be the Privilege of Abraham alone, and not to be transferred to
others, as if Circumcision in whomsoever it was, were a Testimony of Divine
Righteousness. For as it was the Privilege of Abraham, that he should be the
Father of all Faithful, as well circumcised as uncircumcised, being already the
Father of all uncircumcised, having Faith in Uncircumcision: He received first
the Sign of Circumcision, that he might be the Father of the Circumcised. Now
because he had this Privilege, in respect of the Righteousness which he had
acquired by Faith, therefore the Sign of Circumcision was to him a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. But to the rest of the Jews it was a Sign that they
were Abraham' s Seed, but not a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, as also all
the Jews also were not the Fathers of many Nations.

And says another learned Writer; It is no ways difficult to conceive that
Circumcision might have a different respect, according to the differing
Circumstances and Capacity of its Subjects; yea that it had so in another
Instance, has been showed already. It was a Seal of the Inheritance of Canaan
to the Children of Israel, and did ensure the Promise thereof to them, and
their Seed; but it gave their Bond-Servants no such right or claim: Even so it
was to Abraham a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had, etc. but
this arose from the peculiar and extraordinary Circumstances and Capacity that
he was in. For it is not possible to conceive, that Circumcision should be a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to one that never had Faith, nor the
Relation of a Father to all Believers, as Abraham had. -- And it is equally
absurd to say that Circumcision was a Seal to all its Subjects of the
Righteousness of Faith, which they had while uncircumcised, as to affirm that
it was a Seal of a paternal or fatherly Relation to all Believers, unto every
one that received it.

Again, From St. Paul, Gal. 6. 15. we may fairly argue thus: If the Covenant of
Circumcision had been the Covenant of Grace, and Circumcision the Sign of the
Covenant of Grace (as the Doctor would have it,) then had all true Subjects of
it (as such) been new Creatures in Christ Jesus. But the true or right Subjects
of the Covenant and Sign (as such) were not new Creatures in Christ Jesus, etc.
This whole Argument is proved from the Text, which says, In Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature. Plainly thus the Jews were never the better (as to a
Gospel-Church-state) for being the Seed of Abraham, or circumcised: nor the
Gentiles never the worse (as to a Gospel-state) for being not the Seed of
Abraham, and uncircumcised. For there was no other way for either to be brought
under the Privileges of the Church Evangelical, and so to be in Christ Jesus,
but by Repentance, Faith and Baptism, or to be born again; for if any Man be in
Christ, (in a Gospel-Church-way) he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 3.
26, to the end, and 5. 24. I desire the Reader to peruse these Scriptures.

We have proved already that Circumcision was no Gospel-Ordinance, yet we shall
add, It could not be a Gospel-Ordinance, because Moses gave it as an Obligation
to keep the Ceremonial Law, or that intolerable Yoke of Bondage which none was
able to bear. For though Circumcision was before Moses, yet it was given by
him, John 7. 22. for this purpose, Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. and it self was a part of
the Yoke of Bondage. Sacrifices were before Moses, as well as Circumcision, yet
they were given also by Moses. And hence when Paul opposed Circumcision, it was
objected that he taught Men to forsake Moses, Acts 21. 21. And Circumcision is
expressly called the Law of Moses by Christ himself, John 7. 23. And therefore
the Doctor was not well advised* to affirm it to be a Gospel-Ordinance.

Again, The Covenant of Circumcision, and the Sign it self were not
Evangelical, because the Obligation to be circumcised was peculiar to Abraham,
and his Seed or Family, in such a sense, as none but they were obliged to be
circumcised. Men might and did walk with God, and please God, without being
concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision, as we have fully showed. But all Men
are equally bound to obey the Gospel, and all the Ordinances of it, who have
means to know them* they do belong to all Families, all Nations, as much as to
any, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. Romans 16. 26. So did not the Covenant
of Circumcision.

How unlike the Covenant of Circumcision was to the Covenant of Grace,
(especially in Respect of Infants) might have been perceived by the Doctor from
his own Words, p. 8. where he tells us, God made Abraham thus separate the
Children with their Parents from all the World, and look upon them, as a part
of his chosen peculiar People, by which they became relatively Holy, and
differed from the Children of Unbelievers* as much as their Parents did from
Unbelievers themselves. Sure this is a cruel Sentence against poor innocent
Babes. But I answer.

What Separation soever the Covenant of Circumcision made betwixt Abraham's
Family and the rest of the World; It is certain it could not separate them, nor
any Persons in the World, from the Covenant of Grace; there was nothing but Sin
could do that, otherwise it had been a dismal Separation indeed. And can the
Doctor once think that Let was now separated from the Covenant of Grace,
because he was not in the Covenant of Circumcision? Mr. Brouhgton Consent of
Scripture.
Sure he was a righteous* Man for all this. Yea, and other Holy Patriarchs were
yet living, as Heber, Salah, Sem, and so was Melchisedec (if he were not one of
them) being Priest of the most high God. And as these, and doubtless many more,
were good Men; so it is not to be questioned but they had their Holy Societies
and Congregations; Melchisedec being then the most eminent Type of the Son of
God, that ever was, as he was King of Peace, and Priest: in which Offices he
must needs be serviceable to many, as is well observed by Mr. Cox on the
Covenants, p. 154.

The Doctor is greatly out in making the Infants of Unbelievers to be in as ill
case as the Unbelievers themselves, seeing Unbelievers must perish, Mark. 16.
16. But it is not revealed yet to be the Will of God that so much as one dying
Infant shall perish. And as to the rest of Mankind, Mr. Baxter says very well;
That as the Jews had by Promises and Prophecies and Types, more means to know
God than any other Nations, so they were answerably obliged to more Knowledge
and Faith than other Nations were, that had not, nor could have their means.
More Proof, p. 95.

And why may not this be true, That the Effects of the Evangelical Promise to
Abraham, to be a Father of the Faithful in all Nations, had very little
Relation in a Gospel-way, to the Age in which he lived, nor indeed till the
times of the Gospel, or till Christ the Seed to whom the Promises were made did
come? And then indeed it was graciously verified, When by the Commandment of
the everlasting God [even Christ who is here so called] the Gospel was made
known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.

Nor shall the Doctor's Allegations, p. 7. of the great Numbers of diverse
Nations which turned Jews, prejudice that which we have said, seeing St. Peter
affirms, that the Mystery of the Gospel was hid from these Nations and Ages,
notwithstanding their Circumcision. For it is not to be supposed that these who
turned Jews were better skilled in the Mystery of the new Covenant, or Covenant
of Grace, than the Jews themselves, who (God knows) were generally Strangers to
the Steps of Abraham's Faith, and therefore little better in our Savior's
Judgment for being Abraham's Children, John 8. 37, 39. Nay so ignorant were the
believing Jews themselves, of the true Seed of Abraham, according to the Nature
and Extent of the Covenant, Genesis 12. 3. That when Peter preached to the
Gentiles, they contended with him, as doing that which was not lawful, for they
yet understood not that the Grace of Repentance unto Life did belong to the
Gentiles; nor did Peter, till a Miracle convinced him, understand this Grace
himself, Acts 10. The great Accession therefore of other Nations to the Jews
Religion, is no Proof that they were in the Covenant of Grace, or that
Circumcision was a Gospel-Ordinance: though there might be many among them that
so feared God, and wrought Righteousness, as to be (through his Mercy) accepted
of him; and the like in other Nations [even all Nations] too, Acts 10. 34, 35.
Yet these Accessions did contribute much to the Fulfilling God's Promise to
Abraham in other Respects; as to make the Name of the God of Abraham to be
great in the Earth; and also to advance the Name of Abraham the Friend of God.

The Doctor tells us, p. 3. That Faith was the Condition of the Abrahamical
Covenant; that it was made with Abraham, as the Father of the Faithful, and in
him with all Believers. But considering what we have proved before with respect
to Abraham's peculiar Interest in the Covenant, we may well enquire what
Covenant and Faith the Doctor means? seeing it could not be the Gospel Grace
and Faith, which was the Condition of the Covenant of Circumcision, as that
Covenant belonged to all that were circumcised: Because St. Paul tells us,
whilst the Law was in force (a part of which Law Circumcision was, as we have
proved) the time of Faith was not yet come. And that the Jews were shut up to
the Faith which was afterward to be revealed, Gal. 3. 23, 25. And that the Law
(a part whereof was Circumcision) was added because of Transgression, till the
Seed (to wit Christ) should come. And shows likewise that there was no Law (as
yet) given which could give Life. [ The Covenant of Grace made with Adam, Genesis
3. And the Promise to Abraham, Genesis 12. And the Renewal of the Covenant of
Grace to Noah, between them both, must of Necessity be here excepted] And
therefore Eternal Life could not be had by the Covenant and Law of
Circumcision, as made to Abraham's Posterity, otherwise than as it served (as a
Type or Figure) to direct them, to look for the Messiah to be born of Abraham's
Seed, according to the Flesh. And therefore the Promise, so much celebrated,
Gal. 3. can by no lawful means be referred to the Covenant of Circumcision,
strictly taken; and then all that the Doctor has said to make the Covenant of
Circumcision a Gospel Covenant, and Circumcision a Gospel-Ordinance, will come
to nothing, and consequently his whole Book, because it is mainly built upon
this Foundation.

And that the Promise mentioned by St. Paul, Gal. 3. may and ought to be
distinguished from the Covenant of Circumcision, will appear from the Date of
the Promise, which was 430 Years before the Law, Gal. 3. 17. but the Covenant
of Circumcision wants 25 Years of this account. This is plain to such as will
consider, that that great and blessed Promise, that in the Seed of Abraham all
the Families of the Earth shall be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. was at least 25 Years
before the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. And this is granted by the
Learned Willit, who in his Hexapl. in Genesis p. 145. writes thus, From this
Promise (Genesis 12.) made to Abraham, are we to count the 430 Years, which St
Paul says, were between the Promise and the Law, Gal. 3* and hereunto agrees
the Computation of Moses, Exodus 12. 40. that the Israelites dwelt in Egypt 430
Years, not in Egypt only, but in Egypt and Canaan, as the Septuagint do
interpret the place.

Now how this Promise had its Effect in the Ages before Christ's Incarnation,
or how all the Families of the Earth were blessed in this promised Seed then,
God only knows: for though the World had a Promise of a Savior from the
Beginning, Genesis 3. 15. yet that he should be born of the Seed of Abraham, was
not revealed till now. And lest any should stumble at this, that the Promise
here made, Genesis 12. was not confirmed till Abraham, was circumcised, he is to
remember that St. Paul expressly teaches the contrary, Gal. 3. 17. as I have
showed. And I will add the Judgment of a learned Writer upon the place who
writes thus.

That the Gospel was preached to Abraham, and the Covenant of Grace revealed to
him, we have asserted in such full terms in the Context, as none can rationally
doubt thereof; and moreover in verse 17. we have the time of God's establishing
this Covenant with him, so exactly noted, it was, says the Text, 430 Years
before the giving of the Law, viz. on Mount Sinai; now the Law was given in a
very little time after the Children of Israel came out of Egypt; and from the
Beginning of the first Promise to Abraham, which was, Genesis 12. 3. unto that
very Night in which the Children of Israel were brought out of their Egyptian
Bondage, is the Computation of these Years made, as will be evident to him that
shall diligently compare the Chronology of those times with the express
Testimony of Moses, Exodus 12. 41. And it came to pass at the end of 430 Years,
even the self-same Day, it came to pass that all the Host of the Lord went out
of the Land of Egypt. From the time of the first Promise, to the end of
Israel's sojourning in the Land of Egypt was 430 Years, though their Abode in
Egypt was not near so long.

And hence (says he) we collect, that in the Transaction of God with Abraham,
recorded, Genesis 12. he did solemnly confirm his Covenant with him (although
Moses makes not express mention of the term Covenant, until occasion be
offered, Genesis 15. 18.) for the Promise there mentioned, the Apostle-asserts to
be the Covenant confirmed of God in Christ unto Abraham.

The Sum of all that has been said is this, That the Covenant of Circumcision
properly taken, is not the Covenant of Grace, or a Gospel Covenant, nor the
Sign thereof Circumcision a Gospel-Ordinance, as the Doctor maintains and
affirms, that Circumcision did seal to its Subjects the same Grace as Baptism
does now: which cannot stand with Reason, because those who had been
circumcised, should not then have been baptized for Remission of Sins, for if
Circumcision did seal that Grace to its Subjects, why should it be now
conferred in Baptism? they came to Baptism not as Righteous, but as Sinners.

The Doctor's long Paraphrase on Romans 4. is rather destructive of, than
advantageous to Infant Baptism. For whilst therein he makes Faith, yea such as
enables Men to walk in the Steps of Abraham' s Faith, the absolute Condition of
the Covenant, etc. he can never make Infants the Sons and Daughters of Abraham
by Faith; yet he endeavors to do this by telling us, that the Faith and
Consent of the Father, or the Godfather, or Congregation under which he was
circumcised, was believed of old by the Jews to be imputed to the Child, as his
own Faith and Consent, 1 Maccab. 2. 46. They had very good Ground, says he, in
Scripture for this their Opinion, because the Infidelity and Disobedience of
the Parents in wilfully neglecting or despising Circumcision, was imputed to
the Children. And to strengthen this Jewish Doctrine, he brings Austin with
his, accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes, ut veniant, aliorum cor ut
credunt, aliorum Linguam ut fateantur: To all which very strange Doctrines we
reply;

By the Doctor's quoting 1 Maccab. 2. 46. it appears that the Cannonical Books
would afford no Relief for these Jewish Fables. And he that looks upon the
place in Maccabees, can find no ground to say that the Jews there did
circumcise any Children upon the Faith of Parents or Godfathers, for they did
not stay for Consent of Parents, but circumcised them valiantly, or by Force,
as in the Margin, which I take to be a bad Precedent to be brought into the
Christian Church, tho God knows they have been too forward in such violent
Proceedings. And no less strange and unsound is his Interpretation of Genesis 17.
14. where he would make the Sin of Parents to be imputed to the uncircumcised
Infant. In which he is not so well advised as some Papists; and contrary to the
Doctrine of Learned Protestants, who both in this case acquit the Infant both
from Sin and Punishment. Cajetan (tho a Papist) speaks well, Consentaneum est,
(says he) It is fit that none should be punished but they which had committed
the Fault: but Infants can commit no Fault, therefore the Punishment here
designed does belong only to the grown Persons; for they only are justly
punished, who only are justly blamed for the omission of Circumcision. And Dr.
Willit, a Protestant, speaks to the same sense, It is no good reading (says
he) to say the uncircumcised Manchild, but (...) the Male; for the Infant of
eight Days old is of purpose omitted here, though mentioned, ver. 12. Hence
then is inferred that there was no such absolute necessity of Circumcision,
that Children wanting it should be damned. And says Mr. Diodate, This is not
to be understood of Children, but of those, who by reason of their Age were
capable of voluntary Rebellion, refusing or contemning the use of the Sacrament.

As for Augustine, his Church accommodating Infants with others Feet to come to
be baptized, and with the Hearts of others to believe, and the Tongues of
others to confess; it shows that in his Judgment Baptism ought not to be given,
but where it is sought for, and where there is Faith and Confession going before
it. But that one may do these things for another, that is, one believe, and
another to be baptized, we will answer it, as Jerome did another case, Non
credimus, quia non legimus. We cannot find it ought to be so, neither in the
Old Testament, nor in the New, and therefore we believe it not. And let the
Doctor consider whether upon such Presumptions as these, he may not allow the
Feet, Heart, and Mouth of others for the Dead, that they also may be baptized,
from 2 Maccab. 12. 43, 44. The Truth is, should we admit the Dictates of the
Doctor, in this and many Parts of his Book, it cannot be avoided but that many
Innovations and Superstitions used by the Papists and others would obtrude upon
us.

In page 6, 7. the Doctor tells us, That the Gentiles, who were born of
Gentiles in Abraham' s House, or bought with Money as Servants were, and Blacks
are now among us, were the spiritual Seed of Abraham, and Children of the
Covenant. And thus also he makes the Medes, Persians and Idumeans to be
constituted in the Jewish Church by Regeneration, as the Church Christian is;
and calls them the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, because they were turned Jews,
and lived according to the Ceremonies of the Law. Which how uncertain these
Dictates are, may be seen, when we consider that St. Paul says, the Law is not
of Faith; and that if those that are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void,
and the Promise of none Effect. And how Christ calls Circumcision the Law of
Moses; and tells the circumcised Jews themselves, that they must be
regenerated, and born again, or they could not enter into the Kingdom, (or
Gospel Church) which shows plainly they were not regenerated in Circumcision,
and if they were not, then there is little hopes that their Slaves bought with
Money, as Blacks are now by us, had such benefit by Circumcision.

Nay, the Doctor is more bold, and tells us, That always it was understood that
Children were called and elected by God in their Parents: which is such a
Scriptureless Doctrine, and of such dangerous Consequence, that we cannot but
wonder that so wise a Man should assert it. Does not St. Paul expressly teach
the contrary, where he says, The Children of the Flesh are not the Children of
God: And that all are not Israel, that are of Israel: And though they be the
Seed of Abraham, yet are they not all Children. How was it possible that he
should think that the Slaves and their Children were elected, only because they
were circumcised, when Abraham's own Posterity are not therefore elected,
because Abraham was their Father, and also circumcised.

And will it not follow from the Doctor's Opinion, that Infants are also
reprobated in their Parents? Yes, he says no less (I think) when he makes the
Unbelievers Infants to differ from those his Elect Infants, as much as the
Unbelievers themselves differ from the circumcised* Parents whom he calls
Believers. God be merciful to us, and bless us from such Doctrine as this, that
his ancient way of Truth may be known upon the Earth, and his saying Health
among the Nations: for Job and all holy Men, and poor Infants too which were
not circumcised, might for all that be elected. Seven or eight Pages the Doctor
spends mostly to show how Christ did alter the Economy of the Church in many
Particulars, which do not directly concern our present Controversy, in which
there are many Dictates unproved, about the Reasons why Christ made this
Change. But we shall content our selves in setting down these two, which he
thinks moved our Lord to lay aside Circumcision; and his first is, Because by
it the Jewish Nation was become odious and ridiculous to all other People upon
the account of it.

But this Passage seems to cast a Scandal upon God himself, as that he should
appoint any thing that should make his People odious. Sure other Nations had
Usages far more offensive than this could be, in their Idolatrous Services, and
particularly the burning of their Children to Moloch. But the true reason why
it was laid aside, was, because the distinction which it made between the Seed
of Abraham and other People, as the Posterity from whence Christ should
proceed, was now unnecessary, because Christ was born and manifested to the
World: and chiefly because the Ceremonial Law to which it was a strong
Obligation, and also a part of it was now to be disannulled and taken out of
the way, as an Handwriting of Ordinances, which was against us, and was
contrary to us; Heb. 7. 18, 19. Coloss. 2. 14. Acts 15. 10. it was therefore
meet it should be taken away.

His second Reason is more tolerable, but yet not true, for though Circumcision
was a painful Ordinance, yet the Gospel requires as painful things as that was,
of all that will be Christians indeed, as the denying a Man's self; and
particularly in parting with House, Land, Wife, Children, a right Hand, a right
Eye, a right Foot, and our very Life, when God calls for them, in service to
the Defense of the Gospel. Yea, let me tell the Doctor, had he come to Baptism
it self, after the Example of Christ, who came from Galilee to Jordan (I
suppose 60 Miles) and that in the depth of Winter, to be dipped in a River, as
Christ was in Jordan, he might possibly have found it as ungrateful to Flesh
and Blood as some have found it to part with their Foreskin; and add to this
such Repentance as truly qualifies for the Reception of Baptism, and the whole
of it might possibly seem as ridiculous in the Eyes of the wise Men of this
World, as Circumcision it self.

We conclude then that the Wisdom of God was great to try the Pride and
Haughtiness of Man, in appointing Circumcision in the Time of the Law, to bring
Men to Legal Privileges. And it is no less his Wisdom in appointing Baptism,
to bring down the Pride of the greatest Nobles, and most delicate Ladies, (as
well as others) by submitting their Bodies under the Hands of a poor Minister
to be dipped in Water, at all Seasons, as they are found qualified for it by
Faith and Repentance, to admit them to Gospel-Priviledges.

CHAP. II. That the Story of the Jews baptizing Infants, is either a Fable; or
if they had such a Humane Tradition, it is rather destructive of Sacred Baptism,
to ground it on that Tradition, than any way advantageous to it.
IN page 18. the Doctor says, Hitherto I have given the Reasons of altering the
Jewish Economy -- But then my Undertaking obliges me to prove that Christ and
his Apostles did build with many of the old Materials, and conformed their new
House as much as they could after the Platform of the Old. This will appear
from Baptism it self, which was a Ceremony by which Proselytes both Men and
Women and Children were initiated; yet so much Respect had our Savior for the
ancient Orders and Customs of the Jewish Church, that being obliged to lay by
Circumcision, he consecrated this instead of it (though it were but a mere
human Institution) to be the Sacrament of Initiation into his Church, and a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. So likewise the Lord's Supper was certainly
of Jewish Original.

Answer.
This Doctrine, that Christ and his Apostles did build their new House of the
old Materials of the Jewish Church, and that they conformed their new House as
much as they could to the Platform of the Old, seems to hold no Agreement with
the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, whether we consider the
Subjects, Ordinances, or Ministry of the Church.

The Doctrine and Ministry of John the Baptist, is called the Beginning of the
Gospel, Mark 1. 1. And he would not admit of one Stone (or Member of the old
Church) as such, to be laid into the Gospel Church. Begin not to say within
your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. God is able of these Stones to
raise up Children unto Abraham. Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. Every
Tree which brings not forth good Fruit is hewn down. Matthew. 3. So great a
Change do we find, that the old Materials, in respect of Membership in the new
House, would not do, when yet there was but an Introduction, to make ready a
People prepared for the Lord.

Christ came to fulfill the Ceremonies of the Law, and to nail them to his
Cross, as we have showed, not to establish them in his Church. But the Truth
is, whoever revives them, pulls down his Church. And it were the false
Apostles, that would have conformed the Church of Christ to the Platform of the
old Jewish Church, Acts 15. 5. But the true Apostles withstood them, and
decreed that the new Church should observe no such things, but they establish
what the Light of Grace, and the positive Law of God had made necessary before
to all Mankind, Acts 15. 23 to 30. Genesis 9. 4. Thus far were the Apostles from
building the Church of Christ with Jewish Materials: That as the great
Curcellaeus says, The Apostle writ that Epistle to let the Gentiles know they
were freed from Moses's Law, lest by their hearing him read every Sabbath, they
might think they were bound to obey his Laws. And it is strange that the Doctor
should now make Christ and his Apostles Anabaptists, as he does, for he will
have them to have been baptized as well as circumcised, to initiate them into
the Jewish Church; and he will have that very Baptism consecrated by Christ
instead of Circumcision, to initiate into his Church; sure he has little reason
to write against Anabaptism, when he is one of the greatest Asserters of it
that ever was: but more of this pretended Baptism anon.

St. Paul above all the rest, rejects the old Materials, and builds all with
new; Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.
There is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before for the Weakness
and Vnprofitableness thereof, Heb. 7. 18. He calls the whole Mass of Jewish
Ceremonies, Beggarly Elements. And is it like that he would build the
Gospel Church with such Materials? much less with that supposed Baptism of
Jewish Proselytes, or of Jews themselves, which the Doctor knows was at best
but of Man's Institution.

Let us view the old Jewish Church, and the new Gospel Church in a few
Particulars briesly. The Members of the Jewish Church were Natural, called
natural Branches, Romans 11. that is, they were the Seed of Abraham according to
the Flesh. The Members of the Christian Church are spiritual, grafted contrary
to Nature into the good Olive, and born of God.

The Circumcision of the Jewish Church was outward in the Flesh, made with
Hands. The Circumcision of the Gospel Church is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by
the Circumcision of Christ.

Their Sacrifices were carnal, carnal Ordinances, Heb. 10. Our Sacrifices are
Spiritual, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3, 4.

Their Ministers were chosen of one Family or Tribe, and did succeed by natural
Descent: and were Ministers of the Letter. Ours are given by Christ, as the
Fruit of his Ascension into Heaven, and are Ministers of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.

Their two Sacraments served chiefly to seal their Right to the Land of Canaan,
and that the Messiah should come of the Seed of Abraham, according to the
Flesh; and to commemorate their Deliverance out of Egypt.

Ours seal Remission of Sins by Faith in the Blood of Jesus, and our
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven to all Eternity.

In short, Their Services made nothing perfect, Heb. 10.

Ours present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28.

But let us come to this pretended Insant-Baptism among the Jews, which is so
much made use of by the Doctor, as if it were the very thing that must give
Life to Insant-Baptism in the Christian Church. And indeed Dr. Hammond (from
whom this Doctor seems to borrow much) makes the Jewish baptizing of Proselytes
the Original, and ours but the Copy. That our Savior should thus highly
approve of a Jewish Ceremony, as to consecrate it to be the initiatory
Sacrament into his Church, is no way to be believed. For he condemned all such
Ceremonies of their own devising to be but vain Worship, Mat. 15. 9. and will
he then establish this their Tradition (if indeed they had any such)? The
Baptism of John was that which he established, both by his own Submission to
it, and Divine Testimony concerning it, Matthew. 3. 15. and 21. 25. Nor did John
take up his Baptism from the Jews, as many Learned Men of the Church of England
do teach of late. For he was a Prophet immediately sent of God to baptize with
Water, John 1. 33. And he that says John's Baptism was originally of the Jews,
as this Doctor and Dr. Hammond do teach, denies John to be a Prophet, and does
dissent herein from many Learned Protestant Writers, whose Testimonies I will
therefore here bring against them, who with one Mouth bear witness that John's
Ministry and Baptism was Evangelical, and not Ligal, Jewish, or of his own
devising.

Diodate on John 1. 6. Divine Light being now extinguished, the Son of God
himself came into the World to light it again by the Gospel, whereof John the
Baptist was the first Preacher: And on Matthew. 11. 13. John's Prerogative above
the precedent Prophets is, they have only foretold and described things to
come, but he declared the present Salvation, and in him began the Evangelical
Ministry, and the Legal and figurative Ministry ceased. This could not be
true, had he taken his Baptism from the Jewish Church.

Dr. Willit in his Synopsis; John preached the Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of Sins, which was all one with the Baptism of Peter, Act. 2. 38. And
it is absurd that Christ the Head, and the Church the Members should not have
the same Baptism. And that John' s Baptism was not of John' s devising, but of
God's Appointment, Dr. Fulk on Mat. 3.

Dr. Fulk. John by his Doctrine and Baptism prepared a way to Christ, not to
the Baptism of Christ, for he preached not his own Baptism, but the washing
away of Sins by Christ. Therefore he also was a Minister of the Baptism of
Christ.

This new Device of founding the Christian Baptism upon Jewish Baptism is
dangerous, opening a Gap to the Quakers, and other Notionists to contemn it as
a Legal Ceremony. Yet the Doctor boldly tells us, That Christ was obliged to
lay by Circumcision, and consecrated this Ceremony (used by the Jews) instead
of it. The Enemies of Christ durst not say as Dr. Hammond and this Doctor does
say, that the Baptism of John was of Jewish Original. They knew such a Speech
must deny John to be a Prophet. And yet these Learned Men have not Learning
enough to consider this.

We know the Pharisees were very zealous for the Traditions of the Jewish
Church, but it is certain they had no Zeal for the Baptism of Repentance, for
they rejected it against themselves, Luke 7. 20. And here this holy Ordinance
is expressly called the Counsel of God, which shows it was not originally a Rite
or Ceremony of humane Institution, or Jewish Ceremony.

But now let us see whether the Doctor may not possibly be mistaken in
asserting that the Jews had such a Ceremony as Baptism among them before John
Baptist came. And in this Enquiry we will prefer a Learned Protestant of the
Church of England, who writes thus:

As to their Argument who would have our Baptism to Sir Norton Knatchbul.
be derived from the Jewish Lotions, as there is nothing of certainty in it, so
it is so far from being grounded on any Authority in Scripture, that there are
hardly any Footsteps to be found thereof in the Old Testament. They deduce the
Original of Baptism from the Hebrew word (...), which signifies to wash or
cleanse. But the Rabbis, if I am not deceived, use the Hebrew word (...),
which signifies Immersion, thereby making it appear that they owe the Notion of
the Word to the Greeks, or rather to the Christians. For what affinity is there
between Lotion and Immersion? But the thing is so uncertain, that it cannot be
said of the Rabbis, that there were not several among them who differed very
much about this matter. --

For in the very place cited by the forementioned Learned Men, Rabbi Eliezer
expressly contradicts Rabbi Joshua, who was the first that I know of, who
asserted this sort of Baptism among the Jews. Now to whom shall I give credit?
To Eliezer, who asserts what the Scripture confirms [meaning that Proselytes
were not baptized] or to Joshua, who affirms what is no where to be found in
Scripture [meaning this pretended Baptism is not to be found in Scripture.] But
the Rabbis upheld Joshua's side, and what wonder was it? for it made for their
business, that is, for the Honor of the Jewish Religion, That the Christians
should borrow their Ceremonies, [how imprudent then is the Author of the Book
we are answering, to give this Advantage to the Jews against the Christians.]
But when I see Men of great Learning fetching the Foundation of Truth from the
Rabbis, I cannot but hesitate a little. For whence was this Talmud sent to us,
-- that we should give so much credit thereto --? for the Talmud is called a
Labyrinth of Errors, and the Foundation of Jewish Fables. [This is then a Fault
in the Church of England Doctors to fly hither for Refuge for Infant Baptism.]
It was brought to Perfection 500 years after Christ. [This shows the danger of
trusting to it, it being so lately confirmed.] Therefore it is unreasonable to
rest upon the Testimony of it. And that which moves me most, Josephus -- who
was also a Jew, and contemporary with Rabbi Eliezer, who also wrote in
particular of the Rites, Customs and Acts of the Jews, is altogether silent in
this matter. [He knew no baptising of Infants among the Jews] So that it is an
Argument to me next to a Demonstration, that two such eminent Persons, both
Jews, and living at the same time, the one should positively deny, the other
make no mention of Baptism among the Jews.

Besides, if Baptism in the modern sense were in use among the Jews in ancient
times, why did the Pharisees ask John Baptist, Why do thou baptize, if thou
be not Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet? Do they not plainly intimate, that
Baptism was not in use before, and that it was a received Opinion among them,
that there should be no Baptism till either Christ, or Elias, or that Prophet
came? How then there should be so much affinity between Baptism and the Divings
of the Jews, that the one should be successive to the other by any Right or
Pretense, is altogether I confess, beyond my Faith.

It appears from this learned Man's Discourse, that there is no Certainty that
the Jews had any such Baptizing of Infants, or others, as the Doctor pretends.
However, God having appointed no such thing in the Jewish Church, leaves such a
Practice (if they had it) without any Authority to govern Christians in their
Administration of Baptism. Nor do we who assert the Ordinance according to the
Scripture, need to run for Counsel to the Jews Talmud, Gemara, and Maimonides.
And indeed it looks too much like going to the Witch of Endur, and to Baalzebub
the God of Ekron for Knowledge, as if there were not sufficient Instruction in
the undoubted Word of God, how or to whom to dispense the first Ordinance of
the Gospel to a poor Convert. And it is a sure sign that the Doctor and all
that make such a noise about this Rabbinical Learning to justify them in the
case of infant Baptism, are conscious to themselves* that they have no sure
Footing in God's Word for it.

And yet so partial are our Talmudists, that they will not follow its
Directions for the manner of Baptism, which as Dr. Hammond shows is commonly
expressed by (...) Immersion, never by (...), that is, Aspersion or Sprinkling;
for such as will not be true to the Rules given in the Holy Scripture, how
should they be true to any other Book?

One thing I marvel at, p. 20. where the Doctor tells his Reader that the
Anabaptists endeavor to shift off the force of many good Arguments, by saying
Circumcision under the Old Testament was a Type of Baptism under the New. For
this I take to be a great Mistake of the Doctor, I never heard of any, whom he
calls Annabaptists, who hold Circumcision to be a Type of Baptism at all. But I
have met with diverse of the Church of England, who have affirmed it to be a
Type of Baptism; so that all that the Doctor says upon this Mistake about which
he spent some Pages, is nothing to the purpose. For we own no other Antitype of
Circumcision, but the Circumcision of the Heart, called the Circumcision of
Christ made without Hands.

But had he minded well his own Book, he might have seen Mr. Philpot asserting
the thing which he would charge upon us, where he says, The Apostles did
attemperate all their doings to the Shadows and Figures of the Old Testament.
Therefore it is certain they did attemperate Baptism to Circumcision, and
baptize Children because they were under the Figure of Baptism, for the People
of Israel passed through the Red Sea, etc. Where I think he makes both
Circumcision, and passing through the Sea, to be Shadows and Types of Baptism;
which is yet more evident, because (a little before) he tells us that Paul
calls Baptism the Circumcision made without Hands. Which though it be not true,
seeing all Men know, and Mr. Philpot cannot deny but Baptism is made by Hands,
yet it shows that he looked upon Baptism to be the Antitype of Circumcision.
But I shall not fight with dead Men, otherwise I might show his Mistake in
saying that the Apostles did attemperate all their* Doings to the Shadows and
Figures of the Old Testament: but this we have showed before, to be an unsound
Speech.

The Doctor seems to deal unfairly with Col. 2. 11, 12. Circumcision (says he)
has nothing in it symbolical of Baptism, and denies it to be an umbratical,
but areal Consignation of the Covenant of Grace; quoting the Text thus, In whom
also they are circumcised, with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting
off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ; Having
been buried with him in Baptism. Does not the Doctor by this Addition to the
Text, assert the thing which he would deny, or else denies what Paul asserts,
for St. Paul does make Circumcision a Shadow or Figure of the Circumcision of
Christ made without Hands, why else does he call the Work of Grace in the Heart
by that Name of Circumcision, as he also does, Romans 2. 29? But the Doctor does
refer this Circumcision to Baptism, having been buried with him in Baptism: but
then if this be his meaning, Circumcision must needs have something in it
umbratical of Baptism, which yet he denies, and therein contradicts Mr.
Philpot, who affirms even Baptism to be the Circumcision made without Hands.

The Truth is, this Text can never be made serviceable to Infant Baptism, as
Mr. Philpot and the Doctor would have it; seeing no more are here said to be
baptized, than had put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh. Nor, as we have
it, Romans 6. no more are here buried with Christ in Baptism, than were dead with
him. And this alone might serve to show that God expects not, that Infants
should be baptized, seeing they can neither die to Sin, nor rise to Newness of
Life, and to what purpose they should be buried before they be dead, no good
reason can be showed.

Here we are told again, that Circumcision was a real Consignation of the
Covenant of Grace, every way as real and substantial an Ordinance as Baptism is
now. It is only called a Seal in the special case of Abraham. And if it was
every way as real and substantial as Baptism is now, to what end were the
Circumcised baptized also in the Jewish Church, as the Doctor says they were?
And why does Paul call it a beggarly Element? And how could it be the Yoke of
Bondage, or the Obligation to it, and a Seal of the Covenant of Grace too? A
Seal or Sign of the Covenant of Grace frees Men from the Yoke of* Bondage; and
of this, Evangelical Baptism is a real and substantial Consignation, where the
Subject is qualified for it. Had Circumcision been such a real and sustantial
Ordinance to consign the Covenant of Grace, it would not have ceased, if St.
Paul's Argument hold, Heb. 10. 1, 2. But it is abolished as well as other
Ceremonies of the Law, which is a sign it did not make the Comers thereunto
perfect, any more than the other Legal Ceremonies. Whereas had it consigned the
Covenant of Grace, more could not be expected from a ritual to make the
Subjects of it perfect. And this Perfection have the Ordinances of the Gospel,
as we have showed before, but here the Ceremonies of the Law failed.

CHAP. III. Wherein the Doctor's first Question is answered, viz. Whether
Infants are capable of Baptism?
THE Doctor counts it Rashness to deny Infants to be capable of Baptism, and
says, Nothing can reflect more Dishonor upon the Wisdom of God, and the
Practice of the Jewish Church. And the Sum of what he brings to prove them
capable of Baptism, is to repeat what he has said before, about the Identity of
the Covenant of Circumcision, and that which is made with us in the Gospel; and
concludes, that because Infants were admitted to Circumcision, therefore they
are to be admitted to Baptism; and affirms that Circumcision was as spiritual
an Ordinance as Baptism, yea that it was a Gospel-Ordinance.

If therefore I repeat the same things which I have said before, the Reader
will (I hope) hear with that; for Answer then, I say, though we deny not but
that the Covenant of Circumcision did comprehend all those Dignities which
pertain'd to Abraham, for the Greatness of his Faith, to be the Father of many
Nations; yet every Man that reads and considers the Tenor of the Covenant* as
set down, Genesis 17. may easily see these things belonged to none but him, and
therefore Circumcision could seal the Righteousness of Faith in those peculiar
Promises (whether we consider the numerousness of his Seed, or that Christ
should be born of his Seed, and so the Nations blessed in his Seed) but to
Abraham only, because none of these Promises were made to any but to him.

We have also showed how and in what respects the Covenant of Circumcision
could not be the Covenant of Grace, because none but Abraham' s Family was
bound to keep it; nor damned, no nor blamed, if they did not enter into it: but
the case is otherwise with the Gospel: for now God commands (by the Gospel)
all Men every where to repent, and he that believes not the Gospel (when made
known to him) shall be damned.

Can it enter into the Doctor's Heart to think that all the World was now left
under Condemnation without Mercy, except Abraham and his Family? Surely it was
not in the Days of Abraham, as it was in the Days of Noah, as if God had only
found Abraham righteous before him in all the Earth. No we have proved there
were other righteous Men, and some superior to Abraham himself: wherefore
God's peculiar Kindness to Abraham, did not argue that God had rejected, and
taken the Covenant of Grace from all the World besides, but it is certainly a
presumptuous way of arguing, that because God made Infants of eight days old
capable of Circumcision, by his Command to circumcise them, that therefore we
ought to take them to be capable of Baptism, tho we have no Command to baptize
them; and then fly to the Identity of the Covenants to make it good, when there
is no Identity at all to be found between them. But to concess a little.

Let us now suppose (for Argument sake) that the Covenant of Circumcision was
the Covenant of Grace, as the Doctor would have it; yet it will not follow that
an Interest in the Covenant of Grace does infer an immediate Right always,
either to Circumcision or Baptism: and this the Doctor must grant, because
Infants of five, six, or seven days old had an Interest in the Covenant made
with Abraham, and yet had no right to Circumcision till the eighth day. Also
the Infants of the other Patriarchs had an Interest in the Covenant of Grace,
yet had no right to Circumcision at all. Nor could they, nor the Patriarchs
themselves, be cut off from the Covenant of Grace, tho they were not
circumcised. And all the Females of Abraham's Family had Interest in the
Covenant of Grace, but had no right to Circumcision; and the reason was, God
did not appoint them to be circumcised. And yet so foolish have some Nations
been as to circumcise Females without any command from God, and therefore its
less strange that Men now force on their Superstition of Infant Baptism,
without God's Command also.

But what if all the Infants in the World be under the Mercy of the new
Covenant, as it respects the Abolition of the condemning Power of Original Sin,
and Gift of eternal Life: as I think whatever the Doctor says at some turns,
yet he will grant me this (at least for the substance of it) for all that die
in Infancy; yet he will not say that all Infants in the World in Abraham's
time, who were Males, ought to be circumcised, or that all Infants in the World
since Christ's time are to be baptized. And therefore suppose the Covenant of
Grace before, in, and since the Law, to be the same, yet it is clear that an
immediate Right to the Mercy of the Covenant, (in the sense before explained)
does not infer an immediate right to partake of Ordinances, but some other
particular Qualifications; and God's Direction must give immediate right to
participate of them, or else we act and do we know not what.

Let us then calmly consider what were the necessary Qualifications for
Circumcision, and what are the necessary Qualifications for Baptism, and then
we shall soon be able to answer this Question, Whether Infants are capable of
Baptism. Infants Qualifications for Circumcision were these; They must be the
Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, or born in his House, or bought with
Money, or the Children of Proselytes, and they must be Males; and they must be
eight days old, else they could not lawfully be circumcised; I say, it was not
all Infants (as such) that might lawfully be circumcised, but Infants under
such Circumstances or Qualifications. Wherefore in the next place let us
consider the indispensible Qualifications for Baptism.

And here I shall chiefly make use of that Text, Col. 2. 11, 12. so much
insisted on by the Doctor, with its parallel place, Romans 6. 1, 2, 3. From these
Texts it plainly appears that Baptism is a mystical Burial; and therefore every
one of the fallen Race of Mankind which are lawfully baptized, are buried with
Christ in Baptism. So then there is an indispensible Necessity that all who are
to be thus buried, be first dead; for it is directly against these Scriptures,
and against all Reason and Religion, to bury any Person before they be dead.

The Question therefore is what Death is here meant. It cannot be a corporal
Death, for then none but dead Bodies should be baptized, which is absurd. Nor
can it be a Death in Sin; for if that did qualify for Baptism, then all
unregenerate Persons were fit Subjects for Baptism, but that also is absurd: It
must therefore be a Death to Sin, and to the Rudiments of the World. And thus
does St. Paul himself expound it; How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any
longer therein, Romans 6. 11. Wherefore reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto
Sin, but alive unto God. Col. 2. 20. Dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the
World. This is that Death which is so absolutely necessary to the Baptismal
Covenant, that the Doctor knows it to be granted by the Church of England, that
Repentance whereby we forsake Sin, (which is the same thing which St. Paul
calls a Death to Sin) is required of all that are to be baptized.

Another indispensible Qualification, is, every Subject of Baptism ought first
to be a Child of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; or to be a new Creature. Hence
it is said of the whole Church Militant, Ye are all the Sons of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus; for as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, Gal. 3. And as every Member of this Church is said to be buried with
Christ in Baptism; so they are said therein to be risen with him through Faith.
And to this also the Church of England gives Testimony, that Faith is required
of all that are to be baptized, even such Faith as whereby the Promises of God
made in that Sacrament are steadfastly to be believed. And that it is necessary
the Party baptized be a new Creature, they boldly affirm, when they have
sprinkled the Infant, (when perhaps fast asleep) that he is born of the Spirit,
etc. And that to be born again, is a necessary Qualification for Baptism. The
Word of God is clear, Tit. 3. where Baptism is called the Washing of
Regeneration. And St. Peter calls it the Answer of a good Conscience. And unto
this Doctrine all the ancient Writers of Christianity agree with full consent.

And for Brevities sake, as also because Augustine is thought to be as eminent
as any of the Fathers that were before him, and more eminent then any that did
succeed him, I will content my self with his Testimony, who says, Per fidem
renascimur in Baptismate; by Faith we are born again in Baptism, Sermon. 53. And
again, Primo fides Catholica Christiano necessaria est, per ipsum renascimur in
baptismate and Salutem aeternam impetramus; first of all the Catholic Faith is
necessary for all Christians, by the which in Baptism we are born again to
obtain eternal Salvation.

And that Infants have not Faith, he testifies in these Words; Si illis minati
essent ipsum Baptismum (...) susciperent, cui videmus cos cum magnis stetibus
reluctari.

From these Premises I think we may safely conclude that Infants are not
capable of Baptism; for what Man with any Truth or Fairness of Discourse is
ever able to bring Infants under these Qualifications, or to show that Baptism
may lawfully be administered to Persons of whom we can have no Knowledge, nor
Evidence from themselves, that there is any thing of these Prerequisites to
Holy Baptism, but as far as they are able ( Augustine being witness) they do
oppose and withstand it. If Infants were illuminate, they would gladly receive
Baptism, which we see them strive against with great crying.

Now all that Augustine, the Church of England, or the Doctor can say in this
case* amounts but to this; That Infants do perform this Repentance, and Faith
by their Godfathers, etc. which is so poor an Answer, so dellitute of Divine
Warrant, that it is to be lamented, that ever wise Men should satisfy
themselves with such a Speech, as no Man can know to be true, but by all
Experience is found to be false, insomuch that no Man could ever yet (I
suppose) give Thanks to God for that Faith and Repentance* which their
Godfathers performed for them, nor do the Godfathers themselves know that they
do the Infant any good, in or by any Supply the Infant does receive from them
in respect of Repentance or Faith.

But p. 24. the Doctor proceeds thus; If the relative Nature of Circumcision,
considered as a Sacrament, was the same under the Law that Baptism is under the
Gospel, it must needs follow that Children under the Gospel are as capable of
this (supposing no new Command to exclude them) as under the Law they were of
that.

But by the Doctor's favor we do not exclude Children from Baptism, but bring
them to it as soon as lawfully we can, but we must not make more haste than
good speed, nor outrun the Rule which God has given to direct us. Now these
Words [Exclude Infants from Baptism] are rather scandalous than pertinent. Does
the Doctor exclude Children from the Lord's Table, because he does not bring
them to Communion there in their Infancy? sure he does what he can to bring
them to obey God in that Ordinance with what speed he lawfully may, and so do
we in the case of Baptism. As for the relative Nature of Circumcision, though
it was no Absurdity to make Infants Members of the Jewish Church by it, when
God bad them do so; yet had any Man taken upon him to have made them Members of
the Church in the old World by such a Sign, it would have been absurd enough.
It was no Absurdity for Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac, to slay him with his
own Hand, when God did command it* but it would be Absurdity to purpose for us
to do so, having no such Command; and yet we are to sacrifice all that is dear
to us, even our own Lives, but it must be in such a way as God requires. This
talk therefore of the relative Nature of Circumcision is very vain; we say did
the Lord require us to baptize our Infants, and to give them the Communion,
there could be no Absurdity in either, but then he would have diversified the
time for Participation of these Ordinances, as he did in the case of
Circumcision for the 8th day; though it was the precise time for the Admission
of Infants, yet it was no rule at all to the Adulti. Show now that God has
required Baptism at a precise day to the younger sort, and prefixed no precise
day of Age to the elder sort (for thus he did in the Circumcision) and the
Dispute will soon end.

Circumcision did relate necessarily to all Servants bought with Money in
Abraham's House, as Members of his House, but the case is not such in Baptism.
And it was yet never proved that those Persons who were thus circumcised, were
to be qualified for it by Faith and Repentance; but it rather seems to have
been done at first in Abraham's House, either in Obedience to Abraham's
Authority over them, as his Bondmen, Servants, or Child; or else by plain
force: for seeing Abraham circumcised all his that very day, they* had little
time to have Faith and Repentance wrought in them; nor is there one word of
Abraham's preaching any thing to them. But it is said, He took Ismael his Son
and circumcised him, and all that were born in his House, and all that were
bought with Money -- every Male -- the self* same day. Here was bloody Work; and
Dr. Willit thinks the Number of the Males was so many that Abraham could not
circumcise them in one day, and that he used the help of others to do it. And
what Faith and Repentance could be expected from Ishmael at 13 Years of Age,
especially considering that he was not the Child of Promise, nor to have the
Covenant established with him.

And who will say that Abraham, or the Jewish Church either, had any Commission
from God to teach all Nations, circumcising them? this way he never went; but
if he bought any of them, them he would and did circumcise. And where is the
new Birth made the Qualification for Circumcision? No Man can give an Instance
of it. But nothing is more common in the case of Baptism: surely the plain
Truth in short is this: Circumcision did relate generally to a carnal Seed, and
to a Terrestrial Inheritance; but Baptism relates only to a spiritual Seed, and
a Celestial Inheritance.

And let not the Doctor reflect upon us (as he does p. 27.) but we pray the
Doctor to consider whether God was not as wise, and had as great Goodness for,
and care of Infants, and others too, from Adam to Abraham, as from Abraham till
Christ's time. And yet the Doctor knows there was no outward sign appointed for
initiating Infants, as the Doctor speaks: and wherein does it appear that God
was more gracious to Infants by or through Circumcision, than he was to the
Infants of the other Patriarchs? The Fathers tell us (as quoted by learned
Protestants) that Circumcision did not profit the Soul of the Infant; nihil
animae Circumcisionem illum profuisse. Chrysostom. Hom. 39. in Genesis And yet the
Wisdom of God was great in appointing Circumcision so early (seeing it must be
the Mark to distinguish the Family of which Christ should be born, etc.) for
the pain was more easy to be born in Infancy, than when they attained to
Manhood.

Neither is it by any means to be supposed, that God by giving this Ceremony to
Abraham, etc. did neglect all the Infants in the World, as to the Business of
Salvation (which I must mention, because the Doctor ever and anon is dropping
such Passages as may deceive his Reader with such Apprehensions, though I am
sure the Doctor does believe no such thing.) He was still the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, and all Infants were still his Offspring; and never
rebelling against him, his gracious Nature would not suffer them to perish
without Remedy, and Remedy they could have none by Circumcision; for it was not
appointed for them. And indeed to conceit our selves, that our wise and good
God should make either Circumcision or Baptism (or any other Ritual) necessary
to the Salvation of poor dying Infants, is a poor low conceit of God, and
contrary to all Rules which he has given to Men to extend Mercy or Justice. For
seeing it is not possible for them to have the one or the other, but at the
Will of* others, God's ways are so* equal that he will never punish them for
want of either: but the Truth is he required the first but of a few in
comparison, and the latter not so much as of one Infant: whence then is there
such a quoil about Infant Baptism?

One great Pretense of the Doctor for Infant Baptism, is taken from the ends of
Baptism, some of which he will have Infants to be capable of, and therefore to
be baptized. This is the sum of what he says in a multitude of Words in several
Pages. But upon a right Discovery of the ends of Baptism, as they are really
such, his Antecedent will vanish.

The Ends of Baptism (be they what they will) are to be considered in such a
sense, as that ordinarily without Baptism such things cannot be obtained. And
of these ends, Remission of Sins, and Eternal Life are the principal, Acts 2.
38. Mark 16. 16. Now where ever, or upon whomsoever God calls for Obedience in
Holy Baptism, as the way in which these Ends are by them to be obtained, there
the Duty of Baptism being refused, these Ends are lost; as appears in the Case
of the Pharisees and Lawyers, Luke 7. 29. They rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized.

Now I deny that Remission of Sins, and Eternal Life, are propounded to, or in
the Case of Infants, as the Ends of Baptism. They have Remission (so far as
they need it) and Eternal Life, upon other Terms, even the free Mercy of God in
Christ, Romans 5. 18. And the good will of God toward them, Mat. 18. 14. And if
Infants are incapable of these, as they are the Ends of Baptism, so they will
be incapable of all other Things which are annexed to Baptism, as the Ends of
that Ordinance. As we will propose two, viz. the washing of Regeneration, and
incorporating into Christ; Infants are capable of neither of these, as they are
the Ends of Baptism. For, Baptism is but demonstrative, or a sign of the New
Birth; because God will have those that come to be baptized, therein to
testify, that they have, and therein symbolically do put off the Body of the
Sins of the Flesh, which Work had its Effect from the Word and Spirit of God.
And, 2. to be incorporated with Christ, as it is an End of Baptism, does
necessarily presuppose, a being taken out of the Tree that is wild by Nature,
or out of our degenerate Estate, and planted contrary to that Nature, by a
willing resignation of Soul and Body to Christ, in that solemn ministration of
Baptism. And how incapable Infants are of this, all Men must needs see. To be
short, if it could be proved by the Word of God, or found true by Experience,
that Infants are capable of any Good; or* that the Will of God was wrought by
baptizing them, I could yield to the Doctor: but the Truth is, they are capable
of none of the Ends of Baptism, as God has annexed them to Baptism, and
therefore his Argument must come to nothing. And how easy were it to turn this
Argument against him in the Case of the Lord's Supper, but that may be more
sitting in another place.

But the Doctor says, p. 28. That Infants are capable of all the Ends of
Baptism, as Baptism is instituted for a Sign from God toward us, to assure us
of his gracious Favor, and to consign unto us the Benefits of the Covenant of
Grace.

Now, if this Doctrine be true, then either Baptism is a sure Sign of all these
Things to all Infants, or to some few of them only: The former the Doctor will
not allow; and yet he cannot but know, when Christ said, Teach all Nations,
baptizing them, he makes no difference between one Person and another, all are
equally to be taught, and baptized equally upon the same Terms. And if the
Doctor will have some Infants only to have an Interest in the Benefits of the
Covenant of Grace, and therefore but some only have right to Baptism, which
consigns the Covenant of Grace, we shall desire him to prove this well, and
therewithal to let as know how he knows one sort of these Infants from another.
He says, indeed, That Infants may be Members of a Church (their Childhood
notwithstanding) as well as of a Family, etc. But to be of a Family, is equally
natural to all Infants; so that if this Argument prove any thing, it proves all
Infants Church Members as much as any. Nor, says he, does Childhood hinder or
incapacitate them for being adopted the Children of God, more than the Children
of any other Person.

But God is not like Man to adopt (or receive into favor) some poor Infants,
and let all the rest perish without favor: We affirm, that God has in Mercy
taken care of all Infants, (as we have proved): But this does not teach us to
do that to some of them which he never commanded, and to reject the rest, as if
God had no Mercy for them. These Notions are so partial, and so uncertain, that
no solid Comfort can be taken from them. And let my Infant, (whom I confess I
have not baptized, but only devoted him to God's Mercy and Protection by
Prayer) and the Doctor's Infant (whom he has crossed and sprinkled) be laid
together, I am persuaded the Doctor would tremble to say, this Infant is an
adopted Child of God, and in his Favor; that Infant is rejected, and out of
God's Favor: And truly I cannot but think such Discourses as these, proceed
not from the bottom of the Heart, but Men please themselves to dream waking, of
I know not what Favor Almighty God has for their Infants, above what he has
for others.

The Doctor's next way is to make use of Similitudes, as thus; Should a Prince
adopt a Beggar's Child, and incorporate him into the Royal Family, and settle a
part of his Dominions upon him; and to solemnize and confirm all this, should
cut off a bit of his Flesh, or command him to be washed with Water; who would
count this an insignificant Ceremony, or Solemnity? or say, that the Child was
not capable of the Sign, when he was capable of the chief thing signified
thereby?

Surely such flourishes as this, may soon deceive those that rest upon them.
For, 1. here is no qualification in this Child, nor any required of it in this
case; but every Beggar's Child is as capable of this Favor as this Child: and
consequently this makes no more for the Infant of an English Man, than of an
Indian; God may be as kind to the one as to the other. 2. Here Is the King's Act
of Grace peculiar to this Child, and to no other. 3. Here Is the King's express
Command, to cut off a bit of the Child's Flesh, or to wash it with Water. And
thus the whole of the Matter is begged; but not any proof for Infant Baptism
ministered from hence; for we grant, that the Things here supposed to be done,
do sufficiently capacitate the Beggar's Child for the Mercy and Favor of the
Prince; but then it as much incapacitates other Children, to whom the King has
extended no such pity, and concerning whom he has given no such order; for
should the Doctor now, without any Order from the King, fetch all the Beggars
Children in the City and Country, and pass all these Solemnities upon them,
that they all may be received into the Royal Family, etc. I suppose he would
have but little thanks for his labor: even so to cross, sprinkle, or dip all
the Infants in the World, [and either all or none have right to it] and to
adopt them thus to be of the Family of Heaven, without Heaven's Authority to
make them capable of it, and God's Direction in the Business of the Solemnity,
will not please God. We therefore content our selves to commit our Infants to
his Mercy and Protection, in the way of humble Prayer for his Blessing; and for
this we have his own Son, our Lord, to go before us, who thus does suffer
little Children to come unto him, without rejecting so much as one of them.

The Doctor's next Similitude proceeds thus; Suppose a Prince should send for
an attainted Traitor's Child, and say -- You know the Blood of this Child is
attainted by his Father's Treason; by Law he has forfeited all right to his
Father's Estate -- My Bowels of Compassion yearn upon him, and here I restore
him -- and before you all wash him with pure Water, to signify that he is
cleansed -- and restored to his Birthright -- Could any Man say that the
Action was insignificant, because the Child knew nothing of it?

Now in this Similitude, the Doctor begs almost every thing in question between
us. As, 1. That all that are attainted with Original Sin, must be washed with
Water, as a sign that they are cleansed from it. 2. That God vouchsafes the
Bowels of Compassion to such Infants only as he intends shall be baptized. 3.
That he does not require the Party baptized to understand or take notice of any
thing, but bids the bystanders take notice of these Things. And, 4. this
Similitude supposes, that all Rules about Infant Baptism are plainly delivered
by our Heavenly King, when not one of these things are true. But the Doctor
does very ill to suppose that to be a true Gospel-Sacrament, which wants the
inward and spiritual Grace; as in this Similitude there is no knowledge or
consent on the part of him that is baptized, but a mere force is put upon him.
And yet when the Doctor can show us what Infants in particular the Bowels of
God does yearn toward, and his Will that they be cleansed by washing with
Water, that shall suffice to make them capable of Baptism.

But before we leave this Similitude, let us consider whether the Foundation of
it be sound. Are Infants indeed such attainted Persons? Sure no; for whatsoever
was their Case considered in sinful Adam, yet when through Christ Adam was
redeemed (that is, virtually* by the Promise of a Savior, Genesis 3. 15.) all
Infants* who then were all in him, had the Attainder taken off, as much as from
Adam himself, John 1. 29. So that this Attainder of Treason against Infants, as
they proceed from Adam, is but a Fancy; and to think that he has left Original
Sin to be washed away by Baptism, from poor innocent Babes, is another Fancy;
and yet these were the Grounds on which Infant Baptism was built at first, and
many are yet under the dominion of this Mistake.

We conclude then, that through the free Mercy of God in the Gift of Christ,
the Attainder of Sin which lay against Infants to Condemnation, was taken away
from the Foundation of the World; and that Baptism was not ordained of God to
take away Original Sin, but for the Remission of Actual Sins upon Repentance
and Faith. Nor does it appear, in all God's Book, that he appointed any Ritual,
no not Circumcision it self, to take away Original Sin, and he that shall
assert it, will be entangled in so many Difficulties, as he cannot escape. For
what then took Original Sin from all Males that died before the eighth Day? And
what became of all Females and Male Infants throughout the World? Did God leave
them all under a Malady, without any Remedy?

And though the Doctor insists never so much upon that Apochryphal Story of
Infant Baptism among the Jews, before the coming of John Baptist, yet as
himself yields, p. 18. it was not of Divine Institution* so it is looked upon
to be a Fable by the Learned of his own Church, who tell us, as we have showed,
That Rabbi Eliezer denies* that there was any such Baptism among the Jews,
though Rabbi Joshua does affirm it. To whom shall I give credit, (says that
Learned Protestant) to Eliezer, who asserted what the Scripture confirms, [that
there was no such Baptism among the Jews] or to Joshua, who affirms what is no
where to be found in Scripture?

I am not concerned in their answer, who do prove Infants more capable of
Circumcision than of Baptism, because it left a Character in their Flesh. But I
answer, whatsoever makes any Person capable of Baptism, the revealed Will of
God to order it so is the chief; us for Example, some Infants might be as
capable of Circumcision on the 7th day, as others on the 8th, yet those of 7
days were not at all capable of Circumcision. So that for Men to insist upon
their Conjectures, about Infants Capacity or Incapacity, is but to wander in
the Dark. It must be the Institution of Baptism, the Commission for the use of
it in all Nations, and the Example of Christ and his Apostles, and Churches by
them constituted, that must decide this Question, Whether Infants are capable
of Baptism?

CHAP. IV. Answers the Doctor's second Question; Whether Infants are excluded
from Baptism?
AND here in the first place (says the Doctor) I must observe that the
Question ought to be proposed in these Terms, and not whether Christ has
commanded Infants to be baptized? For as a good, Author observes of the River
Nile* we ought not to ask the Reason why Nile overflows so many days about the
Summer Solstice? But why it does not overflow all the Year long?

But by his Favor he is as wife a Man that asks the first Question, as he that
asks the second. And I know but one Answer to be given to both, and that is
chiefly and before all things* It is the Will of God to order it so. Now let
this be applied to the case in hand; And the Will of God shall determine, who
are, and who are not to be baptized*

And let the Doctor here resolve me, whether God excluded Infants of 6 or 7
days old from Circumcision, when yet there is no negative Law, you shall not
circumcise them; and he will soon answer his own Question: For his Answer must
be, seeing God did not appoint Infants of 7 days old to be circumcised,
therefore he did not admit them to it; and our Answer is the same, Christ did
not command to baptize Infants, therefore he does not admit them to it. And it
is observed by some learned Men, that tho Negative Commands do usually exclude,
yet it is also true that an Institution of God, and an affirmative Command does
exclude all that is above or besides that Command and Institution. And they
bring Levit. 10. 1, 2, to justify what they say: For Nadab and Abihu came to a
dismal end. And says Diodate, Though the Command was not given before, yet it
was a Sin, in undertaking the contrary before God's mind was known. And so may
the Doctor find the same Acceptance, in going where he has no Law to direct
him, though there were no negative to forbid him; however we dare not follow
him because we fear the Lord, who if we add to his Word, will reprove both him
and us, Prove. 30. 6.

But here again the Doctor would build his Infant Baptism upon that Jewish
Tradition of baptizing the Infants of Proselytes, though he knows they had no
Authority from Heaven for it. And we have showed from a learned Author in chap.
2. that it is very probable there was no such thing. And it is very strange that
the Doctor or others should suffer themselves to be thus deluded from the
Simplicity of the Gospel by the Jews Talmud, which the Learned Buxtorf explodes
with such Indignation; Whence (says he) was the Talmud sent to us, that from
thence we should think that the Law of Moses either can or ought to be
understood, much less the Gospel, which they were prefessed Enemies unto?

And yet now this is become one of the chief Refuges of this Doctor, and of Dr.
Hammond before him, for the Support of Infant Baptism. And it is strange that
the Doctor should hope by such Arguments to bring any Credit to the cause of
Infant Baptism. He might as well have referred us to the Turkish Alcoran, where
diverse Washings are also mentioned.

Page 32, 33. Upon this tottering Foundation the Doctor builds diverse
Suppositions; as first, That if Christ had not changed the Seal of the
Covenant, but had said, Go make all Nations my Disciples, circumcising them; I
appeal (says he) to any impartial Man's Judgment, whether the Apostles would
not have presumed, that it was Christ's Intention that the Infants of adult
Proselites should be circumcised? And in a Word (says he) there lay no
Obligation upon our Blessed Lord to lay aside the Practice of Infant Baptism,
as being inconsistent either with the free or manly, or universal Nature of the
Christian Church. I answer,

1. The case which the Doctor puts is not at all rational, but upon this
Presupposition that the Disciples had known the Law before given to Israel, and
their Practice in that case: but they knew no such Law to have been given to
any Nation in the case of Baptism, so that they must only keep to the Words of
their Commission, and the Practice of their Master, who made and baptized
Disciples, and none else, John 4. 1.

2. I must needs tell the Doctor that Christ was obliged to disapprove and make
void the Custom of the Jews in baptizing Infants, (if they did so) seeing it
was but their own Tradition; and that from the Tenor of his own Doctrine,
Matthew. 15. 9. Mark 7. In vain do ye worship me; teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men. For it was their diverse Traditional Washings which he was
here opposing. And seeing the Doctor grants their Infant Baptism was but a
humane Institution* the Pharisees might have replied to our Savior, Why do
thou reprove our Washings? Do not thou also allow the Doctrine of Men in the
case of Infant Baptism? Teach thou another, and teach not thy self? And
now the Doctor's Suppositions will tumble down of themselves; for seeing the
Apostles knew no such Practice, as baptizing Infants by God's Appointment in
the Jewish Church, and they having heard their Master condemn all Washings in
Religion founded only on humane Authority, as being but vain Worship; and now
receiving no Commandment (as the Doctor must also confess) to baptize Infants,
Matthew. 28. 20. they were sufficiently forbidden to baptize any Infants by
Christ's severe Censure against the Jews for worshipping God after their own
Tradition.

And therefore though the Doctor thinks he has given some reason why he stated
the Question, as you have heard, yet I humbly tell him he was therein very
unreasonable, in that he would beg the whole Controversy, whilst he will
suppose, nay conclude, that Infant Baptism had been the immemorial Practice of
the Jewish Church, and approved, or not censured by our Savior. And then
indeed if this were true, his Suppositions might beguile a wiser Man than I am:
But all this being mere sophistical, beggarly and presumptuous Insinuations, it
is to me a great Evidence against Infant Baptism.

But now the Doctor ( p. 34* 35.) will show that Matthew. 28. 19. Mark* 16. 16.
Heb. 6. 1, 2. does not so much as consequentially prohibit Infant Baptism. And
because we think these places do evidently show that Christ in the two first
could not impose any such thing upon his Apostles, as to teach Infants, and so
not to baptize them, because all that he commands them to baptize, he commands
them first to teach, or preach the Gospel to them. And Heb. 6. 1, 2. shows very
plainly that Baptism does not go before, but follows Repentance and Faith, and
therefore cannot with any show of Truth or Reason from hence belong to Infants,
but the contrary. I fay, because we thus think and teach from these Scriptures,
the Doctor says, we are grievously mistaken, because these and the like Texts
do of themselves no more prove that grown Persons are the only Subjects of
Baptism, than the Words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. proves that grown
Persons only are to eat. From whence in their sophistical way it may be argued
thus, It belongs only to grown Persons to eat, because the Apostle requires
that Persons who eat should first work. But I reply;

The Doctor does here greatly wrong both the Apostle and us: 1. The Apostle
does not say, Any that does not work shall not eat, for he knew that grown
Persons who are sick and weak as well as Infants, cannot work. But he says, If
any would not work, these only are they who shall not eat, i. e. such as are
able, and yet being idle, would not work. Is this fair for the Doctor to
pervert the Words of the Text? 2. He abuses us, for we do not baptize any grown
Persons merely as such. No, all that we baptize are (or at least profess to be)
newborn Babes in Christ. Now our Savior designing Baptism to be the Laver of
Regeneration, must needs prohibit those of whose Regeneration no Judgment can
be made, nor Demonstration given by any Man whatsoever* Surely the Doctor has
little reason to talk of his discovering the fallaciousness of our Arguing. But
he says, he will further show the Weakness and Fallacy of our Argument: Let us
hear him do that.

Suppose (says the Doctor) there were a great Plague in any Country, and God
should miraculously call an eleven or twelve Men, and communicate to them a
certain Medicine against this Plague; and say unto them, Go into such a
Country, and call the People together, and teach them the Virtues of this
Medicine, and assure them, that he that believes and takes it from you, shall
live; but he that believes not, shall die. Upon this Supposition I demand of
these Dissenters, if the words of such Commission would be sufficient -- to
conclude that it was God's intention that they should administer his revealed
Medicine to none but grown Persons, because they only could be called together,
and taught the Virtues of it, and believe or disbelieve them that brought it.
No certainly this way of arguing would not be admitted by any rational Man,
etc. I answer;

This Similitude is very fallacious and deceitful, supposing what is not to be
supposed in our Case, no, I think not in the Doctor's own Judgment. For 1st. no
Infant is under the Disease or Plague here meant or intended by the Similitude.
For seeing Christ has taken off their original Pollution, they are just Persons
that need no Repentance, they are to be distinguished from Infidels,
Whoremongers, Drunkards, Swearers, Idolaters, superstitious and erroneous
Worshippers. The Plague of Unbelief cannot seize them, therefore the Medicine
of Faith is not applied to them. The Disease of transgressing the Laws is not
upon them, Romans 4. 15. therefore they have not the Medicine of Repentance
appointed to them, and consequently not the Baptism of Repentance.

Secondly, This Similitude supposes Infants cannot be cured of the Disease they
are under without Baptism, which is so contrary to Truth and to Protestant
Doctrine, that it is to be exploded. And thus we see this Flourish, about which
he spends two or three Pages, to the amusing his credulous Admirers, comes to
nothing at all. For no sooner is it looked into, but it vanishes as a Dream
when one awaketh. Even so, Lord, shall thou despise this false Image of the
Gospel, and all that are like unto it.

And like unto this is the next following, p. 36. For tho it be true that
considering the previous Law of Circumcision, Genesis 17. it is not to be doubted
but that David or Solomon would both observe it in any Commission which they
might give to propagate it. But what is all this to the purpose? Where is the
previous Law that commanded Infants to be baptized? And such a Law as must be
supposed according to the Similitude, to oblige our David and Solomon, even
Christ himself to observe it? Where (I say) is this Law to be found? Not in the
Word of God, the Doctor confesses that: Where then? why in the Talmud, the
Gemara, etc. Very well. But then this wretched Talmud was not finished in our
Savior's days, but 500 years after, and so could be no Rule to him: nor in the
time of his Apostles, and so could be no Rule to them, and therefore I hope it
shall never be a Rule to us.

The Doctor, p. 38. says, we put the greatest stress upon Mark 16. 16. But it
is plain (says he) that the believing and not believing in that Text, is only
to be understood of such as are capable of hearing and believing the Gospel.
Now as this is very true, and therefore Infants may and shall be saved without
believing; so it is as true also, that Infants are not concerned in the Duty of
Baptism here mentioned, but may and shall be saved without that also.

And as the Doctor tells us, he has proceeded thus far to show how
inconclusively and absurdly we argue, etc. so I have proceeded thus far too, to
show how little Truth or Reason he has used to convict our Arguments of
Weakness. But he adds, So weak are all the Arguments of the Anabaptists, by
which they endeavor from Scripture to prove that Christ has limited the
Subjects of Baptism to grown Persons, etc. Even so I reply, that our weak
Arguments are too strong to be overthrown by such impertinent Similitudes as
the Doctor has brought against them. And for Scripture, as he has none, so he
has brought none, but 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. which he has also very much perverted, as
he does also the Arguments used by us.

Here the Doctor ( p. 39, 40.) is pleased to say, That Infant Baptism is so
universal and ancient a Practice, that no body knows when and where it began;
or how not being, it came to be the Practice of the Church, since there was
never any Church Ancient or Modern, which did not practice it, it must argue a
strange Partiality to think that it could be any less than an Apostolical
Practice and Tradition. And he brings Tertullian saying, Had the Churches
erred, they would have varied, but what is one and the same amongst them all,
proceeds not from Error, but Tradition.

Here the Doctor has left his Jewish Fort, and takes Sanctuary in Apostolical
Tradition; and indeed, the wisest Man that asserts this Scriptureless Practice,
is at a loss where to fix it. Nay, the Doctor now tells us plainly, That no
Body knows when, and how, and where Infant Baptism came in. And we tell him as
plainly, that this is a sign that it is an Error, and came in privily, stealing
by degrees upon the Churches, as false Teachers are said to do, Gal. 2. 4. But
now if the Doctor will stand to Tertullian's Rule, we shall soon prove that
Infant Baptism is an Error. For,

1. All Churches have not held or practiced it; no, not so much as one Church
mentioned in the Holy Scripture, or during the Apostles Days. The Mother Church
at Jerusalem knew no such practice, for non apparentibus, etc. that which
appears not, is not. It Is easy for the Doctor to say, all Churches held it, but
it is impossible for him to prove it. He confesses, no Body knows when it came
in, nor how, nor where; and why then might there not be true Churches before it
came in, even in his own Judgment, and then all Churches have not held it.

2. But now this is our Argument from Tertul. If the Churches varied about
Infant Baptism, then they erred in it: But they varied about it, ergo they
erred in it. The Major the Doctor must not deny, because it is become his own;
The Minor I shall prove presently; first, in Tertullian himself, for he was not
always the same, even as he is quoted by the Doctor, p. 41. for first he brings
him in saying, Pro cujusque personae condition, ac dispositione, etiam aetate
cunctatio Baptismo utilior est, praecipue tamen circa parvulos, etc. It seems
then, that tho he speaks favorably of it afterward; yet he thought the delay
of Baptism, ESPECIALLY FOR LITTLE CHILDREN, to be more profitable. And this
also was the Opinion of Nazianzen: These two great Men, who are (at least the
first of them) as early Witnesses of Infant Baptism creeping into the Church,
as can justly be named, showing so much doubfulness about baptizing Infants, is
a great sign it had no Authority from Christ and his Apostles; for what were
these Men to teach to delay it, if Christ had commanded it? And yet so they did
expressly teach, as the words quoted out of Tertullian by the Doctor do farther
show, because it was his present Opinion, That, cun^tatio Baptismi praecipue
circa parvulos was utilior. He answers, Venient dum adolescunt, venient dum
discunt, dum quo veniant docentur. Yea, he further says, Fiant Christiani quum
Christum nosse potuerint; but this the Doctor left out. And if after this he
altered his Judgment, as the Doctor supposes, (though some Learned Men think
otherwise) it shows, that he was contrary to himself in this thing.

Now that whole Churches varied about it, whether we respect the Infant
Subject, or the alteration of Dipping to Sprinkling, has been abundantly made
evident by many; so that I shall content my self with an Instance or two out of
the Learned Du-Veil, who from Grotius on Mat. 19. 13. gives this account: That
according to the Rule of Scripture, and agreeing with Reason it self, the most
part of the Greeks in all Ages, even unto this Day, retain a Custom of delaying
Infant Baptism, till they themselves can give a Confession of their Faith. He
also brings Nazianzen, in his 40th Oration, treating of those to whom Baptism
was not administered BY REASON OF INFANCY. And it is certain, that Nazianzen
himself, though the Son of a Christian Bishop, about the 4th Century, and bred
up in the Christian Religion, was not baptized till he was about thirty Years
of Age. The same is also true of Chrysostom, Hierom, Ambrose, Austin, and
others. And hence (says he) it does manifestly appear, That the wisest of our
Fathers in Christ did not come to Baptism, until they were come to a strong and
confirmed Age and Wit. Note here, the wisest of our Fathers were not baptized
in Infancy; you may be sure then, that the Churches did vary about it. I could
never read of so much as one of the Ancient Fathers, for six hundred Years
after Christ, that was baptized in his Infancy.

The Learned Curcelaeus, as quoted by Du-Veil, affirms, That the Custom of
baptizing Infants, was brought in without the Commandment of Christ, and did
not begin before the Third Age. And the Custom of it being brought in, was much
more frequent in Africa than in Asia, and with far greater opinion of
Necessity. This must needs satisfy, that the Churches did vary about
Infant Baptism at its first creeping into the Church. And how Christians have
varied one from another because of it, is apparent in all Ages and Nations
almost ever since it had a being, has been very largely evidenced, by the care
and industry of Mr. Danvers and others: And, I think, this present Age may
speak for it self, that there are very many Christians, and Churches too, who
vary about this Matter. Therefore after the Doctor's Rule from Tertullian, they
have, and do err in this Matter on the one hand, or on the other.

As the Alteration of the Subject, so the Alteration of the manner of the
Administration, has caused great discord among Christians. How Offensive it was
to use Sprinkling (which it should seem some were laboring to introduce) in
the Year 816, may be gathered from the Synod of Celicyth, who gave strict Order
to Dip, and not to Sprinkle; Let the Presbyters beware, that when they
Administer the Sacrament of Baptism, they do not pour Water upon the Heads of
the Children, but let them be always plunged in the Font, according to the
Example of the Son of God. But directly contrary hereunto, our English Synod,
in their Rubric, do order the Presbyters to Sprinkle, in case the Child be
weak; and ever since they were all weak that were brought to be Baptized, for
they do nothing but Sprinkle. And so pernicious is this Alteration, that the
Muscovites, and others, do now deny the Latins, and other Western Countries, to
be rightly Baptized, because they have changed the manner from Dipping to
Sprinkling.

I might enlarge my Testimonies of this kind out of the Learned Du-Veil and
others. And yet the Doctor would persuade the World, the Churches have not
varied about this Matter. Nor need the Doctor wonder that none of the Writers
in the first Age of Christianity, are found to detect the baptizing of Infants,
seeing there are none that yet appear in that Age to have held any such Thing.
And Dr. Barlow has given Testimony, That there is no just Evidence of
Infant Baptism till about two hundred Years after Christ. The Dissenters
therefore are not unreasonable (as the Doctor would have them) in charging
those that have altered, or that approve the Alterations thus made in the Case
of Sacred Baptism, with Apostasy, or falling from the simplicity of the Gospel,
at least in this* that they have now no true Baptism.

I freely grant, (says the Doctor) That no Arguments are equal to the
Scriptures, when the Interpretations of them are not doubtful. And certainly
the Texts which concerns the Subject and manner of Baptism, are none of the
Scriptures whose Interpretations are doubtful, because it did not comport with
the Wisdom of Christ that they should be so. Certainly the Rule which God gave
about Circumcision was plain enough; And shall we think our Savior did leave
us to Ambiguities to guide us, in admitting his People to Church Priviledges?
What then can we suppose to be plain? This very thing then that the
Paedobaptists are constrained to confess, (as Mr. Baxter and others) that it is
a very difficult thing to prove Infant Baptism, and that (as the Doctor here)
the Scriptures which are brought for it are not plain, for if they were, he
confesses no Arguments are like them; but being not clear for Infant Baptism,
tho as clear as the Sun for Believers Baptism, therefore he flies to the
harmonious practice of the Ancient Churches, and the undivided consent of the
Apostolical Fathers as authentical Interpreters, etc. But these are mere
flourishes, there has been no such Harmony, nor such undividedness among
Churches and Fathers in this Matter, as we have showed.

He brings many Passages out of Authors Ancient and Modern; but these,
especially the most Ancient of them, have been so effectually scanned by many
Learned Pens of those of our Way, as Tombs* Fisher, Blackwood, Danvers, Den,
Du-Veil, and others, that it is needless to do more. I shall rather endeavor to
quiet the Clamor about Fathers, Ancient Churches, etc. as if all must be
determined by their Sentences, by presenting the Reader with that grave Speech
of Lactantius, one of these Fathers themselves, by which it will appear* that
this Clamor is unreasonable. Thus he speaks, Lib. 2. c. 8. Div. Instit. Dedit
omnibus Deus pro virili portione sapientiam, etc. God has given Wisdom unto
all Men, according to a competent measure, that they may both find out Things
unheard of before, and weigh Things already found out. Neither because they had
the start of us in Time, does it likewise follow that they have it also in
Wisdom; which if it be indifferently granted to all, it cannot be forestalled
by them which went before. It is unimparable, like the Light and Brightness of
the Sun, it being the Light of Man's Heart, as the Sun is of the Eyes. Sythence
then to be Wise, that is, to search the Truth, is a Disposition imbred in every
Man, they debar themselves of Wisdom, who, without any examination, approve the
Invention of their Ancestors. But this is that which deceives them, they, like
unreasonable Creatures, are wholly led by others; the Name of Ancestors being
once set in the Front, they think it cannot be, that either themselves should
be wiser, because they are called Punies; or that the other should be in any
thing mistaken, because they are called Ancestors.

So that if the Doctor had quoted more of the Ancients than he has done, yet so
long as we have the highest Authorities, the Holy Scriptures, and the Reason of
Men, as well as the Ancients, we can only follow them, as we see or know they
follow Christ. And more than this St. Paul does not require of us. The Ancient
Fathers (says the Doctor) undoubtedly had well read and considered the History
of Baptism in the Acts of the Apostles, but never drew such absurd Consequences
from them, etc. And did they not as well read the History of Communion in the
Acts of the Apostles; and yet drew these absurd Consequences for 600 Years
together, that Infants should be communicated. But to this the Doctor tells us,

That God might suffer all the Church to fall into such a harmless Practice as
that of Infant-Communion; or that the Fathers of the Church might comply with
the Religious Fondness of the People, as we do, says he, in bringing them to
Prayers. Now as this may be well guessed, so we likewise may conjecture, and
it is not improbable but Infant Baptism came stealing so too upon the Churches
at the first; but after these Errors had got root, they were both defended by
the Fathers as if they had been Oracles dropped from Heaven. And such a
Necessity laid upon them, as if Infants could not be saved without them. Thus
did Augustine teach, both concerning Infant Baptism, and Infant-Communion.

The Doctor demands, What account can rationally be given why the Jewish
Christians who were offended at the neglect of Circumcision, should not have
been much more offended, if the Apostles had refused to initiate Infants under
the new Testament? But we may with more reason demand of the Doctor, seeing the
Jews were so offended at the Neglect of Circumcision, why did not the Apostles
quiet this discontented People by telling them, you need not be offended,
seeing instead of Infant-Circumcision you have now Infant Baptism? and if
indeed there had been any such thing, it had been the most pertinent means to
quiet them, to refer them to that for Satisfaction. But seeing the Apostles
make no use of this Argument, it is clear they had no such thing to argue from,
for where they could use it, they did, as in the case of baptized Believers
themselves, Coloss. 2. 11. which is a sufficient Argument that Infant Baptism
had no being in the Church in St. Paul's time, seeing he never mentions it at
all, no not then when he had the greatest occasion for it that could be given.

The Doctor observes, that the Jews always looked upon the Children of Pagans
as common or unclean; but upon their own as separate and Holy. And then he
tells us, that St. Paul makes the same Distinction between them, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
But this is so expressly against the Word of God, that I admire the Doctor
should write it, was not this Distinction between Jew and Gentile, the one
being common and unclean, the other Holy, taken quite away. Acts 10. 15, 18.
What God has cleansed, call not thou common: which the Apostle expounds thus,
ver. 28. God has showed me that I should not call any Man common or unclean.
And why should the Doctor so much as think that St. Paul should count the
Infants of Jews or Gentiles which do not yet believe, common and unclean: The
Text 1 Cor. 7. 14. says not a Word to that Purpose; but is an Answer to the
Scruple which some Christians had about continuing in Marriage-Union with their
Yoke-Fellows, who were Unbelievers, supposing them to be unclean; but St. Paul
persuades them to continue in that Relation, for that they were both sanctified
to that Relation of Husband and Wife, else says he, your Children were
unclean. Now this Text is greatly abused by Poedobaptists, and the learned
Muscullus, who had abused this Text as they do, at last did confess as much.
Now this place Acts 10. 15, 18, 28. does so fully explain St. Paul, that no Man
can with any show of Truth or Reason make a Distinction between a Christian's
Infant, and the Infant of an Indian, to call the one common and unclean, the
other separate and Holy; for if we may call no Man (as such) common and
unclean, much less may we call an Infant so. If they be born according to the
Law of God, they are called by the Prophet Malachi a Seed of God, chap. 2. v.
15.

And though this Mercy of God toward all Infants equally, might perhaps gaul
the Jews, as it does the Doctor and his party, yet it is Evangelical Doctrine,
and shows evidently that God is no Respecter of Persons; and Infants being all
equally the same, as Objects of his Pity, he despises none of these little
ones: The innocent Babes in Nineveh were as dear to him, as the innocent Babes
in the Land of Israel: and yet for all this it is certain that the Children of
faithful Men have many Blessings, which the Children of evil Men have not;
being Children of many Prayers, and under early Advantages to know the Lord,
and to cut short the Days of Iniquity: whilst on the other side the Children of
Unbelievers are in danger by an evil Education to be kept from the Truth* and
brought up in Error, and as such they (as their Fathers for the same cause)
become defiled, not by Birth, but by Sin, Tit. 1. 15. For as born according to
God's Ordinance, they are his Offspring, Acts 17. 28. and so Holy. And to this
agrees the Sentence of Muscullus, Unless Marriage were Holy and clean, even
between Unbelievers; what other thing would follow, than that all the Children
are Bastards and unclean? But far be it from us to say so; they are Holy, for
they are born of lawful Marriage.

CHAP. V. Answers the Doctor's third, Question, Whether it be lawful to
separate from a Church which appoints Infants to be baptized?
THat the Church or People of God ought to be a People separated from them that
live in Wickedness, and are professed Adversaries to the Truths of the Gospel
in things essential to Church Communion, will not be denied, I suppose by any
Christian.

Now there are two Causes, besides that of the want of true Baptism, which does
warrant the present Separation maintained by the present baptized Believers,
from the Parochial Church Communion. The first is that great Impiety and
ungodly living which is every where to be seen in such Churches: for the worst
of Men to be sure will crowd into those Churches as their Sanctuaries; let the
most vigilant Magistrates, and the well-minded Persons in National Churches do
what they can, (in their present Constitution) for there will they be, yea and
in places of Preferment too.

Secondly, The many Innovations and continual Alterations in Religion, not to
be avoided in National Church-Constitutions, by reason of the Influence of
Interest, and of the Revolutions which National Government has always upon
them, does necessarily enforce; at least some Distinction in Communion, between
such Churches, and those whose professed Principles are constantly to adhere to
Apostolical Institutions only, in all things essential to the Constitution and
Government of the Church of God; which must ever be the same, (or should be)
however the Government of Nations do alter or suffer Revolutions.

And to this agrees that excellent Sentence of a Divine of the Church of
England, in his Sermon before the Court of Aldermen, Aug. 23. 1674. We have an
Obligation to the Laws of God antecedent to those of any Church whatsoever: nor
are we bound to obey those, any further than they are agreeable with these --
Separation from a Church is lawful, 1. When she requires of us, as a Condition
of her Communion, an Acknowledgment and Profession of that for a Truth, which
we know to be an Error. 2. When she requires of us, as a Condition of her
Communion, the joining with her in some Practices, which we know to be against
the Law of God. In these two cases, to withdraw our Obedience to the Church, is
so far from being a Sin, that it is a necessary Duty. Now this being our very
case in the point of Baptism, it would justify that Distinction which we hold
needful, between the Church of England, and those of the baptized Believers;
but much more when there are some other things as pressing perhaps as this. But
now let us hear the Doctor.

Considering (says he) what I have said upon the former Questions: this
Question must be answered in the negative, whether we consider Infant Baptism,
as a thing lawful or allowable only, or as a thing highly requisite and
necessary to be done. And as a Foundation on which to build Infant Baptism as a
thing at least lawful and allowable, he directly denies this Principle, That
nothing is to be appointed in Religious matters, but what is warranted by
Precept and Example in the Word of God, accounting this Rule an Absurdity, and
inconsistent with the free and manly Nature of the Christian. Religion -- and
that it is an impracticable Principle, etc. p. 49, 50.

But that this great Principle, well understood, should be spoken against by a
Protestant, is something strange, and especially, that he does not suffer it to
take place in that which is essential in a Churchstate, as who are and who are
not to be baptized, is such a case: but he will have Infant Baptism to be
admitted, as lawful and allowable, tho it be not warranted by Precept nor
Example.

To free this Principle from Abuse, as here suggested against it, we will
explain it, as we hold and maintain it. 1. Then we do not say that every thing,
which is naturally or merely accidental and circumstantial in the Worship of
God, must have Precept and Example in the Word of God. 2. Nor do we hold that
things which are merely indifferent (if not imposed as Boundaries of Communion)
are therefore to be esteemed sinful, because not expressly warranted by Precept
or Example in the Word. 3. But we apply this Rule always, and so in our present
Question, to such things as are essential to Churchmembership, and
Church Government, as true Baptism is to the first; and cannot be admitted only
as a thing indifferent, and as such allowable or lawful only; for it is either
necessary in the Constitution of a Church, or it is nothing: and who are of
Right, and who are not to be baptized, is of the Essence of Baptism, and can
admit of no lower a Consideration.

The Principle thus explained, is clearly justified by the Word of God; and if
Protestants part with this Principle, they will lose themselves. Now thus says
the Lord, Ye shall not add to the Word which I command you, neither shall you
diminish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the Lord your
God, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall
not add thereto, nor diminish ought from it, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Every Word of God is
pure -- add thou not unto his Words, lest he reporve thee, and thou be found a
Liar, Prove. 30. 6. And it is observable that our Lord, as he was sent to be a
Minister of the Gospel, claims no Authority to speak of himself, John 12. 5.
Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. How
ought this to put an awe upon all that speak in the Name of the Lord about
Religion? Neither does the holy Spirit it self [as sent to supply the personal
Absence of Christ] take upon himself to give or abrogate Laws, but to bring
things to the Apostles Remembrance, John 14. 26. Howbeit when the Spirit of
Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; FOR he shall not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: And this is the
Rule also by which the Spirit of Truth is known, namely by his advancing the
Things delivered by Christ and his Apostles, He shall take of mine, and show it
unto you, he shall glorify me. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. If any Man teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is
proud, knowing nothing. 1 John 4. 6. He that knows God, hears us; he that
is not of God, hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the
Spirit of Error. Rev. 22. 18. If any Man shall add to these things, God shall
add the Plagues which are written in this Book; and if any shall take away from
the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God shall take away his Part out of the
Book of Life. And that this Text does establish as unalterable the whole New
Testament our Adversaries do acknowledge: See Diodate on the Place. And Calvin
upon Deuteronomy. 12. 32: Since they (says he) cannot deny that this was spoken to the
Church, what do they else but report the Stubbornness of the Church, which they
boast to have been so bold as after such Prohibitions, nevertheless to add and
mingle of her Own with the Doctrine of God. And Luther does aver, that no
Doctrine ought to be taught or heard in the Church besides the pure Word of
God. Beza upon Levit. 10. 3. speaking in the Person of God, I will punish them
that serve me otherwise than I have commanded, not sparing the chief, that the
People may fear and praise my Judgments.

Mr. Borroughs in his Gospel Worship, p. 8. All things in God's Worship must
have a Warrant out of God's Word, must be commanded; It is not enough that it
is not forbidden, and what hurt is there in it? but it must be commanded.

In a Book called, A brief Account of the Rise of the Name Protestant, p. 12.
printed 1688, we read thus, Protestantism does mainly or rather only consist in
asserting the Holy Scriptures to be the Rule, the only Rule, by which all
Christians are to govern and manage themselves in all Matters of Religion; so
that no Doctrine is to be owned as an Article of Faith, on any account, but
what has very plain Warrant and sound Evidence from the Scriptures: Nor no
Instance of Religious Worship to be owned or submitted to, as necessary, nor
any thing to be determined as a part of Religion, but what the Scriptures do
appoint and warrant.

Thus our Adversaries themselves do say as much for this Principle which the
Doctor condemns as absurd, as we do. And indeed where this Principle is
neglected, many Innovations are introduced, and many Truths are neglected,
under as fair shows of Antiquity as can be pretended for Infant Baptism. The
Doctor then had little reason to call this a slavish Principle, which is indeed
the Principle which delivers us from Slavery, to Jewish Fables, Men's Inventions
and Traditions.

Page 53, 54. the Doctor, to support Infant Baptism, tells us, how he builds
many Points of Faith and Practice, nor upon certain Evidences of the Scripture,
otherwise than as interpreted so or so, by the Catholic Church* as 1. That
Christ is of one Substance with the Father. 2. That there are three Persons in
the Trinity. 3. That it is necessary for Christians to assemble on the Lord's
Day. 4. That the Church be governed by Bishops. 5. That Women have the Lord's
Supper. 6. That Infants are to be baptized. And these things he makes
necessary, no otherwise, but as the Catholic Church has interpreted diverse
Scriptures to justify them to be so. Sure this is strange Doctrine for a
Protestant.

But were a Man disposed to trace him in all these Particulars, it might appear
that the Churches in most Ages have been divided in all, or the most of these
Points; that so that he makes the Catholic Church (as it is commonly taken) so
great a Foundation of his Faith, as he here pretends to make her, will meet
with many Difficulties to discourage and take off his Confidence. And
particularly if I desire him to resolve me but this one, What sort of
Christians are this Catholic Church? But he adds,

We can prove Infant Baptism from the Scope and Tenor of the Gospel, and from
many Passages of it, as they are interpreted according to the Practice of the
ancient Primitive Church. But this is a vain Boast, and I demand what Church,
or what Apostle did interpret any part of the Doctrine of Christ, or of the
Gospel to such a sense? The Doctor replies, It is unreasonable to presume that
the Gospel would not extend the Subject of Baptism, as far as the Jewish Church
extended the Subject both of Circumcision and Baptism. But I answer, if this be
granted, yet the Doctor gains nothing; for, 1. The Jewish Church had no Baptism
at all of Divine Institution, and therefore could not extend* that she had not.
2. Her Circumcision was limited to Abraham's Family, and perhaps not extended
to much above a third part of that Family neither, seeing all Females, and all
Males that died before the eighth Day were debarred of it: Whereas the Gospel
extends holy Baptism to all Nations, to the End of the World, to both Male and
Female, as they are qualified for it: Thus for his Argument from the Scope. Let
us now see his particular Passages to prove Infant Baptism.

P. 55. The Doctor gives us these Texts (as interpreted by the Catholic
Church) for Infant Baptism, John 3. 5. Mark* 10. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 16. Acts 16. 15,
33. 1 Cor. 7. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 2. Good Reader look upon these Scriptures, and
thou will not find one word of Precept or Example for Infant Baptism in them
all. The first Place shows that none can be Church Members lawfully under the
Gospel, except they be regenerate, and have the washing of Regeneration by
Water; but Infant-Regeneration is a Secret, no Man can know it, God will fit
them for Heaven if they die in Infancy: this David knew, for his Child which
was begot in Adultery, and died without Circumcision, yet he nothing doubted
its Salvation. The second Text, our Savior pronounces unbaptized (yea I say,
unbaptized)* Infants to belong to Heaven, how unwise then was the Doctor to
bring it for Infant Baptism? If these very Infants which were brought to
Christ's own Person, yet were not by him appointed to be baptized, it can never
prove that other Infants are to be baptized. And seeing our Savior declares
that unbaptized Infants belong to Heaven, therefore that Place John 3. 5.
cannot by any means be understood of Infants.

Look well also upon 1 Cor. 1. 16. and compare it with 1 Cor. 16. 15, 16. and
thou will find, tho the Catholic Church say nothing, that the Household of
Stephanus were such as had been converted, and were the first Fruits in Achaia,
and had addicted themselves to the Work of the Ministry, and then these could
be no Infants.

As for the two Households, Acts 16. it is admirable that wise Men should bring
them to prove what they do sufficiently confute. For Lydia had no Husband we
read of. And there is no Infant found in her House; but the Persons of her
Family received Instruction from Paul and Silas, Acts 16. ult. therefore no
Infants.

And of the Jaylor's Household, it is expressly said, that Paul spoke the Word to
all that were in his House; and that he rejoiced, believing in God with all his
House. And they went out about Midnight to be baptized. All which being well
weighed, no Man, no Church can honestly interpret this Text for Infant Baptism.

And for that Place 1 Cor. 7. 14. the Doctor does injure it, as he did before,
in thrusting in the word common. And it is ill done to make any distinction of
common and unclean, from holy, which God has not made, but rather taken away,
as we proved from Acts 10. 15. No Man (as such) is now to be called common or
unclean, and therefore no Infant is to be called common or unclean, but being
born according to God's Ordinance, they are (as such) a holy Seed, or a Seed of
God. See the learned Diodate upon the Place, Mal. 2. 14. Marriage ought to be
of one with one; and two in the same Flesh. God's chief End in this Proceeding
was, that the Posterity might be sanctified* being born in chaste Wedlock,
according to his Appointment; whereas it is defiled by all manner of unlawful
Conjunction. And to concude, I wish that my self, and the Doctor, my Oppos^^^
in this case, be found at last as holy as a dying Infant of a Jew, or poor
Indian, and we shall be sure to go to Hea-Heaven; for I could never find that
it is the Will of our Heavenly Father, that one of these little ones should
perish.

We come now to his last Text, 1 Cor. 10. 2. where we find, and the Doctor does
ingenuously acknowledge, that the Baptism here meant was but an Vmbrage or
Shadow of Baptism, not a real Baptism. Nor does the Text speak of Infants being
baptized in this umbratical Baptism, it seems as clearly restrained to the
Fathers in the case of Baptism, as the eating and drinking spiritually of
Christ is restrained to them, ver. 3. So that nothing can be urged from this
Text for Infant Baptism, which will not with equal Truth and Reason conclude
for their coming to the Lord's Table. Read Mr. Diodate upon this place, he was
for Infant Baptism, yet does not infer Infant Baptism from this Text, as indeed
there is no reason so to do. For it is certain, that all that passed through
the Sea, were not baptized to Moses, seeing there was a Multitude of Strangers
did go with the Israelites; and they are distinguished from the Children of
Israel, Exodus 12. 38. Numb. 11. 4. But S. Paul appropriates Baptism in the
Cloud and in the Sea, to the Fathers [ all our Fathers, etc.] Now for any to
add. [ and all their Infants] is a Presumption not to be justified. It is not
said, that Israel, or all Israel were baptized, which had it been so expressed,
would have more favored the Notion* And yet we know that the words [ Israel,
and all Israel] do not include Infants in many places; for example, Exodus 14.
31. and 15. 1. Deuteronomy. 13. 11. Josh. 7. 25. much less can they be here called
Fathers, and such Fathers too, as did feed upon Christ in Manna, etc. as well
as were baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, etc. It must needs be very dangerous
to insist upon this Miracle at the Red Sea, as a Rule to us to baptize Infants;
the Cause is weak which needs such Arguments to defend it.

The Doctor sets down many other Texts in his Margin, Romans 5. Psalm. 51. 5. Romans
3. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 1. 15, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 5. 14; 15. Job 14. 4.
which I have also put down in mine; that the Reader may peruse them, and see
if he can find any footing for Infant Baptism in any of them; the most likely
in the Doctor's own Judgment, is Psalm. 51. 5. and yet we know, that David's
Infant which was born in Adultery, was saved without Circumcision or Baptism.

And the Doctor* confesses that the Requisite Necessity of Infant Baptism
cannot be demonstrated from these Texts, without the Tradition of the ancient
Church. And there is no such authentic Tradition to be found, (whatever is
pretended) for he brings none from the first Churches at all. And that there is
no such Tradition, Dr. Jer. Tailor is a great witness, who in his Disswasive
from Popery, and in his Rule of Conscience, informs us, There is no prime or
Apostolical Tradition for Infant Baptism. That it was not practiced till about
the 3d Century, and judged necessary about the 4th. That Children of Christian
Parents were not baptized till they came to Understanding in the first Ages.
That Dipping, and not Sprinkling, was the Usage of Christ and his Apostles; and
the constant Doctrine and Practice of the Ancients for many hundred Years. See
also Mr. Tombs, 3d part of Review.

But after all this the Doctor is pleased to allow Salvation to Infants which
die unbaptized; Because (says he) we ought not to tie God to the same means to
which he has tied us. It seems then God has not tied Infants to any Necessity
of Baptism, nor can he prove that he has tied us to baptize them. But now he
will try another way to enforce his Arguments.

Suppose (says he) that Scripture and Tradition stood against Infant Baptism,
in the same Posture as now it stands for it, it would not be unjustifiable for
any sort of Men to separate from the Church for not baptizing Infants. Let us
suppose that Christ had said, I suffer not little Children to come to me, for
the Kingdom of God is not of such, -- and that we had been assured by the
Writers of the two next Ages to the Apostles, that then there was no baptizing
Infants, I appeal unto them whether it would not be highly unreasonable to
separate from all the Churches in the World for not allowing Infant Baptism
against the concurrence of such a Text to the contrary, and the Sense and
Practice of the Catholic Church? The meaning of the Doctor I take to be this,
that as it is highly unreasonable to separate from a Church, who upon a
doubtful or probable ground only, does give Baptism to Children: so it would be
highly unreasonable to separate from a Church, who upon a like doubtful or
probable ground only, should refuse to baptize Infants. I confess this is an
odd way of disputing; for here the Churches supposed to err on either side, are
yet supposed themselves to be true Churches, and only erring about such a
doubtful Practice as this, on the one side, or on the other. But alas the case
is far different between the Church of England and us. For she is wholly made
up of Persons thus doubtfully baptized, nay perhaps not baptized at all,
whatever she pretends: and by this doubtful Baptism she is disclaiming all
other Baptism in respect of all her Members for some hundreds of Years.
Otherwise I must confess, had I lived in the Church in the beginning of the
third Century, when Infant Baptism was creeping in, there was then a Church
truly baptized, distinct from the Infants who here and there might perhaps be
baptized, upon such supposed Grounds as are mentioned by the Doctor; here (I
say) a Separation would in my Judgment have been unwarrantable, it being but an
ill Principle to separate from a true Church, tho encumbered with some Error.

But should I have lived till this doubtful Baptism was forced on with
Anathema's, till it had overtopped and quite destroyed in such a Church all
Practice of baptizing Believers in respect of her Members, and that the whole
Church were now become doubtful to me, whether she had any Baptism at all: And
therewith that she had apparently left the due form of Baptism, which she had
formerly observed. Then I think no Man could blame me, if I left this
Communion, to sit down with those who did yet retain the ancient, and only
undoubted Baptism, both for Subject and manner of Administration; and this is
our very case.

Now seeing it is impossible for us, or any Body else, to hold ample Communion
with all sorts of Christians (and there are some good folk amongst them all)
why should any one of these Parties, whether Papists, Prelatists,
Presbyterians, etc. expect that all should come to them? or why should the
Doctor think we ought to join Communion with his Party, more than others,
unless they could not err as well as the rest? But seeing that is not to be
pretended, we must all satisfy our own Souls as well as we can, where to
communicate, and where to forbear, for with all we cannot have Communion; let
us not then grudg one against another about this necessary Christian Liberty.

Page 60. The Doctor attempts to prove his Tradition, not doubtful, but certain
in the case of Infant Baptism; to which purpose he insists on that Rule given
by Vincentius Lyrinensis, viz. Universality, Antiquity, and Consent. But I have
showed already, that all these being truly taken, are all wanting in the case
of Infant Baptism; because (as for other reasons, so for these in particular)
1. The Churches in the Apostles days baptized no Infants. And 2. The Greek
Churches to this day do retain the Custom of delaying Baptism (which yet is no
delay) to Children, till they make Profession of their Faith: and the Doctor
confesses a few of the Fathers were against it. And there might be more for
ought he knows, though not counted among such Fathers that might deserve as
well as any. And it is known that many very learned and good Men have seen
cause in this and former Ages to reject this Tradition, though it has cost them
the loss of all that this World could afford them. And the Authorities here
brought by the Doctor are not so ancient (some of them) as is pretended even by
his own Confession, and they have been scanned and answered by the learned Pens
of Den, Tombs, Blackwood, Fisher, Danvers, Delaun, Duveil, and others.

Lastly, The Doctor says, The Anabaptists themselves cannot defend the
baptizing of such grown Persons as were born and bred in the Church from
Scripture, without Tradition and Practice of the Church.

As if our Savior's Authority to teach and baptize all Nations, or to preach
to every Creature, and to baptize all that believe to the end of the World,
were not a sufficient Rule to us to teach our Children, and to baptize them,
Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. We see evidently that Jesus Christ has given but
one Rule to us and to our Posterity, and therefore it was unadvisedly spoken,
to say that we cannot produce one Precept for teaching and baptizing our
Children, when they are grown up, being bred and born of Christians, as I
suppose that is his meaning, by being bred and born in the Church. Had the
Doctor considered that Exhortation of the Apostle to all Christians, Ephesians. 6.
Teaching Parents to bring up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord, and to Children to obey their Parents in the Lord: And therewith the
Example of the Children of the elect Lady, 2 Ep. John, Who are found walking in
the Truth, as the Apostle and the Lady her self had received Commandment from
the Father, it might have passed for a better Precedent in this case, than Man's
Tradition without Scripture can possibly be, for Infant Baptism.

I conclude then, that seeing Christ's Command is as clear for teaching and
baptizing our Children, as any other Men's Posterity; and that it is the express
Duty of Christian Parents to bring up their Children in the Admonition of the
Lord (that is, as Chrysostom expounds the place) to make them Christians; and
this Advice he gave in opposition to the training up Children in profane
Literature. And the Precedent of this virtuous Lady, whose Children, whilst
under her Care and Tuition, obeyed the Truth, and walked therein according to
God's Commandment, and not as Men received Tradition from their Fathers, but as
the Apostle had received Commandment from the Father; and so he exhorts them to
continue, and to beware of other Doctrine, and to have no Fellowship with such
as should bring any other Doctrine than that which had been delivered by the
Holy Apostles. This may suffice to answer the Objection.

CHAP. VI. Answers the Doctor's fourth Question, Whether it be a Duty
incumbent upon Christian Parents to bring their Children to Baptism?
I Marvel why the Doctor puts not the term [Infant] into his Question, he knows
we are for bringing our Children to Baptism as soon as we can. But how does he
prove that Christian Parents are obliged to bring their Infants to Baptism? Why
this he does by repeating what he had said under the 3d Question: 1. About the
Lawfulness or Allowableness. 2. About the requisite Necessity of
Infant Baptism. And therefore I only refer my Reader to what has been answered
to these things in the former Chapter.

And now when the Parents may very rationally expect some Command from God to
bring their Infants to Baptism; The Doctor tells us, There is no Necessity of
having a Command, or Example to justify it, but it is sufficient that it is not
forbidden.

But he refers them to the Orders of the Church, and quotes Heb. 13. 17. Obey
them that have the Rule over You: But never shows at all, who gave such Orders
to the Church, that Parents and Proparents should bring their Infants to
Baptism. And therefore all that is here said is mere Talk without any good
Warrant.

He quotes Acts 16. 4. which shows that the Decrees which were ordained at
Jerusalem ought to be kept. And we allow it, but here is not a Word for to bring
Infants to Baptism in these Decrees: but here is a Decree against the eating of
Blood, which is little regarded by the Doctor, or however his Church does not
regard it. Yet this Text of the Decrees, he would make serve for
Infant Baptism, and indeed, had the Apostles had Power to make such a Decree,
this was as fit a time and occasion for it as could be, the Question being
about Infant-Circumcision; and the Apostles disannulling their Circumcision,
would certainly have given some Notice that they had or ought to have Baptism
instead of it; but seeing they do not in the least mention it, we may be sure
there was no Infant Baptism in being at that time.

The Doctor will now show us the Benefits of Infant Baptism, and from thence
infer for the Duty of Parents and Proparents to bring them to Baptism; and the
first is their Consecration to God. As if no Infants were consecrated to God
but those who are baptized. Methinks our Savior should know how to consecrate
Infants to God as well as the Doctor, but he did it only by Prayer or Blessing,
not by baptizing them. There is no doubt but such as follow his Example in
devoting Infants to God by Prayer, do act warrantably, but he that will do it
by baptizing them, acts without a Guide, and deprives Children of the Baptism
of Repentance, when they come to Years, and have need of it.

His second Benefit is to make Infants Members of the mystical Body of Christ.
As if it were in Man's Power to make whom they please Members of that Body, and
that when they are fast asleep too. Is not this the plain Consequence of this
Opinion, that all Infants unbaptized, being not of Christ's mystical Body, must
perish? I know the Doctor does not hold this; but it is hard to avoid this Rock
when Men are entangled in this Error, that they can make Infants Members of
Christ's mystical Body by sprinkling or crossing them with Water, and they
think they can be made so by no other way.

Now I demand of any Man, whether the whole Number of the Saved ones be not all
of Christ's mystical Body? not doubting but it will be granted. I desire it may
be considered, whether these unbapcized Infants whom Christ blessed, were of
his mystical Body? I suppose this will be granted too; and then consider also
whether all Infants of whom Christ said, to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven,
are not of his mystical Body, as it contains all saved ones? I believe none
will deny this. The last Consideration is, Whether Christ does speak of Infants
indefinitely, and as such comprehends them all, and if not, how is it possible
for any Man to know one sort of these infants from another? all dying Infants
then are of the mystical Body, as it contains all that shall be saved.

The Doctor's third Benefit, That the baptized Infant by that Solemnity, may
pass from a State of Nature, wherein he was a Child of Wrath, to a State of
Adoption of Grace, wherein he becomes a Child of God, p. 64.

But is the Doctor sure that Infants are now Children of Wrath, that is, liable
to Condemnation? Sure whatever their state was in the first Adam, yet they are
acquitted from Damnation by the Mercy of God in the second Adam: for the Lamb
which was slain from the the Foundation of the World, has taken away the Sin of
the World from innocent Babes, so that they are not the Objects of God's Wrath,
but they are Objects of his Grace and Mercy: see Jonah 4. 11.

Who would think that so wise a Man should believe that the Adoption of Grace
is regulated by Water Baptism? or that it must needs wait on him when he
sprinkles an Infant? for says he, By that Solemnity they may pass from a State
of Nature, etc. Now we teach and believe thus, that the Adoption of Grace goes
before Water Baptism. And so taught the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3. 26, 27. We are
all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. And then it follows, As many as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. But I think the Doctor
comes very near the Papists opus operatum, in what he here asserts concerning
Infant Baptism.

His fourth Benefit, That Infants have Baptism for a Sign and Seal that their
Sins are pardoned, and to confer the Right of Inheritance unto
everlasting-Life: That Baptism washes Infants clean from Original Sin, and
seals the Pardon of it, and the Assurance of God's Mercy unto them; and being
cleansed by the Washing of Regeneration, from the Guilt of that natural
Vitiosity which they derived from Adam, and which made them obnoxious to the
Displeasure of God, they become reconciled to him, and acquire as certain a
right to Eternal Life upon their Justification, as any Believer in the World.

Now had the Doctor proved all this daintily out of the Book of God, I should
have thought him the finest Man that ever wrote about Infant Baptism, but when
he puts me off with Origin, Irenaeus, etc. I am displeased, and must only take
him for a very Bold Man, but no certain Oracle. However he is pleased to add,
(which was very needful for him in this place) That he cannot deny but Infants
may be saved without Baptism, by the extraordinary and uncovenanted Mercies of
God. Well, here is some comfort for unbaptized Infants: But who can think that
the Covenant of Grace should not reach poor Infants in the case of Salvation,
without Baptism? but if any of them that are not baptized be saved, it must be
by extraordinary and uncovenanted* Mercy. These are new and strange Doctrines,
and so let them be. The Covenant of Grace was made with whole Adam, Genesis 3. 15.
And therefore as Infants, without their own consent, or any act of their own,
and without any exterior Solemnity, contracted the Guilt of Adam's Sin, and so
are liable to all the Punishment which can with Justice descend upon his
Posterity, who are personally innocent; so Infants shall be restored without
any Solemnity or Act of their own, or any other Men for them, by the SECOND
ADAM, by the Redemption of Jesus Christ, by his Righteousness and Merits,
applied either immediately, or how or when he pleases to appoint. Dr. Tailor.

His fifth Benefit, That Infants are by Baptism admitted into Covenant, and
ingrafted into Christ's Body, to acquire a present Right to all Promises of the
Gospel, and particularly unto the Promises of the Spirit, which is so ready to
assist initiated Persons. This the Primitive Christians (he durst not say
Infants) found true by Experience, etc. He quotes no Scripture for all this,
but Heb. 6. 4. which how well it agrees to Infants, let the Reader consider. I
am persuaded the Doctor was so sensible of the Unapplicableness of these things
to Infants, that he durst not name them, but Persons all along: but seeing he
must mean Infants, the very recital of his Sayings, is the Confutation of them.
For can he give so much as one Instance of an Infant that received the Holy
Spirit upon its being baptized? And why then does he presume to speak what
neither he nor any Man else can ever prove to be true? Nay he tells us in this
very page, (for he is too wise a Man I hope to face out a Fable) he confesses
that the Holy Ghost cannot be actually conferred upon Infants in Baptism, by
reason of their natural Incapacity. And yet being loath to let the Cudgles fall,
it is notorious how faintly he goes on in this and the next Page, (66, 67.) at
last concludes in a kind of an Angry Huff, saying, No Person of common
Ingenuity, who has any sense of Honor, or any tolerable Degree of Conscience
within him, can without Shame and Horror break these sacred Bands asunder, by
which he was bound to God in Infancy.

But good Sir consider, we do not spurn against the good Intentions of our
Parents in designing us to the Service of God, tho we justly disallow the
irregular Methods which they fell into in so doing. Your Predecessors had their
Consecration in Infancy by Spittle, Salt, Candles, Exufflations, etc. You do
not think that they were bound to ratify these Follies when they came to Years:
And truly so neither can we ratify your Sprinklings, Crossings, Gossips, etc.
in your Consecrations, though so far as you mean well, we may not despise but
commond; and also do now that part of God's Will which our Parents mistake
would have prevented. A due Regard to Vzzah's case, and David's Reformation
thereupon, obliges us to this. But now we are to hear from the Doctor what
Profit Infant Baptism brings to the Church of God.

The first, he says, it prevents those Scandals and shameful Delays of Baptism,
which otherwise grown Persons would be apt to make, etc.

To this I must needs say, If any thing without the Word of God, would induce
me to baptize Children, this Consideration of the Doctor would as soon prevail
as any thing; for God knows this Duty is shamefully neglected by many whose
Duty it is to hasten to it. But we must not do Evil that Good may come; We may
not do what God does not command, because Men will not do what he does command.
And tho it be true that Men will need as many Exhortations to be baptized (and
perhaps more) than to come to the Lord's Supper, yet all this must not
discourage us, nor force us to innovate Methods of our own, and leave what God
has prescribed. If the faithful Minister labor in vain some times, yet his
Work is with the Lord, Isai. 49. 4. But I cannot, as the Doctor does, applaud
the Wisdom of those who to prevent Men's Delay of Baptism, ran into another
Extreme, by which the Church, however she may be more numerous, yet by this
means the Grace of Baptism is destroyed, or made unnecessary to Baptism,
because as the learned Bossuit confesses, it is separated from Baptism in
little Infants.

Were good Schools for catechizing the Youth provided, and a painful Ministry
to keep such Schools, this might be a better way to prevent the Delays of
Baptism than to baptize Infants; for in truth, that proving no Baptism at all,
proves the greatest Delay of all. Now for the use of such Schools, both the
Scripture and Antiquity would stand by us.

For when all is said that can be said, Baptism being the washing of
Regeneration, a mystical and spiritual Burial with Christ, the Church ought to
have pious care, that none be admitted to Baptism, but such as give some
competent account of the Work of Faith with Power in their Souls. And hereunto
agrees the Scriptures with full consent; What hinders that I may not be
baptized, says the Eunuch? If thou believe with all thy Heart, thou may,
says Philip. Acts 8. 46. Acts 16. 14. Acts 2. 38. Acts 8. 12. Acts 2. 41. Acts
18. 8. Mark 16. 16.
They that gladly received the Word, were baptized. Lidea's Heart being opened
to attend to the Word, she was baptized. When the Samaritans believed, they
were baptized, and so were the Corinthians. The Galatians were Sons of God by
Faith, and so baptized. The Romans were dead to Sin, and so baptized; and so
were the Colossians: and so did our Savior order it, that he that believes,
should be baptized: we find none else by him appointed to it. In vain do Men
strive against such clear Evidence of the Divine Will and Authority of Heaven,
and rest upon, and soar very high upon the Wing of humane Authorities: What is
the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord?

Wherefore the Doctor's Flourish about his high Presumption, that the Apostles
authorized the Practice of Infant Baptism, and that it is most agreeable to
Christ's Intention, p. 70, 71. are but Man's Breath: Christ's Intention is not
known in this matter, but by his Word, or the Testimony of his Witnesses, from
whence no such meaning can with Fairness be gathered. And for his Talk here
again of Christ's not repealing the Jewish Custom of baptizing is but vain: nor
does Dr. Lightfoot's Testimony and his own, that there was such a Baptism,
signify so much, but that the Test of the learned Sir Norton Knatchbul, and
that learned Jew Dr. Duveil, may serve to balance them.

CHAP. VII. Answers the Doctor's fifth and last Question; Whether it be
lawful to Communicate with Believers, who were only baptized in their Infancy?
P. 72.
IN stating this Question, the Doctor does little more than repeat what he said
upon the second and third Questions, and grants, that the stating of this
depends upon what he said to them. And therefore what is said in Answer to
these Questions, is referred to in this place.

He tells us, p. 73. It never entered into the Heart of any of the Ancient
Christians, to refuse Communion with grown Persons who had been baptized in
their Infancy. But the Question is not so much what they did, as what ought to
be done in this Case: Yet I must needs say, their Case and ours differ
exceedingly, as I showed in answer to the last Question before this. They lived
when an Error was but creeping in here and there; and it was not pressed as
necessary, till about the fourth Century; and so it may be there was no great
Division about it, tho it is more than the Doctor can be confident of. But we
live in an Age, when Infants are not baptized, but rantized only; and the
Churches allowing such a practice, do not now, as then they did, consist mostly
of Baptized Believers; but the Church the Doctor would have us communicate
with, have not only no other Baptism but the sprinkling of Babes; but have been
very fierce against all that have opposed it, and asserted the Ancient Truth,
even to the undoing of them, nay, to the destroying them from off the Earth; so
that the Separation has been evidently occasioned, by the unreasonable and
cruel proceedings of the Assertors of Infant Baptism.

It is famous in the Writings of Learned Men, that the Donatists and Novatians
denied Infant Baptism, (tho some of them might permit it in danger of Death):
And it is certain these Christians were very considerable, both for Number and
Piety, and were more disliked by the other Party, for their strictness about
their Communion ordinarily, than for any thing of Heresy they charged them
with* But the Apostolici were more Ancient, and they are expressly called
Anabaptists by the Papists, because they looked upon Infant Baptism as
ridiculous.

But now if the Doctor will have the Question truly stated; as the Case is, in
our Judgment and Conscience, then it must be put into these Terms: Whether it
be lawful for Baptized Believers to hold Communion with such Christians as they
think are not baptized at all? And then the Doctor is a Person of that
discretion, that he himself must acknowledge that it must be resolved in the
Negative, till he or some Body else do convince us, that the Church of England
has some Baptism, either true essentially, or false in part and form only,
which would alter the Case. But we do believe she has none at all: So that
Communion with her is more difficult. We cannot conceive how Infant Baptism
should be necessary by the presumptive Will of Christ, as the Doctor phraseth
it. Such Language is very uncouth to us, and seems to open a Gap for Men to
presume the Will of Christ to be whatsoever they please, or what by Learning
and Parts they can make a plausible Discourse for.

It is a weighty Consideration, if it were true, That our Opinion does infer
that there has been no true Church on Earth for 1100 Years, nor a Chruch for
1500, with whom a Christian could Communicate without Sin. But this cannot be
true; for tho Infant Baptism was an Error (in our Judgment) ever since it had a
being, yet there was always some Churches free of it, and those we have taken
notice of before to be many of the Greek Churches, as Learned Authors do
confess, even such as were themselves for Infant Baptism; and with them are to
be reckoned (in this Question) the Apostolici, Donatists, Novatians, and a
great part of the Waldenses, as is fully made manifest by Mr. Danvers and
others, of which I shall here give a brief Account:

1. But first we must premise, That all the Churches mentioned in Scripture are
ours, being baptized upon profession of Repentance and Faith. No Man being able
to this day to show so much as one Infant was baptized in any one of the
Churches mentioned in the Scriptures. 2. In the next Age to the Apostles*
Justin Martyr gives this Account of the practice of the Churches; I will
declare (says he) how we offer up our selves to God -- Those amongst us that
are instructed in the Faith -- being willing to live according to the same --
are brought by us into the Water, and there, as we were new born, are they also
by new Birth renewed -- and then in calling upon God the Father, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, they are washed in Water. 3. In the third Age, Mr.
Baxter tells us out of Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian; That in the Primitive
Times none were baptized without an express Covenanting, wherein they renounced
the World, etc. and engaged themselves to Christ. 4. In the fourth Age, Basil
says, That none were to be baptized but Catechumens, and those that were duly
instructed in the Faith. 5. In the fifth Age, Chrysostom says, The time of
Grace or Conversion was the only sit time for Baptism, which was the Season in
which the three thousand in Acts 2. and others afterward were baptized. 6. The
African Churches (commonly called Donatists) taught, That none should be
baptized, but those that believed and desired the same. 7. The Waldensian
Churches tell us; That by Baptism Believers were received into the Holy
Congregation, there declaring their Faith, and amendment of Life. 8. The
Churches in Germany owned the same Faith and Practice. 9. The Churches in
Helvetia asserted the same, and suffered for their Testimony. 10. The Bohemian
Churches, by great Sufferings, bore witness to the same Truth. 11. The Churches
in Thessalonica did the same. 12. The Churches in Flanders suffered for the
same cause. 13. The Hungarians did the same. 14. And so did the Churches in
Thessalonica. 15. The Churches of the Ancient Britains did the same, and died
for their Testimony.
Here some will be ready to say, We value not Mr. Danvers, he was mistaken in
his Quotations. But let me reply; Would Men but impartially read his Defense,
they would see cause to justify him from most of the Clamours which have been
vented against him.

Neither do we censure good and pious Men in the darker Times above us, who
perhapps had not opportunity, as we have, to see and avoid the Error; God
Almighty indulging the oversights of his sincere Ones in all Ages, as we trust
he will do ours in this; for some may yet come after us to restore some Truth
which we have not minded, being so much busied, both by Writing, Preaching, and
Suffering, in defense of some particular Truths which are the Controversy of
our Age. And this was the Case of our worthy Predecessors, who were called to
contest with the Spirit of Error. And we doubt not but all sincere Christians,
who have not wilfully opposed themselves to any Truth, shall find Mercy in the
Day of Christ, and receive a Reward according to the Infinite Goodness of God,
who will not suffer any to go without a Reward, who have been but so kind to
any, because they belonged to Christ, as to give them a Cup of cold Water to
drink.

And in the mean time, I am for so much Communion with all Christians, as will
do them and my self good. But seeing it is impossible for any to maintain full
or ample Communion with all sorts, professing the Christian Name at this Day;
There is a necessity either for some powerful Party to kill all the rest, that
she may be the only Church, or else Brotherly to agree to permit all to choose
their Communion, where they can most comfortably enjoy it; and I heartily
desire that none for any cause but true inward Peace, would make use of this
Liberty. But about this we have more fully treated in the fifth Chapter, that
here we shall add no more at present, but shall conclude with our humble
Request to the Church of England, to consider how great a Pressure it must be
upon our Conscience, to break up our Assemblies, which we believe to be truly
constituted Churches, and to unite with Hers, which we believe to be so
defective in her Constitution, as to have no Baptism at all.

Now that the Baptism of Repentant Believers is of Heavenly Original, is
granted on all hands, that it stands clear both in Scripture, and
unquestionable Antiquity next to the Scripture, is altogether undeniable; and
that this Baptism is to be continued to the end of the World, cannot be spoken
against.

And on the other side, Does not even Mr. Baxter, and other Learned Assertors
of Infant Baptism, confess; it is a very difficult Point to prove by Scripture?
And do not the Learned Papists, and some Learned Protestants, acknowledge there
is no Scripture for Infant Baptism? Neither Precept nor Practice in Scripture
for Infant Baptism? That it was brought in without the Commandment of Christ?
That it is only a Church Rite, and not of Divine Institution? These Things
cannot be hid from you, and therefore there is a necessity that some speedy and
prudent way be taken by the Church of England to restore this Holy Ordinance to
its purity, in respect of the Subject to be baptized.

For though the Church of England does retain the Doctrine of Baptism, with
respect to its precedence to other Ordinances, its Utility and Dignity in the
Church of God; yet this is to little purpose still, so long as another thing is
substituted in the room of it, both in respect of the Subject and manner of
Administration.

Concerning the latter, let the Church of England be entreated to consider the
Reflections which have been made upon this Alteration of Immersion to
Sprinkling, by the learned Bossuet in his Book of Communion, etc. And the
Conviction which some learned Protestants in France have lately met with upon
that occasion. I will set down the words of the learned Author who calls
himself Anonymus, as they are translated by Dr. Duveil upon the Acts of the
Apostles, p. 292, 293.

It is most certain that Baptism has not been administered hitherto, otherwise
than by Sprinkling, by the most part of Protestants, but truly this Sprinkling
is an Abuse. This Custom which without an accurate Examination, they have
retained from the Romish Church, in like manner as many other things, makes
their Baptism very defective, it corrupts its Institution and ancient use,
and that nearness of Similitude, which is needful should be betwixt it and
Faith, Repentance, and Regeneration.

This Reflection of Mr. Bossuit deserves to be seriously considered, to wit,
that this use of plunging has continued for the space of a whole thousand and
three hundred Years; that hence we may understand, that we did not carefully,
as was meet, examine things which we retained from the Roman Church; and
therefore since the most learned Bishops of that Church do teach us now that
the Custom established by most grave Arguments, and so many Ages, was abolished
by her, this self-same thing was very unjustly done by her, and that the
Consideration of our Duty does require at our hands, that we seek again the
primitive Custom of the Church, and the Institution of Christ. -- Though
therefore we should yield to Mr. Bossuet that we are convinced by the force of
his Arguments, that the Nature and Substance of Baptism consists in Dipping,
what may he hope for from us, but that the Professors see themselves obliged to
him by no small Favor, and thank him that he has delivered us from Error,
when we greatly erred in this thing?

And as we are resolved indeed to correct and rectify this Error; so we desire
earnestly with humble Prayer of him, that he would correct and amend that Error
of taking away the Cup from the Laics coming unto the holy Supper. Does
Monsieur Bossuet think that the Protestants will have a greater respect of that
Custom which they have sound to be unlawful, and that by the most weighty and
solid Arguments, than of the Institution of Jesus Christ, and that to let Rome
get an opportunity of boldly and freely breaking the Laws of Christ, by the
pernicious Imitation of our Example.

Far be that wicked frame of Mind from them: they are straiter bound by the
Authority of their holy Master, than to despise his Voice when his Sound comes
to their Ears, My Sheep hear my Voice; and again, I know my Sheep. None, except
Wolves lurking under a Sheep-skin, refuses and turns from it. -- There is no
Place therefore for cogging in these things, for those that pretend the
specious Title of received Custom for the Days Practice, when Jesus and his
Gospel is not the Custom, but the Truth. From the beginning it was not so, says
the same Jesus unto them, who did object unto him the worst and cursed Custom
of their Ancestors.

When we shall be presented before the Judgment of Christ, he will not judge his
Disciples by Custom, but by the lively and effectual Word of his Gospel.
Neither should any be taken with a vain hope of framing an Excuse from the
Authority of the Church, because all the Authority of the Church is from Christ
granted unto her for that intent and purpose, that she might procure a
Religious Obedience to his Laws, and Heavenly Precepts, but not that she might
break, repeal and cancel them. -- There is in the Church no more Power of
changing the Rites in the Sacraments, than there is Power of changing his Word
and Law, etc. Thus far the Learned and pious Protestant.

And shall the religious French Protestants be thus awakened and resolved to
correct and rectify this Error, by the Reflections made upon it by an Enemy;
and shall the English Protestants add yet more Slumber, notwithstanding they
have not only the very same Alarm come amongst them from the same Pen; but
their own Learned Men who stand upon their Watch-towers, have given them notice
of this Baptism-destroying Error. And besides this, God has raised up Witnesses
for his Truth in this as well as other Particulars, who with great Learning and
Judgment have shown the Beauty of this Institution both by Doctrine, and by the
Practice of it in the Royal City, and in most Parts of this Land, for many
Years together; and yet the Church of England does not stir up her self at all,
to take hold of plain Truth in this matter.

And tho I am one of the least of the Witnesses which God has raised up in this
Age and Nation in behalf of this Truth, yet I shall humbly crave leave to
address the Church of England after this friendly and free manner, as I did Mr.
Bossuet himself.

1. I beseech her to consider that she has now to do with such Christians as
are in good earnest for the ancient Christian Religion, as it was delivered by
Christ and his Apostles; such as would not have any Truth, delivered by Heavens
Authority, to be neglected, nor in anywise to be corrupted by Innovation,
Change or Alteration, but religiously observed and kept, according to the due
Form and Power of Godliness.

2. As to the Case of Infant Baptism, be pleased to consider, that the
Salvation of our Infants are as dear to us as yours can be to you, and
therefore you have no reason to think that we would willingly omit any thing
which God has appointed as a furtherance thereunto; and being, as all Men know,
no less zealous for the Ordinance of Baptism than your selves, you may be
confident we would by no means hinder its due extent, but promote it therein by
all lawful means we are able.

3. That our Lord Jesus has made Baptism necessary to the Salvation of Infants,
is not revealed in the holy Scripture; nor that he has made it necessary for
them at all; and therefore, as the African Council did ill to Anathematize
those that denied the first, so you have not done well to Anathematize such as
cannot in Conscience bring their Infants to Baptism.

4. Let therefore our Brethren of the Church of England return to the Truth in
the Case of holy Baptism, that we may return to her; for when it shall be so
with her, she will distinguish between the Precious and the Vile; yea that very
Ministration rightly restored, will naturally lead to a far greater Purity in
Church Communion, than has hitherto been attained. But if she will not be
entreated to amend her Ways and her Doings, the Lord will plead the Cause of
his neglected Truth and despised People.

The CONCLUSION.
THE Doctor was pleased to reserve some of our Objections* against the
Paedobaptists for the Conclusion of his Book. Now the Reader does understand,
that tho we show like Arguments for Infant-Communion, as they bring for
Infant Baptism, both from Scripture and Antiquity, yet we do not therefore hold
that they are to be brought to the holy Table of the Lord; but we do hereby
show that the Poedobaptist is not consistent with himself, as for example:

This Doctor argues for Infant Baptism from 1 Cor. 10. 2. that because Infants
passed through the Sea; and it is said, All our Fathers were baptized unto Moses
in the Cloud and in the Sea, therefore Infants were baptized to Moses, and
consequently ought to be baptized to Christ. Now to show the Fallacy of this
Argument, we say, All that are said to be baptized, ver. 2. are also said to
eat and drink spiritually of Christ; so that this Scripture is as strong for
Infant-Communion, as for Infant Baptism; tho in Truth it is no Rule for either.
For how should it follow, that because God saved Israel miraculously from the
Rage of Pharaoh, in the Cloud, and in the Red Sea, and fed them miraculously
with Mannah and Water in the Wilderness; Therefore we are to baptize and
communicate Infants. But we have showed before that the Apostle does limit this
Baptism, and feeding upon Christ, to those of Understanding, [to wit, our
Fathers] and so does Augustine, speaking of the latter in these words,
Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos cibum spiritualem
manducaverunt.

We show also from this 1 Cor. 10. 17. that all that are baptized into one
Body, are to partake of one Bread at the Lord's Table: and therefore it will
follow that if Infants ought to be baptized into the Church Militant, they
ought not to be denied the Bread and Cup in the Communion of that Body.

When they plead from Antiquity, etc. we show them (and they know it) that near
the second or early Ages of the Gospel, Infants were brought to the Lord's
Table to communicate there, and that this Custom continued 600 Years, yet it
was laid aside as unwarrantable, and we show there is equal reason to lay aside
the Custom of baptizing Infants. But we have more particularly showed these
things in our Animadversions upon Dr. S. his Digressions about Infant Baptism:
Wherein also the Substance of this Book of the Case of Infant Baptism, is
redargued; and indeed this Book seems to have been added as an Enlargement upon
those short Notes of Dr. Stillingfleet, though done perhaps by another Hand.

I shall therefore say no more at present to the Doctor's Conclusion, nor shall
I take notice of Mr. Philpot's Dream; he was doubtless a good Man, yet that he
did dream waking, as well as when asleep, is evident enough to all that will
consider how extreme weakly he goes about to prove Infants to be Believers,
etc. But let us not trouble the Dead, we shall ere long be with them, where all
our Mistakes will be made manifest, and all our unavoidable Infirmities will be
pardoned. But if any Man sin presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord: And
happy is the Man who sincerely seeks for Truth, and faithfully walks up to his
Light, tho through unavoidable Weakness he may err in many things. For our God
knows our Frame, and whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but Dust,
and like as a Father pities his [willing tho weak] Son, even so the Lord
pittieth them that fear him. To him therefore be Glory for ever.

Amen.
An APPENDIX concerning the Sign of the Cross in Baptism.
BEcause there is bound up with the Case of Infant Baptism, a Treatise called,
The Case of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, We shall take so much notice of
it as to ask, (in Tertullian's words, Vnde venisti?) Whence come thou? And to
this the Author seems to give answer, Ab Antiquitate, from Antiquity,
Tradition, etc. And quotes for it Tertullian, Origin, Basil and Cyprian, and
gives as good ground from Antiquity and Tradition for it, as our Doctor has
done for Infant Baptism. And he has a clearer Text for it too (if Jerome say
true) than any which has been yet alleged for Infant Baptism, viz. Ezekiel. 9. 4.
Set a Mark upon the Foreheads of the Men that sigh. He tells us that by several
of the Hebrew Versions, this mark is supposed to be by the Hebrew (...) Tau,
which Jerome says, was in the Samaritan Character like our T, and so made the
Figure of the Cross.

It seems these two Cases, Infant Baptism, and the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism, stands much upon the same bottom, and will stand and fall together.
Howbeit we shall not do much more about this case, than to be the Remembrancer
of this Generation with what Testimony has formerly been given against this
piece of Superstition, by learned Protestants themselves, even such as were our
Opposites in the other case, who to this Plea of the Church of England; that
they receive not the sign of the Cross as from the Papists, but from the
Fathers of the Primitive Church, gives them this Answer.

1. The Fathers can be no Vizard for a Rite whereof the Pagans, Jews, or
Heretics were the Fathers and first begetters. It was the Fault of one
Alexander, that he sang the Psalms of Valentinus; Dr. Fulk against Saund. c. 13.
It is ours, that we use his Cross. I call it his, because he was the first
that used this Sign, the very first that made account of it, as appears by
Irenaeus, lib. 1. c. 1. And he did wrest the Scriptures to the Crosses
Commendation. -- He termed him Crux to show a purging Power in him, because he
held the Cross a Purger of Man's Sin. -- And that he was drawn into this
Opinion by the same means that Papists are drawn into it, by a supposed
Dedication of it in the Blood of Christ [not considering that by this conceit
Men may adore every Thorn-Bush, because the Holy Head of Jesus was embrued with
Blood by that Crown of Thorns wherewith he was crowned.] And Valentinus does
confess his A^on was without a Figure, until Christ by his Death upon the Cross
gave him one, and till now we never read of any that used the Figure of the
Cross before him, or made any account of it. And therefore he it is (for ought
we know) even Valentinus, that first brought it into Request and Reckoning. And
who then will suffer us to say we borrow it from the Fathers, and not from him?
-- See we not then, that to say we follow the Fathers in the Cross, (
Valentinus the Heretic being the first Deviser of it) we are forced to fly
like Eutropius to the very same Sanctuary, which we have denied and shut up to
others.

The Fathers can be no Vizard for a Ceremony which has been abused since, or
what though from the Fathers we take this sign? This helps not till the
Fathers use be justified, which will never be. -- He that reads the Fathers
Writings will meet indeed with such a Chaos, as will make him afraid, (I say
not to fall into it) but even to behold it. Who can brook the Efficacy which
Tertullian gave it? The Flesh is signed, that the Soul may be defended. The
Necessity which Cyprian gave it in Baptism, Vngi necesse baptizatum --
baptizati signo Dominico consumantur. The Fathers call this sign Spirituale
Signaculum, (to wit) because it brings the Spirit, for which one place may
serve our turn, Sequitur spirituale Signaculum, quia post fontem superest ut
perfectio fiat, quando ad invocationem Sacerdos, Spiritus fanctus infunditur.
And in the opinion of the Fathers the Water of Baptism is nothing worth without
the Cross. In the opinion of the Fathers, the Cross is the Terror of the Devil,
and an impregnable Wall against him, so that they used the Cross themselves
when in any danger. In the opinion of the Fathers the Cross is Insigne Regni,
et clavis Paradisi. Last of all in the opinion of the Fathers, the Cross is so
necessary, as that it is to be made, coming and going, sitting and standing,
even ad omnem incessum, at every stop; and ad omnem actum, in every Action that
we do.

And to show the Superstition of the Cross from Tertullian, take a View of it,
as set down by the Author of the case of the Cross -- Upon every motion (says
he) at their going out, and coming in, when they put on their Garments or
Shoes, at the Bath, or at Meals, when they lighted up their Candles, or went to
Bed, whatever almost they did in any part of their Conversation, still they
would even wear out their Foreheads with the Sign of the Cross. And is not this
a sad Story? yet our Author brings this in Favor of it.

Mr. Hooker is brought in as drawing Mr. Goulart as it were by the Hair of the
Head, to clear the Fathers from the Superstition of the Cross, which he does
not, save in comparison of the Popish Merit and Enchantment which afterward
crept in. As for the operative Power which they placed in the Oily Cross, he
flatly condemns them.

And whereas it is said that the Cross (among Protestants) coming after the
Water (in Baptism) is an Acknowledgment of its Subjection to it. My Author
answers, This ill beseems our Mouths, who cannot endure the Papist when he
makes the same excuse. The Cross which comes after the Consecration in the
Lords Supper belongs not to it. We oppose against him: The Consecration does
reach to the whole Administration, whatsoever Sign is administered it cannot but
(at least) in show pertain to it. Therefore it is a part of the Sacrament,
says the Canon. So all the while the Cross is within the Celebration of
Baptism, it is morally a part thereof: for Example, the Feast came after the
worshipping of the Calf; yet because it pertained to the Solemnity, the Apostle
not only counts it a part of the Idols Service but such a principal part as
includes all the rest that went before, 1 Cor. 10.

If thou have made a Separation, (between the Cross and the Water) thou have
made a fair hand. This very Separation makes the Cross to be a sign of a
diverse species, and so by consequent to be an Addition, which is unlawful: And
the matter of this Separation (boasted of) makes the after-place of the Cross
yet worse -- For what though the Cross and the Water be diverse in matter? So
are the Bread and the Wine in the Supper, [yet] they make one Refection in
Christ, and so grow to be formally one: and so may these grow to be one
likewise, because they make one investing into the Church. And does not the
Cross touch the Water as near as the Wine does touch the Bread? The Postation
of the Wine does not prejudice it, therefore the postponing of the Cross does
not prejudice it. -- As long as the Cross and the Water [our Cross and the
Popish] are seen in the same Solemnity of Baptism, the Separation is
insufficient. -- Is not Baptism the Seal of the Heavenly King? and can any new
print be added to the Seal of a King without Treason? Do we not cry out upon
the Dove, let down of old upon the baptized for a Sign of Regeneration by the
Spirit? (one of which I saw (says my Author) at Wickham not abolished some 25
Years past) sure, a Sign in such manner determined, with State in Baptism, we
can easily prove to have been abhorred throughout all Ages, however in the
particular of the Cross, the Oil and some other Signs, God permitted the
ancient Fathers to fail in Heart to bring in (through their oversight against
their own general* Doctrine) that Apostasy from the Faith which he foretold.
[Thus much concerning the Cross as grounded upon Antiquity, or as coming from
the Fathers.]

2. Concerning that Text in Ezekiel 9. 4. Our Author says that some of the
Authors whom Jerome followed understood this Sign to be spiritual and not an
outward Mark, which is also the Tenent of our Writers: [Dr. Fulk against
Martin.] If our Opposites have found out since the Sign of the outward Cross in
this pla^e, I would they would tell us which way they came by it? [and after he
has set down various opinions about altering the form of the Hebrew Characters,
he tells us out of Baronius, that Ezra never changed the Hebrew Letters, that
the old ancient Copies of the Hebrew Bibles were many of them remaining* in
Ezra's time, and that they are all in one Character, to wit, the old and
ancient Characters of the Hebrews. -- And that the whole matter is of late
brought clearly to light by Jo. Scaliger, who writes thus, The old Hebrew and
Samaritan Letters be all one, and the Letter Tau in neither of them is like a
Cross, or the Greek or Roman T. Hierom what he writes of Ezras's altering the
old Samaritan Tau, he takes word by word out of Origin, in Romanos. Origin was
deceived by a Jew, on whose bare Relation he grounded himself, which Relation
was also false. -- We must give the Fathers leave to play, according to their
own Pleasure, not only to fetch the sign of the Cross out of this Tau, but also
out of the two Sticks which the Widow of Sarepta gathered, yea to fetch a Cross
and a T too out of the 300 Soldiers of Gideon. And (as the Author of the Case
of the Cross tells us) They of the Romish Church can discern the Cross in the
Figure of a Man's Face, by the placing the Nose betwixt the two Eyes, and much
more in the whole Body of Man with his Arms extended: They can discern it in
the Sword in Paradise, and in the Cross Stick that Noah's Dove brought back
into the Ark. And indeed some of the Fathers (says he) bent their Imaginations
something that way, and would fancy the Figure of the Cross in Moses stretching
out his Arms while the Israelites were sighting with Amaleck, and in the
paschal Lamb when the Spit went through it. Surely these things may
sufficiently inform us, that let Men be never so great, or never so much
reverenced as Fathers, etc. Yet God is no Respecter of Persons, but if they
will follow their own fancies, and be adding to his Institutions, he will even
smite them with Stupidity, that the Childishness of the Fathers may appear to
very Children; and that all may fear God, and keep his Commandments, without
adding to them, or taking from them, according to Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.

3. There is a great pretense that Constantine the great had Direction probably
from Heaven to make this sign of the Cross in his Banner; because he dreamed he
saw such a sign in the Firmament with (...), in hoc vince, [overcome in this]
written in it. To this it is answered.

It was not the Sign of the Cross that appeared, but a sight somewhat like it,
to wit, a mark of Christ's Name Xo P. after this manner Xo, or as Lypsius upon
the view of ancient Copies draws it after another manner more different from
the sign of the Cross, than the former. The former of these comes nearest to
the Description of Eusebius, therefore the latter may be some Imitation of it.
But be this Dream or Vision what it will, we find not that Constantine had any
Authority to turn it into a Religious Ritual, much less to make it consecratory
to many Rites in Worship, and particularly in Baptism. These are
after-Inventions: for whatsoever Honor has accrued to the Cross (says our
Author) by this Dream or Vision, it came either from the Alchymie of the
Bishops in those days who drew a Cross out of the sight which Constantine saw,
or from the Sophistry of Papists since.

The Truth is the Vision which St. Steven saw at his Martyrdom, Acts 7. and
that which St. Paul had at his Conversion, Acts 9. are not only delivered to us
by Divine Testimony, but were nothing inferior to that of Constantine, which
whether it were a Dream or a Vision, is not certain, the Story giving it both
ways; yet who so absurd to turn the Visions of St. Stephen and St. Paul into
Rituals, or to assix them to Christ's Ordinances? When Men do assume this
Liberty without Divine Warrant, many Evils do follow upon such doings. How much
innocent Blood has been shed about this sign of the Cross, is not easily to be
estimated? and indeed for the sake of this and other such Inventions,
Christians have hated one another with cruel Hatred, as late Years have showed.
Men more account of those Tradions, than of the Word of God by far. We have
seen it with our Eyes. A Man might be a common Drunkard, and yet permitted to
preach in the Pulpit. But if he would not use the sign of the Cross, and the
Surplice, away with him. This kind of Zeal shows that it is from beneath, it is
not of God.

And so long as these things remain, and are forced on by Authority, there will
be continual Strife, Contention, and Devouring amongst Christians: as it was so
from the Beginning of them, so it will be to the end of them: because an evil
Plant will bring forth according to its Nature. We have more sacred
Institutions, then we can well observe. Why do we seek to burden our selves or
others, in matters of Religion, with the Commandments and Doctrines of Men? all
which are to perish; and God in Mercy hasten the time, that God's People may
have but one Heart, and one Way.

Amen.
POSTSCRIPT.
SECT. I. Of the Manner of Marriages among the Baptized Believers, and that
they are warrantable by God's Law.
SOme of the Baptized Believers having been prosecuted as Offenders, for not
conforming to the Ceremonies of the Ring, and kneeling to the Altar in the
Celebration of Marriage; we shall therefore humbly offer our Reasons why we
dissent from these Ceremonies; and why also our Marriages are good in the Eye
of the Law, (for the Substance of them) the omission of these Ceremonies, etc.
notwithstanding.

But first the Reader is desired to take notice, that we are not against, but
for the public Solemnization of Marriage according to the Law of the Land,
save that there are some Ceremonies used therein which we cannot comply with.
And because some of the Priests will not marry us at all, and others will not
do it, unless we conform to all the Ceremonies required in the Service Book;
this puts us upon a necessity to have it done without them, and the manner thus:

The Parties to be married being qualified for that State of Life, according to
the Law of God, and the Law of the Land, as to the Degrees, etc. therein
limited; They call together a competent number of their Relations and Friends:
And having usually some of our Ministry present with them, the Parties
concerned do declare their Contract formerly made between Themselves, and with
the Advice of their Friends, if Occasion require it: And then taking each other
by the Hand, do declare, That they from that day forward, during their natural
Lives together, do enter into the State of Marriage, using the Words, or the
substance of them, which are appointed for the Words of Marriage in the
Service Book, (as acknowledging them Words to be very fit for that purpose.)
And then a Writing is signed by the Parties married, to keep in memory the
Contract and Covenant of their Marriage, to this effect:

These are to testify to all Men, that we A. B. of, etc. and C. D. of* etc.
have, the day of the Date hereof, entered into the Covenant and State of
Marriage, according to a solemn Contract heretofore made between our selves,
and with the Cons^nt of such as are concerned in order thereunto* And we do
now, in the Presence of Almighty God, and the Witnesses hereafter named, ratify
the said Contract and Covenant. Act of Marriage this day verbally made; in both
which we do, in the Fear of God, mutually and solemnly, and for our Pares
respectively promise, in the Strength of God, to live together in the State of
Marriage, according to God's Ordinance, from this day forward, to love each
other as Husband and Wife, and faithfully to perform all the Duties to which we
are bound by God's Law, and the good Laws of the Land, in that Case provided,
till the Lord by Death shall separate us. In Testimony whereof we have hereunto
set our Hands, the day of, etc.

Then is annexed a Certificate of the Witnesses, thus:

WE whose Names are subscribed, do testify, That the abovesaid A. B. and C. D.
the Day and Year abovesaid, did mutually take each other into the State of
Marriage, acknowledging the Contract and Covenant, and ratifying the same by
Word, and by the Subscription thereof as abovesaid. In Witness whereof, we do
hereunto set our Hands the Day and Year abovesaid.

After these things, some suitable Counsel or Instruction is given to the
Parties (but no Man takes upon him the Office to marry any, that being the
proper Act of the Parties themselves) and then Prayer is made to God for his
Blessing upon the Parties married, etc.

And now whether Marriages thus made, are justifiable by the Law of God, is
first to be considered.

To begin with the Institution of Marriage, Genesis 2. 23, 24. there we find all
that is essential to Marriage: For he that had the right to dispose of the
Woman, was pleased to bring her and give her to Adam. And Moses tells us, That
they who are thus joined together, are one Flesh; and are to forsake all other
Relations in comparison of that Relation.

The Marriage-Covenant is explained by God himself, Mal. 2. 14. She is thy
Companion, and Wife of thy Covenant, of which he himself (says the Prophet) had
been a Witness: For whoever else are Witnesses in this Case, God is the
Principal, and will punish such as break their Marriage-Covenant.

And thus it appears, that a Marriage-Covenant between Persons who may lawfully
marry, with Witness upon it, are the Essentials of this Ordinance; which is yet
more evident in the Case of Boaz and Ruth, Ruth. 4. 9, 10, 11. And then we may
be sure that God appointed no Ceremony in the Institution of Marriage; nor do
we find any Ceremony made necessary to the Celebration of Marriage in the Old
and New Testament; for that passage of loosing the Shoe, Deuteronomy. 25. 7, 9. and
Ruth 4. 7. pertains not to Marriage, but concerns him that refuses to raise up
Seed in Israel to his deceased Brother.

And as there is no Ceremony ordained, so there is no one certain Form for the
Celebration of Marriage appointed by the Word of God; but this seems rather to
be left to Liberty, as appears in the Case of Isaac, Genesis 24. 67. and the
Marriage of Jacob, Genesis 29. 21, 22, 23. and many others.

The chief Things to be observed in Marriage, since the Earth was replenished
with Inhabitants, are these, That regard be had to Religion, that a Believer
marry not with an Infidel; that the Persons to be married, come not within the
Degrees prohibited in respect of Consanguinity and Affinity. That the
Conjunction, and Marriage-Covenant be between one Man and one Woman; plurality
of Wives is utterly irreconcilable with the Institution of Marriage, and with
the Doctrine of the Gospel, as appears Mat. 19. 8. 1 Cor. 7. 2.

And because our Blessed Savior has taught his Followers to discern what
Corruptions have crept into God's Ordinances, by observing the first
Institution of them, and particularly this of Marriage, Mat. 19. 8. for here he
takes down even a Precept of Moses, because it could not stand with the Purity
and Simplicity of Marriage in the Institution of it. We therefore confess, with
the Learned Casuist, Mr. Hugo Grotius, that though the Conjunction of Male and
Female, whereby Mankind is propagated, is a thing most worthy the care of Laws;
yet where God's Law is known, it is especially to be consulted, both for Matter
and Form, in the Things he has ordained. And therefore we doubt not, but what
Rules are given by the Law of God in the Case of Marriage are sufficient, at
least so far, as that such as are married according to them have all things
that are necessary to justify their Marriages in the sight of God and Man.
Otherwise it will greatly reflect upon the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to say
he has made this Ordinance for the Good of Mankind, and yet left it defective
in the very Essentials of it; and sure it would magnify Man too much to suppose
him capable to mend this Ordinance, but if God make any thing crooked, it
cannot be made straight, and that which he has not made at all, cannot be
numbered [with his Works, or counted a necessary part of them.] Eccles. 1. 14,
15.

And seeing no Ceremony in Marriage has been imposed by the Almighty (as in
some other of his Ordinances he has appointed) let no Man judge one another to
be unlawfully married, because some Ceremonies devised by Men are not observed,
perhaps it might be as strongly argued retro, That they who have taken upon
them to add such their devised Toys, (as Dr. Willit calls the Popish
Ceremonies) have not true Marriage. But as the first is groundless, so this
would be uncharitable.

And therefore we deny not but that some decent Usages or Ceremonies may be
appointed by Authority for the more convenient Celebration of Marriage, and
that the Contempt of them may be justly corrected, for the Honor of the Power
Magistratical: But then it is also to be considered, that as in other
Ordinances of God, so also in this, Men, yea Authorities in most Nations of the
World, have grossly abused this Liberty, by ordaining things ridiculous and
sinful in the solemnizing of their Nuptial Contracts, as shall be showed. And
therefore when and where such Prophanations are found, it is commendable
always, and sometimes necessary, for such as God has enlightened to see such
Corruptions, to endeavor after a modest and prudent manner, to have all the
Ways of God, and particularly this of Marriage, to have them, I say, restored
to their Purity, by being purged from such things as tend to the Profanation of
them.

And herein the Learned of the Church of England are our Precedents: for when
they came to consider the Popish Ceremonies used in their Marriages, they were
so far from conforming to them, or judging those Marriages to be null which
were made without them, that they boldly testify against them, and some laid
down their Lives among the Martyrs in opposition to the Papists Opinion and
Practice in the case of Marriage, as Woodman and Benbridg. This is testified by
Dr. Willit, Synops. p. 679. And where also he labors much to show the Errors
of the Papists, both in their Doctrine and Practice concerning Marriage, and
their Ceremonies used therein, and particularly upon this ground, Because they
made the Celebration of Marriage a Sacramental, or religious Act, and had no
word of Institution in the Scriptures for so doing.

This therefore which has been said concerning the Essentials of Marriage, will
(as we conceive) warrant our Marriage-Covenants and Contracts, to be according
to God's Law; And tho we desire and endeavor to come as near as we can to the
Custom of our Nation in the Celebration of Marriage, which we confess to be of
the Nature of moral and civil Contracts of the highest degree, and therefore
under the cognizance of the Power Magistratical; yet when the Church of England
interposes with her Power Ecclesiastical, to oblige us to the observance of her
Ceremonies, which are not of the Essence of Marriages, nor, so far as we can
judge, such as we can answer to God, nor act in with the Peace of our own Souls,
we are then constrained, as in other cases, so in this, to satisfy our selves
in a diligent observance of the Rules of God's Law, both for the Substance and
Celebration of our Nuptial Contracts; and in so doing, we suppose both the
Statute and Civil Law, as well as the Law of Reason, will at least so far
favor us, as to vindicate us therein to have all things necessary and
essential to the solemn Ordinance of Marriage, which also we shall endeavor to
demonstrate in the next Section.

SECT. II. The Law of the Land does not null or make void the Marriages of the
Baptized Beliivers, but does rather establish them.
THAT this also is no uncertain Position, but a clear Truth, will appear, if we
consider, first, That the chief Grounds or prime Foundations of the Laws of
England are clearly for us; for thus says a learned Lawyer,

The first Ground of the Law of England is the Law of Reason, which is to be
kept in this Realm as it is in all other Realms, and as of necessity it must
be; and because it is written in the Heart, therefore it may not be put away
nor changed; it is never changeable by diversity of Place nor Time; and
therefore against this Law, Prescription, Statute, nor Custom may not prevail:
and if any be brought against it, they be not Prescriptions, Statutes, nor
Customs, but Things void and against Justice. Doct. and Stud. l. 1. c. 5. etc.
2.

The second Ground of the Law of England is the Law of God. And upon these
Grounds (I suppose) was that excellent Statute made in the case of Marriage,
wherein we have these Words, as they are quoted by a learned Man, viz. That no
Reservation or Prohibition (God's Law except) shall trouble or impeach any
Marriage, 22 Hen. 8. c. 38. Will. Synop. p. 711. Of which Statute, Bishop Hall
gives this account, i. e. The Statute of 32. Hen. 8. c. 38. intending to mar
the Romish Market of gainful and injurious Dispensations, professes to allow
all Marriages that are not prohibited by God's Law: and this Law is not yet
repealed. And therefore it hence appears that no Law was then thought necessary
to the Essence of Marriage, but the Law of God. And tho there be a Proviso in a
certain Statute made in the Reign of Edw. 6. that this Statute shall not give
Liberty to marry without the Ceremonies appointed in the Service Book, yet it
does not null any Marriages that had been, or that might after be made with the
Omission of them, or at least some of them: for Marriages we know there have
been, and are frequently made by diverse Ministers of the Church of England,
without the Banes, and some other Rites, as well as by Licenses obtained, which
could not be done, if the Intent of the said Proviso were to make all Marriages
null and void, which are made without Banes, and all the Rites appointed in the
Service Book.

But lest this should be taken for my private Opinion only, I will here alledg
the Judgment of such as are esteemed among the best learned in the Law, whether
we respect the Statute or Civil Law. And first, Mr. Swingburn, Bachelor of the
Civil Law, tells us, That an unsolemn Marriage, is not therefore no Marriage,
because it is unsolemn, the Banes perhaps not being published, or the Marriage
being not celebrated in the Face of the Church, but privately in a Chamber, or
some other Rite or Ceremony being omitted; but it is nevertheless reputed for
true Marriage, both in the Ecclesiastical Courts in respect of the Essence or
Knot of Matrimony, and in Temporal Courts in respect of the Wives Dowry, and
other Legal Effects. Treat. of last Will, p. 20, 21.

And to the same effect speaks Espenc. c* 11. Clandest. Matrinto. Consensus
facit Nuptias, sed eorum qui sui jure sunt; It is the consent of the Parties
which make the Marriage, they being such as are at their own Dispose. And again,

Si pompa al^aque nuptiarum Celebritas omitatur, etc. If the Pomps and
Celebrity of Marriage be omitted, nothing is wanting to the Firmness and
Sureness of Marriage. Cod. L 5. tit. 5. tit. 2.

And the Canon Law tells us; Nuptiarum copula Dei mandato perficitur; The
Marriage-Bond is perfected by the Commandment of God.

Thus we see that Ceremonies are not of the Essence of Marriage, that if the
Command of God be observed, Marriage is perfect. And these Testimonies are the
more considerable to our purpose, because they are alleged against the
Papists, by a learned Protestant, because they doted more then ordinary upon
nuptial Ceremonies. Willit. Synops. p. 713. 740. And so rational and necessary
it is, that the Ceremonies appointed either by the Papists or others, should
not be esteemed to belong at all to the essence of Marriage, that Durandus, an
eminent Papist, tells us, as he is quoted by Dr. Willit, That there is neither
any outward Holy Sign, nor [no Minister] necessary in Matrimony besides the
Parties; for, says he, Matrimony may be solemnized by a Proctor between
Parties that are absent. So then the Presence of a Priest is not of the Essence
of Marriage, seeing it may be celebrated without them.

And which is yet more; Bellarmine, that so much rennowed Cardinal, is alleged
by the said Dr. Willit, saying, That Marriage being of the Nature of Contracts,
the Parties themselves suffice, and that it may be done in their Absence.
[meaning still, that all Contracts be witnessed.]

And here the Words of Mr. Diodate are worthy of Remembrance upon Mal. 2. 15.
Did not God in the beginning create Adam alone, out of whom he framed Eve to be
his Wife, without creating any more Women for one Man, or more Men for one
Woman? showing thereby, that as he appointed Matrimony by one only Law [in
which to be sure there was no Ceremonies] of lawful Conjunction, it likewise
ought to be one with one, and two in the same Flesh.

From all which it is apparent that there may be lawful Marriage where there is
no Ceremonies, much more without the Ceremonies of the Ring, and bowing at the
Altar, and the Ceremonies are not therefore in any-wise to be made essential to
Marriage, and that the Contract between two Persons lawfully qualified for the
State of Marriage, and their actual taking each other into the Relation and
Covenant of Husband and Wife, before sufficient Witness, is essential, firm,
and lawful Marriage, and consequently that the Marriages made amongst the
baptized Believers are true Marriages in the Eye of the Law of this Land.

And to make this yet more evident, I will conclude this Section with the
united Authority of the late Lord Chief Justice Hales, and Dr. Burnet, who
fully express themselves for the Sufficiency of Marriages as made by the
present Dissenters. And thus the Doctor speaks. He (that is, Judge Hale) was
very cautious in declaring their Marriage void, and so bastarding their
Children. But be considered Marriage and Succession as a right of Nature, from
which none ought to be barred, what Mistakes soever they might be under in the
point of revealed Religion; and therefore in a Trial that was before him, when
a Quaker was sued for some Debts owing by his Wife before he married her; and
the Quaker pretended it was no Marriage that had past between them, since it
was not solemnized according to the Rules of the Church of England: He declared
that he was not willing on his own Opinion to make their Children Bastards, and
gave Direction to the Jury to find it special, which they did. -- He governed
himself indeed (says Dr. Burnet) by the Law of the Gospel, of doing to others
what he would have others do to him; and therefore because he would have
thought it a Hardship, not without Cruelty, if amongst the Papists all
Marriages were nulled, which had not been made with all the Ceremonies in the
Roman Ritual, so he applying this to the case of the Sectaries, he thought all
Marriages made according to the several Persuasions of Men, ought to have their
Effects in Law.

Of how great Value the Judgment of this worthy Man is in all Courts of
Judicature, is also testified by this learned Doctor in these words; His
Opinion in points of Law generally passes as an uncontrollable Authority, and
is often pleaded in all the Courts of Justice. So that such as out of a Fancy
to some unnecessary Ceremonies, would null all Marriages amongst Dissenters,
though made as publicly and solemnly as we can, and every way agreeable to the
Law of God, and the Rules of Reason, will see themselves concerned we hope, to
be better advised than to throw Dirt in the face of this great Patriot of the
Law, as if he should be a public Defender of Whoredom; for so do some of our
rash Ceremonialists esteem and speak of all Marriages wherein their Ceremonies
are omitted.

Furthermore; If in this, or any other Nation, God's Ordinances should become,
or be reputed to be Nullities; when in the observation of them, the Ceremonies
appointed by the Church (or those that call themselves so) are omitted, there
could be little certainty of a right or effectual enjoyment of any of them: For
Baptism, Confirmation, the Lord's Table, Ordination, Excommunication (and what
not) as well as Marriage, has been, and is encumbered with so many of the
Ceremonies of Men's devising, that it is not easy to number them, much less to
observe them. But yet such has been the Wisdom of the greatest Ceremonialists,
as to be afraid to annual an Ordinance, tho the Ceremonies of the Church were
omitted, and particularly in the Case of Baptism, Ordination, and Marriages. Do
not the Protestants allow of all these among the Papists, though many
Ceremonies be used therein which they dissallow? Yea, there is no doubt but
both the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, would admit the Baptism of
our Children for a valid Baptism, which was performed upon their personal
profession of Faith and Repentance, and by Immersion, and by one whom they
esteem a Layman, because nothing is wanting in our Baptism which pertains to
the essence of the Ordinance, though we reject all their Rites, Sponsors,
Crossings, etc. And therefore by a parity of Reason, our Marriages being
warranted by God's Law in all things essential to Marriage, must be allowed
good and honest Marriages, tho no Priest nor Ring, etc. was concerned in them.

I say again, Does not the Church of England hold the Ordination received in
the Papacy to be valid? and yet they condemn some Ceremonies which they use in
their Ordinations for superstitious Vanities; neither do they marry those
Papists a second time who become Protestants, but do account their Marriages
valid and good; and yet their Marriages were not celebrated according to the
Rites of the Church of England, not by their Ministers. And why? Surely because
neither the Law of God, nor the Law of the Land, do say they are null or void.
And then sure I am, if they will be but as kind to us as to Papists, they must
grant our Marriages to be more justifiable of the two. For, (...) ours is no
where condemned by the Law of God, nor the Law of the Land, any more than
theirs. And, 2. we bring not in any Roman Rites in the Celebration of our
Marriages, as perhaps they do in theirs; but we keep as near the Law of the
Land in the Celebration of Marriage as we can, and do undoubtedly keep to the
Law of God and right Reason therein, as much as any, as has been showed.

SECT. III. Of the most important Question touching the case depending, viz.
Whether it be necessary that Marriages should be celebrated by a Minister? and
whether they may be valid and lawful without them?
THis is the Question propounded by that learned and worthy Man Bp. Hall, in
his Book of Resolut. p. 361. c. 8. whose Answer will greatly strengthen that
which we have said respecting the Law of God, for thus he speaks:

It is no marvel (says he) if the Church of Rome (which hold Matrimony a
Sacrament, conferring Grace by the very Work wrought) require an absolute
Necessity of the Priests hand in so holy an Act: but for us who (though
reverently esteeming that sacred Institution, yet) set it a Key lower, it
admits of too much Question, whether we need to stand upon the terms of a
Ministers Agency in the Performance of that solemn Action? So then it is a
clear case it seems, unless we fall back to the Papists to make Marriage a
Sacrament, there is no absolute Necessity to have a Priest to celebrate
Marriage, and consequently it may be done lawfully (by God's Law at least)
without them. And assuredly that Doctrine which makes a Minister of God
absolutely necessary to the Celebration of Marriages can in no wise be true,
because it is most unreasonable to impeach all those Marriages which all the
World over, from the beginning to this day, have been celebrated without them:
If then all Nations have all things that are essential to Marriage, and yet few
Nations have had God's faithful Ministers to celebrate it, it is manifest there
may be lawful Marriages without a Minister in all Nations, seeing the
Essentials of Marriage is the same in all Nations.

But though the Bishop be for us thus far, yet he seems to be against us in
that which follows, for thus he writes; That as it is requisite (even according
to the Roman Constitutions) that he who is entrusted with the cure of our
Souls, should besides other Witnesses be both present and active in, and at our
domestic Contracts of Matrimony; so by the Laws both of our Church and
Kingdom, it is necessary he should have his hand in the public Celebration of
them; there may then be firm Contracts, there cannot be lawful Marriages without
Gods Ministers.

But (reserving the Honor due to so grave a Writer) I must answer thus; 1. If
there may be firm Contracts without a Priest, that is, Contracts made with
consent of Parents, etc. and before sufficient Witnesses, and firm, that is,
such Contracts as cannot lawfully be broken (and less than such he cannot
mean); then I see not but that the Substance, or all that is essential to
Marriage may be atained without the Priests hand, even in the Judgment of this
learned Bishop. But 2. I answer further, that by the Testimonies of diverse
learned Men, both in the Roman Constitutions, and the Law of this Land, which
we have alleged in the former Section; the Bishop is mistaken when he says the
Law of this Kingdom does make the Priests hand so necessary, that Marriage
cannot be lawful without them. Sure Judge Hale understood the Law of the
Kingdom, yet he thought all Marriages made according to the several Persuasions
of Men, ought to have their Effects in Law: and indeed should it be otherwise,
that the Papists and other Dissenters should have their Marriages nulled, which
were not celebrated by a Minister of the Church of England, it would cause
great Confusion in the Land: and again they must all be prohibited Marriage,
who are unmarried among the Dissenters, and excommunicated by the Church of
England, for they pretend they candor lawfully marry Persons excommunicated;
and how any Church comes to assume Power to make such Laws, we cannot
understand; only of this we are sure, neither the Law of God nor Reason (the
prime Foundation of all good Laws) does warrant any Church in so doing.

The Proof which the Bishop seems most to rest upon as the Strength of his
Opinion, is, because Christians do know Matrimony to be an Holy Institution of
God himself, which he not only ordained, but actually celebrated betwixt the
first annocent Pair, and which being for the Propagation of an Holy Seed,
requires a special Benediction; and how can we think any Man meet for this
Office but the Man of God set over us in the Lord? But sure these Premises are
not at all apt to bear this Conclusion, that none but a Priest may celebrate
Marriage. The Argument seems more naturally to be deduced thus: God the Father
of Adam, (Luke 3. ult.) who also had the right to dispose of the Woman, and to
give her in Marriage, did celebrate Marriage between Adam and Eve. Ergo, The
Father, or those who have right to dispose of the Parties to be married, may
lawfully celebrate the Marriage, and pray for a special Benediction; see 1 Cor.
7. 38. And for this we have some light from the Word of God in other places (as
has been showed): but that God's Ministers were either in the time of the Law,
or of the Gospel, concerned (as God's Ministers) to celebrate Marriages, does
not appear from any hint in the Word of God. And certainly had the Apostle been
of this Bishop's mind, he would have given us Direction either by his own
Practice, or some other way, touching this matter; but that any of the Apostles
ever married any body, will never be proved: And though Jesus was at a Wedding
and wrought a Miracle there, John 2. yet neither he nor any of his Disciples
did celebrate the Marriage, and then why may we not in reason think Marriage
may be lawfully celebrated without a Priest? We may be sure that those who
called Christ and his Disciples to this Marriage, were such as had a love to
him, and being in Galilee, the place where he had been conversant, and where
also his manner was to perform public Ministerial Acts ( Luke 4. 14, 16.) the
Persons to be married, or their Relations, would as soon have desired his
Assistance in the Celebration of their Marriage, as any other Minister: but the
Truth is, neither he, nor any of the Priests were employed in that matter that
we read of: And hence we may well conclude there can be no necessity to have
Marriage celebrated with a Priest; and then it may lawfully be done without
them. And though we grant a Minister may be as fit, and perhaps more fit than
another Christian, to give good Counsel to, and pray for the new-married
Couple, yet it is apparent the Text, which the Bishop seems* to alledg to that
purpose, intends no such thing at all, as the place being read, will fully
demonstrate, 1 Cor. 7. 39. The Wife is bound by the Law as long as her Husband
lives: but if her Husband be dead, she is at Liberty to be married to whom she
will, only in the Lord. Now the Bishop infers thus; If all our Marriages must
be (according to the Apostle's charge) made in the Lord, who so meet to
pronounce God's Ratification of our Marriages, as he who is the professed Herald
of the Almighty? But the Apostle does not at all speak of the Person that must
celebrate Marriage, but of the Person with whom a Christian may lawfully marry,
as Diodate and others do fitly expound the place. And though we yield willingly
that a Man of God is a fit Person to declare God's Will and Authority in the
Ratification of our Marriages, yet it follows not at all, that none but a Man
of God may be fit to do this, or that none may lawfully do it but a Herald of
the Almighty. But what needs many words? The Bishop answers the Question, where
he tells us, that though the Papists make it absolutely necessary to have a
Minister's hand in the act of Marriage, yet the Protestants set it a Key lower;
and confesses that it admits of too much question, whether we need to stand
upon the terms of a Minister's Agency in the Performance of that solemn Action.
So then this solemn Action of Marriage may be done without a Minister's Agency;
therefore there may be lawful Marriages without God's Ministers: this being
granted, we acknowledge it very commendable to have them present, if they may be
obtained.

But now it would be considered, whether the Persons to be married may not
lawfully be satisfied that the Person whom they employ in the Celebration of
their Marriage, is in their Judgment a lawful Minister, or Man of God
(supposing it necessary to have such a Man to do the Business.) This seems
rational, and if so, I doubt there will be a great difficulty in the case. And
to be plain, though we could admit very willingly of the Prayer of a sober and
pious Minister of the Church of England in the Business of our Nuptials* Yet,
when we are required to kneel before one whom we know to be a wicked drunken
Person, etc. how should we act Faith in his Prayer, when God himself tells us,
The Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to him? We may not safely conform
to such things though the Laws of Men do require it. And indeed the Bishop
seems to favor us in such a strait as this: for he says, The Laws of Men do
not, ought not, cannot bind your Consciences as of themselves; but if they be
just, they bind you in Conscience to Obedience. Now to this we do most heartily
subscribe, only desiring we may have leave to consider what is just or unjust
in this case, and then we doubt not of our Duty to obey actively what the Law
justly requires, or else to suffer patiently what it imposes.

Now though we can find no ground to believe that to celebrate Marriage is a
ministerial act (though a Minister may do it) yet we do not refuse the
Ministers of the Church of England, because such, but because they will not
ratify our Contracts unless we conform to such things as seem to us to be
sinful (as we shall show in the next Section.) And if it were a work peculiar
to God's Ministers, our Straits in coming to the Priests would be greater than
they are, because we know God does not allow wicked Men to take his Word into
their Mouths, specially when they hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50. 16. And
besides, we believe and know, we have of those that more fully agree with us in
matters of Religion, that are Ministers of Christ. And therefore were Marriage
(in the Celebration of it) a Ministerial Work, we should not fail to have it
rightly done by them; but this is not our Persuasion: though we think as
reverently of this Ordinance as any, yet we believe it most fit to be testified
before those who are appointed by the Laws of the Land, and therefore do what
with a good Conscience we can to have it so, but being rejected (as we have
showed) we know our Marriages are not therefore null; because we have all that
is essential to lawful Marriage, both in the Eye of the Law of God, and the Law
of the Land also. For the first, this Learned Prelate does not deny, whilst he
makes not a Minister absolutely necessary to the Celebration of Marriage. And
the Learned Judge Hale grants the second, that our Marriages ought to have their
Effects in Law. And Durand (a Man well skilled in the Roman Constitutions)
tells us, There is no holy Sign, nor no Minister necessary in Matrimony, etc.
as we have showed. And besides this, it is fully showed by this learned Bishop,
that many Christians in all Ages have done, and may lawfully do some things,
tho they be Laymen, which are most fitly to be done by such as have a
Ministerial Authority thereunto, namely, to catechize, defend and propagate the
Gospel. Such were Origin, Aristides, Hegesippus, Justin, and many others; see
his Book of Resolut. p. 265. chap. 10. Those who called themselves Catholics
in Augustin's time, did allow the Baptism and other sacred Acts of the
Donatists, etc. to be valid. It is strange then that the Marriages of the
present Dissenters should be made Nullities by the common Protestants; who
themselves are esteemed but Dissenters in a Neighbor Nation, and therefore
their Marriages are as liable to censure there as ours are here; but these are
Hardships and Cruelties in the Opinion of that learned Lawyer, the late Lord
Chief Justice Hale.

SECT. IV. Of the Rituals of the Church of England concerning Marriage, and the
Reasons why the Baptized Believers comply not with them.
HOW gladly we should be to see an end of all Contention amongst Christians
about unnecessary Ceremonies, we have showed in our Friendly Epistle, and our
late Apology; wherein also we have professed our earnest Desire for Concord
with all that love the Lord Jesus, and more particularly with the Church of
England. But it seems all that we can offer below a full compliance even with
the most useless Ceremonies, is not thought worth the notice of the present
Clergy, who now do many of them wonderfully exalt themselves, despising such as
dissent from them, and that so much the more as by how much we seek to them for
Peace.

Marriage-Covenants we confess are things of that nature and importance, that
they are worthy the care of the Laws of all Nations. But such has been the
unhappiness of the Churches which are National, as to ordain such things in
order to the Celebration of Marriage, which becomes a Snare to many; this the
Protestants found true by Experience, when under the Papal Yoke, and therefore
have exploded part of their Ritual, whereof we have an account from Dr. Willit,
and the manner thus.

1. They who are to be joined in Matrimony, must be blessed by the Priest. 2.
Oblation must be made for them in the Sacrifice of the Mass. 3. They are
covered with a Vail. 4. They are coupled together with a Ribbon, partly white
and partly blew. 5. They Bride gives to the Bridegroom a Ring, hallowed first,
and blessed by the Priest. 6. The Priest commends them to God in Prayer. 7.
He admonishes them to their mutual Duties. Dr. Willit, Synops. p. 713.
Now this use of the Ring amongst the Papists is condemned by this Learned
Doctor of the Church of England, for a superstitious Toy, partly for that it
must be hallowed by the Priest; and partly for that the Man holding the Woman
by the Ring, their Fingers across, some enchanting words, says he, are then
muttered; but the words he sets not down.

And now because the use of the Ring in the Church of England, and the kneeling
at the Altar, and to the Priest for his Blessing, are very doubtful to us, we
shall here take a view of the matter. And,

1. The Ring must be laid upon the Service Book. 2. The Priest must then give
the Ring to the Bridegroom. 3. The Bridegroom must put the Ring upon the fourth
Finger of the Woman's left Hand. 4. And holding the Woman by that Finger, must
say these strange Words, With this Ring I thee wed: with my Body I thee
worship: with all my worldly Goods I thee endow. In the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Now these things, so far as we are able to understand them, do look as much
like Superstition, as any thing which the Protestant Doctor has to object
against the Popish use of the Ring: For why must the Ring be laid upon the
Service Book, and so pass through the Priests hand, before it be fit for the
use it is to be made of? Certainly the Ring is hereby supposed to be made more
fit to wed the Woman; and this it cannot be, unless it be supposed to be
sanctified, or if there be nothing of all this, it seems to be wholly
superfluous.

And for the Man to say he weds her (whom he has married sufficiently before)
with that Ring, in the Name of the Father, etc. is so like a Sacramental form
of Words, as that we are sure none more solemn are appointed to be used in Holy
Baptism: nor can any higher form of Words be devised. Had Almighty God
appointed this form of Words to be annexed to the use of a Ring, all Men would
and surely might have concluded Marriage among Christians to be a Sacrament as
well as Baptism: but seeing he has not done it, it seems to us too bold an
attempt; for any Church to impose such a Rite or Ceremony in so great a Name,
and therefore in Conscience we dare not conform to the Church of England in
this thing; for it is dangerous to speak a Word, much more to make an
Institute, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which he has not
commanded.

Let us consider whence the Ring in Marriage was derived, that we may the
better judge of the matter. 1. Then it is reckoned among the Heathen Roman Rites
in their Marriages, and the manner thus; The Man gave in token of good Will
(they say) a Ring unto the Woman, which she was to wear upon the next Finger to
the little Finger on the left Hand, because unto that Finger alone proceeded a
certain Artery from the Heart: Here seems to be the Radix or Spring of the Ring
in Marriage, unless perhaps it might be before this among the superstitious
Jews; for thus we read,

The Wedding-Ring among the Jews had this Inscription, MAZAL TOB, [which the
Learned say, is to wish good luck] and it was given to the Bride-wife: and the
Hebrews called the Planet Jupiter Mazal, whose Influence they thought to be of
great force for Generation. Godwin. Antiq. of the Romans and Jews.

Now which of these soever was the Springhead, though there seems to be
something of Superstition or Folly in the Business, yet I think an impartial
Man must needs say the Ring has attracted more of that kind among the Christian
Nations, than it had among the Jews or Heathens. The short is* Were the Ring
used only as a Civil Ceremony, without this seemingly sacred Solemnity, we
should say nothing. But for Christians to adopt either the Heathen or Jewish
superstitious Rites into the Service of the Church, and to make the Celebration
of them ministerial Acts, is the Business for the serious and thinking
Christian to consider.

And assuredly till it turn to the Lord to incline the Hearts of his People
with one accord, to restore his Holy Ordinances (and amongst the rest this of
Marriage) to their Native Purity and Simplicity, there will be continual cause
of Sorrow, Discontents and Animosities amongst Christians, and occasion thereby
given in all Christian Nations for the more Carnal and Ceremonious, to
persecute the more spiritual and serious sort of Christians. And the grave
Author of the the first part of the naked Truth (not that of Mr. H.) makes
those without doubt to be always the weakest and most carnal, who stand so much
for Ceremonies; and speaking of the Ring, he makes it (in respect of himself)
as a thing of mere Indifferency, to be married with or without it. And were it
left to that Liberty, we should not much complain; but alas it is made so
necessary that we cannot be married by a Priest without it.

2. We cannot understand how to worship our Wives, yet we can understand St.
Paul, where he bids us give them Honor as the weaker Vessel. To worship any
Creature in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is very suspicious;
but I say, to worship our Wives thus, is a thing we understand not. This seems
to be borrowed from the forementioned Jews, who had Jupiter in such esteem: For
the same Antiquerist tell us, that the Words of their Dowry-Bill ran thus, Be
thou unto me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and Israel, and I according
to the Word of God will worship, honor, maintain and govern thee, etc. But
where the Word of God obliges a Man to worship his Wife, is yet unrevealed to
us. There is indeed a Civil Worship due to our Superiors, or Persons of great
Worth, Luke 14. 12. But the Law of God and Nature has made the Man superior in
Marriage, and why are we to unman our selves to gratify a Ceremony?

In all that I have written I design nothing against the Church of England,
whom I unfainedly honor, as I do all that heartily love Jesus Christ, as
Charity commands me to believe she does; yet let me freely say, that the Sign
of the Cross in Baptism (though certainly an Error, because added to a sacred
Institute of Christ, without any Allowance from his Word, yet) is much more
excusable than this Sign of the Ring. For if we consider their Original, the
Cross was used in Defense of his Honor who died upon a Cross, and in
opposition to the Blasphemy both of Jews and Heathens. But the Ring was
borrowed from the superstitious Rites both of Jews and Heathens, and so more
unfit for any Service among Christians.

Again, The Cross is not so highly honored in Baptism, as the Ring is in
Marriage; for the Cross is not made or used in the Name of the Trinity, as we
see the Ring is. Moreover, the Sign of the Cross may be omitted sometimes, even
by the Laws of the Church of England, (as in private Baptism) but the Ring is
not so. That Baptism is not doubted to be valid, which wants only the Sign of
the Cross, but (according to some of our present Clergy) the Ring must be one,
or else they will not celebrate Marriage, and if it be done without the Ring,
will almost condemn it for no Marriage at all. But sure it is not in the Power
of any Church to make Laws, Ordinances, Rites or Ceremonies, so necessary to
this Ordinance of God (I mean Marriage) as that the Omission of them should
null God's Ordinance, or put a Bar against Men's having the Benefit of that
Ordiaance, which both the Law of God and Nature allows them.

Has not the Church often been not only the least, but also a persecuted
People in a Nation, and may be so again; how then can it pertain to her to make
Laws in cases which concern Men as Men, and all Men in a Nation as much as any?
and in which she is bound to observe the Laws of these Nations (so far as she
may do it without Sin) rather than prescribe ( unless to teach the Law of God
to them) what ceremonies they must use in their Nuptial Celebrations.

But forasmuch as Marriages are the Foundation of Families, and that upon the
Legality whereof the Good of Posterity does much depend, we therefore conclude,
this universal Ordinance of God is under the Cognizance of the Magistrate,
whose care is to see that nothing be done herein against the Law of God, right
Reason and common Honesty, but that all Violation of these rules of Government
should be corrected, and the contrary encouraged. And herein we cheerfully
submit our selves to their Majesty's, and to all that are in Authority as in
Duty bound, most humbly entreating that some prudent care may be taken by our
Superiors that whatsoever is grievious herein may be removed.

FINIS.

