A DISCOURSE Delivered in Two Sermons, PREACHED in the Cathedral at ELY, in
September 1684.

Not long after the Death of the RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD PETER GUNNING
Late Lord Bishop of ELY.

By HUMFREY GOVVER D. D. Master of St John's College in Cambridge and one of
the Prebendaries of ELY.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University. For John Creed,
Bookseller there. 1685.

To the Right Reverend Father in God FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY and Almoner to
His MAJESTY.
My LORD,
IT is now near five months since this Discourse was delivered in Two Sermons
in your Lordships Cathedral Church at ELY. So long have I been able to keep it
confined to that privacy, for which it was intended, notwithstanding many
endeavors that were used to make it Public. I had no reason to be easily
persuaded to offer to the world any thing so mean on so Great a Subject. That,
which might serve well enough from the Pulpit to express my own Duty and
Reverence to the Blessed Memory of this Holy Prelate, and could raise suitable
Affections in that one Auditory for which these Sermons were composed, will
not, perhaps, deserve Pardon coming from the Press and presented to the Public
view. It may be expected from a Discourse of this nature, that carries in its
Title Page the Great Name of Bishop GUNNING, that it should bear some
proportion to the Excellent Subject, adorn the Great and Good Man's memory and
render Him Lovely and Admirable in the Lively expression of His Character, as
He really was in the Perfections of His Soul and the whole Tenor of His Life.
But that is an undertaking far above My reach and beyond the Power of any words
that I know. If so Happy a Performance may be reasonably expected from any Pen,
My Lord, it must be Yours; You best understand and can best Express what an
inestimable Treasure the World lately Enjoyed, and now Laments as lost, in Your
Renowned Predecessor. But, if the Important Affairs that take up your time and
the many Duties of that High Station, in which God and the King have so happily
placed You, will not allow Your Lordship leisure to oblige our Age and
Posterity in this particular, I hope some other will be found ready, and, in
some good Degree, qualified for such an undertaking.

In the mean time I have suffered my self to be overrul'd by my Friends, but
especially Your Lordship, whose Commands I do not use to dispute; but still
delight to Observe and Obey the least intimations of Your Pleasure, as well now
that You are Bishop of the Diocese as when You were Master of the College. But
nothing made Me yield more patiently to the publishing of this imperfect
Account of my late Dearest and most Honored Lord, then some comfortable Hopes,
which arose within Me, that it might be a means to provoke and hasten some
other to draw up a just and complete History of His Lordships Life. For these
papers are such, as they cannot forestall, but may well Encourage and quicken a
performance so desirable in its self, so due to the Bishop's memory, and so
profitable for the Public.

That I have inscribed them to Your Lordships Name, I hope, My Lord, You can
easily pardon, because You could not expect that it should be otherwise:
Nothing of this kind can be so properly offered to any other as to Your self:
You were that Great Prelat's most intimate and many ways indeared Friend; You
are his most Worthy and wished for Successor; You tread in his steps and most
happily Imitate his Virtues: In all things You appear a Prelate after his own
heart, the very Person, whom (had it been in His power) the Holy Man would have
named, to that Honor, before any other in the World.

That Your Lordship may live long for the further Service and Benefit of the
Church, and to the manifold increase of Honor and Happiness to Your Self both
in this and a better World, is the daily Hearty Prayer of, My Lord,

Your Lordships most obliged
St John's College in Cambridge Febr. 12. 1684/5
II. KINGS 2. 11, 12. And it came to pass as they still went on and talked,
that behold, there appeared a Chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted
them both asunder, and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.

And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof: and he saw him no more, and he took hold of his own
clothes, and rent them in two pieces.


THis Church has so lately lost a Prophet, and a Father, I mean a most
Venerable and holy Bishop, and these words do so expressly commemorate such a
loss; that I can easily believe you to be already in some apprehension of a
discourse on that sad subject. And indeed, prepare to renew your mourning. If
you have bin yet able to make any truce with your sorrows for so inestimable a
loss, you are like now to have occasion to break it off, and to return a while
to funeral and melancholy meditations. I fear I cannot touch, though never so
gently, that tender part without being troublesome and grievous unto you; and
somewhat unseasonable too, now that your breach is so happily repaired, and
good amends made you for what you have lately suffered: And yet I must venture
it. I can forbear no longer, I have held my tongue hitherto and kept silence,
even from good words, but it was pain and grief to me. A great man is fallen
amongst us; and shall none of us cry out, and lift up his voice in weeping and
mourning, and go before the people, and lead them on, and teach them how to be
affected, how to express their sorrows at the Grave of so Honorable and
Renowned a Person? It may be some satisfaction to me, and not unprofitable to
you, to spend this hour (my first before you in this place, since that
mournful day) in considering and discoursing of that great common calamity,
which then befell us.

What though it cost us some fresh tears? Our whole stock is not sufficient
worthily to express all the degrees and particulars of our loss: It can never
be better spent: You scarce ever had, ever can have juster and greater matter
for repeated and even perpetual lamentation; You, I say, of this Church, of
this City and Diocese. For God has lately taken from you your Bishop, a
Prophet, a Pastor of his own sending, and after his own heart; a spiritual
Father, a vigilant Guide and Guardian of your souls: You have lost an excellent
Governor, a watchful Overseer, a faithful Instructour, an able Pilot, an
affectionate Friend, a charitable Neighbor, an hospitable Entertainer, and a
bountiful Benefactour.

Thus much, at the least is yours: this is your share in the public Calamity
that we now deplore: public, I say; for so it is, if ever the death of a
single man and a subject can be such. It is not a private and domestic sorrow,
not the mourning of one place or people, that I now invite you to: there is not
a good man alive, that knew this Bishop, but laments his death. Were the
greatness of the loss as generally known and as well understood, as it is
certain and sad, there would be as many mourners for this death, as there are
Christians in the world, and a lamentation as Universal as the Catholic
Church. Therefore, when we discourse of this late Great man, when in Him we
lament our loss, it will become us to entertain resentments, and frame
expressions, as near as we can, suitable to his worth, and our sense of it.
There can be no danger of being too excessive in our weeping and mourning;
whilst our Grief is Christian, and that we sorrow not as men without hope: nor
can the expressions of it be extravagant, whilst they endeavor to signify no
more then a loss as great as could well happen by the death of one man.

It is one of the least considerations that we can have of him, that he was
ours: If we will lament becomingly at this Tomb, our cry must be double, like
that of Elisha in my Text, it must mount apace, rise still higher, and express
more and more abundantly in every note; My father, my father, the chariot of
Israel and the horsemen thereof. Elisha, you hear, claims the interest of a son
in the departing Prophet: And I have reason to think that those of this Church
and Diocese had as good cause to love and Reverence their late Bishop as a
Father, as any Congregation ever had so to esteem their Pastor; since any less
then Apostles have bin employed to feed and govern the Christian Flock: But
Elisha soon passes from so private and particular a consideration to the much
more considerable interest, which the public had in that wondrous man. The
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof.

And that is it, which, in the case before us, is most to be regarded. We have
lost a Father, it is true, and such a one as your own memories and happy
experience can better represent unto you then the best of words, or the most
affectionate and advantageous report, that can be made. But even that, which
seems so much yours, must likewise be accounted to the Church: He could not
have been such a beneficial Father to you, had he not been as useful and as
excellent a Son to the Holy Church: All that we can say or think to imbitter
our own particular share in this loss does but inhance and aggravate that much
more deplorable of the public. For in your late holy Prelate the whole
Catholic Church of God on Earth, but in an especial manner, this blessed part
of it, the Church of England did enjoy whatever almost could be Good and Great
in a Christian and a Scholar. He lived and died the great Instance and Example
of his age of extraordinary natural Endowments most wonderfully improved, vast
Learning graced with the greatest Modesty, incomparable worth and profound
Humility. In him has the Church lost one of the most perfect patterns of a
Christian Bishop that She ever had: Furnished he was with all the Gifts and
Graces, that are requisite to make a man most amiable and useful. His
unfeigned and exemplary piety, devout and holy Life, his searching and
comprehensive understanding, lively and quick apprehension, ready and retentive
memory, His solid judgment, unwearied industry, and, an effect of these, His
accurate and almost Universal Knowledge, especially in that which is the end
and perfection of all, the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures and the whole sacred
Text, as they rendered him the wonder and delight of all that knew him, whilst
he was here; so (it is to be hoped) those Great Accomplishments have shed
abroad such happy influences in this Kingdom as will not perish with the
present age, but spread and propagate to succeeding times, and both to us and
our latest posterity bring forth fruit for the use and benefit of the Church.

And here, methinks, I am willing to enjoy with you, a while, the refreshment
of this comfortable, and well grounded hope; and thence to take occasion to
alter my style a little, and to speak of the Churches gain rather then Her
loss, to congratulate as well as condole with Her on the account of this great
man. For the Lives of such men as He, even after death, like the blood of
Martyrs, give nourishment and increase to the Church: Their fame and memory
remains, when they are gone, and shall be for ever blessed. As they were
honored in their Generation and were the glory of their times, so have they
left a name behind them, that their praises might be reported; And with that
name an Example too, which will live though they are dead: And those their
Praises and good Examples are most powerful exhortations to suitable practice
and imitation. Their good actions are so many good Doctrines, backed and
seconded by the best motive, and the most persuasive and convincing
application. It Is thus that Holy Church enjoys Her Bishop still, and I hope
ever will, by the blessed effects of his eminent abilities and exemplary Life;
though He himself is gone and is seen no more. And it is thus that he being dead
yet speaks, and teaches more powerfully from the Grave, then he could
formerly from the Pulpit. For his Life was a better Sermon then He or any man
else could ever preach. A mere repetition of the chief Heads of it fully and
faithfully performed, would furnish you out a much more useful one then this
of mine, hasty notes and imperfect, and mostly taken at a distance, and, by the
shortness of the time, now to be made shorter. It must be a juster account,
that must duly inform the world with what an excellent spirit He was endued,
how full of God and all good things, how conscientiously and faithfully He
spent his hours, how industrious he was in private, and how laborious in
public, how covetously He hoarded up, and yet, how liberally He scattered
abroad the richest treasures of knowledge Humane and Divine, how holily He
taught, and as holily lived.

By this great instance, amongst others, the world may see and be convinced
that a man may be as great and good in this, as in any other age of
Christianity. That the highest and most Heroical representations of virtue are
not mere scheme and fiction, but very real and practicable things; such as may
be indeed reached and effectually attained. For these did all live and appear
and flourish in the Holy Prelate, whom you lately lost, and we now lament. In
him we have seen plainly and eminently exemplifi'd what before (perhaps) we had
only read in the Rule, conceived in Theory or Idea, or could apprehend and
fancy as most desirable and lovely in the Character of a Bishop. All which
being well considered, I hope I may be allowed to insist on this Illustrious
instance of glorified Elias, and the words of his renowned Successor Elisha,
as being such as may very easily be accommodated to our present business, and
may help us to meditations proper for this occasion.

For what is the death of Saints but their entrance into glory? Every good man,
at his death, ascends as really, though not as visibly as Elijah, and is made as
certainly happy as he. Their bodies, indeed, go down to the Grave, and mingle
again with the dust, from whence they were taken, so to remain till the happy
hour of an indissoluble reunion to their souls shall consummate the bliss of
which that better part had taken possession immediately after it was dislodged
from the body: the spirit springs upwards as soon as ever it feels it self free
from the clog and weight that pressed it down: the soul of every Saint mounts
as swiftly toward Heaven as Elijah himself, though carried up in a flaming
Chariot with Horses of fire. Therefore well and wisely has the Church chosen to
celebrate the day of their death, as the happiest and most memorable of their
lives; and such as better deserved to be accounted (as it was styled) their
birthday, then that, on which they were born into the world. For then they
truly begin to live when to us they die: Whenas, that which we commonly call
our Birth, is indeed but the first step we take in our advance to death: There
is a short passage between the womb and immortality, called life; but indeed it
lies all along in the region of Death, to which we are inrol'd subjects as soon
as we enter on that path of mortality, and are not a moment free from the
malignant influences of his dominion, till we are got to the end of it, and
have sheltered our bodies in the Grave, and our souls in the hands of him that
gave them. Then, and not before, are we freed from the imperfections and
encumbrances of flesh and blood, from all the hidden snares, the silent and
secret encroachments of Death, who begins its approaches as soon as we begin to
live: for then he first finds us on his own ground, and within his reach, and
instantly quarries upon his prey: As soon as we were born we began to draw to
our end: And there is no standing still in this walk of Death; for man that is
born of a woman never continues in one stay: He that lives most healthfully
dies daily: In the midst of life we are in death, and every moment ripens us
for the Grave; to which we are still posting as fast as the wings of time can
carry us. Our very health is a kind of sickness, and whilst we seem to gather
strength and lay up plenty of provision to prevent the ruin or decay of our
frail nature, we are really, all that while, but making further advances
toward our latter end: Death is at work as well as we. In vain do we endeavor
to entrench and fortify against the assaults of that obstinate and unrelenting
enemy. An enemy it is that cannot fail of victory either by undermining or by
storm, by lingering consumptions or more acute and violent distempers. Death
will certainly demolish our strongest hold, and easily reduce the tottering
tabernacle, which we possess and would still gladly defend, to ruin and
rubbish, dust and ashes, out of which it was first reared, and to which,
according to its Makers doom, it must return by an unavoidable dissolution. But
when we are once arrived at that period, and have received the last blow of
Death, and happily passed the common Gate of Mortality, we are no longer in its
power: For what is said of the Head is true of the members; That being once
dead they die no more, Romans 6. 9.
death has no more dominion over them. That then is the blessed hour, that
completely delivers the sons of men, who through fear of death, were all their
life time subject unto bondage. It is at that fatal moment, as it is called,
which seems to reduce us to the lowest, most lamentable and helpless condition,
that the Righteous man first feels his shackles fall off, and himself set free,
far out of the reach of the malice of Men or Devils. For by dying he has
overcome his last enemy which is death. Strange victory! But yet certain; such
almighty efficacy in it self, and such a quickening influence on his members has
the Death of our Head the Lord Christ; who having first himself overcome it,
teaches and enables us to triumph in Death over Death it self.

It Is true the victory is not, in all respects, complete, till we have
destroyed and spoiled, as well as vanquished, this King of Terrors: But that
last Enemy cannot be so absolutely subdued till the last day, when Death shall
be swallowed up in victory; that is finally and for ever; so slain as never to
revive; for after that, it shall be no more: Then likewise shall the little
victory of the grave be blasted, and the poor remains, we left behind us,
wrested out of the jaws of Death, and restored to us: But how? Not worsted and
worn, as they were by course lodging in the dust, and long captivity in the
dark dungeons of the Earth; but all fresh and new, and wonderfully changed for
the better: That which was swon in corruption will be raised in incorruption.
Its dishonor will be turned into glory, and its weakness into power; of a
natural body, as we left it, it will be raised and presented to us all over
spiritual and heavenly.

The same indeed, we had before: For though it be most true, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, as the
Apostle immediately explains himself, Corruption cannot inherit incorruption;
yet we know that this mortal must be quickened, and have learned to believe the
resurrection of the flesh, Job 19. 26, 27.
and are assured that we our selves, and not another for us, in our flesh shall
see God; Even after worms have destroyed our bodies.

It will therefore be the same, I say; and yet not that vile thing, which once
it was, but changed and fashioned like unto his glorious body, who was the
first fruits of them that slept, and who is the resurrection and the life.
Prudent therefore and pious is the Churches choice in celebrating the death
under the notion of the nativity of such, to whom the day of their death must
needs be better then the day of their birth, according to the observation of
the Royal Preacher. Eccles. 7. 1.
For then it is, that they are born members of the Church Triumphant, not only
heirs but possessours of Eternal life. For they shall not come into
condemnation, but are actually and properly passed from death unto life: Their
Savior has wiped away all tears from their eyes; Revel. 21. 4.
and to them there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain.

This alone is life properly so called; in comparison of which, that of this
world, which has usurped the Name, is a very Death, only that it continues
longer, is more vexatious and tormenting then Death it self. Born, indeed, we
are, but unto trouble, Job 5. 7.
as the sparks fly upward. Cares and fears, tears and temptations, doubts and
disappointments distract the mind; whilst the body, which partakes in those
agonies of the soul, is also miserably subjected to racks and tortures of its
own, to pains and diseases that would be desperate and insupportable, were they
not, as it were, the earnest and Harbingers of Death, which puts an end to all
those tragical miseries of life. And is not this a goodly thing, for men to be
so fond of, as generally they are, that is it self so great a disease, that
nothing but death can cure? That therefore is often called for, even by those,
who yet are much unprepared for such a remedy. But how welcome then are, or
ought to be, the approaches of Death stingless! Such it is to those that die
the death of the righteous, as they all do, to be sure, that have lived their
life; which was well known and considered by the Holy Prelate, whom I now
commemorate.

Conscious to himself of a race happily run, of talents well improved, and a
fight well fought; with a clear conscience and an undisturbed mind, in a well
grounded reliance on the Mercies and Merits of his Redeemer, the Holy Man, like
just and devout Simeon, or this very Elias in the Text, humbly prayed for his
departure, in my hearing (as I kneeled by him) though, as I have reason to
believe, against his will, as well as without his knowledge: For He seemed to
mind nothing but his God, his eyes then shut, and his words whispered; though
both before and after he spoke strongly and aloud. It was the only Prayer I
ever heard him make, to which I could not heartily say Amen. I could have
wished that He should still have walked before the Lord in the Land of the
Living, and therefore must confess was afraid He would be heard, and that God
would not deny him the request of his lips, but would bestow Death upon him; so
pressing and importunate was his Prayer; for He seemed to groan earnestly, like
St Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 2.
to have that his earthly Tabernacle dissolved, and to be clothed upon with his
house from heaven. And yet were those breathings of his soul sent up to Heaven
with that same Christian resignation and submission to the Divine will, which
so qualifies and recommends a Good man's Prayers, that they cannot fail of a
favorable audience and success. Thus He, whose Conversation had been so much
in Heaven, even whilst Himself was on Earth, did in heart and mind thither
ascend, even before his soul could get loose from the troublesome embraces of
the body: And thus like Elijah, He was not only carried, but went up to Heaven.

That Holy Prophet gladly mounted up into his Heavenly Chariot, leaving most
willingly Elisha, and the world below: The whirlwind it self was not in more
haste then He; the Chariot and Horses and Fire could not move quicker and fly
swifter then did his own ardent desires toward his everlasting bliss. So did
our dying Bishop joyfully part with all that He valued here on Earth, and, in a
chariot of fire, mounted unto the Heavens; if I may be allowed so to style the
Feavour, that snatched him from us. But if that may seem too remote a Metaphor;
I know I can truly say, that his soul still soared higher and higher in
raptures of fervent and devout desires of being dissolved, and being with God
his exceeding great Reward.

This, indeed, was most like the fire, in which Elijah ascended unto Heaven: A
fire that needed no fuel but the devout mind that kindled it: A fire that
burned but consumed not: Such a fire as warms and heats the Holy Angels
themselves, and kindles those Divine Ministers into a flaming fire: And,
perhaps, They were the Chariot and the Horses in the Text. Prompt and ready
they are to execute all the commands of their great Maker, and most cheerfully
do those Triumphant spirits of Heaven fly down to succor and assist Holy men
on Earth and promote the happiness of Militant Saints. But Angels or clouds, or
whatever it was, fiery it did appear; a fit emblem of that Heroic Zeal that
did so illustriously discover it self and shine forth in the life of that great
Prophet: A zeal for the honor of him that sent him, like that which
afterward, in a more Divine manner, appeared in our blessed Savior, of whom
Elias himself was a type and, in some sense, a forerunner, as well as the
Baptist, who came in his Spirit and Power: A zeal it was, that even consumed
him, stuck nearer and closer to him, then any earthly concern of his own; A
zeal that He durst own and stand to before the Searcher and Judge of hearts; 1
Kings 19. 10, 14.
I have been very jealous, says He, more then once, for the Lord God of Hosts:
It vexed his righteous soul to see the Apostasy of a whole nation, as He
reckoned, from God and all goodness; The children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword: the
desolation of the Church lay heavy on the Good man's heart.

For Ahab walked in the sins of Jeroboam; 1 Kings 12. 28, etc.
who, for fear the heart of the people should turn again to their Lord the king
of Judah, that he might secure his usurpation and establish himself, thought it
necessary to invade the Religion as well as the Government of the Nation: And
so he sets up Gods of his own, and made Priests of the lowest of the people,
such as were not of the sons of Levi; and therefore, having no lawful
Ordination, incapable to succeed in the holy Function; Verse 33.
and he ordained Feasts and made Sacrifices according to his own fancy; even as
he had devised in his own heart. Ecclus 48. 1.
Then stood up Elias the prophet as fire, and his word burnt like a lamp, as it
is expressed by the son of Sirach. Even then, when there was not a man on Earth
to second him, did he courageously keep his ground, assert the Church and its
cause, and made stout and vehement protestations against the Schism, and all
their unreasonable and irreligious Innovations: Full of God and the Commission,
that He had from Him, He put himself in the gap, withstood the torrent of
Apostasy that had overrun the land, boldly rebuked vice and called often and
aloud both to Prince and People, to return to God and his Holy Church. The
haughty and bloody Jezebel with all her cruel instruments, and the many hundred
Prophets of Baal, and of the groves, that did eat at her table, could not
persuade or fright him from his integrity: still the holy fire was kept alive
in his religious breast, and flamed brightly out, on all occasions, into acts
of devotion, and zealous undertakings for the honor of his God: This I say,
was the fire that seems, at the last, to have kindled for him even the wings of
Angels, and turned them into a flaming Chariot and Horses, with which He
ascended unto a place of Bliss prepared for him; according to that in the first
of the Maccabees: Elias for being zealous and fervent for the Law, 1 Maccab. 2.
58.
was taken up into heaven. It pleased God to reward his signal piety with
signal and singular Honor; And, for that and other reasons best known to his
Divine wisdom, He made him an exception from the general rule, exempting him
from the common fate of all men, by taking him up alive to himself in a visible
and most wonderful manner.

It is not my present business, nor was it my design, or at all in my thoughts,
when I chose this Text for my Theme, to draw a parallel, betwixt the Prophet
Elias and our late Bishop; And yet I judge this a proper part of my discourse
for the mention of that holy zeal for God and every good thing, which was so
visible and lovely in that excellent Person. God had enriched his mind with
many extraordinary endowments, which rendered him eminent and honorable, above
most of his generation. But nothing deserved and procured him a greater
veneration and awe from all that knew him, then the unblemished sanctity of his
life, his zeal for God and our most Holy Religion, and his own steady, uniform,
and exemplary obedience to those Evangelical precepts, which he so faithfully
preached and recommended unto others. The day would fail me, before I could
recite the many Evidences and Instances that may be given of what I say. But it
is not my business to write the Great man's Life, as he must, and that, very
voluminously, who undertakes to do him right in this particular. His
discourses, designs, endeavors, undertakings, his labors and his studies,
almost every thing that he did or said, capable of expressing the piety of the
heart, discovered the Holy frame of his Spirit, and convincingly proved to
those that conversed with him, what Elijah's miracle did to the widow of
Sarepta, that he was a man of God, 1 Kings 17. 24.
and that the word of the Lord was in his mouth.

Nor could so sincere a Piety toward God be in the Bishop any more then in the
Prophet without a suitable love and religious regard to his Holy Church. But
this was so eminent in our Prelate, and is so famously known at home and
abroad, and his praises, on this account, are so acknowledged and received in
all our Gates, that I shall not need to justify this part of his Character, by
alleging here any of the very many instances of his zeal in opposing the
attempts of the late Schism and Rebellion. He did not forbear to protest
publicly against the Faction even when it was most formidable: And in a Sermon
preached before the University in St Mary's Church in Cambridge, He urged them
vehemently and convincingly to publish a formal protestation against the
Rebellious League. And they to whom he spoke were sufficiently disposed to
comply and close with so Christian and Loyal an exhortation. For the spirit of
Error and Delusion, of Faction and Fury, which had long before broke loose and
ravaged far and near, confounding and subverting all Orders of men and things,
had not been able to poison or corrupt that bright and wholesome Fountain of
Learning and Religion, though situated in the midst of the enemies quarters, and
perpetually surrounded and infested with boisterous Troops of Rebels. The good
Work was therefore presently begun and soon finished; But could not be
published in the name of the whole Corporation, and consequently not at
Cambridge, because one man, who alone could hinder it, would not permit it to
be done. But I have not only Charity enough to hope, but sufficient Reason to
believe, that He soon repented of the opposition He had made, and became quite
of another mind. But however, printed it was, though most of the impression was
seized at London, before it could get abroad; And this Renowned Nursery of
Learning and Loyalty did not loose the honor of getting the start of her equal
Sister, and giving her an excellent pattern and encouragement by so early and
laudable an undertaking.

In this conscientious zeal for the Church, did our Bishop and many others, to
their lasting comfort and Renown, faithfully persevere, to the loss of all they
had in this world, but their lives: And those lives, which God gave them for a
prey, were cheap and vile in their own eyes in competition with their Loyalty
and Religion; for which the Bishop was ready and resolved, and (sometimes) very
likely to resist even unto blood. Every place, where this Good man sojourned,
after He was driven from his study in Cambridge, can furnish out various
evidences of his pious and restless endeavors for the benefit of the public.
His time was always usefully spent, in confirming those that stood, supporting
them that were falling, raising up them that were down, encouraging the
faint-hearted, and reducing them that were gone astray. In the very worst of
times, when the Rebellion was rampant, and the bloody Usurper had killed and
taken possession, then did our Elijah, even in Samaria, in the Rebels
Metropolis, in spite of all their menaces and malice, courageously stand up,
and in words assert, and in practice perform his duty to God and to the Church:
And to him gladly flocked Loyal multitudes of Religious and true hearted
people, to celebrate those Holy Offices (to which they were by Law obliged) in
private houses, when by armed violence they were forced out and driven from the
Churches.

Now, can you believe that this Heroic Instance of Primitive Christian Loyalty
and Zeal, could be alleged for the justification of Factious and Schismatical
Conventicles? But what has not been said and done to give life and countenance
to the beloved, though desperate, Cause? It might have been hoped that such an
instance of integrity and honest perseverance in obedience to the Church, in a
time of trial and danger, would have wrought some relenting in Her persecutors,
and made them more mindful of their own duty for the future. But instead of
that, the thing has been represented as an argument or defense for the illegal
meetings of Nonconformists. One would think this could not be intended for good
earnest: but be that as it will, I am sure the Bishops answer was very
ingenious and apposite; and it was to this purpose, that, as our present
Sovereign was rightful King of England, even when hid in the Royal oak, and
Cromwell an Usurper, though at Whitehall and in the Throne; so was He a regular
Preacher, and his meeting at Exeter-house a true Congregation, of the Church of
England; whenas the Objectour though preaching at St Paul's Cross, would be still
a schismatic, and His assembly of Separatists a Conventicle even in the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, or St Paul's in London.

But thus as I was saying, did this Apostolical man endure hardship as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. God having not given him the Spirit of Fear, but of
Power, of Love, and of a Sound mind. Like his Lord and Master He went about
doing good, in meekness instructing those that opposed themselves; and was
instant in season and out of season reproving, rebuking, exhorting with all
longsuffering and Doctrine. Thus spent he his days of mourning, either
privately wrestling with his God in Prayer for the remnant of Israel; that He
would turn the Captivity of his people, and be favorable and gracious unto
Sion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem; or in public contending with the
enemies of the Church; disputing both in public and private with the most
Powerful and skillful of the Adversaries of both kinds, Romanists and others;
with equal zeal and knowledge, convincing or confounding the gainsayers. For He
was a Workman that needed not be ashamed. God had given him many talents, and
grace to improve them, so that as none could be more desirous, neither was
there any more able to serve the Church then Himself. Once He was seized whilst
He was in these Holy Exercises, and by special Order carried before the Usurper
himself: who expostulated with him as Ahab did with Elijah, as a troubler of
Israel: But then so affectionately and solidly did the Apostolical man, like St
Paul before Felix, reason of those things, for which He was called in question;
that, whether the wretch that heard him, had sense enough left to make him
tremble, or no; certainly, he was not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit
by which he spoke; but, having vouchsafed to bestow some few good words on the
Church-Prayers, sent away the Good man, without using any further violence, at
the present.

But thus far have I been carried by the Consideration of that Holy Fire of
Zeal which flamed in Elijah's breast, to speak of that which was so plainly
discernable in our late Prelate. But leave we now that blessed Prophet to the
happy rewards of his Love and Labors, and leave gazing too at his wondrous
ascent, the Whirlwind, the Fire and Flames, the Chariot and Horses that
conveyed him strangely and safely to some of the many mansions in the Fathers
house. And let us look down a while and observe and listen to the behavior and
lamentation of the forsaken and desolate Elisha.

Elisha was the humble Friend, both the companion and servant of Elijah: He was
Prophet-elect, being, by Divine direction and designation, to succeed his
Master. But why should he lament then? Why this outcry when his Master was
taken from him? Was there any thing so sad and grievous to either of the two in
this translation, that might justly provoke Elisha to such a transport of grief
as he seemed to express when he cried out, and took hold of his own clothes and
rent them in two pieces? He himself well knew, and had been reminded by other
sons of the Prophets, often enough, of what would happen, and he expected it at
that time, and was come thither resolved to be present at it: Elias himself
could not persuade him to stay behind; so that there could be no great surprise
in the case. Besides, it was a very glorious Exit for his Master, whom he saw
in State and Triumph ascending up toward Heaven. Here was no room, one would
think, for sorrow, no reason for lamentation; No sick bed nor dying groans;
Nothing of agony or pain, nor ought of that ghastly pomp of Death, that
commonly renders the passage to the other state terrible and uneasy, even to
the best of men, and very uncomfortable and grievous to their friends. Or was
it for himself that Elisha thus laments, because now he had lost his Master,
who was taken from his head, and therefore could no longer assist him by his
presence and advice? But what loss could that be to him, who had the Spirit of
God, for his assistance, was a Prophet himself, and now that Elijah was gone,
the Principal and Father of them all?

But well might He grieve for all this: Not, indeed, on the account of his
Master, in whose case there was nothing at all dismal or deplorable, but for
himself, and for the public, there was much matter of sorrow: And those
considerations of a just grief seem to be expressed in the Phrases of his
lamentation: My father, my father, The chariot of Israel and the horsemen
thereof. The first speaks (as we have observed already) his own private
interest in the Prophet. He had lost a Guide and Governor, a faithful and
able Teacher and Director: And such are very frequently and deservedly styled
Fathers in Holy Writ; and accordingly they that are so taught and governed are
called Sons; as several times in this very Chapter, as well as in other places.
The Spirit of God indeed, could, and would, and did abundantly supply Elisha
with all things necessary for his Prophetic Office. But still he had lost a
sure Friend, a pious Companion and wise Guide of his life; and that is enough to
make his mourning appear decent, and to justify all the expressions of his
sorrow. But Elisha stops not at this reflection on his own loss: That
consideration was presently swallowed up by greater. The Church and Kingdom had
in Elijah lost a main ornament and support; and that is it, which is expressed
in the following very elegant and significant Phrases: The chariot of Israel
and the horsemen thereof.

The appearance, which Elisha then had before his eyes, of a chariot and horses
of fire, made the comparison the more seasonable, and might be sufficient to
prompt him to it. But that was not the only reason, if it were at all any
occasion of that figurative allusion. It is like he would have used the same
expression, though he had seen the Prophet expiring on a bed, instead of mounting
toward Heaven in a chariot; as it was by King Joash applied to him himself, 2
Kings 13. 14.
when fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. The whole world is a looser
by the death of a good man; more especially then was that Kingdom and people
so, by the loss of so excelling a person as was Elijah: This truly was a
becoming argument for the lamentation of a Prophet: For when the righteous man
perishes, or is taken away, though others do not, yet, they that are like
himself will consider it, and lay it to heart. He, indeed, has hope in his
death, and enters into peace, and is refreshed and comforted in Abraham's
bosom: but they that are left behind; they, particularly, that lived near him,
within the direct influence of his good deeds and holy example, are really
damnified by his death; as will soon appear by weighing the expressions, in
which Elisha here bemoaneth the public loss in the person of the great Elijah.

The chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. A Metaphor taken from war, and
so very aptly bestowed upon a Champion of the Church Militant. Chariots
anciently were, and Horsemen still are a main strength and protection to a
people, to defend them from, and prevent, as also to repel and suppress the
insults and invasions of their enemies. Formidable was the force of Chariots of
war in the land of Canaan, when the Israelites came to dispossess the former
inhabitants, and to plant themselves in that fruitful country: Insomuch that
the house of Joseph, Josh. 17. 16. Verse 17.
though a great people and of great power, excepted against the portion allotted
to them by Joshua, because the enemy, that was in possession, had chariots of
Iron: and so, all along, we find the power of those Princes expressed by the
number of their Chariots and Horsemen, both before and after the conquest of
the Country by the Israelites. Accordingly, it is particularly observed in the
description of King Solomon's strength, 2 Chronicles. 1. 14.
that he gathered Chariots and Horsemen, and had a thousand and four hundred
Chariots and twelve thousand Horsemen, which he placed in the Chariot-cities,
and with the King at Jerusalem. Nay, the invincible force of the armies of the
Lord of Hosts is expressed by the inspired Psalmist with an allusion to this
powerful provision for war; where he sings that the chariots of God are twenty
thousands even thousands of Angels; Psalm 68. 17.
of which, perhaps, as I noted before, a party were commanded out to fetch
Elijah, and were the same that convoyed that great Prophet in his ascension
unto Heaven: For they are sent forth to minister for them, Heb. 1. 14.
who shall be heirs of salvation. But there were many more of them appointed
afterward for a Guard to his successor Elisha against the Horses and Chariots
of the Syrian King; when at the Prayer of that Prophet, 2 Kings 6. 17.
the Lord opened the eyes of the young man his servant, and he saw, and behold
the mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire, round about Elisha. And
perhaps there were two armies of them encamped about Jacob to keep and conduct
him and his in safety in his return to his own Country: Genesis 32. 1, 2.
for it is said the Angels of God met him, and he called the name of that place
Mahanaim; which dual word may imply that there were two Camps or Companies of
that Heavenly Host. So that this bright Militia of Heaven is always ready to
execute the orders of their Sovereign Lord, whether they be to honor and
protect his Loyal Subjects, or confound his Enemies. And we know what dreadful
havoc and slaughter has been made by a destroying Angel in the space of three
days, nay even in a night. The Fire and Chariots and Whirlwind had orders, as
we find in the Text, to attend, assist and adorn the Triumphant ascension of
Elias: But in another case, the very same are to be dispatched as messengers of
Gods wrath, the Instruments and Executioners of his vengeance. Isa. 66. 15.
For behold the Lord will come with fire and with his chariots like a whirlwind
to render his anger with fury and his rebuke with flames of fire.

From what has been said it is evident enough, that, when Elisha styled Elijah
the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, he intended thereby to express
him to be the great Strength, Defense and Support of the Kingdom: And so he was
in a most eminent manner; being extraordinarily commissioned and empowered by
God to protest against the abominations and Apostasy of that people; and to
endeavor the restitution of Religion, the Reformation of manners, and
Establishment of Affairs in the whole Kingdom: In this Office and
Administration Elisha succeeded him, and was accordingly, when he lay on his
death bed, saluted and acknowledged, as the chariot and horsemen of Israel, by
the King himself, as I observed before.

But not these two extraordinary Prophets only, but all the sons of the
Prophets, all that are sent by God, and set apart to be Guides and Pastors of
a people, I say all and every of these, as far as they are true to their trust,
and worthily discharge their duty, are strengths and defenses to the places,
where they live, and so, in some preportion, the chariot and horsemen thereof.
Nay, so is every virtuous and good man, in some degree. Sodom it self had
escaped its so much merited and long provoked destruction, if ten righteous
persons could have been found in the whole City; And, one single Just man might
have been sufficient to have indemnifi'd all Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1.
as appears from the Prophet Jeremiah. Every good man is a public good: He
helps to stave off Judgments and bring down blessings upon a people. Just Lot
saved Zoar, and the prayers of Nehemiah raised up again, and repaired the
ruins of Jerusalem. They have an interest and favor in the Court of Heaven:
Psalm. 34. 17.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry: They who make most conscience of their own duty, make the best Solicitours
for others. John 9. 31.
If any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. And
therefore the Church has always given thanks for them, as Public blessings,
praising Almighty God for the good Examples of all Holy men and women in
general, as well as for Bishops, Priests and Deacons. But such as by their very
Function and office are Holy to the Lord, such whose very business it is to
bless and mediate for the people, and to guide and teach them; these, I say,
are in a more especial manner, Protection and Defense, the Chariot and Horsemen
unto the Church and Nation, unto which they do belong: And this they are
chiefly on the account of their Prayers, their Precepts and their Practice.

GOD is most likely to hear the Intercessions of those whom He Himself has
appointed to intercede. Abimelech King of Gerar was not presently to be
pardoned on the account of the Integrity of his heart, and the Innocence of his
hands, which he pleaded, and was by God, in some sort allowed, but by the
prayers of Abraham: God would have his mercy and blessings descend in a regular
way, and what he might have given out directly and immediately from himself,
was not to be bestowed till the Prophet had prayed, Genesis 20. 7.
Restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and
thou shall live. When God had denounced heavy Judgments by his Prophet Joel he
prescribes it as one means to avert those impending evils that Prayers be made
by the Priest. Joel 2. 17.
Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the
Altar. Nor did St James think it sufficient to advise the sick man to pray for
himself, but remits him to Gods officers, appointed for that purpose, the
public Mediators and Intercessours for the people. James 5. 14.
Let him call, says he, for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him. But how very effectual the fervent prayers of such men sometimes are,
appears sufficiently from the instance here before us of the great Elijah,
singled out by St James for the same purpose, and alleged soon after the words
already cited. James 5. 17.
He, I say, who, tho a man subject to like passions as we are, opened and shut
the Heavens at his pleasure, kept up the dew and rain, but brought down showers
of fire; so that all things happened according to his word. 1 Kings 17. 1.


The Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, in respect of one part of
their Function, are Gods Ambassadors to the people; but, in this of prayer,
they are their Agents and Solicitours with God, constituted by himself as a
sort of Mediators for and amongst men, Masters of Requests, resident on Earth,
appointed to present and offer up the petitions of the people to and in the
name of the one great Mediator between God and Man: 1 Timothy 2. 5.
And to him those addresses cannot but be the more acceptable as coming in his
own Method and way, and through those hands, to which he has committed so great a
power as to bind and loose in Heaven and on Earth, a power not vouchsafed (as
St Chrysostom somewhere expresses it) either to Angels or Archangels, or any
other of the most glorified favorites of Heaven.

If then persons set aside and consecrated for the service of God and his
Church be ordinarily acceptable, and powerful Intercessours; how much does
this Church and Nation, and, indeed, the whole Christian world owe to the pious
Devotions of the Holy Prelate, of whom we are now speaking! Twice a day, most
duly, besides his family Prayers, He offered up to Heaven, either in the
Public Congregation, or (when his health could not allow that) more privately,
his daily Homage and Sacrifice of Morning and Evening Prayer and Thanksgiving,
according to the Prescript of the Church of England. He that had so thoroughly
studied and did so perfectly understand the Beauties and Excellencies of the
English Liturgy, and so frequently and affectionately recommended the
conscientious and devout use of it to all, both Clergy and others; and had
himself received great Spiritual Comfort and Advantages by a long and Religious
attendance on it: He, I say, as you will easily believe, could not allow
himself in the least neglect of it, but went to it and called for it as his
daily bread, the necessary food and refreshment of his soul.

I need not tell this Congregation, I am sure, how Solemn and Reverend his
approaches were to this Sacred place, how Holy and Saint-like his behavior
here. Almost every thing that Good man did or said was edifying and
instructive; but nothing could well be more so, then his devout deportment,
when he had audience with his God. The Faith and Fervency, the Humble, yet
Restless and Irresistible importunity of his Spirit struggling and contending
with God in Prayer could not be concealed from those that saw him, but flamed
up from his heart into his eyes, and discovered it self by so many natural
indications of Holy and transported Affections, that the Example was enough to
rouse and warm the most sluggish and frozen Devotion of any that did observe
him. It is no wonder that his devout Soul found so Divine a relish in those
Prayers, to which He attended with so much Reverence and Religion. The Prayers
of the Church are a dead letter to none but such as bring dead hearts to them,
(...). disc. 16.
as our Martyred Sovereign observed long since. And I dare say, that all that
use them, unless the blessed effect be hindered by prejudice or profaneness, do
experience that those united and well advised Devotions are most excellently
contrived to kindle and keep alive in us such pious dispositions of mind, as
are most suitable to that duty.

I shall not presume to conduct you from the Church to the Good man's Closet, or
pretend to reckon how often in a day He was upon his knees. He that did nothing
for ostentation, and understood so well the Reward reserved for good things
done in secret, knew how to conceal those Addresses from the eyes of man, which
He intended only for the notice of his God. But his constant and steady
Practice of all Christian duties, the general Holiness of his Life, the visible
delight He took in Prayer (that great Privilege as well as Duty of mankind)
besides other Evidences, that could not always be kept from the observation of
those that had the honor and happiness to be near him, serve to assure us,
that He watched unto Prayer, prayed always, without ceasing, and at all
seasons, according to a due understanding of those expressions in Holy Writ. It
was to him a pleasant performance, of which He could not be weary. What a
Benefactour (I say) then was He to this Church and State, which had so great a
share in his public and private Petitions sent up to a Gracious God with such
an unfeigned Piety and ardent Zeal! Luke 18. 1.
Shall not God hear his servants that cry day and night unto him? He that asked
such a question when He was on Earth, will be sure to answer such prayers now
he is in Heaven. And then I am sure the public has received manifold advantage
from the Bishop's earnest supplications put up in the behalf of the whole
Kingdom; The interest of which was as dear to him as his own Soul, and for
which He was almost hourly breathing out fervent ejaculations, Rev. 5. 8.
and night and day praying exceedingly. The prayers of Saints, we are told, are
as golden vials full of odours; and those odours are sacrifices of sweet
savor, unto the God of Heaven. Such Sacrifices of Supplications, Intercessions
and giving of Thanks, was this Holy Prelate almost constantly offering up unto
Almighty God, for the King and all in Authority, for the Holy Catholic Church,
and for all Men.

Three most signal Favors and Blessings on this Land within our memories I
have often heard his Lordship mention with most feeling and affectionate
expressions of Religious Gratitude and Joy. The first was that Abundance of
Heavenly Graces which adorned the Person of our late Martyred Sovereign, and
those particularly which did so Gloriously shine forth in him under the most
barbarous indignities and bloody violence offered him by the Rebels: Another
was that stupendous revolution of Affairs brought about by the miraculous
Providence of God in the Restitution of His present Majesty and the Church in
Honor and Peace, to the astonishment and confusion of the Adversaries of them
Both. The Third was the wonderful disappointment and most happy Discovery of
the late Fanatical and Republican Conspiracy against the Life of His Sacred
Majesty and His Royal Brother. And to these He added that more Public and
General Mercy of God in appearing so seasonably and so mightily for the defense
of our common Christianity, by putting a hook in the Nostrils of the Turkish
Leviathan, and pulling him back again, and humbling him even to the dust; when
he seemed to himself and us in possession of his prey, and to have little to do
but to kill and eat. These were Bounties and Largesses of Heaven, that filled
the heart of the Holy Bishop with daily Hallelujahs: He could hardly ever speak
of them without tears of Joy: And doubtless they rellished the more comfortably
to his Soul, because he had reason to apprehend them as so many Gracious
returns and answers to his Prayers.

In short, That Kings and Princes do again enter into the Gates of our Cities,
and the Regal Throne is not dishonored and polluted by Usurpation, that our
Judges are restored as at the first, Isa. 1. 26.
and our Counselors as at the beginning; that our Holy Religion is secured to
us by the reestablishment of the most Apostolical constistitution of this
Church; that we do not eat our bread with carefulness, Ezech. 12. 19.
and drink our water with astonishment; But free from oppression either foreign
or domestic we do or may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and
honesty: All this, I say, and all else in this world, that is or ought to be
dear to Men and Christians, we owe under God to the fervent Prayers of such
Holy Men as this, of whom we are now speaking: In this respect therefore they
are not unworthy of the Compellation in the Text. Greg. Nyss. (...).
Since Prayer it self is such sure armor and defense, such a shield and
buckler, and mighty Protection both day and night, as we know it is, the Holy
Men that are assiduous in this devout exercise, and expert managers of so
powerful a weapon of our Christian warfare may well be esteemed the Chariot
and Horsemen; that is, a great strength and defense to the Church and Nation,
in which they live, and for which most especially they are concerned.

BUT such they are still on another account; and that is, as they labor in the
word and doctrine; when to their Prayers they add Precepts, and join
Instruction to their Intercession: By one they prepare and bespeak Mercies; by
the other they qualify the People and make them capable to receive them: The
choicest Blessings of this life, will turn at last to no comfortable account,
if we are not, by a right use of them, something bettered, and so made fitter
for another. Now these men I speak of are to teach us how to make that Saving
Use of them; For they are Messengers of God sent by him with full Commission
and ample Instructions to make known the the whole will of God for our
salvation. It is true, Romans 10. 13. 14.
that whoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: But they cannot
call on him that do not believe in him, which they cannot do, unless they have
heard of him; nor can they hear of him without a Preacher, and that Preacher
must be sent.

Nor is this Office of Teaching necessary only for the first publishing of the
Gospel: Otherwise, our Savior needed not to have assured his Apostles, as he
did, of his presence with them and their Successors even unto the end of the
world: Matthew. 28. 20.
The Teaching part of their Office might have been dispatched in a few years,
if it had been sufficient for the edification and establishment of the Church
to have the foundations of it laid by publishing the Christian Faith to the
whole world. But we know that God gave Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God unto
a perfect man; unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And
that is a work that will be still in doing, in some particulars at least and in
some persons, so that we shall never be perfect enough in this world to stand
in no need of our Teachers.

To them it appertains to strengthen the diseased, Ezekiel. 34. 4.
heal the sick, bind up that which is broken, seek that which is lost, and
bring back that which is driven away: And there will be sooner want of
laborers then work for them in all these particulars of their employment. It
is the faithful Teachers part to deliver to the people that which He has
received of the Lord, to withstand the oppostion and contradiction of those
that would obtrude any thing contrary to the form of sound words, and to
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints: He is not only
the Watchman, that observes the approach of the Enemy, but the Warrior also
and the Guard that repels him. He descries afar off and gives notice of all the
sly malicious designs and attempts of Heretics and Innovatours, all that lie
in wait to deceive, that would invade the vineyard of the Church, either by
open Violence, or private and Treacherous insinuations. He countermines the
secret and wily workings of the Moles and Foxes, as well as fortifies against
the furious assaults of wild Boars and other rampant Beasts of prey. He
encourages the Righteous man to persevere in the happy course that he has
begun, applauds his progress in the paths of Piety, bids him look forward and
press on to the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Phil. 3. 14.
He plains and smoothes his way before him by removing the impediments and
slumbling-blocks of scruples, doubts and difficulties, strengthens his
Conscience, administers cordials and comforts, and never leaves till he has
conducted him safe to the blessed end and Reward of all his troubles and
endeavors. The sinner he warns of the danger of his sin, and delivers his own
soul by endeavoring to save his. He lifts up his voice like a trumpet and
spares not; but shows the people their transgression and the house of Jacob
their sin. He tells them of the danger they are in, and points to the gaping
precipices that are in their way ready to swallow them up into everlasting
destruction. He speaks, exhorts, rebukes with all authority, fearlesly he sets
his face and prophesies against them.

And now tell me, does not such a one as this, that thus in all things approves
himself as the Minister of God, deserve to be styled chariot and horsemen, a
great support and defense of the people? Such an one was Elijah here mentioned:
and such an one too was the Holy Bishop, whom I commemorate in this discourse.
You have read the history of the former, and so know well what the Scripture
says of Elias, of his constancy in his Religion, and his many dangers in
endeavoring to instruct the people in their duty, and reclaim them from their
foul Apostasy, and bring them back to the Church and worship of God.

Nor are you or the world ignorant of your late Bishop's great Abilities and as
great Industry in Teaching. You I say of this Church especially can tell of his
wisdom, Ecclus. 44. 15.
and this Congregation can show forth his praise. You are happy witness how He
minister'd the gifts that He had received, as a good Steward of the manifold
grace of God: You saw with wonder, and perhaps, not without pity, how
unmercifull He was to his own body, that He might be profitable to your souls,
by his indefatigable labors in Preaching and in Catechizing: And not you alone
but all that ever had the happiness to be under his charge, or near the places
of his Residence, were, or might have been, not only witnesses, but partakers
of the benefit of his labors in the public. He was never weary of doing Good;
and though his body, unable to keep pace with the zeal and eagerness of his mind,
languish'd and fainted in the service; yet could He never be persuaded in his
age and weakness to abate any thing of the toils and hardships of his younger
and stronger days. He knew God had entrusted him with much, and therefore was
very intent on the great account He was one day to give of the use and
improvement of so great a treasure. He had always a steady eye on that blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.
A deep and Religious meditation on this made him covetous of his time, fearful
and impatient of omitting any opportunity of doing good; for which He could not
but be sensible that He was admirably qualified and prepared.

It Is true, and He knew it well, that a Bishop may be able to give a very good
account of the trust reposed in him, though He be not often in the Pulpit or the
Desk: He may be apt to teach and do it effectually, though He make not many
Sermons, in the vulgar use and signification of the word: If He makes due
inquisition into the merits and manners of his Clergy, and takes full pains and
care to instruct by way of Conference or otherwise, to advise, commend, rebuke,
encourage, discountenance, reward, and cesure as often and as far as occasion
shall require; He, I say, that shall constantly and conscientiously discharge
these and such other acts of Government; as He will not abound with spare time
for other purposes, so will He thereby most certainly benefit and edify the
Church much more then He can do by Sermons and such like set and Solemn
Discourses to the people; however industrious He may be and frequent in that
employment.

But the Great Good man, that I am speaking of thought He had time and strength
enough, for more then was or could be reasonably expected from him. And truly I
fear He was much mistaken in the judgment He made of the ability of his body.
Indeed, nothing could be too much for his soul: His mind and memory (admirably
stocked and stored) plentifully furnished out matter and words, whenever He had
occasion for them.

Few men have acquired a more general, perfect, and comprehensive knowledge in
most parts of Learning than He himself had. But in Theology, in the study of
the holy Scriptures and all Antiquity useful for the explaining and
illustrating the Doctrines and Mysteries of our holy Religion, He was so very
extraordinarily versed, that it is hardly possible for any to labor therein
more fruitfully and succesfully then did this Prelate. The foundation of so
many Excellencies were laid in his Nature, his Temper and Constitution. For (as
I have shown already) God had furnished this chosen vessel with all that was
requisite for the great improvements and purposes, for which He was intended.
His Industry from his very Youth was extraordinary and beyond Example; for the
supporting of which God had provided him a strong body, and a firm health,
which lasted him many years; and, as his Physicians and Friends thought, might
have held out much longer could He have been persuaded to have remitted
somewhat of his continual pains and severities to himself.

But He was not convinced by such their careful and affectionate remonstrances
for his health. I wish in this one particular He would have been governed more
by others then himself; for perhaps in this one only could they advise him
better. He found such delight in preparing his thoughts for the public, and so
much pleasure after the performance, that He had no leisure to observe how
greatly his body had suffered, and paid for that satisfaction of his mind. It
was meat and drink, exercise and recreation, life and health to him to be
searching the Scriptures, comparing and pondering on the lively and holy
Oracles of God, and then to deliver his happy and well digested meditations to
the people: He was well when He was thus employed, as He thought and said;
Whereas, indeed, too often this was no more but that He was well-pleased. That
cheerfulness and complacency of mind, which is the present natural reward and
consequent of a conscientious discharge of duty, that testimony and approbation
which a man's own breast pays to his sincerity and worthy endeavors, this Good
Bishop I believe, often interpreted as an effect of health, and the natural
strength of his own body; or at least, placed too much of it to that account.
The weakness and decay, which He felt in himself and could not but acknowledge,
He wholly ascribed to other causes, but would impute nothing of it to his
immoderate pains in Studying and Preaching.

But, had He been convinced that those his labors, by night and day pressed
too hard on his infeebled body and impaired his health; I question whether the
argument would have prevailed to have made him spare himself, as much as his
Friends desired. And for this I have reason from what I have heard him say,
particularly a day or two before his last sickness, when observing his
languishing looks, and being in private with him I took the boldness, to insist
more vehemently then ever I had done on this subject; For He then with some
warmth and earnestness told me that He would never be persuaded to indulge his
ease to the neglect of any opportunity of doing good, and propter vitam vivendi
perdere causas. He desired to live no longer, then when whilst he might be
serviceable to the Church.

But to return: It is no wonder, that so great natural Endowments carefully
cultivated by unwearied industry and assiduous application did multiply into so
vast an increase, and turn at last to such excellent account, as we know they
did in this Bishop: Especially, if we consider, that He prayed as hard as He
studied. He well knew that without God He could do nothing; that in order to
the happy searching the Scriptures and full comprehending the revealed will of
God and the Sacred mysteries of our Holy Faith, there was need of special
assistance from the Holy Spirit; and the blessing of him that teaches man
knowledge, and conducteth the pious enquirer into all Truth; That otherwise it
was in vain to rise up early or to sit up late. Therefore, like Daniel, Dan.
10. 12.
He set his heart to understand and chasten'd himself before his God, and his
words were heard, or, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 138. 3.
He called upon God, and he heard him, and endued his soul with much strength:
Thus was our Holy Bishop made wise unto salvation, and profitable to his
Generation, for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: In a word, as it follows in the place to which I allude, 2 Timothy
3. 17.
A man of God perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And you have
heard and seen his wisdom and his worth; and not you alone, but many thousands
of others, all people and places wherever and with whomsoever He had converse,
can bear true testimony that He gave as freely as He had received, and, like a
Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, was continually spending and
pouring out his inexhaustible Treasures of Sound Doctrine and Edifying
Knowledge, to the unspeakable delight and advantage of those, that came to be
instructed by him.

And they came in great numbers, not of this Nation only, but from abroad and
remoter Countries. For that which He did in the Church was the least part of
the pains He took, and of his laboring in the Word and Doctrine. But this is
no time and place for a particular account of such matters. It is well enough
known, that his house was rarely without some Foreign Visitant led thither by
the far-spread fame of the Renowned Bishop: Scholars from almost all parts of
the Christian world, Greeks and Latins, flocked to him; whom they found, like
a true Apostolical Bishop, Given to hospitality and apt to teach. 1 Timothy 3. 2.
His doors and his purse were open to receive and relieve them that were in
want; and his heart and mouth always ready to instruct those that desired to be
informed.

A great part of his time was spent in explaining and justifying to strangers
and others the regular and Catholic constitution of the Church of England, and
in asserting Her Doctrine and Discipline and whole entire frame against the
opposition of Her Adversaries, the Romanists, and all other Recusants of
various denominations amongst our selves. And these unwearied endeavors of
this Holy Man God has been pleased to crown often with good success. Many
thereby have been confirmed in the Communion of the Church, with whom Bigots of
Rome, or other Zealots of the Schism had been dangerously tampering. Several
quite spirited away by such Emissaries and Agents He retrieved and brought back
again to their Reason and Religion. Foreigners have parted from him not only
filled with admiration of his own worth, but also highly satisfied with the
excellent Frame and Order of this Church, which had before been ignorantly or
maliciously represented to them: And the report which they have accordingly
made to their own people at their return home has rebounded back and been
brought hither again, to the great praise and honor of this Christian
Catholic Church, so happily established in this Land. These (I say) are things
well known to many, but not to be by me at present branched out into any of
their many great instances, or expanded to their due advantage. That, if done
according to the dignity of the subject and the great abundance of the matter
it affords, would be a more proper Theme for a just volume then the few narrow
Pages of a popular Sermon. It suffices me to have said enough on this Head, to
show, that this Prelate was a worthy Champion of our Faith, and an able
Defender of the Church, and therefore very capable of such a compellation as
Elisha, on the account of the like excellencies, gave to Elijah: The chariot of
Israel and the horsemen thereof.

THE last thing I shall insist on, as a reason or justification of that great
Title, is the great good that is done, and the mighty advantage that accrues to
the Public from the Lives and Examples of Good and Holy men, especially those
of a Sacred Character. Certain it is, that men are generally convinced and
guided more by their Eyes then Ears. Precepts and Exhortations affect the mind
but slowly and weakly, whilst Actions and Examples move strongly and with
power; so that if they be but advantagiously represented and duly attended to;
they are winning and persuasive, and have a very quick and almost irresistible
influence and efficacy in soliciting the consent of the will, and prompting it
to imitation. For virtue moves practically, as Plutarch expresses it, (...).
Peric.
moralizing the beholder, and, as it were, transforming him into its own
likeness: It draws him to imitation neither able nor willing to resist that
(...), as the same Author well styles the influence of a Good Example. Our
Blessed Savior himself, though anointed to preach the Gospel by the Holy Ghost,
which He received without measure, and though assisted with all the powers of the
Godhead, Col. 2. 9.
which dwelt bodily in him; though God immediately from Heaven, in an audible
voice, bespoke and prepared for him and his Gospel attentive Audience, dutiful
Reception, and Universal Obedience and Conformity, as to the words and will of
the declared Son of God, Mat. 17. 5.
in whom He was well-pleased; And though He himself taught with Authority, and
spoke as never man did, John 7. 46.
according to the frank confession of his most bloody Enemies; and all wondered
at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth; Luke 4. 22.
Yet would He not rely on that voice from Heaven or his own Divine Rhetoric on
Earth, for the Success of his undertaking, without the assistance of a further
Testimony and demonstration of the Excellency of his Doctrine; and that was his
own Example. Therefore He appeals and refers them to what He did as a
confirmation of what He taught: Mat. 11. 29.
Learn of me, says He, for I am meek and lowly of heart. And when He had given
them a manifest proof of that virtue, stooping to so low and mean an Office as
the washing of his Disciples feet, He tells them He had given them an Example
that they should do as He had done. John 13. 15.
Nay, this Divine Preacher, sent from God and descended from Heaven, even in
his farewell Sermon would not trust to the efficacy of those his last words,
without adding the further and more powerful argument of his Example; Matt.
15. 9, 10.
teaching his disciples obedience to himself by his own obedience to his
father, and Love for one another by his own Love to them. Which argument St
Paul not able to find a better, repeats and urges when He would enforce the
same duty: walk in Love, Ephesians. 5. 2.
says He, as Christ also has loved us. And St Peter, when He was to recommend
the most difficult duty, even suffering patiently though wrongfully, and for
doing well, found it necessary to have recourse to Example rather than precept:
And whether should He go for that, but to him, who taught both by his Life and
Death? Even to our Savior Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 20.
who, says He, suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
his steps.

And this practice of our Savior is an awful Precept to all his followers,
but especially to those whom He sent as his Father sent Him, that they in like
manner, should not be only Teachers but Doers of his will; that so they may
more happily confirm and propagate their Doctrine by their Practices, according
to the Example of their Lord and Master. They that do otherwise, whatever they
say, are rather Enemies than Friends, do really more oppose than promote the
Cause they would seem to own: St Paul warns the Philippians to mark, Phil. 3.
17.
that is, to emulate and imitate those that walked after such an Example as He
had given, but to apprehend of others as the enemies of the Cross of Christ.
That great Apostle had often denied himself innocent and lawful Liberties,
that He might the more effectually gain others to the performance of necessary
duties: Not because we have not power (says He to the Thessalonians) but to
make our selves an example unto you to follow us. 2 These. 3. 9.
And therefore not to them alone did He come in more then Word only (as he
expresses it in his first Epistle to them) but others, and on other occasions,
He frequently provokes to follow his Example, to be followers of him, 1 These.
1. 5.
to be followers together of him; Using frequently other exhortations of the
same kind. Great pains did He take, and much watching and mortification did He
use and undergo, lest that by any means, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
when He had preached to others, He himself should be a castaway. After such
Authorities as these, I need not tell you, that a good Life is the main
Ingredient or the Grand Qualification, which the Philosopher requires in him
that sets up for a Teacher; and for this reason, because it is not the
discourse, but the opinion the Auditory has of him that speaks, that instructs
and edifies those that hear him.

Such, indeed, are the most of men; They will not lead but follow: You cannot
persuade them even to happiness or Heaven, unless you go before them. It cannot
be denied, but that this is their fault and folly: They are not so wilful and
blind in Temporal concerns. But when you advise them to quit present and
palpable for future and invisible advantages and satisfactions, they require
encouragement from your own Example for so doing. If they observe their Teacher
to do otherwise himself then He would persuade them, they are apt to suspect or
pretend that his Doctrine is impracticable or doubtful; or that some design,
forgery, collusion, some dishonest artifice and practice is in hand and ready
to be imposed upon them. But our blessed Savior, who himself took such care to
enforce his Doctrine by his example, forgot not, for all that, to condemn this
madness of the people, and to cure or prevent it, if possible, for the future;
by commanding obedience even to the Scribes and Pharisees, as being the
appointed public Guides and Doctors of the Law: And yet in the same breath,
He took care to caution against, the contagion of their bad example: The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat. Matt. 23. 2, 3.
All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not
you after their works, for they say and do not. So that it will prove but a bad
plea at the last dreadful Tribunal, and a worse comfort after the Sentence of
condemnation, for any to say, that they would have done better had they seen
their Teacher do so, and that they chose to go out of the way for his good
company, though they had all the reason in the world to believe and He himself
told them, that they trod the paths of death, and that the end of that road was
ruin.

But since it is so, that the Holy Life of the Teacher is the Life of his
Doctrine, and that He is the most successful Instructour that preaches by his
good Example; The great Prophet in the Text, and the great Prelate, of whom I
speak, do from hence derive another good plea to the meaning of the Phrase in
the Text, and may justly be esteemed to have been in their generations chariots
and horsemen; as that signifies Strength and Defense unto the Church and
Commonwealth to which they did belong. If the lips of the Priest are to keep
knowledge; If the Teachers be, also on that account, the Guardians of our
Faith; If sound Doctrine be the shield and buckler, the Spiritual Safeguard and
Protection of Religion and consequently of the people that profess it, and the
dispensers of it be therefore themselves Chariots and horsemen; when the virtue
of a good Example, Holiness of life, upright and unblameable Conversation shall
be joined to their other Excellencies, a great Strength and Ornament will
thereby be added to them; and being now thus completely armed, safe and
invulnerable all over, they will appear still more redoubted and accomplished
Champions; and so further qualified for that honorable compellation in the
Text. This is that which helps to put to shame the Adversaries of the Church,
and as such it is recommended by an Apostle to a Bishop, by St Paul to Titus,
Tit. 2. 7.
that to the incorruptness of his Doctrine He should be sure to add that of his
own Example: In all things, (says He) showing thy self a pattern of good
works, that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil
thing to say of you. A great victory easily obtained: If we run not upon the
Enemies weapons, they will either cast them away or turn them upon themselves.
Verse 8.
Sound speech that cannot be condemned, as the Apostle there expresses it, and
a suitable practice must needs either convince or confound the Gainsayers: They
will, sure, be silenced if they are not satisfied, which last, another Apostle
hopes well from the influence of a good Example, which He enjoins on this very
consideration; 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
That if any obey not the word, they also may without the Word be won over,
whilst they behold such chaste conversation coupled with fear. There are those
that desire occasion, 2 Cor. 11. 12.
as St Paul tells us in one place; 1 Timothy 5. 14.
therefore we must be sure to give the Adversary no occasion to speak
reproachfully, as He admonishes in another. Very busy are the Enemies of
Religion, always endeavoring to discountenance and undermine the Professors
of it. This is the way to countermine those deceitful workers, to blow up
their Treacherous trains, and expose and defeat their malice. This therefore is
very good service to the Church, both as it is a means to secure what She has
already gotten, and also to enlarge Her conquests: And surely then such Holy
Warriors may with good reason be styled as we see they are, The chariots of
our Israel and the horsemen thereof. They fear not the utmost malice of the
world; In the thickest of the Enemy they stand invulnerable and secure: Their
breastplate of Urim and Thummim, soundness of Doctrine and integrity of Life,
is proof and an impenetrable defense against all the fiery darts of Men or
Devils.

Thus was Elijah clad, thus armed he contended earnestly and successfully for
the Faith: His conversation was in Heaven, long before he himself ascended
thither. He lived a great pattern of holiness to his Age: His very actions,
whilst his tongue was silent, were so many rebukes to that apostatized people;
For even by his refusing to comply with them He upbraided and rebuked their
abominations. The terror of Death from the bloody hand of Tyranny did make him
fly, indeed; but could not shake his Integrity: This his constancy in the Faith
and Worship of God gave as great Testimony to the Truth as his Preaching did:
so that Elijah taught by his deeds as well as by his words, and edifi'd the
Church both by his Doctrine and his Example.

And did not our Holy Prelate so too? Did not He show his Faith by his Works?
Ye are witnesses and God also how holily and justly and unblameably He behaved
himself among you that believe. For ever blessed be our Gracious God, who, (to
the great advantage of his Spouse the Church and the public Good) did furnish
this his servant with such large measures of his holy Spirit and all Heavenly
graces, that He became a burning and a shining light; and could not be more
admirable for his extraordinary parts and vast improvements then He was truly
venerable for exemplary Piety and Holiness of life.

Had I not already very much transgressed the limits of my time, I would boldly
enlarge on this Head, as I easily might, secure and fearless of seeming to any
of you to say to much, or being too lavish in the commendations of the Holy
man. It is a Theme scarce capable of Figure or flattery. His very enemies could
not but acknowledge the uprightness of his conversation even when He stood
before a Committee of them, impeached and arraigned for his Loyalty and
Religion. They could find no occasion, though diligently sought for, against him,
except in that which concerned the Law of his God. They granted He was a man of
Good Life; but that, they said, made him the more dangerous, for that such men
did all the mischief: A good testimony from the mouth of the Enemy, of what I
was before saying, that nothing confounds them more then the unblameable Lives
of such as profess, and pretend a regard to Religion, and obedience to the
Church. When they could not censure his practice, they would needs question his
Sermons; nay, rather then fail, pick quarrels with his very Texts; as they did
with his choice of one that, it seems, had too much Loyalty in it for their
purpose; and that was some of the first Verses of the thirteenth Chapter to the
Romans; to which their Venerable Prisoner appositely replied, that He was come
prepared to justify his Sermon, but did not expect to be called upon to answer
for his Text: But it seems, in the afternoon, He had chosen a more innocent
piece of Scripture for the subject of his Discourse; and that was the
Benediction of the Peacemakers: Blessed are the Peacemakers: But when it was
alleged by his accusers, that He had observed that League-makers were not
Peacemakers, this Text could no more excuse his Sermon then the other Sermon
his Text.

This Pastor certainly, if any, was an Example to his flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
in St Peter's Phrase, to the believers, in St Paul's; and that in all the
particulars there mentiond. 1 Timothy 4. 12.
In word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

That He was a faithful Minister of Christ, a conscientious dispenser of the
Word, and Steward of the Mysteries of God, You have heard already under another
Head, and knew it well before by your own observation and experience. Acts 11.
24.
He never shunned to declare unto you all the Council of God. For he was a good
man, (that I may apply the Character of St Barnabas to this Saint of ours) and
full of the Holy Ghost and of Faith, and added much people unto the Lord. Very
much pains He took to convince and reclaim Recusants of all sorts: He invited
them to frequent conferences; in meekness instructing those that opposed
themselves, answering their arguments, resolving their doubts, removing their
scruples, and silencing all their Cavils against the established Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church, and this he did oft-times with most happy success:
For the Word of God, in his mouth, was quick and powerful.

But O how sincere and great was his joy when He found God had made him an
instrument of bringing back a wandering and a lost sheep! How did his humble
gratitude issue forth of his very eyes, discovering to all, that saw and
observed him, his religious soul triumphing in the spiritual victory, and at
the same time heartily ascribing it unto Heaven! But when overgrown and
stubborn prejudices, pride, obstinacy or stupidity made his charitable
endeavors ineffectual, it is true, the Good man seemed troubled; He sighed and
prayed and sent many a pitying and lamenting look after the hardened and
unrelenting wretch; but, for all that, knew how to be content, and, though He
might say, as the Prophet in the person of our Savior, I have labored in
vain, Isa. 49. 4.
I have spent my strength for naught, yet withal He could comfortably add that
which immediately follows; my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my
God. His prayers and his pains were accepted by his great Master in Heaven, who
set him on work, and from thence returned in showr's of blessings and comfort
on his head, and into his own bosom. But when this was done, when to the Laws,
and the weighty considerations of public safety and quiet, common utility and
general experience of the mischievous effects of the separation (all which
pleaded strongly on his side) I say, when to these He had added his own public
and private endeavors to remove all, if there were any real conscientious
scruples and difficulties in the case; He was far from thinking it an
Usurpation upon consciences, to remit refractory persons to the Civil power to
be proceeded against by legal prosecutions, the likeliest means then remaining,
not only to prevent the increase of their numbers, but to bring themselves to
Church, and thereby give them opportunity to hear and hearken to further
instructions, more attentively and effectually then otherwise they would have
done.

But I must hasten to an end. As for his Common converse it was pleasant,
affable and courteous, and yet still grave and highly becoming his Sacred
Character. That doubtfulness and fear which his Venerable Presence, his high
Station and Quality, together with his great and just Renown did frequently
produce in strangers at their first approach, was by the easiness of the access
they met with, by his humble and courteous deportment, and all-obliging
affability and condescension soon converted into perfect Delight and Love. So
sweet and heavenly a temperament there was in him of Greatness and Goodness, of
Meekness and Majesty, of Gravity and Courtesy, of every thing, indeed, that is
amiable and Reverend; that it was impossible to know him well and not to Honor
and Delight in him. Something like this has perhaps been fancied in many, but
the whole Character was hardly ever more truly applied to any then to this
Bishop.

If ever that which we call Good nature did abound in any man, it did in him;
but so refined, beautified and set off by Religion, that surely it scarce ever
shined with more luster and loveliness in any then in our Prelate. Even they
that went from him disappointed of their hopes (which none did that had not
unreasonably entertained them) could never find in their hearts to be
displeased with him: So much reason did He always give for his denial, such
kind pains would He take to satisfy the Petitioner, though He could not grant
his request, so loath was He to dismiss him from his presence till He had
scattered all signs of discontent (if any did arise) from his countenance, That
it was evident the Good Prelate was more troubled that He could not give, then
the other that he did not receive.

The subject of his discourse, as far as Decenty and Company would allow, was
generally about matters of Religion and Learning. It was his great business to
be doing or receiving good; considering that so employed He was most acceptable
to that One Master, whose service He had chosen. He gladly put all that came
near him upon discourses of things of which they were most likely and able to
give the best account, which was the most probable way to oblige them and
benefit himself: Though, for the most part, Those, who He seemed to hear and
confer with for his own instruction, He really taught and sent away better
informed in the very things wherein they thought themselves to excel. Never
was that Apostolical qualification of a Bishop's being apt to teach more
eminently present then in him; Whether we consider the word as it signifies
ability, or else inclination to instruct and edify others. Of the first I have
discoursed already: The other is as famously known as that.

Some greatly Learned men have been noted to be very reserved in conversation,
as if they envied or grudged the world, or, at least, their company, the riches
of their discourse; That they could seldom be persuaded to deliver their
judgments, or that, when they did, it was in so dark and perplex't a manner
that it edified but little: Much further were they from freely giving the
reasons of their opinion, and submitting them to the debate and examination of
others.

But it was quite otherwise with the Bishop: He was as an open fountain, free,
plentiful and communicative: Always asking and answering questions in all
parts of Learning, but especially such as might conduce to the clearing of
obscure places of Scripture, or the confirming some Doctrine or Article of
Faith, or some other Theological Verity. For that was the end of all his
Studies; To this. He directed all his endeavors; and well understood how to
keep and use other Arts and Soiences in due subordination and subserviency to
the study of Divine matters, to the knowledge of God and his own duty; for
which He knew He was born, and which He desired and valued above all other
acquisitions in the world. This eager bent of his heart framed and seasoned all
his conversation, giving it the tincture of his inward thoughts; so that it
plainly appeared, out of what abundance it was that his mouth spoke.

In my Text it is observed that the chariot and horses of fire appeared whilst
the two Prophets walked and talked together. Some will be guessing at the
particulars of their discourse. But, whether we consider the men, the occasion,
or that part of the conference which is recorded, we have reason to conclude
that it was all holy and good, relating either to Gods honor on Earth, or the
now approaching felicity of Elijah in a better place. But sure I am, that our
Holy Prelate was almost constantly speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God: It was the language of his Life and Health, of his hail and
Youthful days, as well as of his Old Age and the bed of sickness and death.
And truly, in all other Religious respects, as well as this, his Death was but
like his Life, his latter end exactly conformable to his more early days. I
could not observe of him (as Pliny from his friend, Nuper me cujusdam amici
languor admonuit optimos esse nos dum infirmi sumus. Plin. Ep. 26. lib. 7.
did of all men) that He was best in sickness. A pious disposition of mind
expressed by a constant uniform Tenor of Holy and Devout Practice had been
very visible through the whole course of his Life, and it accompanied him to
the last. He had no new promises and professions of Reformation to make; Tales
esse sani perseveremus quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi: ibid.
as the same Author in that same Epistle intimates, and common experience
shows to be the custom of men on the bed of sickness: He had lived so as He
would be contented to die; and all the usual or necessary business of the sick
bed, Repentance, Mortification and Holy Vows had been the happy Work of his
strongest and healthful days. By a Religious use of those frequent Communions,
which, to his everlasting Praise, this Holy Bishop established or practiced
weekly in all places where He lived, and which were subject to his
Jurisdiction, He had nourished and increased in his Bosom a watchful and wary
disposition of mind, that kept him perpetually upon his Guard; his Saviors
Death and his own being always so before his eyes, that He could not easily be
surpised by the most hasty summons to leave the world. Indeed his whole Life
was, in a manner, a perpetual Fast and Mortification, and so a good preparation
for Death. Plenty of all things flowed round about him, but for the use of
others rather then himself. His study and his business was his meat and drink;
for of any other He had as little regard and made as little use, as was well
possible to flesh and blood. He that had writ so irrefragably for the Fasts of
the Church, kept them as rigidly himself. But that sufficed him not: He obliged
himself to so many others, that they who knew not what Excellent Use his mind
made of those hours of Abstinence might suspect that so much severity to his
body, inclined somewhat toward a fault.

I am very sensible how my Subject grows upon my hands, which makes me grow
burdensome to your patience. Much matter and many thoughts crowd in upon me;
which I must refuse, remembering where and what I am about; that it is a Sermon
and not an History that I have in hand. However, methinks, I should not omit
one thing which was most remarkable in the Bishop, and is very proper to be
mentioned in a Pulpit; and that is his Charity, which is another of those
Virtues wherein the Apostle would have a Bishop be Exemplary.

Take this in its full latitude, of love both to God and man, it was as eminent
in your late Prelate as any other of those many Christian Graces, wherewith God
had adorned and blessed that Excellent man. As it relates to the doing kind and
charitable Offices, the good Bishop did so transcend in it, that He seemed
nothing more then a provident and faithful Steward for the public and the
poor. But I know not how to apply my self to this particular Head, where to
begin or where to end. In the conclusion of a long discourse and your tired
patience, to undertake a new Theme of so vast an extent, that it cannot be
treated and displayed, as it ought in as much time as I have already spent in
all the other particulars, must needs be to the injury either of the Subject or
the Auditory. I will leave it therefore to speak it self. Let the Scholars He
has supported in the University of Cambridge; His several large Indowments and
bountiful Benefactions in that place; Let the crowds of poor fed daily at his
door, and from his Table, the Widow, the Fatherless and the Stranger, indigent
foreigners, distressed Travelers, and the other various objects of Charity
publicly fed, clothed and relieved, or privately supplied by him with a
plentiful hand; Let these, I say, since they are many, speak first: Let them
all, according to their Age and Abilities, in their several Capacities and
Languages, rise up and bless and publish the Praises of him, whom living they
experienced a careful Father, a liberal Patron, and munificent Benefactour.
Then there will be nothing left for me to tell you; but that as He lived so He
died: What He had not charitally spent by retail before; He did so dispose of
all together and in the lump, by his last Will and Testament, in which He has
taken care that all the remaining part of his Estate shall be laid out for the
augmentation of poor Vicaridges; A Charity as prudent and pious in the kind as
bountiful in the measure of it.

Thus Lived; and thus Dyed this Great and Holy Bishop in the Seventy first year
of his Life, a Good Old Age as He had made it to himself and others, by having
endeavored and done so much good in it; but not without hard travail,
lassitude and toil which He had brought and imposed upon himself, by
considering more the willingness of the Spirit then the weariness of the Flesh,
and striving to live too fast in the best sense; that is, to be more useful
and serviceable then his Health and Strength (though He had a great share of
both) was able to endure.

Whilst God afforded him the use of his senses and his tongue, He employed them
(as He was wont) in Prayers and Praises and other Discourses that tended most
to his own comfort, and to the Edification of the standers by. Whilst I waited
on him, which I thank God I had the Happiness to do, before his sickness had
too much ruffled or discomposed his thoughts, He was frequently putting up
ardent Prayers for the Welfare and Prosperity of the Church: He could not
forget to recommend that to the care of Heaven with some of his last breath,
which had ever been much dearer to him then his own Life, which He had spent in
the service of it, with no less benefit to the Church, then Honor and
Satisfaction to Himself: When ever the fiercer assaults of his Feavour began to
remit, and afford him some intervall of ease, He presently returned to the
Beloved Subject; and the next words we heard were concerning the Church. His
serenest thoughts were spent on this, and He seemed unsensible of pain, and to
forget that He was sick, whilst He was Praying for the Health of the Spouse of
Christ. Once particularly, in my hearing, did He make a large and solemn
declaration of his devout thanks, which, said He, I render to Almighty God with
all the powers of my mind, and from the depth of my soul for his most
wonderful Mercy to mankind in his Eternal Son our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Then, after some more words to the same effect, He repeated that Verse
of the thirty first Psalm. Blessed be the Lord, Psalm. 31. 21.
for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a strong City; the Holy
Catholic Church, raising his voice very strongly when He so interpreted and
applied the Psalmist's Phrase. Then again He proceeded to speak of the Church
of England, which He did with so much Honor, Reverence and Affection, that not
my words nor any other but his own are able to express it. Often have I heard
him preach and often dispute, and still oftener Discourse privately in the
Justification and Honor of the Reformation, as it was contrived and managed
and now stands by Law Established in these Kingdoms: And this He always did
with a fervency and zeal worthy of the Excellent and Deserving Subject: But
these his dying expressions, methoughts, outdid all that ever He had used
before. In few words (which I dare not pretend to repeat) He fully expressed
his admiration of the Beauty and Soundness of the constitution of the Church of
England; and applauded the unvaluable Happiness of the Nation in it, and
blessed the goodness of God for it, and owned it for the unspeakable Comfort of
his Soul, and his Glory that He had lived, and now should die, a member of it.

Thus heartily and highly was this Church esteemed and honored by this most
Learned and Holy Man: Such were his last, his dying thoughts and expressions
concerning it; and agreeable hereunto had been the Profession and Practice of
his whole Life. As He lived so He dyed a Zealous assertour of our Reformation.
For this He had appeared and acted several ways, so often and so successfully,
that He was long since become come very formidable to our Adversaries in the
Church of Rome; who at length, found it expedient to caution their Emissaries
against contending with Him. None understood the true state and full compass of
the Controversy between the two Churches better then himself, or could with
more Evidence and Conviction make out the Warrantableness and Regularity of the
English Reformation, the Canonical proceedings in it, the Excellent Pattern
proposed and imitated by it, the most Apostolic and truly Catholic
Constitution that did arise from it, and all the happy Advantages that were
obtained by that blessed undertaking; to which we owe, as our Bishop with much
thankfullness and comfort was wont to acknowledge and avouch, that, at this
day, by a singular felicity, we enjoy the envied Communion of a Church the most
exactly conformable to the Primitive and purest of any other Christian Society
upon Earth.

On the other side, He knew as well how most effectually to expose the
Uncatholick impositions and Anathema's of the Romish Church, and to show
plainly how unlike She is become to Her First Self, how prodigiously deformed
and overgrown with monstrous Innovations in Doctrine and Discipline, how
unchristian in Her Usurpation, and in Her Tyranny insupportable: To explain and
maintain such Truths as these was the business of the Bishop's study, spent a
great deal of his Time, and was some part of his daily work, even to the last.

But all this could not secure the Good Man from the malicious? and impudent
Calumnies and Railing of such as were Enemies to Him, because they were so to
Religion and the Public. The most Heavenly Innocence is not Antidote
sufficient against the venom of the Tongue; that is, it cannot prevent the
malignant assaults of a Serpentine brood of people, that will be vomiting out
poison, though they cannot hurt: Malice will be gnawing at the most entire and
solid Virtue; which, though it be impenetrable armor, and a sure defense, yet is
it still the Envy and Aim of those men, Psalm. 57. 4.
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their Tongue a sharp sword. All the
Zealous endeavors, I say, of our Learned Bishop against the Romanists, and his
many Victories and Successes in that Cause, could not hinder, (as, doubtless,
you remember, and not without much indignation, at the very thought of it) but
that the Faction voted and reported this unwearied Champion of the English
Church a very Papist. But it was at a time, indeed, when it seemed very
behoofull for their purposes, that the best Subjects and the best Churchmen
should be so reputed: And, accordingly, it was in such good company that the
Bishop suffered: For almost all the Loyal Nobility, Clergy and Gentry fell
under the same injurious imputation.

But all that popular Madness and Malice did but serve to exercise and
Illustrate new Graces in our Holy Prelate, and bring still further into the
light the more hidden and undiscovered Beauties of his soul. By this means it
did appear how smoothly and evenly He could go through or lie under good and
evil report, and how perfectly He had learned from the Apostle both to labor
and suffer reproach. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
All their tumult and noise was not able to discompose the sweet calmness and
serenity of his mind, which the inward testimony and applause of his own
Conscience had made sure and perpetual to him. The slanders and clamours of
people against him could not rise higher and louder then his Wishes and Prayers
for them. He blessed as fast as they could curse: And when the rage of the
Rabble began to swell high, and at last became threatening and dangerous, yet
was He not then concerned for any interest of his own; so much were his
thoughts possessed with the generous apprehensions He had for those miserable
people themselves, and the fatal Mischiefs which their unbridled Fury might
bring upon the Government and the Public.

But I have done; The time will not admit of any more: I must leave both the
Deathbed and the Grave of this Great Man: And I am e'ne glad that I am to
proceed no further. You could bear, it seems with the prolixness of my
Discourse, whilst I was speaking of his Life, but may not perhaps, so well
endure the galling of your Memories with sad Reflections upon his Death. Elisha
himself could not look on with Patience when Elijah was parted from him, tho?
He saw him ascending into Heaven: Nor can you, I dare say, reflect upon the
last Hours of your late Bishop's Life, though they were the last of his labors
too, without troubled and sorrowful hearts: For it is to your almost
irreparable Loss, though to his unspeakable Advantage that He was taken from you.
To conclude therefore.

Let Virtue have its perfect work; (...) Plut. Peric.
that effect, I mean, upon you, which the Moralist tells us is natural unto it;
that is to dispose men not only to Praise or Admire things well done, but
likewise to imitate the doers of them. I dare say, this Holy Bishops memory is
precious to you, and you would do it Honor: Then use your best endeavors to
practice his Doctrine and imitate his Virtues: Recollect some, atleast, of the
many Divine Precepts and Rules He has often, with so much Religious vehemence,
delivered, explained and pressed upon you from this place; and make conscience
to put in practice those his Pious Admonitions, which you know the Holy Bishop
recommended both by Word and Deed. This, as it will best express your esteem of
him, by testifying your value of his Advice and your confidence in his
Abilities and Integrity; So will it likewise speak your care and kindness for
your selves. Such practice made your Bishop Famous and Honorable here, and has
raised him, without doubt, to a very high degree of Glory in another world. The
same means will produce the same happy effects for you that they did for him:
Imitate, I say, his Excellencies all of you, in your several Stations, as far
as they are imitable by you, and persevere in well doing; And then you will not
fail to be made partakers of those inestimable Rewards of Glory and
Immortality, which God has laid up for them who diligently seek him; which
that we may all endeavor faithfully and constantly, God of his infinite mercy
grant; to whom be glory and honor and praise now and for evermore. Amen.

THE END.

