A Sigh for Peace; OR The Cause of Division Discovered. WHEREIN The great
Gospel Promise of the Holy Ghost, and the Doctrine of Prayer with Imposition of
hands, as the way ordained of God to seek for it; Is asserted and vindicated,
as the Interest and Duty of Christ's Disciples in general. In Answer to a Book
Entitled A Search for Schism.

By Tho. Grantham, a Servant of Christ.

Gal. 5. 7, 8, 9. Ye did run well, who did hinder you that you should not obey
the truth? This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump.

I have confidence in you, through the Lord, that you will be none otherwise
minded; but he that troubles you shall bear his burden whosoever he be.
Wherefore love the Truth and Peace,

Zech. 8. 19. Printed for the Author, 1671.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Church of Christ in London, with the General Assembly of Messengers,
Elders, and Brethren, occasionally meeting together to consider of the Affairs
of the Churches of Christ. Salutation, etc.
Brethren,
WHen I consider how much it is your desire, and the desire of the Churches in
general, that brotherly concord, peace and truth, might possess the room of all
our divisions, in affection, judgment, and practice; and particularly in the
fourth principle of Christianity. And how many Prayers are daily made to God
for so great a Blessing; And that hopeful way we lately seemed to be in, to lay
hold of the thing which has been so long desired: And therewithal that most
unhappy obstruction of our hopes (as ye know) arising from one who should
rather have been a restorer of the ancient path which many have forsaken, and
so a healer of the breach which has been made, by its being neglected: Who
being in reputation for Wisdom, having therewithal great opportunity (and I am
persuaded really intended) to do the Church of Christ much good; Even then, by
a little solly following his own Councels (doubtless through Satan's malice, who
envied our good) has made himself and his enterprises obnoxious, and our wound
more grievous.

I say, when I considered these things, I could not pass them over without a
Sigh, (even this which here I present unto you) saying in my heart, Why has
the Lord done this? Which was no sooner conceived, but I was immediately
satisfied, that the Lord was jealous for his holy way, which had been gr^sly
profaned by an hypocritical conformity thereunto. And true for ever is that
word, Hosea 14. ult. All the ways of the Lord are right, and the Just shall
walk therein; But the Transgressor shall fall therein. And certainly, as our
Brethrens resusing to seek the Lord after the due order at the first, so this
prodigious hypocrisy at the last, may too truly be called The breach of the
Church.
Perrez Ecclesia at this day.

Thou Lord art righteous, thou know the Hearts of the children of men, and
have discovered the hidden things thereof, and have pleaded the cause of thy
precious (though much abused) Truth. Even so Lord let our iniquities be ever
corrected, but yet in mercy forgive us our Trespasses.

But what shall we say, shall we now no more go about this dreadful work, to
bring the Ark (the fourth principle of Christianity I mean) to its proper place
in the Churches? or rather some irregular Churches to their due reverence unto
it.

If it seem good in the eyes of the Lord, let his servants still convene to
consider of this matter, perhaps we shall find grace in his sight; for there is
hope that we shall one understand another, and with one consent seek and serve
the Lord God of our Forefathers.

And this I am the more induced to believe or hope for, from, not only the
great desire which I yet find to be alive in the hearts of Christians
generally, that peace in this matter might be upon Israel. But also from the
great forwardness which I found in the Searchers themselves to consent unto
certain Proposals for Peace; the first of which is this, That it be granted and
professed on all sides by the formerly divided parties, That that laying on of
Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is one of the Principles of Christ's Doctrine, and a part of
the foundation.

This Proposition being considered, it may appear that there wants but a step
(as it were) to unity in the truth it self, and so to a lasting Peace one with
another. And methinks it should be no impossible thing, for us to agree about
the particular service intended, Heb. 6. 2. (unless a spirit of perverseness be
mingled amongst us) Toward the clearing of which difficulty, something is said
in the sequel, which I desire may be considered.

Why the Searchers should so much declaim against you, as if you unchurched all
Church^s but your selves, I can see no reason, having never understood, that
you did at any time by any agreement, deliver such a Doctrine. Nor is it so
much your business to meddle with unchurching any body, as to keep your selves
from corruption in Doctrine and Manners.

Indeed the point of Communion with those who reject or oppose your Faith and
practice in the case depending, has been much debated, and resolved in the
Negative (especially touching the Table of the Lord) but this is so far from
being an Argument, that you deny them to be Churches of Christ, that it plainly
Argues you own them for such; but yet such, as for their rejecting or opposing
some truth of God, are therefore incapable of present communion with those that
religiously observe the truth by them rejected and opposed. For if you deem
them to be no Churches at all, what need any debate be had, Whether it be
orderly or safe to communicate with them at the Lords Table?

Now, that persons may be allowed the Appellation of Christians (and so of the
Church of Christ) and yet (as the matter may be circumstanced concerning them)
ought to be held at some distance in respect of present Communion, with other
Christians, or Churches, implies no absurdity, but is rather very necessary, I
hope the ensuing discourse will demonstrate.

Something also I have said in vindication of the Messengers Office (which I
perceive to be much questioned by some) I confess my self nothing so fit a
person to plead this cause as some other. However, if that which I have done
may give occasion to any other to do more, or more effectually, in this point,
I shall think my pains well bestowed. I commit all that I have said to the
blessing of God, and the Consideration of his Churches.

Your Brother and Servant, Tho. Grantham.

To the Authors of the BOOK, Entitled A Search for Schism.
Brethren,
WHen we consider how God is able to effect good things for his people by
contrary ways, even by turning the unkindness of Brethren into means of
preservation to the family, Genesis 50. 20. we are made even against hope to
believe in hope, that the product of your doings in your Search (and the
Epistle prefixed) may be good, although its procedure in respect of its chief
Patriot, was certainly from a mind filled with perturbation, and (its to be
feared) with no small emulation against some, for no other cause, then for
their confidence and constancy in that, which by the Vision of Truth, is made
known for the good of the Church. For how is it credible that a pure fountain
(or mind filled with Love and Peace) should ever send forth such dreadful
streams of slanders against the Church of God, as can hardly be paralelled in
any Author? As if the Congregations of Christians under imposition of hands,
were invaders and usurpers of the Lords peculiar Prerogative, such as would
irrevocably throw their fellow servants into Hell and death: Such as lock
heaven-gate against the strictest piety of a dissenting Brother, and open it
wide to those that are defective in Morals. Such as heat the Furnace seven
times for those which bow not to their dictates: Such as make Conscience a make
bate: Such as kindle flames in Gods House by Fire taken from the Altar, and
bring the fattest Oblations to maintain that fire of Contention: Such as will
rather fire the house of God, than dye without doing somewhat, which may
perpetuate their names: yea such as are Satan's ^urveyers to bring prey to his
den. And (to make the measure run over and over) such as, if they could execute
all that they condemn, few or none could be saved!

It is true, after all this, and much more of the same nature, you stroke us on
the head, and tell us, though you thus speak, yet you are persuaded better
things of ^he most of us; a narrow Plaster for so great a wound, being no more
then must ^e said (if Charity bear any sway) of the manifold Sects which now
profess Christianity, among whom there are many ^ who according to their Light)
are pious, peaceable, and serious.

But alas, who will believe that many among us are good Christians, if it be
true, that one part of our Churches consist of such as are notoriously known to
be such as you have Characterized?

But what shall we say, shall we render railing for railing? God forbid! for we
are taught of God to overcome evil with good; nor will we revenge our selves by
recriminations. And as we are confident that our innocence will in these things
greatly plead against you; so we trust there are no such impieties, and
execrable doers among you, if this your Search have not tinctured you.

The Lord knows, and Israel shall know, that if we knew any such evil workers
in our Congregations, they should either reform or go to their place, and if
you know any such, you might have done well to have singled them out, that we
might have known them by name, and not have thus sold us into the hands of
Scorners, to be a derision to the foolish, Prove. 12. 18. There is that speaks
like the piercings of a Sword, but the tongue of the wise is health.

Nor do we doubt but that many of you are merely ensnared in the publication of
your Epistle, and it is strange you should imply his pen in this matter, whom
you knew to be too much entangled in the folly of his own ways (at that time)
to be truly serviceable to God and his People, whatever he has been in time
past.

What is here written, now offers it self to your consideration, as a thing
compelled from us at this time, by your high provocation, well knowing it to be
more suitable to the time, and the state of the Church in general, to be
studying for terms of reconciliation, then Arguments for Disputation; and
therefore we could wish that Christians would not thus put one another to
business, seeing they do bear (and are like to bear) in their body the Marks of
the Lord Jesus, according to that saying, Gal. 6. 17.

Nor was it needful to set down your demands in this our Answer, partly for
that the substance may be understood by what we have said, and partly for that
you have made your Book so public, as that it is (as it were) in every
Brothers hand, who therefore when he sees this Answer, may compare it with your
Search, for his own satisfaction.

Your Brother, Tho. Grantham.

A Sigh for Peace: OR, The cause of Division discovered, etc.
IT is certainly an easy thing (though very pernicious) to fill the Church of
Christ with Questions; and such too, as may carry a show of strength against
the most important Articles of our Faith. But it is not so easy for those who
are sick of Questions or demands, to receive satisfaction by any endeavor
whatsoever. And as in other points of faith; the Questions of some have been
endless, even so now that humor has been and is much at work, against that
solemn service of prayer, with the imposition of hands for the promised Spirit
of God, as a gift pertaining to the members of the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ. As is too apparent by sundry papers extant, and among the rest, one
entitled, A Search for Schism, containing no less than an hundred Demands
(though 40. only be the number set down by the Demandants) which are the more
prodigeous for that diverse of them have been answered, by diverse hands, and no
reply made by the enquirers. What the reason hereof should be is doubtful,
unless the opposers of this truth intend to state the Controversy anew (for I
was told that this Book of Demands is but a preparatory to a greater work) and
thereby become (more effectually) the disturbers and obstructers of that
measure of unity remaining, and peace pretended.

But as in this we shall be too solicitous, so, neither in our Answer, shall we
need to be ovluminous, by tracing their demands one by one. For though the
number thereof be many, yet they are reducible to three Heads, touching which
the truth being evinced, the whole Body of their demands are answered. Now the
Heads to which their demands may be reduced are these:

The first, concerns the constitution of those Congregations of Baptized
Disciples who reject that solemn service of prayer with imposition of hands for
the promised Spirit: viz. Whether they be true Churches of Christ or not?

The second, respects the matter of Communion between those Christians who
religiously observe prayer with the imposition of hands, as a principle of
Christ's Doctrine, pertaining to the beginning of Christian men; and these who
reject and oppose it.

The third, is touching the service it self, in respect of its grounds and
ends; as also in respect of the persons concerned in the practice thereof at
this day.

That I may with the more facility and clearness proceed in the consideration
of these particulars, I shall begin with the last first; touching which
particular, I shall endeavor to make good this proposttion, viz.

That as God has promised to give the Spirit of his Son (or his holy Spirit)
to all that are the called of the Lord: So he has appointed a solemn way
wherein his Servants and Handmaids, generally, are to wait upon him for the
reception thereof, which way is the prayers of the Church (performed by her
Ministers) with the laying on of hands, and this as a principle of Christian
Religion, belonging to them in the min^rity of their Christian state.

For explication of some parts of this Proposition, it is meet that we show,
first, what we mean by the holy Ghost, since some now, (as well as heretofore
Acts 19. --) either by reason of ignorance or some worse cause, seem not to
know, whether there be any holy Ghost. As if they had forgotten unto what they
were Baptized. Matthew. 28. 19.

By the Holy Ghost then, we do not mean the Spirit of man in its most reformed
and elevated state imaginable; neither any created Spirit whatsoever.

But by the Holy Ghost, we mean that Spirit, by whose operation the Creation of
the world was brought forth, and formed. Genesis 1. 2. Job 26. 13. And which
knows all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. And which is
present every where, Psalm. 139. 7, 8. 9. Which Spirit we therefore believe to
be one with the Father in nature and essence, and therefore rightly said to be
God, Acts 5. 3, 4, 9.

Secondly, when we speak of men's receiving this holy Spirit, we do not mean
that he dwells in them essentially and personally; for so they cannot contain
him. But he dwells in them by manifestation and operation. By gifts, according
to 1 Cor. 12. By fruits, according to 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Galath. 5. 22, 23.

And seeing the ground of this so much neglected truth, the fourth principle of
Christ's doctrine, lies much in that great promise of the Spirit of God, as the
right of all the Disciples of Christ. It behooves that we open the nature of
that glorious promise, that being affected with the excellency, and made
sensible of the necessity thereof, we may the more devoutly seek for it, not
only in our private devotion, but also in that special and public way assigned
in the holy Scripture for the obtaining so great a benefit.

Let it therefore first be considered, that to be under the common influence
and operation of the Spirit, in the Ministry of the Word, in order to
conversion, is one thing; and the reception of the Holy Ghost, as a Seal and
confirmation of the souls of Christians, as it is the earnest of their
inheritance, is another.

It is certain, a person may be eminently under the operation of the Spirit, in
the first consideration; and yet be a stranger to the reception of the Spirit
in the other; as appeared first in the Apostles themselves, who though they
were the persons which received the first fruits of the promised Holy Spirit,
yet were they for some time in the profession of the Gospel before they
received it.

For they did not receive the Spirit of promise till after the Ascension of our
Lord, Acts 1. 4, 5. -- But wait for the promise of the father, which (says he)
ye have heard of me; f^r John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. John 7. 39. The Spirit was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. In like manner the
Samaritans were converted from the error of their way, by the preaching of the
word, and became the Disciples of Christ, and yet the Spirit of promise was
fallen on none of them, Acts 8. 12, 15, 16. The Ephesians also believed in God
after they heard the Gospel of their salvation; But were not sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise till afterward, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Agreeable hereunto is
that question of the Apostle, Acts 19. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost SINCE
ye believed? The persons to whom this question was put, were believers in
Christ, yea Baptized believers. Whence we are to note, that Baptized Disciples
have right to the promise of the Holy Ghost; and indeed hence it was that Peter
could so confidently and universally promise (in the word of the Lord) the gift
of the Holy Ghost to every one that does repent of their iniquities, and are
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins,
Acts 2. 38. It appears therefore, that persons may be under the operation of
the spirit of God in the Ministry of the Word, to their illumination and
conversion so far as to be brought into a certain state of Christianity, (for
those that may be called Disciples are called Christians, Acts 11. 26.) and yet
be without the enjoyment of the sealing and confirming spirit of promise, in
themselves, which is yet more evident, from John 14. 16, 17. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter -- even the Spirit of TRUTH --
for he dwells WITH you, and SHALL be IN you. Note well, this promise does not
respect the spirit, as it works Miracles, only; but also, and indeed much
more, the Spirit as it is a Leader into all Truuh, called therefore the Spirit
of Truth, yea, it is the Spirit in such wise as should ^bide with, and in the
Saints for ever; yea, it is the Comforter, or Spirit of Comfort, and is
therefore that gift of the Spirit which pertains to Christians generally.

Secondly, That this sealing and confirming Spirit of promise belongs to
Christ's Disciples generally, whether male or female, I conceive some necessity
to demonstrate, because the Searchers, to the intent, that at the least they
may exclude ^omen from the benefit of prayer, with the laying on of Hands, will
not have them included in the word THEM, Acts 8. 17. but if we prove, that
women have right to the promise equally with men, we shall not at all fear the
trifling demands of the Searchers in their 29 Querie, which only serves, to
show the weakness of their cause, for it seems if it be true, that women (as
well as men) had Hands imposed on them with Prayer, by the Apostles, for the
Holy Spirit; then their cavils against the universality of the pract^ce of
laying on o^ Hands is (at least) the less considerable. Now that the promise of
the Spirit extends to Christian women as well as men, appears from the
Prophets foresight of the extent thereof, Isa. 44. 3. I will power water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, I will power my Spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon their offspring. Joel 2. And it shall come to
pass afterward, that I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh -- and upon the
servants, and upon the Handmaid in those days, will I power out of my Spirit.
Which glorious promise was first fulfilled to the Christians, soon after the
Assention of our Lord, Acts 2. And now is the time, as well as then, for
Christians to reap the fruit of that promise, Acts 5. 32. -- the holy Ghost
which God has g^ven to them that obey him. Because ye are sons, God has s^nt
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. Gal. 4. 6. In Jesus Christ there
is neither male nor female, but if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and
Heirs according to promise. It is the Spirit of promise which does witness with
our spirit, that we are the children of God. And again, He that stabiisheth us
in Christ, and has ano^nted us is God, who also has se^led us, and given the
earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. Yea this, even this Spirit, is one of the
great and precious promises by which Christians are made partakers of the
Divine Nature, according to 2 Pet. 1, 3, 4. Thus we see that the Scriptures do
evince, that the Handmaids as well as the servants of the Lord; that the
Children of God without excepti^n; that ^he Church of God without rejection of
any true Member thereof* have a clear indubit^te right to the gift of the h^ly
Spirit. And it is also evident that the promise of the Spirit, consists not
only, no, nor chiefly in those gifts, which some say are now ceased, to wit, of
Miracles, Tongues, etc. (though they have no Scripture for it) But this promise
chiefly consists in the sanctifying graces, and soulest ablishing comforts
thereof, yea in that which seals a Christian to the day of redemption* (which
tongues and miracles will fail to do) and in the mean time is like water to him
that i^ thirsty, as before we have seen. It Is that Unction which the holy one
which Teaches Christians all things, or Leads them into all truth. I^ a word,
it is that reception of the Spirit which is above all gifts of Tongues,
Prophesies* etc. called Charity, and is branched into meekness, temperance,
goodness and faith, yea, 'ti^ that gift of the Spirit by which the Love of God
is shed abroad in the hearts of Christians, being the Spirit of Love, power,
and a sound mind* in the exercise whereof (I mean this gift o^ the Spirit) a
Christian is both accepted of God* and approved of men. So then we have the
glorious promise of the Spirit remaining for, and pertaining to the Handmaids
and servants o^ the Lord, in the most excellent gifts thereon as much as ever,
and consequently are as much concerned to seek for it as ever any was, and this
leads me to the second branch of my Proposition, viz. The dutiful observance of
that way which is allowed and confirmed from Heaven for obtaining that heavenly
donation.

That God should by his Prophets foretell o^ such grace, and so often mention
it as so great a promise; the reception whereof is so necessary as without
which Christians do want the lively evidence, ^ea^ and confirmation that they
are the Sons of God, and heirs with Christ; and not assign some peculiar way,
and special means, for all that are concerned, to make use of in order to their
obtaining it, seems not to be credible; which yet he has not done, if prayer
with imposition of Hands by the Church (or her delegates) be rejected; if
otherwise, it were well if some body would assign us what peculiar way the word
of God directs us to, as being that which God has ratified from heaven, as a
means peculiar for that end and purpose; which if any assay to show us, Let
them also consider why the Apostles took that way which is so much neglected by
our Brethren, if there were any other particular means and way to be used for
the end aforesaid? But if it be said that no special way or means is left us,
but the general Ordinance of prayer; etc. We must then say, it is not like the
dealings of God in other cases; for ordinarily when it pleased God to promise
or give some special favor or gift unto his Church, he therewithal ordered
some solemn or service to keep in memory that his favor, and to be a means to
partake of the fruit of his promise: Thus the Covenant which God made with
Abraham and his seed, the deliverance which he wrought for them, the great
things which he promised them, must be perpetuated, and waited for, in the use
of such ways, as in the wisdom of God, were thought fit for the memorial or
reception of these favors respectively. And so must the remission of our sins
by the death of Christ, be sought for, and signified, not only by the word and
prayer, in general; but particularly, in the Baptism of of repentance, for the
remission of our sins also. Nor must we only receive the flesh and blood of
Christ, by the word preached, but particularly, in the solemn use of the Table
of the Lord also. In like manner, we are not only to seek to God for his Spirit
in the constant and ordinary course of Prayer, but also in a special and
peculiar way of Prayer, allowed and confirmed from Heaven, for that very end
and purpose, which is the point to be demonstrated according to what the
Scriptures in that behalf does teach us.

And first from that place, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. Now when the Ap^stles which
were at Jerusa^em heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John who when they were come down prayed for them that they
might rec^ive the holy Ghost -- then laid they their hands on them and they
received the holy G^ost. For the better understanding of this place, it is meet
to consider that such as pray to God, ought to know that the thing which they
pray for is attainable; and that they know it is the will of God that they
should ask of him that very thing which they pray for, especially when the
prayer is made positively; I mean, without conditional expressions, as in the
case before us the prayer is such, as indeed it ought to be without doubting,
when we ask of God those gifts which he has promised. James 1. 5, 6, 7. But if
by the holy Ghost in this place, be meant only the extraordinary gifts
thereof, such as Tongues, M^racles, etc. Then certainly there was no ground
from any promise of God, to pray that all those persons which were Baptized in
Samaria, should so receive the Spirit. No, nor any ground from any promise of
God to pray for so much as any one particular person among them ^l^, since the
Promise of God in that case, is not made to this or that man or woman by name;
and consequently here was no ground for the Apostles to pray absolutely and
believingly, but rather doubtingly, for that very thing which they purposely
prayed for. Seeing it is evident that not all the members of a Church, but
rather very few (and them also unknown by name to any man, no not to the
Apostles themselves. 1 Cor. 12. 11, 29. Acts 1. 24.) are chosen to be Prophets,
workers of miracles, etc. And therefore it follows that there could be no
such laying on of hands at all practiced here, as some imagine, namely a laying
on of hands for the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost. For though it is
true, that God did sometimes give such gifts of his Spirit in the way of Prayer
with laying on of Hands, yet that such gifts was the only proper end of that
service, is confidently denied, because (as before) it was impossible to know
(in any ordinary way) for whom to pray, or on whom to impose Hands, whether on
men or women, seeing neither sex is exempted from the extraor; dinarie gifts of
the Spirit.

It is certain that God gave the gift of Tongues, etc. in the Ministry of the
Word. Acts 10. Yet it does not follow thence, that such gifts are the only
proper end of preaching the Word; but the undoubted end of the Lord, in that
Ordinance is, that men believe, and be saved (though perhaps they never receive
the gift of tongues, prophecy, etc.) and this is certainly that end which
shall be attained by all that rightly accept that means of salvation. John 20.
31. These things are written that ye might believe, and in believing that ye
may have life through his name.

Nor will Acts 19. 6. prove that there is, or ever was any such thing as laying
on of Hands for the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit only, for still we must
distinguish between an effect only, and that which is the undoubted end of any
service. The reasons even now urged, do forbid us to say, that tongues,
miracles, etc. was the undoubted or precise end of laying on of Hands, Acts 19.
because the service was universal; but extraordinary gifts are particular
only; And let it be seriously considered, that if Paul had found twelve hundred
men instead of twelve who had not receiv^d the holy Gh^st since they believed,
ought he not to have done that to them all which he did to these? Doubtless he
ought; yet who can imagine, that such gifts as Tongues, Miracles, etc. should
be given to each individual? This would be far from that order which God has
beautified his Church withal. 1 Cor. 12. 29, 30. And whereas Paul in this
place, and Peter and John in Acts 8. is conceived by some of our opposites, to
have imposed hands to work Miracles for confirmation of the Word, this is a
very great mistake, for then there is no reason to imagine that the practice of
laying on of hands should have been general (as doubtless it was.) For seeing
that the healing of one Cripple Acts 4. 16. was sufficient to convince open
enemies that the power of God was with his Apostles; Then surely it was not
necessary that all the Baptized should miraculously speak with tongues, for to
convince themselves or others, that the Word which they had received was from
heaven. But alas, men fall into thi^ error, by their unwillingness to see the
truth, for signs are not for them that believe; and Miracles had been wrought
by Philip at S^m^ria, to confirm the word, before Peter and John came there.
Acts 8. 6, 7. and all that we read of Peter and John in respect of confirming
the Word, is only this, that they testified and preached it, and departed verse.
25.

Now that all the Disciples at Samaria had Hands imposed on them, cannot
without absurdity be denied, for certainly they imposed hands on all, in whose
hehalf they prayed; but will anyman say that they prayed but for some of them
only, that they might receive the promise of the Father, and that all the rest
must be excluded both from the prayer, and the gift prayed for? Surely such a
conceit would make Peter and John miserable comforters to those Disciples, whom
they should thus neglect in their prayers for the holy Spirit; as all the women
which were Baptized were so neglected, in the opinion of the Searchers, for
they by their demands will needs suppose, that the Apostles did not impose
hands on women, as if women had not as clear a right to the promised Spirit as
men! They might as well have doubted whether Peter and John laid hands on men,
seeing the Text says nothing particularly of them any more than of the women.
But I say these imaginations are very irrational, since (as before) it was not
known to Peter or John, what persons by name should have extraordinary gifts,
whether the Servants or Handmaids of the Lord, nor whether any of them should
be Prophets or ^peakers with tongues. But this they knew, that the gift of the
Holy Ghost belonged to them all (for so they had preached to others, Acts ^.
38.) and therefore certainly they prayed for all to whom the promise did
belong; and then doubtless for whom they prayed, on them they laid their hands,
and so it is evident they laid their hands on all. The same may be noted from
Paul's question Acts 19. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?
Where certainly he includes the whole number of these certain Disciples, who
(by their ^nswer to the question) being all discovered ^o be wanting in respect
of that great gift of God; Paul must needs be very partial, if he had not the
same care for all, that he had for some, and if his care was equally for them
all, ^hen reason tells us he would not be want^ng to any of them in his
endeavors, that they might receive that Spirit which as (...) they had not
received. So that still we see, laying on of Hands was practiced as generally
as Baptism, or any other Ordinance, where the practice of it is recorded, and
that is an evidence that the end of that service was that gift of the Holy
Ghost which is general, and consequently not for the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, otherwise then as they are included within the compass of that gracious
promise.

That the laying on of Hands, Acts 8. Acts 19. was not the laying on of Hands
for extraordinary gifts, but for the general donation of the Spirit to
Disciples indifferently, is yet more manifest; because upon this only ground
could Paul ask the Disciples, whether they had received the Holy Ghost since
they believed; and upon this only ground may the Ministers of Christ ask this
question of the Disciples at this day, I mean so to ask it, as thereby implying
that they ought to have it, for so much Paul's question does plainly imply, as
appears by his endeavors that they (who had been so long without it) might now
be made partakers of it, and that for them all indifferently. And upon this
ground only could Peter and John use the means to obtain the Spirit for the
Disciples at Samaria generally, namely because the promise of the Spirit was
universal.

Again from this consideration, that that laying on of Hands Acts 8. Acts 19.
was a general practice, and the gift prayed for in that service, a general
gift, it will follow that the Apostles performed this service of prayer with
laying on of Hands, by virtue of their Ministerial Authority, and not by
virtue of any particular power they had to give the Holy Ghost, as some do
vainly imagine, otherwise it will follow, that by their gift of miracles they
were bound to work a miracle for every Disciple at Samaria; and for every one
of those certain disciples at Ephesus, And then why not the like for all
Disciples where ever they came, no man can render a good reason.
which is absurd to imagine, or else that they did in this service more than
they were bound to do either by virtue of gift or office, which is as
ridiculous on the other hand; for though it is certain that they had no power
to give the Spirit of God to any man; yet certainly they had power (or
authority from God) to pray, with the laying on of their Hands, for the
members of the body, that they might receive the Spirit of promise, as
appeared by those heavenly confirmations which ensued upon their performance,
insomuch as that it may be said, this service of prayer with the laying on of
hands is as much confirmed from heaven, to be a thing well pleasing to him, as
any other ordinance whatsoever.

And forasmuch as the UNIVERSALITY of the practice of layng on of Hands, with
prayer for the Holy Spirit, being evinced is a matter of that importance, that
even thence it will follow, that it is no such thing as many imagine it to be
(viz. a temporary practice only fitted for the Apostles times, that some few
having practiced or submitted to it, It was to cease, being only perf^rmed for
the gift of tongues and miracles, etc.) I will therefore proceed a little
further to demonstrate this service to be very universal.

It may appear to all indifferent men, that very many thousands were in the
religious practice of this ministration in the first Churches. And first from
the state of the Church at Samaria in its plantation, where the number of
Disciples was very great, in likelihood not less than an hun^red thousand, as
may be gathered from Acts 8. verse. 14. It is said, Samaria had received the
word; and verse. 8. There was great joy in that City. Which expressions, that
they include each individual, I will not affirm; for, if they import the
generality of the inhabitants (as that will appear) it suffices for my
purpose. This is evident, partly for that we hear not of so much as one person,
who opposed himself against Philip's preaching in that City. No not so much as
Simon the Sorcerer, for he consented to Philip's doctrine. And partly, for that
there is the same reason to believe, that the whole City (or the generality
thereof) was converted by Philip, as that they had been generally deceived by
Simon the Witch (as that will not be denied) for as it is said verse. 9. He
bewitched them, to wit, the people of Samaria; which is interpreted of all, or
the generality. Verse. 11. To him they had regard, from the least even to the
greatest of them. So on the other hand it is said, verse. 5. That Philip went
down to Samaria, and preached Christ to them, i. e. all, or the generality of
them; as it is rationally gathered from verse. 6. And the people WITH ONE
ACCORD, gave heed to those things which Philip spoke, he^ring and seeing the
miracles which he did.

Hence we may perceive, a very general (if not an universal) conversion of this
City; who, Like as in times past they gave regard to the Sorcerer, both the
least and greatest of them; But now, with ONE ACCORD, they gave heed to what
Philip spoke; even so, verse. 12. it is said of the very same people without
exception, that when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized.

And that there might be no cause to doubt, whether the account given, be so
general, as the terms already noted may imply; it is added by way of
explication, both Men and Women. Yea further, as the deceived City is now
recorded to be converted, so the very deceiver himself is brought in as
believing and baptized, verse. 13. We have therefore not only a general or
indefinite account of the Disciples at Samaria, but what is generally or
indefinitely delivered in the words, Samaria received the Word, etc. is
sufficiently defined to be meant of the people with one accord. Of the
Deceiver, and them that had been deceived. Of the people of both Sexes, to wit,
both men and women. And upon those very persons, it is said (without the least
intimation of any exception of any person or persons whatsoever) the Apostles
laid their hands, after they had prayed for them, that they might receive the
holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen on none of them. Note [on none of them]
wherefore they prayed for them all. Therefore they imposed Hands on them all.

Now, suppose that the City of Samaria, would afford but three hundred thousand
inhabitants capable of instruction, if then I do allow two parts out of three,
yet there remains 100000 Converts probably; however infallibly a great
multitude. To whom we may well add (as a people owning the doctrine of
imposition of Hands) the Church at Jerusalem, which consisted of many
thousands, by whom Peter and John was sent to Samaria, and it were impious to
think, that they would now innovate a service in the worship of God at Samaria,
which was not before received, in the Church that sent them thither. But this
service is numbered among the principles of the Hebrew Church, and found
practiced in the Church at Ephesus; whence it appears, this ministration was as
universal as other Ordinances in the primitive Churches. Ergo, it was for the
general gift of the Spirit. Ergo, not for the extraordinary gifts only.

Nor does that Text, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. alleged by the Searchers, prove the
contrary; for it is not only said, that Joshua was full of the Spirit of
wised^me, for Moses had laid his hands on him, etc. which seems to be no more,
then what Timothy received by the laying on of Pau^'s hands (viz.) the Spirit
of -- a sound mind or judgment, which may be received where the miraculous
gifts of the Spirit are wanting. Doubtless, it may be said without boasting,
that some Christians in these days, are so endewed with the Spirit of God (at
least in comparison of many of the Lords servants) that, they are full of the
Spirit of wisdom; yet the Searchers will not say, they are full of the
miraculous gifts of the Spirit: seeing they have told us (though very untruly)
that the end of laying on of Hands, Acts 8. Acts 19. is ceased, or not
attainable; which they conceive was only the miraculous gifts of the Spirit.
Which conceit of theirs is the more prodigious, when we consider that some of
them did lately submit to laying on of Hands, with prayer to God. But I marvail
with what conscience, if indeed he was of this mind, that the end of that
service was not attainable.

It is worthy consideration, that there was a Church at Ephesus, long before
Paul laid hands on those certain Disciples, which he found there, at his second
coming to that City. Acts 18. 19, 20, 26, 27. So that the word of God had been
confirmed there for many years; Priscilla and Aquilla having been left there,
who taught such as were ignorant, the way of the Lord more perfectly. Apollos
also, mightily convinced the Jews by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ;
we cannot now reasonably think, that Paul would settle those certain Disciples
Acts 19. in a Church distinct from the Church at Ephesus already, much less in
a way or practice contradistinct from the Church; and if not, then it follows,
that the Church at Ephesus were also in the practice of prayer, with the laying
on of Hands, as well as those certain Disciples, who were now to be laid into
the building with the rest; which yet is the more considerable, if we note that
passage in Ephesians 1. 13. which was spoken of the whole Church at Ephesus,
and shows plainly, that they had received the Holy Ghost or Spirit of Promise,
after they believed the Gospel of their salvation; which fully agree with the
order, wherein the certain Disciples also received the Spirit.

And here let us not omit that passage, Acts 22. 10. and 9. 17. Whence it is
observable, that Paul, the elect v^ssel, must be sent to Damaseus, to be taught
the principles or rudiments of Religion by And yet it is true, which Paul says
Gal. 1. 11, 12, 15, 16. for the substance of the Gospel was revealed to him,
before Ananias came at him.
Ananias, and particularly in the Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of Hands
for the gift of the Holy Ghost, not only in repect of the miraculous gifts of
Tongues, etc. (For it is a doubt (among Christians) whether he spoke with
tongues, by virtue of any proper gift) or by means of his education.) But the
spirit of love, power, and of a second mind, which he affirms God had given
him, 2 Timothy 1. 7. And though it is true, there was some variaiton in the order
of things in Paul's case; that is no prejudice to the truth in general, there
being an emergency which might occasion it, and a special allowance from heaven
for it at that time. Nor may this variation be a president for us, to vary in
things of this nature, having no such occasion for it, any more than the
Israelites eating the Passover, without being cleansed, according to the
purification of the Sanctuary; when an emergency called for it, and the Lord
allowed it, gave them ground to do so again, when there was neither the one nor
the other; nor is it material against ought that we have said, that Ananias was
no officer in the Church, and therefore imposed Hands on Paul by virtue of his
gift only. For unless we imagine the Church to have greater power than God, we
cannot deny Ananias to have authority, for all that he said and did to Saul.
Seeing he had immediate mission from heaven, which is equivolent to the
Churches mission at least; Nor is it ^easonable to think, that power to act in
Gospel Ordinances, is so tied to the Church, as that God may not anticipate
that Order when it pleases him.

And as this chosen vessel was taught the ^udiments of Christianity, so he
instructed others in the same, as we have seen in part, and may see yet
further, in his writing to ^imothy; who being under some fears and ^emptations,
he labors to comfort him, from the consideration of the Spirit which God had
given him; which was the Spirit of love, power, and of a sound mind, which he
reminds him of, by mentioning the means used for obtaining it, which was the
putting on of Paul's hands. See and consider, 2 Timothy 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

We are now come to the great Charter of the Church, for this point of Faith; I
mean, that Epistle which Paul wrote unto the Hebrew Church; who, as he himself
had learned and taught others, concerning the laying on of Hands, as we have
seen before, so he ^uts the first of Gospel Churches in mind, of that which
they (who were to be as a standard to the rest) had been taught, in respect of
their principles as Christians. Heb. 5. ^2. and particularly, concerning laying
on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. Concerning which particular, as I shall have too much
occasion to note the differing opinions among the Baptized Congregations, so I
shall first set down those things wherein they do generally agree, or rather,
that which is granted by the Searchers. And first,

They grant, that the doctrine of the Holy Ghost (I suppose they mean the
Promise of the Holy Ghost) was frequently taught as a principle of the
Christian faith; and they give us no reason, why it ought not with like
frequency to be taught, as a principle of the same Faith now.

Secondly they grant, That that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. is a principle
of the doctrine of Christ, and a part of the foundation Which they said to me,
they did always grant, or else I had nor mentioned it in this book.
. Now, either they must grant that these two, to wit, the promise of the
Spirit, and laying on of Hands, with prayer to obtain it, makes but one
principle of Christianity, or else they fall into that which they condemn; viz.
the making seven principles. But to say the truth, they seem to make these two
to be but one; yet so, as that they would destroy the practick part. For they
demand, whether laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. may not be figuratively
understood, for the Holy Spirit which was given thereby? But the Answer is
easy, and tells them plainly, that ^his is the way to have such a figurative
foun^ation, as Babes in Christ could never under^tand; and then will come in a
figurative Bap^ism only. Yea a figurative Resurrection too, ^ould creep into
the Church, at the heels of ^he other figures; till at last, the truth of all
^he principles would stand only for a Cyber.

But the instance, which the Searchers bring ^o strengthen this their
figurative interpreta^ion, very providentially overthrows it. For, though the
Cup is taken for the Wine, and the ^read and Wine, for the Body and Blood of
Christ; ^et we know that the sign, and thing signi^^ed, do both remain; for the
use and com^^rt of the Church; and why then should ^rayer, with the laying on
of Hands (which (...) the sign) be made void by the promise of ^he Spirit,
which is the substance. These things premised, the Searchers twenty fifth
^emand, and the discourse thereon depending (...) discerned to be frivolous.
Because whatso^ver they are pleased to write, it is certainly ^nown that their
opinion is contrary to that wri^^ng. Otherwise it were easy to show, not only
the Novelty of their conceit in the said Question, but the vanity of such an
interpretation of the word foundation, as th^re they bring, might be
discovered. For evident it is, that the same which is called, the first
principles of the Oracles of God, and milk for Babes, verse. 12. is called the
principles of the doctrine of Christ [which pertain to the beginning of
Christian men] which now the Author would intermit; and the foundation, which
he would not lay again; which foundation when he comes to set down in its
parts; which principles, when he comes to enumerate, are thus set forth; of
Repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God. Of the doctrine of
Baptism, and of laying on of Hands. Of the Resurrection of the dead, and of
Eternal judgment.

And what though it be said, that other foundations can no man lay, than that
which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ; does this prejudice that use of
the word foundation, He^. 6. 1. not at all. Or at least not any more than the
Church, being called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and the pillar and ground [or
foundation] of the truth; 1 Timothy 3. 15. does prejudice the Son of God, his
being called Christ, or the foundation. And are not the Prophets and Apostles
called the foundation; Ephesians. 2. 20. of which Christ in the same place is said
to be the corner stone? And yet surely Christians of ordinary capacity do
understand, that these sayings do not contradict, but agree very well with that
saying of Paul, other foundation can no m^n lay, etc. So long as Christ is held
to be the Head, the all, and in all, to the Church of God.

But since the Searchers do grant (and say to my knowledge, that they did ever
grant) that laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. to be a principle of the doctrine of
Christ, and a part of the foundation; which I take to be a good b^sis for a
happy composure of our unhappy d^fference; It remains, that the only (or
chief) point of difference lies in this, what laying on of Hands it is, that
is called a part of the foundation, Heb. 6. 2? Whether laying on of Hands with
prayer, for the Spirit of promise; or some other kind of laying on of Hands.
We affirm the first, they imagine the latter. But now, ask them what laying on
of Hands they will assign to be meant, Heb. 6. 2. and then, they either answer
nothing at all, or else so flatly contradictorily one to another, or with such
hesitation in themselves, as it is to be admired; but more to be lamented, that
such Leaders in Israel (as they pass for; and to give them their due, might
well pass for such, IF, etc.) should not be able to digest the milk which Babes
must feed upon, nor can they assign to Babes their Portion therein. But instead
of Milk, they sometimes set before them strong meat, even that imposition of
Hands which pertains to Bishops in the Church; and this as one of the Babes
principles, which is far from being fit nutriment for them. And now that the
Searchers may sufficiently show themselves to be in the dark, about that laying
on of Hands which they confess to be a principle, etc. They number up six or
seven sorts of laying on of Hands, and then puts it to the question, Which of
all these laying on of hands is intended Heb. 6. 2. and is that which we call a
Doctrine of Christ? By which unwary demand, no doubt they have led many a
simple meaning Christian into a Maze, and there left him; nor can they possibly
give him relief, since they cannot extricate themselves from the same meander;
and as an addition to their folly, they demand, that seeing diverse men are
differently persuaded, concerning that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. Whether
this be not a sufficient ground for them to doubt, whether that laying on of
hands practiced by us be instituted by God? Which if it be, then they have
sufficient ground, to doubt of all things which they (as well as we) do hold
for Gods institutions; For certainly diverse men are (notwithstanding their
interest) diversely persuaded of most places of Scripture, on which they ground
their faith and practice. But to leave them in this mist, till they being
weary, shall desire to return to the Lord in this part of his will; I shall
endeavor to show plainly, what laying on of hands it is, which is called a
principle of Christ's doctrine, and a part of the foundation. And though the
Searchers are pleased to trouble their Readers, with a large enumeration of
layings on of hands; yet they seem at last to be content, That, that laying on
of Hands Heb. 6. 2. should be one out of two; namely, either that which was for
healing the sick, or else that which was for the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit: But they rather incline to the first, and as for the latter, we have
showed there is no such thing, nor ever was; being a thing out of the reach of
man's understanding to whom such gifts do belong, and consequently they know not
on whom to impose their hands.

That the laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. should be that on the sick is no way
congruous to truth or reason. For, how should this be one of the first
principles of the Oracles of God, and Milk for Babes; seeing it is more blessed
to believe without a miracle, than with one, (but it is not more blessed to be
without a principle of Christ's Doctrine, than to have it) and those who would
not believe unless they saw them, are upbraided for the hardness of their
hearts. Certain it is, That that laying on of hands to heal the sick, if
necessary, yet is prerequisite to faith, signs being for them which do not
believe; and not for them that do. But the laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. is
subsequent to Faith, yea it follows Baptism; and that as it is a principle of
the Oracles of God, therefore it cannot be that which was for the working of
miracles. Again, laying on of hands on the sick, is most proper (if not only
proper) for those that are without, and therefore not milk for Babes in the
Church, and consequently not that laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. As for sick
persons in the Church of God, they are not bid to have hands laid on them, but
are bid to send for the Elders of the Church, that they may pray over them,
anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord, etc. And they have a promise,
that the prayer of faith shall save the sick.

And what though the healing of the woman, Luke 3. 17. and the diseased people
of the Island, Acts 28. 9, 10. may be teaching to all, yet this does not prove,
that it is a principle appertaining to the beginning of a Christian and to
follow his Baptism. Nor do I see, that it is properly teaching to a Believer as
such; for what does it add to the Faith of a Christian, who believes already,
that Christ has one far greater things than the healing of a disease? For he
believes, that he has overcome death, and brought life and immortality to
light, by the Gospel. Indeed, to those that doubt whether Christ be the Son of
God, such a sight may be some way convincing to them. But still this is for the
begetting of Faith, and so not the fourth principle of a Christian. We see
then, that laying on of Hands on persons which are without, to work miracles,
can with no show of truth, be said to be that laying on of hands He^. 6. 2.
Especially if we consider, how it is joined with the casting out of Devils,
Mark 16. 17. Which is therefore a further evidence, that it is not in any wise
to be recounted as milk for Babes, in the Church of Christ. I will end this
point, with an argument from our Brethrens opinion; which is, that laying on of
Hands for working miracles is ceased; whence I argue,

All the principles of Christ's doctrine do remain, of which principles, Laying
on of Hands is one.

But Laying on of Hands for working miracles (say our Brethren) is ceased;
Ergo, laying on of Hands for working miracles, is not that which is called a
principle of the doctrine of Christ. Ergo, Laying on of Hands to heal the sick,
is not that which is called a principle of the doctrine of Christ. That the
laying on of Hands, Acts 8. Acts 19. is the very same that is mentioned, Heb.
6. 2. appears thus, That in Heb. 6* 2. is a principle of the Doctrine of
Christ, a part of the Foundation. But why so? Not simply as a bare Ceremony, or
Act done by man; but rather in respect of some divine thing signified, and
obtainable, in the religious observation of it, as the proper undoubted end of
that service, and that for Babes in Christ. That laying on of Hands Acts 8.
Acts 19. does agree with these considerations, being dispensed to Babes in
Christ, religiously performed with prayer to God; and signified a spiritual
benediction, and was useful for the obtaining of it, even the spirit of
promise; and was therefore fundamental to their Christian state. Again, that
laying on of Hands Heb. 6 2. does immediately follow Baptism, as its proper
place; and so does that laying on of Hands, Acts 8. and Acts 19. which cannot
be said of any other laying on of Hands whatsoever.

The due consideration of the place of this laying on of Hands, is very
material for our information, what particular laying on of Hands, is intended
Heb. 6. 2. Yea, it is necessary in any case, that the order of the truths of
Christ be maintained, otherwise we shall be very preposterous in Religion; Let
us then reflect upon that order, in which the principles of Christianity are
proposed to us, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Here that faith which justifies, must needs
follow brokenness of heart, as not only Scripture, but Christians experience
does witness. And the promise of the holy Spirit does follow the Baptism of
repentance, for remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. And so does the means which God
has provided for the obtaining that gift or promise; and so does the
Resurrection precede the eternal judgment. Nor can I imagine how our
dissenting Brethren can satisfy their consciences, touching the place of that
laying on of Hands, which they imagine to be a principle of Christ's doctrine.
For let those that say, it is laying on of hands upon the sick, tell me where
they will place it in the order of their principles; and why it may not as well
precede Faith, as follow Baptism? And how can those that will have it to be
laying on of hands on Officers, make it the fourth principle, or fundamental to
Christianity, since in reason the Church must be founded, before she ordain her
Officers. As for those which say, the laying on of hands Heb. 6. 2. is wicked
men's laying wicked hands on the Saints, I say a more prodigious dream was
scarce ever heard of: For how can that be the fourth principle of Christ's,
which neither he, nor none by his appointment, ever taught at all. And though
it is true he speaks of such a thing, and fore-tels it, yet that proves it not
his doctrine, for then it will follow, that Judas his treason, and all the
impious acts foretold in the Scripture, are the doctrines of Christ.

Nor shall we intermit Doctor Hammond's conceit, as if the laying on of Hands,
He^. 6. 2. should belong to those who fall after Baptism; which conceit our
brethren do seem very highly to approve of; as if any thing but truth in this
case were acceptable to them, though it overthrow their own opinion. For whiles
they lean to the Doctor, they have quite forgotten, that laying on of Hands,
Heb. 6. 2. is a principle of Christ's doctrine, and a part of the foundation;
yea milk for Babes in Christ. But what shall we say, do none attain to all the
principles, nor to every part of the foundation, but such as fall after
Baptism? Again, are they only Babes which fall so, as to need the indulgence of
reconciliarion; or do not sometimes strong men fall, when Babes hold on their
way? It is not forgotten, that the chief Author of this Search, did so fall, as
to need the indulgence of reconciliation; from whence I conclude, that he
either is a Babe, or else strong men may fall; If the latter, then I further
conclude, that if there be any such laying on of hands as the Doctor supposes;
but proves not (though our brethren unwarily say that he does) yet it cannot be
that which is mentioned, He^. 6. 2. for the reasons aforesaid. As also, for
that it would follow from this conceit, that one and the same person, must have
hands imposed on him 70 times and seven, if he fall so often after his Baptism,
and require the indulgence of reconciliation.

I doubt not, but that our dissenting Brethren would easily grant, that the
laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is the very same that is mentioned, Acts 8. Acts
19. provided we did not urge the continuance of the practice in the Church of
God. But then I would know, how we can rightly own that principle, if we
destroy the practick part? And here let me seriously ask our Brethren, what
manner of instruction they give young Disciples, concerning this matter? or how
they principle them in it, or build them upon it? Their conscience is witness,
(I speak what I know, for I also was as they are) that they either wholly pass
by that principle in silence, not instructing them at all concerning it; or
else, if any thing be said about it; it is rather to make the matter doubtful,
than to clear their understandings in it. And indeed it is impossible they
should do otherwise (as the case stands) for seeing they know not what it is,
are therefore such (I speak it confidently, yet I trust humbly) as
(notwithstanding their largeness in the knowledge of many things) have need to
be taught this principle of the Oracles of God. Let it not offend them, though
I plainly tell them, that in this point of Faith, they are too much like the
Athenians in another case, for as they by their inscription to the unknown God,
declared plainly, that they ignorantly worshipped him whom they know not; Even
so our Brethren, whiles they grant (and all men must grant) laying on of Hands,
Heb. 6. 2. to be a principle of Christ's doctrine, and yet cannot determine what
laying on of Hands that is; they do little less than subscribe, to the UNKNOWN
PRINCIPLE; or the VNKOWN PART OF THE FOUNDATION. If otherwise, let them
determine positively concerning this principle, what it is; and let their
diligence appear, in teaching it; together with the rest of the principles:
which yet (to use their own dialect) I despair ever to see them perform either
the one, or the other; at least, so long as they carry themselves toward those
who show them that which they so ignorantly pretend to own, so much like the
Athenians, as to account of those to be setters forth of strange Principles, as
they accounted Paul, a letter forth of strange gods. And though you (as they)
seem to be very desirous to hear what in this case we have to say; yet when we
have told you the truth, then, as they thought it a thing incredible, that God
should raise the dead; so you think it incredible, that we should receive any
blessing, in the way of prayer with the laying on of Hands; as evidently
appears by your demand, in these words.

How does your practice of laying on of hands, agree with theirs, (meaning the
Apostles) Acts 8. Acts 19. having no such blessing to communicate, as they had?

In which demand, you seem to lie under two very great mistakes; as first, that
the Apostles had the blessing of the gifts of the Spirit, to communicate to
others; as if, they could give the gift of prophecy, tongues, miracle, etc!
Secondly, that on whomsoever they laid their hands, the same received such a
blessing; to wit, the miraculous gifts of the Spirit. Which blind conceits you
never learned of Simon Peter, for they are the errors of Simon Magus, Acts 8.
Whose blindness was rebuked by Peter, affirming, that that blessing was the
gift of God. Yea, it is written, and the Scripture cannot be broken, that
every-good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights, etc. Yea the Spirit it self is free, blowing where it
lists, and is therefore not to be communicated by any man whatsoever. We
conclude therefore, that the Apostles had no blessing to communicate to those,
on whom they laid their hands; but could only beg it at the hands of God, as
the very words of the Text does show, Acts 8. They prayed for them that they
might receive the Holy Ghost, not that they might receive the gift of tongues,
miracles, etc. but only that they might receive the Holy Ghost. From the Text
thus considered, I argue; He did communicate the blessing only, to whom the
prayer was made for it. But the prayer was only made to God, therefore he only
did communicate the blessing. Again, They that beg a blessing for themselves,
or for others, do not communicate that blessing to themselves, or to others;
But, the Apostles did only beg the blessing of the Spirit, etc. therefore they
did not communicate it, etc.

Let it further be considered, that if that which they ask be obtainable, and
obtained by those that now wait upon God in prayer, with the laying on of
Hands, then our practice does agree very well with theirs; now what did they
ask? The gift of tongues? etc. No, they only asked the Holy Ghost, and surely
the Holy Ghost is now attainable and attained, even there, where tongues are
not attained; Otherwise it will follow, that the greater part of the Saints in
the primitive times, as well as the Saints in these days, have not received
the Holy Ghost; which is not only foolish, but very pernicious to imagine. For
Acts 13. 32. its said, the Disciples were filled with ^oy, and with the Holy
Ghost; and the Church is exhorted to be filled with the Spirit. All which may
be attained to now, although the miraculous gifts of the Spirit be not
attained, nor indeed are they necessary in order thereunto; as the places last
quoted do show.

Now that there is an agreement between the laying on of hands, Acts 8. Acts
19. Heb. 6. 2. and that which we practice, will further appear by this
parallel: The Apostles performed laying on of Hands, with prayer to the Lord,
and so do we; They performed this service on Disciples, as such, whether male
or female, and so do we; It was practiced by them in order to the receiving the
Holy Ghost, and so it is by us; They placed laying on of Hands, in the fourth
place of Christian principles, and so do we; They asked not Tongues, and
Miraculous gifts, no more do we: The effects of that service depended not on
them, no more it does on us; But that was according to the will of the Father
then, and so it is to us.

Justly might we return our Brethrens demand upon themselves, in their
practices of prayer and preaching, when we consider how God gave the Spirit in
the likeness of fiery tongues, to the hundred and twenty Disciples, who prayed
with one accord, in one place: The like to which effect, never followed the
most serious prayer, that ever proceeded from our Brethren. Must we then
conclude, that there is no agreement between their prayer, and the prayer of
the Church in those days? This is the way to make void the the ways of God,
unless he give us the like effect at all times, which he ever gave to any, at
any time. The like may be said of preaching; For when Peter preached, Acts 10.
the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the word, so as that they spoke with
tongues. Would it not be absurd now to say, that Peter did communicate the
blessing of tongues here? And thence to conclude, that none may preach unless
they have the blessing of tongues to communicate to those to whom they preach.

Nor may we say, that the like effect did always follow the preaching of Peter
himself; no nor his laying on of Hands neither. For there is no mention that
those Disciples at Samaria received the gift of tongues; but only that they
reeeived the Holy Ghost: For we have showed, that the Holy Ghost may be
received so, as that persons may be known, and said by others to be full of the
Holy Ghost, and yet the miraculous gifts of the Spirit may be absent. Nor is it
to be doubted, but that Simon Magus had hands imposed on him, in common with
the rest, since he was a Believer, and Baptized, and showed as much zeal as the
rest (if not more) for its said he continued with Philip, and wondered,
beholding the miracles which were done, etc. Nor was the deceit of his heart
perceived, till after the service of laying on of Hands was performed, Acts 8.
And yet certainly his receivings in respect of Spiritual blessings, was not so
great, but that it may be safely presumed, that many Christians in these days,
do receive the Holy Ghost as much as Simon M^gus did. And though Peter said to
him, thou have no part or lot in this matter, yet the words [this matter]
cannot refer to Simons desire of subjection to laying on of Hands; but to his
ambitious and avaritious desire, to be a Minister to dispense that ordinance to
others, for carnal advantage.

And whereas it is much doubted, whether laying on of Hands, was ever taught or
commanded by authority from heaven, me thinks this should not be hard to be
understood. Unless we can be so void of reason, as to dream that Peter and
John, when they came among the Disciples, went preposterously, from person to
person, praying and putting their hands upon them, and that without telling
them what they meant by it. Which to do* were enough to amaze the Spectators,
and i^ contrary to the glory and gravity of Gospel performances; which as they
must be acts (o^ subjections) of Faith, if they do please God so the faith of
such acts (or subjections) mus^ come by hearing, with understanding wha^ they
must do, or to what they must submit, and to what end. And this hearing must be
from the Word of God, else there i^ no ground for Faith, or practice in matter
of Religion, so as to please God. But Go^ was well pleased with the Apostles
acting, an^ the Samaritans submission, in the case of prayer with laying on of
Hands, and bore witness from heaven that he approved it; Therefore their
obedience was of Faith; Therefore they heard with understanding, that what they
did was their duty; and therefore the Lord taught them both concerning the
duty, and the end thereof.

That the Apostles should practice with such frequency, this service of prayer
with the laying on of Hands, upon Disciples generally; That it should be
recorded among the chief of their Acts, in promoting the Gospel, and settling of
Churches, that it should be placed among the principles of Religion, and all
this without authority from heaven, is unworthy the followers of Christ or his
Apostles to imagine.

But forasmuch as diverse have labored to satisfy the contrary minded in this
point, whose works are extant and unanswered, I shall not insist farther; save
that I do briefly show that our Brethren, are not consistent with themselves in
this particular. For they do that themselves, which they will not allow
themselves to do; for they practice laying on of Hands on Officers, for which
there is as little by way of precept as for the laying Hands on Disciples, or
rather less. For since they do now acquit that Text, 1 Timothy 5. 22. as not
having any thing to do with the business of Ordination; and to strengthen a
contrary interpretation, do bring the Suffrages of Dr. Hammond, Victor,
Cyprian, and the Council of Carthage; sure I am they have no Text which has so
much as the face of a precept [I mean in so many words] for laying hands upon
Officers; although it is beyond doubt with me, that that way was ordained of
God, to depute his servants in the Ministry, to their works respectively;
wherefore I will conclude this discourse, with this Enthememe.

There is sufficient ground in Scripture for laying on of Hands on Officers in
the Church. Ergo, there is sufficient ground in Scripture for laying hands on
Members of the Church. And whereas our Brethren do make a show (by their
actions out of some ancient Authors, as well as Modern) as if Antiquity were on
their part in this Controversy; I will therefore put in something by way of
evidence to the contrary, as I find them; partly from the Authors themselves,
and partly from such as have gathered certain sentences out of the works of the
Ancients concerning this matter.

Tertul. de resur. c. 8.
Tertullian to this effect; That like as in Baptism the flesh is washed, that
the soul may be made clean; so in laying on of Hands the flesh is overshadowed,
that the soul may be illuminated by the Holy Spirit.

In the Constitutions of Clemens, there is said to be this passage, viz. We
must all hasten to be born again to God (meaning by Baptism) and at length to
be signed by the Bishop, that is, to receive the seven fold grace of the
Spirit, otherwise a person cannot perfectly be a Christian, if carelessly and
willingly (and not of necessity) he remain without it.

Cip. ep. ad Jubi.
Cyprian, speaking of the Samaritans receiving the Holy Ghost, by laying on of
Hands; says -- -- Which also is done with us, that they which are baptized in
the Church, must be presented to those who are set over the Church, that by
prayer and laying on of Hands, may obtain the Holy Ghost.

Jerome. ad Lucif.
Jerome (according to Andreas Willet) touching laying on of Hands, has these
words; viz. It has ever been the Custom of the Church.

Eusebius. l. 6. ^. 42.
Eusebius, has a passage concerning Novatus (who lived about the middle of the
third Century) how he slighted the imposition of Hands; these are his words
(after mention made of his being baptized, he says) He obtained not -- -- that
which he should have done, according to the Canon (or rule) of the Church; to
wit, Confirmation by the hands of the Bishop. Insomuch then he obtained not
that, how came he by the Holy Ghost? See also to the same effect, the seventh
book of Eusebius, c. 2.

For Modern Writers, Erasmus (in my opinion) as he is most clear without
mixture in most of his Expositions, and particularly in this point he is most
clear.

These are his words upon the principles, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Erasm. paraph. in Heb. 6. 2.
The first degree unto Christianity, is to be repentant of our former life, and
to forsake sin; Next of all it is required, that we be taught that true
innocence, and soul-health, is to be hoped for of God: Then forthwith, that we
be purged by Holy Baptism, from the filthiness of our sins, and rest^red again
to the state of innocence: then that we receive the Holy Ghost, by laying on of
Hands; and believe the resurrection of the dead to come; and also that last
judgment, that shall award some to eternal felicity, and other some, to
everlasting pains and damnation.

Diodate Annot. on Heb. 6. 2.
Diodate has these words; Laying on of Hands, was a Ceremony joined to
Baptism, for a sign of Blessing and Consecration to God. And he calls these
principles, the first grounds of Christian Catechism, and the heads of
Christian Doctrine.

Tindale in 2 Timothy 1* 6.
As in Baptism, the outward Ministry or mystical washing does regenerate, wash
away sins, cleanse and purge us from our filthiness; so does the imsition or
Laying on of Hands, give us the gift of the Holy Ghost: but the outward and
mystical washing, does only represent unto us, that in Christ's Blood our sins
are clean washed away, etc.

From these Testimonies it appears, that what the Churches of Christ now
contend for, touching the practice, and the subjects, and the end of prayer,
with Laying on of Hands, is no novel thing; but as the institution of that
Ordinance is found in Holy Writ (as we have showed) so it has continued in use
as necessary, in place, the next to holy Baptism, among Christians generally.

AN APPENDIX.
MEeting lately with a very worthy Brother, at East Haddon in the County of
Northampton; he did much importune me, to admit of a short dispute with him
about the principle under consideration; to whom I consent, and he laid down
this Assertion.

That Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is not a foundation Principle, nor a
practical Duty.

Against which I laid down this Position:

VIZ.

Laying on of Hands Heb. 6. 2. is a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, to be
practiced by his people, and a part of the Foundation there mentioned:

Which my Opposite did wholly deny.

It was argued that I should be Opponent, whereupon I offered this Argument.

Arg. 1.
Opponent. The word Principles, Heb. 6. 1. being of the plural number, is
referred to all these particulars; namely, Repentance, Faith, Baptisms, Laying
on of Hands, the Resurrection of the dead, and the Eternal judgment.

Ergo, Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is a principle of the doctrine of Christ.


Respondent. You ought not to prove it a Principle by that Text.


Opponent. My position is not the Text, therefore I may prove it by this Text.


Respondent. The Text about which we d^ffer will not prove it.


Opponent. If any Scripture will prove it, it is sufficient; and therefore
answer to the Argument. Either distinguish, or deny the Antecedent or
consequence.


Respondent. I will prove that Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. is no foundation
principle, thus. --


Opponent. Sir, you would by no means be Opponent, when I desired you to make
good your Assertion; but complained, as if I put you upon that which was not
your part: Why then do you now refuse to answer, and put your self into the
place of the Opponent, which you know is contrary to rule, since I am now to
prove.


Respondent. Well, I answer by denying the consequence.


Opponnent. I desire to know whether you grant the Antecedent, for your denial
of the Consequence only, supposes that you grant the Antecedent.


Respondent. I do grant your Antecedent.


Opponent. Then take notice that you grant the first branch of my Position,
which you denied [saying, I deny it all] for that the word principles, Heb. 6.
1. refer to all the particulars aforesaid, then to Laying on of Hands; and so
the Consequence will follow. Thus you grant as much as I can desire.


Respondent. I will prove --


Opponent. Brother, you ought not to prove till you be Opponent, this you know
better than I do. Therefore either recall your answer to the Antecedent, or
confess your error in denying the first branch of my position.


Respondent. Well, for Argument sake, I grant an error in matter of form.


Opponent. No Brother, your error is an error of judgment. First, to deny
Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. to be a principle of the Doctrine of Christ, and
then to grant it; in one of these you must needs err in judgment.


Here my Respondent was not willing to acknowledge an error in judgment. And
therefore (as also for diverse other pressing occasions that was to be
considered, and the time but short) I put a period to the dispute.

And because I had many other things to say, which time would not then permit
to be spoken, I will now offer them to consideration; and that as for other
causes, so chiefly for that I hope it may tend to the satisfaction of my
honored Brother, and others that are under the same mistake.

Argument 2.
Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is a Principle of the Oracles of God.

Ergo, Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is a Principle of the doctrine of Christ.

The Antecedent is manifest, because the same particulars which is called the
principles of Christ's doctrine, Heb. 6. is called the principles of the Oracles
of God, Heb. 5. 12. which is evident; Because as the principles of Gods
Oracles, He^. 5. 12. were the things which the Hebrew Church ought not to have
any need to be taught again; so the principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb.
6. 1, 2. are the things which (as a foundation) among them, ought not to need
any laying again.

Argument 3.
All those particulars, which in Heb. 6. 1, 2. the Apostle says he would
intermit, and so go on to perfection, are the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ:

But Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is one of the particulars, which the
Apost^e said, Heb. 6. 1. that he would intermit.

Ergo, Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ.

I take this Argument to be irrefragable, therefore I proceed to the second
branch of the position, which is; That laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. ought to
be practiced by the people of God.

But first must explicate the words [Laying on of Hands] which in the
understanding of any considering man, must needs signify an Act, and therefore
cannot be restrained to the passive; for as the subject on whom Hands is laid,
is passive as to the Act, (but not in faith) so the party imposing of Hands is
active. And evident it is, that the word [Principle] Heb. 6. 1. refers to the
Act expressly, and to the passive implicitly, as any considering man may
understand: Whence I argue,

Argument 1.

Seeing the Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. as it is a Principle (or Doctrine of
Christ (if you please) is not passive only, but active als^. It must needs be
pract^sed, either by the servants of Christ, or the servants of Satan;

But Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. as it is a principle of the doctrine of
Christ, is not to be practiced by the servants of Satan:

Ergo, Laying on of Hands, as it is a principle of the doctrine of Christ, is
to be practiced by the servants of Christ.

The Major is plain. The Minor surely will not be denied. For who will presume
to say, that the principles of Christ's doctrine (as such) are to be practiced
by the servants of Satan. Seeing it is Christians (not the devils Vassals) who
as they are once to lay it, so are not to lay again the Foundation. As for
wicked men, they will persecute the Saints again and again, and so Christians
must have the hands of wicked men laid on them again and again; and that when
they are gone on to perfection, as well as when they begin their profession, so
then this Laying on of Hands, He^. 6. being but once to be laid, cannot be that
which the wicked do impose; since its certain as they do it often, so sure it
is, they ought not to do it so much as once. Again, The laying on of Hands by
the wicked, to per^^cute the Saints, is the doctrine of the Devil. Ergo, no
principle of the Doctrine of Christ. Ergo, Not that laying on of Hands
mentioned, Heb. 6. 2.

Argument 2.

Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. was held and practiced by the primitive Church,
as a principle of Christ's Doctrine;

Ergo, It ought to be held and practiced as a principle of Christ's Doctrine
now, by the subsequent Churches.

The Antecedent is proved above, therefore the consequence is indubitable;
which yet I may demonstrate thus.

Argument 3.

None of the principles of Christ's Doctrine (which were practical) are
abolished, no more then those which are not practical.

Ergo, Laying on of Hands as a practical principle, Heb. 6. 2. ought now to be
practiced by the servants of Christ.

The Antecedent cannot be denied, without manifest danger to all the principles
of Christ's Doctrine; for if one be abolished, then why not the rest? So then
the consequence must not be denied.

The third branch of my position proved, Viz. That the Laying on of Hands, Heb.
6. 2. is a part of the foundation there mentioned.

But first, for explication of the word [Foundation] it is to be considered;
That when it is applied to Christianity; or the Church of God; It may be
considered first originally, and in the main, and so Christ our Lord is only
the foundation. Or secondly, demonstratively, or in the mean; and so his
doctrine may be said to be the foundation, by an usual manner of speech, when
the thing containing or holding forth is taken for the thing contained or held
forth. For, whatsoever Christ is in himself, certain it is, he is not a
foundation TO US. But as he is held forth in his doctrine, Heb. 6. 1, 2, etc.
Hence I argue,

Argument 1.

The word Foundation, Heb. 6. 1. cannot be referred to Christ, as the foundation
of his Church, originally, or in the main, or in the highest or most sublime
consideration.

Ergo, The word [Foundation] is referred to the doctrine of Christ, in the
first, or most easy demonstration; to wit, the first rudiments, or principles
of Religion; even such as Babes in Christ may know them.

The Antecedent is true, otherwise what shall we think of Paul. Would he not
teach the Christians concerning the knowledge of Christ in the more sublime
points of Christianity? Surely he professes to do this, at the time he wrote to
them; and indeed, how else could he lead them on to perfection? Heb. 5. 11. and
6. 3. So that our consequence is very rational.

Argument 2.

The word Foundation, Heb. 6. 1. is comprehensive of all these particulars, to
wit, Faith, Repentance, etc.

Ergo, the word Foundation, Heb. 6. 1. is comprehensive of Laying on of Hands,
Heb. 6. 2. as well as any of the rest.

That the Antecedent is true, may in part be perceived by the Searchers
themselves; For they were more rational than to deny, the word Foundation to be
meant, of this or that particular only; and grant it to be meant of the rest.
Therefore they would have none of the said particulars to be understood by, or
comprehended in the word Foundation, but restrain it only to Christ; which yet
is contrary to their own opinion, since they have since granted, Laying on of
Hands, Heb 6. 2. to be a part of the Foundation.

The consequence is good, because no reason can be assigned, why the doctrine
of Baptism should be a part of the foundation there meant, rather than the
promise of the Holy Spirit, with the way of God to seek for it.

Argument 3.

The Apostle in Heb. 6. 12. describes the foundation in its several parts.

But it is irrational in such a description, to intermix two purticulars in the
midst of four, the two first, and two last, being Fundamental, an^ the two
middlemost Circumstantial (or what els^ would you have them.) And yet give us
no intimation of any such unsuitable commixtion.

Ergo, Laying on of Hands is one part of the Foundation, which is mentioned,
Heb. 6. 1, 2.

T. G.

The Second part. Of the Constitution of a true CHURCH.
NEither are the demands of our Brethren, about what truths, the knowledge
whereof are necessary to the Constitution of a true Church, so difficult; but
that we shall give them a direct answer, at least to a larger degree, than what
they in that case have assigned; for they only set down Faith, Repentance and
Baptism, with a holy life, etc. omitting not only the fourth principle of
Christ's Doctrine, (though they confess laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. to be a
part of the foundation) but also they omit the Belief of the Resurrection, and
the eternal Judgment. If it should be said that they comprehend the two last
principles in that of Faith toward God, we must tell them they had better by
far have expressed them; for certainly in this case we cannot be too express,
if we express nothing but the truth. But to be plain, it is justly suspected
that they do not make the Knowledge or Belief of the Resurrection and eternal
judgment necessary to the Essence of a true Church; for if they had, they would
some where or other have asserted these truths to be necessary in that behalf;
which they have not done, but rather argued to the contrary, whiles they reason
from the state of the Church before Christ's Ascension to the state of the
Church after it, as we shall see more anon.

These things premised, I answer directly to their demands, (in this case) That
the belief and practice (so far as they are practical) of all these principles
or truths, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Are necessary to the right or perfect Constitution of
a true Church, which I thus demonstrate.

All the first principles of Gods Oracles (from the time they were in being)
are necessary to be known, believed, etc. in the Constitution of a true Church:
Ergo, all those trutbs, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Are necessary to be known, believed, etc.
in the constitution of a true Church.

The Antecedent I prove, because, first principles are either necessary in the
constitution of a true Church, or not at all. But first principles are
necessary; Ergo, they are necessary in the constitution of a true Church. This
will yet further appear, by considering every principle apart after this manner.

1. If Repentance from dead works be not necessary to the constitution or
beginning of a true Church, no man can show a reason why it should be necessary
at all.

2. If Faith toward God be not necessary to the constitution of a true Church,
then not at all.

3. If Baptisms be not necessary to be taught, etc. in the constitution of a
true Church, then not at all.

4. If Laying on of Hands for the promised and Sealing Spirit be not necessary
in the constitution of a true Church, then not necessary at all.

5,6. If the Knowledge that the dead shall rise again and be judged, be not
necessary in the constitution of a true Church, then not necessary at all. And
therefore I argue further.

Milk is necessary for Babes, or mankind in his first estate; Ergo, all th^se
principles, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Are necessary to Churches in their beginning, or
constitution. The antecedent is evident by sense, the consequence is true,
because all the principles, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Are called Milk, Heb. 5. 12. And that
which pertains to Babes in Christ, and consequently to the constitution of
Churches.

Again, If the Principles of Religion be not to be taught in the beginning of
our Christian State, no man can tell the time when these things ought to be
taught. For pass but the time of the beginning, Plantation, or founding of
Churches, and let our Brethren resolve us concerning the proper time to begin
to teach the Principles of Religion, and particularly, that principle of Laying
on of Hands? Mean while we conclude, that the proper time to instruct Men
concerning the promise of the Spirit, and consequently touching the means to
obtain it, is at or about the time of their beginning their Christian course,
or being made the Members of Christ's Body, because every Member of that body
ought to be vivified by that one Spirit, which God has promised to them that
obey him.

Again, The whole foundation is necessary to the constitution of a true Church;
Ergo, all the principles, Heb 6. are necessary to the constitution of a true
Church.

The Anteoedent will never be denied by any wise builder, for they know the
Superst^ucture is not like to be secure, if the Foundation be defective The
consequence is good, because every principle, Heb. 6. is a part of the
Foundation, and so Laying on of Hands among the rest, as is granted on all
sides.

Nor will our Brethrens demands grounded on the state of the Church before the
Ascension of our Lord, prejudice ought that we have said, seeing it is evident,
that they were not only ignorant of the promise of the Spirit, and by what
means it should be obtained, but they were plainly ignorant that Christ must
die for the sins of men, and rise again for their justification, as appears
Luke 24. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And he [that is Jesus] said unto
them [that is his Disciples] what things? And they said unto him concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet mighty indeed, and word before God, and
all the people. And the chief Priests and how our Rulers delivered him to be
condemned to death, and have crucified him; But we TRUSTED that it had been he
that should have delivered Israel. And beside all this, to day is the third day
since these things were done; yea, and certain women also of our own company,
made us astonished, which were early at the Sepulcher, and when they found not
his Body, they came, saying that they had also sein a Vision of Angels, which
said That he was alive. And certain that was with us went to the Sepulcher, and
found it even as the women had said, but him they saw not; Then he said [that
is Jesus] unto them, [that is his Disciples] O fools, and slow of heart, to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered
these things.

Hence these three things are evident. 1. That Christ's Disciples were ignorant
that he should work man's deliverance by dying for them. 2. That he should
overcome death by rising again from the dead. 3. That Christ both reproves
their ignorance, and instructs them in the knowledge of the Scriptures touching
these principles.

Now let us see what our Brethren have gained by quering from the state of the
Church before, to the state of the Church after the Ascension of our Lord;
surely not an hairs-breadth of proof, that Laying on of Hands should be
dispensed with in the perfect constitution of a true Church, any more than that
the knowledge of Christ's dying for our sins, and rising again for our
justification, may be dispensed with in like manner.

But howsoever it was the pleasure of God to wink at the days of this
ignorance, yet surely we know that men are not now under the promise of
salvation, unless they confess with the mouth the Lord Jesus [that is, not to
cry Lord Lord only, but acknowledge him their Lord purchaser, and their Lord
commander] and shall believe in their heart that God has raised him from the
dead: whence we conclude, if they be not under the promise of salvation, they
are very unfit for Church Communion.

And here we will take notice of your demand, Where the Apostles Laid Hands
upon any after they had received the Holy Ghost?

The ground of this demand seems to be corrupt in two respects; first, in that
it supposes, that if the end of an Ordinance be obtained, the Ordinance
cease. The contrary to which is evident in the case of Baptism, Acts 10. 47,
48. For Baptism in the ordinary way of Gods communicating the graces of the
Gospel is antecedent to the reception thereof, and is propounded as a means
wherein not only the Remission of our sins shall be granted to us, but as a
condition whereupon we shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts. 2. 38.
yet we know the Spirit was (once at least) given, and received before Baptism
was dispensed, yea those persons had the chief end of Baptism; for God that
knew their hearts did now evidence the Remission of their sins, purifyng their
hearts by Faith, Acts 11. yet did not all this in the least make void that
solemn Ordinance, the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins, which was
foreordained to signify and Sacramentally to confer the grace of the pardon
of sin, and the inward washing of the Conscience by Faith in the blood of Jesus
Christ. If then the end of an Ordinance being obtained, does not make void the
practick part (during the time that the Church is under Ordinances) then who
can forbid prayer with the Imposition of Hands, for the gift of the promised
Spirit, even for those that have received a measure thereof already, seeing
none will say (I trust) that they have received so much, but that they are
capable of receiving more.

Again, it is the will of God that there should be no Schism in the body, nor
confusion in the Doctrine or practice of his holy things, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 16
17. 1 Cor. 14 33. And therefore has not ordained a divided or confused order
in the constitution of his Churches, which yet cannot be avoided, if once it be
allowed that part of a Congregation (under a pretense that they have the Spirit
or gift of the Holy Ghost already) must be admitted to all manner of
privileges in the Church, without any regard had to an Ordinance, or principle
of the Gospel, without the observation whereof, the other part cannot arrive at
the privilege of Communion in the same body, without being guilty of the
breach of order. A weak sight may perceive whither such a conceit would lead us
at last, even into that Wilderness whither many are gone, who (forsooth)
because they have the kernel, to wit, the Spirit, they have no need of the
shell, to wit, the Ordinance of God [as if that Spirit which leads men into
disobedience were the Holy Ghost] till at length they have so much Spirit, that
the knowledge of Christ crucified without the gates of Jerusalem, is of as
little esteem with them as his Ordinances.

The other corrupt ground of this demand seems to be an over-weaning conceit of
present receivings, and has too much of that Language, What pr^fit shall we
have if we pray unto him? And seems to border much upon their apprehensions,
who concerning Holy Baptism do thus speak, I am as well as Water can make me.
Not considering that the way of God is strength to the upright; and that G^d
never said to his people seek (...) me in vain. The ground therefore of this
demand being thus corrupt, we shall leave it without further Answer.

We shall seriously consider the most impor^ant pinch of a great part of our
Brethrens demands; and that is, whether they ought not to be steemed a true
Church, they being under the pre^^ssion of Faith, Repentance, and Baptism,
refol^ing to believe and do further what they shall from ^^me to time
understand to be according to the will ^ Go^?

These latter words (I confess) do make a fair show, yet are as little
satisfactory to us with respect to the truth under consideration, as the like
resolution would be to them, from such persons of other persuasions as should
desire Communion with them, only desiring to be born with, in the case of Holy
Baptism, till they see it to be their duty; though in the mean time, they
frequently dispute and write against it, and do more than any other Adversaries
whatsoever, to weaken the Hands of many Christians, who religiously observe it,
as necessary to the perfect constitution of the Church of Christ. I say, like
as this kind of resolution, would little comfort our Brethren, so does the
other as little comfort us, till we see them in good earnest more solicitous
for the knowledge of the truth which they see not, than hitherto (or at least
than by this their search) they have appeared to be. But notwithstanding this,
and much more of like nature which might be said, I shall answer this demand
with all integrity and ingenuity: And first Negatively.

That those baptized Christians who reject prayer with the Laying on of Hands,
for the Spirit o^ promise, has a Church State perfect in principles and
orderly in constitution, according to He^. 6. 1, 2. [which I take to be a
platform for the constitution of Churches, if there be one in all the New
Testament] I say, that our Brethren has such a constitution, or Church State I
must plainly deny, and for the grounds of this denial I dare refer my self (if
not to the Consciences of our differing Brethren yet) to the Reasons and
Scripture-evidences preceding: But Secondly,

That our Brethren have a Church State in some good measure according to truth;
I must and do cheerfully grant, like as I must grant him to be a man in respect
of the genus, who wants an hand, or foot; as also in respect of that measure of
Form and proportion which he holds with other men, and yet deny the same person
to be a man in respect of the species or parts, which are necessary to the
perfect Essence, composition and Form of a man. Or as I may call an Edifice by
the name of an house, though it want not only much of its compleatness in
respect of the Superstructure (as God knows all Churches do) but also though it
be somway defective, by reason of the absence of some material part of the
Foundation, which defect no Churches (but by reason of their wilful want) need
to have; for though it is certainly true, that we cannot do the things which we
would, in going on to perfection (at least according to the highest import of
that expression) by reason of the manifold obstructions within and without, yet
doubtless we may learn all the Rudiments or first principles of Christianity,
maugre the opposition of Satan and all his Auxiliaries; otherwise it will
follow that we cannot exceed the stature of Babes in Christ.

And that we may improve our Simile (by which we have explained our selves in
Answer to the most important of our Brethrens demands) for the defense of the
truth under debate. Let it be considered, that look how far forth such a
necessary Member as the Hand, etc. does conduce, not only to the well-being,
but even to the very being of the body Natural, so far doubtless the least
Foundation principle of Christianity, conduces not only to the well-being, but
to the very being of the Church of Christ; and consequently as he that takes a
Member from the body Natural (be it Hand or other Member) detracteth somewhat
from the being of such a body, even so, he that takes away from the principles
or Foundation of Christianity, does entrench upon the being of the body
Mystical.

Now, that the Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is such a principle as is a part
of the Foundation, etc. is granted by our Brethren (as we have heard) and
therefore we do with good right stand for it, as necessary even to the Essence
of a Church, in such sort as we have even now declared. And, that that very
Laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 1, 2. is that which we hold it to be, and
^ccordingly do practice, we trust is sufficiently loved before, and that as by
other Arguments, so also by this; namely, because no other Lay^ng on of Hands
practiced by our Brethren, or any body else, can with any show of Truth or
Reason be called the fourth principle of Christ's Doctrine, or Milk for Babes in
Christ.

Our Brethren do seem to be very sensible ^ow that the removal or extirpation
of any other of the principles, Heb. 6. would leave (if ^ot mortality yet) a
dangerous wound or grie^ous maime in the Body of Religion; and therefore could
they but once humbly consider, ^hey would certainly see that their rooting out
^he fourth principle, is very injurious to the Body of that Doctrine contained
in those prin^iples, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Were our Brethren only wanting in respect ^f the truth we plead for, the case
were the more tolerable; but now, together with their ^eing wanting, they are
become the enemies, and greatest opposers of it. It is certainly (O ^e
Searchers) your opposition to the truth which we profess, which is, and ever
was the CHIEF cause of our divisions, as is evident by what is to be seen in
several Congregations, where, they being imbodyed before they saw this truth,
yet abstaining from opposition an^ contradiction, have very much Christian
Communion, though they d^^^er in their apprehe^sions about the point depending.

It is our Saviors rule, He that is not against (...) is on our part; whence
it will follow, that he is n^ on our part who is against us: But then (our
Br^thren) are the men (and in a manner the on^ men) which are against us in
this point ^ Faith; And this is it which has made tw^ parties, where indeed
there should have be^^ but one.

You see then Brethren, that we lay t^^ ground of our Non-communion with yo^
more upon your opposing the truth we hold, tha^ upon your non-submission to it.
Yea beshre^ your late opposition discovered in your late u^seasonable and
partial search: for had it n^ been for that, we had gained some grou^^ (through
the help of God) of our long dissen^^ons and unhappy distractions.

Had you (or at least many of you) carry^^ it humbly and peaceably as men
desirous know the truth, it may be easy for you know how dear you had been to
us, when y^^ consider how much it was upon our hearts, embrace you in as large
a degree of Communion we could possible, without violation of our principle^
merely upon consideration of your (as (...) thought) very Christian-like offers
in order to peace, viz. That you would not only permit, but desire us to preach
up the principle under consideration in your Congregations, but also that you
would cease your opposition against it. And though it is true, our endeavors
for peace went slowly on (you know the cause) yet you ought to have had
patience, for things which are carried on with least violence, are commonly
most permanent.

And here I should have given the Reader no further trouble about this
particular, but that the Searchers are pleased to upbraid, and very strangely
to reflect dishonor upon some among us, and upon us all for their sakes, as if
we made not only many more Fundamentals and Essentials to Communion, then ever
God made; but that we are so eagerly set upon making every thing fundamental,
as that every circumstantial thing is by us ready to be received into the
adoption of Fundamentals.

But, what the Searchers should mean to suggest by their demands, as if we made
mixed Marriages; The ^ating of blood and things strangled: matters of Apparel;
and the taking an Oath to end strife, the Essentials and Fundamentals of
Churches, I cannot so much as imagine, unless it be to make themselves (as well
as their Brethren ridiculous in the eyes of their Adversaries. However a
necessity lies upon us to give the Reader not only a true account of the
received Doctrine of the Church touching these matters, but also the grounds or
reasons thereof; least otherwise being prejudiced with their strange
reflections, their souls should be ensnared in these enormities.

And first concerning mixed Marriages, thus we teach, That it is unlawful (by
the positive (...) of God) for those that are Members of the Visibl^ Church of
God, to Marry with th^se that are no^ of that body. And for this we have the
consent o^ Holy Scripture, declaring the will of God here in, ever since he
chose a people out of the fal^ race of Adam to be his Church. As appears by his
revengeful stroke on those his Sons, who i^ the days of Noah took unto
themselves Wives o^ those who were only the Daughters of men; bu^ not such as
were born from above. Genesis 6* 2, 6, 7. To which we will add our Sav^ours
premonition and prediction, that the si^ of the last days will be like their's
in the days o^ Noah, Luke* 17. 27, to 30. and particularly i^ the case of
Marriage; for it cannot be that ou^ Savior in that place should be opposite t^
Marriage, a^ it is instituted of God for man use, no more than he is against
eating an^ drinking lawfully, but it is the sins of me^ committed in these
actions respectively, which he disalloweth.

How much the Lord disallowed such Marriages in the time of the Law is evident,
Exodus 34. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 7* 3. 1 King. 11. 1, 2. Neh. 13. And that
the same transgression in the time of the Gospel ought to be avoided, cannot be
denied, 1 Cor. 7. 39. and 10. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 14.

And that the nature of the sin committed by persons so unlawfully coupled is a
carnal pollu^^on (to say no more) cannot be withstood, but by such as trust
more to their own Arguments then to the Scripture, seeing the Law which forbids
Members of the Church to marry with those that are not, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. is
interpreted of the very act, 1 King. 11. 1, 2. Thou shall not (...) in unto
them, etc. and for further Light in this matter, read and consider these
Scriptures, Act. 15. 29. Mal. 2. 11, 12. Rev. 2. 14.

As in this case the Scriptures are plain to him that is not perverse, so we
have the con^ent of the Generality of men professing Christianity, both ancient
and modern, to o^it the manifold testimonies that might be ^rought, I will only
set down two; The first ^aith thus.

Marriage is not only grounded on the Law of Nature and Nations, but also on
the Law of God; (...) it was instituted and commanded by God, and (...) by
Christ vindicated from abuses and corruptions. -- In which, regard must be had
to Religion, that Marriage be not made between those of different The opinion
of the University of Basil.
Religions. It is one thing to speak of Marriage already made; and of that
which is to be made; of the former the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7. But the latter
is most severely prohibited, Exodus 34. 12. etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Where a reason is
rendered taken from the danger of seducing, to which Paul's saying agrees, 2 Cor.
6. 14. Be not unequally yoked with the wicked, or bear not the strange yoke
with unbelievers. Sad examples we have of the events of such Marriages of the
first world, Genesis 6. Of Solomon, 1 King. 22. of Ahab, 1 King. 21. 15. of
Jehosaphat, 2 King. 8. Of Valence the Emperor, who by his Wife was seduced and
drawn to Arianism.

It is not lawful for Catholics to marry with Heretics or Infidels. Rhemists
Testament, in 2 Cor. 6. 14. Where they also refer to St. Jerome. contra The
opinion of the Rhem.
Jocinian lib. 1. and to the Council at ^^aodicea, cap. 10. 31.

Neither may it be inferred of these things which we have said that persons
thus transgressing, must put away their yoke-fellows, no, God forbid that any
should so imagine; for though it is true, God suffered that sin once to be so
severely punished, yet he has no where by any standing Law enjoined such a
penalty; but on the contrary, has permitted such Marriages to continue as have
been unlawfully made, as is evident in the case of Leah, who was fraudulently
given to Jacob, by which means Rachel the lawful Spouse was withheld from her
Husband.

Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall man be more Righteous then his
Maker, Job 4. 17.

Nothing can be said, why the Marriage of Leah to Jacob should stand, that will
not as well argue the continuance of the Marriages of such as err in the case
of their choice as aforesaid, the sin being rather greater in the one, than in
the other; for it was not lawful to marry two Sisters* especially not in the
lifetime of each other. There was also in this act the sin of Fornication or
Adultery. The Learned Protestants affirm the sin to be Adultery. See Dr. Willet
in his Hexapla in genesis upon this Text.

Again, Poligamy (or having more Wives than one) was neither according to the
Insti^ution of marriage, nor warranted by any positive Law of God, but is
rather against it. And had its rise (so far as the Scripture bears Record) from
Genesis 4. 19.
a wicked man, yet diverse such Marriages were permitted (when contracted)
though never commanded, and so never lawful by any appointment of God.

When the sin of marrying unlawfully was punished, by separating the persons so
coupled, the Children also was put away as well as the Wives, which howsoever
it might stand with the state of the Jewish Church (and perhaps was necessary
in respect of their Terrestrial Inheritances, and the policy of their Nation)
yet surely it would be great cruelty for men professing Christianity, to turn
their Wives and Children out of doors, who both by the Law of Nature, and
Nations have as clear a right to all Temporal or Domestical privileges now, as
the Husband himself in any Nation whatsoever.

Finally, since God has grievously punished this sin of marrying contrary to
his positive Laws in that case, provided for his peoples good, chiefly in
things pertaining to the worship and service of God, let all Christians
therefore stand in aw, and sin not, but commune with their own hearts in this
behalf, least they provoke the Lord to plead against them by his judgments, for
his eyes are upon the ways of men; to render to them the fruit of their doings.
Chiefly those, who sin presumptuously, for such do reproach the Lord, as it is
written Numb. 15 30, 31.

In the next place, on ching blood and things Genesis 9. 4.
strangled, we know the wisdom of God has forbidden the eating thereof to Noah
and his Sons for ever. And when men had generally forgotten the Lord, he
severed Abraham Lev. 17. 13, 14, 15.
and his seed to be his heritage, and gave them this Law to observe (among
others) which Law he has established in the Churches of the Gen^^les in those
right needful decrees, which does declare the repeal of the Cerimonial Law, and
gives continuance to what was generally necessary, upon the delivery whereof
Acts 15. 29.
the Churches were established in that Faith, by which a man is justified, and
not by the works of the Law.

True it is that which g^e^h into the man, defiles not a man, and consequently
blood does not defile any man by eating thereof. But disobedience which
proceeds from an unlawful desire to that which God has forbidden, and so
comes out of the man, that defiles a man; so then, not the fruit which Adam
did eat, but the sin which he committed defiled him, and the same will defile
his Posterity, if they covet and take the thing which God has forbidden.

The Doctrine of our Churches about Apparel is this, that the adorning of
Christians ought not to be that of plating the hair, wearing of Gold, nor
costly array, with Rings and toys, as the humor of fantastic persons in City
or Country commonly leads them. But that instead thereof, moderation, modesty,
and yet decency, according to the state and condition of persons respectively,
should be observed on all sides, that so Christians might be examples to
others, even in these matters. And what though some person or persons in the
Church be more than ordinary set against the vain fashions of our days, and
sometimes lets their zeal go a step too far, is this so offensive to our
Brethren, that they can no way bear this without such a public reprehension? I
fear in so doing they may have done the Church more disservice, then those whom
they inveigh against.

What the Searchers should mean about these matters being made the Ess^ntials
of Communion, I cannot imagine, unless they would have us to suffer men to sin
in these cases without being called upon to reform, and in case of obstinacy to
be withdrawn from by the Church, as disorderly persons, that they may learn to
be ashamed, (yet we mean not that they should be accounted as enemies, but
admonished as Brethren) and surely, if this be their meaning, that offenders in
these cases must be let alone in their sins; we should in so doing loose the
order, and in time the Essence of Churches. For suppose now a gallant of the
Times should desire to be Baptized, and to walk in Communion with the
Searchers, only he tells them they must give him leave to marry out of the
Church, and allow him the liberty to transgress the Apostolical decrees, in
eating blood and things strangled, and meats offered to Idols: and therewithal
that he may wear Gold, and tread the steps of the Gallants in matters of
Apparel, etc. Would the Searchers now admit such a person into their Communion?
if not, then they make these things as necessary to Church Communion as we do:
And certainly that which is ground sufficient to keep men out of the Church,
will justify a Church in withdrawing from such, if they refuse to reform.

To give evidence by Oath, to terminate strife among men, we have not one
Congregation in England (that I can hear of) does oppose it, (indeed some
particular persons are doubtful in that matter, because of our Saviors words,
Swear not at all) and therefore it was very unnecessarily put to public
observation, as an Essential of our Church Communion.

What the Searchers do suggest against some, as denying that Christ took flesh
of the Virgin Mary, is, I confess, a matter of great importance. And sure I am,
many of our Congregations never heard of such a thing, till the Searchers
became their informers: nor do I think there is so much as one Congregation in
England that holds such a thing (for particulars no man may speak) however upon
this occasion I can do no less then protest against that Opinion as a most
dangerous conceit; nothing inferior to theirs that deny that glorious and
blessed person to be God by Nature; for as the one denies his Manhood, the
other denies his Godhead, and so between them we have little left to fix on,
for our Redemption and Salvation.

And as I have showed my dislike to these conceits (to say no more at present)
so I hold it requisite to protest my Faith in this case, as I have been taught,
and as I have believed, and as (I trust) I shall hold fast unto the end.

That Faith which I have learned (and is the Faith of our Churches generally)
is this, First.

That the - Lord Jesus, the Savior of the World is God by Nature, and
therefore of one substance with the Father as touching his Godhead. He is
called the only begotten of the Father. The express image of his Fathers
person. The true God and Eternal Life. The Lord Almighty. It is he by whom the
Worlds were made. Without him nothing was made, which was made. He is that very
Lord who in the beginning laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are
the work of his Hands. He is the Alpha and Omega, the first, and the ^^st. He
is said to be before all things, and by ^im all things consist. He is the I A
M; who ^eing in the form of God, thought not robbery ^o be equal with God. He
is God over all bles^ed forever Amen. I conclude then, that he of whom these
things are spoken, is doubtless God by Nature.

^. This Lord Jesus the Savior of the World is man (...) Nature. He was made
lower then the Angels, (...) took not on him the Nature of Angels, but (...)
seed of Abraham He is of one substance with ^is Church touching his Manhood;
and for that cause he is not ashamed to call them Bre^^ren. As they are
partakers of flesh and ^loud, he also himself likewise took part of the ^^me.
He was made of a Woman, raised up (...) the fruit of David's Loins according to
the ^^esh. He is David's Son, called frequently a ^an; and the Son of man. He
had the pro^erties and infirmities of man in all things, sin ^xcepted. This his
Birth, Growth, manner of Life and Death do declare. I conclude then, he of whom
these things may be said, is man by Nature. The short is this.

Jesus the Savior of the World was before al^ things, and he that made all
things, therefore he i^ God by Nature, Jesus the Savior of the Worl^ was born
in time, and suffered death, or was slain (...) therefore he is man by Nature,

Yet more shortly

This Jesus is Immanuel, or God-Man in on^ Person.

The Third Part.
Shows that our Brethrens rejecting and opposing the fourth principle of
Christ's Doctrine, enforces a distinction in Communion (at least in part)
between them, and the Churches which walks in the Religious observatio^ of
it; and that all divisions which happen in the Church are not properly, but
accidentally against her: as also that it is no absurdity to refuse to
communicate with a people who may be allowed the appellation of a Church.

As it must ever be granted that a Kingdom divided against it self is brought
to desolation: and is very true when applied to the Church of God, where
Divisions are as Epidemical as in any Societies of men whatsoever: So also it
must be denied that all manner of divisions which happen within the pale of the
Church ^re property against her self.

For seeing it cannot be denied, but that she may be and has been corrupted
diverse ways ^^om her first integrity, both in respect of the ^orm and power of
godliness, even hence is en^orced, a necessity that ^he be Which seldom can be
done without division, by reason of Pride on the one hand, and Ignorance on the
other.
reformed. Where^pon diverse worthy men in all ages have labored (...) restore
the decayed parts if Christianity, as well as to ^oot out such things as ^ave
been obtruded by innovation. And surely that was the duty of some, was (more or
less) ^he duty of all: and consequently the sin of ^^ch as put not their
shoulder to the work, ^eh. 3. 5. But much more theirs, who not on^y would not
do it themselves, but hinder and ^iscourage them that would. Saying in effect,
(...) the corrupt part of the Church of old did in the days of the Prophet Jer.
44. 16, 17. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken unt^ thee, but we will certainly do as we have done;
(...) and our Fathers, etc. Putting the mark of Antiquity upon their own ways,
and the note o^ novelty upon the Doctrine of the Prophet o^ God. Something like
to which is that saying of the Searchers where they tell us, They ca^ well
remember when Laying on of Hands was no^ esteemed a Fundamental Doctrine, which
yet (...) have reason to question, when I consider tha^ themselves do hold (and
say they ever di^ hold) Laying on of Hands, He^. 6. to be (...) part of the
Foundation; And I think non^ of its Assertors ever had less esteem o^ it, then
they. Neither does the Moderation of its Assertors in the point of communion
(which it seems they held with thos^ that did not receive that Doctrine, for
some time after themselves had owned it) argue^ that those who received ^he
Doctrine of Layin^ on of Hand, did not esteem it the same which now they do.
Since reason wills that when an^ part of the Church of God attains to the
knowledge of any principles of truth, which by the corruption of the times,
has been obscured they should exercise all long-suffering an^ forbearance, to
see if by any means the contrary minded may be enlightened.

But now, if after all endeavors used, and patience extended, some part of the
Church remain wholly av^r^e to Reformation, and that in such weighty matters as
the principles of Religion, it cannot be reasonable (nor is it Scrip^ural) 1
King. 18, 21.
that those whom God has enlight^ed, should be bound to continue with the
^bstinate in their bypath; but must at length ^eclare themselves in manner of
speech like that of Joshuah, If it seem evil to you to serve (...) Lord, in
this principle of his Doctrine, choose (...) what you will do, but as for us we
are resolved ^^rein to serve the Lord: Agreeable whereunto (...) that direction
of the lord to the For it cannot be thought but that Jeremiah had some that
stood with him. ver. 11.
Remnant that held to the truth with their whole heart, Jer. 15. ^9. Let them
return to thee, (...) return not thou to them. ^hence I note four things,
considerable to ^ur present occasion.

1. That the parties here spoken of, were ^oth of the Church of God.

2. That there was a difference between ^^em, touching some necessary part of
Religi^^.

3. That the Lord allows this division, and ^^courageth the continuation of it
on the part of those that served him perfectly, or according to his Word.

4. That the Church State of neither part is (as yet) taken wholly away or
destroyed; And therefore hence I infer this conclusion.

That in a time of the^^ It is not so much an error, as the pertinacious
continuance in an error, that destroys the Church State of those that are
under the appellation of Christians, by true Baptism according to Mat. 28.
Churches defection in the principles, or any necessary part of Religion, there
may lawfully be held a distinction in communion, between the part defective,
and that which is sound or reformed, and ye^ the Church state of neither wholly
destroyed. And b^ how much the principles (...) points of Faith are greater or
l^sser, by so much thi^ distinction is to be maintained with greater or les^
severity.

This I might confirm by the consideration of the state of the Jewish Church,
under thos^ great distractions which happened among the^ sometimes about
principles of truth, referring immediately to the Majesty of Heaven Hos. 11. 12.

And otherwhiles about those which being neglected, would greatly impair the
power o^ godliness among men, Iud^. 19. 20 chu^. I^ which distractions the
Faithful labored as i^ were in the very fire to reform the part distempered,
without destroying their Church State, Judge. 20. and 21. Chapters, Jer. 17. 12.
to 17. during which combustions, there must needs be a demur in the point of
communion between the parts contending, as may ^asily be gathered from their
bitter and sangui^^ry conflicts, if our very reason did not con^ince us.

But leaving the many and convincing Allega^^ons which might be brought from
the state of the Jewish Church, who were not denied that Appellation, though
under such defile^ents as rendered them unfit to Celebrate the ^oly Rites and
Mysteries of the Law, and therefore consequently very unfit for commu^ion with
those who withstood their polluti^ns, which may sufficiently satisfy
reasonable ^en (and therefore the Searchers themselves) that it is no absurd
thing to grant a people the Ap^ilation of a Church, and yet hold them incapable
(...) communion with such of the Churches or Congr^^tions of Christ as are free
from these corrup^ions. I will descend to those grounds which ^re more familiar
to us, and then see how it ^ay reach the case depending between the ^earchers
and their Brethren.

And first from Acts 15. 2. It appears that ^here was not only great
disputation, but dissension also in the Primitive Churches about matters of
Doctrine, which word The word (...) here used, is rendered by Montanus,
Seditione. And so it is by our Transl^tors in Gal. 5. 20. which being
considered, must needs supose (at least) a demur in point of Communion.
dissension does imply the discontinuance o^ communion between Paul, Ba^n^bas,
with those which did adhere to them* and that part of the Church which were
zealous for Circumcision and the Law* And yet we do not find that they did one
unchurch another, but used the most effectual means tha^ might be to put an end
to the strife. And very remarkable it is, that though the Assembly a^ Jerusalem
did plainly determine the point o^ Doctrine, yet did they forbear their censure
against the persons who erred in that case (...) choosing to exercise all
Longanimity, rather then severity; knowing that their power was given Hence let
the Christians of this age learn Moderation. Moderation. Moderation.
more for Edification^ then for destroying any man's seize in the paths of
Christianity. Howbeit, when this lenity would not effect the Reformation of the
ill manners of those corrupters or depravers of the Gospel, then di^ the
Apostle lay greater weight upon them, wh^ would not cease to trouble the
Churches, Gal. 5. 12.

Nor is there any reason to doubt but that the Judaizers had (generally) been
held at some distance in point of Communion, or privileges in the Churches
before Paul wrote to the Gallatians. For seeing that Epistle written by Paul,
Si^vanus, and Timotheus, did empower the Church at Thessalonica to note such as
dis^beyed 2 These. 1. 1.
it, with a note of di^inction from the rest of the Christians who conformed
themselves to its directions; Then doubtless that Epistle, Acts 15. written in
the ^ame of the great Assembly at Jerusalem, did every way as much empower all
Churches to put ^he like note of distinction upon all that did not ^hey the
same; which note of distinction, howso^ver it might lie as a bar against their
present Communion, yet did it not destroy their Bre^her-hood, 2 These. 3. 14, 15.

So that it is further evident, that a people ^ay be esteemed Brethren in
Christ, or a Church (...) Christ, and yet justly be denied communion ^^th other
Churches, or Brethren in Christ. For ^he matter in short lies thus. As a
Brother is (...) member, in respect of that Congregation or church to which he
is immediately related. ^o, a particular Congregation is but a member in
respect of the Church universal. As therefore a man may be called a Christian
Brother, and yet justly (for some cause) be denied present communion with his
fellow Brethren; So, a Congregation may be accounted a Church of Christ, and
yet justly be denied communion by her Sister Churches, and chiefly when she is
such a Church as causes divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which
the Primitive Churches received from the Apostles. All which being considered,
may well serve to satisfy our Brethren, that we commit no absurdity in
refusing to communicate with them, though we grant them the Appellation of the
Church of Christ, and Brethren in particular as before we have said.

Having showed that al^ manner of Divisions which Division against unsufferable
errors, and corruptions are not against the Church, but for the Church.
happen in the Church, are not properly against her they being after a sort
rather nec^ssary for her Reformation, then to bring he^ to desolation, when
corruption in Doctrine or manners have made in vasions upon he^ (Though it must
needs be granted that eve^ those divisions are accidentally against the Church,
and that as for other causes, so chiefly, for that they are a scandal to the
World and a stumbling to weak Christians.) It behooves that we briefly show
what we mean by divisions which are properly against the Church, and they are
such as these. 1. When both parties contending strive to set up some sinful
thing, or their own devices. 2. When they divide about that which is not
necessary, but indifferent only. 3. When the point in question is not so much
the thing sought for as revenge upon the persons against whom the controversy
is held.
Those and such like tend only to the ruin of Churches, having no tendency at
all to Edification.

The first of these showed it self among the Corinthians, when they strove to
set up men; some this man, and others that, and this in opposition one unto
another, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Which folly has been the overthrow of Congregations,
where men's persons have been admi^ed, and truth neglected.

The second is rebuked, Romans 14. But why do thou judge thy Brother, or set at
naught thy Brother? (meaning for things indifferent) Therefore who art thou
that judge another man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or falls, yea he
shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand.

The third is detected, Gal. 5. 15. for whatsoever the question was, this was
their sin, they did bite one another. Thus men may hold the truth in
unrighteousness, and without Charity, preach Christ merely of envy to add
thereby some affliction to the bonds of their brethren. Those kind of divisions
in the ages bordering upon the Apostles became the Heathens sport (and the
Christians shame) upon their ^pen Theaters.

Let us therefore now return to consider the Nature of that distemper which
has befallen our body about the fourth principle of Christ his Doctrine, Heb.
6. 2.

The Searchers have declared it to be the sin of Schism; and the part
distempered to be only the Congregations under the practice of Laying on of
Hands, as is evident from the whole Contexture of their search, and the
directon of the Epistle prefixed to it, as if there were nothing amiss in this
matter on their part who (if I may so speak) have made (and defended) a Schism
in the principles of the Doctrine of our Lord, and there withal divided
themselves from a principle thereof.

And this word SCHISM is taken by the Searchers not in a mild sense, such as
wherein it may be taken by propriety of Speech to signify division in some
lower consideration, as the word is translated, 1 Cor. 1. 10. But they have
hoysed it in their application of it to the Congregations, professing the
fourth principle to the most extreme signification, even that of Sedition; yea
to such a degree, as if we unchurched Which how untrue that is, their own
Search does testify, for there they confess that we own them for Churches at
some turns, (they say) but surely, (to let go this taunt) what, we confess them
to be at any time, we confess them to be at all times, and that is a Church of
Christ, though irregular in point of Constitution.
all Churches but our selves. As if it were a light matter to brand all those
Churches for Schismatics. But they should have considered that bare abstaining
from communion, chiefly at the Table of the Lord (which is all that has been
done generally, if so much have been done) and that upon such immergent
occasion, as has (at least in the time of hot contention) been given for it,
is far from being sufficient to bear them out in this their rash charge against
their Brethren. Seeing our Savior himself puts a bar for coming to the Altar,
while differences between Brother and Brother, only remains undecided, which
being duly considered, may justly cause the sober Christian to be afraid of
such a communion as (I perceive) the Searchers would (hand ov^r head) involve
us into.

Now, what has been done by some particular persons among us in respect of
Church-rendings, or unchurching other Churches through ignorance or preposterus
zeal, as I do not perfectly know, so I will not in any wise go about to
justify. But sure I am, it is no good ground for you to asperse all our
Congregations with such men's actions; no more then the like preposterous
actions by some among you (for such there has been, both particular persons
and Congregations) will justify us to fasten the like reproach upon you, which
hitherto we have not done, nor intend to take the advantage of your procreation
to do it now.

And what though there has been (during the time of these contentions and
oppositions) a distinction in communion between the Congregations aforesaid,
held to be needful, at least in some things (wherein Christians communicating
one with another, cannot be very comfortable without unity in their Doctrine
and practice) yet sure this has been done (generally) without contracting the
guilt of Schism on either side, in respect of all such as in the midst of all
these dissentions, have maintained the great engagement of Charity toward one
another. And for those that have not so done, its justly feared the guilt has
been as great on the one side, as on the other.

This distinction in communion, has been held (I presume) by all wise
Christians, rather of necessity, then for any delight they have had in it,
partly for that the truth in question would otherwise have been slighted as a
thing but at most indifferent; And there is no readier way to destroy any
truth, then to let it pass with such an estimation. And partly, for that
contention would ever have been rising between Members of the same particular
community, and no means remaining to pacify those divisions. For, what pious
Pastor of the Church can justify his admitting some to the Lords Table without
embracing (nay though opposing) the fourth principle of Christianity, and yet
with the same breath deny another that liberty? The truth is, this disparity in
judgment and practice must admit of one thing out of two (at least so long as
the Spirit of contradiction works,) viz. either that the parties dissenting
may sit down in distinct Congreations, without the offense or grudging one
against another, or else it must admit of dispencing with most of the
principles of our Religion, one by one till indeed we have none left entire; as
will appear by singling them apart, and yielding to each opinionist the plea
which our Brethren do use in the case depending, which in effect is this.

Why should we not sit down at the Lords Table with you; Seeing we own all the
principles of Christ's Doctrine as you do (which yet I fear, etc.) except the
fourth? and as touching that, we say and believe, that the Laying on of Hands
in Heb. 6. 2. is a principle of Christ's doctrine, and a part of the founlation;
yet we deny that Laying on of Hands, which you hold to be that principle. This
plea being admitted, a second comes and pleads thus,

Let us build with you, for we own all the principles of Religion, Heb. 6. 1,2.
as you do, except that of Faith, and yet we say Faith is a principle according
to Heb. 6. 1. but we deny that faith which you say is there meant to be that
principle.

A third comes and says, we have right to sit down in communion with you, for
we do own all the principles, Heb. 6. only the Doctrine of Baptisms which you
say is there meant, we deny to be a principle of Christ's Doctrine, and do say
that it is your own innovation or tradition, yet we own the Doctrine of
Baptisms.

A fourth pretends they own all the principles, etc. only that Resurrection of
the dead, which we say is a principle of Christianity, they term an Humane
innovation, yet they profess to believe the Resurrection.

Finally, there comes others and professes that they own all the principles of
Gods Oracles, He^. 6. etc. but withal they deny with Origin, that eternal
judgment which we hold, and say that there shall be an universal Salvation; and
yet they own with him a judgment which is eternal. And upon these pretensions
they demand the privileges of Christians among us in all things.

Now admitting laying on of Hands (as we hold) to be as undoubtedly a principle
of Christ's Doctrine, as any of the rest (as that is our case.) Let our Brethren
resolve us how we shall dispense with them in rejecting and opposing that
principle, and yet do nothing at all to the prejudice of any other principle,
or part of the Foundation?

Certain it is (as before we have hinted) there is no Artifice of Satan so
likely to wear out this or any other truth, as to make it subject to the wills
of men, viz. to admit men to the same degree of Estimation and fitness for
communion in the Church, though they deny this truth, as if they owned it. And
whilst our Brethren are laboring with all their might to bring the fourth
principle of Christ's Doctrine to this state of subjection, others are as busily
tampering with the Doctrine of Baptism and have prevailed to the great reproach
of those Christians who have suffered themselves and the truth to be thus
abused.

Open opposition though too bad, yet is more advantageous to the truth, then
such pretended friendship; for truth being opposed, has strength and Authority
to withstand its greatest Adversary. But if once subtle men creep into the
Church under a specious pretense of waiting for the knowledge of such truths as
they have a design to overthrow; these prove the greatest prophaners and
subverters of the ways of God in the world. And what devourer shall we be able
to keep out (that has but craft to get in) if once this door of dispensing
with principles of Religion be opened?

Assuredly had those persons, Acts the 10. (the remission of whose sins was
evidenced from Heaven very eminently) been admitted to communion, without
submitting to the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sin (as Peter's
question, can any man forbid water, that these should not be Baptized, which
received the Holy Ghost? seems to intimate that some such thought might
possibly dart it self into the breasts of some.) It had certainly made nul^
that ordinance almost totally, for who does not now adays presently suppose
himself to be baptized with the Spirit?

Our Brethren demand of us, whether those qualifications which gives right to
B^ptism, do not give right to the Lords Table? The answer is easy, for Faith
and Repentance (as they say) gives right to Baptism, but not so for the Lords
Table, for though Baptism be no qualification for it self, yet it is a very
necessary qualification for the Lords Table. But that we may reach the utmost
that can lie in this question, we answer further: And first,

By granting that those that are rightly baptized, have thereupon a general
right to all the privileges and holy Ordinances in the Church of God; and so
to the Lords Table among the rest: But then secondly, we must distinguish
between this general right, and a regular capacity for the immediate
participation of these privileges. The children of Ephraim, etc. 2. Chron. 30.
18, 19, 20. had a right to the Passover in general with the rest of the
Israelites, because they were Circumcised, etc. yet since they were not cleansed
according to the Purisication of the Sanctuary, they were not in a regular
capacity to eat the Passover with the rest of the Israelites, therefore
Hezekiah made supplication for them, and it was permitted in that strait, (for
they could not do what they would because of the shortness of the time) that
they should eat the Passover otherwise then as it was written in the Law, but
this was an extraordinary case as we have showed before. Again, suppose I know
that my Brother has something against me, when I am going to the Lords Table;
this does not take away my right from the Table of the Lord which I have in
general with other Christians, only now I am not in a regular capacity to
participate. And what though those that are baptized according to Christ's
command have right to the Lords Table as aforesaid, yet may they not be
preposterous in taking their right; for there is an orderly way to partake of
our privileges. And we say and have proved that the next step Let no man here
object, prayer and hearing the word, which as they are of necessity antecedent
to our Membership, so they are of perpetual use in the Church.
or principle in Christianity to holy Baptism, is, that we wait upon God in
prayer with the Imposition of Hands for the holy Spirit of promise. This our
Brethren do not only neglect, but they oppose it as an humane innovation. Upon
this, not a brother only, but the Church has something against them, they
refuse to be reconciled, unless we allow them in their disobedience, at least
so far as to leave undone that which is their duty to do: hence it appears,
that whatsoever our Brethren may say for themselves in respect of their right
to the Lords Table, yet we find that in them, which ^uts them into an
incapacity for their imme^iate participation; at least with those
Congregations, who religiously observe that order ^herein the truths of God are
proposed to be ^bserved.

But here peradventure our Brethren will ^y, they do not remember that we have
ought a^ai^st them in this case; To which it may be ^^swered, that makes the
case never the bet^^r in respect of them that do know their er^our; no more
then my Brothers justifying himself in his trespass against me, does lessen his
^espass, which is so far from that, that in truth makes it greater, and there
is now a necessity ^^at these two be reconciled before they sit ^^^wn at the
Lords Table together.

If yet it should be said, we take for granted the ^^ief thing denied, viz.
That our Brethren are ^^fenders in the case depending. The answer first, this
objection will help those that (...) the Baptism of Repentance against our
^^ethren, for denying them communion in ^^eir, Congregations, as much as it
will help (...) Brethren against us, for though our Bre^^ren say they offend in
omitting that part of ^hrists Doctrine, yet they deny it. 2. Though (...)
Brethren will needs suppose the case to be doubtful whether what we hold in the
case d^^pending be true or no, it is out of doubt wit^ us, and so much the more
as by how much ou^ Brethren labor to raise new doubts and scruples about it,
according to that true saying When Black is rightly posited with White,
Then black's most dark, and white does shi^^ most bright.


The Searchers insist much upon their offer in order to the accommodating the
differen^ depending. To which I answer, had they pe^sisted in that candor and
condescending temper which lately some of them pretende^ to. It is not doubed,
but the end might ha^^ been happy, provided that their hearts were (...) right
according to those pretensions. But to (...) plain, by all that we can as yet
understand, some of them were more politic than pious in su^^ their
endeavors, of which let this their Sear^^ be an evidence to Pesterity. For,
even when (...) were busily endeavoring to answer their co^^ descending
proposals, with the greatest co^plyance, which with a good conscience (...)
could, even then comes our Brethren forth wi^^ a firebrand of Schism and
Sedition, and claps on the backs of our Congregations. (...) therewithal arms
themselves with the (...) Clandestine and subtle opposition against the
principle under consideration, wherewith they have at any time (so far as I
know) as yet advanced themselves against it, which yet will make as little for
their Credit, or the Churches Comfort, as their former attempts of this kind
have done (unless God whose wisdom can bring good out of evil, turn it to our
advantage) for no weap^n formed against the truth shall prosper.

And though it is true there was some unhappy obstructions of our peace before
they Printed their Search, so it is as true that the hypocrisy of some of the
Searchers was the cause thereof.

Nor need they make so much of their permitting the Country Elders to preach
up Laying on of Hands among them, when they consider the hot opposition which
some of them met with, as soon as they had done. And its known from some of the
most plain-hearted among them, that though we have been desired to preach the
Doctrine of Laying on of Hands among them, yet Ex ore judicium.
it is more to please our humors (which our souls abhor) then that they have
any expectation to see the truth by such preaching.

Neither is the complaint of our Brethren just at this time, how that they, or
many of them would have submitted to Laying on of Hands, did we not prohibit
them communion with those, with whom they formerly walked* For they know that
what ever has been, when contention was in the highest about this matter; yet
there has been as much forbearance that way of late, as could reasonably be
desired, and this condescension (perhaps) might still have increased had you as
you promised, seaced your opposition against the truth by us professed. But now
you have revived the whole Controversy, in most of the Congregations in
England: And therefore as the cause of our division at the first was much on
their part, who divided the principles of Christianity and themselves from a
principle there of, so the revival, and aggravation (with the prevention of our
concurrance at least in many things) will be found at the door of the Searcher,
when he searches well his own Habitation.

When we consider Pau^s charge to Timothy, to withdraw from such as had a form
of Godliness, denying the power thereof. And his command to the Church at
Thessalonica, to withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly; we cannot
but dislike the tendency of your 19th. demand, as if it would follow, that
because there were some sinfully suffered in some Churches of old, who taught
Gods people to commit fornica^ion, and to eat meats effired to Idols, and to
hold (...) community of Women (a thing so beastly as scarce fit to be named)
therefore we may not withdraw from such Churches as suffer such things. Now!
when yet its evident that the Lord charges those sins so deeply upon those that
suffered those Abominations, that without speedy Repentance their Church State
must be removed. But surely our Brethren cannot be ignorant that the Lord
commends such of the Churches in Asia, as could not bear, but uncharched those
that were evil, who said they were Jews, and Aposties, and were not, but were
the Synagogue of Satan: and how vehemently ^he reproves those that did not
thus separate from such evil workers, whether Congregations, or particular
Members, for sure there is but one Law for few or for many in this case.

True it is, That God had mercy for great offenders upon repentance, and there
must be admoniton before they be spewed out of the mouth. But what will this
avail their case, who being entreated and exhorted to turn from the error of
their way, and diligently taught concerning the truth, yet persist in their
opposition.

The slight exposition which the Searchers gives us of 2 John 7. 9. Verses, is
no more to be commended (as I conceive) then their Adversaries unwary syllogism
from thence: Seeing it is not all that confess that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, that has fellowship with the Father and the Son. For that is the sense
of the Searchers, or else they must tell us how many of Christ's Doctrines or
teachings must be owned as necessary to men's communion with God and Christ;
which will puzzle the Searchers as much as any body else, their flourishes and
reflections against others notwithstanding. Nor need we say much to our
Brethrens demands, which they ground on a supp^sition of the truth of our
opinion, considering what we have said already, for if that we hold b^ the
truth, it is such a truth as may not be dispensed with or neglected without
manifes^ danger to the rest of the principles of Religion as has been showed;
It shall therefore now suffice for the trial of the consciences of ou^ Brethren
in this matter, that we appeal t^ them touching the like service in another
case namely, the Laying on of Hands in the Ordination of Officers in the
Church, which some o^ them will have to be that principle, Heb. 6^ though
others of them reject that as erroneous, s^ that our Brethren had little cause
to upbraid u^ about some differing apprehensions about the end of that
Ministration, since themselves are divided both about the end and the principle
it self. I say, put case now, that some among you should deny the Layng on of
Hands on Officers to be instituted of God, and tell you it is an innovation of
man (to say no worse) and that you have no command from God for it; and
thereupon they bring all the Arguments against you which you devise against us.
And not only so, but they carry on all the Affairs of the Church without any
regard had to that orderly way of ordaining men to Office by prayer with the
Laying on of Hands. Only, because its your humor to have men so ordained,
therefore in condescension to your weakness, and that they may the better bring
you off that usage they permit you once, twice or thrice, etc. to preach up
such a thing in their Congregations. Do you now make so little conscience of
that Laying on of Hands which you practice, and that as a part of the
Foundation (say some of you) as that you could maintain a free and cheerful
communion with such persons? Howsoever you may shuffle in this case,
considering the liberty which you incline to in the other, yet surely were you
free from that temptation, you would find no small difficulties to hold such
communion with those who should not only make void, but even despise (for it is
no better) that wholesome and Divine order which God has left for the
Government of his House.

As for general Assemblies, which are ordained for general Controversies, and
which through the blessing of God are the best expedient under the Sun, for
composing divisions in the Churches. Here the liberty of Christians should be;
yea, must be maintained, though they differ right much in their opinions* in
matters of Religion, and therefore we have (indeed) very Christianly admitted
the Searchers to such our Assemblies; knowing well, that not only the
Christians in the ages bordering upon the Primitive, but even the Apostles of
our Lord did allow Christians of very different persuasions, freely to
deliberate on things propounded in such Assemblies. But yet we little thought
that our Brethren would have abused us in the sight of the World, for this our
Christian respect toward them, as if we were inconsistant with our principles
in such our condescentions, unless we also communicate with them at the Lords
Table. Surely this kind of dealing is unlikely to effect the peace and concord
of our too much divided Congregations.

For my part, I could heartily wish that all the Congregations of Christians in
the World that are baptized according to the appointment of Christ, Math. 28.
19. Mark 16. 16. Acts* 2. 38. would make one Consistory (at least some times)
to consider of the matters in difference among them. For, if this be not
admitted, there is no means under Heaven remaining (as I conceive) to heal
their divisions, and consequently to obtain that peace which should rule in the
hearts of all Gods people, because they are thereunto called in one (universal)
body.

And herein (I conceive) an union in the main may be held, though in our
particular communities, for the avoiding (otherwise inevitable)
inconveniences, we are constrained to hold some distinctions. For, it is one
thing to forsake the Church of Christ, and another to cease communicating with
such a particular Congregation, as in the time of Reformation, will needs stay
behind in the steps of irregularity. The first can be no other than Schism,
since there can be no cause to forsake the Church of God, though there may be
cause to forbear communicating with some particular Members or Congregations
thereof. The other is so far from Schism, that it is more truly called
Reformation, nor does it follow that because we efuse to communicate with our
Brethren in rheir irregular proceedings in the matters of Religion, that
therefore we reject them in those principles of truth which they do religiously
observe, and zealously profess: neither is our distinguishing our Congregations
from theirs, so much a separation from them, as a Reformation of our selves, so
that the 10. and 11. demands of the Searchers might well have been spared, since
as things stand among us, they are not only unnecessary, but I fear may prove
very pernicious to the peace of our Churches.

Let me now conclude with a free Word to the Brethren of both persuasions; And
that is, to beseech you to consider one another as Brethren, and not as
Adversaries, and as Brethren to put on Charity one toward another; and chiefly
you that are zealous for the principle under debate; the more you walk in the
truth, the more it concerns you to show forth your works with meekness of
wisdom, and to abound in that gift of the Spirit which hops and believes all
things, which doubtless will teach you to believe this of your Brethren in
general, that if they saw the truth as you do, they would be nothing less
zealous for it then your selves, and consider in the mean time as they are
erroneous in our judgments (and certainly erroneous they are) so we seem to be
to them. And though the consequence of their rejecting one principle of
Religion, do indeed endanger the rest, yet let us believe, that if they were
awar of this, they would abhor such an opinion as does so prejudice the
Doctrine of Christ.

Our Brethren do err, it is true, but they err with a conscience void of
error, because (as may be hoped) they know not that they err. Now Charity
suffers long, and is kind, is not puffed up against any that zealously serve
the Lord, though perhaps they err from many of his Precepts. Charity is not the
companion of that excess of indiscreet zeal which abounds in some men, for it
knows that temperance is as necessary in our zeal, as mercy is in judgment,
violent Spirits seldom or never does the Church service without disservice; And
let us consider that the truth we stand for, has no need of our passions to
defend it; no, its own authority will support it against the strongest
opposition, therefore let your moderation appear to all men.

To the Brethren on the other side, Let me thus speak, beware that you despise
not your Brethren especially you that are men of parts, because you being taken
for Brethren of high degree, must now if you own the truth which you have
opposed, seem to be abased. You that have been Instructers of the simple, must
now learn of Babes, or at least such things as pertains to Babes. Whereupon if
you ask your consciences, I am persuaded you (or at least some of you) have met
with such reasonings, as once a Wise man met with upon an occasion like to
this, when he reasoned with his friend after this manner. Because others are
gone before, is it a shame for us to come after? or is it not rather a great
shame not at all to go after them. Aug. Confess. l. 8. c 8.

And let it be considered how upon the discovery of the right manner of
Baptizing (for men had forsaken the way of God both in the subject and manner
of that Ordinance) there was found a kind of necessity for Christians of
ancient standing, as it were to begin again. And yet some then, (as you now)
was by no means to be prevailed with, but would (at least) have the way of
baptizing left to every man's liberty (as you would have the 4th principle) and
now the Lord has pleaded that cause, when no other endeavor could prevail,
for those that stumbled at that truth, are in a manner wholly extinct in this
Nation, whilst those that embraced it are blessed with great increase. And what
shall befall you if to your disobedience you shall add pertinacity, a little
time may determine.

By that which has been said you may perceive (Brethren) how the case stands
between us, gladly would we have communion with you in all Christian
privileges, but your willful want (as of some may be feared At least some of
of you.
) of one principle of Christian Religion, and therewithal your endeavors to
deprive our Churches of it (as is too evident to be denied) puts a stop to that
which is so much desired, and how it shall be obtained is the business for time
to determine, and O that the set time were come. Mean while we must leave the
Searchers, and their search; our selves, and our Sigh, to him that will cause
all the Churches to know that it is he that searches the heart, and tries the
Reins, and will give to every man according as his work shall be.

A Defense of the Offices of Apostles; and of the continuance thereof in the
Church till the end.
FOr men to strain more at the Word Apostle, [as some do at the word Bishop]
then at the work or Office signified thereby, is no other thing (as I conceive)
then groundless humility, or hypocritical subtilty; seeing it is evident that
those Titles are as lowly as any that can be given to suit with the matter,
thereby intended.

The first signifying a Messenger, or one sent, the other an Overseer.
Wherefore that I may avoid this humor, I will not fear to call old things by
their old names, and therefore shall call the Officers of the Church by the
same names which the wisdom of God has given them, not to make them proud, but
rather humbled, and to be as a Memento concerning the work, which by their
Office they stand engaged to do.

Nor shall we need at this time to say much of the Officers of the Church
generally, but only of the Office of Apostles, or messengers, and this because
some of our Brethren do not only doubt (but endeavor to make others doubtful
also, whether God has given to his Church ANY Apostles or Messengers to
succeed the Primitive Apostles, as a constant Ministry in the Church to the
end of the World.

And albeit, we say that the Apostles have Successors (as well as Bishops,
etc.) yet our meaning is not that there are any that succeed them in all
respects; for there was in the Office of the chief Apostles, something ordinary
and fixed, and something extraordinary and ^emporary, the latter was, first
their immediate ^ission; Math. 28. 19, 20. Gal. 1. 1.
Secondly, they ^earned their Doctrine either from the Sacred Lips ^f the Lord
Christ, or by ^^fallible Revelation, and were not taught it ^y man, as 2 Timothy
1. 13.
Timothy and ^ther their successors ^ere, Heb. 2. -- Great sal^ation, which at
the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that
heard ^im.

That which -- we have heard, which we have ^^en with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of Life. -- tha^ which we
have seen and heard declare we unto you 1 John 1. 1, 5. But I certify you
Brethren, th^^ the Gospel which was preached of me was not afte^ man, for I
neither receive^ it of man, And yet it is true that Paul was taught the
knowledge of some of the principles of Religion by Ananias.
neither was taught it but by the Revelatio^ of Jesus Christ Gal. 1. 11.

Thirdly, They were t^ lay a Foundation, and t^ propose a form of Doctrine Acts
9. 6, 17, 18. Acts 22. 16.
for other Teachers to buil^ on, and to keep as their pattern, and a Standard
by which to try others Doctrine an^ Spirits, 1 Cor. 3. 10. -- as a wise Master
builde^ I have laid the Foundation, and another builde^ thereon. He that is of
God hears us, he that is n^ of God hears not us, hereby know we the Spir^^
of truth, and the Spirit of error, 1 John 4. 6.

Fourthly, they were Necessarily endowed wit^ I. e. as a Concomitant; not as a
part of their Office.
the gift of Tongues, M^racles, etc. to demonstra^^ that they were sent of God,
and that the^ Doctrine was from Heaven, Luke 24. 49* -- But tarry ye in the
City of Jerusalem until (...) be endued with power from on high, 2 Cor. 12. 1^*
Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought amo^^ you in all patience, in Signs
and Wonders, and might deeds. In these and the like respects the Apo^^les have
no successors, for if they have, then ^ust their Words and Writings have the
like ^orce, and Authority, and then we should be ^^ill receiving new Oracles,
and never know when the whole Council of God was made ^nown to us.

Now the things which were ordinary and ^ixed, in the Apostolical Office were
such as ^hese, their Authority to preach the Gospel in ^ll places, at all
times, to all persons, as occasi^n and opportunity by Gods providence was given
to them, Mark. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel (...) every Creature, Math. 28. 19,
20. Teach all Nations -- and lo I am with you, always even to ^he end of the
world; this work could not be ^ied only to the chief or Primitive Apostles,
^^th they were to leave the World by death ^ech. 1. 5, 6. The Fathers where are
they, and the Prophets do they live for ever? Acts 20. 29. I know after my
decease grievous Wolves shall enter (...).

Secondly, their unwearied diligence in Teaching both the Churches and Pastors
in ^ll the will of God, their care for the well-set^ing and governing the
Churches, Acts 20. 31. Therefore watch and remember that by the space of ^hree
years I ceased not to warn every one night and ^ay with tears, 2 Cor. 11. 28.
-- that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches, 2 Pet 1* 12,
13, 14, 15.

I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things --
yea, I think it meet (...) long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance, moreover I will endeavor that you may be able
after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.

The rest will I set in order when I come; and perfect that which is lacking
concerning your Faith.

Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee.

3. Their being set for a defense of the Gospel against false Apostles, Phil.
1. 16, 17. the one preach Christ of Coniention -- supposing to add affliction
to my bonds. The other of Love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
Gospel.

Fourthly, To strenthen the Hands of particular Pastors against Usurpers, and
such as despise the Ministers of Christ, Acts 20. And from Meletus he sent to
Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church. And when they were come unto him,
he said unto them -- of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things -- Therefore watch, etc. 3 John 5. Beloved thou do faithfully
whatsoever thou do to the Brethren, and to strangers -- I wrote to the
Church, but Diotrephes who loves to have the pre-eminence among them receives
us not, wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds that he does, prating
against us with malicious words, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be
counted worthy of double honor, Gal. 4. 17, 18. They zealously affect you, but
not well: yea, they would exclude us, that you might affect them.

Now that the chief Apostles have some to succeed them in the Apostleship, as
we have affirmed will appear first from the consideration of that Commission
which our Lord gave for the Teaching of the Nations, or for the preaching the
Gospel to every Creature.

Secondly, from the duration of those gifts in the Church which our Lord
obtained and gave, by virtue of his Ascension.

Thirdly, from the consideration of the Primitive Churches, their having such
Apostles or Messengers.

Fourthly, from the practice of those who most question the necessity of
Messengers at this day.

Fifthly, from the state of the World, their necessity to be taught the truth
as it is in Jesus. And in regard of the danger they lie under by means of false
Apostles.

And first it is evident from Math. 28. 19, 20. and Mark 16. 15. that it is the
will of God that the Nations be taught, and that every Creature should have the
Gospel preached unto them, wherefore it remains that we stick to If the
Church have not a Ministry of Messengers, then none are bound by virtue of
Office to preach to the Nations.
one thing out of three, and that is, either some body in special are bound to
preach the Gospel to those that are without; or else that all Christians are
equally bound to perform this work if capable in respect of gifts, or else that
this work ended with the Apostles.

The last will not be said by any that considers, that the making one branch of
that Commission, Math. 28. and Mark 16. void or not obliging or binding to the
Church now, or any persons in it, is in effect to make the whole commission
void, for if none have power by virtue of this Commission to teach the Nations,
how can it be that any has power from hence to baptize? both works being
commanded as it were in one breath. Nor can the Church observe all things
whatsoever Christ commanded his Apostles, if they be not to observe this great
work to preach the Gospel to the World.

Neither can it rationally be said that this work belongs to every gifted
Christian alike; because the employment of the Gospel consists in diverse
Offices, and all such Members have not the same Office.

2. Again, mere gifts do not make men Officers (and that the Teaching, Math.
28. and the preaching, Mark 16. is a preaching not by virtue of gift only, but
by Authority also cannot be denied) 1 Timothy 1. 18. This charge I commit to Son
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 20. O Ti^othy keep that which is committed to thy trust, ^
Tim. 2. 2. and the same commit thou to faithful ^en, and let these also first
be proved, and then let them use the Office of a Deacon being found blame^iss,
1 Timothy 3. 10. Surely if this care must be ^ad, that none use the Office of a
Deacon, but upon such proof had of their fitness, it cannot ^e imagined that
the greater matters of the Go^pel should be taken in hand without the like ^are
and circumspection.

3. They that would have this work of reaching to the World, no man's concern,
by ^irtue of Office, whiles they speak against Mes^engers, do make more than
any body else, therewise we may well enquire how shall they reach except they
be sent? Romans 10. We con^lude then, if those that preach must be sent; and if
that commission, Math. 28. Mark 16. be yet in force, then the Apostles have
some to succeed them in their Office Apostolical.

Which is yet more evident by the consideration of those gifts which our Lord
obtained and gave to his Church by virtue of his Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 11. And he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors,
and Teachers, for the perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for
the edyfying of the body of Christ. Till we all come into the unity of the
Faith, etc. See 1 Cor. 12. 28. It were certainly a very dangerous thing to say
that any of these gifts are taken away from the Church of God, albeit some of
them are perhaps but rarely found, at least in that part of the World which do
profess the name of Christ; especially Miracles, etc. which yet may not be said
to be wholly absent from the Churches in these days, and in this Nation, of
which I could say something, partly from such information as I know to be true,
and partly from what I have heard and seen in that behalf. But as touching the
gift of Offices here repeated, why any of them should be taken away from the
Church, I see not any ground at all, they being so evidently fixed in the
Church (...) the whole Church be completed; and the use of these Offices
respectively, as before we have defined, so needful, that the Church would
easily find the want of them if indeed they be taken from her as we shall see
more anon. And although we said before that the gift of Miracles, Tongues, etc.
was necessary to the Office of the chief Apostles, and yet was only temporary:
and now say the gifts of Miracles may not be denied to have a being or
continuance in the Church. In this there is no contradiction; for, the making
those gifts temporary (or but for a time) as they were necessary to the Office
of those which first preached the Gospel, does not at all conclude that they
are wholly abnegated, or taken away from the Church. And when we say that these
gifts were necessary to the Office of the chief Apoostles, our meaning not that
Miracles was a part of their office, but only a necessary concomicant thereto;
so that though this concomitant should not befound, it is no prejudice to the
Office considered as we have defined it.

We come now to enquire into the order of the Primitive Churches, who certainly
had many Apostles beside those that were Foundation layers and Master Builders,
such were Andronicus and Junia, Romans 16. 7. who are ^^id to he men of note
among the Apostles (some conceive they were of the seventy Apostles) then they
were, for it were a strange interpretation to say they were noted by the
Apostles; it being to wrest the words of Paul from their native signification
which clearly gives Andronicu^ and Junia, a place among the Apostles; not among
the chief Apostles, but those that were called the Messengers of the Churches,
and the glory of Christ, as such we read of 2 Cor. 8. 23. And such in all
probability were those, 3 Ep. John, who are said to go forth for the names sake
of Christ taking nothing of the Gentiles, whom Gaius is commended for courtesly
entertaining, and Dioteophes for rejecting. Had not these brethren been sent
topreach. I see not how John should reprove them that received them not, or
stir up Gaius to bring them on their journey WHETHERSOEVER they would go, but
John's care of them, and his h^lding them in reputation, and defending them
against opposers of their Ministry, and therewithal their forsaking all for
the name of Christ, and their freely preaching to the Gentiles that they might
be saved, shows that they were the Messengers of the Lord, and of his Churches,
otherwise if they ran before they were sent, they could not manage the great
affairs of the Gospel among the Gentile^. And though it is true, John calls
them Brethren only, yet this does not argue that they were not in Ministerial
capacity, for we find the same phrase used by Paul, concerning those who were
Messengers of the Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 32. -- Or if the Brethren be enquired o^,
they are the Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. To say that
those Brethren were messengers, only as they were sent to carry the
contribution from the Gentile Churches, to the Church at Jerusalem (as some
would have it) is a very cold exposition; for first, it cannot be proved that
they were employed in that business; but secondly, if they were, how should
they for this service only be called the glory of Christ. Surely this character
must needs refer to their being entrusted with better treasure then Silver and
Gold, since either Brethren or Sisters of very ordinary capacity (if faithful)
might have been sent with earthly treasure. Again, Epaphroditus is not only
called the m^ssenger of the Church at Philippi, but also Paul's companion in
labor, and his fellow soldier, which shows, that though he might bring the
Churches bounty to Paul, yet this did not confer upon him the Title of Apostle
or Messenger; since he had a greater employment than that, namely to labor in
the work of the Gospel, and to war in that holy warfare even as a companion of
Paul himself, and therefore worthily might he be called a messenger of the
Church of God.

Of this sort of the Ministers of the Gospel was Barnabas, Luke, Mark, Silas,
Sylvanus, Titchicus, Troplimus and Apollos, as appears from their being
frequently fellow Travelers and Laborers in the Gospel with the Apostles,
concerning whom I argue thus. These persons were Ministers of the Gospel. But
they were not entrusted with the care of particular Churches, therefore their
Office was general, and by consequence traveling Ministers ^r m^ssengers of
the Gospel. The major is true, otherwise they ran before they were sent; and
then how could they preach? Romans 10. or be Paul's fellow soldiers and fellow
Laborers? The minor is out of doubt, because of their unfixedness in respect
of place, as before we have said; and beside, some of them are expressly called
the Apostles of Christ, 1 These. 1. 1. where Silvanus is joined with Paul* as
speaking to the Thess^lonians, and so throughout that Epistle, and chap. 2. 6.
it is thus said, nor of men sought we glory. We. What we? Paul and Silvanus,
when we might have been ^urthensome. How might Paul and Silvanus have been
burdensome? why as the Apostles of Christ, for such they were, otherwise they
might not have been burdensome as such

Timotheus and Titus are evidently Ministers of the same rank, as appears
partly from the Scripture even now alleged; where, as Pa^l and Silvanus, so
also Timotheus, is expressly called an Ap^stle of Christ. And partly from those
Epistles which Paul wrote to them respectively, 1 Timothy 1. As I besought thee to
abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedoian -- that thou might w^rn some
that they teach no other Doctrine, so do. Had Timothies charge been only at
Ephesus as Pastor only of that Church, there had been no need to beseech him
to abide there; it being not unknown to him that it was by all means requisite
for such Pastors to reside neatheir respective flocks, and not to go to foreign
Countries, to manage the Affairs of other Churches. But evident it is, that
Timothy was not fixed in any particular Church, but was Paul's fellow-traveller
among the Churches in diverse Countries, and frequently sent by him to sundry
places, from the time that he was called by the Apostle to go forth with him,
till Paul sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, which was not long
before he was taken prisoner, for all which see. Act. 16* 1* 2, 3, 4. and 17.
25* and 18, 5 the 19. 22. the 2. 4. to 18.

And though in a certain Postscript added to 2 Timothy it is said, that Timothy
was ordained the first Bishop of the Church at Ephesus, yet this cannot be
true, seeing the Church at Ephesus had Bishops, Acts 20. 18. even whiles Paul
and Timothy were companions in preaching the Gospel in diverse Countries. Nor are
the ancients positive in this matter, for I find Eusebius only saying that it
is reported that Timothy was the first Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet;
but he affirms nothing in this matter. But that Timotheus his care was for
other Churches, as much as for that at Ephesus is evident Philip. 2, 19, 20.
But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus unto you -- for I have no man
like minded, who will naturally care for your state -- But ye know the proof of
him that as a Son with the Father he has served with me in the Gospel.

Of Titus the same consideration may be had, seeing he was left in Creet to set
in order the things which were wanting, and to ordain Elders in EVERY Church,
plainly showing that his power in the Affairs of the Gospel, and, his care for
the Churches was the same for every Church, that it was for any one; which is a
far different charge from that which was given to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, Acts 20. for they are not bid to look to all the Churches in Asia, but
only to the flock (in the singular number) over which the Holy Ghost had made
them Episcopos, Overseers or Bishops, nor was Titus, his care, for the Churches
in Creet only; for Paul calls him his partner and fellow helper concerning the
Church at Corinth, 2 Cor. 8. 23. whether any do enquire of Titus he is my
partner, and fellow helper concerning you.

Of the same import is that place, Gal. 1. 18, 19. I went up to Jerusalem to
see Peter -- but other of the Apostles saw I none save James the Lords brother:
here James the Lords brother is called an Apostle, he was not one of the 12.
for that James is called the Son of Alpheus, Math. 10. 3. of this mind is
Eusebius.

But Ierom would sometimes make these two one self-same man, and yet
otherwhiles does call him Decimum tertium Apostolum, that is, the thirteenth
Apostle, but that James the Lords brother was not one of the 12. is evident 1
Cor. 15. 5. to 8. where it is said that our Lord apppeared first to Cephas,
then to the 12. after that he was seen of James then of ALL the Apostles. Two
things are hence to be noted. 1. That James is distinguished from the 12. and
so are those persons signified by ALL the Apostles; for it cannot be that by
all the Apostles should be meant the chief Apostles, for they were mentioned
before, and Paul himself who was an Apostle of the same dignity, is mentioned
afterward, but by ALL the Apostles, is most like to be meant the 70. Disciples
whom our Lord sent out as messengers to preach the Gospel in every City whither
himself would go, and who no doubt became famous Ministers of the Gospel after
the Ascension of our Lord, and with this Eusebius does seem to agree; we see
then, partly from evident Texts of Scripture, and partly from rational
probabilities, that the Primitive Churches were endewed with a Ministry of many
messengers or Apostles beside those who were the Foundation layers and
Master Builders in the Church of Christ; And hence we infer that God has
ordained such a ministry to continue in his Church till the body of our Lord
be perfected.

4. From the practice of those brethren who most question the being of
messengers, as a ministry in the Church at this day. It will appear that such
an Office does remai^.

For, do they not frequently send out men to act Authoritatively both in
preaching the Gospel to them that are without? in setting things in order in
remote Congregations? to exercise Discipline by Excommunication of offenders?
and remitting the penitent? by ordaining them Elders, and dispencing to them
the holy Ordinances? etc. As these things cannot be denied, so we may justly
enquire how it comes to pass that they do thus? if indeed the Church has none
to act in the capacity of Apostles, or messengers of the Gospel, at least as we
have defined them, seeing it cannot be proved, (neither I think do our Brethren
affirm) that Elders of the Churches have equal power in other Congregations, as
in that which they are chosen to serve neither is it in the power of any
Congregation to take the Pastor of any Church from them; neither may any
Church impose their Pastor upon another Church, wherefore unless there be a
ministry remaining in the Church which is related to all Congregations
indifferently, we may perceive what confusion is like to ensue. Moreover if
those who go to preach to the World cannot justisie their calling, how shall
they comfort themselves in their undertaking, or answer opposers when
questioned concerning their Commission? especially in such places where the
Scriptures are received since all that have read them may easily perceive, that
as the Gospel is to be preached, so those which go forth as Ministers thereof,
must be sent either by immediate mission from Heaven (which our brethren
pretend not to) or some mediate mission from the Church of God, which none can
pretend to, that deny the Office of messengers since other Officers are not by
virtue of their Office to go out into the World to teach the Nations, or to
preach the Gospel to every creature. If to that which we have said it should be
replied, that Churches which are distant one from another may by consent let
the Elders of one Church act as Elders in another, etc. this is sooner said
than proved, for seeng Officers have their Commission at what time they a^e
ordained, it cannot be that they should have their power (de jure) made either
less or greater by the consent or non-consent of any person or persons
whatsoever.

Again, It would be understood how long the power our brethren gives to men to
act as Elders in those Congregations does remain? Whether they thenceforth
stand equally engaged to Oversee those Churches, as the Church that first
called them to serve as Pastors? And also how many several Congregations they
may act in as Pastors by consent? Whether two only, or ten only, or an
hundred, and so ad infinitum. Surely if once they give particular Pastors,
power to act as Elders in more Congregations then they were at the time of
their Ordination, appointed to Oversee; they can never bound their power; and
then what messenger of the Church did ever exceed them in that respect. And
further, if our brethren can give their particular Pastors power to act as
Pastors in many Churches for a month or half a year, then why not a year 2. or
3. and so for the term of life, the occasions still being the same? And how
much comes this short of the power committed to any messenger in the World at
this day? Wherefore seeing that our brethren do exercise as great Authority in
sending men to preach to the World, and to settle their Churches as we do, it
is strange they should dislike our calling those Offices by such names as the
Scripture gives them, rather then by such names as are exclusive of that
Authority, which is exercised either by those who go out to preach the Gospel
to every creature, or those that take the care of all the Churches. True it is,
that Peter calls himself an Elder, and that he was Elder in one Church as well
as in another, but this was because he had an Office which was comprehensive of
all Offices in the Church, and hence it is that we find the Apostles sometimes
performing the Office of Deacons, when it might be done without let to the
preaching of the Word, but though it be true that the Acts 6. 2. Gal. 2. 9, 10.
greater contains the less, yet the less does not contain the greater; for it
cannot be denied, that the Office of a particular Elder of a Congregation only,
and a charge to Teach all Nations, are things inconsistant to one and the same
person.

What may or ought to be done in preaching the Gospel by persons gifted in the
Church, as a general privilege or duty, it is not my business here to
discourse, but only to show what it is which necessarily is to be done by
virtue of those Offices which God has ordained in his Church, otherwise it
were easy to show that God has not only provided a Liberty in his Church for
the modest exercise of the gifts of his Spirit, in the way of Prophecy,
Exhortation, etc. That the body may be edified. But also when by his providence
any of the members of the body are exposed to rem^te places, or otherwise
called to testify their Faith, they may lawfully Evangelize or preach the
Gospel, as is evident both from the holy Scriptures, Act. 8. 4, 5. And other
very ancient Authors. See Socrates Schlasticus, l. 1. the 15. 16. Chapters.

5. The necessity of messengers or Apostles (in the sense we have defined) is
yet more evident from the state of the world, in respect of their continual
ne^d to be taught the Gospel in the ancient purity thereof; and the rather
because of that great danger they lie under, by reas^n of the many decivers or
salse Vpostles, which are gone out into the world, who corrupt the wordly
mingling therewith their own Traditions.

The world is the Lords Harvest, into which he is pleased to send his
Laborers, and the Church is commanded to pray that the Lord of the Harvest
would send forth painful Laborers into his Harvest, Luke. 10. 1, 2. It will
not be denied that these laborers are at least chiefly) some that are in a
ministerial capacity to preach the Gospel. And they cannot so well be
understood of any particular function in the ministry, as that of messengers,
partly for that the other Officers in the ministry are bound to particular
congregations as we have showed before, and partly for that our Savior gives
this direction to the Church, upon the occasion of his sending forth messengers
to preach the Gospel. If then it be the duty of the Church at this day, to pray
to the Lord that he would send forth painful Laborers to preach to the world
(as sure none can deny that) there is not any room left to doubt of the
continuance of such an Office, as that of messengers of the Gospel, for that
very clause touching their being sent forth, and that as Lambs in the midst of
Wolves, does sufficiently instruct us what Laborers these are. A necessity
therefore lieeth upon the Church of God to dispose of her Members to that
needful work, as the Lord vouchsafes to fit them for; least otherwise she be
like those who make many prayers for that which they never intend to do.

It is certain the Church has no power to cause the world to come to her
Assemblies, nor is it like that the world will send to the Church of God for
instruction. It remains therefore, seeing the Gospel is for the illumination
of all, that as Gad has wont to send forth his Ambassadors to beseech the
world in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God even so, one fruit of the
Ascension of our Lord (at this day) is a gift even for the Rebellious, that the
Lord God might dwell among them, Psalm. 68 18. which being compared with Ephesians.
4. may very well be interpreted of a gifted ministry to turn Rebellious
sinners from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. To which
agrees that place, John 16. 8. where our Lord does assure his Disciples, that
when he should send the Holy Ghost, he should convince the world of sin, of
Righteousness and judgment, and this (no doubt) as he should operate or work
upon men by the ministry of the word, which promise either ended with that age
(which is absurd to think) or else if it remain to these days, then it supposes
a ministry to hold forth to the world the everlasting Gospel for the obedience
of faith, I mean such a ministry as are bound even by virtue of their calling,
as debtors to the wise and unwise, to preach the Gospel to those that are
without.

There is no doubt but Satan has his Ap^stles, Ministers or messengers in the
world, as well as in times past 2 Cor. 11. 13, 22. It were strange now if our
Lord Christ should have none to withstand these, if need be with an are they
Apostles? so am I, as well as with an are they Mnisters of Christ? so am I. Nor
does the Apostle hear dissllow the Appellation of Apostles or Ministers of
Christ to others beside himself and the rest of the chief Apostles: But that
which he does disallow, is, that men should be called either the one or the
other, when their works declared that they were false Apostles, and such as
only transformed themselves as the Ministers of Righteousness. But had it been
unlawful for any to be called Apostles beside the Foundation-layers, Paul had a
very easy way to confute these deceivers even by telling them that their
professing themselves Apostles was proof sufficient that they were deceivers;
yet he never makes that an Argument at all, but goes about to vindicate his
Apostleship as being nothing inferior to those Transformed-Apostles, since he
was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles. The same consideration may be
had of that place, Rev. 2. 2. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles
and are not, and have found them Liars: For had there been no more Apostles but
the chief Apostles, there had been no need to try whether these were Apostles
of Christ or not, for still their very saying they were such, had, without more
ado proved them Liars, and like as if any should arise and say I am Christ the
Savior of the World, his very saying so were the greatest evidence that the
same is a deceiver. But why so? verily because there is only one Lord Jesus our
Savior, whom the Heavens must retain till the times of the resti^ution of all
things; even so, if there were not a succession of Apostles, it were one of the
easiest things in the World to discover a false Ap^stle.

Finally, The Gospel must be preached in all the World for a witness to all
people, and then shall the end come, Math. 24. 14. which supposes the being of
a ministry, whose work it is to preach To all Nations, even to the end of the
world, Rev. 14. 6. The Angel [a definite for an indefinite number] messenger or
Messengers must preach the everlasting Gospel immediately before great Babylon
fall. It follows then, that though darkness has much prevailed since the
first publication of the Gospel, yet a ministry shall go forth, even the
messengers of the Gospel by whom the earth shall be enlightened.

And here let it be noted that the preacher (or preachers) of the everlasting
Gospel, has not a Gospel to confirm with Signs and Wonders, but a Gospel to
preach to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and People, even the same that was
preached by our Lord, and confirmed to us by them that heard him.

The sum of that which we have said is this; That as God has given to his
Church a fixed Ministry of Bishops, Elders, Pastors, etc. to take the care of
particular Congregations so he has given her a traveling ministry, or
unfixed, in respect of particular Societies or Congregations, to whom it
appertains by virtue of their Office to take all occasions to cause the Light
of the glorious Gospel to shine unto such as sit in darkness to plant Churches,
to confirm and settle them in the Faith and Order of the Gospel. To visit and
comfort those which have believed through grace.

Go ye, preach the Gospel to every creature. Jesus Christ Mark 16. 16. 2 Cor.
1. 19.
-- who was preached among you by US, even by me, and Silvanus, and Timotheus.
Thanks be to God which makes manifest 2 Cor. 2. 14.
the savor of his knowledge by US in every place.

And when they had preached the Gospel to that City, Acts 14. 21, 22.
and taught many, they returned again to Listra, and to Iconium, and Antioch
confirming the souls of the Disciples: For this cause have I sent un-unto you
Timotheus, who is 1 Cor. 4. 17.
my beloved Son and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you in remembrance of
my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where Act, 14. 36.
in every Church, let us go again and visit our brethren in every City where we
have preached the Word, and see how they do.

And Lo I am with you always, even to the End Math. 28. 20.
of the World.

When we say the messengers of the Gospel are unfixed ministers. Our meaning is
not thereby to deny, but that for the more convenient mannagement of the great
Affairs of the Gospel, they may divide themselves into diverse parts, and so may
be called the messengers of such Countries, as with whom they most frequently
converse of the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 2. 9. when James, Cephas, and John
perceived the grace which was given to me and Barnabas, they gave unto me and
Barnabas the right hand of fellowship that we should go to the Heathen, and
they to the Circumcision. In Asia we read of seven See the Old Trans.
messengers, and these related to seven Churches in seven principal Cities in
that Country* yet it may not be doubted but there were many Congregations and
scattered Disciples in Country Villages, and so, many Elders also: yea, and
that in those very Churches which are particularly named, for in the Church of
Ephesus (which is the first of the seven) we find diverse Bishops or Elders
before John wrote from Pa^mos, Acts 20. 17, 28.

It is true, the Ancients call these seven Angels or messengers, Bishops or
chief Ministers. But then we know by Bishops they commonly mean such as had the
charge of many particular Congregations. Thus they make Timothy a Bishop, yet
confess him to be a preacher of the Gospel from Ephesus unto Illiricum, and
throughout Hellas in Achaia. Titus they make Bishop of Creet, yet such an one
as preached the Gospel in all that Country. They also make Silvanus Bishop of
Thessalonica, but the Scripture as we have seen calls him an Apostle, as well
as the rest. Now whether it be more safe to call those traveling Ministers of
Christ Bishops, after the manner of men; or Apstoles, after the manner of the
Scripture, is the business for the sober and unprejudiced Reader to consider.

FINIS.

