Presumption no Proof: OR, Mr. PETTO's ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT - BAPTISM,
Considered and Answered. AND Infants Interest in the Covenant of Grace without
Baptism, asserted and maintained. Whereunto is prefixed An ANSWER to two
QUESTIONS propounded by Mr. Firmin, about Infants Church Membership and Baptism.

By THOMAS GRANTHAM.

The Earth also is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have
transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant.
Isa. 24. 5. Now I praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and
keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you 1 Cor. 11. 2. London, Printed
in the Year, 1687.

To the READER.
IT appears by Mr. Pett's Epistle to the Reader, that he took hold of a very
slight occasion to write against the Baptized Believers; it was, because one
(without acquainting him with it) came over to their Communion.

I could wish he had been more patient under so small a trial, and thereby
saved me this labor: which whether it will end here I know not; that may be as
he pleases.

I hold it no convenient time for Dissenters to write one against another;
Friendly Conferences might do much better. But I have found Men of Mr. Pett's
Principles very averse to that, when it has been offered.

I have not answered each particular Page in Mr. Pett's Book, for that one and
the same thing is very often repeated. I have chiefly dealt with his two main
Arguments, on which his whole Discourse depends.

What he says about the mode of Sprinkling, I have not meddled with, nor is it
needful. For we see that generally, such as are seriously convinced of their
Duty in the case of Baptism, will not, if they might, receive it but in the way
of Immersion. They are presently apprehensive that no way can be so safe for
them, as to follow Christ himself, who it is certain was baptized so: For it is
granted by the Learned, that Mark 1. 9. (...), may be truly read, And was
dipped of John into Jordan. This account of our Savior's Baptism is sufficient
to decide this Controversy, about the manner of Baptism, if the highest and
most perfect Example that ever was be of any force at all.

What I have offered on behalf of Infants Interest in the Covenant of Grace,
may perhaps seem too full of Charity in the Judgment of Mr. Petto and some
others. But if that offend thee, do but consider from whom this Doctrine of
Infants Damnation has proceeded, it is either of God or Man. I have searched the
Scriptures, but could never find his Word (that is Truth it self) declare such
a dreadful Sentence against any one Infant, much less that the greatest part of
dying Infants are damned.

Could Men be satisfied of the certainty of the Salvation of their dying
Infants, the Controversy about baptising them would come to an End; for as far
as I could ever learn, it came into the World upon this Mistake, that they
could not be saved without it.

And tho Mr. Petto seems to dislike Cyprian's Judgment herein, yet what does he
say less himself in p. 1. where he insinuates that those who deny the Baptism
of Infants, exclude millions out of the great Charter of Heaven. But this may
perhaps be found their Fault, who exclude all but the Infants of such as they
count Believers, when the reckoning comes to be truly stated.

I never saw Mr. Firmin 's Book till I had answered Mr. Petto. And at the
request of some, as also for that his Questions may seem to be serious and
considerable, I thought it needful to give a serious and Christian Answer to
them, which I hope I have done. And as I must commend Christians in their
Enquiry, what Evidence of God's Love we have concerning Infants, and therein be
an Enquirer as much as any, having Children of my own; so I think it needful to
caution my self and others, that we set not up our own Devices for such
Evidences, lest our Hope be thereby lessened, seeing our imposing that upon
Infants which God has not required at our hands, is no sign of his Love to them
at all.

Tho. Grantham.

The PREFACE.
Containing Brief Answers to two Questions, propounded by Mr. Giles Firmin, in
his Book called, The Plea of the Children of believing Parents.
BEcause Mr. Firmin's Questions bear date, four years before Mr. Petto's
Arguments, I will give them Precedence in my answering them.

Their Books are much of one quality, save that Mr. Firmin's abounds with more
unhandsom Reflections upon many, in which kind of dealing it were easy to give
Retaliation; but that is not commendable.

What he writes against Mr. Danvers, I leave to him to vindicate himself, as he
has done against others, and that very well, either by justifying his
Authorities, or rectifying such Over-fights, as might easily befall the most
accurate Writer in such a multitude of Quotations; and which I am persuaded
would much satisfy Mr. Firmin himself, would he impartially read the
Controversies.

Mr. Firmin being a wiser Man than to engage closely in the Question about the
Divine Authority for Infant Baptism, maintains his Fight at a great distance,
save that he plays a little with some Arguments, rather of other Men's devising
than his own. He at last comprehends the whole strength of his Discourse in two
Questions; and ONLY desires some Answer to them, from those whom he is pleased
constantly to call Anabaptists.

I know no such Creature, yet I know that he means those Christians who,
according to God's Word, Heb. 6. 1, 2. make Baptism the third (not the first)
Principle of Christ's Doctrine. In which order the first and best of
Gospel-Churches received it, even that which was founded by Christ himself, in
the exercise of his Ministry, and which is therefore the Mother of all Churches
Christian; in which Church, consisting of believing Jews, their Children had as
clear an Interest in the Covenant of Grace as any can pretend to, and as great
Privileges in the Church Christian as was, or is needful for any; and yet
whoever reads the Plantation and Progress of that Church, or the Epistle which
was written to them on the occasion of some Decays, which afterward befell them,
shall never find so much as one Infant baptized in that Church, nor indeed in
any other during the Apostles Days; which Consideration alone is enough to
cause a modest Enquirer to question the Legality of Infant Baptism. Mr. Firmin
has got Infant Baptism into a very little Corner, it belongs only to Children
of believing Parents [in an Independent or Presbyterian Sense] so that a great
Part of the World called Christendom, will have no Right to it. And he makes it
very insignificant to a great number of these two, for page 33. he does not
make God to be INDEED their God, till with his Call he gives them Faith to
answer his Call. And this is the reason (I suppose) why they deny these so
pretendedly holy Infants, whom they sprinkle, any Privilege in their Church at
the Lord's Table, till they covenant again, which is commonly 20, 30 or 40
years after they have sprinkled them. For which strange Practice they have not
the least Tittle in God's Word to warrant it; and where then they can find a
Rule for this Practice I know not.

I have been told that Mr. Firmin's Questions are taken by some to be
unanswerable: Let us therefore view them in his Words verbatim.

The first is thus.

Mr. Firmin's Quest. I.
Since God was so gracious to make a Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, and it
did then consist with his Wisdom to constitute his Church of Parents and
Children, while the Parents did believe in the Messiah to come; Why may it not
consist with his Grace to continue that Covenant, and with his Wisdom still to
constitute his Gospel Church of Parents and Children, the Jews now believing in
Christ come?

Answer.
You must allow that the Covenant of Grace was not restrained to Abraham and
his Seed, but did belong to many at that time both Parents and Children; many
holy Patriarchs being then living, and some outlived Abraham himself, and yet
none of these were concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision, as made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. but only in the Covenant of Grace as made with Adam and Noah,
which had now continued more than 2000 years, during all which time no Infant
was concerned either in Circumcision or Baptism, and yet were as much of the
Church as was needful for their Salvation. And hence a Man may very well answer
your Question, by asking you another, Thus:

Since God was so gracious to make a Covenant with Adam and Noah and their
Seed, and it did then consist with his Wisdom to constitute his Church of
Parents to practice his Ordinances, and of their Children to partake of the
Grace of eternal Life, without being concerned in the Practice of Ordinances in
their Infancy, for more than 2000 years before Christ came: Why may it not
confist with his Grace to continue that Covenant of Grace made with Adam, Noah
(and Abraham himself 24 years before he was circumcised)? and with his Wisdom
still to constitute his Gospel Church of Parents to practice his Ordinances,
and of their Children to partake of the Grace of eternal Life, without being
concerned in the Practice of his Ordinances in their Infancy, since Christ is
come; especially considering that Christ himself did not appoint those very
Infants who were brought to him, to have his Ordinances imposed upon them?

If Mr. Firmin be not satisfied with this Reply, then let me tell him it
becomes no Man, no not Mr. Firmin himself, to propound such an unlearned
Question, which is guilty of no more reason than this: Since God was so
gracious, and it did consist with his Wisdom to give Abraham a Command to offer
up his beloved Son as a Sign of Christ to come, why may it not consist with his
Grace and Wisdom, for us of our own Heads without any Command from God, to
offer up every one his dearest Child in remembrance that Christ is come?

Sir, What may, or may not consist with the Wisdom of God in relation to his
Church-constitution, and our serving him in matters of Religion, must not be
concluded from the likeness which we fancy to be between his former
Institutions, and our own, or others Inventions; but from such Directions as he
has given us by the Messiah, which was to teach us all things, John 4. both
concerning our selves, and concerning our Infants.

And we do therefore know that it was not consistent with the Wisdom of God to
constitute his Gospel Church, so as to impose Gospel Ordinances upon Infants
(although he did impose Legal Ordinances upon them) Because Christ (who is the
Wisdom of God) has revealed no such thing to his Apostles, nor they to us.

And like as ye know it to be inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, to bring
little Children so into the Church, as to partake of the Lord's Table, because
God has required Faith and Humiliation in every one that comes to that holy
Manducation: So we do know it to be inconsistent with the Wisdom of God to
bring Infants so into his Church, as to partake of holy Baptism, because
Repentance, whereby Sin is forsaken, and Faith to believe God's Promises, is
required by him of those that he requires to be baptized. You see then that we
do not deny Infants to be of the Church, in such sort as to obtain Salvation,
with them that shall be saved; although we deny them to be in the Church in
your sense. But let us hear your second Question.

Mr. Firmin's Quest. II.
If God has repealed his Covenant with the believing Jews Seed, turned their
Children out of the Church, and deny them Baptism, tho the Jews truly believe
in Christ come; what has God left in the room of these, that carry any show of
his Blessing, or good Will toward their Children during their Infant-state?

Answer.
The Words Covenant and Church, as used by Mr. Firmin, are ambiguous. I do not
find that Abraham, nor Isaac neither, were out of the Church till they were
circumcised. It Is evident Abraham's Seed was in Covenant before they were eight
days old, even as it was a peculiar visible Church Covenant, else all that were
uncircumcised for forty years in the Wilderness were out of the Church and
Covenant.

Mr. Firmin himself believes that Infants are in the Covenant, and in the
Church also, before they be sprinkled by him. For this is the Minor of one of
his Arguments, p. 103. But Children of believing Parents are Church members,
and this before you sprinkle them. Now, Sir, if your Doctrine be true; then it
is not our waiting for a fit time to baptize our Children, which turns them out
of the Church, nor does God for our so doing turn them out of the Church; any
whit more than your waiting a fit time, (and you make it perhaps twenty,
thirty, or forty years) for your bringing your Children to the Lord's Table,
turns them out of the Church. Indeed if they live to years, and choose sinful
ways, they then turn themselves out of that Relation they had to God and his
People in their Infancy, by virtue of God's gracious Covenant; and they thus
turning his Mercy into Jndgment, shall perish whether yours or ours. The Case
is equal, I need say no more to a wise Man.

Yet I add, That the believing Jews, and their Infants also, were now made free
from the Jewish Church State, Gal. 5. 1. But neither they nor their Infants
were deprived of any place in the Church, which was needful for them in their
respective capacities; yet the Parents had many Duties upon them which the
Infants had not, and of these the Baptism of Repentance was one; they had also
Privileges which the Infants had not, of which the Lord's Table was one. Yet
the little Children had these Privileges which the Children of Unbelievers had
not. First to be devoted to God by the Prayers of the Church, warranted therein
by the Example of Christ, who when little Children were brought to him for
Prayer, did not refuse but perform it, and wills that little Children be
brought to him; and accordingly we do dedicate our Children to him from the
Womb, according to our Capacity.

2. Little Children are also by this means (i. e. of their Parents Conversion)
under the Blessing of an early Education in the Christian Religion; by which
means (through God's Blessing) I have known some who were not sprinkled in
Infancy, attain to more true Knowledge of Christianity, and Experience of the
Work of Grace (so far as Man may judge) at 7 or 8 years of Age, than multitudes
of those who were sprinkled in their Infancy, have attained at the Age of 70 or
80 years.

3. Our gracious God by Jesus Christ has left us an open Declaration that the
Kingdom of Heaven belongs to Infants, in which Declaration he has not excepted
so much as one of them. This is more than Circumcision, and more clear than any
thing before declared concerning Infants, tho there was evidence of God's Love
to them before.

From all which you may see, that God has left us in the room of Circumcision,
a far more excellent Testimony of his saving pleasure concerning Infants than
that was, or any legal Rite whatsoever.

As for Mr. Baxter's Argument which you borrow, it is answered in what is said
to your Questions. Howbeit, I have more particularly Answered it in my
Examination of no less than five hundred Queries, gathered by one of his
Admirers out of his voluminous Works; all which have been redargued by a
proportionable number of Anti-Queries, in which all his Devices for
Poedorantism, is in some measure discovered to be but the cunning craftiness of
human subtilty, or a copious Brain. Of whose Books on this Subject, and Dr.
Hammonds also, take thus the Judgment of a Learned Doctor of the Church of
England now living: I have seen what my learned and worthy Friend Dr. Hammond,
Mr. Baxter, and others say in defense of [Infant Baptism]; and must confess I
do not a little wonder that Men of so great Parts should say so much to so
little purpose; for I have not yet seen any thing like an Argument for it. Dr.
Barlows Letter to Mr. Tombs.

Thus much in Answer to your Questions. See more in the last Part.

One thing I take special notice of in your Discourse of Infants. You tie up
the Salvation of all Infants that shall be saved, to their having Faith some
way; yea, you say, else they must all perish. p. 90. And you allow Faith to no
more Infants than are elected in your seem of Election. The rest of Infants,
even of believing Parents, are reprobate and damned, for all the Noise which ye
make of their Covenant Interest, Church Membership, Holiness, etc.

Miserable Infants! If there be none to plead your cause better than Mr. Firmin
has done, it is uncertain whether so much as one of you shall be saved out of a
thousand.

And whilst his Book may cause many weak Readers to think that Circumcision
did, and that Infant Baptism does great things toward their Saltion, it is
evident he can believe no such thing himself. For if they be elect, saved they
shall be tho they be not baptized: And for those Infants which are reprobated,
damned they must be tho they be baptized.

He is so far from making Baptism of Infants to be of that Concernment which
you may imagine from some Passages in him, that he plainly tells you, p. 20.
That he does not think that a sound Believer dying without Baptism shall be
damned: And then how an innocent Infant dying without Baptism should be damned,
is not easy to be imagined. But, by his favor, if such a Believer had
opportunity to be baptized, and neglected his Baptism, he will hardly pass for
a sound Believer in the Day of Judgment; because in this thing he believed not
his Lord, who told him, Thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3.
15. Deuteronomy. 1. 33. Act. 3. 22, 23. And I must in Faithfulness tell Mr. Firmin,
that such a sound Believer I take him to be, for after all the Improvement
which he tells us he has made of his Fathers Covenant, (which would make a well
Man sick even to see what pitiful work he makes with it, page 68, 69, 70, 71.)
for after all his shifting from Post to Pillar, he only gets Stomach to reject
the Counsel of God against himself, being not baptized with the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins, as some of the Learned have done before
him, Luke 7. 30.

And seeing it is the known Practice of Infant-sprinklers to sprinkle them when
they are fast asleep, and it is odds but Mr. Firmin was asleep when he was
sprinkled and crossed, and therein these wonderful things done, which he talks
of, without Scripture or Reason to warrant his Conceits. I desire to know of
him what Ground any Man has, his Parents or himself, to baptize any Person
when they are asleep? This is no idle Enquiry, but calls for the Consideration
of all serious Christians.

In these and the following Pages you will find this to be Mr. Firmin's sense:
That the Covenant as it concerns Infants, has two Parts, the inward, and the
outward: That some Infants have the outward Part who are not concerned in the
inward Part, and that the first sort of Infants cannot fall, but the rest may
and shall fall, because they have not seminal Faith and Regeneration, but only
reputative Faith. And yet sure this was not the Infants Fault, for it could not
choose of what Seed it should be produced. And what the Seminal Faith is, I
suppose Mr. Firmin may know as much as those Infants do whom he supposes to
have it. Dr. Hammond was a great Man for Infant-sprinkling, yet he rejects this
Fable of Mr. Firmin's: For he tells us, he must confess that Faith is so
necessarily founded in Understanding, that he which has not Understanding,
cannot have Faith. And Dr. Tailor confesses, whether Infants have Faith, is a
Question to be disputed by those who care not how much they affirm, and how
little they prove.

This damning all In^^^^^ which have not Faith, I take to be a very damnable
Doctrine, because it represents God to be so cruel, as to make millions (...)
Infants on purpose to send them to Hell, who could by no means help (...) want
of Faith. What Man would kill his newborn Child, because it does not call him
Father as soon as it is born? And shall mortal Man be more just than God, shall
Man be more righteous than his Maker?

I am ashamed of the Doctrine of our Presbyterians and Independents, which, as
I am informed, teach that Infants are yelling in Hell, yea that Infants of a
Span long are yelling in Hell.

I am also ashamed of Mr. Firmin's Conceit, page 90. where from Dr. Ames he
would have us believe, that an Infant is as capable of a passive Reception of
Christ and Grace, as a Man. Now if this be true, that Men are no more capable
to suffer the Grace of God to act upon their Souls than Infants, I am persuaded
they would fare better than they are like to do. For it is certain if Infants
receive any thing of Christ or Grace, it is merely by Miracle, as in the case
of John the Baptist, when he was in the Womb: and hence it must needs follow,
that unless God will work a Miracle upon every one at the Beginning of his
Conversion, he is excusable; according to this Fancy of Dr. Ames and Mr. Firmin.

Is not this an Adulterous Generation, who without a Miracle will not admit
that any Man can receive Christ more than an Infant, who it is certain cannot
receive him without a Miracle?

But let such vain Disputers know, that the Record which God has given of his
Son, concerning his Death and Resurrection, will be sufficient to leave them
without excuse if they believe it not, and that it is their Duty (not the Duty
of Infants) to receive Christ as made known to them in his Doctrine, which if
they believe not, it shall judge them (not Infants) in the last Day.

Some indeed do abuse Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. to uphold this false Opinion, that none
can believe without such a Power as by which Christ was raised from the dead.
Whereas it is evident, the Apostle only shows that the Faith of Christians
agrees with, or is according to the Power of God, which he wrought in Christ
when he raised him up from the dead, i. e. they doubt not at all, but that the
same God which had Power to raise up Christ from the dead, has Power to do
whatsoever he pleases, and so to raise us up also by his Power, 1 Cor. 6. 14. 2
Cor. 4. 14. For the Power by which Christ was raised from the dead, being
irresistible, all the Power of Men and Devils cannot resist it. All that have
true Faith, do believe that no Power shall be able to withstand God in the
Resurrection, but that his People shall be raised from Death to Life, and set
with Christ in Glory, maugre the Devil and all his Power.

But the Power of God's Grace by which God works in Men in an ordinary way, is
not irresistible; Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. and 13. 46.
Christ marvelled at the Unbelief of the Jews, Mar. 6. 6. because they had a
sufficiency of means by which to believe, otherwise he could not have marvelled
at their Unbelief. But what needs many words? Unbelief shall be the condemning
Sin, John 3. 18, 19. Mark 16. 16. It follows therefore against all
Contradiction, that Men perish not for want of an Object of Faith, but because
they reject that Object, and neglect that great Salvation which God offers
them, Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3. otherwise it will follow that all which shall be damned,
were created to be damned without any Remedy. And how unlike this is to that
God whose tender Mercies are over all his Works, and to that Christ who wept
for the Destruction of his Enemies, Luke 19. 41, 42. let all Men of Reason
judge, as they would judge in any case where Justice and Mercy must both stand
inviolate.

This strange Doctrine of damning the greatest Part of the World, and that
before the World was, is so pernicious, that it makes God Author of all Sin for
which Damnation is due. For if he have destined the greatest Part of the World,
Infants and grown Persons, to a damned State, without any Intention of their
Salvation, or means to prevent their Destruction, because it was his Pleasure
to damn them. He that was thus Author of their End, must also be Author of that
which conduces to the end: but far be this from God.

And let it be far from us to think thus hardly of God, that he should be so
unmerciful, as to send poor Infants to Hell Torments, who only had time in this
World to cry and die, and sometimes too to die before they could cry.

Presumption no Proof; OR, Mr. Petto 's Arguments for Infant-Discipleship and
Baptism, Considered and Answered.
PART. 1.
MR. Petto entitles his Book, Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment, and lays
down this Position, That it is the Will of Christ that some Infants should be
baptized: But why some, and not some? Are Infants so diversified in the Will of
Christ, as that he has excepted some of them? It had been fit that the
Scripture which excludes some Infants from Baptism, and admits othersome had
been produced. But alas, this is only Man's Invention, and none of Christ's
Distinction: they are equally precious in his Sight, yet he requires none of
them to be baptized.

Two things you premise before you set down your Arguments.

1. You complain that some call for plain Scripture for Infant Baptism, and
speak slightly of Scripture Consequences. But this is your Mistake: if they be
Scripture Consequences rightly deduced (as you seem to allow they must be such)
then you have no Adversary. But perhaps you are displeased that your
Consequences are not taken for such as our Savior's was, for you quote Mat.
22. 31, 32. but his Deductions are unquestionable, yours are not, and why may
not our Consequences be equally valuable with yours?

2. You are pleased to tell us, There is no express Scripture against
Infant Baptism, therefore Infants may be baptized. And this Argument is
sufficiently answered, by saying,

There is no express Scripture for Infant Baptism, therefore Infant Baptism may
be omitted. If you fly to Consequences for it, it is odds but we shall find as
good Consequences against it.

But I will deny the Consequence of your Argument, and answer it by an Author
of your own, who writes thus:

All things in God's Worship must have a Warrant out of God's Word; must be
commanded. It Is not ^^^ugh that it is not forbidden, or what hurt is there in
it? but (...) commanded, When any Creature is raised in a religious way abov^
(...) it has by Nature, if I have not Scripture to warrant me, I am (...)
sup^^stitious. -- We must be willing Worshippers, we must not be
will-Worshippers. -- You see how severe God was to Nadab and Abihu, but for
taking other Fire than that which God appointed, tho there was no direct
Command against it. -- In matters of Worship God stands upon little things. --
For there is nothing wherein the Prerogative of God does more appear than in
Worship. Thus he. To which we add Tertullian's Rule: If it be said, it is
lawful, because the Scripture does not forbid it: it may equally be retorted,
it is therefore not lawful, because the Scripture does not command it.

And truly by your Argument (as of all that is brought it is the best) you will
never be able to withstand any Innovation, which is not expressly forbidden in
Scripture. And then why do you disgust the Common Prayer, with the Rites and
Ceremonies there required, which are not expressly forbidden, more than your
sprinkling Infants? Nay, the Church of Rome will by this Argument stand on
equal Terms with you, for many of her Ceremonies which you disallow; For admit
one Error, and a thousand will follow. Thus, by your Argument, Men may run they
know not whither, and return they know not when. I now come to your two main
Arguments, for this you seem not much to rest upon; but you use it ad hominem.

Mr. Petto's first Argument for Infant-Discipleship.
Some Infants are so discipled, as to have the Name of the Father, Son, and
holy Spirit upon them. Therefore by the Will of Christ they are to be baptized.
Answer. This Argument supposes that some Infants have the Name of Father, Son,
and Spirit upon them before they be baptized. This I take to be the newest
Piece of Doctrine in the World, and therefore must needs enquire what Infants
these are? How Mr. Petto knows them from others? And at what time before their
Baptism, and also by whom this Name is put upon them, and in what manner it is
done? For all these things he ought to know, before (according to his own
Logic) he may baptize them.

Till he do this (and he must do it well too) I deny his Antecedent: Saying
also, that no Infants are discipled at all, much less so as to have the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon them. My Reasons are such as these.

1. God has not made this distinction in Gospel Times between some Infants and
other some, so as to disciple some of them, by putting the Name of Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit upon them. He has taken down the Wall of distinction between
Jew and Gentile, accounting the one as clean as the other, Act. 10. 28. And has
given the same Order for discipling to all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. but not a
word in that Order to put his Name, of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon any
Person before they be baptized.

2. No Man has Authority by the Word of God to make Infants Disciples at all,
much less by putting the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon them before
Baptism. But the only Way assigned by God to make Disciples, is, first, by
preaching the Gospel to them, Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every Creature,
which shows the true Intent of our Savior in the Verb, (...), to which you
refer us: And our Critics do allow that it signifies an actual teaching both
in the Hebrew and Greek. But the best Interpreter of that Verb, is the Practice
of our Savior and his Apostles, who made Disciples by actual teaching, John 4.
1. (...), plainly evincing the Truth of this.

3. If it could be proved that the Name of the Trinity were upon the Infants of
Christians; yet this would not bear your Conclusion, that they must be
baptized, any more than it will bear Augustin's Conclusion, that they ought to
partake of the Lord's Table. Dr. Jer. Tailor, and Dr. Barlow confess you may do
both as well as either, and that the Wit of Man cannot show a difference in the
Sanctions. And indeed all your Arguments for Infants Church Membership and
Baptism (if they were good) might be improved against you concerning the other
Ordinance; for admit one Error, and another will follow. But let us examine
your Scriptures by which you would prove your Antecedent.

1. You bring Matthew. 28. 19. (...), Disciple ye all Nations. Now if these Words
did oblige the Apostles to put the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon
all Persons or Nations before Baptism, it quite spoils your Argument, which
would restrain it to some Infants only. Why do you thus abuse the Word? Did the
Apostles put the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon any one Infant?
Is not the Scripture silent as to this? Or did they put the Name etc. upon any
to whom they preached, till they received their Doctrine? Or did they do this
before they baptized them? In that solemn Institution they did put the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon all such as gladly received the Word,
Act. 2. 40. Act. 10. ult. And for this they had full Authority, Matthew. 28. 19.
Mark 16. 15, 16. even to preach to, and so to disciple all Nations, baptising
them, viz. Mathet as subintelligitur in verbum Mathetusate, as the Practice of
Christ had directed them. John 4. 1. Jesus made and baptized more Disciples
than John. And Junius and Tremelius adds the Particle Et: Ite ergo, docete
omnes populos, and baptisate eos, etc.

2. You tell us, they are Disciples, not only who actually learn, but who are
in the School of Christ his Church in order to their future Learning. This is
not true: 1. Infants are not in the School or Church of Christ, as it is a
School to learn any thing whilst they are Infants. God has neither bound his
Ministers to teach them whilst such, nor enabled them to learn as such. If you
say this future teaching respects not the time of their Infancy; then were you
very fallacious in your Argument: for this will prove all the Infants in the
World to be Disciples, as well as any of them, seeing Christ's Church is the
Light of the World, and all that come to Years of Discretion, having
opportunity, are bound to learn of her. 2. But yet it does not follow that all
who are under present means of Instruction, are therefore to be accounted
Disciples. For you know many heard Christ preach, who yet were none of his
Disciples, but his Persecutors; many heard his Apostles teach, who yet were not
their Disciples, for they put the Word of God from them, and judged themselves
unworthy of eternal Life. I suppose also that all that hear Mr. Petto are not
his Disciples, how much less poor Infants that never heard him at all. And here
I require Mr. P. to name one Infant that he ever made a Disciple according to
Matthew. 28. and that will do more a great deal than his empty Dictates.

3. You bring Act. 8. 3. and 9. 1. which shows how Saul made havoc of the
Churches, entering into every House, haling Men and Women to Prison, and that he
breathed out Slaughter against the Disciples. Sure you may blush to bring such
Texts to prove Infants Disciples; nor will Act. 15. 10. bear your Inference.
The false Apostles would indeed have had the Disciples among the Gentiles to
have been circumcised: but it does not follow at all, that every one were
Disciples whom they would have circumcised. This is just such a Consequence as
this; You would have Infants to be sprinkled: Ergo, all are Infants whom ye
would have sprinkled. This Consequence you will deny, because you would have
others also sprinkled who are no Infants. And for the same reason I deny your
Consequence, for the false Apostles would have circumcised some who were no
Disciples, to wit, Infants.

You bring here Genesis 17. (but this we will consider anon) and Acts 21. 4, 5.
This Place informs us, That the Disciples told Paul by the Spirit that he
should not go up to Jerusalem. Is it possible that * (...) signifies Offspring
of Growth or Stature, but (...) signifies an Infant.
Infants who are not mentioned here, should be of the number of these
Disciples. It is true, it is said that the Wives and Children went with Paul to
the Seashore, and kneeled down and prayed. But are all Children Infants? Or,
if there were any Infants, did they kneel down upon the Seashore and pray with
Paul? And if not, to what purpose has he brought these Scriptures?

4. He brings a Cloud of other Scriptures in Figures, for had he read them his
Folly would have been seen with more ease. Let us hear what these Scriptures
say; 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of Conversation. Heb. 7. 26. For such an high Priest became us who is
holy: What must these Places prove? I will set down your own Words: As to the
Name of the Trinity that of being holy is attributed often to Father, Son and
Holy Spirit. And this very Name of the Lord [holy] he has imposed upon the
Children of Believers. But what a wretched Consequence is here? as if it would
follow that all for whom Christ offered up himself, or for whom he was God's
High Priest, has thereupon the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit on them?
Why according to this Logic Saul had the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
upon him, when he persecuted all that called on that Name. And the Scripture is
very plain, that whilst we were Enemies, Christ died for us: but we had not
then the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit imposed on us. And how follows
it, that because Christians are exhorted to be holy in all manner of
Conversation, that therefore Infants are discipled, so as to have the Name of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon them. Might not a Man by this kind of
reasoning prove that all the Infants in the World have the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit upon them: I am sure that God is the God of the Spirits of
all Flesh, and that all Nations are in respect of his gracious Providence, his
People, and Sheep of his Pasture, and exhorted to enter into his Ways with
Praise and Thanksgiving, Psalm. 100.

The Places you bring from the Epistle to the Ephesians, cap. 1. 13. and 4. 30.
informs us that after Men believed, they were sealed with the Holy Spirit; this
shows these Persons were no Infants. Romans 11. 16. shows that an holy Root has
holy Branches; 1 Pet. 2. 9. tells us Christians are a chosen Generation, a
royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, that you should show forth
the Praises of him that has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light. As for Romans 11. 16. it evidently refers to the great things which God
will do when he calls the Jews, which were cast off, and so it little concerns
our Question; otherwise it were easy to show that at that time, how holy soever
Abraham had been, yet his Children were profane enough. But Mr. Petto's Drift
is to make Men believe that each of them (whom he calls Believers) are as holy
a Root in respect of conferring Church Priviledges, as Abraham was, and so
their Children must needs be holy for Baptism. But this is a very unlawful
consequence; seeing Abraham never did, nor ever can confer that Holiness upon
so much as one of his Offspring, which shall entitle them to Baptism; because
every particular Person's Repentance and Faith is required as the true
Antecedents to Baptism, as is granted by the Church of England in her
Catechism. But how well she keeps to her Doctrine therein, admits of
consideration.

Upon 1 Cor. 7. 14. you teach, that Infants are holy by separation to God and
his Service. But, Sir, can you tell us what Service of God Infants are fit for?
If other Men may judge as well as you, then as they are not able to serve God in
spiritual things, so God requires it not of them whilst Infants. But so
strangely are you transported here, that you tell us from Mr. Cotton, That Sin
it self is sanctified to Believers. This is another Strain of new Doctrine; and
will it not follow from your Doctrine that Sin has the Name of Father, Son,
and holy Spirit upon it? Let Mr. Cotton look to it: You must have a care how
you take up such Notions.

You will by no means admit the Holiness here mentioned to be meant of a
Matrimonial or Legitimate Holiness. And yet I pray what Sanctification of the
Unbeliever can that be but Matrimonial, so as the believing Husband and the
unbelieving Wife might cohabit together as Husband and Wife without Sin? The
Childrens Holiness is derived from this Sanctification of the Unbeliever, (as
the Word else, being rightly referred, does show it does.) This Holiness
therefore in true Construction of the place is most fitly interpreted (as
Erasmus does expound it) of Legitimacy, and so did the eminent Man Augustine of
Hippo (long before Erasmus) take the sense; for he tells us, whatsoever that
Holiness is, it is certain it is not of Power to make Christians, or remit Sins.

5. The Figures which you give us out of the Old Testament, are Lev. 19. 2. and
20. 7. Exodus 16. 6. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. and 26. 19. and 28. 9. All which do
show, That God was the Lord; that Israel should know that he is the Lord; that
he is a holy God; and that they should be a holy People. But what is all this
to your purpose? God spoke not these things to Infants; he tells us so himself:
Deuteronomy. 11. 2. And know you this day: for I speak not with your Children, which
have not known, and which have not seen the Chastisement of the Lord your God,
his Greatness, his mighty Hand, and stretched out Arm, etc. ver. 7. but your
Eyes have seen, etc. -- Therefore ye shall keep all the Commandments, etc. Sure
you have not proved your Argument by any thing you have yet brought for that
purpose. For,

By all that you have said, it appears not, that some Infants are so discipled,
as to have the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit upon them. Nor are you
able to name so much as one such Infant now in being, and consequently you can
with no show of Reason baptize them. I consider again: Who must do this
previous Work to Infant Baptism? Must the same Minister do both? And what Order
have you to put the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost upon Infants twice,
once before you sprinkle them, and then again when you sprinkle them?

There is one thing remarkable from your self and others in these later times,
who espouse this Controversy. You all seem to be convinced that none are to be
baptized but Disciples, according to Matthew. 28. 19. and indeed the Text is so
very clear to that purpose, that it cannot be denied. But when I behold the
miserable Shifts you are put to, to prove Infants Disciples according to
Christ's Commission, Matthew. 28. 19. I do with the greatest Admiration bewail
your Unhappiness; and cannot tell how to imagine that any wise Men among you
does really believe your selves in what you say on that account. And sure I am
the Papists have as strong a pretense from Hoc est Corpus meum, for their
Transubstantiation, as you have from Matheteusate for Infant-Discipleship.

And to speak freely, they are both incredible things; all Sense and Experience
militates equally against both Opinions. If they be Truths, it must be because
they are both Miracles: but then they want the Character of true Miracles; for
they are no ways demonstrable that there is any Miracle at all in either of
them; we are only told that they are so, i. e. that the Bread in the Eucharist
is Real Flesh; That the Child in your Rantism is born again of Water and
Spirit, made a Disciple of Christ, etc. but no mortal Man knows any of these
things to be true. And what is it that we may not believe, if we must believe
such things as these? Prayer for the Dead, Purgatory fire, etc. will come upon
us armed with our own Arguments, if we admit the former.

And to conclude, as to your first Argument, Give me leave to say, if your
Hearers can receive your Dictates, and ill-prov'd Affirmations, I know not but
they may believe you in whatsoever you will be pleased to tell them.

What you say of the Antiquity of Infant Baptism, I shall here consider in few
words; for since you insist only upon Cyprian's Testimony, whose Grounds for
Infant Baptism you confess to be unsound; I need say little here, that which
was built upon bad Principles then by him, and stands upon as unsound ones now
by you, does gain nothing by either of you. But will you know that it is
plainly granted by some of the most Learned of your way; That there is neither
Precept nor Practice in Scripture for Infant Baptism [Here it wants the best
Antiquity], nor any just Evidence for it for about two hundred Years after
Christ. -- Yet it came in upon a gross Mistake of the Scripture: that in what
Mr. Baxter and Dr. Hammond has said for it, there is nothing that looks like an
Argument. Dr. Barlow. This is enough at present.

PART. II.
Wherein is considered Mr. Petto's second Argument, which he delivers in these
Words;
If some Infants be visibly or externally in the Covenant which God made with
Abraham, then by the Will of Christ they are to be baptized.

But some Infants are visibly or externally in the Covenant which God made with
Abraham:

Therefore by the Will of Christ they are to be baptized.

BEfore I answer this Argument, I shall consider a few things: And, 1. That (as
Mr. Petto grants) God made the Covenant of Grace with Abraham, twenty four
years before he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, see Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
with 17. 24. so that the Covenant of Grace had no external Sign, as it was made
with Abraham, Genesis 12. But when God was pleased to add to this Covenant the
Promise of the Land of Canaan, etc. then it was that he gave him the Law of
Circumcision: and these additional Parts I take to be most properly, if not
only that which is the Covenant of Circumcision.

2. It is to be understood that Abraham was not the only Person in the World,
which was under the Covenant of Grace at this time, when God made Covenant with
Abraham, Genesis 17. It Is observed by some that Salah lived after the Covenant of
Circumcision was made about 50 years. Arphaxad lived thirteen years after; and
that Heber lived till Jacob was about twenty years old, which was long after
Abraham died. Now these with Melchisedeck (if he were not one of these) with
many others (amongst whom was just Lot) were not only true Worshippers of God,
according to the Covenant of Grace, but some of them superior to Abraham
himself, for Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, being the King of Salem, and Priest
of the most high God.

3. And as neither these nor their Posterity were liable to any loss of the
Covenant of Grace, by their not being circumcised after the manner of Abraham;
so neither Job, nor other worthy Men that were not of the Seed of Abraham
according to the Flesh, had any obligation to Circumcision: from whence it must
needs follow that God intended not the sign of Circumcision to belong to
Persons as they were in the Covenant of Grace, but that it was appropriate for
some great Ends, respecting a special preservation to the Family of Abraham, as
of the Kindred from whom Christ should proceed, and with whom he would presence
himself, in a Land of Promise, by a distinct way of Worship from all Nations,
who at that time were falling very fast into Idolatry.

4. And besides this, it is certain that this Sign of Circumcision, was by
God's Appointment to be affixed to some to whom the Covenant of Grace might
seem to have the least extent (or at least they did forfeit all Interest in it)
this was the case of Ishmael and Esau, who proved very wicked: and it is to be
questioned whether the Bondmen or Slaves in Israel had that Ceremony as a Badge
of the Covenant of Grace. Men may talk high of these things and prove little,
or whether Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to any Person
in the World save to Abraham: And in what sense it was so to him (who had so
many things peculiar to him) is not easy to be demonstrated.

5. Our Practice in Religious Institutes is not to be gathered from such
uncertain Conjectures, but to stand upon the clear Direction of the Instituter,
or the Practice of such as God has thought fit to make Precedents to us; and
it is certain we are not at all concerned in the Law of Circumcision, and for
us to take our Rules thence for the Subjects of Baptism, is very childish and
reflects Dishonor upon Christ and his Apostles, who never sent us to learn
Infant Baptism from Infant-Circumcision, nor indeed have they taught it at all.
These things premised I answer to the Argument by these ensuing Distinctions.

1. If by Covenant Mr. P. means the Covenant of Circumcision (as he does, for
he quotes Genesis 7. 9, 10, 11. to prove his Assumption), and by some Infants he
means the Infants of Christians as such, as that is his meaning; then I deny
his Minor.

2. Or, if by Covenant, he mean that Covenant of Grace, Genesis 12. distinct from
the Covenant of Circumcision; and by some Infants being in this Covenant
externally, he means Infants are concerned in the outward Profession or
Practice of Worship; still I deny the Minor: for God by that Covenant of Grace,
Genesis 12. never required the Performance of such Duties of Infants.

3. If by Covenant, he mean the gracious Pardon of Original Sin to some Infants
only, or the Salvation of their Souls dying such; and by some Infants he means
that some few of them only are visibly in that Estate, and all the rest in a
visible State of Damnation to Hell Torments; still I deny his Minor. For God
has not said (and therefore Man ought not to say it) that so much as one poor
Infant shall be damned; but he is so far from that, that he has no Pleasure in
the Death of the Wicked, but rather that they turn and live; and has assured
us that the Son should not bear the Iniquity of the Father, which can only be
true in respect of Damnation, for all Infants do bear the Sin of their Father
Adam, and sometimes in temporal Punishments they bear the Sin of their
immediate Parents.

4. If his Arguments were so good natured, as to allow Infants indefinitely to
be in a visible State of Salvation, (viz. a declared Right to the Kingdom of
Heaven, as their dear Savior has testified they have) yet I would deny the
Consequence of his Major, because the Covenant of Grace, considered as
abstracted from the Covenant of Circumcision, never required the Application of
any Ceremony to Infants as a Pledge of it, either before the Law, or as it is
now established by our Savior in the Gospel Economy; so that his Conclusion
is far from Truth, which tells the World that by the Will of Christ some
Infants are to be baptized. Now let us examine his Proof.

1. He begins page 7. with Genesis 17. which speaks not one word of Baptism; and
himself tells us in the next Page, That the Covenant in Gospel Times cannot be
kept by Circumcision; for that, says he, is abrogated, and ceased to be the
Token of it; so that Genesis 17. can be no Proof for his Minor. But he quotes Act.
2. 38, 39. and Heb. 10. 16, 17. And this (he says) is a full Command to baptize
all in Covenant now.

But for Answer, consider that no more are commanded in this place to be
baptized, than are first commanded to repent; nor no more were baptized, than
gladly received the Word. And the Promise is expressly of the pouring out of the
Holy Ghost upon all Parents and Children, as God shall call them: But no
Command nor Promise respecting Baptism, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, before
the Lord shall call them, whether Parents or Children. Again, these Words,
(...), to you and to your Children, is not applicable to Children in Infancy,
but to a Succession or Posterity qualified for the things required and promised.

That Text he brings out of Heb. 10. tells us, That God will write his Laws in
the Minds, and put them in the inner Part of his People under the new Covenant,
and that he will remember their Iniquities no more. This is not meant of
Infants, who as they have no Iniquities for God to remember, but only original
Sin for him to pardon, as to the condemning Nature of it, so he never did
remember their Iniquities. Nor need they any Laws to be written in their Hearts
during Infancy, for they can understand none, and God speaks not with them
about the Observation of his Laws, as he tells us Deuteronomy. 11. 2.

The second Commandment is brought to prove Infant Baptism, but Mr. P. should
know it does not command any particular Form of Worship at all. Only this is
true what God has elsewhere instituted, and never repealed, the second
Commandment may serve to enforce the Performance of such things. But here he
beggs the Principle which he cannot prove, no not by Genesis 17. Let us hear the
most Learned of his way (I mean in point of Infant-sprinkling) speak their
Judgments, and these be their Words. Manual of Contro. p. 372, to 377.
That Promise Genesis 17. 7. concerns literally peculiar Protection, and worldly
Felicity, not the Remission of Sins and everlasting Life. And another tells us,
to argue from Circumcision to Infant Baptism is a cunning Argument, by which it
will follow that Females are not S. n. Antid.
to be baptized.

Mr. P. tells us there is no Warrant to delay the Application of Baptism; And I
grant it. But then he should consider that where there is no Authority nor
Capacity to dispense Baptism, there is no delay. And this is the case of
Infants: Nor does their being under the merciful Covenant of Salvation by
Christ, oblige them to Duty in Infancy, because they can perform none. And
therefore your arguing from Foederati to their being signati, is better Rhyme
than Reason; for if you follow that Consequence, it will unavoidably bring
Infants to the Lord's Table, where you will not be pleased with them. And pray
consider what Multitudes were foederati before, and in, and after Abraham's
time, who yet in your own Judgment were not signati; such were the Patriarchs
beforementioned, and those under their Conduct; such were the thousands of
Males who died before the eighth day in Israel. Such were all the Females, who
alone were one half of Abraham's Seed; all these were foederati, yet were none
of them signati.

What you are pleased here to add of some that can, and some that cannot fall
away. As it is impertinent, so I think it far better for Men to cease such idle
Disputes, and to exhort one another daily to take heed that they do not fall
away.

For my part I am far from thinking that any Man can stand by his own Strength,
or do any thing in Religion as he ought without the Help of God: I likewise
grant that God does much more for some, than he does for all Men. Yet all this
gives us no occasion or Authority to tell any Person in the World, that it is
impossible for him to fall, so as to perish. And if we may not tell another Man
this confident Story, it is bad venturing to tell our selves that we cannot fall
so.

I think it is only proper to say of God, He cannot lie, and then it follows,
all Men may lie; and this Lie may be their Ruin for ought they know; Rev. 21.
27.

I will not dispute whether there be a State attainable in this World, in which
Men shall certainly be saved, I doubt it not: but when Men have got to that
degree, is so hard to be demonstrated, that I take him for no wise Man, that
will affirm it of himself, or any other in particular.

It remains therefore the best way in the World to do as Paul did, 1 Cor. 9.
27. Beat down the Body, and bring it into Subjection, lest while we preach to
others, we become Cast-aways. And if any confident Gentleman shall here tell me
the Word only intends reprovable, I Will make bold to tell him, he does neither
understand the Greek, nor his own Heart much better than I do, and that is not
very perfectly, I will assure him.

I have done with Mr. Petto's two main Arguments, we will now consider his
Auxiliaries.

Mr. Petto 's third Argument, page 39.
Some Infants are visibly Christ's, and so are Abraham 's Seed; and hence he
would infer their Baptism. He has many Words, and very often repeated, the
substance of all has I think already been answered; however seeing he talks
here of a threefold Seed of Abraham, under the Titles of Natural, Spiritual,
and Ecclesiastical Seed, I will seriously consider the Scriptures which he
brings to prove Infants to be the Ecclesiastical Seed of Abraham. For the
Scriptures which he brings to describe the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, speaks
not one word of Infants. Gal. 3. 8, 9. shows that God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, and concludes thus; So then they which be of Faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. This is not spoken of Infants, yet they shall be blessed.

The Texts he brings to prove Infants to be the Ecclesiastical Seed of Abraham,
are many* first, Matthew. 25. 1, 2. where the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to
wise and foolish Virgins: but I suppose no wise Man takes Infants to be of
either sort, for they are neither wise nor foolish, but they are innocent.

Two Texts more we have, Romans 11. 20. John 15. 6. where we learn that the Jews
were broken off for Unbelief, and the Gentiles stood by Faith; that some
Branches in Christ not bearing Fruit are taken away, and those which bear Fruit
are purged to bring forth more Fruit: But what all this is to Infants no Man
can tell.

He quotes these over again, and with them Matthew. 19. 14. Mark 10. 13, 14. Luke
18. 15. Matthew. 16. 18. Romans 16. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Rev. 1. 12, 13, 20. Now he
that from these Texts would prove Infants to be Abraham's Ecclesiastical Seed,
must prove that in the three first Texts, the Word Kingdom must needs signify
the Church-militant, and that Christ admitted these Infants into the Church by
Baptism, or else that they have Authority to do more than Christ himself did:
For if these very Infants were not baptized, they must have very great
Confidence that can pretend from hence to find ground to baptize others.

The next Christ tells Peter, that he would build his Church upon a Rock. But
must all that are saved be Abraham's Ecclesiastical Seed? Sure some Infants may
be saved who were never baptized for all this. Romans 16. 16. bids Christians
salute one another with an holy Kiss, and tells them also that the Church of
Christ salutes them. I see nothing from hence to prove Infants visibly
Christ's, so as to be Abraham 's Seed; sure his Proposition will fail of Proof.

The Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 27. tells the Corinthians that they were the Body of
Christ, and Members in particular. But not one word to prove that there was one
Infant of this Communion. Yet all Members of that one Body were partakers of
that one Bread, in which their Unity was demonstrated, Rev. 1. 12, 13, 14. only
describes the Vision that John saw of the Son of God, and the seven Golden
Candlesticks. But no Man can yet find in any of these Candlesticks so much as
one Infant concerned bearing up the light of Truth in the profession of the
Gospel.

Now for his Argument, I would know the meaning of this Speech, Some Infants
are visibly Christ's. If he means some Infants only are Christ's by Redemption;
how can he possibly know the Redeemed from the Damned? (for so they are
supposed to be in this Man's destiny.) The work of Redemption is visible,
because God's Word tells us who Christ died for, and that is for every Man,
Heb. 2. 9. and here Infants are equally Christ's visibly.

But so long as Mr. Petto thinks that Christ died but for some Infants only,
(and those very few in comparison of the whole, he cannot name one for whom
Christ died, it being impossible) for them to give any Demonstration by which
he may know such a thing, and therefore he can have but small comfort in
baptizing any of them, if indeed it were lawful to baptize some Infants, as he
supposes. Nay, were he as sure that Christ died for some particular Infants, as
I am that he died for them all, yet would it not follow that they are Abraham's
Ecclesiastical Seed, so as to be baptized: for Christ knew that the Infants
whom he took in his Arms were his, and yet he did no such thing to them; and I
shall never think Mr. P. wiser than our Savior, nor so kind to poor Infants as
he was.

Mr. Petto argues thus: Some Infants are visibly of the Faith, and so are
Abraham's Seed. Here I deny the Antecedent. I say no Infants are visibly of the
Faith. And Mr. P. tells me in this very place, That he does not say that Faith
semenal, and habitual, or actual, is in all Infants baptized; for then (says
he) all of them must be saved, which they are not; or else they might lose that
special Faith: But they are invisibly invested in the Covenant or Promise,
which is the Word of Faith, and may bear that Name, etc. I answer:

Here are two kinds of Faith which the Scripture knows nothing of, i. e.
seminal, and habitual. However I perceive he knows not one Infant that has any
of these kinds of Faith, he therefore has found out a fourth, and that is a
reputative Faith, or a thing which he says may bear that name. Sure these are
mere Dreams and Fancies, and so let them go.

Actual Faith Infants have none; and this is all the Faith that Man can make
Judgment of by God's Word. He does indeed grant all Infants which are baptized
have not this Faith; and if he dare affirm it ^f any of them, all the
Experience of the World will confute him, and so he has lost his Argument, as a
mere Story without Truth, and against all Experience. For seeing Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; he cannot without a Miracle show any
Infant to be visibly in the Faith; for the poor Babe knows not its right hand
from its left. He might as well say some Infants are visibly in Repentance, and
I marvel why the Poedobaptists do not insist upon that, as well as Faith, to
entitle their Children to Baptism.

Mr. Petto tells us, If Infants have not Faith for the present, yet visibly
they are under a Promise of it, which Promise Baptism may be a Sign and Seal
of; it may seal a Doctrine of Faith, even where a Principle of it is yet
wanting. These and what follows, are mere Dictates and Presumptions, without
Proof. Yet he brings Deuteronomy. 30. 6. where God promises to circumcise the hearts
of the Israelites, and the heart of their Seed, to love the Lord with all the
heart, and with all the soul. But God spoke not this to Infants, nor as a thing
to be done to them in their Infancy; for when they should thus be circumcised,
they should be able to know the Lord very well, for they should love him then
with all the Heart and Soul. Now this Promise is made to all Men upon future
Contingencies, for God commands all Men every where to repent, and wills that
the Gospel (which contains this and many other precious Promises) should be
preached to every Creature; And if Baptism may be a Seal of this Doctrine, even
there where there wants a Principle of Faith, as you tell us it may; then we
may go and baptize every Creature, and not higgle as you do about some Infants
only: but should we do thus, God's Word would trip up our Heels, as it does
yours, for tho he has proclaimed Peace to the World by the Gospel, yet he makes
Faith necessary to the Pledge of its Reception; He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; If thou believe with all thine Heart thou may be
baptized: When they believed, they were baptized, not one Person admitted
without; and then what is Mr. Petto that will adventure to give Baptism, even
there where there is not Faith, no nor so much as a Principle of it? How shall
Baptism be the Answer of a good Conscience without a Principle of Faith? And
what good will it do you without Faith?

He quotes Isa. 44. 3. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, I will pour
my Spirit upon thy Seed, etc. Well, but not in Infancy; when was this done to
any of your Infants? Or, has not God made good this Promise in the Gospel? Men
must be thirsty before this Water be poured out upon them. You bring Isa. 59.
21. which might have showed you that these Promises belong not to Infants;
seeing they cannot understand either the Word or Spirit, which yet is here
promised to be in the mouth of the Church, and her Seed for ever; or, if you
please, in the mouth of Christ, and his Seeds Seed for ever. But Infants are so
called, says Augustine, a non fando, because they cannot speak.

You bring Psalm. 25. 13. and 112. 2. where it is said, The Seed of good Men
shall inherit the Earth, and be mighty upon Earth, and be blessed. But I think
these are unfitly applied to Infants in Infancy; and yet if they concerned
them, here is no Proof that they are visibly in the Faith during Infancy.

But what shall become of the Infants of ill Men by Mr. Petto's Doctrine? they
are put by him in a Condition contrary to that of the Infants of good Men, as
if the Infants Blessing or Cursing must be measured out, as the Parents are
Believers, or otherwise. Let us see his Scriptures; Psalm. 37. 28. -- The Seed
of the wicked shall be cut off: But why must this be applied to Infants? Sure
he has Mercy for them, so as not to turn them into Hell. For he has told us,
if those Children of wicked Men which live to years do but turn from the wicked
Ways of their Fathers, they shall not die; and so equal are God's Ways, that if
the Son of a righteous Man follow the Ways of wicked Men, he shall die: as to
temporal Judgments, I grant the Infants do sometimes suffer for the Sin of
their Parents, but our Discourse is about their Salvation.

You bring Romans 11. again, and thence you infer that the Infant Seed of the
Jews was broken off for the Parents Unbelief. But if this Breaking-off be
understood of an Exclusion of Infants to Hells Torments, it is a most false
Opinion, as I shall fully show anon.

That Abraham by virtue of his Faith which he had being uncircumcised, is a
Father of the faithful, both Jew and Gentile, is very true. But that any of
them are his Children, so as to be Members of the Church militant, to do and
suffer for Christ, without actual Faith, is not true, nor does Romans 4. 10, 11,
12. prove the contrary; let us hear your Text: How then was it reckoned? when
he was in Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? not in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision. And he rereceived the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, that he might be
the Father of them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
Righteousness might be imputed to them also. And the Father of Circumcision to
them, who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in the Steps of that
Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised. May the God
of Heaven give you a good understanding of this Place, and then all your
struggling for Infant Baptism would soon vanish.

For there is nothing more evident than this, that none but such as so believe,
as to walk in the Steps of that Faith which Abraham himself had (which was true
actual Faith,) are the Children of Abraham, in a visible Church State to
worship God, either in Baptism, or other Ordinances.

From page 48. You proceed to answer many Objections, and in all you say this
seems to be your great Stick, That Infant-Interest in the Covenant, Genesis 17. is
not cut off by any thing so objected, as you have set them down; and unless
this be showed, all Objections signify nothing to you.

1. To which I answer, Infants had as good Right to the Covenant of Grace
before Circumcision, and have the same Right now which they ever had to that
blessed Covenant: of this more by and by.

2. No Person's Right to Circumcision did arise out of the Covenant of Grace,
but did only issue from the Command of God; otherwise all good Men then living
must needs be circumcised, for they were in the Covenant of Grace as well as
Abraham.

3. As Circumcision did not give Abraham's Seed an Interest in the Covenant of
Grace, so the Abrogation of Circumcision did not take that Interest from them.
Nor did the omission of it, when in being, cut Infants off from the Covenant of
Grace: It only cut them off from the Land of Canaan, and the external
Privileges of the Jewish Churchstate. For the delay of the Circumcision of
Moses's Child did not cut it off from the Covenant of Grace, nor did the
omission of it forty Years in the Wilderness, cut them Infants off from the
Covenant of Grace who died in that time, howbeit before they possessed the Land
of Canaan they must be circumcised; which evidently shows that the Covenant of
Grace, and the Covenant of Circumcision are to be distinguished. And therefore
though Infants have now no Part in the Covenant of Circumcision, yet they lose
nothing by it; because though it was very useful till Christ came, for the Ends
for which it was ordained, respecting the Church State of the Jews, and the
Birth of our Savior, of that Seed according to the Flesh; yet the Removal of
it was a great Mercy, whether we respect the Severity of the Service it self,
or the Obligation to which it bound all that were circumcised.

Neither does any Man's Right to the Covenant of Grace arise from the Covenant
of Circumcision; neither does his Right to Baptism arise from the Covenant of
Grace, without a Divine Command appointing to whom, and how it should be
performed. Now the Gospel being preached for the Obedience of Faith to all
Nations, Romans 16. 26. And that Typical Covenant of Circumcision being made
void, and the Gospel appointing no Ceremony for Infants (yet assuring them of
Heaven) but making Repentance and Faith the two first Principles of the
Christian Religion, and Baptism the third Principle in order to a due
Profession of Gospel Worship in a Church Way, it is manifest that
Infant Baptism is an Innovation, and makes a Breach upon the sacred Doctrine
contained in St. Paul's Catechism, as set down, Heb. 6. 1, 2. And therefore all
good Men should labor that Truth herein according to Primitive Crder may be
restored.

Nevertheless that Infants (even all of them dying such) have an undeniable
Right in the Covenant of Grace, to Life and Salvation, I hope to make very
evident both from the Scripture and right Reason, in the last Part of this
Treatise to which I now apply my self; and though herein I shall not directly
answer to Mr. Petto, yet I shall scarce fail to remove those things, which may
seem to be of any moment, in his often and unnecessary Repetitions.

PART. III.
In which Infants Interest in the Covenant of Grace, without Baptism, is
asserted and maintained.
IT is evident from the Writings of many Paedobaptists, both Papists and
Protestants, that they do hold either absolutely, that no unbaptized Infant can
be saved, or at least that their Salvation is very doubtful, and amongst those,
Mr. Baxter, and from him Mr. Barret, and now Mr. Petto has not a little amused
the Minds of Men about this matter. First, Mr. Baxter tells us (and Mr. Barret
also) that Infants are not so much as seemingly in a State of Salvation without
Baptism. And secondly, Mr. Petto thinks they are cut out of the great Charter
of Heaven. These are his Words: It is the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the
Infant Seed, only of visible Believers, that I plead for; and there are such
vast Numbers (even millions) of these, that if Men unduly exclude and raze out
the Names of so many out of that great Charter of Heaven, they will have a
dreadful Account to give thereof to God.

In answer to these childish Fears and undue Reflections upon us, I shall take
the pains to transcribe what I have formerly written upon this Account, it
being yet unanswered.

This new Art of pleading for Infant Baptism by virtue of their
Church Membership, Covenant Interest, etc. and not from the Scriptures
directly, but altogether by remote, obscure, and far-fetched Consequences; I
say, considering these Subtilties of Mr. Baxter and others, I perceive the
Controversy to rise very high, and Questions thereupon to be multiplied,
insomuch that I have had for my share not less than five hundred of them sent
out by Mr. Barret abovenamed, which has been redargued in two Books of
Antiqueries.

Hereupon I conceived it needful to consider this matter, for I perceived very
wise and good Men engaged on both sides; and as I believe much more straining
in the Point of Church Membership, or Covenant Interest of Infants than needed.
By which the Readers of the Controversy, as handled between Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Tombs, shall sooner fill their Heads with Amazement, than their Hearts with
Satisfaction, in tracing the several Meanders of their Scholastic Disputations.

And though I am abundantly short of the Accomplishments of either of these
Champions, yet standing to view till they engage, I hope I have thereby been
led to the Consideration of a Medium, which if well considered and improved,
will reconcile the difference about Infants visible Church Membership, and
Covenant Interest, and yet do not doubt at all that Infant Baptism will be
found unnecessary, and unlawful. To which purpose I shall lay down once more
this Position.

That all Infants (as such) are in a visible State of Salvation by the Covenant
of Grace, and so are of the universal Church of God; and cannot be put out of
that blessed State, till by their voluntary Departure from God, by choosing
sinful Ways, they destroy themselves. And the better to convince my present
Adversaries, I will make my Entrance hereunto by a Passage out of Mr. Baxter's
Book, of More Proves, etc. page 8. where he says,

All Mankind is brought by Christ under a Covenant of Grace, which is not vain,
nor repealed by God, but as their Abuse of the Grace of the Covenant may cast
them out.

For as a Covenant of entire Nature was made with all Mankind in innocent Adam,
so a Covenant of Grace was made with all Mankind in lapsed Adam, Genesis 3. 15. in
the promised Seed; and renewed again with all Mankind in Noah.

Now this Doctrine being no more than plain Truth, we shall apply it to the
case in hand, by showing,

1. That this Covenant of Grace was a visible Church Covenant. 2. That it was
made with all Mankind, and takes place in their Infancy. 3. That it was never
repealed by God. 4. That no Infant did ever abuse the Grace of this Covenant;
and that therefore no Infant was ever cast out of this Covenant.
And then, fifthly, they all stand visible Members of the Catholic or
universal Church, by virtue of this Covenant, however their Parents do abuse or
neglect it. And hence it will follow, no dying Infant is damned, but are all in
a visible State of Salvation. These things I hope to show to Satisfaction.

Demonstration 1.
That this Covenant of Grace, first expressed, Genesis 3. 15. was either a
Church Covenant, or else there was no Church Covenant in the World, that we
read of from Adam to Noah; this being indeed all the Covenant which is found in
Scripture during these times, besides that Covenant of entire Nature made
before the Fall. And that Covenant of Nature being broken by Adam, and in him
by all his Posterity, it being not a Covenant of Grace, could not afford means
to justify the the Offenders in the Sight of God. There must therefore be some
supervening Act of Grace or Mercy from God, else Adam, even whole Mankind who
were then in his Loins, must have stood under Condemnation for ever; seeing no
Man could redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him, Psalm. 49. 7.

It is the received Doctrine of Christians that the visible Church began in
Adam; and that his Family was the Church, wherefore the whole World being then
the Church, and that Church Covenant being made with the whole World, which was
to proceed from Adam, and this Covenant yet remaining, it follows against all
Contradiction, that whole Mankind, considered as they came into the World, in
the several Ages of it, are in that Covenant, and so in a visible State of
Salvation, and therefore of the Universal Church of God.

But whereas many did apostatize from the Grace of God's Covenant, by
corrupting his Way, Genesis 6. 12. it was necessary that they should be ejected;
and therefore was the Profession of this blessed Covenant accommodated and
appropriated to that Part of the Adult, who had not sinned themselves out of
it. But still we do not find that the Innocent was ejected with the Guilty. For
this is God's Order, It is he only that sins, whom he will blot out of the
Book of Life, Exodus 32. 32, 33.

And therefore neither the Method which God took with Noah in settling the
Covenant of his Grace; nor yet that Order which he observed with Abraham, Genesis
12. was exclusive of any Infant in the World, as to the Grace or Mercy of
eternal Life, no more than the Establishment of it by Christ in the Gospel, in
a far more excellent way, for distinguishing the precious from the vile, is in
any wise, no not in the least iota, exclusive of any dying Infant of ill Men:
but contrary-wise the Right of Infants, without excepting any of them, is
asserted by Christ in this last and most ample Edition of the Covenant of Grace.

Nor can any Man show either by Scripture or Reason, that God will shut out all
the dying Infants of wicked Men, from Life and Salvation by Christ, no nor so
much as any one of them. For we are sure that the Judgment of God is according
to Truth, that the Judge of all the Earth will do Right: That the condemned
shall all be judged according to the Deeds done in the Body. But as for poor
Infants, what Evil have they done?

Demonstration 2.
That this Covenant was made with all Mankind, because it was made with Adam,
without the least Intimation of the Exclusion of any part of his Posterity (as
they proceed from him) to the End of the World. Neither has God himself
explained the Covenant of Grace to be exclusive of any, but for the Cause of
their own Iniquity. And this was evident first in the case of Cain, who not
being faithful in his Offering, was not accepted; yet God was pleased to tell
him how he might be accepted, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? It should seem God never rejected Cain till now, neither did he now
delight to reject him, but graciously expostulates with Cain to convince him of
his Evil, and assures him of Acceptance, if he did well.

If then Cain had an Interest in the Grace of God, who can we suppose to be
shut out of it? Or how should Infants be cast out of his Favor, till they with
Cain shut themselves out of it?

Evident it is that the Covenant of Grace extended to those Rebels in the old
World, because we read that the Long-suffering of God waited in the Days of
Noah upon them, and he gave them time of Repentance, and sent a Preacher of
Righteousness (even the Righteousness of Faith) among them. Heb. 11. 7. 2 Pet.
2. 5. therefore it is said Christ went by his Spirit and preached to them, 1
Pet. 3. though none of them believed his Word.

Now such Acts on God's part are great Evidences of his Graciousness toward
Men, and shows that he remembers his Covenant made in Christ for them, even for
them that rebel against him, and so perish. And then how should we think that
he should not be gracious to poor Infants, who never rebelled against him?

Demonstration 3.
The Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. was never repealed by God. For if it be,
there is now no Covenant at all: Nor can it be repealed to one Man, but it must
be repealed to all Men. It Is true, Men may forfeit the Mercy of God held forth
in that Covenant, but the Covenant cannot be repealed, for then there can be no
certainty of Mercy for Sinners. Christ our Lord may as soon be made null, as
this Covenant: For what if some do apostatize, shall this make the Grace of God
without effect? God forbid. When we continually see the Covenant of God's Grace
displayed, making Overtures of Kindness to Sinners, by beseeching them to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. What shall we say? Has the chief of Sinners this
Benefit by the Covenant of Grace? And shall poor innocent Babes have no Benefit
by it? Is he not worse than the chief of Sinners, that is thus exposed to
Damnation? Sure there are better things with God for poor Babes, and chiefly in
this he has not given Parents power to make void the Covenant of his Grace with
respect to their Infants: For he has said, the Son shall not bear the Iniquity
of the Father: The Soul that sins it shall die.

Demonstration 4.
No Infant did ever abuse the Grace of the Covenant made with them in Adam;
therefore no Infant was ever cast out of it.

Although it is most true that Original Sin is come upon Infants, and Death by
Sin: Yet this is as true, That Original Sin was not committed against the
Covenant of Grace. And therefore Infants are not guilty of any Sin committed
against the Covenant of Grace, and consequently are not deprived of the Benefit
of it.

Otherwise if the Sin of subsequent Parents should make void the Grace of the
second Covenant, as the Sin of Adam made his Posterity guilty of the Breach of
the first Covenant, we may then cry out, who then can be saved? But therefore
was our Savior the Mediator of the New Testament, for the Redemption of the
Transgressions which were under the first Testament.

Wherefore seeing Infants stand acquitted from the Trespasses committed by Adam
against the first Testament or Covenant, and having not sinned against the
Grace of the second Testament, they cannot come in the Condemnation of Hellish
Torments. The Church of Rome, who make Baptism as necessary for Infants as any
Body does, yet they have so much Kindness, as to condemn Infants only to a
State of Loss, but not of Torment: Whilst those of Calvin's Spirit do send them
(by their Doctrine) to yell among the damned in Hellfire. Sure this is no part
of the Gospel, I will not call it so: Yet I will say those that reject that
great Salvation held forth in the Gospel, are justly condemned; but this is not
the case of Infants.

Demonstration 5.
That all dying Infants are Members of that vast Body of which Christ is the
Savior finally, and so of his Church considered as universal, is evident,
because they are in a visible State of Salvation. And I think no Man will deny
the Catholic Church to contain the whole Number of the saved.

I have nothing more to do, but to prove all Infants in a visible State of
Salvation; which shall be done more particularly by answering such Objections
as I have met with, more especially from Mr. Barret.

Objection I. I gave you thanks for some things before granted concerning
Insants, and I here promise more Thanks if you will prove the same of all
Infants.
Answ. When I speak of the Right which Infants have to Life by Christ, I intend
it only of that Right derived to them by the first Edition of the Covenant of
Grace, Genesis 3. 15. wherein they are equally concerned, and so have the same or
equal Right. And I hope you cannot charge them with forfeiting the Grace of
that Covenant, and then they cannot be damned.

Our Savior says, it is not the Will of his Heavenly Father, that so much as
one of these little Ones should perish, which is as true of Infants, as of any
Persons in the World.

Object. II. The Overthrow of both these Generations in the old World, is a
strange Medium to prove the Salvation of all Infants by.
Answ. The mere destroying of the Infants of those who were called the Sons of
God, as well as the Infants of others, Genesis 6. and 7. I do not say is any
Evidence of God's saving any of them.

But this is that which I say, it shows them to be in one State or Predicament:
And how shall any Man prove the Salvation of so much as of any one of them,
better than I shall prove the Salvation of them all: And shall we suffer it to
enter into our Hearts that God sent them all to be damned in Hell?

By no means. When therefore we read, 2 Pet. 2. 5. That God brought the Flood
upon the World of the Ungodly; and Jude 7. it is said of those who suffered the
Vengeance of eternal Fire, that they were given over to Fornication, and went
after strange Flesh. May we not perceive some Light which may guide us to
believe that God did not plead in such Wrath against the Infant Seed as he did
against the wicked themselves? And though it is true, God suffered the Infants
to die with the wicked Parents, yet that is no Argument of God's condemning
them to Hell. For did not the same God suffer his Servant Sampson to die with
the Fall of the Theater, among the wicked Philistines?

And we see the righteous often taken away by the same common Calamities which
have befallen Nations and Cities. Let us remember how tender the Lord was of
the Infants of Nineveh, and that may convince us that the same gracious God
could not be cruel to the Infants of the old World; and he that made those
little ones an Argument to justify his sparing sinful Nineveh, against the
murmuring of Jonah, would certainly make that an Argument for us to believe,
that had his Judgments proceeded against that City, according to the Prophesy
of Jonah; yet he would have distinguished between the Innocent and the Nocent,
in respect of future Punishment and Mercy: For it was not the Sin of the
Infants, which cried to Heaven for Vengeance, but of the grown Persons.

When we consider how hardly Almighty God was drawn to inflict those Judgments
upon Men's Bodies in the old World, and in Sodom, Genesis 18. and frequently where
we read of the Execution of his Judgments; it might justly seem very strange
that Men should think that God can be so easily provoked to damn Infants to
Hell: For him I say to damn poor Infants to Eternal Fire, who was so unwilling
to inflict on the Babes in Nineveh so much as a Temporal Judgment; nay he is
unwilling to destroy the very Cattle for Man's Sin, Jonah 4. which are only
capable to suffer a short of Death. And can it become any Christian to think
that God will send Millions of poor dying Infants to Hell? Pray what have they
done so highly to stir up his Wrath against them? let any Man show a Reason
for it if he can.

Object. III. To the Text Romans 5. the Free-Gift abounded toward all Men to
Justification of Life. This [all] must be restrained to [all in Christ].
Answ. But by your Favor there are none so out of Christ in Infancy, but that
God has Mercy for them in Christ: John 1. 29. so that here is no Restraint to
the Justification here spoken of, till Men abuse this Mercy of God by sinning
against their own Souls. Nor can your Restriction which I suppose would limit
this Free-Gift to the Elect only, hold any Agreement with the Scope of the
Place. For seeing all Mankind are personated as well in the second, as in the
first Adam, you can no more exclude any from the Justification of Life, as
having abounded toward them by Christ, than you can exclude them from the
Condemnation which abounded toward them by Adam. For tell me how many came
under Condemnation by the Sin of Adam? Is there any one, or any Infant that can
plead Impunity? Why even so (says the Apostle) the Free-Gift abounded toward
all Men to Justification of Life.

And may we not safely conclude, that had Mankind never been guilty of any
other Sin but that of Adam's, I say upon a Supposition that Adam's Posterity
from the time of the Promise, Genesis 3. 15. had lived holily, and done no
Iniquity, would you not conclude with me, that none should have perished in
Hell Torments? And if you grant this, then we must either find some Man SO
concerned in the Covenant of Grace, AS that if he sinned against this Covenant,
his Posterity is damned with him eternally, as all Adam's Posterity was exposed
to Condemnation for his Sin; or else we must hold that no Infant shall die
eternally for Adam's, nor for any other Persons Iniquity.

If you name any Man, thus concerned in the Covenant of Grace, you can name
none so apt for the purpose as Adam, seeing we were all in him when the
Covenant was made with him, and there is no doubt but that he sinned after the
Covenant was made Genesis 3. 15. yet where do we find any Sin which he afterward
committed, imputed to any Part of his Posterity? And seeing we cannot prove an
universal Resurrection from 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. unless Mankind be equally
concerned in the Death of Christ, we must necessarily believe whole Mankind to
be interessed in him, and as interessed in him, they are in a saneable State,
from that Wrath which lay against them by reason of the Sin of Adam: So then
Infants being justified from the Guilt of Adam's Transgression, by Christ the
Lamb of God; who shall lay any thing to the Charge of poor Infants, that may
justly cast them into Hellfire? Sure it is but meet that Men should be able
plainly to convict them, before they thus condemn them.

Yea, you that hold the eternal Damnation of Infants, ought you not to bring
substantial proof for so dreadful a Doctrine? And when you have done your worst
that way, you have only destroyed your own Hope concerning your own dying
Infants. For I am persuaded you are not so unwise to think (whatever you make
others believe) that your Infants are saved because of your pretended
Church Membership and Baptism. Nay Mr. Petto plainly tells us, that all Infants
that are baptized are not saved; as I have showed above. And it is impossible
without a Miracle for him to know this, or that any one of them is saved,
unless he comes on this Foundation that none of them shall perish.

Object. IV. To assert the Salvation of all dying Infants, seems to imply, that
God's destroying the old World and Sodom, etc. were eminent Acts of God's
Mercy, rather than of Justice, etc. help me over this Difficulty.
Answ. Although it is not unjust for God to take Infants out of the World at
any time, yet his Justice in destroying them in the old World and Sodom, lay
not against the Infants, as I proved in the precedent Answer. But in Justice he
punished those wicked Parents, in putting a Period to their Posterity. And did
not God in the Days of Noah destroy the Beasts and Fowls of Heaven, yet who so
weak to think that he was offended with them? Was the Lord angry with the
Beasts of the Field? God was just in taking away David's Child, 2 Samuel 12. 14.
yet who so rash to say that God did this in Justice against the Child? much
less that the Child was damned, or that God was angry with the Child. David was
far from such an Opinion, for tho that Child was conceived and born in Sin, as
much as any, yet David nothing feared the Damnation of the Child, but rather
shows his Confidence of its Salvation, when he said, I shall go to it. For had
it gone to Hell Torments, he would not have comforted himself with Thoughts of
going to it.

Object. V. We do not say that Infants do perish purely for another Sin, but
for their own contracted.
Answ. I cannot see any Agreement with God's Justice in this Objection, nor
Truth in it self. I can hear Men talk big Words against Infants, as if they
were very great Sinners, yet I never saw any Proof, that any Infant had any Sin
of its own, for which you would here make them perish.

The Scripture says Sin is the Transgression of a Law, and tells us also where
no Law is, there is no Transgression. You must therefore either show some Law
to be given to Infants, or else you cannot make them guilty of any Sin of their
own. And seeing you have granted that none shall perish purely for another
Sin, it remains for you, or some body else, to show what Sin has been committed
by them, or any of them, for which they incur the Damnation of Hell. You may
talk of Infants contracting Sin of their own; but I am to learn how this can be
said of those who neither act nor consent to Sin at all. Such Scriptureless
Notions are fitter to be exploded than embraced.

And though you seem to have some Charity for those and their Seed, who only
come up to the Covenant of Grace made with Adam and Noah, though they never
heard the Gospel, whilst you say, you do not rank them with Imsdels; yet this
is but a slender Kindness: you do not say they shall be saved, and you are
positive in this, that Infants are not saved by the Covenant of Grace, if they
be neither Believers, nor the Seed of such. How this Doctrine will stand with
the Justice of a gracious God, I cannot conceive when I consider, that God has
not given to Infants either Capacity to believe, or Liberty to choose whether
they will be the Seed of Believers or Unbelievers. Will you yet say a gracious
God will be more harsh in Acts of Justice, than the Rules will bear which he
has given to Men? Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26. Here he will not have a Damsel punished,
though her Body be defiled, because she could not help it. And yet you would
have him send Infants to Hell for that which they cannot help!

It is not the part of a wise Legislator (says one) to recede from his own
Laws; much less to destroy them, by acting contrary to them. It must be a fault
then in you, thus unjustly to represent the God of Justice. Is the Covenant of
Grace set upon such a little Point, as that the greatest Part of Infants cannot
possibly have any Benefit by it? So you teach, who affirm Infants cannot be
saved unless they be Believers, or the Seed of Believers. Why call you a
Covenant made with Infants on such Terms a Covenant of Grace? sure such
absolutely impossible Terms in any Covenant are not very gracious, when the
Non-observation of them is Damnation without remedy, and that of the Innocent
too.

You would condemn this in Men; you would abhor to hear or receive such Terms
of Man; yet thus you make many believe that God deals with the greatest part of
poor Infants.

Object. VI. According to your Doctrine the taking away the Infants of the old
World and of Sodom, was a great Mercy, because had they lived to Age, many of
them might have been damned for Wickedness.
Answ. The taking away by Death of the Infants of the old World and Sodom, is
neither an Instance of Justice nor Mercy to Infants in the main; any more than
the taking away thousands of Infants daily by Death throughout the World: For
whenever they die, they are taken away from ALL EVIL TO COME, and so it is
always a Mercy' and such was the Mercy of God to Infants in the Old World and
in Sodom* But whenever they are taken away, we know it is for Sin, even that of
Adam. And sometimes their Death is hastened for the Sin of their Parents, as in
the case of David's Child, and the Old World, and Sodom; and thus their being
taken away is always a Judgment: And the Judgment lies much in this, that Men's
Posterity is either quite cut off, or much weakened; thus was the Old World and
Sodom punished, their Succession was cut off.

And though it is true, if those Infants in the Old World and Sodom had lived
to Age, many of them might have been damned for Wickedness, yet (not to insist
upon the Prescience of Almighty God) to balance that, it is as true that a far
greater Multitude, in few Generations, both of Infants and others, which might
have proceeded from them, might have been saved. So that though we have no
ground to doubt of the Salvation of these dying Infants in the Old World and in
Sodom, yet we may see a just Judgment executed in both.

Object. VII. Should the French King destroy all the Infants of the Pagans,
would not this be a Judgment? Sure had the World your Light and Knowledge, they
ought not to be sorry for the spoiling of their Cities, and depopulating their
Countries.
Answ. What if the French King should do thus? it follows not that here is not
a Judgment in all this, neither yet that God has no Mercy for those murdered
Infants.

But pray consider, whilst we all condemn such Cruelty in Tyrants, we must by
no means think or say, that our gracious God, when the Tyrant has murdered
them, will take these Infants and cast them into Hellish Torments: Were not
this to represent Almighty God to be the worst of Tyrants?

And let no Man murmur against God for saving such Infants (or all Infants),
who when Men have done their worst, he will prevent that which would be far
worse to poor Infants than the worst that Man can do. And though I may be
satisfied that my Child or Friend is gone to Heaven, yet I may lawfully be
sorry for both, so that I sorrow not as one without Hope.

Object. VIII. What shall we make of Ephesians. 2. 3, 12. And were by Nature
Children of Wrath, even as others? That at that time you were without Christ,
without Hope. If there be no Ground to doubt the Salvation of their Infants, is
there not some Hope?
Answ. I grant that all Adam's Posterity with himself were Children of Wrath;
and take that Wrath in as large a sense as you please, it hurts not my Cause at
all: Seeing it is evident that Christ abolished that Wrath and Death, and
brought Life and Immortality to Light by the Gospel, which he preached to whole
Adam, Genesis 3. 15. and then took whole Adam into Grace and Favor; so that till
they, or any of them, become the Serpents Seed, they stand in a State of Favor
and Grace, which shall deliver them from Wrath and Death. And it is most
certain, no Infant is the Serpents Seed, it being out of his Power to beget
them to be his Offspring, seeing they are out of the reach of his Temptations
during Infancy. Howbeit this Place, Ephesians. 2. is best interpreted of the Adult
or grown Persons, for these, of whom it was said they were without Hope, etc.
it is said, they were dead in Trespasses and Sins, and walked according to the
Course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, which
now works in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience; such as had their
Conversation in the Lusts of their Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh,
and of the Mind: And S O were by Nature the Children of Wrath.

But what is all this to the innocent Babes of the Gentiles? they were not thus
the Children of Wrath, no nor out of the Covenant of Grace, as made with Adam,
having never abused the Grace of that Covenant. So that there was Hope (or
Ground of Hope) concerning the dying Infants of the Gentiles, whether their
Parents understood it or not: but no Hope concerning themselves, considered in
their wicked Courses.

Neither could the Hope of these Gentiles (when they believed) concerning their
Infants, stand upon the same Grounds on which their own Hope was founded,
seeing these were saved through Faith, and built up an Habitation of God
through the Spirit. Only this is very true, they now understood the Riches of
God's Grace to Mankind, and that God had pity for them, when they were dead in
Trespasses and Sins. And therefore they could not rationally doubt of his good
Will toward their dying Infants: For still his Unwillingness to destroy the
actual Sinner, is Argument enough that he will never destroy the innocent Child
eternally.

What Hope there is of all Infants entering into Heaven (however it may be hid
from the Pagans.) is evident enough from our Savior's Speech; Except ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Now suppose I take the Infant of a Jew or Pagan for my
Pattern, and labor that my Conversation may answer to such a Precedent, in
point of Innocence, Humility, and Simplicity; will not this as well accord the
Intent of our Savior's Words, as if I took the Child of a Christian for my
Pattern? certes it would.

And indeed our Savior here speaks as much for our Comfort concerning all
little Childrens Capacity, to enter into Heaven, as for any one of them; as
also when the Apostle exhorts us, as touching Malice, to be as Children; Does
he not hereby justify the whole in that State of Infancy to be devoid of that
Evil? And why even of our selves do we not judge what is right? Could any Man
from the Beginning to this Day, bring the least Charge against one Infant more
than another? Unless God by Miracle show some special Power upon them, no
Difference can be seen in them in point of Innocence.

Object. IX. But have you not forgotten that you told us you do not doubt but
the Promises made to the Seed of the Righteous, and the Promises of showing
Mercy to them that love God, remain unrevoked?
Answ. I have not forgotten that, but still believe that there are many more
Blessings pertaining to the Seed of the Righteous, according to the Texts by
you alleged, than to others. And that they may be better considered, I will
set that down in Words which you write in Figures; Psalm. 102. 28. The Children
of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before thee.

This had doubtless been the Portion of the Sons of God in the Days of Noah,
had they not sinned with the rest of Mankind: Psalm. 103. 17. The Mercy of the
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, to them that fear him, and his
Righteousness to Childrens Children, to them that keep his Covenant, and
remember his Commandments to do them. Prove. 20. 7. The just walks in his
Integrity, his Children are blessed after him.

Now what do these Places prove? sure nothing less than that no Infants shall
be saved, but the Infants of Believers, etc. and if not, how do they suit your
Case? They prove indeed that God will bless the Posterity of his faithful
Servants if they keep his Covenant, and remember his Commandments to do them: I
think David well expounds this Place in Psalm. 37. 25. And yet I grant, though
you prove it not, that there are very many other Blessings (even in Infancy)
does attend the Seed of the Righteous.

They being a Seed of many Prayers, and devoted to God from the Womb, as far as
their pious Parents has Authority to do it; whilst, God knows, others are
destitute of these Blessings, being crossed and exorcised among the
Paedobaptists, and offered to Molech among the Jews, and the like among the
Heathens. And yet for all this, I can see no Ground to think that the righteous
God will punish with Hellish Torments those dying Infants for the Wrong which
their Parents have done them.

It being inconceivable how it can stand with his Attributes, either of Mercy
or Justice, both which must have Effect upon them: His Justice has its Effect
on Infants in Diseases, Sickness and Death. Now either his Mercy must have
Effect upon dying Infants in the next World, or not at all, if not in that
World, how shall that Saying be true; His tender Mercies are over all his
Works? Will he never show tender Mercy to Infants, who only lived to cry and
die in this World, and must they now die eternally in Hell? Is this your tender
Mercy to Infants? O ye cruel Paedobaptists!

Object. X. If the Blessing of Abraham came upon the Gentiles through Faith,
Gal. 3. 14. how does it reach to the Infants of the Gentiles which do not
believe?
Answ. I told you that the Blessing in respect of Eternal Life was not peculiar
to Abraham and his Seed, but was made as well to Adam and his Seed, and so
common to Mankind, and may well be called the common Salvation, being derived
from Christ promised, Genesis 3. 15. (before Abraham was) who is therefore the
Savior of all Men.

Indeed Abraham, and so all Believers, have many things in special or peculiar
Blessings, as a People engaged in the Duties of Religion: Whilst Unbelievers
are under a wrathful Sentence, because they neglect so great Salvation. But all
this concerns not dying Infants, who neglect not this Salvation, and so forfeit
not their Right to that common Salvation obtained by Christ for Mankind.

In Gal. 3. 14. the Apostle speaks of the Promise of the Spirit, which as it
concerns the Church under the Gospel-frame, does not concern Infants. It being
understood of a greater measure of Wisdom, and Power to walk in the Paths of
Righteousness, than was ordinary under the former Testament; 2 Timothy 1. 6. Gal.
3. 2, 3, 5, 7. Gal. 5. 25.

Nor can you with any show of Reason say, that I make the Salvation of Infants
run in a fleshly Line, seeing I derive it only from the free Grace of God,
manifested in the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, to take away the
Sin of the World.

Nor do I consider Adam in a State of Nature, but as under a Covenant of Grace,
from whom the second Adam must in time proceed as touching his Flesh, and
therefore his Descent is reckoned from him, Luke 3. 23. to the end. In this
second Adam, the Repairer of Mankind, do I place the Salvation of all Men. And
of the Infant-Race, I say, their Title to this Grace is not tied to Man's Will,
to sin them out of it at their Pleasure, nor can the Devil himself deprive them
of this Grace of Life. And therefore they being thus written in the Book of
Life, and not being under the Sentence of the Book of Conscience, they cannot
be hurt of the second Death.

To what you say about God's putting the Salvation of Infants out of his own
Hand. I say, that though he put the Salvation of no Creature out of his own
Hand according to my Opinion; yet when he stretched forth his Hand to
Gainsayers, as Romans 10. and gives them the Word of Life, and they put it from
them, Act. 13. 46. Then Men may truly be said to have a Prize in their Hands,
and to put it from them, even the Salvation of their Souls.

And then I pray consider, that if their putting Salvation from themselves, be
equally or really a putting it from their Infants (as that must be your
Opinion, or else we differ not) then I say, according to your Opinion, God
suffers Men to damn poor Infants whom he would save. Seeing, according to your
Doctrine, had the Parents believed, their Infants had been in the Covenant of
Grace. But now for their Fathers Sin (for what you say of their own contracted,
is but a Fable) they are left by you in the Kingdom of the Devil to suffer with
the Devil and his Angels for ever. Now this dreadful Doctrine can never be
proved by the Scriptures, though some have assayed to do it.

I find indeed Dr. Fulk saying, That Calvin holds all Infants under the
Sentence of Eternal Damnation; only he admits, that such Infants as are Elect
and born again by the Spirit of God, may be saved. But I find no Proof, that
any Infant, dying so, is reprobate to Eternal Damnation: The Scripture says no
such thing.

Indeed Diodate would have us believe that God cast Esau (even before he was
born) out of his Love as a Father: But here is no Proof. For if we should admit
his Gloss upon Romans 9. 13. yet we are to consider that God knew what Esau would
be in time, and did here foreshew what in time should be done concerning him.
Esau lived to be a Man, and a very sinful Man. God knew all this before. Esau
is not to be ranked with dying Infants, therefore the Instance of Esau is
nothing to the purpose. And this Instance failing, as it evidently does, I am
sure there is not the least show of Proof in the Scripture for the Damnation of
Dying Infants. And therefore no Man ought to believe such strange Doctrine, nor
trouble the World nor Church of God with it.

When our Savior denounces the dreadful Sentence of Hell's Damnation, he
directs his Speech to Hypocrites, and grievous Sinners. But he has better
things in store for poor Infants; testifying that to them belongs the Kingdom
of God. In his gracious Arms therefore we shall leave all dying Infants, for
the obtaining that Blessing of Life, without which they are more wretched than
the fallen Angels; for they had once a blessed state, but proudly fell from it.
But here it is poor Infants are above these Angels; Infants have a Redeemer,
but the fallen Angels have none.

Glory to God in the Highest for his free Grace toward all Dying Infants, and
let all good Christians say, Amen.
FINIS.

