THE GRAND JVRIES ADDRESS and PRESENTIMENTS TO THE Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Bristol, etc.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Heart Knight, Mayor of the said City, ^on.
Civit. ^^ISTOC.
and the Right Worshipful and Worshipful the Aldermen of the same, his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of, and for the City, and the County of the
same, now assembled in their General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, begun and
beld the 12th day of April instant, and by several Adjournments continued to
this 26th day of the same Month, Anno Dom. 1681.
WE the Grand Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King, and for the Body of the
County of the said City, as becomes good Christians, do publicly and solemnly
acknowledge and profess our Zeal for the true Re^ormed Religion, as the same is
by Law established in the Church of England, as becomes Loyal and Dutiful
Subjects, We take this Opportunity to repeat and testify our Allegiance and
bounden Duty to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, acknowledging with all
possible Gratitude the great happiness and Tranquillity, that (since his most
happy Restoration) all his good Subjects have been blessed with under his most
gracious Reign and Government; and as becomes good Citizens, We render our
unfeigned thanks to the Right Worshipful Master Mayor, for his singular
prudence and integrity in his administration (as Chief Magistrate) of the
Government and Affairs of the City, according to the Duty of his Office; and
especially we must not omit to perpetuate and transmit to Posterity (amongst
the Records of the Court) the memory of those eminent and good offices done by
Himself, and such of the Worshipful Aldermen and worthy Citizens of this City
as have joined with Him, in his and their hearty and active endeavors to
secure and preserve the Honor, Welfare and good Government of this City, with
our Franchises and Privileges from being invaded or trodden down by Ambitious,
Factious, and unreasonable Men, some of whom, by means of extraordinary Favors
conserred on them by this City, have had the happiness to be advanced into His
Majesty's Royal Grace and Favor, and have been by Him honored with Dignity,
and preferred unto places of considerable Trust and Profit; howsoever by them
deserved or requited. As to what chiesly relates to our present duty; forasmuch
as the Religion established and professed in our Church, has the highest
Obligations to Loyalty and Obedience, and is the firmest Ligature of all Humane
Societies, and unless that be secured and defended, we cannot reasonably
promise our selves the Blessing either of Peace or Trade (both which
particulars the Right Worshipful Master Myor at the close of the charge given
us, was pleased in especial manner to commend to our Consideration) we thought
it our duty to employ the greatest part of the time allot^ed us for this
present service, about enquiring into the true Causes of the decay of the first
of these (namely Religion) and with humble submission, to propose to this Court
the ways and means to vindicate and restore it to its former purity and beauty
amongst us, that so the two other (viz.) Peace and Trade, which are so mainly
Influenced by the former, may be Restored and Increased also.

And upon such enquiry, we find it too evident and apparent, and in pursuance
of our oaths and duty we present, that those who have abandoned their
Parish-Churches, and refusing to resort thither, are become frequenters of
unlawful Conventicles, and some other, who (though they have not perhaps, for
fear of the penalties of the Laws, or for other respects, altogether forsaken
their Parish-Churches) are become notable Encouragers and Countenancers of
Conventicles, do give the greater ^ound to our Religion, and administer the
greatest scandal to (...) true Professors thereof, and are the principal
Authors of all ^^reat disorders and breaches of his Majesty's peace,
disturbances of the Government of this City, Tumults, Riots, and other
factious, seditious, and disloyal practices that have happened amongst us,
whereby, and by the dangerous and pernicious Principles and Doctrines, as are
taught at such Conventicles, and are daily spread abroad within this City, by
such as are inspired and actuated by Fanatic zeal and Democratick fury, the
very Foundation of our establishments, both in Church and State, are
endeavored to be removed, and the minds not only of such as are Inhabitants
here, but of such also as being strangers would otherwise resort hither for the
sake of the Commerce and Traffic, are quite taken off from their Trade and
Business, and are possessed many of them with doubts and fears, others with
hopes of great alterations, if not a total subversion of the Monarchy and
Government, and too much of that time, which would be better employed by some
in their Callings, is spent in debating of State-matters, and in hearing and
reading News; which, though oftentimes it proves false, yet is very glibly
swallowed by the Credulous Vulgar, who commonly delight to be entertained with
fables and falsehoods, especially such as reflect on his Majesty, his Affairs or
Government, which we present as being of great detriment and hinderance to our
Trade, as well as destructive to his Majesty's peace, and tending to the
Impoverishment of the City.

And therefore we further present the tolerating of, or connivance at, such
unlawful Conventicles, to be utterly inconsistent with the honor and safety of
the Church, and the interest of the Religion by Law established, his Majesty's
peace, and the good Government and Trade of this City; and do humbly desire
that the Laws and Statutes in force against such like conventicles, as well as
against Popish Recusants, if any be within this City, may be put in speedy and
effectual execution, in order to their being suppressed and convicted: and that
such as frequent such Conventicles, especially the Preachers, may be proceeded
against, and punished as the Law directs, the rather for that they have been so
often complained of by several former Grand Juries, at several former Sessions,
in the Mayoralty of former Mayors, by presentiments of the like nature, which
have proved so fruitless, that were it not that the conscience of our Oaths and
Duties did prevail upon us above all other discouragements, we should have
forborne these Presentiments at this time.

We present that all such are guilty of the breach of their Oaths of
Burgesses, who knowing of any unlawful assemblies (whether under pretense of
Religious Worship, or otherwise) as have been, are, or shall be within this
City, contrary to the Laws, do not give notice thereof to Master Mayor for the
time being, or such other Person or Persons, as by the Tenor of the said Oath
they are directed.

Item, We Present, that Sir John Knight, Knight. one of the Aldermen of this City,
who according to the Duty of his Office, ought to be Aiding and assisting to
Mr. Mayor for the time being, in the execution of his Mayoralty, did on the
eleventh day of February last past, in a furious and menacing manner, Affront
and Assault the Right Worshipful Mr. Mayor, on the public Toulzey whilst he
was in the Execution of his Office of Mayor, and had the Sword of Justice
before him; He the said Sir John Knight shaking a Cane he then held in his hand
at the said Mr. Mayor, and calling him base fellow, and giving him the lie, in
the presence of diverse persons of Quality, and others; in contempt of our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the dishonor of this City, and the Government
thereof.

We Present the said Sir John Knight, for his public Stigmatizing and Branding
all such of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, as gave their votes at the last
Election of Parliament men within this City, for Mr. Ma^or and Mr. Tho. I^arle.
Members to serve for this City in the last Parliament, with diverse
reproachful, odious, and Ignominious Names and Characters, especially of
Papists, Popish dogs. Jesuits, and Popish Devils.

Item, We present Sir Robert Atkins Knight of the Bath, and Recorder, one of
the Aldermen of the City, and the said Sir John Knight, John Lawford another
Alderman of the same City, Henry Merret, Henry Glesson Senior, William Douning,
Samuel Halles, Stephen Watts, John Hine and Humphry Cres^^, Members of the
Common Council of the same City; and Charles Plum^^^^ Miner, a Citizen and free
Burgess of the same City, for that they, in and by a certain Writing under the
Title of a Petition, by them Subscribed and Published within this City,
directed to the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons in Parliament Assembled; did safely, maliclously, and scandalouslie
cause to be inferred diverse, notorious and scandalous Untruths and Falsehoods,
tending to the Dishonor and the Reproach of the good Government of this City,
of Mr. Mayor, and the present Sheriffs of the same: and diverse other persons
of Quality and Loyalty; particularly, those of the Artillery within the said
City, and to the stirring up of causless heats, Animosities, and breaches of
His Majesty's Peace amongst His Majesty's Subjects within this City, and
elsewhere; and we humbly submit it to the consideration of this Court, whether
the said Sir Robert Atkins his continual Non-Residence amongst us, and his
deserting the Service of this City, in his not Advising and Assisting Mr.
Mayor, in matters of great Importance to this City, be not a sufficient cause
for removing him from his place of Recorder of the said City.

We Present John Roe, to be a Common lover of Discord and strise amongst his
Majesty's Subjects within this City, one of the chief Authors of all those sad
Divisions that have lately risen amongst us; a person of a Vicious and
Profligate life and Conversation, a Liar, a False Accuser of His Majesti^s
Subjects, and not fit to approach the person or company of Mr. Mayor, or any
other of the Magistrates of this City, much less to bear the Sword before him;
and in case he be not already dismissed from bearing the Sword before Mr. Mayor,
We ^umbly pray his Worship, that at some convenient time he will please to
conveen an house of the Common Council, in order to dismiss him, and choose some
fit and Loyal person for that Service.

Item, We Present that Rich. Fairclougth, John Weeks, George Fowns, (...)
Young, John Moon, (...) Steel, (...) Throughton, and diverse others, whose
Names we do not as yet know, not being in Holy Orders as we believe, but being
Nonconformist Preachers, do frequently take upon them to Preach and Teach
without being Licensed, in several unlawful Conventicles and Meetings, let up
and continued within this City, contrary to the Laws and Statutes in that
behalf; whereby they seduce diverse of his Majesty's Subjects from their
Loyalty and Obedience: And that the Laws in Force, especially the Act of
Parliament made at Oxon, for the restraining of Non-Conformists to come into
Cities or Corporations, or within five miles of them, be put in speedy
execution against them; It being imposiple that the peace of this City should
be preserved to long as such Incendiaries are tolerated amongst us.

Item, We Present that the Coffe-house and Tipling-house of John Kimber near
the Toulzey, in the Parish and Ward of St. Ewen within this City, has a door
newly made therein near adjoining, and opposite to St. Ewins principal Church
door, whereby diverse dissolute, idle and disorderly persons sitting Tippling
and Sinnaking Tobacco in the said Coffee-house at time of saying of Divine
Service, and doing other Holy Offices in the same Church, do with derision and
contempt look on such as are at their Devotions in the said Parish Church, and
by their Tippling and Tobacco taking there, do offend and interupt such as are
so at Church in such their Devotion, and greatly Scandalize them.

And We further Present, that the said Coffee-house is commonly frequented as
well on Lords days as other days, by many Schismatical and Seditions Sectaries,
and other Disloyal persons, where for their encouragement in Tippling, they are
usually entertained with false News, Lying and Scandalous Libels and Pamphlets,
tending to the Reproach and Dishonor of the Established Religion, and of his
Majesty and Government; and diverse of his great Officers and Ministers of
Seat. For avoiding whereof, and the great inconveniences and mischiefs thereby
arising; and for removing the Offense thereby justly given to diverse of His
Majesty's Loyal Subjects; We Present it as necessary, and Humbly pray, that if
it lie in the Power of this Court, the said house may be suppressed, and not
applied to that ill use, or else that this Court will take Order that no
Printed or Written News or Pamphlets be suffered to be Read or Published there,
or in any other Coffee or Tipling-house, but only such as shall first be shown
to Mr. Mayor, or the Alderman of the Ward for the time being, where such Coffee
house is, and be by one of them Allowed or Approved of, as fit to be Read or
Published.

The rest of our Presentiments are contained in several Schedules hereunto
annexed: Thus having done Our parts in Presenting according to our Consciences,
We presume your Worships will not be wanting in punishing, as Your Duty, and as
the Law directs; by which means suture Grand Jurors will be encouraged to
present Offenders and offenses likewise. And if so, We may Reasonably hope to
see Disloyal, Seditious, Factious, and Disorderly persons discountenanced; and
Peace, and Plenty, and all outward Happiness to flourish amongst us; to the
envy of his Majesty's, and our Enemies; to the Joy and Comfort of us all, and
of his Majesty also, whose Life and Reign, GOD Almighty long preserve, AMEN.

Walter Gunter, George Larkin, Robert Brookhouse, John Ollife, Edw. Millard,
Tho. Lugg. Tho. Turner, Rich. Gibbins, Will. Lewis. Thomas Durbin, Thomas Rich,
Benjamin Rostern, Rob. Lippiac, Rich. Kirwood, Tho. Rogerson. Thomas Tilie,
Hen. Daniele, Will. Scott.


EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, Anno DOM. 1681.


