Paul Rycaut Esquire late Consul of Smyrna and Fellow of the Royal Society.


THE CRITIC.

WRITTEN Originally in SPANISH; BY LORENZO GRACIAN One of the Best Wits of
Spain, And Translated into English,

By PAUL RYCAUT Esquire

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1681.

The Epistle Dedicatory To the KING.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
THis little Treatise, which was written in my Youth, was the first Fruits of
my Travels, and ought to have been offered in the Years of my Minority, when
perhaps it had looked much more like my self then it does at present: But
because the Words only are Mine, and the Sense and Scope the Thoughts and
Contrivance of a Serious Don; the Subject will be liable to no other
Incongruity, then that which is now common in the World, where we see Men of
Years and Gravity dressed in the Hair and Fashion of the Youthful. But be the
Attire what it will, I am sure the Subject, which is Morality, giving Rules for
a Virtuous and Prudent Life, is seasonable in all Ages; and much more
conduducing to the common good of Your Majesty's Kingdoms, then the swarms of
Libels, and Seditious Pamphlets, which fill the Press; and are the
Entertainments of Men who are wanton and at ease. It is want of true Morality
which makes Men Censurers of others Actions, neglecting in the mean time to pry
into their own: It makes them Proud, High-minded, and Boasters, and gives them
confidence to arraign Princes, and their Cabinet Counsels of Government; whilst
in the mean time they are so far from Ruling their own little World within
them, that they are not able to subdue a Passion, or moderate that little, or
untowardly Member of their Tongue. But our CRITIC, which suggests better
things, does with that Humility which he teaches, appear before your Majesty,
being conducted to your Royal Presence by the Interpreter, who having received
Encouragement by the Gracious Eye, your Majesty has been pleased to bestow on
his other Writings, does with greater Boldness, and yet with due Reverence,
tender this at your Royal Feet, Praying always for the long Life of your Sacred
Majesty, in which the Peace, Prosperity, and Welfare of your People is bound
up; and that God Almighty may ever Bless your Majesty with Increase of Honor,
Triumph, and greater Exaltation of Glory, are the unfaigned, and fervent
Prayers of,

Most Dread Sovereign, Your MAJESTY'S Most Dutiful Subject, and most Humble
Servant, PAUL RYCAUT.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Reader.
WHen I was about the Age of Twenty, of which I had spent Five in the
University of Cambridge, my good Father, who was desirous to bestow on me a
liberal Education (though the youngest of his Ten Sons) and to improve me in
all the Languages which are common to Europe, thought fit to send me to the
Court of Spain in company with my eldest Brother, whose principal Business
there was to recover a Debt of One hundred thousand Pieces of Eight, which his
Catholic Majesty owed unto my Father: The Demand was unquestionable, for the
Account was liquid, and clearly stated by the Council of the Exchequer, and the
King upon their report, was pleased to give his own Royal Firm for confirmation
of it, and to make several Decrees for the Payment; but as the Proceedings in
Spain are always Dilatory, and the Kings Revenue most commonly Anticipated, so
our private Pretensions were forced to give place to the more importunate
Necessities of the Public, and after a year and halfs Solicitation, we were
dispatched thence with a poor Auyda de costas, or something under the name of a
Largess, to bear our Expenses, paid in Vellion, or the Base Copper Money of
Spain. Since which the Interest has increased without either payment of it, or
of the Principal, though our King of Great Britain (whom God preserve) has
been graciously pleased often to recommend our case to his Ambassadors sent to
Madrid, and to make it one particular in their Instructions: But all this being
without effect, gave me often cause to conclude, that it was much better, and
of more Security to have a Mortgage on good Farms and Tenements in England,
then of honor to be a Creditor of the most Mighty and Potent Monarch of both
the Indies.

But I, who in the gaity of my Youth, little regarded the Interest of Wealth,
leaving that care to the incumbence of my pious Parents, attended wholly to the
Improvements of my Mind; and to that end, not to loose time, I studied awhile
at Alcala de Henares, called in Latin, Collegium Complusense, where I had the
Honor to be esteemed more for my skill in the Latin Tongue, and my Faculty in
Poetry, then ever I had a Reputation for in my own University; I there applied
my self especially to learn the Spanish Tongue, in gaining of which I had
something more then an ordinary advantage, by having no conversation with
English; and then this Book of the Critic being newly published and
recommended to me for being wrote by one of the best Wits and Pens of Spain; I
was easily persuaded to read it over; the Style being smooth and pleasant in
the beginning, gave me an easy Introduction to it; but the remainder being
more harsh, and crabbed, I forced my self with some difficulty to understand
the sense and humor of the Author, fancying in the mean time, that I was
entered into those steep and thorny ways of Virtue, which Critilo teaches, and
from which no difficulties ought to divert, or discourage a Wise and a resolved
Person. When I had once read it, I was so pleased with the Subject, that I was
willing to try how it would run in English; which being finished, I was
infinitely pleased with the Work, both for the Argument, which is Virtue, and
Morality, and for my own improvement by the Translation; for it had almost made
me a Master of the Spanish Tongue. Howsoever, as our greatest Enjoyments, and
things which please our Minds most at first, grow dull, and disrelishing with
time; so these beloved Papers were neglected, and thrown by me whilst I had
occasion to travel the World; for I was afterward in Italy, and there I
embarked on the Fleet under command of General Blake, and was present at the
bur^ing of nine Turkish Ships, and batter^ng the Castles at Porta Farina, near
Tunis; I also spent about two years in the Low Countries, when his Majesty
resided at Bruxelles; after which having the Employment of Secretary to the
Earl of Winchilsea at Constantinople for seven years, and Subsequent to that of
Consul at Smirna, for the space of eleven more, I was so taken up with the
Thoughts and Business of that Country, that I had no leisure to remember, or
reflect upon my little Critic. But now, being by Gods Providence returned to a
more quiet, and reposed life in my own Country, and tumbling one day over my
old Memoires, these Papers casually offered themselves to my hands, torn and
worm-eaten with bad Ink, and in every manner ill treated. When I saw them, I
presently knew and owned them, recalling them to my mind and acquaintance, and
with much eagerness and delight I read them over, because they lively
represented to my Memory and Fancy the Verdures of my Youth, which I found to
be over affectionate to words, and Romantic expressions; howsoever I observed,
that I kept close to the sense, and that I was as faithful even in those years
to the Author whom I translated, as I was to the Charge, and Interest which I
afterward undertook. And though in my late perusal of this Book, I have
suffered it to pass with little alteration, that so it might appear more like
to a Product of my Youth; yet having now ruminated with more serious, and
mature reflections, on the subject of its discourse, then I was capable to do
formerly, my Judgment tells me that this Treatise is neither misbecoming my
present years, nor unseasonable to the present times. It begins like a Spanish
Novel, placing the Scene of Discourse in the Ocean, and in the Isle of St.
Helen, where a Man is strangely figured to have been enclosed in the darkness
of a Cave, and fed by Beasts, until he arrived to some maturity of age; which
is purposely designed to introduce the Notions, which a Man may by the mere
light of his immaterial Soul, without Sight, or Conversation, conceive of a
Deity, and of his own Being. Then he Fancies, a Whirlwind or Hurricane to
break open the Cavern of this natural Man, and all on a sudden to represent a
new Scene to him of Heaven, and Earth, and Sea; and then he strives to express
the Ecstasies of his Soul, and the strange Conceptions he must entertain upon
the view of such different Objects: Thence he descends from the Natural to the
Moral World, drawing a Scheme of the Follies and Vanities of it, in order to a
true regulation of Life, builded on the Foundation of Morality, and Virtue. I
am of opinion, that the Author of this Book might originally have deduced his
fancy from the History of Hai Ebn Yokdhan, wrote in Arabic by Ebn Tophail, and
Translated into Latin by Dr. Pocock; and though there is much difference in the
relation of one, and the other, yet the design of both is almost the same,
being only to show how far the Spiritual and Immortal Soul of Man, is able in
its natural capacity, and by its own reflex acts to consider its proper being,
and the existence of something above it; and by degrees, and steps of exterior
Objects to proceed unto Rules for conservation of its own well-being, and that
of others. The Subject of this fancy being much affected and enlarged by
Arabians, it is probable that from them it was derived to the Moors, who have
the same Language with little diversity of Dialect, and accent common together:
And the Spaniards, who for the space of 600 years had the same Country and
Manners with Moors, easily received their Fashions, Learning, Proverbs, and
every thing but their Religion: So that as their Customs and way of living are
different to other Nations of Europe, and most resemble that of the Eastern
Countries; so their way of writing in Dialogues and Novels is much after that
manner, and is as well pleasant and diverting in it self, as it is curious to
us, who follow another form, and manner in all our Books, and Treatises of
Philosophy. And thus, Reader, having given thee some intimation concerning the
substance of this Book; the occasion on which it was translated; and the
Reasons, why after so many years, it came to be published. I leave thee to a
perusal of it, which I beseech thee to do, with the same candor, which is to
be allowed to the Works of Youthful Fancies.

Farewell.
THE Spanish Critic:
The Spring of Childhood, and the Summer of Youth.
The First CRISIS.
Critilo being Shipwrackt, meets with Andrenio, who renders a strange Account
of himself.

NOW both Worlds had kissed the Feet of Catholic Philip their Universal
Monarch: and the Circle of his Royal Crown, the greatest stage the Sun runs
both in the one and the other Hemisphere: within whose Crystaline Center lies
enameled a small Isle, or Pearl of the Sea, or Esmerald of the Land: to which
the August Empress gave it her own Name, that it might be Queen of all other
Isles, and Crown of the Ocean. This Isle of St. Helena (for so it is called) in
the passage from one World to the other, yields refreshment to the grand
Cargason of Europe, and has always been a Free-Port, preserved by Divine
Providence between those immense Gulfs to afford entertainment for the Eastern
Catholic Fleet.

To this place a Shipwracked person endeavored to make his Port, who striving
with the Waves, and contending with the Winds, but more with his own sad
disastures, a Monster of Nature, and of Fortune, a Swan in his Hoariness, and
Voice, sinking on his Plank, between the fatal Medium of Life, and Death, thus
complained. O Life! thou should never have begun, but since thou have, thou
should never end: there is nothing more desired, nor yet nothing more frail,
than thou art, and he, who once loses thee, too late seeks to recover thee;
for ever after I esteem thee for lost: Nature has showed her self a
Stepmother to Man, denying him a sense to rejoice at his Birth, Life.
and yet to fill him with sad apprehensions at his Death: to make him
unsensible of the good he receives at his Beginning, and yet to affright and
torment him with a Combination of Mischiefs at his End. O Tyrant! a thousand
times more cruel than Humane Nature is capable to be, who first through a
scandalous temerity trusted his Life to this inconstant Element on no better
support than a frail Vessel; They say his Breast was covered with Steel, Illi
robur and aes triplex circa pectus erat, etc.
but I think it was doubled with Iron. In vain has the Supreme Providence
separated Nations with Seas and Mountains, since Humane boldness has found a
Bridge to transport its Malice. Whatsoever humane Industry has invented, has
been unfortunately retorted to its own destruction. Gunpowder, that horrible
devourer of Lives, has been an Instrument of greatest Ruin; and what other is
a Ship, but a Coffin to anticipate the Solemnities of Death. The Land seemed
too narrow a Theater to act the Tragedies of Death, until man found ways to
triumph on the Seas, and find a passage to his fatal Destiny through both
Elements. By what other means needs unfortunate Man seek to perish, than in the
Hull of his own Ship, which like a Scaffold seems erected for punishment of his
boldness: With Reason did Cato esteem amongst the three Follies of his Life,
his embarking to have been the greatest. O Fate! O Heavens! O Fortune! though I
would persuade my self that I were something, yet so do thou pursue me, that
when thou beginnest, thou know no end but mine. O! that now it were possible
for me to be nothing, that I might disclaim that Being, which is confined with
Eternity.

In this manner he beat the Air with Sighs, whilst his Arms rowed the Waters,
accompanying his Art with Industry, he seemed to rise above the reach of
danger; for Perils do both fear and respect great Persons, whom Death it self
is sometimes ambitious to spare, and Fortune seeks occasions to advantage. Thus
the Serpents spared Alcides, the Tempests Caesar, the Sword Great Alexander,
and Bullets had no Commission for Charles the Fifth. But alas! how Misfortunes
are enwreathed, one is but the Introduction, or but the Parent to another; for
when he thought to reach the secure Bosom of our Common Mothers, he then began
to apprehend new fears, lest the enraged Waves should dash him against the
Rocks, which were as hard, as his Fortune was cruel; the Earth too catched at
by his hands, crumbled between them, and tantalized his hopes, when his Life
seemed almost secured; there being neither Water in the Seas, nor Earth on the
Land, to assist the Miserable. Thus floated he between both Elements, in the
Medium between Life, and Death, made a Sacrifice of his own Fortune: when a
sprightly Youth, an Angel in his Appearance, but much more in his Actions,
stretched forth his Arms to enclose him, attracting him as the secret Virtue of
the Loadstone does the Iron, and securing his Happiness together with his Life:
And being now in Safety on the Shore, he first kissed the Earth, and casting
his Eyes up to Heaven, he gave thanks for his Deliverance; and then returning
to the Restorer of his Life, with open Arms, endeavored to gratify him with
Embraces, and Acknowledgments; but he, that had thus obliged him by Deeds,
could not answer him with Words, but only gave demonstrations of the grand
satisfaction he received at this accident, and of an astonished admiration, to
see one so like himself. The grateful Naufrague repeated the expressions of his
thanks, and seconded his embraces, asking him of his Health and Fortune; to all
which the astonished Islander was silent; wherefore he varied his Idioms, and
tried him with some other Languages, with which he was acquainted; but in vain,
since he was a person void of Speech; so that turning all into Signs and
Actions, he ceased not to behold, and admire him, mixing the extremes of Wonder
with Contentment. One might reasonably have believed him to have been some
incult product of those Woods, but that this Island being uninhabited by
Mankind, could not be the native Soil of Humane Race; besides the fairness and
length of his Hair, and the equal proportion of his Mouth, was an argument that
he was an European; the fashion of his Clothes, or Garments, could yield no
light to any Conjectures, being no other than Nakedness the Livery of
Innocence. The Intelligent Naufrague reasoned with himself, whether he was
destitute of those two Servants of the Soul, Hearing, and Speech; but his
experience soon revolved him in that, for he listened to the least noise, and by
his ready attention could so aptly imitate the Voices of Beasts, and Chirping
of Birds, with such natural Propriety, that he seemed better to understand
Brutes than Men, so prevalent is the force of Custom, and Education. From these
sensitive Actions the vivacity of his Spirit darted forth certain Rays, as
through the twilight of Reason, the Soul laboring to show, that where
Education is wanting, Nature of it self is wholly rude and unpolished.

The desire of knowing each others Fortunes, and Lives, increased equally in
both; but the want of a common Idiom, was that which envied them this
enjoyment; for Speech is the grand effect of Rationality, and he that cannot
Discourse, cannot Converse. Speak, Speech.
says the Philosopher, that I may know you; for the Soul does in a noble
manner communicate it self, by producing the Images of what it conceives in the
Mind of him that hears, which is Properly to Converse: there is no presence
where there is not Discourse, nor can they be termed Absent, who communicate by
Writing. Those Wise Sages live still, though dead, and discourse with us daily
by their Immortal Volumes, and Illuminate Posterity with a continued source,
and spring of Knowledge. Speech is both necessary, and pleasant, which two,
wise Nature always conjoined in the Functions of Life: Conversation is ever
attended with Pleasure, Conversation.
and thence is immediately derived the important Affair of Knowing, which
Speech only can administer. Wise men by Speaking beget others like themselves,
and by Converse Knowledge is gently instilled into the Soul. Hence it is, that
Men cannot live happily without some common Language, both in respect of their
Necessity, and of their Pleasure. For should two Infants be cast purposely into
an Island, they would invent a Language to Communicate, and Converse with each
other; so that noble Conversation is the Daughter of Discourse, the Mother of
Wisdom, the Ease of the Soul, the Commerce of Hearts, the Bond of Amity, the
Food of Contentment, and the Employment of Humanity.

The experienced Naufrague being well assured of the truth hereof, began
immediately to teach this ignorant Youth to exercise Speech, who being both
desirous and docible, was very apt to improve the flexibility of his Tongue: He
began by the Names of them both, calling himself Critilo, and the other
Andrenio, which fitted the ripe Judgment of the one, and of the other, in his
natural Principles. The desire of bringing those Conceptions unto light, which
had so long inwardly been suppressed, and the curiosity of knowing the truth of
what lay clouded, and confused: in his Understanding, were strong Incitements
to the docility of Andrenio: so that now he began to Pronounce, then to Ask,
then to Answer, and endeavoring at length to Discourse, accompanied his Words
with Action, that sometimes where his Words began, his Gestures supplied the
want of other Expressions in the Conclusion. The Account he gave of his Life,
was in short and abrupt Speeches, so much the more strange, by how much the
less understood; and oftentimes, where the improbability of the matter could
not gain Belief with Critilo, there he pretended to want a true Conception of
what he related; but when he had learned to continue his Discourse, and the
number of his Words were equal to the greatness of his Thoughts, at the earnest
desires of Critilo, who afforded him also somewhat of his assistance, began to
satisfy him in this manner. I, says he, neither know who I am, nor who has
given me this Being, nor to what End he has given it me: which Question I
often, without Words proposed to my self, being as Ignorant, Natural
Conceptions of a Being.
as Curious; but since Queries are caused by Ignorance, I had little means to
resolve my self: yet so would I prove my self with argument, that I might, if
possible, exceed my self; for as yet no affectation to any particular Good had
so possessed me, but that withdrawing my Soul out of Ignorance, I might reach
the limits of my desires. Thou, Critilo ask who I am, and I desire to know
that of thee; for thou art the first Man that until this day I have seen, in
whom I find my self more perfectly delineated, than in the silent Chrystals of
a Fountain, which oftimes my Curiosity carried me unto, and my Ignorance
applauded; but if you would be informed of the most material success of my
Life, I shall relate that to you, which is more strange than long, or tedious.

The first time that I could take knowledge of my self, and form Conceptions of
my Being, I found my self immured within the Bowels of that Mountain, which
though it hangs out beyond the rest, yet its height asserts its honor and
eminency above the other Rocks. Infancy.
There it was that I received my first Nourishment from one of those which you
call Brutes, but I call Mother, believing my self to have been born from her,
and that she had given me the Being I am endued with. It is very agreeable
(replied Critilo) to natural Ignorance to style Men Fathers, and Women Mothers,
from whom we receive Beneficence, in which manner, until now, you esteemed a
Beast for such; so the World in its Infancy called every Creature which was
profitable, and beneficial, by the name of Father, and at length improved that
to the Title of God. So I, (proceeded Audrenio) believed that Beast to be my
Mother, which nourished me at her Breasts, and bred me up amongst her young
Ones, which I esteemed for my Brethren, and as a Brute amongst the Brutes, we
played and slept together. She often gave me Milk from her own Teats, shared me
part of her Fruits, and Prey which she brought for them. At first I was not so
sensible of that tedious Imprisonment, whilst the interior darkness of my Mind
accorded with the exterior of my Body; and the want of Knowledge alleviated
the deprivation of Light, though some confused glimmerings appeared, which
Heaven dispensed at times, through the top of that unhappy Caverne.

But at length arriving at a certain term of Growth and Life, I was on a sudden
surprised with such an extraordinary force of Knowledge, with so bright a
radiancy of Light, The Light of Reason.
and Advertency, that I began to make several reflections upon my own proper
Being. What is this, said I? am I, or am I not? for since I live, and know, and
observe, I must have a Being: But if I am, Who am I? and who has given me this
Being? And to what end has he given it me? If it be to remain here, it were a
high Infelicity! Am I a Brute like these? No, for I observe most apparent
differences between us; for they are covered with Hair, but I, as less favored
of him, who gave me this Being, am Naked, and uncloathed; besides, I observed
my whole Body otherwise proportioned than theirs; I laugh, and weep, they howl,
and cry. I walk strait, raising my Face upwards, when they move bending with
their Heads toward the Earth: These were palpable differences, and which
observation administered to my Understanding. My desire to come out from hence
increased daily, and the endeavors to see, and know, as they are natural to
every one, so they were in me more than ordinarily violent, and impatient; but
that which troubled me most, was to see the Brutes my Companions, with a
strange nimbleness to trip over the indigested heaps, entering out, and
returning in at their own pleasure; which I not being able to do, was soon
sensible, that that Privilege and Liberty was denied only unto me.

I assayed often times to follow those Beasts, and crawl over the Rocks after
them, which I appayed with the Blood, that started from my Fingers; and I would
have helped my self likewise with my Teeth, but all in vain, and to my
prejudice; for I commonly tumbled to the next Bottom, which I left wetted with
my Blood, and Tears: at my Voice and Cries the compassionate Beasts came
running to my succor, and dividing me a share of their Fruits, and Prey,
moderated my Grief, and in part eased me of my discontent. The want of my
outward Speech was supplied by my inward Thoughts, and Soliloques, and the
Doubts, and Difficulties my observation and curiosity encountered, not being
capable of being resolved by my Judgment, ended in wonder and admiration; but
the confused noise of these Seas, was a subject of my continued trouble, whose
Waves beat more violently against my Breast, than these Rocks; but what should
I think of those affrighting Claps of Thunder, those encounters in the Air,
whose Clouds dissolved into Rain, as my Eyes into Tears? But that which reduced
me from a perplexity of Mind, and Pangs of Soul even to the very Agonies of
Death, were certain Voices which I heard from without, somewhat like yours,
which at a distance seemed more confused, but afterward came by little and
little more distinct and articulate, which so naturally affected me, that they
left me not without strong impressions in my Mind. I well observed the
difference of them from those of Beasts, and from the usual sounds with which I
was formerly acquainted, which begot in me a vehement Passion, to see, and know
from whence they proceeded; but being not able to attain thereunto, I
languished in the extremes of despair, and death; and though there were but few
things into which I could dive with my Thoughts, yet I have neither wanted of
them Discourse, nor Meditation: one thing I can assure you, that I have often,
and a thousand times entertained thoughts of the manner and disposition,
situation, variety, and composure of these things according to the meanness of
my capacity, yet never could attain to the least apprehension of the manner,
and order of this various Composition, which we now see, and admire.

This is not much (answered Critilo) for if the Wits of all those Men, which
have been, or shall be hereafter, should unite in one, to trace the Artifice of
this Worlds Composure, and to consider of its Government, their Consultations
would come short of that Providence, which is required in its direction. But
why do I instance in the Universe? since their art reaches not to the formation
of the least Flower, or Fly; only that supreme Creator has found a Way, and
Order to make a harmony in Beauty and changeable Variety.

But tell me, that which I so greatly desire to know, and hear from you, in
what manner you came forth from that tedious Prison, that untimely Grave of
your Habitation, but especially (if it be possible for you to express) what
Thoughts, and Notions, your admirable Spirit conceived, at your first entrance
into Light, when you discovered, saw and admired the applauded Theater of the
Universe. Hold (said Andrenio) I had here need to take breath to prosecute a
Relation so strange and pleasant.

The Second CHRISIS.
The Grand Theater of the Universe.
THey say, that as soon as the supreme Artificer had accomplished the Composure
of the Worlds Fabric; his next Work was to dispose unto every one his Order,
and apart all Kinds in their several and most natural Stations. So he summoned
all Creatures from the Elephant to the Fly, and showing them the several
distinct Regions, and Elements, left the choice of all to their Free and
voluntary Election. The Elephant answered, That he would content himself with a
Wood, the Horse with a Meadow, the Eagle with one of the Regions of the Air,
the Whale in the Ocean, the Swan in a Fishpond, the Barbel in the River, and
the Frog in a Pool. The last of all came Man, though the first in Dignity, who
to the Question propounded, answered, that he could not content himself with
less than all, and that too seemed but little for his enlarged desires. This
exorbitant Ambition struck no small wonder to those present, though it was soon
applauded by a flattering Sycophant, as a demand agreeable to the greatness of
his Mind; though by one with better Judgment termed the defect of his depraved
corporeal composition. The superficies of this Globe seemed too narrow a
confinement for his enlarged desires, until in quest of Gold, and Silver, he
found a way to undermine, and rip up the Bowels of the Earth. His Pride makes
him climb to possess the Air by the lofty Pinacles of his Edifices, lest his
Ambition should be suffocated, and stifled in the lower Region. He compasses
the Seas, sounds the Ocean, dives for Pearls, Amber, and Corral to nourish his
Folly, and swell his Vanity. He taxes each Element according to its quality to
pay him Tribute, the Air her Birds, the Sea her Fish, the Earth her Beasts, the
Fire its heat, to entertain, not to satisfy his Luxury. And yet, as if all
this were unsufficient, nothing can appease his Complaints of a Penurious
Portion. O monstrous Covetousness of Man! The Supreme Creator took him by the
hand, See, said he, and know, that I have formed Man by my own Hands, for my
Servant, and your Lord, and like a King, as he is, pretends to Govern all. But
understand, O man, that this is to be with your Mind, and not with your Belly,
as a Man, not as a Beast. You ought to be Lord of all Creatures, and not a
Slave to them, they ought to follow you, and not you attracted by them. You
ought to possess all with Knowledge, and Acknowledgement, that is contemplating
in all these Created Mirrours the Divine Perfections, making a step of the
Creature to pass unto the Creator. This Relation of Prodigies, though a Lesson
amongst us common to the meanest and most vulgar Capacities, was yet strange,
and unheard of to Andrenio, who recovering himself from his deep Contemplations
thereon, and passionate Aspirations toward the Divine Essence, began to
proceed in this manner.

My sleep, said he, prosecuting his former Discourse, was the ordinary pastime
of my hours, and the chiefest ease of my Melancholy, and Solitariness: to that
I inclined as a Remedy of my Discontent, when one night (for all to me were
such) a more than ordinary deadness of sleep possessed me, an infallible
Presager of Evil; and so it was, for startling from my Slumber, awakened by the
vehemence of a Gust, burst from the deepest Caverns of yonder Mountain, which
shook the whole Fabric, and firm Pillars which support it; and whistling
through the Breach it made, diffused it self into a general Tempest with so
much Rage and Violence, as to shake the foundation of the neighboring Rocks,
as if its force had been sufficient to have shattered this grand Machine into
their first nothing. Hold, said Critilo, the Mountains themselves are not
exempted from change, but exposed to Earthquakes, and Thunder, their power of
resistance being the cause of their subversion. But if these Rocks shook (said
Andrenio) what should I? All the Joints of my Body seemed to be loosed, and
dissolved, my heart ready to break with Throbs, my Senses failed me, that I
found my self half dead, and almost buried between the Rocks and my own fears;
whilst this Eclipse of my Soul remained, the Parenthesis of my Life, neither
can I know, nor can any other inform me concerning it, at length, I know not
how, nor when, I returned by little and little to recover my self from this
total dereliction of my Spirits; I unclosed my Eyes to the dawnings of the day,
a day clear, great, and happiest that ever my life has seen, a day which I
have noted on the Stones and engraved on the Rocks. I instantly perceived the
Doors of my tedious Prison broke open, a comfort so transporting me, that I
delayed no time to unbury my self, and as one newborn in the World, to leap
into it, through that Gap, in which appeared the Rays, and Light of the
cheerful Heaven: At first, not fully satisfied of the reality, I went round the
Rock, still suppressing with what power I could the strong rebulliency of my
Passions: but at length, well assured, I returned to the confused Balcony of my
Life, and Prospect, diffusing my Eyes in a general view over this grand Theater
of Heaven and Earth: the whole vigor of my Soul applying it self to the
Windows of my Eyes with that Contentment, and Curiosity, that it disabled the
rest of my Senses to perform their Function, that for a whole day I remained
immovable, unsensible, and dead, being overwhelmed by over-powering of too
strong a Life. I would here express, but it is impossible, the intense violence
of my Affections, the extravagant Raptures of my Soul; I can only tell you,
that there still remain impressions thereof upon me; and the wonder, and
amazement I then conceived, are not so clearly forgotten, but that the sense
thereof, do strongly affect me. I believe, said Critilo, that when the Eyes see
what they never espied, the Heart feels, what it was never sensible of. I
beheld (proceeded Andrenio) the Sea, the Land, the Heaven, and each severally,
and altogether, and in the view of each I transported my self without thoughts
of ever ending, admiring, enjoying, and contemplating a fruition which could
never satiate me.

O! How much I envy thee (said Critilo) this unknown happiness of thine, the
only privilege of the first Man, and you, the Faculty of seeing all at once,
Novelty.
and that with Observation, the Greatness, Beauty, Harmony, Stability, and
Variety of this created Fabric. Familiarity in us takes off Admiration, and
Novelty affects little those, who have neither Knowledge, or advertency to
enjoy it. For we enter into the World with the Eyes of our Understanding shut,
and when we open them unto Knowledge the Custom of seeing has rendered the
greatest Wonders, neither strange, nor admired at the Judgments disclosure.
Therefore the wise Worthies have repaired much of this defect by reflections,
looking back again as it were to a new Birth, making every thing, by a search
and examination into its Nature, a new subject of astonishment; admiring, and
criticizing on their Perfections. Like those, who walk in a delicious Garden,
diverted solely with their own Thoughts, not observing at first the artificial
adornments, and variety of Flowers; yet afterward return back to view each
Plant, and Flower with great Curiosity: So we enter into this Garden of the
Universe walking from our Birth, until our Death, without the least glance on
the Beauty, and Perfection of it: unless some wiser Heads chance to turn back,
and renew their Pleasure by a Review, and Contemplation. This Andrenio
considered to be his greatest Happiness, in that he arrived to that height of
Perfection, which he had so long expected and desired. Your happiness (said
Critilo) was your restraint, since afterward you knocked off your Bolts, and
arrived at a full fruition both of your own desire, and them; for things that
are worth our Wishes, and obtained, are twice enjoyed: the greatest Wonders, if
familiar, and common, soon loose their Repute, and an easy access, and a free
use makes but a toy of the greatest Prodigy; The Sun has done us a courtesy
in absenting himself at night, that his return may be the more grateful in the
morning. What a conjunction of Affections must you needs feel? What
over-flowings of your Senses? How must your Soul have been ravished, and
employed in its attention on those Objects? 'Twas much, you were not over-boarn
with a Contemplation so violent, and admirable. I believe (answered Andrenio)
that whilst my Attention was busied in Seeing, and Observing, it was so fixed
on the present Object, that it found no force nor power to communicate unto
another.

But those cheerful emanations of the Grand-Monarch of Light, which you call
the Sun, crowned with his own Beams, The Sun.
and encircled with Rays, stroke an awfulness to Eyes to render him the
Reverence, and Admiration: At the Glory of his Throne, at the Sovereignty and
Silence of His Majesty, which triumphs in the Christaline Waves, and fills all
Creatures with his bright Presence; I was wholly swallowed up in Amazement,
envying the Eagle should be more intent, than my self. At his naming the Sun (
Critilo could contain no longer, but instantly cried out, and applauded the
Comfort, the Bliss, the Happiness enjoyed in that immortal and glorious Light
the Sun. My admiration still increased, said Andrenio, until my Attention grew
dim, and amazed, because I desired him at a distance, to whom I feared to
approach near, my Reason telling me, what I observed that no other Light but
his could dim my Eyes, and that no nearer Access could be to him, but only by
Contemplation. The Sun (said Critilo) is that Creature, which is the most
lively Esfigies, and Abstract of the Creators Majesty and Greatness. He is
called, Sol, because he solely runs the compass of the Heavens, his Presence
out-shining the Glory of the other Luminaries: his situation is in the midst of
the Celestial Orbs, as the center and heart of Light, the perpetual fountain of
Rays, a constant and an unchangeable Essence, whose Virtue assisted us to see
other things, and yet covers and hides his own Beauty with the Vail of his
Brightness: his influence concurs with more immediate Causes to the Production
of all Creatures: nor can Man deny him to be the Author, and Parent of his
Life. His Light is most effectual in being communicated; for diffusing it self
into all parts, and piercing the very Bowels of the Earth, does with an
admirable Virtue, strengthen, foment, rejoice, and nourish: his influence is
not Partial, but common, all having need of him, and he of none. In fine, he is
a Creature of the greatest Pomp and Glory, the most resplendent Beam of the
Divine Majesty. A whole day, said Andrenio, I was employed in beholding him,
sometimes in himself, and sometimes his Reflections in the Waters being
forgetful of my time and self. At this Critilo remembered what the Philosopher
said, That he was born to behold the Sun; which was well said, though ill
understood; for his meaning was, that in this material Sun, he did contemplate
the Divine Glory, for if but an Emission, and Shadow of him be so bright, what
must be the true Light of that infinite, and uncreated Beauty?

But alas, said Andrenio, how soon, like the unconstancy of this World, was the
height of my comfort changed into displeasure, the joy of my birth into the
horror of my Death, the throne of the morning into the Grave of the night, The
night.
the Sun being descended through the Waters into another World, left me drowned
in a Sea of my own Tears; but whilst the apprehensions of never seeing him
again, did grievously affect me, behold on a sudden a new Wonder diverted my
Thoughts, the appearance of a Heaven adorned with Stars, changed the Scene, and
renewed my Contentment. This Prospect was no less welcome than the other, the
variety, and strangeness of the Objects affording me an entertainment to busy
my attention. O that immense Wisdom of God! said Critilo, which has found a
means to make the Night no less beautiful and admirable than the Day. Absurdly
has vulgar ignorance imposed the Epithites of drowsy, dark, and uncomely upon
the twinklings, and serenity of the night: those descriptions of being the
repose of Labor, the refreshments and diversion of Cares, are but reproaches
of its Sluggishness and Melancholy: but better is it expressed by a Person of
Wisdom, who calls it the time of Contemplation and Thoughts: and for that
reason, was the Owl at Athens celebrated as the Hieroglyphick of Knowledge. The
night is not so proper for the Ignorant to sleep, as for the Wise and Studious
to watch, the Night being to prepare that which the Day must execute. In this
entertainment my Thoughts were soon engaged in a Labyrinth of numbering the
Stars, some whereof only twinkled, others shined clearly, observing their
various Magnitudes, Degrees, Motions, and Colors, whilst some appeared, others
withdrew: all resembling, said Critilo, humane Fortune, which is no sooner up,
but inclines to his setting.

But what I much considered, said Andrenio, with small satisfaction, was that
disorderly, and yet admirable disposition of them; for seeing the Superior
Artificer had adorned, and sealed the Convexity of the Heavens with Stars, why
he did not dispose them with Order and Method, interweaving them with pretty
Knots, and flowery Circles: I know not how to declare or express my self. I
already understand you, said Critilo, your meaning is, that the Stars should
have been disposed in Order, and Rank, like some rich Embroidery, or the
Flowers of some delicious Garden, or studded like Rows of D^amonds, that the
luster of one, might with an artificial correspondency have set off the Beauty
of another. Yes, said he, for besides that the disposition of this resplendent
Artifice, would have been a prospect more delicious to the Sight, so it would
have cleared that fond imagination of some, who suppose Chance to have been
Framer of this Universe, and by a foolish Profaneness hoodwink the Providence
of the Almighty. Your Query, said Critilo, is not from the purpose, for you
must know that the Divine Wisdom directing, and disposing of them in this
manner, had more Sublime Reason, than is easily conceiveable, placing their
Harmony, and Rule not so much in their situation, as the convenience of their
Motion, and Temperature: for there is not a star in heaven, which has not his
different nature, and influence; as Herbs and Plants of the Earth have their
distinct Virtues, some predominate in heat, others in cold, some are dry,
others moist; so that their extreme qualities being equally mixed, produce a
just and moderate temperature in all. That Artificial order that you speak of,
is but an Idle toy, and fond invention of Art affected, and procured only to
entertain the vanity of humane Folly. In this manner, every night represents us
a new Scene of Heaven, nor is our Sight, nor our Humor though unconstant, ever
wearied to behold it. Every person according to his fancy, entertains a
distinct Conception, and Idea of their Proportions, the variety and well
ordered confusion make the vulgar to imagine them innumerable, and the
appearance of disorder is to them a riddle of Providence, though Wise men have
the knowledge to search out, and discover their Order and Government. I was
much pleased, said Andrenio, with the diversity, and variety of their colors,
some were pale, others ruddy, some of a gold, others of a silver color, there
only, methoughts, wanted Green, that acceptable and grateful object of the
Sight. That, said Critilo, partakes too much of an Earthly quality, greenness
being a Symptom, or Badge of Hope, is more agreeable to the future Wishes, and
growing expectation of the Earth, than to that sublimer Region, which is
swallowed up wholly in a happy Possession. This color also is contrary to the
nature of the Celestial Luminaries, and is a sign of humidity, and corruption.
Did you never observe that Star which makes a Point in the Globe of Heaven, the
Object to the which the Lodestone tends, and the blank to which it darts all
its Emissions? To that the Compass of our attention fixes one Point, and
thereby measures other Circles, which running round encompasses our Lives.

I must confess (said Andrenio) with no less curiosity was my attention taken
up in admiring that beautiful Queen of the Stars the Governess of the night,
The Moon.
the Suns substitute, and little inferior to him in Dignity, that which you
call the Moon; though at this Light I found not those refreshments, nor
alacrity, as at the the other; A Mirror of Humane Frailty.
yet the varieties of its increasing, and decreasing was no less subject of my
admiration. It is the second President of time, said Critilo, an equal
Colleague with the Sun in Government, if one Governs the day, the other Rules
the night, if one is the Almanac of the Year, the other is of the Months, if
the Sun heats and dries the Earth by day, the Moon refreshes, and bedews it at
night; if the Sun cherishes, and ripens the fruitful Fields, the Moon swells,
and overflows the Fountains, so that both perform their several Functions, and
are the two scales and balances of the Times and Seasons. But that which is
best worth your observation is, that as the Sun is a clear Mirror, and Emblem
to represent unto us the Perfection of the Divine Attributes; so the Moon is
the Glass wherein to discover the uncertainty of humane frailty; for her
condition, like the unconstancy of his, is never settled, or permanent, but is
sometimes in the increase, then in the decrease; sometimes in the first point
of its appearance, anon in the last term of its decrease; sometimes at the
full, anon in an unperceivable nothing: whose Light being totally communicated
by the Sun, is eclipsed of her Glory by an interposition of the Earth; when she
is brightest, she discovers most of her spots; she is the lowest of all the
Planets in situation, and dignity; her power is more predominant on Earth, than
in Heaven: so that all those Epithets of changeable, defective, spotted,
inferior, poor, sad, and the like, are all derived from her too near vicinity
with the Earth. All this night, said Andrenio, and many more I spent in this
pleasant entertaintment, making my self as many Eyes, as the Heaven had Stars,
and all too little to view this Prospect. But by this time the Noats of the
Birds were alarms of the mornings approach tuning their Salve to his second
entrance, giving notice to the Stars to retire, and to the Flowers to awake.
The Sun began again to arise, Sun.
and I to revive with his sight, whom I cheerfully saluted, but methoughts,
with something more cool affections. The Sun, said Critilo, at the second view
does not amaze, nor at the third strike admiration. My curiosity began by this
time to abate, as my stomach became more sharp; so after I had repeated some
applauses, and praises in his honor, I descended lower by the direction of his
light (which I perceived was a Creature, and an Instrument to serve my use) for
the strengthening of the Mind is subject to the necessities of the Body, and
sublime contemplations cannot be continued but by new supplies made to the
decays of nature. So that, I say, I descended by that dangerous Ladder which
those confused ruins had rudely and casually digested, which yet I acknowledge
to the Providence of Heaven; for otherwise there had been no means for my safe
descent. But before I tread the least step on the bottom, I must tell you, that
both my Voice and words fail me; and therefore I must entreat the supply of
your expressions to recount the number of my thoughts, and so the second time I
invite you to new Wonders, though Terrene.

The Third CHRISIS.
Natures Comeliness.
THe Variety of Nature is one part of its comely adornment, and affords us
matter to busy our Heads in Contemplation, and our Tongues in Praises: our
Souls are naturally propense to observe the effects of Nature: The wisest man
called it the worst employment, and indeed so it is, when our considerations
arrest themselves in satisfaction of our own Vanity, not proceeding to such
sublime Raptures as may serve to raise in us the returns Gratitude and Glory to
the supreme Creator. Though admiration be the Daughter of Ignorance, yet it is
the Mother of Content; to admire in small things is folly, and to stand
unstruck at more miraculous Prodigies, is inadvertency. Admiration is the
highest expression of Praise, we can attribute to any Object, and especially if
it proceeds like expressions of Flattery, which pretend those excesses of
perfection that are better evidenced by silence, than words. But it is a vulgar
saying, that not the greatness of a wonder, but the novelty affects us; for we
are not studious to behold those superior wonders, because they are known but
because they are strange; by which means we beg for trifling Novelties to
entertain our unconstant humor, and pacify our curious solicitude with
extravagancies. So much has Novelty bewitched us, that the staleness of
ancient wonders, is oppressive, and tedious to our unconstancy, which our
Brains are forced to remedy by the arts and toys of new inventions. That which
yesterday struck admiration to the beholders, is to day slighted, and
undervalued, not that it has lost its perfection, but our estimation;
therefore the wiser Sages excuse this former clownery by the civility of new
addresses, reflecting on those ancient perfections with delight and admiration.
If therefore a Pearl brought from another World affects us more, than our own
Diamond, because extraordinary, what advantage must it then be to Andrenio to
see on a sudden the Heaven, the Stars, the Moon, the Sun, the Earth decked with
Flowers, and the Sky enameled with Stars? Let him relate this himself, and
with that he prosecuted his Discourse. In this conjunction of beautiful
rarities, which I never before apprehended, I found the motion of my Soul more
active, and vigorous than my Body, moving my Eyes more than my Feet, every
Object retarded my progress, and found me matter to admire and applaud. Whilst
yesterday I admired the Heaven, I had only opportunity to exercise my sight,
but in this nearer approach, had I had a hundred eyes, and as many hands, all
would have been too feeble, and exhausted in the diffusion they made of
themselves through all the variety of these Objects. I unweariedly beheld the
multitude of Creatures, their different Proprieties their Essences, Forms,
Colors, Affections, and Motions: with one hand I gathered a Rose, considering
the beauty of it, and smelt its fragrant odor, with the other I plucked some
Fruit to please my taste, and satisfy my appetite: That in a short time I
found my self so embarked in such a diversity of Prodigies, that I was forced
to leave one, to consider the other, still filled with delight, and admiration.

But that which with most delight I considered, was, that amongst the multitude
of Creatures, The Variety of Creatures.
there should be so great diversity, and difference, that not one leaf of a
Plant, nor of a Sparrow, should have a resemblance of another Species. In this,
said Critilo, the wise Creator determined not only to supply the mere
necessities, and wants of Man, for whose sake all was created, but bountifully
to extend his hand in a various plenty, that so he, who had been thus liberal
in his Gifts, might well epect man should nor be sparing or niggardly in his
returns of service. I soon knew, proceeded Andrenio, some sorts of those
Fruits, which the courtsie of the Beasts had brought unto my enclosure: but
especially I observed the manner of their growing, the extention of their
Boughs, the twining of their Roots, which as they were of no small delight to
me to behold, so the reason, and nature thereof was too high for my young and
unpolished understanding to comprehend: the crudity of the unripe Fruits, which
I gathered, offended my Teeth and Taste, not knowing as yet how to distinguish
their times and seasons. This is another Rule, said Critilo, and disposition of
Divine Providence, to prolong the ripening of some Fruits, till the necessity
of Animals require them. Some not only budded, but ripened in the Spring, are
first Fruits and Sacrifices more devoted to our taste, than nourishment, and
would rather be early than seasonable: the cool refreshments of others are
fitted to temper the Summers heat, and others of a more dry, and durable
quality are heaped up for the Winters store, both for provision of the barren
season, and by their innate heat to fortify men's stomachs against the Winters
cold. The cool Herbs of Summer abate, and attemper Iuly's heat, and hot plants
revive our benumbed coldness in Decembers Frosts: so that one Fruit being gone,
another comes in, observing their appointed times, and seasons, so as to supply
our wants with abundance, and convenience. O that Provident Bounty of the
Creator! who appears so expressly manifest, that none can in words deny him, but
his inward thoughts and conscience will immediately check, and accuse him.

I was involved, proceeded Andrenio, in so delightful a Labyrinth of natures
twining, that I committed my self to the mercy of my own unsatiable curiosity,
and to the astonishment, and confusion, which every new Object had power to
inculcate. I gathered this and the other Flower, feasted with its fragrancy,
flattered its beauty; nor was I ever wearied with its smell, or sight; I
plucked each leaf particularly, making a prolix lecture thereon, anatomatizing
its artificial composure, deducing conclusions from thence of the general
comeliness of the whole Universe. For thus I reasoned, if one Flower be so
beautiful, what must be the whole Garden? if one Star, so bright, and glorious,
what must be that transparent clearness of the whole Heavens? Who does not
admire this glory, and celebrate the praises of so comely, and profitable a
Fabric? I commend your fancy, said Critilo, but take care, that the intentness
of your outward sense obstruct not the operations of your inward thoughts; that
you walk not like those in this Garden of the World, whose eyes are fixed
downwards, and decline with Souls no more elevated than their animal senses:
but do you raise your contemplation to that infinite Perfection of the Creator;
other things being but a ray, and glimpse of him: and thus argue, if the shadow
be such, what must be the cause and the reality which it follows; if such be
the Dead, what must be the Living? if such be the Image, what is the Original?
For as a cunning Artist, designing to build a Palace, intends not only to make
it strong and convenient, but stately also, and excellent in its symmetrical
Proportions, which may please the sight, which is one of the most noble of our
Senses. Even to the Divine Architect of this Palace of the World, has not only
fixed the Foundation, and Pillars of it firm, and stable, but adorned it with
the excellency of Proportion: so that Trees do not yield their Fruit before
they are first decked with Blossoms, making Beauty subservient unto Profit. From
the flagrant Flowers the Bees collect both substance for their Combs, and
Honey; and from the thin Leaves are distilled sweet, and medicinal waters, to
revive our Spirits, and please our Senses. But alas, replied Andrenio, as at
first the beauty and odor of those Flowers delighted my fancy, so was I no
less troubled to see that flourishing estate so soon changed, and faded. This,
said Critilo, is a lively Emblem of humane frailty, for beauty begins in
ostentation, the year smiles amongst the flowers of a cheerful Spring, and the
day dawns with beams of a blushing Aurora, and man begins to live with the
smiles of Infancy, and wantonness of Youth; but all ends in sadness, and
corruption, when the apprenhesion of being laid in the dust, and paying the
tribute of Nature, affrights us with horror; whilst the uncertain time of
destiny in general serves to elude men's expectation thereof in particular.

After I had in this pastime entertained my sight, said Andrenio, there wanted
not the Harmony, and Musical Notes of Birds to content my Ears: their tuned
throats ravished my Senses, their Quavers, Stops, and sweet Airs kept time with
the Woods, and Valleys which were instruments of their louder Sounds, and by
Echo bore part with them in the same Music; the shrubs also, and twigs
dancing at the noise, seemed to salute the Sun at his first arise. I observed
here, and that with no small admiration, that nature had bestowed the Gift of
melody in Voice, which is the recreation of our Lives, on Birds only; Beasts
with an ungrateful Voice offended my Ears, and the sound they made was more of
horror, than harmony. The reason is, said Critilo, because Birds as
Inhabitants of the Air are of more refined Spirits in that subtle Region, and
therefore have the advantage of other Creatures, and only can imitate the words
of men, through the Purity of that place they live in, and abiding in a Region
of nearer vicinity unto Heaven, have need of sweeter Voices to resound
continually Divine Praises. Another thing I would have you to observe, that
amongst all the diversity of Birds, none is affected with a venomous quality,
like those Animals, who crawling on the Earth, suck in noxious qualities, which
should admonish man to avoid the dangers of this Region, and retire from the
filth of this infection. I was much taken, said Andrenio, to see them so neat,
and so pretty in their variety of colors. But here observe, said Critilo, that
the Male has more variety in his colors, than the Female, resembling the like
in man, whom nature it self has so sufficiently decked, that he needs no other
foils to set him off; but Women being subtle in their inventions, know ways to
deceive with the snare of their dresses, and to cover their defects with
counterfeited Feathers.

That which I much observed (said Andrenio) was that admirable correspondence,
and rule by which the distinct multitudes of Creatures were distinguished, The
Subordination of Creatures.
and disposed, without one being troublesome unto the other, but rather every
one in their several natures, lik a well-ordered Commonwealth, helpful and
assistant amongst themselves. This is another effect, said Critilo, of Divine
Wisdom, the balance of all things in weight number, and measure; for every
Creature has its Center, his natural place of residence, his duration in time,
his proper end both in being, and operation: By this you may see the link and
chain of Creatures, their orderly situation, and the due degree of their
Perfection. Of the Elements the meanest Servants of nature are composed mixed
Bodies, and the inferiors are subordinate to the Superiors: Herbs, and
Plants, which are in the lowest order and degree, of life, are Vegetables,
moving and increasing until they arrive at the full point, and period of their
perfection. In the second order of life are Sensitives, the Animals of the
Earth, which prey on the Vegetables, making them Food, and Nourishment for
their own sustenance; and these are the Beasts of the Field, the Fishes of the
Sea, and the Birds of the Air; these feed on the Grass, people the Trees, peck
the Buds, build in the Branches, and make the Leaves their defense, and
security: but both these, one, and the other are bound to obey a third sort of
Nature, viz. the Vegetable, and the Sensitive are made Servants to a higher
Master, Reason, and Understanding, which is Man, and he subordinated to a
greater Sovereign which is God, whom he ought to know, love, and serve. In this
wonderful order, and harmony, all things are disposed, one Creature being made
helpful to assist the Wants and Necessities of another. The Water has need of
the Earth to support it, the Earth of the Water to bedew it; the water in
rarefaction becomes Air, and the Air Food to nourish, and foment the Fire:
every part being ordained mutually to maintain the other, all generally concur
to the preservation of the whole. Besides, it is worth observation to consider
those ways, and means the Divine Providence has invented for the preservation
of that being, which he has given to every Creature, especially to the
Sensitive, as the most considerable, which is a natural instinct to know the
good, and avoid the bad: whence we may better admire, than relate, the apt
hability some have to deceive, and that others have to escape and fly the
danger.

Though all this diversity of Prodigies, said Andrenio, was but as one
continued Series of Novelty: yet my wonder was still dilated with the sight and
survey of that immense Ocean. The Sea seemed as envious of the Earth to form
Tongues in the water to chide my sluggishness, The Sea.
and by the noise of its Waves to invite my curiosity to a new admiration. Thus
wearied with my Walks, but not with my Thoughts, I sat me down, on one of
yonder Cliffs, oppressed with as many fits of astonishment, as the Sea has
Waves. I contemplated much on those slight bounds that imprison the Sea, and
the obedience of that furious Monster to the gentle Curb of the unstable Sand.
Is it possible, said I, there should be no stronger Wall, than that of Dust, to
limit the violence of this furious Enemy? Hold, said Critilo, Divine Providence
has with much lenity circumscribed the rage of two boundless enemies, which
being let loose, would have destroyed the World, and its Inhabitants. The Sea
he has terminated with the limits of the Sands, and the Fire he has
imprisoned in the hard intrails of the Flint, The Author speaks here with more
Rhetoric than Philosophy.
which being called by two strokes only comes forth, and serves our occasions:
when we have no farther need of it, it retires or is extinguished; if this were
not, two days could not pass, before the Earth were consumed by the Fire, or
drowned with the Waters. I could not satiate my self, said Andrenio, in
beholding the transparent clearness of the Waters, and my eyes were
hydropically thirsty to view the constant motion of those liquid Chrystals.
They say, answered Critilo, that the eyes being composed of those two humors
Watrish, and Chrystaline, are so much pleased with beholding Waters, that they
are never wearied in beholding them. Above all, said Andrenio, when I saw so
many Fishes within the Bowels of the Sea, so differently formed from Birds, and
Beasts, it was here, that I can properly say, my admiration was at a stand, and
being wholly exhausted was reduced to a ne plus ultra. Upon this Rock being set
alone, without other admonition than my own weak Meditations. I began to
consider the rare harmony of the Universe, Composition of Contraries.
which being composed of Contraries, one would think in so near a conjunction
should like irreconcilable Enemies, as they are, combat both to their own, and
the Worlds destruction: This held me for some time in contemplation; for who
would think a League could be made to compose things so contrary, and opposite?
It is true, answered Critilo, the World is compounded of Contraries, and
Agreement of Discords; as the Philosopher says, there is nothing, but has an
Enemy with whom to combat, either with Victory, or subjection, all is with
action, and passion, none assaults, but his blows are returned by his Enemy.
The Elements command the Vanguard, by whose example the mixed compositions are
encouraged to Battle, one destroying the other, evils waiting to entrap our
Goods, and malice to ruin, and overthrow our Fortunes. Sometimes even the
Stars have their Dissentions, and Quarrels, and though there is no Weapons, or
power in fight capable to hurt those invulnerable Bodies; yet the damage of the
War, like that of Sovereign Princes, redounds to the affliction of their
sublunary Vassals, and their natural Discords are converted to moral
oppositions: so that none on Earth, is so peaceable and quiet, but finds some
whom he may hate, or emulate, for corrupt nature is pregnant with the innate
seeds of dissension. Thus in Age the old are Opposers of the Young, in
Complexion the Phlegmatic are averse to the Choleric, in Estate the Rich
unsociable with the Poor, in Climate the Spaniard unpleasing to the French:
thus in all forts of Qualities, and Conditions, some are contrary, or in
opposition unto others. But what if I should tell you, that within the very
Gates of Man himself, within the small compass of that earthly Cottage, the
fire of dissension should be kindled, and he as an enemy oppose himself? For he
as a little World is compounded of all Contraries: the Humors begin the
Quarrel, the Moisture resists the radical Heat, still endeavoring to abate,
and quench it; the inferior parts are always offensive to the Superior,
contradicting their Designs, and Intentions, and the Appetite subdues, and
tramples on Reason. The Soul, that immortal Spirit, is not free from this
Calamity, the Passions quarrel amongst themselves; Fear endeavors to abate
Valor, Melancholy Mirth; sometimes we desire, and then we abhor, sometimes
Vices triumph, and anon Virtues, all consists of Arms and War, and the Life of
Man on Earth is nothing but a continued Warfare. But O! that wonderful and
infinite Wisdom of the Creator, who has so moderated, and attempered the
Contrarieties of Creatures, as to make their Discords their stay, support, and
conservation, and thereby to unite, and sustain the whole Fabric of the
Universe. This, said Andrenio, was none of my meannest Contemplations,
observing so much change in so much Permanency, all things seemed to move in a
continual progress to their natural end, and yet the World as the stage of the
Tragedy to remain the same constant, and immutable. The supreme Artificer, said
Critilo, has so ordained, that nothing should end, but another should begin,
that from the ashes, or ruin of the one should arise another, that the
corruption of one should be the generation of another: when all things seem to
be at an end, a new Offspring begins, Nature peoples again the World, and older
ages cast their Bill, and grow young with a new Generation, in all which is to
be admired, and adored the Wisdom of Divine Providence.

But here, said Andrenio, did not my thoughts, and observation rest, but still
proceeded to consider the variety of times, The Changes of Time.
and seasons, the exchange of day with night, of summer with winter, by the
moderate and gradual intervention of the temperate Spring; Nature proceeding by
degrees never makes so long a step as from one extreme to another. In this
again, said Critilo, appears the Divine Government, not only in appointing unto
all Creatures, their orders and situation, but in accommodating fit times and
opportunities agreeable to all occasions. The day serves for labor, and the
silence of the night for quietness and repose: the Frosts of Winter fix and
extend the Roots of Plants, and the Spring with a reviving warmth causes the
branches to blossom, and the Summer appears in Plentiful hopes, and the Autumn
crowns our Labors with the Fruits we reap, and gather into our Barns. But what
do you think of the strange Miracle of the Rains? This too I admired very much,
said Andrenio, to see those sweet dews distill on the earth with gentleness, and
divided streams, for a common refreshment: and so seasonable, added Critilo, in
the two Months of October and April, which are productive of Fruit, and serve
the Plow, and Seed, with a kindly Moisture. The changes also of the Moon
contribute unto Plenty, and favor by a wholesome influence the health of
Creatures; for some Months are cold, others hot, some moist, and blustering,
others dry, and serene, according to the different Seasons: the Waters cleanse,
and fructify, the Winds purge, and animate; the Earth immoveably supports the
descending gravity of Bodies, the Air is pliable not to hinder their motion,
and diaphanous not to obstruct and cloud the Sight. Whence we may see, that it
is, that Divine Omnipotency, that Eternal Providence, and that only immense
Bounty, which alone knows how to erect this vast Fabric, which we can never
sufficiently admire, contemplate and applaud. These are certain Truths, said
Andrenio, which I have often observed, and yet ill conceived in my rude
Understanding. It was no unpleasant entertainment to me, to traverse all the
day from one place unto another, from one prospect to another, continuing to
admire, and view the Heaven, the Earth, the Seas, the Fields, and all with an
unsatiable fruition. But that point, on which I much insisted, was that
admirable Art of the Divine Wisdom, which with so much facility has performed
a Labor so difficult, and in the first invention proceeded to the very height
and top of all Perfection, and Accomcomplishment: How much art was there in
fixing the Earth firmly on its Basis to be a secure foundation for the
following Superstructure? Nor less admirable are those perennal streams of
Fountains, which swell with an unexhaustible increase, whose continued
inundation is no more than a necessary Plenty. How much power is there in
forming the Tempests, and those still whisperings of Wind, which steal from
unknown places, and as much unknown the Stages to which they tend? How much
power was there in digesting those useful heaps of Mountains, the ribs of this
composure, the Bay and Harbor for the Earth to shroud it self under? These, as
they are additions to the beauty of the Worlds variety, so are they the
Treasuries of the Snows the Mines from which Metals are extracted, are the the
dissolvers, or breakers of the Clouds, the Head and original of Fountains, and
the dens of Beasts; from them fall the lofty Pines to build our Ships, and
Houses; in them we have refuge from the over-flowings of Waters, in them we
remain secure, as in Towers, or Bull-works from the sudden assaults, or
surprizal of our Enemies: all which Miracles, and Wonders, what but an infinite
Wisdom could sorm, and dispose with Reason, therefore must we confess that were
all the best Heads, and Judgments of the World united in one, and all their
Reasons, and Discourses, squeezed, and distilled to the purest quintessence of
Rationality, it were not capable to amend the least circumstance, or make an
addition to the least Atome of Natures perfection. And if that King, for only
knowing four Stars, was so highly commended by one of his Parasites (so much is
Wisdom esteemed in a Prince) and with that extravagant applause, saying, That
if he had been Counselor to the Divine Workman, at that time when he created,
and ordered these things, that his Humane Wisdom would have outdone the Divine,
and better contrived the composure of his Fabric. But this saying proceeded
not from an effect of Reason, but from a defect of Judgment, incident to the
nature of the Spanish Nation; which in the swellings of their boasting humor
cannot moderate their ostentation though with God himself.

Hear me, said Andrenio, this last truth the greatest, and most sublime of any,
that I have yet declared. The Descriptition of Divinity.
I confess, that though I have admired four strange Prodigies in this Universe,
The multitude and variety of Creatures, viz.
the harmony and agreement in Contraries, their beauty and ornament mixed with
profit, and convenience, and their mutations with Permanency. Yet above all, I
remained confused in the knowledge of the Creator, who is so manifest in his
Creatures, and yet hid in himself; whose Attributes are imprinted on every
step, and action of his Work, as his Omnipotencey in the execution, his
Providence in the Government, his Beauty in the perfection, his Bounty in the
communication; and so the rest of his Attributes; of which as none were
unemployed at the beginning, so in succeeding ages are maintained, and
conserved by the existence and operation of his power. And notwithstanding this
great God is hid, though known, not seen, though manifest, far distant, though
near; this is that riddle which has confused my Understanding, and left me in
an ecstasy of love, and adoration. Man, said Critilo, is naturally inclined to
love his Maker, as the beginning, and end he tends unto. Nor is there any
Nation so barbarously ignorant, in whom the Light of Nature has not infused
the awe, and reverence of a Deity, sufficient to curb the most audacious
profaneness, and convince them of the Divine Essence, Omnipresence. Nature
having made nothing but to some end, the inclinations and propensities of every
Creature are useful in their several Operations. If the Loadstone turns unto
the North, it denotes a simpathy between them, and its trembling till it
returns unto its Point, shows that a violence is offered to its nature, whilst
it remains in the state of Separation. If the Plant turns with the Sun, the
Fish to the Water, the Stone to the Center, and Man to God, there must be a
God, who is his attracting North, his Center, and Sun, to which his head bends,
and with whose vigor, and heat the deadness of his Soul receives vigor to
revive. From this Great Sire do all Creatures acknowledge to have received
their Being: he only is from himself, and therefore is Infinite in all kind of
Perfection, whose Being none is able to circumscribe with Place, or Time.
Though he is not seen, yet he is known, and like a Sovereign Prince keeps a
distance agreeable to his Majestic Greatness, not admitting, unless rarely,
his Vassals to a familiar Audience, and yet is familiarly present with all by
the representation of his Creatures. So that a Philosopher defines this World
to be the Grand Looking-Glass of God. Philon Ebreus terms it the invitation of
the Soul, and the only nourishment which feeds Minds. Pythagoras calls it a
Tuned-Harp, whose measure, and harmony wraps up our Contemplations, and
Thoughts with uncontainable Ravishments. Tertullian names it the Pomp of
Increated Majesty. And Trismegistus the Musical Consonancy of the Divine
Attributes.

These are, and so concluded Andrenio, the first Rudiments of my Life, better
conceived than related; for where the Thoughts are screwed beyond their natural
power, there must consequently want words to utter them. That which I must now
desire of you is, that you would satisfy my longing expectation to know what
you are, and from whence you came, and how you passed the rolling Waves of this
Ocean, tell me if there be more Worlds, or more People than this, to all which
my Curiosity will render me as attentive as you can desire. To which Relation
Critilo willingly consented, being the great Tragedy of his Life declared in
the following Crisis.

The Third Crisis.
THE Destroyer of Life.
Critilo Relates the Misfortunes of his Love in the time of his Youth; and the
occasion of his Shipwreck.

THey say that Cupid complained of the Injuries he had received from Fortune,
in that she had slighted and undervalued the Power of his Mother, by not
appealing, as she was want, to her Arbitrament and Judicature. What want you
Blind Boy, said Fortune? and he again, replied, this is agreeable to those
reproaches and scorn, which Envy and Dissension has cast upon me.

Fortune. With whom have you this enmity?


Cupid. With all the World.


Fortune. I am sorry you should contend with so powerful an Enemy, and that the
Justice of your Cause should invite none to defend it.


Cupid. Had I but only you on my side, I should be sufficiently defended, and
this my Mother daily tells me, and often preaches to me, that I should get you
to my Friendship and Party.


Fort. But do you not revenge your self?


Cupid. Yes, both of young and old.


Fort. Well, but what is the occasion, and reason for your anger?


Cupid. The cause is as great, as just.


Fort. Perhaps those ordinary reproaches of having been born in the Family of a
Mechanic, or your Education to be no other than amidst the Anvile, and Hammers
of a smooty Forge.


Cupid. No, not these, for never was I so disingenuous as to deny Truth.


Fort. Nor should it trouble you to be called the Son of your Mother.


Cupid. This less; for I triumph and glory rather to proceed from the Race of
so Divine a Progeny; neither can I be without her, nor she without me; neither
Venus without Cupid, nor Cupid without Venus.


Fort. Now I know your distaste, you are vexed to be thought the heir of your
Grandfathers defects, or to imitate the Sea, that troubled and unconstant
Element.


Cupid. No, for these are but Fables.


Fort. If these be Fables, what are Truths?


Cupid. That which unquiets me is, that they impose upon me false Aspersions,
unseemly Epithites, and Slanders.


Fort. I understand you now; without doubt it is, that they say, you have
changed your Bow with Death, and are not called Amor from Amare, but from Mori,
as if Love, and Death were both one, your Profession being to destroy Life, to
unrip the Heart, and lodge it in another; rather where it loves, than where it
animates.


Cupid. This is all true.


Fort. If this be true, what other reproach can you complain of, as false, or
injurious?


Cupid. Are those true, that speak me Blind, and whose Malice would pluck out
my Eyes? If I am blind, let those well-shot Arrows declare, or those marks hit,
be mended by the shasts of a more quick-sighted Shooter. They paint me also
with a Fillet bound about my Eyes; not only Apelles, whose Fancy guides his
Pencil, nor the Poets, whose obligation is to faign, and their trade to invent
fabulous Fancies; but also the wise and understanding Philosophers; These are
they which move my Patience, and make me angry to think their better Judgments
should style me such, and like the rest be seduced with a vulgar Error. Prithee
tell me, Fortune, what Passion is there, Blind Passion.
that does not blind? Is not the Angry blinded with his own Choler? The
Covetous with his Interest? The Desperate with his Confidence? The Idle with
his Sleep? Is not the Vain a Mole in his Gallantry, and the Hypocrite blinded
with the Beams of his Eyes? And do not the Proud, Gluttonous, and Drunkards
groap in the darkness of their own Passions? Why then do they impose this
Ignominy on me only, and so deprive me of my Sight, that by a Metonimy of
blindness they describe me? which is the more strange, because this deprivation
is contrary to my Nature; and Sight gives me the first Being. By Seeing I
begin, and thereby my Passion is nourished and formed, and like an Eagle at the
Sun, am never wearied with beholding Beauty. This is the quarrel, and injury I
complain of; what think you, have not I reason? The same, said Fortune, is my
grievance; and since we both lie under the same abuse, let our equal misfortune
comfort, and content us both; but that which has chiefly imposed this name
upon you, is the too raised conceit of your own Sight, as if only enamoured
Spirits knew how to delight their eyes; and that others had only light to serve
their necessity, and not their curiosity, which causes you to accuse them of
blind Ignorance, and upbraid your defects in return of their affronts: He that
will see this Philosophy compared with experience, let him attend to this
following discourse of Critilo, which he dedicates to the years of flourishing
Youth.


Your demand, said he, renews my ancient grief, which my mind already better
feels, than my tongue relates: as your discourse was pleasant and delightful,
so the troubles, and misfortunes of my life convert our former content into
extremes of Melancholy: happy art thou who wast born among the Beasts, and
unhappy I who was born and educated amongst Men, whose cruelty exceeds that of
ravenous Wolves; for every one is to the other such, and to be a Man is to be
more unhumane than they. You have given me an account how you came into the
World, and I shall tell you, how I came out of it; the sense of which has so
altered, and changed my humor, and condition, that I know not so well to tell
you who I am, as who I was. They say I was born at Sea, and indeed the
inconstancy of my Fortune persuades me the same. The word, Sea, was no sooner
out of his Mouth, but turning his eyes toward it, on a sudden started up, and
distrusting his sight at first, stood a while in suspense, but at length
calling to Andrenio, and pointing with his Finger, Do thou not see, said he,
yonder afar off? What is it you see? I see, said he, some wandering Mountains,
or winged Sea Monsters, or else some Clouds. No, said Critilo, they are Ships,
though you have said aptly in calling them Clouds; for they rain Gold into
Spain. Andrenio was much pleased to see them come in with such full swelled
Sails; for he admired a sight so unusual, being naturally desirous to enter
into humane Society; but Critilo began to sigh, and lament the trouble and
inconvenience of the present occasion. What is the matter, said Andrenio, is
not this the desired Fleet of which you told me? Yes. Are not those Men that
come? Yes. Why then are you so sad? For this only reason, said Critilo, for
know, Andrenio, that we are already lodged within the power of our enemies;
Moral Rules.
now we must be circumspect over all our actions, be provident in seeing,
cautious in hearing, but especially speaking; we must bridle our tongues, and
before we begin our Speech, we must premeditate what inconvenience may ensue.
The professions you make may to credulous ears insinuate affection and
friendship, but be so provident as to arm against the assaults of enemies. This
new Lecture seemed strange to Andrenio, whose Judgment not being improved by
experience, made him to reprove Critilo, wondering that he did not rather advise
him of the dangers of the Woods, and cruelty of Beasts, than with so much
inveterate hatred to inveigh against man. Was not our danger greater, said he,
whilst our want of habitation drove us to the dens of Tigers, nor did you fear
them, much less should your courage abate with the sight of men. Yes, sighing,
answered Critilo, for if Men be not Beasts, it is because their inhumanity
exceeds theirs, The Iniquity of Mankind.
whose irrational Soul is not capable to invent such extravagant Iniquities.
Never was our danger greater than with the approach of these; which Truth is
confirmed by the example of a King, who to protect his Favorite from the
violent hands of his own Courtiers, enclosed him within the Den of his Lions,
esteeming him more secure there, than within the reach, or power of his
malevolent Prosecutors. I shall refer that to your own confession, after that
your better experience has acquainted you with the same. Hold, said Andrenio,
are they not all like you? Yes, and yet are not, for every one is the Son of
his Mother, wedded to his own humor, and opinion, and affected with a
diversity both of fancy and gesture. There are some who but Pigmies in growth,
have yet their Souls elevated to the Skies, and others, Giants in bodies, have
yet their thoughts levelled with the Earth: you shall meet others of a
revengeful, and malicious Spirit, whose rage dies not with time, and whose
rancour infecteth others; as poisonous as the Scorpions Tail, having its Venom
sublimated by age, and long durance. You shall hear, but let it be your care to
avoid the impertinent discourses of the talkative, which are often vain, and
idle, and neither profitable to him that speaks, or hears them. You will please
your self with the conceits of some, whose quicker genius comments on the
actions of others, imitating in a jesting scorn their words, their manners, and
behavior; but these Men reflect not on the looseness of their own Lives, nor
how obnoxious they are to the censures of a scrutinous Judge; others there are
foolishly inquisitive, whose impertinent questions may puzzle the Answers of a
good Resolver. You shall see others, whose long discourses conclude in nothing,
in all things aggravating and enlarging; for though they be Men more short in
stature than one of Navarre, and corpulent also, are yet without substance. In
fine, you shall find few men that are so, Brutes they may be, and Monsters of
the World, having no substance but their own Flesh and Skin, and the rest but a
mere shadow or apparition of Mankind.

But tell me, how is Man capable of doing so much mischief, since Nature as
seemingly negligent of him, has denied him those weapons with which, she has
armed, and defended Beasts? He has no claws like the Lion, or Tiger, no Trunk
like the Elephant, no Horns like the Bull, no Tusks like the Boar, no Teeth
like the Dog, nor Mouth like the Wolf, how then is that unarmed Malice able to
wage such continual War? For this very reason, said Critilo, has provident
Nature not delivered weapons into the hands of an enemy dangerous to himself,
and the rest of her Product; whose hate knows no bounds, for being let loose,
would destroy even Nature her self, notwithstanding all which, his malice has
found means to convert those parts which Nature has given him for necessary
uses into more bloody and cruel Weapons than those of Beasts, his Tongue is
more sharp than the Lions Claws, by which he shatters the Reputation of others,
and wounds them in their name, and honor. His bad intentions are more
perverse, and crooked than the Bulls horns, hurt at random, and hit those it
never aimed at: his bowels are more poisonous than the Vipers, his breath
blasts more than the Dragons, his eyes are more envious, and dart more deadly
emissions, than the Basilisks, his teeth are more sharp than the fangs of the
Boar, and his nose like the Elephants trunk, wrings and turns it self into a
thousand forms, and shapes of derision; so that all those offensive Arms which
are sparingly delivered to other Creatures, are not given to, but usurped by
Man, and in him found as the store and Magazine of them all. And that you may
understand this the better, know that Lions, and Tigers are capable of no other
damage, than what touches their Bodies; but Man is liable to what misery,
fraud, deceit, treason, theft, homicide, adultery, envy, injuries, detractions,
and falsities can throw on his honor, and cast on his peace, estate, content,
happiness, conscience, nay and to a malice, which would proceed to the very
ruin, and destruction of his Soul. Believe me, there is no Wolf, nor Lion, nor
Tiger so unhumane, as Man; which is sufficiently verified, if true, what is
reported. That a Malefactor being condemned to die upon a legal Trial, was by
Sentence of Justice to be cast into a deep Cave to be there devoured by
ravenous Beasts: it fortuned that a Stranger passing by, and hearing the sighs,
and groans of the condemned person, and yet ignorant of the punishment, was
moved by compassion to relieve him out of misery; to which end opening the Cave
suddenly, with extraordinary nimbleness leaped out the Tiger, which contrary to
its nature, and the expectation of the Traveller, by way of salute and
gratefulness, kindly kissed and licked his hands; next followed the Snake,
which twined about his Legs, not to wound, but to embrace them; in like manner
did all the rest most gratefully join to give him thanks not only for saving
their lives, but for rescuing them from a death accompanied with the loathsome
Society of a wicked Man; in recompense of which they seemed to advise him to
fly and be gone, least when that Miscreant came forth, Man's Cruelty.
he should endanger his own life, by saving his The Passenger, though much
amazed, yet desired to see him whom he had so much obliged, expecting some
acknowledgements for so great a benefit, instead of which the Malefactor coming
forth, and supposing that the Traveller carried some Wealth and Riches with
him, killed him, and despoiled him of all, a kind return of his Charity and
Compassion. And now judge, which are most cruel, Men, or Beasts. I am more
astonished, and amazed, said Andrenio, to hear this, than the day I beheld the
World. You cannot fully conceive their Malice, said Critilo, and yet Women are
worse, and more dangerous. If they be worse, what must they be then? In short
they are Devils, hereafter I will tell you more of them: but above all I
conjure you, that by no means you tell, who we are, nor how I came hither, nor
how you proceeded to Light, for by that means you may loose your Liberty, and I
my Life. And though I distrust not your faithfulness, and secrecy, yet I am
glad, that I have not finished the Relation of my Misfortunes, which in this
only are fortunate, that being as yet untold, are not subject to that discourse
which may sometimes inconsiderately fall from you. Here therefore we will
double down the leaf, until the next occasion, which cannot want in so long a
Voyage.

By this time the near approach of the Fleet made their Voices more distinct
and audible, which they raised with greater acclamations with the joy conceived
at their arrival: Men always grow more wanton, when their success promises
fairest, and their enterprises have the face of a happy issue; being come into
the Road, they furled their Sails, and cast their Anchors, and the Passengers
began to land on the desired Shore: The meeting was as strange to the new-come
Guests, as to the two Inhabitants; who in the relation they gave of themselves,
declared, that having been asleep, or negligent at the departure of the last
Fleet, they were left behind on that Island, which account reconciled both
their pity, and their courtesy. Having thus for some days entertained
themselves in Hunting, and furnished their Vessels with fresh Water, and Wood,
they set to Sea, directing their course to desired Spain. Critilo and Andrenio
embarked together on the same Gallion, which sort of Vessel is a terror to its
enemies, the opposer of the Winds, and a yoke of subjection to the Ocean. The
Voyage was as dangerous as long, but the Relation which Critilo made of the
many Tragedies his life had passed, was a good entertainment for tedious hours,
which he prosecuted in this manner.

I was born, (as I have already told you) amidst of this immense Golfe, and of
the dangers and continual motions of this turbulent Element. The reason was,
that my Parents being both Spaniards, by consent, and favor of Philip the
Great, Critilo relates the History of his own Life.
the most universal and mighty Monarch, embarked for the Indies with no small
Wealth to improve their Fortunes. My Mother at that time suspecting her self
with Child, carried me in her Womb; and before the tedious Voyage was ended,
brought me forth, whose untimely birth was hastened by the terrors of that
Tempest, in which I came to light, that so the raging of the Seas, might add
pains to the pangs of her Travail: My being born amidst this confusion, was a
bad omen of my future infelicities, so early began Fortune to play with my
life, hurrying me from one part of the World to the other. At last we arrived
at that rich and famous City of Goa, which is the Court of the Catholic Empire
in the East, the Imperial and August Seat of its Vice-kings, and universal
Emporium of the Indies, and its Richness. At this place lived my Father, whose
Stock, which he brought with him, directed with Prudence, and industry,
advanced suddenly both his Fame, and Fortune. But I, being educated amidst the
happiness of a plentiful condition, and being the only Son of my Parents, was
tenderly nurtured with too much care, and indulgence, whose fondness to me in
my Childhood, produced the fruits of an exorbitant Youth. Vicious Youth.
For being now entered into the green champions of springing years, made wanton
with delights, loose and uncurbed by the reigns of Reason, I fell into Gaming,
empairing my Estate, and abusing the industry of my Parents, whose cares
obtained that with trouble, which my folly squandred in pastime. From this Vice
I passed to the vain toys of Gallantry, and Fashions, dressing my Body with
borrowed Feathers, whilst I neglected the true adornments and virtues of the
Soul. This vanity of mine was incited forward, by the evil conversation of some
pretended Friends, Flatterers, and Braves, the vile moths of an Estate, Honor,
and Conscience. The Wisdom of my Father prognosticated the ruin of me his
unfortunate Son, and Family, from whose rigor I appealed to the indulgent
tenderness of my Mother, whose protection defended me not, but destroyed me.

But at that time my Father gave an end unto his days, seeing but little hopes
to recover me from my desperate condition, especially as then being blindly
entangled within the Labyrinth of love, For I had cast my affections upon a
Lady, though noble, beauteous, and as perfect as Nature could make her, The
Amors of Critilo.
yet wanting the endowments of Fortune, she shined not in that luster to the
World as to be adored, and courted for them: only I alone idolized her person,
and my devotion grew more zealous by the correspondence of her favors: and
though her Parents desired to admit me into their Family, yet mine refused to
admit her into theirs, endeavoring by all means to wean my affections, which
they styled my ruin, and by proposing another Match more fitted to their
convenience, than my content, thought to distract, or divert my love, which was
so firm, and blindly constant, that nothing could overcome: I thought, I spoke,
I dreamed of nothing but Felisinda (for so she was called) esteeming no small
portion of my happiness to consist in the repetition of her name. This, and
many other discontents were heavy troubles of my aged Father (the ordinary
punishment of Paternal indulgence) which sat so heavily on him, as to deprive
him of his life, and me of my protection; But yet the ignorance of my Youth
knew not how to make that estimate of my loss as the importance of so great
damage ought to have affected me. My tender natured Mother bewailed, and
performed the Obsequies of the dead with tears sufficient for us both; but with
that excess, that her own life lasted not long after, leaving me more free, and
less sad. The undoubted hopes of obtaining my Mistress, were now by the removal
of those obstacles, some remedy of my grief, and recompense of my loss; but
those filial respects I owed to the memory of my dead Parents, and my desires
to comply with the censures of the World, made me for some days to retard my
intentions, which seemed years, and ages to my longing hopes. In which interim
my unconstant Fortune so changed the condition of these present affairs, that
the death of my Parents, which at first seemed to facilitate my desires, was
that at last which put the obstacle. and reduced them to an Estate of almost
impossible. For it fortuned, that in a short time the Brother of my Mistress
died, a Gentleman well accomplished, and noble, the sole Heir of the Family,
leaving my Felisinda Inheritrix of all, and Phoenix in all Ornaments, whose
Beauty now joined with Riches, The Misfortunes of Critilo's Loves.
made her glory to shine in the highest magnitude; her fame was greatly spread
in one day, being become a person that suited with the most aspiring ambition
of that Court. This unexpected accident intervening, things had a strange
change, and the face of my affairs looked different, to what they formerly
promised; only the constancy of Felisinda was stable, and changed in nothing
but in greater kindness; her Friends and Parents aspiring now unto higher
Matches, were the first who by cold entertainments discountenanced my
pretensions, which they had formerly invited: this neglect proceeded afterward
to affronts, and endeavors to move in her a hatred of my Person; but she
advised me of all that might disadvantage me, made me of a Lover to become her
Councellor. Many other Rivals as powerful as numerous declared themselves; but
Lovers who were wounded more by those Arrows which were shot from the Quiver of
her Portion, than from the Bow of Love; yet of all I was timorous and
suspicious, love being naturally jealous, and like an effeminate Passion apt to
be foiled with the least disappointment, but that which gave me the greatest
blow, was the pretensions of a new Rival, who, besides that he was comely,
rich, and youthful, he was Kinsman of the Vice-king, which is there as much as
to be allied to a Deity, or to be a Branch of Divinity, whose Will is his Law,
and whose intentions are as soon executed, as conceived; he, I say, began to
declare himself a Pretender to my Mistress, being as confident, as powerful; we
both stood at open desiance, he encouraged by the strength of his authority,
and I enabled with the Passion of Love: but his own, and the reason of others
assured him, that this long rooted affection of mine, completed with time, and
conversation, was not easily eradicated, unless diverted; to which effect, he
promised his best assistance, and favor to the industry, and malice of my
enemies; whose Plot was by Law to pretend upon my Estate, and thereby either to
scare me out of the fits of Love, or at least to affright the Parents of
Felisinda from Matching her with me, over whom hanged an apparent ruin. I soon
perceived my self entangled within two dangerous toils, of Interest, and Love;
but Love being that which most prevailed, the fear of loosing my Estate was not
strong enough to contend with the valor of my affection, which like the Palm
grew more under the heavy pressure. But what this Plot wanted to avail with me,
it worked in the Parents of my Mistress, who considering most the conveniences
of Interest, and Honor, contrived -- I know not how to proceed, it will be
better to leave off: But Andrenio, still pressing him to proceed; Well, said
he, in fine, they resolved to kill me, and to deliver that life to my Adversary
which was already consecrated, and devoted to my Mistress; but she acquainted
me with the design that night from her Balcony, and according to her custom
consulted with me concerning the remedy; with which she let fall such a flood
of tears, as kindled in my breast a sire, and hell of despair, and fury, so
that the next day, not considering the inconveniences, nor dangers of Honor
or Life, but guided by the blindness of my Passion, armed with my Sword, or
rather Thunderbolt, pierced through the Quiver of Love, and whetted with anger
and jealousy, I went in pursuit of my Enemy; and now remitting disputes to
works, and our tongues to our hands, we unsheathed our Swords without remorse,
and having made some few Passes cach at the other, I soon pierced his heart,
depriving him both of Love, and Life; so that now I lay exposed to the Sentence
of Justice; whose Ministers, desirous to content the Vice-king, and covetous to
engross my Estate, were ready at hand to execute their Office. I was presently
sentenced to imprisonment in a dark Dungeon, laden with Bolts, and Irons, the
natural Fruit of my foolish rashness. The Fruit of Vice.
The sad news soon came to the ears of my Rivals Parents, who melted in their
sighs and tears, and resolving to revenge the injury, continually thundered out
threats against me The Vice-king also moved with the death of his Kinsman,
designed to prosecute Justice to the utmost extremity. The report of our Combat
was soon bruited abroad, and as men's affections led them, they either
condemned, or defended me; but all were generally sorry, that our Reason guided
us not better than so unfortunately to ruin each other. Only my Mistress was
she alone, that triumphed in my valor, and celebrated the faithfulness of my
affection, and constancy. The Charge was strongly prosecuted against me, of
which being convicted, my Estate became their Prey, and my Riches a sacrifice
to their revenge, venting their malice thereupon, as the angry Bull does on the
Cloak of his escaped Enemy. At the Sports of Bulls in Spain, they avoid often
the Horns of the Bull. by throwing their Cloaks away.
The sole support which remained unto me, were some Jewels, which providently I
had entrusted within the sacred Walls of a Monastery, the only Relic of my
shipwracked Fortune. The violence of this Storm stopped not at the ruin of my
Estate, but proceeded to a condemnation of my Life; and having lost my Goods, I
lost also my Friends, which are Companions inseparable each from the other; but
all this had not yet abated my Courage, had not something more unhappy
augmented my Misfortunes: For the Parents of Felisinda discontented at the
accidents and disgraces lately past, resolved to leave the Indies, and seek
more quietness, and preferment in Spain, which they hoped to procure by the
favor, and recommendations of the Vice-king. So that having converted their
Estate into Money, they embarked on the first Fleet, leaving me --. With that
his sighs interrupted his Speech, and his tears gave a full stop unto his
discourse: At last, said he, they carried with them two Pledges of my Soul,
which doubled my grief, and made it more fatal; one was Felisinda herself, and
the other was, the Burden which she bore in her Womb, miserable only for being
mine. They being in this manner set to Sea, had their Wind increased by the
storms of my Breast, whom whilst I leave engolfed in the Ocean, I was drowned
in the Sea of my tears, remaining eternally condemned to darkness, and a
Dungeon, poor and forsaken, forgotten of all, but the malice, and hatred of my
Enemies.

As he who falling from a Mountain, scatters his spoils on every stone, here
his Hat, there his Cloak, there his Eyes, and Hands, till at last he looses his
life, and bursts in pieces at the bottom. The Ruin which Love brings.
Even so, I sliding from the dangerous Clifts of this Ivory Rock, more to be
feared, because delightful, rolled my self from one misfortune to another, left
on every stone testimonies of my Ruin, in Goods, Honor, Health, Parents,
Friends, and Liberty, till I arrived at this grave, and prison, the abiss and
pit of my Miseries. Yet I may truly say, that though Wealth corrupted my
happiness, and raised enemies to throw troubles on me; yet Poverty restored me
to a better condition; for here I found Wisdom, unto which, till now, the
extravagance of Youth had made me a Stranger; here I undeceived my self, and
gained experience and health both of body and Soul: and being abandoned of all
living Society, I conversed with the dead, and by reading I began to
understand, and to become rational, having only before led the sensitive life;
so that having extracted some knowledge, my understanding was enlightened, and
my will was obedient to the dictates of it, one being replete with Wisdom, and
the other with Virtue: and so I opened my eyes when there was nothing to see,
and so it happens often. I studied the noble Arts, and sublime Sciences,
devoting my self with great affection to Moral Philosophy, which is the Food of
the Judgment, the Center of Reason, and the Life of Discretion. I reformed my
self from the vain Society of my Companions; instead of a wanton Youth, I chose
a severe Cato, in place of a shallow Wit, a wise Seneca; sometimes I perused
Socrates, anon Divine Plato, easing in this manner my tedious hours, and
recreating my self in that grave of the living, and labyrinth of liberty. Years
passed, and Vice-kings, but still continued the rigor of my Adversaries; for
they prolonged the hearing of my Cause, and since they could arrive no higher,
they resolved to linger out my days in Prison, and convert my Dungeon into my
Grave. But at the end of some years miseries, came an Order from Spain,
obtained by the secret Negotiation of my Mistress, that my Cause and Person
should be remitted thither. The new Vice-king being less my Enemy, and more
favorable, put it in execution, and dispatched me away in the first Fleet,
committing me a Prisoner to the charge of the Captain of the Ship. Thus parted
I from the Indies, the first from that place, poor, and necessitous, to whom
the dangers of the Seas seemed Entertainments and Pleasures. My affable
disposition soon gained me Friends, and those, that were delighted with Truth,
were attentive Auditors of my Lectures of Morality; but above all, the Captain
of the Admiralship made me his Confident, a favor which I much esteemed, and
verified the truth of that common saying, That Fortune often changes with the
place; and that our designs can never be prosperous, whilst we live under the
influence of a malevolent Star. But here sit, and admire a prodigy of humane
fraud, an extremity of malice, the spite, and quarrel of a contrary Fortune,
and the full point and period to which the preamble of my miseries tended; for
this Captain being a Gentleman obliged in all points of honor to treat me
civilly and fairly, yet puffed with ambition, and infected with the same
rancour, and malice which the former Vice-king my enemy, and his Kinsman boar
me, or rather incited with a covetous desire to inherit the small remainder of
my Estate, which I had saved from the storms of my late Shipwreck, was induced
to put in execution the lowest, and most unhumane of all unworthiness; For
standing together with him one day, on the Quarter Deck, entertaining each
other with discourse, and with the prospect of the Seas, he surprised me
unawares, and threw me into the Sea: and that he might cover this Treachery, he
called out too late for assistance to save my life; At his call came his
Mariners, and my Friends, who desirous to help me, threw out their Cables and
Ropes, but all in vain; for my slow Arms not being able to follow the swift
Sails of the flying Ship, I was left striving with the Waves, and Death: but
one of those Planks which they threw out, as the last hopes, and means to
preserve me, was my sacred anchor, and support, which the compassionate Waves
presented to my innocence, the desperate, yet welcome refuge of my lost hopes,
the which I kissing, said, On thee will I lay my self, the Coffin of this Body.
Having thus small hopes to reach the Ship, I suffered my self to be carried by
the Waves, and my own Fortune; which not contented to reduce me unto this point
of extremity, but venting the rest of her tyranny, called all the Elements to
conspire against me in such a Tempest, as if her intent was not only to destroy
me, but first to exercise on me all the train, and solemnity of miseries. The
Waves sometimes tossed me so high, that I feared to be dashed against the
Points of the Moon, or bruised against the Heavens; anon I descended to the
Center of the Earth, and again raised to that height, that I feared more to be
burned with the heat of Heaven, than drowned in the Waters of the Sea. But as
these rigours, of which I have so much complained, have graciously been
converted into favors, so the blustering storms have sometimes broke up in a
mild calm: for miseries often times have so exceeded, and so over-acted, and
strained their part, that misfortunes themselves have passed into blessings. I
tell you this because the fury of the Tempest, and current of the Waters so
violently carried me, that in a few hours I came to the sight of this little
Isle, for otherwise it had been impossible for me, before I had perished with
cold, and hunger to have steered my Vessel without Oars or Sails, or Rudder,
unto this place, which is your Country, and my Heaven: but in the Bad consisted
the Good, my courage helping me more than my strength, I sheltered my self in
the Port of your Arms, in which I desire a thousand times more to be embraced,
and to confirm our friendship to all eternity. In this manner Critilo gave an
end to his Relation, and embracing each other, they renewed their first
enjoyment, finding within themselves a mutual simpathy of love, and
contentment. They passed the rest of their Voyage in profitable exercises, and
besides, their pleasing discourses, which were all but a continued Lecture of
Instructions, he taught him some knowledge of the World, and the Rudiments of
those Arts which inspire and enrich the Soul; as History, Cosmography, the
Sphere, and chiefly that which most becomes a Man, namely Moral Philosophy; but
that to which Andrenio was most intent, and studious in, was to learn the
Tongues, as Latin, that eternal Treasury of Wisdom, Spanish, as universal as
its Empire; the courtly French, and eloquent Italian, which he made use of as
Keys to open that Treasure which is enclosed in them; and sometimes for his
convenience, and use, to pass over the various Countries of the World. The
curiosity Andrenio had, was as great as his docility; so that he was always
conferring, and asking concerning the Provinces, Republics, Monarchies, and
Cities, and of their Kings, and Governors, still improved himself with as much
delight, as novelty, desiring to arrive at the highest point of Wisdom, and
Understanding. In this pleasant employment they contentedly passed the
tediousness of this Voyage, who at their usual time arrived in this part of the
World. Whose various successes, and events are related in the following Crisis.

The Third CHRISIS.
The Entrance into this World.
NAture has dealt subtly, if not fraudulently with Man, by decoying him into
the World in a condition of Ignorance: for he enters in obscurity, and
blindness, and begins to live before he is sensible of his life, or knows, what
it is to live; his fond childishness is hushed with every trifle, and lulled
asleep with a toy. She makes him believe, that she has led him into a Kingdom
of felicities, which prove but miseries to enslave him, which when the eyes of
man's judgment discovers, he finds himself defrauded, and engaged without
remedy, placed in that dirt out of which he was formed, and can now only
trample on it, and endeavor on the best conditions to escape. I am persuaded
were it not for this universal Policy, none would upon such hard conditions
adventure to tread this deceitful World, were they forewarned of those
difficulties they were to undergo. For who being first acquainted with these
infallible inconveniences, would rashly precipitate himself into this feigned
Kingdom, and true Prison, wherein to suffer both multitudes, and varieties of
punishments, as in the body, hunger, thirst, cold, heat, nakedness, grief,
infirmities; in the mind, deceits, persecutions, envies, contempts, dishonours,
melancholy, fear, anger, desperation; and at the end of all to escape out by
the passage of a miserable Death, with the loss of our goods, houses, honors,
friends, parents, nay of life it self, which then flies from us, when we most
pursue it. Nature knew well what she proffered, and what evil man accepted. For
he who were aware of this condition, would rather then pass these miseries,
step at once from his Cradle to his Urn, or from his Marriage Bed into his
Grave. The tears which he drops at his Birth, are common presages of his
succeeding miseries. The happiest that are born to great Inheritance, enter but
on a sad Possession, and the Music which wellcomes this King Man into the
World, is composed of his own cries, and tears, which fore-run his troubles,
and denote the future unhappiness of his Kingdom. For what can that life be to
which the groans of his Mother give a Being, and the weepings of the Child,
which receives it; though he has no knowledge to conceive his misfortunes,
has yet a Prophetic spirit to divine them.

We are now (said the wise Criti^o, to the unexperienced Andrenio) arrived in
the World, when they first disembarked and stepped on the Sands of Spain; I am
sorry that your Understanding so ripe enters into this Country, for thereby you
must needs be most sensible of the dissatisfaction, and emptiness of things;
whatsoever the supreme Artist has undertaken to perform, has been completed
in the greatest height, and measure of perfection; but the invention of man
has begun what he can never be capable to perfect. What God has orderly
disposed, the unquietness of man to the farthest extent of his power has
strained it self to trouble, and confound, and what through his inability he
could not reach, his working fancy has endeavored to disorder. You have seen
hitherto the works of nature, admired and contemplated on them; now observe
those of Art, the artificalskill of Men, and comparing those of Men, and God
together, your own Reason will distinguish one from the other. Oh what a vast
distance and difference you will find between the Civil, and the natural World,
The World, Civil, and Moral.
between the Humane, and the Divine; this I thought fit to advise you, that you
may not admire whatsoever it is, you see, nor be discouraged by any accidents
that befall you.

Thus being entered upon their Journey, they reasoned themselves into a Path
plain and beaten, the first they met with, wherein Andrenio observed that in
all the ways and paths of Men, the footsteps seemed to bend forward, and none
backwards, a sign that those who followed them, never returned. Not far had
they passed before there offered a strange Encounter, yet very pleasing and
diverting, namely, a disordered band of childish infantry, a squadron of
Children made up of different Conditions and Nations, a Babilonish confusion
both of Fashions, and Languages: the Governess, and Protectress of these was a
Woman, of a courteous aspect, cheerful countenance, kind words, pious care, who
diligently over-eyed, and watched her Charge, with the greatest caresses and
love, that could be expressed from a most indulgent Mother. The Servants which
she had procured to be assistant to her, were of the same good disposition, and
nature like her, who still attended to this helpless board; those that could
not go, they carried in their Arms, and such as could walk they led by the
hand. It was wonderful to observe the tender Bowels of this common Mother,
whose sole thoughts and desires were to pacify their unreasonable complaints,
which she hushed with a thousand toys, and baubles, which she had provided for
them, together with Comfects, and Sweetmeats, with which no sooner any cried,
than immediately she applied herself to pacify it; but a more special care she
took of some of greater Finery and Bravery than the rest, which seemed the
Sons, and Offspring of more noble Families, which she so indulgently contented,
as in nothing to restrain their desires, such was the care, and embraces of
this pious Mother, that the natural Parents would resign their trust into her
Arms, in whose they esteemed them more secure, than in their own. Andrenio was
much pleased to see the Marches of this tender Infantry, admiring, and
contemplating on the childish Age of Man, and taking one into his Arms, wrapped
in his Mantles, said to Critilo, is it possible this should be a Man? who would
believe it? is it likely this almost senseless Creature, this unprofitable
Member of the World should with time put on the gravity of Cato, and his
babbling Tongue persuade with the eloquence of a Seneca, or of a Count
Monterrey? Now you may see, said Critilo, what it costs to become a Man: for to
be so, is not the work of a moments space; Brutes soon attain their Perfection,
and with agility and strength of Body live, and move; but Man's accomplishments
are of a higher value than naturally to grow upon him, or to surprise him at
unawares. I did much admire, said Andrenio, this fond affection of this rare
Woman, and the unnatural bowels of Mothers in comparison of hers: So that I who
was born within the hard bowels of the Rocks, and nurtured among Beasts, began
to envy this felicity, and to wish a recall of my years, only to deliver my
helpless age to the protection of her Arms; for I have been exposed to hunger,
cold, nakedness, and all has seemed to stop their ears unto my cries, nothing
endeavoring to pacify my tender peevishness, or to comply with the weak
simplicity of my humor. Do not envy, said Critilo, that which as yet you know
not, nor style that a happiness whose end and event is uncertain; for there are
many things in the World which bear a different face to what really they are,
as you will find by experience; being now come into the World to live, see, and
observe: this youthful crowd traveled, without stay, or refreshment,
traversing the Country, but still descending downward; it was wonderful to see
this Pigmy band march so stoutly, and that for all the weary steps they
fetched, none tired, nor desired repose: they always gave them meat, which for
being all the day, may be called but once.

At length, after they had traversed much ground, they found themselves in a
deep Valley, fortified about with high Mountains, the highest of this universal
Road; by this time it was night, and then the deep profundity of the place made
the darkness more horrible: The Descriptiof Natural Inclination.
this deceitful Woman, the greatest Impostor of humane kind, and Trayteress to
this tender Nursery, made her Sign; upon which rusht out from the Wood, and
dismal Dens, an Army of Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, Serpents, and Dragons,
which mercilesly set on this unresisting force, and disarmed Bands of
Innocents, who in a horrible Massacre burst themselves, with draughts of their
Blood, for some they dragged, others they toar in pieces; the Blood of some
they sucked; and when their ravenous stomachs were satiated, they sported
themselves with the Plenty of their Feast; there was one Monster that swallowed
down two at once, and not sufficiently filled with these, extended his Paws to
enclose others: another Beast chewed one in his Teeth, whilst his Claws were
preparing another for his Palate; and the rest ran furiously about this tragic
Theater, drivelling out the overflowing Blood, and laden with two of three
apiece, the relics of their plenteous Fare, they carried to feed their
Savage-whelps; great was the confusion, and sad, and cruel was the Spectacle of
these Innocents. And yet such was the fond simplicity, and humor of the
Infants, that they esteemed this destruction and ruin to be a pastime, and a
delight, or sport to be devoured, with Nods to invite their cruelty, and with
open Arms to meet half way the approach of Death. Andrenio was much astonished
at the horrid Treason of such an unexpected Cruelty, and being by the diligence
of Critilo retired to a secure place, thus sighed, and said, O traitorous,
barbarous, and sacrilegious Woman, more cruel and unhumane than the Beasts
themselves! is this the Fruit of so much care, and were these toils, and
indulgencies for no intent, or end but this? O innocent Lambs! how soon were
you made a victim, and sacrifice of your Misfortunes? how soon were you
betrayed to an untimely Ruin? O deceitful World, is this the Fruit you bear,
and do you protect those who dare to attempt such horrid Cruelties? My own
hands shall revenge this sin; with that he furiously arose to destroy the
Tyrant-Mother, whose known guilt hastened her flight, and with the rest of her
assistants, went in pursuit of more, which she had already sold to the cruelty
of those destroyers, so that she still supplied the hunger of these Beasts,
whose stomachs continually craved; whilst Andrenio lamented this irreparable
damage.

Amidst of this horrid confusion, and cruel Massacre appeared on the other side
of the Valley, over the top of the highest Mountain, with the dawning of the
day, another Woman of a different nature, who encompassed with light, and
attended with a train of Servants, The power of Grace and Virtue.
which winged flew to the speedy deliry of these perishing Infants, her
countenance was cheerful, though Majestic, and being dressed with rows of
Pearls, and Diamonds, sent forth such emissions and rays of Light, that she
might well stand in competition with, or supply the place, and absence of
Aurora: she was beautiful above measure, and with her more glorious Light
outshone the beauty of her attending Ministers. O fortunate accident! for at
the same instant that these murdering Beasts perceived her approach, they left
their Prey, and betaking themselves to their legs, with yells and cries retired
to their Dens; then she began with singular diligence to collect the scattered
Relics, which were few, and those goared, and lanced with gaping wounds. The
rest of her Attendants, with the like care searched their obscure Dens; and
wresting some from the very jaws and mouths of Monsters, saved and protected
those in whom they saw the least breath, or pantings of life; but Andrenio
observed, that these were those of the meanest Rank and Condition, and most
neglected by that cursed Mother, which the Beasts esteemed of a more course
Diet, having already made their Feast of the more delicious dish of her
pampared care; when she had collected them altogether, she made no stop, nor
delay to clear them from danger; nor did she stay, till she had conducted them
to the top of the Mountain, as being most secure. From thence she placed them
in the view, and by the Rays of Light she had infused into them, making them
sensible of their rescued Condition, and of that danger, to which their
Ignorance had betrayed them. They being thus secured, she presented to every
one those precious Stones, which were Preservatives against any danger, and
which darted forth such Rays of Light, that they made the Night, Day, and were
the more estimable, because they were not obnoxious to corruption, or decay.
She recommended them to the tuition of wise Governors, who should direct, and
lead them still upwards, till they arrived to the grand City and Metropolis of
the World; at the same instant they were again alarmed by the cries of more
perishing Infants, in the same fatal, and dismal Valley; which this valiant and
pious Queen no sooner heard, but with the rest of her Amazons she marched to
defend and succor. Andrenio was greatly astonished at this sight, and wondered
to see the variety of Fortune, and the successive exchanges of happiness and
miferies of this life? What two Women are these, said he, and what strange
Visions are these of different Apparitions. Tell me Critilo, who was the first,
that I may hate, and abhor her, and who is the second, that I may honor and
adore her. What do you think, said Critilo, of this entrance into the World, is
it not agreeable to those many admonitions and relations I have already
delivered you? Observe well the passages, and state of things here, and if such
be the beginning, tell me what you conceive may be the progress and conclusion;
that so you may always live awake, and be readily provided against the assaults
of enemies. You desire to know, who was the first unnatural and cruel Mother,
whom you at the first sight so much applauded, hereafter be not so rash in your
censures, but see the conclusion before you either undertake to commend, or
dispraise any; know then that this first Tyrant is our own bad Inclination, and
Propensity to Evil, this is she, that takes advantage on the unripe
understanding of Infancy, rages, and triumphs in the Spoils, to that degree,
that the fond impertinency of the Parents, would rather suffer their Son to
live in his folly, than to displease his Palate with the bitter Pills and
remedies of Correction; so that they commit him to his own Will, and rather not
contradict his Humor, than that he should cry or be displeased. And in this
manner Vice, Choler, Gluttony, Deceit, Fraud, and Peevishness get ground upon
him, and he becomes swelled with Ignorance, and Self-conceit. And thus the
Passions having gained strength, are seconded by Paternal connivance, whereby
the evil of depraved Nature prevailing, allures the tender Infant into the
Valley of Beasts to be made a Prey unto Vice, and a Slave to Passions.

But when Reason breaks forth, which is the Queen of Light, the Mother of
undeceived Judgment, The Aurora of Life.
with the Virtues her Companions she rescues our depraved Wills from the jaws
of Vice, and heals those Wounds which are almost incurable. She finds no small
resistance, and opposition to withdraw them from the claws of their evil
inclinations, and greater difficulty to direct their steps to the top, and
secure habitations of Virtue; but the way being steep and difficult, many are
discouraged in the journey, and return again to opprobious Vice, most whereof
are Rich, the Sons of Monarchs and Princes, whose smiling prosperity, and
plentiful fare, is the Food, and Nourishment for Vice: but others, who are born
poor, and under the rigours of a severe Stepmother, do most usually prevail,
and like a Hercules, strangle their serpent Passions in the very Cradle. But
what was that precious Stone (demanded Andrenio) that she has recommended to
us with so much earnestness. Know, answered Critilo, that what some have
fabulously reported of the virtue of certain Stones, is verified in these; for
this is the true Carbuncle whose rays and light scatter the Clouds of
Ignorance, and Vice; this is the true Diamond which resists the Hammer of Vice;
and amidst the fires, and heats of Passion, comes forth more pure, and refined.
This is the Touchstone to examine the Good, and Bad: This is the Lodestone
which is always attentive to the North of Virtue. In fine, this is the Jewel of
all Virtues, which the Philosophers call the Dictate of Reason, The Dictate of
Reason.
the most faithful and true Friend in whom we may confide. Thus they went on
conferring, and discoursing together, till they came to a crossway, where the
Paths were divided, and the diversities of life distinguished, it was a notable
knot of difficulty, yet not so much discernable by the Understanding, as by the
choice and election of the Will. But here their doubt was the more increased,
by that common tradition of being but two Ways, one plain and smooth, on the
left hand, with a deep Descent, and the other on the right hand, rugged and
stony, of a steep Ascent; but with no small admiration, Critilo observed that
here were three ways, which did the more confound him in his election: Heavens
guide me now said he, is not this the difficult Bivium, where Hercules himself
lost his way; he looked behind, and before, and privately demanded of himself,
Is not this the Letter by which Pythagoras described, The Letter.
and cyphered Wisdom, which hitherto proceeds equal, and afterward divides it
self into two Branches, one broad, which is Vice, and the other narrow, which
is Virtue, but the ends are differently distinguished, one concludes in
punishment, and the other honored, and rewarded with a Crown. Hold, said he,
where are those bound marks of Epictetus, the Abstine in the way of Delight,
and the Sustine in the path of Virtue. Well, said he, we are come to such times
of change, that the very Kings Highways are altered. What is that heap of
Stones, demanded Andrenio, which stops up the middle of the way? let us go
thither, said Critilo, for this is the sign of the Gold Vial, by which he calls
and directs us. This is the mysterious heap of Mercury, in which our wise
Ancestors made a Hierogliphick of Wisdom, standing with a stretched out hand to
point us out the way, or as the clue of thread to guide us out of this
Labyrinth into Heaven. But to what purpose, replied Andrenio, is this
unprofitable direction of the way, which serves only to confound or make the
unwary traveller to stumble? These are sighing (answered Critilo) the Stones
which Pilgrims cast up, in tribute, and reward to the Instructors of Truth and
Virtue; for such is the envy and malice to Piety, that the very stones are
raised in opposition against them. Let us go round this Pillar, and see if the
Oracle can give us light in this difficulty. Critilo read the inscription,
which said, in all things there is is a Mean, depart not to the Extremes. This
Pillar was from the top to the bottom carved with great Artifice, and rarity,
and the Ground-works and Materials not unworthily refined with that curiosity
of Art. In it were engraved many sententious Aphorisms, and allusive Histories,
which Andrenio admired, and Critilo commented on with much perspicuity, and
clearness. The Golden Mediocrity, which is the first Rule of Life.
Hereon was represented that rash and inconsiderate Youth, who mounted the
Chariot of the Sun, and his grave Father admonishing him to keep the middle way
in which he should drive secure. This was, said Critilo, a Youth who
ambitiously entering into Government, and not observing that Mean of Prudence,
according to the Rule, and Example his experienced Predecessors had instructed
him, lost the Reigns and Bounds of Reason, and by immoderate imposition of
Tributes, contracted such clouds and vapors of Envy, that he consumed all, and
lost both the World, and his Command; on the other side was falling the
unwinged Icarus, passing from one Extreme unto another, from the Fire, into the
Water, being Deaf to the cries of Dedalus, who admonished him to keep the
middle. This is another commented Critilo, who not contented with a convenient
Knowledge, but endeavoring to soar too high in ungrounded subtleties, and
aerious motions, his Wings failing him, tumbled down with all his Chimera's
into the brinish Sea of tears, and miseries. This is famous Cleobulus, who in
answer to three Epistles in which a King had demanded his Advice, in three more
only wrote Modus, Modus.
as being a most secure way and rule for his Government. Observe well one of
those seven Worthies of Greece, who is eternally Chronicled, for that one
Sentence, In all things avoid Excess; as if to exceed were more dangerous, than
to be deficient. Thereon also were engraved all the Virtues, every one with
their Motto on their Targets, and Banner, and set in order between their too
vicious Extremes; at the bottom of all stood Valor, who between the Extremes
of desperation, and cowardice, leaned on a Pillar, or Support, as a Tower, or
Fortress to defend the rest; at the top of all sat Prudence, who as a Queen
held a precious Crown in her hand, with this Inscription, For him who knows a
Mediocrity in Wealth. There were many other Inscriptions, which were
definitions of Artifice and Wit; above all a happy, and serene felicity crowned
this curious Wo^^, leaning on the wise and famous Worthies of past Ages, and
supported on each side with the two Extremes of Lamentation, and Laughter,
whose Atlasses were Heraclitus, and Democritus, one weeping, and the other
laughing. Andrenio took much contentment to see, and consider the Epitome of
Life so fully described, in this miraculous Oracle; but by this time were
crowded together a multitude of people, who without consulting any other Deity
than their own Will, ran headlong through the Extremes, blinded with false
spectacles, and delight. And first enters on who without informing himself of
any thing, with inconsiderate folly passed through those Extremes which the
general esteemed the worst, who being the Presumptuous, Presumptuous.
was the soonest lost: After him followed a vain Blusterer, who with some few
Courtesies, and handsome Air, and Behavior, The Vain.
without asking any question took the highest way; but being hollow, and empty,
was by a sudden puff of wind, blown down, and being high, and so in view of
all, was in his fall entertained with the common scorn and derision of the
World. There was one way much overgrown with Briars, and Thorns, which whilst
Andrenio persuaded himself none would take, Revengeful.
he saw some passionately bent to follow it, striving one with other who should
go foremost. The path or track of Beasts seemed the most smooth and beaten, and
when one was asked why he went that way? he answered him, because he would not
go alone. Next to this, was another path, but short, and all that past it made
great provision for their Bellies, Gluttonous.
but they journied not far, for more died with Surfets, and Intemperance, than
with Want and Hunger. Some pretended to fly through the Air, but their heads
growing giddy, fell down, and these for the most part neither remained in
Heaven, nor on the Earth. There were others who hurried through a pleasant, and
delitious plain, Covetous.
entertaining and sporting themselves with Meadows and Gardens, till their
extravagant motion over-heating their Blood, casted them into Fevers, so that
their fair complections became discolored, and swarfy, and their faces bad,
for having made them good. Not far off some complained of a dangerous passage,
infested with Thieves and Robbers, who notwithstanding ventered on, and at the
end turned all to the same Profession, one destroying and pillaging the other.
Covetous.
But Andrenio observed with much admiration, and Critilo with pleasure, that
some were diligently inquisitive to find out those who could inform them which
was the way of infallible ruin; one would think it had been to avoid it; but
it happened out contrary, for as if there had been a necessity of their
destruction, they took the very highway that lead them to it. Andrenio seeing
some of them to be of great condition and quality, asked them why they went
that way? who answered, they did not go, but were carried by force; nor was
less ridiculous that Circle that others moved in, who winding in a continual
compass, rounding like a Wheel, never passed forward, but reeling in a
circumference, could not arrive to the Point, and Center of Virtue. There were
others who never found the way, but as soon as they began to set forward,
stopped, and gave over their farther progress. The Idle.
These with their hands in their bosoms, sluggishly moved their unnimble legs,
which weary of doing nothing, being sick with the Scurvy of Sloth, fainted
before they accomplished their intents. Another said out of love to curiosity
he would tread those paths which none had done before him; but being ruled by
none but his capritious Humor, Humoursome.
was soon ruined and lost. Do you not observe Critilo, that all follow in most
preposterous ways, and run upon those Extremes, which naturally they disaffect
and refuse. The Fool becomes presumptuous of his Parts and Knowledge, and the
Wise, out of a distrustful confidence, is reserved and silent: the Coward
affects Valor, and only talks of Arms and War, whilst the Valiant disdains
them: the Comely affect a decent negligence in their Dress, and the
ill-favored set out their defects, with helps and advantages, and think they
exceed the very Sun in glory and Splendour: the Prince affects a Courteous
humility, and the common and ignoble sort vaunt themselves as if they were of
more then mortal Race: the Eloquent are silent; and the Ignorant take on them
the whole Discourse: the Dexterous is dissident of his Art, and the Unskilful
fills the World with the unpolisht pieces of his rude hand. In fine, you will
see all run through Extremities, which is the course of Error, and which strays
from the way of life. But let us pass through the most secure way, the most
plausible and happy Mediocrity, happy in that it can contain it self in a
prudent Mean. There were few whom they could persuade to follow them; yet as
soon as they saw them enter on that Path, they felt a more than ordinary sense
of Comfort, and satisfaction of Conscience which transported their Affections;
they observed, that besides those precious Jewels which adorned them, they were
no less glorious with the rich Endowments and Abilities of Reason, which began
to shine, in that degree, that every one seemed a glistering Star, forming
Tongues in his rays, crying out, this is the way of Truth, and the Truth of
life. On the contrary all those that followed the Prospects, and Glasses of
their own Brain, soon lost their Eyes, and Sight, that they blindly wandered,
and were Eclipsed both in their Judgment and Journey. Andrenio always observing
that they went upward, This, said he, seems rather a way to bring us to Heaven
then to the Earth. So it is, said Critilo, for this is the Path that leads us
to Eternity; for though we trample on the Earth, yet our thoughts are raised
above it, and soar to that height, that they become Neighbors and Citizens
with the Stars; for these are they which we now eye, and steer by, being
engolfed between the Cylla, and Caribdis of the World; for such is the entrance
we are now upon into this great City, the Babylon of Spain, the Treasury of
Riches, the Theater of Learning, the Sphere of Nobility, and the large compass
of a Humane life. Andrenio was more astonished to see the strange Accidents of
the World, which before he knew not, than when first he proceeded from his
cause to the unknown Light: for then he beheld them only at a distance, and in
a long view and perspective, when to see only and contemplate on them was not
so much as by Experience to try them; so that all seemed strangely disfigured,
and the face of things of a different complexion; but that which was most
strange, was that in a populous City, and at Midday no man appeared, though
they with great diligence and affection sought them. Where are the Men, said
Andrenio, is not this their Country, their beloved World, their desired Center,
where then are they gone, or in what part, or place, do they lie concealed?
they diligently searched in one place, but discovered none, until -- but how
and where they found them is related in the following Crisis.

The Sixth CRISIS.
The Estate and Condition of this Age.
WHosoever hears this word, World, presently conceives an orderly composure of
this Universe, fitted in the most perfect, and best manner. For the word
Mundus, signifying as much as Clean, or Neat. We ought to consider it as some
stately Palace contrived for the Divine and infinite Wisdom, erected by
Omnipotency, and by his Provident Bounty fitted for Man's convenience, that he
as King thereof may Rule, and maintain the original Agreement, and Harmony,
which the Divine Creator has settled and ordained. So that it is nothing but a
House made, and fitted for God and Man; nor is there any other definition, by
which its Perfection may be more plainly declared; for the very word Mundus
does sufficiently denote its Perfection, and both the beginning and ending are
Testimonies thereof, but how Man's ill management has disappointed this Order,
and disgraced the Honor of this Title, was the consideration of Critilo, who,
together with Andrenio, were placed in the World, but not in the Society and
Conversation of those, to whose Words, and Actions they could not confide or
trust.

They were now busied, and inquisitive in search of Men, for having trod many
steps, and weariedly traveled over much ground, they met no Man, unless it
were one, half a Man, and half a Beast, an encounter welcome to Critilo, but
strange and unexpected to Andrenio, who starting, demanded the Nature and
Condition of this deformed Monster: do not fear, said Critilo, for it is more
Man than Man himself; this is the Master and Ruler of Kings, and the King of
Rulers, this is that wise Quiron, Quiron.
whose presence is as welcome, as the occasion; for his prudence and direction
must guide us into this entrance to the World, and hand us in the way, through
the Journey of our life; with that they went toward him, and saluting him, had
their Salutes returned with the like civility; they acquainted him that they
had been in search of Men, and after a hundred turns and walks, either through
ill Fortune, or scarcity of them, they had met none. Wonder not at it (replied
the Centaure) for this is not an Age for Men; such I mean whose noble Acts have
famed the years of former times. Do you think to find now a Don Alonso the
Valiant in Italy, a Great Captain in Spain, a Henry the Fourth, in France,
whose Sword has maintained his Scepter, and the Flower-de-Luces made up the
hilt and guard of it? There are now no such Heroes in this World, nor memory of
their past Acts; and shall there be none hereafter? replied Andrenio? There is
no appearance of them at present, said he, and shortly it will be too late for
them to remedy the evils past. But why are they not now, demanded Critilo, and
the Offspring of this Generation? There is much to be said in this, answered
Quiron: for there are some affect to be all, and in truth they are less than
nothing, and better that they never had been; some say also that Envy cuts off
many with the Scissars of Tomeras; but I say, that neither this nor that is the
cause, but that whilst Vice prevails, Virtue cannot flourish, by whose
assistance Heroic Greatness receives its being: believe me, Venus benumbs and
stupifies Minerva in every Joint, and Member, and in regard her chief
habitation is in the smoke of the Forge, and in conversation of mean
Mechanics, is not to be esteemed a sit Companion for noble Belona. In fine,
let us not weary our selves in so vain a search, for this is not an age for
eminent persons, either renowned for Arms, or Learning; but tell me, where have
you sought them? Where should we, said Critilo, but on the Earth; in this
Country, and Element of their life. You are much mistaken, said the Centaure,
and in this time of scarcity you will have good fortune to find them there,
since their unconstant humor desiring change, has with a nautious Stomach,
and glut of this ordinary enjoyment altered their natural habitation. If we
find them not on the Earth, said Andrenio; we shall have less hopes to find
them in Heaven, and if we find them in neither of these; where can we expect
them, in the air? for there they have built Castles and Towers of Wind, in
which they have fortified themselves, Castles in the Air.
not being willing to depart from their own Chimera's. But these feeble
Bulwarks, said Critilo, will soon dissolve in confusion; for they not being
like a Ianus of prudence, looking on all sides, become a common derision, and
the mark of the scorning Finger, whose disgrace is pointed out, and are denied
as Bastard Sons the title of their more noble Ancestors, that what some have
opprobiously derided behind their Backs, others with the same contempt, like
dirt will spatter in their Faces. There are some, proceeded Quiron, who have
raised, and exalted themselves to the very Clouds, and in their fond fancies,
though buried in the dust, have imagined their heads advanced to the Stars;
there are some who walk in imaginary paths, and climb up into the highest rooms
of their own presumption, and would yet get higher than the Moon, did not more
noble Bodies possess the place. It is true, said Andrenio, there they are, for
I have seen them wrapped up in the Clouds, some stumbling, and others falling,
all changing according to the unconstancy of the Planet, which sometimes shows
one countenance, and then another; nor do they cease to justle and shoulder one
another, and tripping up each others heels they fall with more hurt to
themselves than they are sensible of. Was there ever such folly, said Critilo,
is not the Earth the proper and natural Center of Man, his Beginning and his
End? Were it not more prudence to preserve himself in a moderate Mean, than by
too high Aspiring, incur an imminent danger? Never was there such folly. If the
folly be great, said Quiron, there is place for pity and for laughter; to
behold him who yesterday slept in a tottering Cottage, to day is lodged in a
Palace, esteeming it too mean a dwelling for his Greatness; and speaks over
that shoulder, which yesterday boar the weight and burden on it: He that was
born under the thatched Roof, now contrives his fretted Seelings, and Cedar
Rafters, he contemns the Society of those, who in his Poverty despised his, and
to the highest point stands on the Punctilio's of his base Family; he who
yesterday had not to buy Bread, his Stomach is now curious, that the greatest
delicacy becomes nautious, and runs the Line of his unknown Pedigree: Thus all
pretend to rise, and to mount above the Horns of the Moon, which are more
dangerous than the Bulls; for being removed from their own Center, must
naturally decline, and return to their own place with exemplary Infamy.

Whilst he was thus discoursing, he had led them into the High Street, where
they encountered multitudes of Beasts, free, and unbound, dangerous to unwary
Passengers; Brutish Citizen.
some whereof were Lions, others Tigers, Leopards, Wolves, Bulls, Panthers,
Foxes, intermixed with Serpents, Dragons, and Basilisks. Andrenio at this sight,
was much troubled, and starting backwards, demanded whether this were a
habitation of humane Society, or a Wood of Beasts. Do not fear (said the
Centaure) only be cautious. Doubtless Men, said Critilo, the ancient
Inhabitants out of a distaste to the miscarriages of this World, are retired
into the solitary Mountains, and left these Palaces desolate, and to be
Inhabited by Beasts, who only imitate and counterfeit Citizens. It Is true,
replied Quiron, for in the Tower of the Potent, with whom there is no
contending. resides the Lion; to the Murderer, succeeds the Tiger, in the
Wealthy Coffers of the Covetous lies the Wolf, the Fox hides himself under the
deceitful Covering, and Vizard of the Fraudulent, and the Viper within the Bed
and Courtains of the Harlot: So that all is filled with Beasts, and Brutes, who
walk the Streets, inhabit the Dwellings, whilst the true Men are banished
thence; and live retired within the limits of their own Wisdom and Moderation.
Let us sit, said Andrenio, on the rising of the Hill, that so we may with more
ease, and security over-see these passages. No, replied Quiron, for this is not
a Place nor World to take a Stand, or Seat in. Let us then, said Critilo,
repose us against some of these Pillars. No, said he, for these will soon
deceive us, being false, weak, and unstable; it is better to be still in
motion, walking and passing from one to another. The ground was here very
unlevel, and unequal, for at the doors of the Powerful and Rich, The Rich most
Rich.
were high Heaps and Mountains, which shined with much Luster and Splendour. How
much Gold is here, said Andrenio? Observe, said Quiron, that all is not Gold
that glisters; and coming nearer, they perceived that it was nothing but
counterfeited Wares, and Ordure gilded over; but on the contrary at the doors
of the Poor, and Feeble, was such a deep, and horrid Abiss, that struck a
terror to all that beheld it, so that all shunned it, and beholding it at a
distance, would not come within a thousand Leagues of it; The Poor most Poor.
whilst certain Beasts unweariedly traveled all the day long, still casting a
continual mass of Mud and Dirt, on those large Heaps, and Hills of the Rich,
adding as it were Mountain unto Mountain. What disparity is this, said
Andrenio, were it not better to cast these superfluities of Earth to fill up
those Cavities and deep Abysses of the Poor, so as to level and make smooth
these rude and uneven ways? It Is true, it were better, said Quiron, but what is
there in this World which tends unto the best; we may here disprove that
conclusion of the Schools, that impossibility in Natural Philosophy, that there
is no vacuum, Datur vacuum.
or emptiness; for alas! in our Moral Experiments we daily find the contrary;
the World gives not to them, who have not, but to those who already plentifully
enjoy; and there are many who loose the small Bounty of Fortune which they
have, for no other Reason than because it is adjudged and condemned to more
crowded and over-slowing Coffers. Gifts are not the Companions of Poverty, nor
do Presents follow the footsteps of departed Friends. It is Gold that guilds
the Plate, and one calls and invites the other; the Rich are those that
Inherit, and boast of their Lineage, whilst they scarce give license to the
Poor to acknowledge his Parent. The Hungry shall scarce obtain Bread to support
Nature, and the over-burdened Stomach be a continual Guest to a Luxurious
Table: So that he that is once Poor, shall be always Poor, the general rule of
the Worlds inequality. Whither shall we go now, demanded Andrenio? Let us go,
said they, through the middle, where we shall pass with less throng, and more
security.

I think, said Critilo, I see some Men, or at least those who esteem themselves
such. These are less than any, said Quiron, for looking toward the corner of
the Street, they perceived some walk with much gravity, hanging their heads
downward to the ground, and their noses grabling in the dirt, Ambitious Folly.
and kicking up their legs, and feet in the air, made no progress nor way
foward, but at every step stumbled and fell, and notwithstanding this, they
still obstinately persist in this course of walking which was as dangerous as
ridiculous. At this sight Andrenio much admired, and Critilo laughed. Suppose
now, said Quiron, that you dream waking: Oh! How excellent well did Bosio paint
these things; for now I understand his fancy. Do but observe, and you shall see
incredible Follies. Those who ought to be the chief Heads and Commanders for
their Prudence, are despised, and forgotten, drooping, and hanging their heads
toward the Earth; on the contrary those who for want of knowledge and
experience in affairs, ought to be the feet are the commanding Heads, and the
first Movers of that Wheel which turns the World, you shall find no thing in
its right order and rule, and because the World wants it self both head and
feet, does in conformity thereunto commit its Government to the weakest
Understanding: these were scarce out of sight, before another, as preposterous
a Spectacle as the former offered it self, and these were Men who still went
backwards, and according to this motion all their actions tended and looked
behind them. What other absurdity is this? said Andrenio, if the World abounds
with such fancies and capricho's as these, we may take it for a College of
Fools, or Associated Changelings. Has not Nature, considered Critilo, placed
both our eyes, and feet, with a natural aptness to tend forwards, that so we
may see where we go, and go where we see, with the most security, and the least
danger. How then do these blindly walk, and with small advertency mind either
their way or motion? Observe, said Quiron, these are Men, who instead of making
progress in Honor, Wisdom, and Prudence, relapse, or return backwards again,
before they arrive to any Perfection of being Men; such I mean as our Count of
Pegmoranda. Consider the folly of yonder Woman, man, observe what she drives
at; she would by no means pass twenty years, and the other will never count
above thirty; for arriving at a certain period, they fix there, as at the full
stop or stage of years; for women would never grow old, though they would as
unwillingly recall the time of their first Childhood. See how lame age has
rivelled and furrowed the foreheads of some, Women.
and dragging them by their unbound Hair, has plucked off the best Ornaments
of Nature: See what a blow he has given, and another that her Teeth drop out
before, and Eyebrows rot with years? How has he altered their complexions and
faces, and transformed their beauty to an uncomely Vizard. Hold, said Andrenio,
do you speak of Women? where are they? for I have but small skill as yet in the
distinction of Sexes, Did not you tell me Critilo, that Women were of a weak
Nature, and Men strong and courageous; that Man spoke strongly and loud, and
Women with a low shrillness; that the Habits of Men are a Cloak and Breeches,
and Women are covered with loose Garments, and vails: but I find all this
contrary, for either Men are degenerated, and become Women, or all Women are
become Men, or both Sexes are confused: Men with their Tongues between their
Teeth, stand quiet, and mute, and Women with their shrill Voice speak so loud,
that they open the Ears, and work a Miracle on the Deaf hearer, these rule the
World, and Men are only ciphers and actors of their Commands. Thou have
deceived me Critilo. It is true, said Critilo, sighing, for Men are now more
feeble, and less than Women; one tear or drop from a Woman's eyes, avails more
than all those streams of Blood which Valor has let forth: the least smile
and favor from a Woman persuades more, than the sweetest Tongue, and
Rhetoric of the Eloquent. In fine, we can neither live with them, nor without
them; never were they more esteemed than now, and their power so far enlarged,
that they are able to do all, and undo all. In vain has Nature denied them the
ornament of a Beard for distinction; and that their blushes and modesty might
be more apparent in their Cheeks; for neither of these is available against the
impetuous violence of their Spirits. According to this, said Andrenio, Man is
not the King of the World, but the Slave and Vassal of the Woman. Know, said
Quiron, that naturally Man is King and Sovereign, and was so until he had made
Woman his Companion: but that you may be better acquainted with this sort of
Creatures, you must know that when they have most need of discretion, and
courage, it then falls them most; but yet there are some exceptions from this
general Rule, which are verified in that incomparable Princess of Rosana, and
that most excellent Lady the Marquess of Valdueza, and others. But that which
caused most admiration, was one who instead of a Horse rode on a Fox, which
always went backwards, making continual turnings and windings at every step,
his whole Train also which followed him, and those not few, imitated him in the
like motion, together with an old Dog, his usual Companion. Do you see this,
said Quiron, I will assure you, it is to some purpose and intent, he makes
these twistings and Labirinths in his way. I believe it, said Critilo, for all
the World seems to pass through Extremes: but who is this, pray tell us, for he
is one who looks more like a Knave, than a Fool? Did you never hear the name of
the famous Caco, The Politician Caco.
that Engine of Policy, the confused Chaos of Reason of State; for in this
manner all Politicians work backwards, that so they may not make discovery of
their intentions by their actings: for they would by no means be traced by
their footsteps; for though their eyes point one way, the path they walk leads
to another; they publish not what they intend, and in saying Yes, they mean No:
so that they act always by Contraries, and their Ciphers are most legible when
they are read backwards, one had need of another Hercules, who with force, and
a Sledge of Iron, might level and make plain these paths, and cut in sunder
their intrigues and knots of deceit.

Andrenio observed that the chiefest part of those that spoke, whispered their
words not into the ears but into mouth of the Hearers, who were not displeased
with the gross absurdity, but with the like undecency kindly received, and
gaping with an open mouth, and forming their lips into ears, ravenously sucked
in the distillation of their words. Was there ever such Absurdities, said he,
words were made for the ears, not for the mouth; but these people eat them, and
drink them, suck them in like sugared Comfets: it is true that they proceed from
the lips, but they die in the ears, and their tomb, and grave is formed in the
Heart: but these seem to lick and chew them in their mouths, and with this
aerious nourishment sustain their vanity: it is a sign, said Critilo, they
carry but little truth in them, since their taste is sweet, and have no relish
of bitterness in the Stomach. Do you not know, said Quiron, that the chiefest
art is to speak those words which are savory to the Palate. Flattery.
Observe Andrenio how yonder Lord sucks in the syrrop of Flattery; see what
draughts he makes of the sweet Liquor of adulation; believe me though he seems
attentively to hearken, yet his ears receive not the sound, for the words
vanish into air. Consider yonder Prince how he gluts himself with Lies, though
never so incredible; it is a most strange thing to consider that this Man never
disbelieved a Lie, though he heard never so many, and yet never believed
Truths, though few were told him, and those seldom. What do ye think of the other
vain Fool? what do you think he is filled with? it is nothing of substance but
air and vanity. This must be the cause, considered Critilo, that those whom
Truths most nearly concern, can yet seldom hear them, for they are bitter, and
give a bad relish to the Palate, so that either as unpleasing they refuse them;
or else endeavoring to swallow them, the squeamish tenderness of their
Stomachs is not able to digest them.

But that which scandalized them most, was the sight of some vile and sorvile
Slaves to themselves, dragging their own Bolts and Chains, wherewith their Arms
were mannacled, that they might not be able to extend them in acts of
Liberality; or in the pious works of Honor, and Virtue, their necks wore a
slavish Collar, the note and sign of their voluntary Servitude; their feet
chained and mannacled, suffered them not to make one step in the way of Fame,
or of a good Reputation, and thus laden with Irons, and locked in their Bolts,
and in a condition more of shame, than glory, yet with an impudent boldness
stood Inthroned, and applauded, commanding Men of better Blood, and Nobility,
enslaving the freeborn state and condition of those who willingly submitted to
their rod, and bowed their shoulders to receive the weight of their vile
Burden. At this sight Andrenio, as being not able to hold longer, cried out,
who will dare to approach near these, and contest with the abuse of Fortune?
How I could kick down these misemployed Seats, and change the condition of the
others, into what their own Virtue and Merits have deserved. Do not speak so
loud, said Quiron, for you undo us. Slaves Command.
It is no matter if this be permitted, though all run to ruin and destruction.
Do you not see that these are the powerful Rulers; those who, etc. -- are
these? If these Slaves of their own Appetites, Servants to Delight; these
Tiberius's, Nero's, Caligala's, Heltogabulus's, and Sardanapalus's are such as
are idolized and adored, and the true Commanders, and Lords of themselves,
free, and in subjection to none, are Slaves and Vassals of Servitude. Why then
let the sound Health, and incorrupted Body, be stretched, and laid out for its
Grave, and the sick and dead Corpse walk the Streets: let the fresh, and lively
color faint and droop, let those whose sick and ill Consciences have made
their looks pale, recover courage and strength, let the sound Entrails be
unsufficient to maintain life, and the corrupted Lungs breath the strongest
blast: let those whose weak Stomachs the smell of Nourishment offends, grow
fat; and let the Dropsical and the Lame be supported with sound Feet and active
Hands; For thus, said Andrenio, all things walk contrary in this World, the
Good creep and crawl humbly on the Earth, and the base vileness of the bad is
exalted.

But that which was pleasing and new, caused much laughter, was to see a Blind
man, with eyes more dim and dark than his own Vileness, more thick and misty
than an April Cloud; with as much presumption as blindness undertook to
conduct, and guide those of more quick eyes and sight than himself, leading the
Van whilst they silently followed, without any doubt, or fear of the way, This
is a brave daring Blindness, The Blind Guide.
said Andrenio. But dishonest and base, said Critilo, that the Blind should
lead the Blind, though there be folly enough in the thing, yet it has been
seen and known with the fall of both into the same Pit of Ruin, and
Destruction; but that the Blind should guide those that see, is an unheard of
folly, and a preposterous madness. I (said Critilo) do not wonder that the
Blind should pretend to direct others that See, because he may believe that all
are as blind as himself, but that those who see, and observe the danger before
their eyes, into which their blind guides would precipitate them, should accept
of their service, and tumble with them, and yet go forward till they fall into
the same deep Pit, and Abyss of Infelicities, is a most incredible Folly, and a
monstrosity of madness. Know, said Quiron, that though this be a most
transcendent piece of rashness, yet it is a folly that each day represents us
with, and more often is it acted in our preposterous times than formerly; for
those who know least, pretend as great Doctors to instruct others; the
Intemperate and Luxurious undertake to read Lectures of Sobriety, and to sit in
the Chair to expound, and comment on Lessons of Morality. Our own experience
can testify how one blind with Affections of a Woman, as ill favored as
infamous, has seduced infinite to follow him, and thrown them down the
Precipice of eternal Misery: This is not the eighth Miracle, but the eighth
Prodigy. For the first step of Ignorance, is a Presumption of Knowledge, and
many would know more, did they not already think they knew too much.

They had no sooner let pass these Sights, but they heard a confused noise and
combustion, amidst a Crowd, and Throng, in a corner of the Marketplace, as if
a quarrel or contest had arisen amongst the people: for it happened that a
Woman, (the usual cause and author of disturbance) ill favored and deformed,
but set out, and adorned to the best advantage; for the whole World had
bestowed the best ornaments she could find to dress, and deck her with; but she
scolded and raved, and railed at another Woman, which was of much better
Temper, and wholly contrary to her disposition; for she was a Woman amiable and
fair, her Clothing course, but clean, and becoming, yet scarce sufficient to
cover her Nakedness, which some attributed to the Poverty of her Condition,
others said, she did it to show her comely stature, and the due proportiod of
her parts. Truth in its Simplicity.
At these revilings and scorns which were cast upon her, she was silent, for
the prevailing force of her enemies, who were the chifest and most numerous of
the World, overawed her in her Speech, so that she durst not reply to those
many affronts, but received all with silence. In fine, all sided against her,
passing from jest to earnest, from words to blows, and as it were stifled in
the Crowd of Adversaries, none durst to oppose so strong an Enemy, or like the
Champion take up the Buckler in defense of the oppressed; but Andrenio,
naturally compassionate, was inclinable to take her part, had not Quiron
prevented him, by saying, do you know whose Cause you patronize, and against
whom you declare, know you not that it is against plausible falsity, Plausible
Falsehood.
which is as much as to take part against the whole world. However the
simplicity of Children would have taken the part of Truth, and have risen in
her defense; but alas! their childish strength, and policy was unable to
prevail against inveterate and old Malice, so they were content only to praise
Truth, and speak it. Thus was beautiful Truth stripped, and forsaken, and by
degrees so pushed and shouldred, that at length she was justled into those
remote parts, from whence we can have no news or tidings of her abode or
residence.

It is well, said Andrenio, I see now there is no Justice in this World, and
yet it is true, that there are Ministers of it. There is Justice, said Quiron,
and that not far off, since Falsity stands so near. With this there appeared a
Man, as severe, as Cato, his aspect and countenance rigid, accompanied with
others of the same profession; at his first appearance Falsity went toward
him, and with many of those few Reasons which she had in store, she informed
him the condition of her present state; he answered, that he would presently
give Sentence in her favor, and that by his authority she should be licensed
to wear Feathers; with that she instantly clapped in his hand winged-feet, with
which swiftly flying, he firmed the banishment of Liberty his mortal enemy. Who
is that (demanded Andrenio) who trusts the stay of his body to the feeble
support of a weak Rod? That is, answered Quiron, a Justice, Corrupt Judges.
who is so called, because he sells it, he is one, who feels first, that he may
hear the better afterward. What means that Sword, said he, they carry drawn
before him, and to what purpose is it? This, faid Qniron, is the Ensign and
Badge of his Dignity, and the instrument of Punishment, and Justice; and that
which lops and cuts the overgrown Branches, and Weeds of Vice; it were more
available, replied Critilo, to tear them from the root, than only to pare the
luxuriant Branches, by which they gather more strength daily. So it ought to
be, answered Quiron, but these Men prune the Roots of Vice, that they may yield
more Fruit, and a constant Harvest, whereby the sins of the people may be their
Livelihood and Maintenance. This Judge suddenly, and without more appeal
condemned to death a poor Fly, for no other reason then because it was
entangled within the web and net of the Law: but an Elephant who had trampled,
and trod down all, without sparing or respecting, either Humane or Divine
Justice, was so far from being chastised for it, that with much reverence the
Judge treated him in his passage, and let him pass undisturbed, though laden
with prohibited Weapons, as Granado's, Daggers, Pick-Iocks, and Wildfire, and
in complement demanded of him if he would permit him leave to crowd in amongst
the rest of his Attendants, and to accompany him to the entrance of his Den.
Nor did his Injustice stop here, but catching another poor Fellow by the
shoulder, who durst not cry out, without farther matter condemned him to be
whipped, and some asking the reason of his punishment, it was answered again,
that he had no back to support a Burden, which if he had had, he should like
others have been charged with load upon load. This Judge was no sooner out of
sight, but appeared another, who as some valiant General was introduced with
the applauses, and acclamations of the people, and might be compared to Don
Paula de Parada, D. Pablo de Parada.
he was armed with Back and Breast, and fitted for all numbers, times, and
persons: his Arms were two Pistols, but dormant in their Holsters; he was
mounted on a cropped Horse, but had not lost his ears for his own faults; he had
a thing gilded for a Sword, which for many good respects was never drawn; he
was more than a man in his words, but less than a Woman in his fears; he had a
Cap of Feathers, a very Pie of Gallantry, but a Hen in Valor. Who is this,
demanded Andrenio, a Man, or a Monster? The question is very apt, said Quiron,
for some Nations unused to this sight, have at first view, imagined the Horse,
and Man both one. This is a Soldier, Soldiers of Fortune.
who were he such in his Manners, he would not be so ragged in his Conscience.
Of what use are these in the World, said Andrenio? These are, replied he, the
Chastisers of our Enemies, but a worse scourge and plague to our Friends; these
are those who defend us, but may Divine Providence defend us from them. These
fight, destroy, and kill, and are the terror and devourers of our Adversaries.
How can this be, said Andrenio? for they say that these very Men make, and
raise enemies themselves. Hold, said Quiron, I speak what their office does
enjoin and oblige them unto; but now is the World so corrupted, that the
remedies of evils, are the causes of them, and the medicine to cure our
sickness is the destruction of our health. These that ought to end War, and
close the Breaches, are those that husband, and prolong them; for they knowing
that their own Fortunes are small, and their Income not sufficient to sustain
their lives, piece out their Fortunes with the employment of War: for were it
ended, they would remain without office, and without benefit: wherefore then
should they kill the Sentinels of the Marquis of Peseara, since they live by
the Enemy? This is a Policy which to the very Drummer and meanest Officers is
known so well, that the breach which Prudence and sincere Conscience might make
up in one years space, is continued seven, nay double, and would remain for
ages, or to eternity, had not Valor and Success been now united in the Marquis
of Mortara. Marquis of Mortara.
The same censure did they pass on another, who being likewise on Horse back,
as bold and confident as a Mountebank, pretended Knight Errant like to ease the
afflicted, and with his art to cure languishing Nature: but he was but a
Charlatan, for all his drugs operated so ill, that the Sound were empaired by
them in health, and the Sick by his means were gven over by the Physician. He
was one who declared War against Life and Death, the open enemy of them both,
neither a Friend to the Dead, nor to those who were perfectly Living, but ran
in a Medium (the only bad one) between both. Mountebanks.
That himself might eat, he brings his Patients to short allowance, and
beguiling them of their meat grows fat himself: whilst they lie under the mercy
of his hands, his care forbids them Meat, and if their health admits them to
quit his Cure, which seldom happens, the Patient will soon perceive the policy
the Physician used to restrain the danger of his future excess; so that these
live, and feed on the spoil, with more cruelty than the Excutioner: for as he
studies with the nimblest art, to end the pain of the Malefactor, these are the
tormentors of life, esteeming it the best part of their skill, to linger out
life to the last gasp; and to sustain a continued course of sickness, a better
art than to recover health, these are as an infected air of sickness, and where
are most Physicians, are most Diseases; This is the common calumny that the
Vulgar has cast upon them; but for my own part, I think none can either speak
good, or bad of the Physician; for he on whom his Art has not been exercised,
rails at his Cruelty, wonld be censured as passionate without Reason: and he
who has already fallen into his hands, has neither Tongue, nor Breath to make
his complaint; but mistake me not, for here I speak not of the natural
Physician, but the Moral, into whose hands is committed the distempered
condition of the Republic, who instead of easing, and remedying indisposed
affairs, foment and distract them, and where is required a sudden recovery, the
unskilfulness of these Physicians reduce the Fever to a lingering Consumption.
How comes it to pass, said Andrenio, that we can meet no man of honesty passing
this way? These, said Quiron, are not in motion, but are permanent Pillars, and
durable, whose immortal Fame never dies, and their number so small, that they
are enroulled and listed in Letters of Gold: who are named in the same
scarcity, as the Unicorn in Arabia, or the Phoenix in the East; however if you
will feign see one, look for Cardinal Sandoval in Toledo, the Count de Lemos,
Governor in Aragon, the Archduke Leopold in Flanders; and if you will find
Integrity, Justice, Truth, and all Virtue concerned in one, behold D. Luis d'
Haro in that Center, which he enjoys and deserves.

They being now wearied with these prodigious Spectacles, desired to retire
some time for repose; but Andrenio stretched out his Arms, lifting his Eyes to
Heaven, fetched most deep sighs, as if he would make the Stars take notice of
his complaints. How is this, said he, have I my self lost my Reason, or with
the Society of the Frantic, has my own Brain been made giddy? Methinks all is
blasted with the Worlds contagion, nay the Heaven seems confused, and time to
have changed his course, and as recalled to move backward: Is it day, demanded
he, or night? but let us have a care that we fall not into guesses, or
conjectures, for that will serve more to perplex, and confound us than we were
before. Hold, said Quiron, for the Worlds Mis-rule is not to be attributed to
the influence of Heaven, but to the Earths own disorderly motion; for things
have not moved contrary to their natural course only as to place, but are
confused also as to times, and seasons, for some make the day night, and the
night day. One rises hot from his Bed, when another as weary with his Labor,
inclines to repose: The Day Night.
some go then from home with the light only of Venus Star, and return to their
rest, with the Beams and dawning of the morning; and these who are thus
singular in their lives, are those of the most famous Families, the illustrious
Nobility, who yet deserve that Sentence, which one passed on them, That he who
by night lives and wanders like a Beast, by day must live more like a Brute
then a Man. This is the course of the World, said Critilo, but let us retire to
our Beds, least we incur the same censure; nor am I willing to desist now,
since it is night, and little to be seen. Why, said Andrenio, do they call the
World Mundus, Mundus signifies Clean.
the very name seems to belie it, being not worthy of so honorable a Title,
its nature being better expressed by something that denotes Uncleanness, and
corruption of it? There was a day, replied Quiron, when this word was but a
true description of its Nature, when first this uncomely Fabric proceeded from
the unpolluted hands of the Divine Creator: but whence comes this disorder
then? demanded Andrenio, or who has subverted, and overthrown its Foundation,
or with an unskilful pencil defaced the lines of this equal proportion? There
is much to be said in this, replied Quiron, this subject have the Learned
already treated on, and these defects are sufficiently bewailed in the
Philosophers Meditations. Some attribute this disorder to the blindness, and
Folly of Fortune, who each day changes her motion, and neither leaves place,
nor seasons unaltered. Others say that when Lucifer of the morning fell, he
gave so hard a blow on the Earth, that he stroke the World from off the hinges,
turning it from one side unto the other. Others lay the fault on the Woman,
stiling her the Universal disturber, and the sole cause of all Coufusions: But
I say we need not seek any other subject, on whom more justly to cast the
guilt, and accusation hereof, than on Man himself, the unquietness of whose
Spirit is sussicient to distract a thousand Worlds, and that there are not more
Worlds for him to disturb, is the sorrow, and complaint of the principal
Inquieter if the Divine Providence had not fixed the Primum Mobile, or first
Mover into that Sphere, to which his Malice, and Fury has not possibility to
climb, the Sun had before now changed his course, and made the West the place
of his arise, and terminated his stage in the consins of the East: so had Spain
become one of the extreme Poles of the World, and so made unhabitable by any.
It is a thing worth observation, that Man, who is a Creature endued with
Reason, should in the first act and operation of it, commit it to the
subjection and obedience of his Appetite, from whence, as from the fountain and
original of all are derived those contradictions which succeed; nor can it be
otherwise since they are but consequences of the first Capital disorder. Hence
it is that Virtue is persecuted, and Vice applauded, Truth silenced, and
falsity endued with a threefold Tongue to vent its deceits, the Knowing are
robbed of their Libraries, and the Ignorant confounded in the multitude of
their Leaves, the Doctor is without his Books, and the Books without the
Doctor; the Discretion of the Poor is esteemed Folly, and the extravagant
Discourse of the Rich a Treasury of Knowledge, those who undertake to recover
life, destroy it, Youth withers and decays, and the decrepit years of the Aged
grow green, and flourish; In fine, Man is arrived to that pitch, and height of
Madness, that he has forgot almost to know his right hand, sor mistaking it,
he places the way to happiness on the left. Thus does he cast the greatest
matter of importance behind his back, treads Virtue underfoot, and instead of
going forward, turns again.

If things go thus, said Andrenio, why then did thou Critilo draw, and seduce
me from my own World, wherein I was free in my own Solitariness? Let me return
again to that Cave of my nothing, to that high Precipice of my Rock, and retire
from this sink, and confusion of the World. It is now too late, replied
Critilo, O how many would return now back again if they could; but this has
Nature denied, being that Policy whereby the World is preserved and peopled.
Observe how we still move us this ladder of life, and how we leave the steps of
our days behind us, which we no sooner pass, but they vanish, leaving us no
means, and remedy of descent. How is it possible (said Andrenio, still
contesting, and tormenting himself) that we should live and suffer this
preposterous humor of the World; must I be mute, and see the enormities of the
World in silence, can my patience bear this, and yet not burst with Choler?
Alas! said Quiron, if you were left to your own humor but for four days only,
you would accommodate your self to the age you live in, nor would you be so
severe in your censures of other Men. Who, said he, am I, one of those
distempered Brains, or one of those vulgar and mean Spirits? Do you hear, said
Critilo, thou art not able to pass, and imitate the wise Sages of past times,
though it were only A Spanish expression of Silence.
in swallowing your own Spittle. The World is the same now as then, the same
which they found it, the same they left it. The wise Count of Castrillo lives
now, and yet he is not outrageous as you are. Likewise the Marquis of Caretto
passes with patience. What course then, replied Andrenio, did they take being
so pradent? Why, said Critilo, they did only see, hear, and were silent. But is
there none that endeavors now to correct things? Yes, Fools. Why Fools?
Because it is as impossible, as to unite the two Castiles, or to discompose
Arragon; for who can hinder that Cardinals should not adopt Nephews, and others
entertain private Favorites, that the French should not be Tyrants, that the
English should not be as deformed in their Souls, as they are comely in their
Bodies, that the Spaniards should not be Proud, and the Genoueses, etc. Well
then, said Andrenio, I will return to my ancient Grave, to my former Society of
Beasts, since I see no remedy to ease these Miseries. Hold, said Quiron, I will
give you as easy, as true a Lesson, if you will hearken to me in this
following Crisis.

The Seventh CRISIS.
The Original of Errors, and Deceits.
THe whole Army of Passions banded themselves against Man, as their common
Enemy, and declared the quarrel on no other grounds, than his favoring Reason.
The Battle being now ranged, and both sides ready to give the assault, Discord
entered the Field, coming neither from Hell, nor as some report, from the Tents
of War, but from the House and Habitation of hypocritical Ambition. Her
business was to move a competition amongst them, who should lead the Front and
Van of the Battle, each Vice pretending to it, with such boastings of its
strength, and valor, as made the question more hardly to be decided. Riot
pretended the principal places, because she was the first Passion that
encountered Man, and had gained on him the first Victory in his Cradle.
Lasciviousness alleged the success of her valor, and that her Merits might
deserve a greater Command, since her Victorious successes had so often gained
the Laurel, and made such Spoils on Youth the strength of Man. Covetousness
pleaded to be the root of evils, Pride vaunted its noble descents, and family,
as a seed and branch of Heaven, and was the only Vice peculiar to Man, and the
rest in a lower degree common to Beasts. Anger took these boastings much in
disgust, and in a furious rage began the fight, the success as yet being
doubtful, the end concluded in a general confusion. Malice desirous to make up
the difference in a grave Oration, represented the danger of this civil War,
and that their strength united would be more available, where the power of one
would be assistant to the other; and as to the present dispute, told them, that
this command from whence the present discord arose, was always adjudged due to
her eldest Daughter Falsity: for she is the Author of Evil, the fountain and
source of Vice, the Mother of Sin, the infectious Harpy, the mauy-headed Hydra,
the various shaped Proteus, the Centimanus of War, the Caco of Policy, and the
fruitful Womb always pregnant with Errors, and Deceits. It was Fraud that
assaulting Credulity, and Malice taking advantage on Ignorance, which entrapt
the World, and delivered it into the immense grasp of the Worlds Monarch; It is
Falsity and Deceit which invest the easy Nature of Man, The Devil.
and take advantage on his Childhood, and Youth, whereby he is disabled to
resist their Stratagems, Treasons, Frauds, Delusions, Fallacies, and the whole
train and method of Italian devices, to that either sooner or later he yields
his Judgment a trophy to Deceit.

The Truth of this Philosophy has been confirmed by the success of Critilo and
Andrenio, who having but lately quitted the Society of cautious Quiron, who by
his Industry, and Council, had exempted them from the confusion of Babel, the
Worlds Register; and having placed them in the direct Road, returned again as
guide to direct others. Andrenio was now well armed against these dangers, with
the various Lectures he had received from him, but especially by the assistance
of a Glass, which changed the common prospect of the World, and made all things
appear with their natural defects, though disguised with the Mask which Fraud
had put on them: for so ought every one to behold this World withan eye
different from the vulgar view, and to understand things in the same Notion,
that the wise Count d' Oniate apprehended them. When you see a presumptuous
Opiniator, believe him a Fool, the Rich suppose Poor, in respect of those true
Riches of Felicity: He who commands all, is the common Slave; the Man that is
biggest, is in bulk not much a Man, the gross and fat have but little of
substance; he that would seem to be deaf, hears more than he would, and the
Acute-sighted is Blind, or will be so. He that smells out much, leaves a bad
savor of himself in the Nostrils of all; the Talkative speaks nothing; he who
Laughs, raves with fury; who excuses, condemns himself; who Eats most, Eats
least; who discommends the Merchandise, desires it most; who acts the Fools
part, is the wittiest Comedian; who wants nothing, wants himself; the Covetous
enjoys equally that which he has not, as what he has; the greatest Clerk is
seldom the wisest Man; who desires a good Life, desires a good Death; and he
who loves life most, most abhors it; who invites his Friend to a plentiful
Table, is he that causes him to fast; Folly is often seen in good Conjectures;
the most straight, is crooked; he that goes the nearest way home, goes the
farthest about; who would not lose one mouthful, loses a hundred; the best
which cost most, is best cheap; he who makes thee weep, is thy best Friend. In
fine, that which one affects most, and esteems the greatest, is the most
unworthy, and of the smallest value. With this discourse they eased their
tedious steps, which insensibly passed away, till the encounter of another
Monster interrupted them, which now did not, as formerly, astonish nor distract
their thoughts, for they had learned that they must in this World expect to
meet diversities of Prodigies one after another. For now came toward them a
Coach, which was not usual in so bad a Road; but being made so artificially,
and with such nimble Joints, it passed through all rubs, streights, and
difficulties; the Beasts that drew it were two flea-bitten Jades, like
Serpents, and the Coachman a Fox; Critilo asked if it were not a Venetian
Chariot; to which the Coachman replied in a manner far from the purpose, as if
he understood not, what he demanded; within rode a Monster, or rather many, for
so often changed he his color, and shape, sometimes black, anon white, then
young, anon old, sometimes Great, sometimes little, then a Man, a Woman, a
Beast, that Critilo soon discovered him to be the famous Proteus. Proteus.
As soon as he came near them, he alighted from his Seat, and with more bows
and cringes then a young French Monsieur, which are the Prologues to deceit,
and then with more Complements then an Aragonesa, welcomed them in behalf of
his great Master, offering them the convenience of his Palace, where they might
ease, and refresh their Bodies already wearied with so long a Journey. They
both having returned their thanks, for so unexpected a favor, demanded who was
his Lord, who in so small knowledge of them, and their deserts, had so
courteously obliged them. He is, says he, a mighty Prince, whose Territories,
though they extend over the compass of the World, yet keeps the famous
Metropolis of his Court, in this first entrance of the Earth and Life. He is a
Monarch more great than any, in that Kings are his Feudataries and Vassals, and
few there are who unsubdued by his power pay him not Tribute; for besides the
flourishing estate of his Kingdom in Peace, and Plenty, it is the Academy of
Arms, and Learning, and rewards the most forward Proficients herein; let him
who would understand the root of Policy, Artifice, and Cunning, Outward
Appearances.
apply himself to this Court, where he shall learn to thrive, and pass in the
World, to insinuate into the affections and favors of advantageous
Acquaintance, and both win Friends, and preserve them, and especially to cloak
and disguise things with fictitious colors, which is the Masterpiece, and most
useful Lesson of Art, and Knowledge. This Report was persuasion enough for
Andrenio, to visit his Greatness, and to be educated in a Court, or School
rather of so much Policy; and being overcome with his Civilities, stepped into
the Coach, reaching out his hand to draw in Critilo; but he being more cautious
and experienced than the other, turned again to demand the Titles and Name of
this mighty Prince, who being so great as Fame had reported, could not but be
adorned with Titles and Honors equivalent to his Dominions. His Titles,
answered this Officer, are many, summing up a Catalogue of Names, and Surnames,
run over multitudes of Appellations, and told him that every part of his
Territories, and successes of his noble Achievements, had inserted new Titles
into the List of his Honors: but his most natural, and original name is not
vulgarly received, being his Majesty and Greatness admits few to see him, much
less to know him: he is a King of much Authority, not to be reckoned amongst
the petty number of Provincial Princes, but one of great State, whose
retirement and difficulty of access renders his person more awful and
reverenced. At the end of Lustrums, or some period of years, his Courtesy
admits the longing curiosity of some to his presence, which is a blessing of
their Fortune, and excess of his favor; with this discourse he had insensibly
drawn them out of the way, into another Path more intricate and crooked, which
when Critilo observed, he was desirous to return from whence he had erred,
before it was too late; but what with the windings and turnings of the Road,
and with the persuasion of the Guide, who confidently assured them of his
knowledge of the way, and the multitude of the Passengers that they saw
traveling therein, he had much ado to retreat back. Howsoever Critilo made a
stop here, and coming to a way with three Paths, was doubtful which way to
take, and therefore warned Andrenio to be now careful of himself, and more
watchful and cautious then ever before. For being now come to the Fountain of
Thirst, The Fountain of Thirst.
so named from the longing thirst of those travelers, that were enamoured with
its Fame; for its curious invention exceeded the Works of Iuanelo, and the
continual current of its Waters was the celebrated Theme by heroic Poesy.
Though the head arose and bubled in the greenness of an open Plain, yet such
was the concourse, and crowd that pressed to obtain a draught of this stream,
that the wide and large Champion round about seemed too narrow to receive the
multitude of Visitants; for such was the number that encircled this Fountain,
and swelled with the excess of the sweet Waters, that one would think the whole
world were in this confluence met together, and indeed few there wanted who
sucked not at the spouts of this renowned Fountain. The water sprang from seven
Pipes, though not of Gold but Iron, a circumstance well observed by Critilo,
and also that the Spouts were not formed in the fashion of Lions, and Griffins,
but of Serpents, and Dogs; and though the water flowed in much abundance, yet
with such thirst did every one receive it, that there was not one drop spilt,
nor was there need of a Pond or a Cistern to receive the overflowing Waters;
for all praised the sweetness to their taste, and being weary, and heated with
their Journey, sucked them in excessively, until they had filled their Bodies
with hydropical Humors. The Nobles, and those of higher quality, as more
esteemed, were served with Cups of Gold, which a pretty Nymph, the Vinteress of
this Babylon, filled with much Courtesy, and Compliments, and to entertain her
Guests danced like a Courtesan before the streams. Here Andrenio both moved
with Thirst, and with the present entertainment, unadvisedly approached to the
head of the Waters: But the cautious Critilo drew him back. Hold, said he,
consider well first, see if this be Water. What can it be else, replied he? It
may be Poison, and if not, yet it is always good, especially on the terms we
now stand to suspect, and fear all things, if my eyes deceive me not, said
Andrenio, it is Water clear and Cristaline. This, replied Critilo, is a sign
which I like the worst, the clearness makes me suspect it most; for as with a
pleasant color it often smiles, so adulterated Liquors, and beauteons
outsides, serve commonly for a gloss to set forth an inward corruption. See
but how the deceitfnl Water sometimes smiles, and anon murmures, and acts the
part of flattering Courtship. Let me alone, replied Andrenio, let me satiate my
self with this Water, and refresh my parching heat, for if I dye with Thirst,
may I not (if it be dangerous to drink) wash away this dust, bathe my eyes, and
limbs, and refresh my Body fevoured with our Travels? Nor this neither, replied
Critilo, for believe me, remit it to experience, behold others, and read my
Lesson in their destruction. Observe the effect, and operation it has on
these, who now come; consider what their humor was before they went, and how
different they are now at their return. With that passed by a great crowd of
Passengers, more lead with a thirsty Desire, than Reason, plunged themselves
into the Waters, and began to bathe and dabble, and to wash their eyes, that
they might see clearer: but it is well worth our observation, that these who at
first, were clear, and their skins fair, and of a natural pale, were with the
first touch of the Waters, died like a Glass into several colors. Some were
blew, that whatsoever they saw, appeared like a Sky, and their Raptures so
transporting as if they had been catched into a Heaven, and there enthroned.
These were Fools who contented themselves in their own Senseless Paradise;
Senseless Content.
some turned white like Milk, that whatsoever they saw appeared good, and
acceptable, without suspicion of evil, thus all deceived them, especially if
recommended by the Flatteries of their Friends, with less caution than a
Polander they were ready to receive them. On the contrary others there were,
who turned as yellow, as Choler, their eyes malicious, always made a pause, as
fearing Treason, they interpreted the best kindness amiss, abhorred Society,
unless with circumspection, and these were Men who had more of Malice,
Malicious.
then of Judgment; some turned green, fancying all of the same color, which
being a badge, and signification of Hope, gave encouragement to their humorous
Ambition: Ambitious.
some turning gray, and of watrish eyes, grew stark blind: but it is strange,
that these Waters did perfectly clear some men's eyes, and yet though they saw
well, they beheld ill, and these were envious; Envious.
some had the natural force of sight, so empaired, not so much in the quality,
as the quantity of the Object; that Mole-hills, as in a Magnifying-glass,
appeared as Mountains, and ordinary Toys, applauded by a Castilian, for but
being his own, with praises as might befit the ultimate of all Perfection, and
others on the contrary became of a murmuring querulous Spirit, never contented
with the present Government, repining at the greatest caresses, and embraces of
Fortune. There was one whose eyes read best at distance, he beheld all in a
large prospect, especially the dangers of Death, and this was an unwary Person.
Unwary.
Another was of a Humor, that he thought he had all ready at hand, and with
that Confidence assured himself to conquer difficulties, that impossibilities
were esteemed easy, and the Prey sure before it was taken; there were many of
a merry humor, that every Object they saw seemed to smile upon them, The
Confident.
that every one caressed, and made much of them, and these were in a condition
of childish Folly. There was one observed to be extremely contented, as in a
Fools Paradise, he supposed to see always a Vision of Angels, and there was
nothing, that he saw, but he picked out some Beauty whereof to be enamoured;
and this they say was a Portugez, or the Nephew of Macias. There was another
who spoke of nothing but himself; this was the Theme both to begin, and
conclude his discourse; one had his eyes so dazzled, that he supposed to see
that which he never beheld; this was a Man of a perverse Will, and crooked
Intention; he had eyes for his friends, and eyes for his enemies much
different; there were some Maternal, and tender eyes that looked on a Dunghill
Worm, like an oriental Pearl; and some eyes cruel, like a Step-mothers, which
frowned with an evil aspect on all: In sine, some eyes were of a Spanish Black,
and others of a French Azure. Such were the monstrous effects of this venomous
Liquor, on the Bodies of those who bathed in it; that some who only washed their
Mouth and Throat, became a more strange Metamorphosis than the rest; for their
tongues, which were of solid, and substantial flesh, turned into a fire, that
the whole World was in danger of its Flames; others into Wind, which seemed to
breathe a spirit of falsity, and like Bellows puffed Men's Brains full of the
Air of lies, and flattery.

Some that had Tongues of Silk, were turned into Bays, those of Velvet into
Satin, others were transformed into Tongues of Burlesque, consisting of Scum
and Froth, without substance; but the most of these had an impediment in their
Speech, and were tongue-ty'd in modest and decent discourse; some Women had
their tongues eradicated, but in anger talked the more, for having no tongue to
rule, spoke at random. One began to speak earnestly loud. Manners of Speech.
This, said Andrenio, is a Spaniard; but Critilo, said not, but some
presumptuous or consident boaster, for he who speaks most deliberately, and
soberly, is most commonly best heard, and understood. Indeed, so it is, said
another, which he whistled out with an effeminate Voice, like a French Man; but
he was not so, but one affected, and foolishly nice. To meet him went forth
another, who spoke as if he had a Plum in his Mouth, that all supposed him a
German; but he answered he was not, but one who to speak fine and elegantly did
not regard whether his matter were to the purpose or not. Another spoke through
the Teeth with such a lisping pronunciation, that all believed him an
Andaluzian, but others, who could better distinguish Languages, judged him of a
malevolent Tongue, who Serpent-like hist out his Malice. Another in a bustle
disturbed all, and with an unquiet spirit, without knowing the reason why,
endeavored to discompose the whole World, having no other excuse, but that it
was his natural infirmity, so that he was supposed to be an Islander of
Majorca; but he was not of that Country, but a barbarous hot-brained Furioso;
another spoke, and none understood him, that they took him to be a Biscayner,
but was not such, but one who was always making Petitions and Requests; another
spoke not at all, but endeavored to be understood by signs, whom all derided
and scorned; This certainly is one, said Critilo, who desires to speak the
truth, but either cannot, or dare not; others spoke hoarse and low, these, said
he, must certainly be Parliament Men; but they were not so, but Men who were
Counselors to none but themselves; others snuffed words in their nose, which
some understood, and stammering answered them in the same Dialect, but neither
appositely, nor to the purpose, and some biting their tongues, spoke inwardly,
and answered them as if the questions propounded to them were troublesome; some
pronounced words hollow, as from an inward sound and cavity in their. Breasts,
which was both as unpleasing to the Auditors, as troublesome to themselves. And
so it was that none remained with his own Voice either good or true, no man
spoke clear, equal, or without artifice. So all lost the natural accent of
their Tongues, but feigned, deceived, lied, blasphemed, and injured; whence it
seems, that the French especially, as good fellows in this meeting, drinking in
the freest plenty to pledge the Italians, neither speak as they write, nor
perform as they say, that a man had need of good ears and good learning to
understand their Words, and Letters, but to apprehend them rightly, you may
interpret all to a contrary sense. But the most pestilential effect of this
Liquor, was shown in those that drank it, that like a Vomit it moved the
Stomach, as soon as taken in, to spue it forth again with all the true
substance, and sound nourishment they had before, leaving room for wind and
air; for lies and deceits, with which they swelled as with a Tympany. Their
Hearts turned to cork void both of Valor and Courtesy, their Entrails were
metamorphosed into Stone, their Brains to Cotton, dry and without Judgment,
their Blood hydropical and watrish, without color or heat; their Breasts,
which should be of Steel, were turned into Wax, their nerves grew flaccid, Men
of this Age.
as if the spring of their motion, were composed of Wool, their feet as clogged
with Lead, moved with a slow pace toward good, but like a Mercury winged to
pursue the flight of evil; their hands turned to pitch, which grasped, and
retained all they touched; their tongues blurrers of fame, their eyes paper; in
fine, here was the original of the Worlds Metamorphosis, the cheat of vanity,
and the best Masterpiece of the Worlds deceiver. The operation it had on poor
Andrenio, was, that the strength of one drop, he but supped in, did so
intoxicate his Brain, that ever after he grew giddy, and reeled in the way of
Virtue. What do you think now, said Critilo, of this constant spring and stream
of Fraud of this tottering Mansion of the Worlds falsities? If you had drank
with the same liberty that others have done, how had your Joints been dissolved
with its strength? how had your Reason abated, and your feet tript at every
rubb? Can you possibly esteem so little an eye clear of blood, or beams, a
tongue clean and true, a Man of verity and substance, such as a Duke of Ossuna,
or a Prince of Conde? believe me he that is so, Duke of Ossuna Prince of Conde.
is as strange and unusual as a Phaenix. Would one think, said Andrenio, there
should be so much evil in so smooth a water? The more dangerous is it, replied
Critilo, for those smiles and gentleness are symptoms of its danger, how is
this Fountain called? demanded Andrenio, which he asked of one and the other,
but none could inform him. At last Proteus answered him, that it had no name,
for in being unknown, consisted the efficacy, and success of its operation. Why
then, said Critilo, it may be called the Fountain of Deceits, of which who once
drinks is by the Virtue, and strength thereof metamorphos'd into another shape.

Critilo was now desirous to turn back, but Andrenio could not, nor would
consent, and Proteus pressing them forward, would needs persuade them that it
was better to be a Fool for company, A Fool for Company.
then singular and wise alone. Thus he led them astray, rather then guided
them, in by and cross ways, through delightful Fields and Meadows, where Youth
stood sporting in the pleasant Greens, under the fresh shades of leafy Boughs;
but the Trees wanting heart, and sap, were barren, and unfruitful. By this time
being come in view of the City, they observed it to be covered with a Cloud of
smoke, a certain sign, that it was inhabited by Mankind. The Prospect was
composed of a pleasing variety, and seemed best at the farthest distance; such
was the general concourse of all Provinces to this common place of resort, that
the Road was crowded with Travelers, which raised such a cloud of dust, that
nothing in the way thither could be seen or observed; but in their nearer
approach, they easily perceived that that which at a farther distance appeared
beauteous, and comely, was within a confused mass and heap, no Street, direct,
or strait, but like a Labyrinth or Den of Minotaures. Andrenio was about rashly
to enter in, but Critilo pulling him by the Sleeve, said, Hold open first your
eyes, those inward Faculties, I say of the Soul. Whereupon he bended down to
the Earth, and looking narrowly, he espied traps and slips covered in the dust,
made with Golden threads, and fair hair, to catch, and ensnare silly and unwary
Innocents. Observe well, said he, where and how you enter, let not your feet
tread without an assay first, and certainty of a secure, and firm foundation;
do not move one foot from my side, unless you will wilfully precipitate your
self to an evident destruction; believe nothing, though urged with Oaths, and
Protestations; grant nothing, though petitioned with the most submissive
humility; Rules to Live.
do nothing what they command, and so armed with the Virtue of this Lesson,
which is to see, and hear, and be silent; let us venture up this Street. All
the Street was rowed with the Shops of Handicrafts-men, no Foreign Labourer
appeared there, whose simplicity was unpractised in the art of fraudulent
Dealings; through these Streets crossed flocks of Crows, which bred under the
Eves of the Houses, and maintained a sociable familiarity with their Landlords,
which Andrenio judged for an ill omen, that presaged some future disaster. But
Proteus informed him, and bid him not to wonder at this, for that these had not
been the ancient Inhabitants, of the City, which Pythagoras in honor of his
foolish opinion, supposed to be the Souls of evil livers, whom God for a just
punishment, had transmigrated into the Bodies of these irrational Creatures
making their being now the same with theirs, since their death, whose actions
they so fully imitated in their life; the scarlet Souls of cruel Tyrants he
transfued into Tigers, the Proud into the Lions Skin, and the Souls of the
dishonest to animate the Boar; but Souls of Artisans, Mechanics.
especially those that make our Clothes, were covered with Crows feathers, for
they having always used to say to their Customers, to morrow it shall be done,
to morrow without fail, has aptly in punishment thereof, put the same term
into their Mouths, that continual Cras, Cras, Cras signifies to morrow.
a time which eternity it self shall never overtake.

But having passed the Suburbs into the heart, and middle of the City they saw
most stately Palaces, magnificent Buildings, the first of which, they said, was
Solomon's Seraglio, (before any asked the question) for there he lay slumbering
amidst of his Three hundred Concubines, making Hell, with these Sports, and
Pastimes equivocate a Paradise; in one House, which seemed a Fortress, but was
no other then a tottering Cottage, founded on an unstabled Sand, sat Hercules,
made effeminate, spinning with his Omphale, the shirt or winding sheet of his
dying Fame; at the same Window peeped out Sardanapalus, dressed in Woman's
habit, and attire; and Marc Anthony not far from him, unhappy Man, whose
Fortune was both told and made by a Gypsy. In another ruinous Castle, did not
live, but died the Goth Roderigo, since whose time the Nobles have been fatal
to Spain. Another Palace there was half Gold, half Dirt, cemented with Humane
Blood, this was the House of extravagant Nero, whose Reign began with the mild
calm of a prodigious Clemency, but ended with a storm of bloody Cruelty; within
the next room sat Pedro the Cruel, mad and enraged, grating his Teeth, and
crackling Bones with anger. There were other Edifices erecting in all haste,
but none could tell as yet for whom they were, though diversely reported by the
World, certain it is, not for the enjoyment of those whose pains and cost
raised the Structure, but for the possession of others, who perhaps as yet
unborn, will reap the fruits of another labor; but one in a green Coat
standing by, told them, that in this part of the World live the deceived, and
in the other the deceivers; these laugh at the others, and the others at them
again, but at the end of the year they balanced Accounts, one having no more
cause to laugh than the other. Andrenio being weary of the company of the
deceived, The Deceivers deceived.
desired to see all, and to divert his humor, would needs pass to the quarters
of the deceivers, so that proceeding forward, they found none but Merchants
shops, and those dark, having no other but False, which they called
Shop-lights, to set off their counterfeit Ware; others sold false Teeth, and
Peruwigs, and all sorts of Habits and disguises for Comedians. There was one
Shop full of nothing but Foxes skins, which the cunning Citizen swore, that
they were more in demand, and in esteem than the best Sables, which they easily
believed, when they perceived the Shop so well customed by the famous
Themistocles, and other modern Heroes of our time. It was really the only Fur
in fashion here, for want of the Lions skin, which was grown a scarce
Commodity, because it was not in demand; and it is said that the subtlest and
greatest Politicians used to line their Garments therewith, instead of Ermines.
In another Shop, they sold Spectacles by the Wholesale to blind Men, so as
neither to see, nor to be seen, and these were all Grandees, who bought them,
for to blind their Porters, which carried them on their Shoulders, that they
might be the more tractable and quiet, as they do Horses to make them stand
still. The married Wives bought them up a pace to blind their Husbands with,
and to make them believe they loved them more than they did; some were like
multiplying Glasses, which were of all sorts, and sizes for Young and Old, Men
and Women; and these were the dearest, because most in demand; another Shop was
full of Cork heels to raise men in their Stature, and make them seem more
Personable than they are. But that which most pleased Andrenio was to see
Gloves, an unknown invention, and a novelty to him. What means this, said he,
these seem to be an useful contrivance for all occasions, against the Heat, and
Cold, the Sun, and Air, nay they are very convenient for those, who have
nothing else to do, were it only to put them off and on. Above all, said
Critilo, they take most excellently a Perfume, and is the cheapest way to
conserve rich smells. How well you understand it, replied the Glover, if you
had said they serve to mask the Fingers, that they should not behold the hands,
you had hit the difficulty; for there are those who catch at their Prey with
Gloves on. How can that be said Critilo, for that is against the Proverb? The
Proverb, said he, alas! Sir, all Proverbs now either lie, or are belied, for
there are Gamesters now adays that hunt in Gloves, and though the Proverb says,
the mousing Cat preys not with Mittens, it here meets an exception; and let me
tell you, that more is given now for Gloves than formerly for Clothes. Reach me
one, said Critilo, that I may try it.

Having thus past the Streets of Hypocrisy, Ostentation, and Artifice, they
came at last to the Marketplace, on which was erected a famous Palace,
overtopping all the rest, and situated in the Heart and Center of the City, it
was spacious, but not uniform, nor of equal proportion, but all angles and
confusion, had no prospect nor equality, many Gates it had, but all false, and
those shut, and more Towers and Pinnacles than Babylon it self. The Windows
were green, a grateful color to the sight, promising fair, and deceiving most.
Here lived, or rather lay undiscovered that hidden Monarch of the World, who
one day appeared in public to honor certain Feasts which he had dedicated to
the deceived Vulgar, to whom it was not permitted to argue, or ask questions.
His sacred Majesty sat retired under the cautious covert of his Jealousy, or
Latices, and this day more especially he desired to sit close, intending to
entertain the People with the Subtleties, and Legerdemains of a cunning Jugler.
The People, for the more common view of all, had made a Ring to see these
Exploits, and swarming like Flies, settled themselves on the filth of evil
Customs, till they swelled with the ordure and filth which they had sucked from
Moral Wounds. At the Vulgar applauses mounted an eloquent Impostor, on a stage
above the people, and with more Impudence than good Manners, after an affected
Prologue, began to act such rare Subtleties, and Frauds, that an innumerable
number of people stood astonished at his devices. Amongst the rest of his
tricks, he persuaded some to open their Mouths, promising to fill them with
some rare Julip or Comfects, which they swallowing down, it gave them
immediately such a Vomit, that they speued forth most vile Corruption, and
beastly Ordure, ungrateful to themselves, and ridiculous to the Beholders. This
prattling Charlatan made them believe he had swallowed Cotton, and opening his
Mouth, there issued out a thick smoke, and flame of Fire greater than his Art
could quench. Sometimes he swallowed down Paper, anon he drew out Ribons from
his throat, but it was all a Cheat, and a mere deception of the eye. Andrenio
was much pleased to see this entertainment, and began to praise his Art. It is
well, said Critilo, he has deceived you amongst the rest, who notwithstanding
our Lectures of Morality, cannot yet distinguish Truth from Appearance. Who do
you think this confident Gypsy is? it is the false Politician, the cunning
Machiavil, who gives Potions of his false Aphorisms, to the greedy Throat, and
vitiated Palate of the Ignorant, which being plausible, appear true to them;
but being well examined, are no other than painted Corruption, and the gilded
Pills of Sin, and Vice, not so much the Plots of State, The cuning Iugler.
as devices fit for the Stalls of Beasts: he seems indeed to carry a mildness
in his lips, and suavity in his tongue, and yet breaths infernal Flames,
consumes good Manners and Customs, and burns up the flourishing condition of
Republiques; that which seems Ribons, are such Politic Laws as tie and bind up
the hands of Virtue, and loose the ravenous claws of Vice; the Paper he
swallowed is the Book and Pandects of Falsity, and that which in the form of
Truth invites so many Fools and Knaves to receive pernicious Maxims. Believe me
all here is deceit, it would be better to disengage our selves quickly and
retreat back; But Andrenio taken with these pastimes, desired another days
recreation here, having received much satisfaction with that which was past.
Scarce was it day (though there, seldom more than a dim twilight appears)
before the impatient Vulgar weary of their Beds, returned again to the same
Stage desirous of the second days Festival; the representation was a Masque of
various Apparitions, and Scenes, acted on the grand Theater of the Universe.
Andrenio was not backward to be one of the first Spectators, induced thither by
his own fancy, and Critilo assented thereunto that he might advance his
knowledge, and increase his experience. Here now, instead of Music, which is
the ravishment of our Senses, and usual Prologue to a Comedy, were the harsh
and untunable clatterings of Tongs, and Kettles, and instead of tuned
Instruments, and the ravishing Quavers of a Voice, the doleful sobs of deceived
Wretches grated their Ears, and in the conclusion, or last Act, entered a Man,
or one rather newly stripped out of his childish years, known by his Habit and
Fashion to be a Stranger, though ragged and naked, had no sooner (being one
whose Laments kept Consort with the Music) wiped off the tears from his eyes,
but instantly stepped out one to meet him as complemental as a Courtier, giving
him the welcome, and desiring his Commands wherein to serve him: He made large
profers to him, in what his Abilities could reach, or he desire in a strange
Country, and all with such an affluencey of Complement, that the credulous
Stranger turned that to Deeds, which he only promised in words. At first he
invited him to his House, a place as full of Inventions, as void of Realities,
where he freely presented him with Gifts, and stripping off his Rags seemed as
if he would perform the act of charity in clothing the naked; but yet with so
slight an art, that what his right hand seemed compassionately to bestow, his
left hand with as much cunning Jugled away: upon his Head he put a Hat with a
Band of Diamonds, but that on a sudden it was hooked away, without knowing how,
nor where, which he excused with a multitude of Complements; then he gave him a
rich Jewel, which with as much dexterity as the former, went the same way,
placing in the room a counterfeit Stone, anon he attired him with a costly
Robe, which in the twinkling of an eye, was converted to a Winding Sheet, a sad
Spectaclo, and at length being left in cuerpo, was laughed at by all there
present, who took no small delight to see the simplicity of the Forraigner so
wittily deceived. But whilst they were attentive on him, they observed not how
the art was operating on themselves, who insensibly had their Pockets picked,
lost their Cloaks, and looking one on the other, it was some comfort to them to
have Companions in the same misfortune; at length every one slunk away, more
troubled for their loss then ashamed of the Cheat. This was no sooner gone, but
entered another Wheedler, who promised more civility then the former, and like
an Epicure, treated of nothing but Sensualities, and to satisfy the enormous
Lusts of his own Appetite, in order to which he prepared a plentiful Table,
with all Varieties of Sallets, and quelquechoses, and set out Chairs for the
Guests, one whereof without farther ceremony taking the chief Seat, had it
slipped from under him, and so fell with the common shout of the whole Theater;
but suddenly a compassionate Woman applied her assistance to recover him, and
giving him her hand helped him up to be partaker in the remaining Banquet, but
the Meat was all imaginary and fantastic, the Pie was empty, and hollow, the
Gammon was dried to nothing, and the Birds, had only the names of Partridges
crude and without substance, and the Salt falling with him was a token of ill
luck, and the occasion that the Meat was without taste or savor; the Bread
which seemed of the purest Flower, was gritty and full of Sand, neither Bean,
nor any coursness sifted from it; the third course was of the Fruit of Sodom,
dry, and choaky, and the Cup they drank out of, full of leaks, and holes, that
they sucked more of Air, then Wine; Our Life a Tragedy.
their Music was but drunken Acclamations; at the midst of the Banquet, one
already satisfied glutted after his eager greediness, and sleepy with a full
Stomach, reposed his Body on a false support, which wanting force for the
weight he laid on it, gave way, and so falling, counted every step backwards,
till at last he came to the Earth, where he was stifled in the ill Air of Mire
and Filthiness. Of all the present Spectators of his Fall there was not one so
much as to assist him, until looking on all sides to see if any would
compassionate his case, he spied an old Man, whose age he thought was past the
wagery of Youth, to him he reached his hand, and desired his help, which he
readily gave, and not only assisted him with his hand, but lifted him on his
shoulders, but but he being lame with age, and no less false then the rest, in
a few paces, strumbled on his Crutches, and fell into a secret snare of
Flowers, and greeness of effeminacy, where he slited him off, catching at his
flying Coat, let his Body drop where it was no more seen, nor heard of; at
which the Mechanic Theater shouted with acclamations, and thereby performed
the Obsequies of his dying Memory. Every one, even Andrenio himself, clapped
their hands applauding the Jest, and Trick of the one, and the ridiculous Folly
of the other. Andrenio turning himself to Critilo perceived he did not only
laugh as the rest, but sighed to see the madness of this age. What is the
matter, said he, is it possible that you with so much affected singularity
should go in opposition to the common humor, when some laugh, you Weep, and in
their rejoicings you lament? It is true, said Critilo, for this has been
rather a torment, and spectacle to exercise my Patience, then a pastime for my
pleasure; and if your experience and judgment knew how to interpret these
passages, you would side with me, and be partaker in the same resentment. Why,
who is this, replied Andrenio, but a credulous Forraigner, whose folly is his
destruction, and his ears being open to all Stories, is subject to all Frauds,
and is paid with that gullery, which his indiscreet facility has deserved;
such an one I would rather deride, then pity, and in this case be rather a
Democritus, then an Heraclitus. Tell me, replied Critilo, if you were in his
condition, whom you thus despise, What would you say? Who I, said he, in his
condition, how is it possible, that I who am alive, healthful, and perhaps more
in my Wits than he, should so far outrun them as to arrive at this pitch of
madness? This is the error, replied Critilo, know then that this unfortunate
Stranger, is a Man as we all are, who enters Weeping on this Tragic Theater,
is encountered with the Songs, and Enchantments of Falsity, as a remedy of his
Melancholy: naked he comes in, and as empty goes out; which is all the
treatment he receives from ruinous Masters; his entrance is encountered by the
first Deceiver, which is the World, who proffers and complies in nothing, gives
and enriches him with the spoils of another, which he suddenly returns to
challenge again, and to draw away with one hand, what the other offered, that
all those Gifts, and Caresses of Fortune, at last like Smoke vanished in
nothing. The other, which invited his Appetite to the Feasts of Sensualities,
was a Deceiver, who importunately vexed this Guest, till he was fallen into the
Sins of Lust, and after as much tormented him, with the pangs of Conscience;
the Meat was without substance and nourishment, the Drink a poisonous Potion,
or at the best but a falsified Liquor, which fumed and intoxicated the Brain,
that cast him down, and his fall received with the Songs of Sorrow, and the
Acclamations of Misery, the vile Rabble of Fortune. Lastly, that old Hypocrite
the worst of all, inveterate with Malice, was Time, which tript up his heels,
and cast him into the Grave, where he left him dead, solitary, naked, and
forgotten: So that if we observe well, all take advantage on miserable Man. The
World deceives him, Life flatters him, Fortune derides him, Health forsakes
him, his Youth passes, Felicity withdraws, Years fly away, and Contented ones
come not, Time runs, his Life ends, Death catches him, the Grave devours him,
the Earth covers him, Putrefaction dissolves him, Oblivion swallows him, and he
who yesterday was a Man, to day is Dust, and to morrow nothing. But how long
shall we loose precious Time, let us return to our former Road, our straight
and direct way; for here is nothing that we can expect more, unless to entangle
our selves in a Labyrinth of Errors; but Andrenio, bewitched with this Vanity,
and having found gracious reception in the Palace, became an Idolator of this
Kings Greatness, which was fantastic, without reality or substance: The many
favors he had received there, and the good eye with which he was looked on by
the greatest Ministers, made him promise himself no small Preferment; he made
often means and friends to be admitted to the presence of his Majesty, and to
kiss his Feet, though he wanted those Parts, being an imperfect piece of
Nature. Critilo returned again to him, desiring and persuading with what
Arguments he could, his departure; and being at length wearied with his
importunity, and requests, at last consented to his demands: But being come to
the Gates of the City, with an intention to leave it. O unhappy Fortune! they
were stopped by the Guards, who suffered all to come in, and none to go forth,
so that they were forced to return again, and to lament the misery of this
Snare, into which they were fallen. Andrenio returned again to the former folly
of his ancient pretentions, who was yet entertained with large promises, but no
performance. Which Critilo objected as an argument to wean his affections. But
which way their escape was effected is related in the following Crisis,
together with the Acts of the famed Artemia.

The Eighth CRISIS.
The Miracles of Artemia.
A Resolute Courage is a good remedy against an unconstant Fortune, an humble
Nature will bear patiently the severity of Laws; Art, and Science overcomes the
unpolished rudeness of Nature, and a discreet Judgment is a secure protection
in all difficulties. For Art perfects Nature, is a second Being, endeavors to
adorn the first, and pretends to exceed the rude lines of her work with a
better Air, and neater Curiosity. Well may she glory to have created another
World, and reformed its rudeness, that what blots and errors Nature has
committed and blurred, Art has expunged, and been an assistant to her feeble
Operations. This without doubt was the employment of Man in Paradise, when God
invested him with a Power of Predominancy over the World, to rule and make up
the discomposed Breaches, which was but to polish Nature, and to teach rude
clownery a more artificial Behavior. So that art is a trimming of Nature, the
mount of this level Simplicity, and miraculous in her Works; so that if a
desert by the Gardners hand may be turned to a Paradise; Why should it not take
the same effect in the Soul, and cultivate the overgrown Soil of Man's Reason.
Let then our Roman Youth try these Mysteries, view the effects on Andrenio, who
now though clouded, and captivated in the confusions of this Court, is yet
ransomed with Felicity, and by Critilo's importunities obtained his Liberty.

There was a Queen, whose prodigious Miracles and Actions had celebrated her
praises in the farthest World; her Territories bordered on the Confines of this
King, so that such potent Neighbors, differently disposed, must necessarily
contract hatreds and distastes, which breaking out into Wars, often ended in a
bloody conclusion. This Lady was called (for never did she belie her name, or
actions) the wise, and discreet Artemia, famed in all Ages, and her Actions
chronicled to all Posterity. Every one spoke honorably of her, and with that
variety of adoration worshipped her, as the distinction of Religions, directed
their Devotions, and though the Wise, and Prudent were only those (and amongst
them the Duke del Infantado) who had procured a true and right notion of her
Worth; yet the Vulgar report spoke her to be a famous Medea, an Enchantress
whose Art worked not like the Charms of Circe, which metamorphos'd Men into
Beasts, but rather disinchanted, and regenerated the bewitched estate of Man
into original Reason. Some say they have seen enter into her House, something
without shape, a Brute, or Beast, which in a few days, she turned to so
different a Nature, that he became a polite Work, and piece of Rationality; she
made the blind Mole more acute in Sight then the spotted Linx; Crows she has
turned into the mild innocence of candid Doves, the timorous Hare has received
a Lions courage, and the ignoble Kite become as long Winged, and generous as
the Eagle: a Horse committed to her Charge, proceeded as an effect of her
School, eloquent in Speech, so that they generally reported, she taught Beasts
to speak, but of greater honor it was, that in convenient occasions she taught
them silence. She inspired life into Statues, and gave breath to appearing
Shadows. Out of lumps of Clay she produced Flesh; into giddy Fancies she
infused Gravity; the Dwarf she has raised to a Giants Stature, and turned
apish Postures to a composed Countenance; of a scoffing Jester she has made a
severe Cato, and by the strength of nourishment, she has nurtured a Pigmy
Infant to a lofty Tipheus, such as were Men only in Title, and Name; she has
really and substantially made them so; to the Blind she has given Sight, and
fixed the Lights of Reason like Argus's Eyes; she has quitted the prejudice of
the blind interested, and against their own advantage obliged them to profess
Verity. Men but of Straw and Clouts, she has turned into true and unfeigned
Figures; from the Viper she has plucked his Sting, and not only cleansed its
Venom, but made it an Antidote against other Poisons; her Art has been most
extolled, in the greatest difficulties, and her skill then most renowned, when
it worked on the bad Materials of incapable Subjects; for into dull Wits, she
has instilled Wisdom; she has not only endued the prosperous with Memory, but
the unhappy with Judgment and Discretion; a mere Fool she has made a Seneca;
an ignorant Citizen a high Politician, and an unskilful Soldier she advanced to
a knowing Commander. Of some deformed Monsters she has made Angels, a Miracle
that the Feminine Sex ought to esteem and gratefully to acknowledge. Of a
ruinous Desert she had often composed a delitious Garden, and gave so much virtue
to the Soil, that Trees began there to radicate where but lately a Shrub wanted
moisture. A Court, and City she had formed, and rendered as polite and neat as
Florence it self; nor was it impossible that her exploits should erect a
triumphant Rome. In this manner did every one discourse of her Actions, not as
if she had produced them by Miracle, but as plausible and honest effects of her
own Power.

Critilo had soon intelligence of this Lady, for his troubles obliging him to
seek a remedy, he was the more inquisitive to receive an exact insormation
concerning Artemia; and in regard that all the Arguments and Persuasions which
Friendship suggested were little available to the deaf Ears of Andrenio, he
resolved to depart, and to force his way against all difficulties, which he
found not so environed with obstacles, but that he, who was resolute to escape,
might find a door; from whence I say resolving to depart, he found an easier
passage then was expected, and remained as happy as contented, and being freed
from any detentions, followed the Road that directed to the desired Court of
Artemia, to consult about a remedy which might uncaptivate his beloved Friend,
whom so much the more he entertained in his Thoughts, by how much the farther
the distance of the way had separated him from his society. Many Passengers he
encountered in the way, who journied thither, some for curiosity, others for
their advantage and profit; the wisest and most observing, passed their Journey
with Stories of her Actions, how she had made Lions to couch at her feet, and
transformed them into humane Souls, and with muttering some few words
disinchanted Serpents, and raised their crawling Bowels from the dust, and
erected their Heads toward Heaven: how she had sucked out the Venom from the
Basilisks eyes, that an Infant might behold them without danger of emissions,
or infections, which dart into youthful tenderness; all which were things as
rare as profitable. All this is nothing, said another, her power can charm the
Sirens Songs, transform their lascivious Tongues into chaste Matrons, Chaste
Matrons
make the ravenous Wolf become a mild Turtle, and the highest that possibly can
be imagined a sensual Venus, take the Vow of a Vestal Virgin. All agreed that
this was very admirable and rare. The Artificial Palace of this Queen, was
situated on an eminent rising, where she commanded the Waters to ascend in
Streams in token of their obedience to her powerful Art, in imitation of which
that famous The Invention of Juanneto in the Water Works of Toledo.
Artist invented those Crystal Fountains, that arise like dews from the
running Tagus; her Garden was crowned with Flowers, surrounded with Beds of
Pinks, Prodigies of fragrancy and odours; for the Brambles produced Roses,
which saded not like other Flowers, but continued their lively blush, and sweet
smells, as rarities in all seasons of the year, the very Elms produced Pears,
and the Thorns Grapes, the choaky Aragon Pear changed its Nature, and turned
Mellow, and became more delitious then the Bergamot, and the dry Cork-Tree
sweated forth drops of Nectar; in the Pools were heard the continual harmony of
melodious Swans, which was an unknown Note to Critilo; for though the vulgar
Speech report them to sing their own Funeral Obsequies, yet so rare is one Song
from them, that none can say he has been an Auditor of their sadness; for they
being of a candid, and undeceiving Nature, if they sing, it must be in the
Satyrick Meteor of unsavory Truth, which so grates the cars of the generality,
that they think it more convenient to be silent, till either their Agony, and
Pangs of Conscience force them to breathe out Truth, or that then in their last
farewell they fear not to pronounce boldly their own Sense, fearing neither
punishment, nor loss of Estate; hence it is said, that such a Preacher, or that
Minister spoke clearly, that such a Secretary of State confessed and published
Secrets, and that this Councellor disclosed the most inward Thoughts of his
Breast, and breathed out Truth together with his life. At the Gate stood a
Lion, a gentle Porter, whose fierceness had been lately turned to the Mansitude
of a Lamb, and a Tiger to a Sheeps innocence; at the Balconies appeared
prattling Birds, who yet worked, and discoursed together with the prating
Parrot, who held the Distaff? The Cats and Domestic Animals of that House,
were not ravenous, nor given to prey, but Loyally acknowledged their mighty
Empress, and each day prostrating at her feet, renewed professions of
obedience. At her door attended multitudes of modest Virgins, well fashioned,
and comely, though Mechanics, and of mean Degree. The more Noble and ingenuous
Ladies, all Attendants of the discreet Artemia, were advanced to such Forms, as
some vertutuous Heroes thought fit to advance them, reparting unto every one
their peculiar Lessons and Places of Preferment; in judging of which, and of
every ones particular Abilities, the chief Arbiter employed was Don Vincentio
de Lastanosa. Her Mouth was little and modest, her Eyes full, and piercing, her
Speech though grave yet pleasing, and above all, her hands were of Sovereign
Quality, that they gave life to those on whom she laid them, and worked a
Miracle on benumbed Souls; her behavior was with a good air, and fashion, her
body handsomely proportioned; In fine, all she did, became her, and all her
actions were full of Art and Virtue. Critilo being arrived, had Audience of
her, with the greatest Civilities and Courtesy, that could be expressed, for
she quickly discovered his constancy and inclinations to Virtue, and judged of
his good Nature and Affability from the ingenuity of his Countenance, which is
the Index and Character of the Soul. Whilst Critilo approached near to kiss her
hands, she retired with some wonder backward, to see one such a Master in
Virtue, to enter the School, and one so wise to walk unaccompanied, in regard
that Society is affected by the Wise, and carries with it much of the
comeliness of the Graces, which are at least three in number; but he pressing
forward, let fall a flood of tears, and answering, said, I was not wont to walk
thus solitarily alone, for I had once another Companion, whom I now give over
for lost, by means of an ill Conductor, and a trateirous Guide, who in this
Country sometimes directed us, and at last destroyed us; in his behalf, I apply
my self to you, Thou sole Remedy of Misfortunes, petitioning your favor to
rescue my other self, who remains a distressed Captive, and the more
unfortunate, because I know not where, nor how, nor with whom, I lost him. If
you know not, replied she, where you left him, or with whom, how shall we know
where to find him? This I commit to the skill of your mysterious Art, said he,
for he remains in the Court of a famous King (whence I durst swear, he could
never be recovered) an Emperor universally powerful, and only singular in being
unknown. Hold, said she, I understand you now, without doubt he remains in the
great Babylon (but no Court) of my great enemy Falismund, in whose Territories
the whole World runs to confusion, and all hasten their end there, because they
know not, nor consider it. However take good Courage in a bad Fortune, and our
Policy shall not be wanting to countermine his deceit, and so calling one of
her chiefest Ministers, and greatest Confidents, who attended with great
readiness, and being a person of much Resolution, and Illustrious for his
Integrity, and clear Dealing, she committed to him the charge of this business.
Critilo having informed him concerning the particulars of all passages, Artemia
gave him directions, and therewith a Glass of pure Cristal, the famous
Workmanship of one of the seven Greeks, and having acquainted him of the
efficacy and virtue of it, and how to make use of it, she referred the rest to
his own management. Before he departed he clothed himself after the fashion of
that Country, in the Livery of Falimund, which was made up of many Folds,
Linings, Furrs, Counter-Furrs, covered with Coats, and Cassocks, and over all a
Cloak to hide Frauds; and in this manner he departed to comply with his
Commands and Confidence reposed in him.

Critilo was as much contented as favored in the Court of Artemia,
entertaining himself with improving his knowledge, and every day observing
Miraculous operations; for there he saw (what seemed impossible) a rugged Clown
transformed to a refined Courtier, a Mountanier to become a Gentleman, and
Principal in his Art; nor was it less wonderful, that a Biscayner should be
made an Eloquent Secretary. There were Cloaks of Baze, transformed into Velvet,
the Scholars rags of Poverty to eminent Purple, and the Novitiates Bonnet to an
Episcopal Mitre. Those who commanded in one part, she has given Commission for
another: the poor Shepherd of a thin Flock, she has made an universal Pastor:
Besides, her power knows no limits, but works most intense at the farthest
distance, for some have seen a Post-Boy promoted to Bethlem Gabor, and a
Lacquay, to a Lord of Tenza; and there are Witnesses how in former times the
Goad has grown into a Scepter, and a Scrivener become a Caesar; the shadows of
one night over-past she has so changed and altered the Faces of some, that
their intimate Friends have scarce taken acquaintance of their altered
countenances; their Judgments, Opinions, and Wills, have been changed, and
their Affections reformed. Men of wild, and and unconstant Brains have been
made grave and severe; and others of vain and empty Carriage have been
confirmed in solidity, and substance. In like manner she has supplied all the
defects and infirmities of the Body, for on some she has bestowed shoulders,
feet, hands; to others she has given eyes, teeth, and hair; but above all she
has cured the rotten Ulcers, and gangrings in the heart; all which are not
less than Miracles of her admired Art. But what Critilo most admired was to see
her shave, and hew an unfashioned Log, a Trunk, an unformed Lump, till she
brought it both to the Form and Rationality of a Man, which could speak,
discourse and reason in a manner as was worth the attention; but let us leave
him here a while entertained, and follow the discourse of this prudent
Minister, who is now on his journey, and pursuit of Andrenio, remaining as yet
in the Court of the famous Falismund.

Still did the drunken Surfeit of the Bacchanalian Feasts go forward, the
Streets were filled with Sports and Mascarades, walked with more licentiousness
then in Barcelona it self, both Men and Women sported in disguised Habits,
fashioned not only in the mode and cloak of Sin, but in the white attire of
Sanctity and Virtue, whereby the credulous simplicity of some was deluded,
though the Wise clear-sighted Men, knowing them well, advised them to unmask
themselves. It is a thing very observable, how desirous all were to cloth
themselves in foreign Habits, and some contrary or different to their Natures;
for the Fox put on the skin of the Lamb, the Serpent the feathers of the Dove,
Feigned Men.
the Usurer desired to paint his Avarice with the Twins of Charity, the
Adulterer to be styled the familiar Friend of the Husband, the Wolf ambitious
to be esteemed Abstemious, the Lion to be accounted as gentle and mild as the
Sheep, the Cat affected with a Roman Beard, would hear of nothing but Rome's
Customs, the Ass would imitate the Lion, whilst he is silent, and the angry
Dog that snarls, affected to show his Teeth in smiles and laughter. This
faithful Officer traveled in quest of Andrenio, through cross-ways, and
bypath, and though he was skilful, and wary enough to avoid errors, yet so
was he changed, that he knew not Critilo himself, for his Eyes were now clouded
with a mist, not fully open, as formerly, but dimmed, and a little obscured;
for the Officers of Falismund do chiefly design at first to vitiate or
debilitate the Sight of Strangers; for that besides his Voice began here to
fail him and to change both pronounciation, and accent, his Ears grew deaf, and
the rest of his Senses disturbed and distempered, that if man each hour has
his Changes, and in the evening is altered from his mornings Strength; what can
we expect but a Change in those who descend from Virtues more different
Climate, to the Center of Error and Falsity. But yet breaking through all
difficulties, with much industry and diligent enquiry he came at last to hear
of Andrenio, and one day found him employed in what he usually lost his hours,
in beholding others sport away their Wealth, and make an end both of their
Estate and Conscience: for there he stood gazing at a Match at Tennis, the most
natural and fashionable Entertainment of the World, which was performed in the
high Street by Parties of different Natures and Conditions: the one side was
black, and the other white, one tall, the other low, these rich, and the other
poor, and all dexterous Gamesters, and accustomed to the sport, in which they
eternally consumed their time, and thoughts. The Balls were puffed with wind, in
fashion like Men's heads, which the Ball-maker had filled with blasts, at the
eyes, and ears, making them as hollow as empty; thus one giving the word,
warned them to play with attention. All, said he, is but sport and madness, and
with that gave the Ball so hard a stroke, that it flew through the Air, by the
virtue of that violence which the blow had impressed on it, which another
taking at the rebound, returned it again without suffering it to rest from its
motion. Thus all endeavored to kick, and foot away this common Ball, for in
that consisted their dexterity and Victory. Sometimes it was tossed so high,
that it was out of sight, anon so low, that it bounded and trilled on the
ground, so as to bemire it self with the filth and ordure of the Earth; some
kicked it with their feet, others stroke with their hands, but the most with
Rackets in the form of tongues, The Game at Tennis.
that sometimes it mounted through the air, and again descending quarrelled
with the ground, suffering great varieties and changes of Fortune; one cried
out he won Fifteen, and so he did, for at those years Men gain Vice, and loose
the Treasures of Virtue; another said he had won Thirty, and gave the game for
his own; but these years do conclude the Set. In this manner they sported with
the Ball, till at last it fell down and burst, and then every one trampled on
it. Thus concluded the Game, some winning at their own cost, whilst others were
entertained with the view of this pastime. These, said Andrenio, turning
himself toward him, that sought for him, seem to be the Heads of Men. And so
they are, said he, and one of them is yours. Men I mean who have lost their
Brains, and filled their Sculls with Air, and Wind, with Dregs, and Cobwebs,
and fantastic Apparitions. The World throws up her Balls of Vanity, which the
elevated and happy Souls, catch and hurl down again to their contrary opposites
Trouble and Calamity: whilst miserable Man standing in the middle way,
sometimes depressed, Our Life again.
then exalted, and subject to the strokes of both, till at last he tumbles
burst into the mire, and filth of his Sepulcher. What art thou, said Andrenio,
that see so much? And, what art thou, replied he, that see so little? Thus
in discourse he began to insinuate himself into his favor, and first to gain
the Fort of his Will, the better to command and overawe his Understanding; so
that Andrenio discovered unto him his Breast, declaring his hopes, and those
great promises were made of obtaining his pretensions. But this cunning Artist
seeing his time and season, informed him, that the course he took was vain, and
would never gain him admittance to see this King, much less introduce him to a
private Audience; for to see him is to be effected by your own Will, and the
sole being of this Prince is to be unknown: the way his Ministers take to give
a view, and prospect of him, is to blind you first: Consider but awhile how
blind you are: What will you give me if this night, I show him to you? You do
but jest, said Andrenio. No, for I am most usually serious. All I shall desire
is, that when I discover him, you would view him well, observe, and eye his
humor. This, said Andrenio, is to desire me what I have so earnestly
entreated. So having appointed the hour, both punctually complied with their
promise, one as desirous of this Novelty, and the other as zealous of the
others deliverance. But whilst Andrenio believed he should be first introduced
into the favor of some intimate Ministers, he on the contrary perceived
himself lead another way, and carried always to a distance from the Court,
which made him give a stop; willing to return backward, suspecting a greater
Fraud, and Abuse in this then in those former Snares to which his Errors had
betrayed him. But this discreet Officer still detained him, Observe, said he,
and view through this Glass, what is denied us at a nearer Prospect; for
ascending up this Hill, a little raised from the ordinary level of the Earth,
we shall I know discover most hidden Secrets; with that he persuaded him to
ascend a little up, and place himself just opposite to the Windows of
Falismund. I think, said Andrenio, I see more then I did before, which much
encouraged his Instructor, who knew that to see, and understand, was the only
remedy, and cure for his sickness. Andrenio turned his eyes, and looked toward
the Palace, to see if he could espy any glimpse or appearance of that hidden
Majesty; but he perceived that it was all in vain, for the Windows were shut,
the Latices obstructed, and the Glass so thick as no sight could penetrate it.
This is not the way, said this grave Instructor, to behold, and take a prospect
on the World; but turning his back upon it, advised him to consider all in a
different nature, from what they appear, the inward and most natural Affections
having another force, then the outward Visions: with that he drew out his
Looking glass, and uncasing it of its Silken-cover, put it before his eyes, in
that manner, that the reflections of the Palace, whose view deceived the eyes
of common beholders, gave here a perfect description of all its infirmities.
Look now, said he, contemplate on it, and glut your longing desire with a full
enjoyment. With which Andrenio was so astonished, and amazed, that every Joint
began to tremble. What is the matter now, quoth the old Man? What is it
affrights, and dismays you? I see, said he, what I never desired, nor ever
believed; I see a Monster, the most horrible my life has seen, one that has
neither feet nor head, a most disproportionate piece of Nature, one part not
corresponding with the other, a prodigious shape of Monstrosity; his hands
cruel and brutish, a counterfeit composition of all kinds, and yet of none in
reality; his mouth like a Wolf, where never Truth has had a habitation, and is
so prodigious in all respects, that a Chimera is an Ass in comparison hereof;
take me, take me away, lest I faint with these affrighting Apparitions; but his
prudent Companion told him, and bid him observe well his Mouth, which at the
first glance represented the lively features of a Man, but in reality was a
Foxes Snout, his Middle a Serpent, his Body was so crooked, and his Bowels so
twisted, that he seemed as if he would vomit them up. His back was rising like
a Camels Bunch, his Nostrils stuffed with knobs, his upper parts like the Sirens
countenance, and his lower Supporters of no nobler substance then the rest of
his composure. Do you not see with what pain, and trouble he walks forward, how
he turns his neck, how a Bunch on his Back, depresseth his steps, how ill
inclined he bends, his Hands lame, his Feet splaed, his sight a-squint, his
Speech stammering, and scarce Intelligible. In fine, all is bad, to consummate
the full Catalogue of all imperfections. It is sufficient, said Andrenio, that
these deformities are so contrary to my Nature, that I start in beholding them.
And it is sufficient, said his Instructor, that it is with you, as it is with
others, who having once seen these things, they have enough, and never desire
to see them more. Deceit.
But who is this crowned Monster, demanded Andrenio? Who is this horrid
Spectacle of a King? This is one, replied he, as famous, as unknown, this is
one to whom the whole World yields obedience, the general discourse and speech
of all, whom all would rather visit in their Neighbors house, than entertain in
their own. This is that grand Hunter, who entraps the whole World in his
universal toil. This is that Lord who commands the half of the first year, and
afterward possesses himself of the other half. This is the powerful Commander
of weaker Heads, the Judge who condemns all those who make their appeal to his
Sentence. This is that universal Prince of all, not only of Men, but of Birds,
of Fish, of Brutes. In fine, this is that famous, that renowned, and that
common Deceit. Let us not then stay longer here, said Andrenio, for methinks my
affections are more estranged from him at this distance, then when I was nearer
to him. Hold, said his Tutor, this is not enough, but I would have you know and
view his whole Kindred, and Family, and so having laid aside the Glass, on a
sudden appeared a Fiend more mad, and furious then Orlando, an old Hag more
fraudulent and crafty then the Wife of Sempronio; Who is this Meguera, demanded
Andrenio? This is the Princes Mother, said she, who commands, and governs all,
which is Lie, and Falsity, Old, and Decrepid, and almost as ancient as the
World, being not long produced after its Creation. It seems, said Andrenio,
then that she is very ancient. O! the monstrous deformity of this Creature;
when she discovers her self, she halts so, that the slowest pace of those that
follow, may overtake her. What great attendance is that which accompanies her.
These are, said he, the whole World, her two Dwarfs are Yea, and No, which
waited on her in her Promises, Offers, Excuses, Complements, Favors, and
Flatteries. With that turning the Glass on the other side, they perceived an
honorable Train, if Antiquity, and ancient Blood may more ennoble a Family
then Honesty; for there was Ignorance the Grandmother, Malice the Spouse,
Folly the Sister, Calamities, Troubles, Discontents, Shame, Repentance,
Perdition, Confusion, Contempt, and the rest of the Brood, and spurious
Offspring of so vile a Parentage. Those who stand Attendants at her side, are
the Brethren, and Kindred of her nearest Blood, and Cheats, Wheedles, and
Intrigues, are her Grandchildren, born in this present Age. Art thou now
content Andrenio, demanded his Instructor? Content, No, but yet I am glad, I am
thus undeceived: Let us depart therefore from hence, for every minute seems to
me an age, and every thing produces to me a double torment. First by an
importunate desire to enjoy it, and after enjoyment to hate and abhor it. So
they went forth by the Gate of Light, from that Babel of Fraud. Howsoever
Andrenio was not yet fully satisfied, nor could he say that he was perfectly
recovered, complaining, that though he had found half of himself, yet the other
half was lost, that is, his Friend, or rather Brother, or his own self, for
such is a Friend, whose real sincerity knows no Falsehood. Friends.
If you have lost a Friend, said his Instructor, you have reason to lament your
loss: But tell me, was he discreet? Yes. Why then, fear not to recover him. He
told me, said Andrenio, he went to the Court of a wise Queen, called Artemia.
If he were wise, replied he, he must needs reside there, and let this banish
all farther care from your thoughts, for whether can he go, who has drawn you
from the confines of Deceit, but by the path of Wisdom to the Court of that
discerning Queen? Who is this famous Woman, this Lady so renowned in all parts
of the World, demanded Andrenio? With Reason you style her Queen, said his
Instructor; for there is no power without discretion, and who has that, has a
sufficient ability to command the World. But those who deduce her Pedigree from
the first original of her long descended Ancestors, account her rise from
Heaven it self, as being a ray and glimpse of that Glory which descends from
the immense Wisdom of the eternal Creator. Some call her Daughter of Time, and
Observation, the Sister of Experience, though others maintain her to be the
only Child of Necessity, Bastardising her Nobility with base Blood, whom I know
to be the Legitimate product of the Understanding. She is one who lived in
ancient days, no Child, nor Infant in age, but one who has found the greatest
favor in the Courts of the Mightiest Monarchs, her Original was in Assyria,
from thence she traveled into Egypt, and Caldea, much respected; she has been
in Athens, that great Theater of Greece, in Corinth, and Lacedemonia; and after
she was Crowned in Rome, where in a competition with Valor, she had the Laurel
judged, as due to her Deserts. The Goths, a barbarous and uncultivated People,
were contemners of her Sacred name, banishing not only her, but her devoted
Worshippers from the extent of their Dominions, with which barbarous Morism,
not yet fully satisfied, pretended to give a full Period to her being, had she
not retired to the protection, and sanctuary of the famous Tetrarchy of Charles
the Great, where she sat installed in as much Glory, and Luster, as ever she
had shined in the most Potent Empires. But now at the fame of this powerful and
dilated Empire of Spain, which possesses both the Worlds, she has changed her
Seat to this ample Center of her Estimation. But why, said Andrenio, does she
not rather choose the famous Court, for her Habitation, to whose Altar the
various Nations of her universal Dominions might resort, and the polite
Courtiers adore her in the nearest Devotion; then to fix her Tent here amidst
the converse of rustic Clownery, to enjoy only the Scrapes of the clouted
Shoe, and the homely respect of Country behavior? It is, replied his
Instructor, because she would have experience of all, having found of late, but
bad entertainment in Courts, caused by the countenance which is there given to
Vice, which has often times attempted to throw her from her Seat; nor is it
long since she lived amongst Courtiers, The Court.
where she found to her own damage, Persecutions, Misfortunes, and Malice, much
want of Truth, and excess of Fraud, for there is most Folly, where there is
most Presumption; and I my self have heard her say, that if there be most
Courtship there, here is most reality, if there most pastimes, here is most
leisure; there things pass away, here we enjoy them, and this is to live, and
that to die. Notwithstanding, An Intalian Proverb, La corte e morte.
replied Andrenio, I would rather live with Knaves, then Fools, for though both
be bad, yet Folly is an intolerable plague (I mean) to Understanding Men, this
I speak with reverence, and submission to wise Artemia. Her Palace began by
this time to appear, and shine with such a Splendour, that it represented
Heaven, engraven with Inscriptions, and crowned with Laurels of her Conquests,
where being now arrived, they were both received with many Wellcomes, but
Andrenio especially with Embraces; only security was required for his constant
perseverance in that profession, which is so severe, that it indulges no
permissions contrary to that Duty it imposes. Here to honor her two Guests,
Artemia worked many famous Miracles not only on others, but on them,
themselves, and more on Andrenio, being one who most wanted her Art: In a short
time he became a person well armed against other Encounters, that if one Lesson
of her Council, is able to make our Life happy, what then must the effect be in
him, of so many repeated Instructions, both of his Life and Fortune, wherein
she sprinkled some Lessons of a superior and spiritual Knowledge. Many times
she questioned Andrenio of his Life, and made him repeat the Story of his
strange Condition, when he first entered into the World; what effects the
Novelty of this universal Theater produced in him; but one thing she told
Andrenio, that she was most desirous to know, in what manner he first beheld
this admirable Creation, and how he admired these strange Prodigies, and who
was he, who gave the greatest satisfaction to his Reason. But what Andrenio
answered is related in the following Crisis.

The Ninth CRISIS.
The Moral Anatomy of Man.
THe ancient Ministers of Delphos had engraved on the Temple Walls, in Letters
of Gold, and the wise Philosophers had imprinted in larger Characters in their
Hearts, That recorded Sentence of Bias, Cognosce teipsum, Know thy self. For
none of all created Natures, errs in that way he should run, or misseth that
mark the race of his life should tend to, but Man only whose distemper is
chiefly caused by that noble Faculty of Free Will, nor can the knowledge of
other things avail, whilst Ignorance dwells at home, and misapprehends the
operations of it self. So often does he degenerate to the vile Servitude of a
Slave as often as he renders himself a Captive unto Vice. There is no Robber
pillages so much, nor oppresses the unwary Traveller, as the Ignorance of a
Man's self betrays him to be preyed on by others, which in many is such a height
of Stupidity, that they are neither sensible, how insensible they are, nor do
they observe how little they observe or consider. Yet Andrenio seems worthy to
be exempted from this common Folly, when he thus satisfied the curiosity of
Artemia.

Of all these wonders I saw, and varieties of satisfaction I that day enjoyed,
there was none which more affected my thoughts, (I speak it with some
astonishment, but yet with Truth) then my self, which the more I revolved, and
considered in my Understanding, the more I found it a subject to admire. This
is that, said Artemia, which I have longed to hear you relate, and was a Theme,
that the greatest Wit of our times has so much applauded, calling Man, above
all other Created Wonders, the greatest Prodigy, The greatest Prodigy.
and effect of Omnipotency. The same conclusion we may make from the general
Maxim of the principal Philosopher, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud
est magis Tale, That always is more, for whose sake another is such. So that if
for the sake of Man, Stones were created with so much Virtue, Flowers with so
much Beauty, and the Stars twinkling with so illustrious a Glory, in what
sphere of Beauty must Man shine above all these, to whose use and service they
were designed, and destinated, he is the Creature of all most Noble, the
Monarch of this great Palace of the world, invested in possession of the Earth,
having a Commission delivered to him as Governor, and Deputy to rule for the
best advantage both of himself and his Maker. At first, proceeded Andrenio, I
had only some rude Notions and Conceptions of my self, till light of the day
illuminated my thoughts, and the Cristals of a Fountain was the only Glass
wherein to contemplate and view the delineation of my parts, whereby I
perceived my proportion different from what my imagination fancied, which
caused in me so much admiration and delight, that I cannot express, with how
much content, and pleasure I was deceived. I reflected again on my self, and
methought I was not yet so foolishly ignorant as I was contemplative. The first
thing I observed was this composition of my whole Body, which is straight, and
direct, not inclining to one side, nor to the other. Man, said Artemia, was
created as a Servant of Heaven, and so he ought to have his Mind and Body
incline thither; for the material rectitude of the body often simpathizeth and
correspondeth with the Soul, that where accidents and mishaps have made a
deformity in the Members, the Mind has often been misshapen with them, and both
have become crooked and humoursome in their Actions. It is true, said Critilo,
for in a crooked composition does seldom dwell a plain, The Crooked.
and direct intention, in the nooks and bendings of a Body, we may fear some
folds and doublings in the Soul. The eyes which are dull and misty, are
accustomed to grow dim with Passion, whom we do not compassionate as we do
Blind-men, but rather fear them, as those who may kill with the Squints of an
indirect glance; Squint Eyes.
the Lame often stumble in the Road of Virtue, and their Will halting between
their Affections, makes these maimed Cripples, incapable to walk with equal
steps; but Reason and Understanding in better Judgments, has prevented the
Prognostics of such sinister infirmities.

The head, said Andrenio, I know not whether I speak improperly, I call the
Castle, and Fortress of the Soul, the Court of her Powers and Faculties. You
have reason, said Artemia; for as God is assistant, and present in all parts,
yet the Glory of his Court, is most apparent in the Celestial Jerusalem; so the
Soul manifests it self most in her superior Stations, which is a lively
resemblance of the heavenly Orbs. Who believes not this, let him look into the
Soul through the Windows of the Eyes, hear its Voice through the Mouth, and
speak to it through the Crevices of the Ears, the upper, and most eminent place
does best become the Authority of the Head, that its Office may be best
executed in its command and rule over other parts; and here I have observed,
said Critilo, with much attention, that though the parts of this Republique are
so numerous, that to every day of the year may be allotted a Bone, yet this
variety is with so much harmony, that there is no number that may not be
applied to it; for the Senses are five, the Humors four, the Powers three, and
the Eyes two, all which come to reduce themselves, and terminate in one common
Unity, and Center of the Head, resembling the first and Divine Mover, in whom
the whole Series and Degrees of Creatures come to end by an universal
dependence. The Understanding, said Artemia, possesses the most sublime and
purest spirituality of the Soul, and has no small interest in the Government
of the material Faculties, but as King, and Lord of the Actions of Life, soars
aloft, penetrates, subtiliseth, discourses, understands, and has fixed its
Throne in a candid and flexible disposition, the true Essence of the Soul,
banishing all obscurity and darkness from Conceptions, all prejudice from
Affections, and as a good natured Creature, encourages the gifts of docility,
with moderation, and prudence. The Memory looks on what is passed, and eyes
that behind, as the Understanding does that before; so that what we pass, we
still see, and because we cast that commonly behind which most concerns us,
every Wise man becomes a Ianus, and sees as well behind as before. The hair
seems to me, said Andrenio, a Gift bestowed on Man, more for his adornment,
than necessity. They are roots, replied Artemia, of this humane Tree, which
radicate him in Heaven, and by one hair he is drawn thither, there ought his
cares to be, and there he ought to receive his substantial nourishment. They
are the Index and Almanac of our Age, and change their color, as we our
affections; the Forehead is the heaven and sky of the Mind, which is sometimes
clouded, anon serene, and clear, the Seat of the Senses, where a shame of our
Crimes discovers it self, and is the place where Passions sport, and delight;
Anger in the stretched Forehead, Sadness in the fallen Countenance, Fear in the
Pase, Modesty in the Sanguine, Deceit in the wrinkled Brow, Good nature in the
Smooth, Immodesty in the Bald, and a good Capacity in the spacious Forehead.
But that which I most admired, said Andrenio, in this artisicial Fabric of Man
was his Eyes. Do you know, said Critilo, with what name that great Restorer of
Health styles them, Galen that retainer of flying Life, and searcher into
Nature, he calls them Divine parts, who in this spoke well; for if we observe,
they are invested with a kind of Divinity; which infuseth Veneration: they work
with a certain Universality, that they resemble Omnipotency, producing the
Images, The Eyes have something Divine.
and Species of external Objects in the intimate and inward rooms of the Soul:
they seem to be endued with a kind of Infinity, being present and assistant in
all places, and commanding at one instant the whole space, and circumference of
the Hemisphere. At one thing, said Andrenio, I have been much amused, that
though the Eyes see all, yet they see not themselves, nor those Beams that
usually obstruct them, a Condition and Paradise of Fools, who are acute Spies
of disorders in their Neighbors house, and Bats of Blindness in their own: It
were no small convenience if Man could retort his own Eyes upon himself that he
might start at his own deformity, moderate his passions, and compose himself
again into the beauty of that form, he has destroyed with the loss of his
original Perfection. It were of much advantage, said Artemia, if the Choleric
could come to see the lowering Frowns of his own Brow, and his own fury affright
himself; if the finical and amorous Lover could come to the sight of his
effeminate Gestures, and the rest of vain Fools to see their own Follies. But
wary Nature has omitted these small advantages, to prevent more dangerous
inconveniences; for could the Vain reflect and retort his Eyes, he would be
enamoured of himself, court and adore his own shadow, which how deformed and
monstrous soever, yet his fond affection would still limit, and confine, to the
sole prospect of himself, it is sufficient he can behold his own hands before
another, or view his Life, and attend to his Actions, which may be as many, as
perfect, that he can see his own Feet, and know where to direct them, that he
knows where to fix his footsteps, on a secure, and firm Foundation, this is the
chiefest use to employ our Eyes. It is true, replied Andrenio, but yet two Eyes
seem to me too small a Light for so spacious a Prospect, and this animate and
lively Palace could not have been better adorned then with ranks of this
precious Furniture, which since they are but two, their order might have been
better disposed, one fixed before, to see that which comes, and the other
behind, to consider what we have past. Some, said Critilo, have reproached
Nature, and accused her of this absurd oversight, and faigning a Man more
agreeable to their sense, fixed his Eyes both behind and before, which served
only to make him a Man of a double Countenance, and more double in his Actions,
then in his Sight. Were I to correct the faults of Nature, I would place these
Lights of the Soul on each side, and over the Port-holes of his Ears, which
should neither by day, nor night close their Lids to the softness of Sleep,
that so they might see with whom they associate and link their sides in a
friendly familiarity, so would not many be easily subject to the deadly
Plurisie, a Disease, as Epidemical, as Mortal: so might Man, see with whom he
speaks, know with whom he sides, Rules most important for the Government of
Life, it being better to be deserted, and left to our own heads, then to be
subjected to the whispers of bad advice; but know, that two eyes well employed
are sufficient for our necessities, which looking forward, spy the coming of
bolder dangers, and with a retorted glance see the timorous assault of backward
Treasons. One wink in an attentive beholder is sufficient to make discovery in
the most hidden Secrets; and therefore the eyes were made in the form of
Spheres, the most proper figure, and fittest for sight, they being of a square
have no corners to dim any part or virtue of their light; their situation is
proper also, both to look upwards, and before them, for if besides our proper
Eyes others were set in the hinder parts of the head, whilst some looked
upwards toward Heaven, others might look to the Earth and breed a schism, and
dissension in our Affections: But another Wonder I have observed of them, said
Andrenio, that in a foolish tenderness, and good Nature they dissolve in tears,
for what remedy is it to Weep, or can the showers of our Eyes prevent, and
drown our misfortunes? let us not sigh, but laugh at the World, and where our
Policy cannot avail us, let our contempt, and scorn despise its Malice. Alas!
(said Artemia) the Eyes are the first Messengers of our bad news, who having
the first notice, are the first lamenters; who is not sensible of troubles, is
dead in a Stoic stupidity, Proverbs.
and who heaps up Wisdom, heaps up Sorrow; common Laughter is most proper for
the foolish Mouth, and that which offends most often. The Eyes are the faithful
doors to let in Verity, in disposing of which Nature was so scrupulous and
cautious, that she has not only fixed them in the same order, but united them
in exercise of the same act, she suffers not one to see alone, but makes one a
Witness for the other, that they may consent in the same operation; one cannot
see white, and the other black, but are such twins both in color, and bigness,
that one equivocates the other, and their agreement dissembles an Unity. In
fine, said Critilo, the Eyes are in the Body, as those grand Luminaries are in
Heaven, and the Understanding in the Soul, they supply the defects of other
Senses, but all are not able to make up the infirmities and imperfections of
them. They do not only see, but hear, speak, demand, answer, contend, affright,
embrace, attract, consider, and perform the acts and offices of all, and what
is most considerable, their vigor never abates by seeing, as neither do the
indefatigable pains of State Ministers, who are the Eyes, and sight of the
public Welfare. Methodically has provident Nature, proceeded said Andrenio,
in reparting to every Sense, their rank and order, as befits the Dignity and
Honor of their several Excellencies. Some it has disposed in the most
honorable Seats, and fixed the sublime operations of life in the public view,
and eye of the World, and contrarily seated the homely and mean Works of
necessity in more occult places, the better with Modesty to conceal their
uncomeliness. In this, said Critilo, she has reconciled Honesty with Decency,
and particularly in that convenient disposure of the Mothers Breasts, by which
with much decency she tenders nourishment to the unweaned Infant. In the next
place to the Eyes, said Andrenio, the Ears challenge their degree, which are
well disposed in a rank so high, but their being placed on each side, seems, I
must confess inconvenient to me, it being a means to lay them open, and
facilitate an entrance to introduce Deceit: for as Truth always meets us face
to face, so Fraud, Traytor-like, crowds to one side, and insinuates
entertainment in to unwary Ears. Would not, the Ears, be better and more
securely seated under the Eyes? by which means they might first examine
treacherous Spies, and call them to a Parley, before they admit them into the
Bowels of the City? How well you understand it, said Artemia, were the Eyes in
that place you speak of, that small remainder of Truth would be banished out of
the World, The Hearing.
together with the rest; let them rather be separated ten Fingers breadths from
the Sight, or placed in the hinder parts, for that is not Truth is flattered to
our Faces, but what proceeds from Sincerity, and is without Passion, spoken
behind our backs. How well do you think Justice would proceed, should she see
that decency, which excuses her, the riches that defend her, the nobility which
pleads her cause, the authority which intercedes, and the abilities of other
Ministers whose Rhetoric charms her Adversaries? It is better, that she is
blind, and most convenient for her own, and others advantage: Our Ears stand
well in this Mean, not before, lest they should hear too soon, nor behind, lest
they should hear too late. Another thing, replied Andrenio, has busied and
troubled my thoughts to resolve, which is, that being the Eyes have the
convenience of those fringed Curtains, to bar out the importunate entrance of
unwelcome Spectacles, and to close themselves against the view of displeasing
Objects: Why should not also the Ears have the same privilege, and shut a door
against the ribaldry of vain discourse, become Serpents, and deaf to Charms,
and so excuse impertinent Follies, and intercept at the entrance relations of
bad news, and sorrow, the chief destroyer and ruin of our Lives. I cannot, I
must confess, but condemn Natures Error in this, especially when I see the
Tongues rashness curbed within the Wall of Reason, and as an unruly Beast
imprisoned within the Grates of Teeth, and Doors of the Lips. Why then should
the Eyes and Mouth have this advantage, above the Hearing, which seems more
needful of it, as being most subject to the danger of Errors? Upon no terms,
said Artemia, will Nature consent to shut the free and open passage of the
Ears, which should always be ready to admit an entertainment to the welcome
access and entrance of Instruction. So that Wise nature is not only content to
unhinge these Doors, and unlock the Bars which interrupt the passage, but has
made them the only immovable parts of Man, as esteeming the least diversion
from their proper office, but time misspent, and leisure prejudicial to Man's
condition. These watch, and every hour give audience, that when the other
Senses weariedly retire to their repose, and rest, these careful Sentinels of
the Soul, attend their guards, and give alarm at the approach of danger; the
Soul might sleep in an eternal lethargy, were not this watchful Sense an early
Waker at the mornings approach. There is this difference between Sight, and
Hearing, that the Eyes seek the Species of distinct Objects, how and when they
will, but Sounds and Voices move first, and are received without choice into
the Organs of the Ears. The Objects of Sight are permanent, and durable, and
though at present we see them not, yet they vanish not away, and may be visible
at a second review; but Sound flies like time, and who meets not the Fore-lock
in its approaching steps, Post est occasio calva.
shall like bald Occasion, too late seek detention in his past progress; its
proper the Tongue should have a double fence, and lined Walls to enclose it,
and the Ears two passages of free entrance; for we ought in prudence to hear
twice more then our Tongues should utter. I am not ignorant, that the half of
what our Ears are Auditors is impertinent, and fruitless, for which wise Men
have a singular remedy, and that is by making themselves deaf, or composing
wise Men's Ears, which is a rare invention and of great advantage; for there are
some shrill sounds of unprofitable reasoning without Reason, that so thin a
covering as an Eyelid would not be sufficient proof against its penetrating
violence, and then we have need to stop our Hearing with both our hands, whose
actions as they often express our Minds, and open the Ears of others, so also
are they helpful to stop our own: Let the Serpent teach us Subtlety in this,
who stops one ear by laying it close to the other, and the other with his Fall
denying entrance to bewitching Charms. You cannot deny, urged Andrenio, that
were there a guard or stoppage in the ear, there would not be so free a passage
for dangerous Enemies, for the hissings of venomous Serpents, for Songs of
deceitful Sirens, for flattering Schisms, Discords, and Dissentions, and other
Monsters, who crowd to get admission at this entrance. You have reason, said
Artemia, and therefore has Nature formed the Ears like a Colender, or Strainer
of Words, making them almost rational and able to judge of Verity; and if you
observe, she has before hand prevented this inconvenience, and formed the
organ of this Sense with so many turns, and twines of Labyrinth, that they
seem the Portcullis and Trenches of a Fortress, in which words are so drained
and examined, that there is time and opportunity sufficient to bring them to
the touchstone and test of Reason. There is also within a Bell, which beaten on
by the Hammer of Words, gives a certain sound of their Truth, or Falsity: Have
thou never observed the bitterness of that Choleric humor which purges forth
at these parts; and can you agree with the Vulgar Errors, that it only sweats
forth as Birdlime to dam up an entrance from Flies, and blinder Animals? Know
that Nature had thoughts of higher preventions then these, and intentions by
this to detain the gentle words of Circes, and the smiling breath of the
deceiving Flatterer, whose Palates being displeased with this wholesome
bitterness, which is tempered with the unsavory relish of discretion, are here
stopped, and retained: and therefore, considered Critilo, that Surfeit which
many take with a glut of sugared words, is only curable by this antidote of
bitterness. In fine, there are two Ears, that so a wise man may keep one
unviolated, though the other be affected with Falsity; for there is a first and
a second information, that if one Ear be prepossessed by a too forward and rain
reception, the other may be yet conserved for Truth, which is commonly
manifested by the latter Relation. The smell, said Andrenio, seems to me a
Sense more delightful then profitable, and more requisite to feast and indulge
our Genius, Acute Sent.
then to serve our necessities, and therefore it should not advance its self to
the third degree, and displace others of more importance. O yes! replied
Artemia, for this is a Sense of greatest acuteness, and is the reason why the
Nostrils our whole life long are in continual growth, and that through the same
Organ of our Nostrils are breathed the respirations of life, which makes our
Smell as necessary as to live. This distinguishes perfumed Odours, from the
displeasing stenches of Corruption, and comforts the Soul with the cheerful
fragancy of a good Fame, which is the nourishment of it; a corrupted Air
infuseth a pestilentious noisomness, and infection to the Bowels, which a
sagacious and acute Nose discerns, and knows the comfortable refreshments of a
sweet Savor, and the danger of poisonous Sents, and Camerines of Customs,
which use to envenome, and infect the Soul; it is the Guide of the Blind, and
tells him what Meat is tainted, and what is wholesome, and is our Taster before
we eat; it is that Sense which only enjoys the fragrant respirations of
Flowers, and refreshes the Brain with the odoriserous Smells of those
Perfumes, which Virtues, Glory, and Fame fend out from their natural sweetness.
We may know the principal Worthies of our time, in whom the Blood of true
Nobility resides, not by their Perfumed Skins, and Ambar Ointments, but by
their Parts and Excellency of their Abilities, which cast out a fragrancy of
Odours from them, unlike the clownish blasts of Garlic, which the Plebeian
breaths. With much reason, said Andrenio, has provident Nature endued each
Faculty with a double power, bestowing several Offices on one, not to multiply
Agents: So that not only the Nostrils serve for their principal use, but in a
more servile condition, are the channel to convey away the Brains
superfluities. This is true, said Critilo, in Children, but in Men of riper
years, they rather serve for a channel to convey the passions, and the swelling
ventosities of Vanity, which belch through them, and that Impostume of the
Head, which usually causes a Giddiness, and Meagrum, vents and discharges it
self by this way. Through these also are eased the oppressions of the Heart,
and steams evaporate from the Stomach. The Nose is a Feature that much adorns
the proportion of the Face, The Nose.
and is the Pin of the Souls Dial, which points at the temperature of its
Nature; a Lions Nose denotes Valor, an Eagles Beak Generosity, a Long one
Gentleness, the Sharp Ingenuity, and the Thick Folly.

Having already treated of Sight, Hearing, and Smelling, the next, considered
Andrenio, is Speech. The Mouth seems to me the principal Gate, and Door of the
Soul; for as through the passage of the Senses, The Mouth.
Objects enter, so this is reserved only with respect, for the Mind to go
forth, and to manifest her self by the help of her expressions. It is true,
said Artemia, for in this artificial composure of Man's countenance, the Mouth
is the Gate of its Royal Person, and the Teeth the Guards, all set and composed
in a decent rank, and order; in this resides the best and worst part of Man,
which is his Tongue, having its root radicated in the Heart. There is one
thing, said Andrenio, I have beaten my Brains to understand, What was the
intent of wise Nature in making our Speech and Eating to have one and the same
instrument for both operations; that our words, which are most peculiar and
proper to Man, should dwell in the same office, wherein is acted and framed the
vile occupation, and exercise of Brutes; were it only those inconveniences that
proceed from hence, it were enough to persuade us of Natures oversight; were it
only that change of the Tongues accent, which sometimes speaks smooth, and
gentle, and anon with bitterness, and choler breathes out rage, and varies with
the relish of material Food; this makes the Tongue trip and stammer, equivocate
and talk at large, that it were better this nobler Member were set apart, and
consecrated as a Temple of the Souls Oracle. Hold, said Critilo, the Argument
you urge well, and a little more difficulty would puzzle my Reason to resolve;
but howsoever, I appeal to the Providence of Heaven, which governs, and directs
the Function of Nature; and therefore I may boldly affirm the convenience which
Speech enjoys, by joining Houses, and Mansions, with their taste, that so the
relish may examine and tell us the nature of our words, before we pronounce
them, inform us how sweet or bitter they are, chew and prove them, whether they
be substantial, and accordingly sweeten those which may embitter, and dress,
and comfect them for the Stomach of the receivers; besides the Tongue is
employed in the taste and eating; for Speech well moderated, ought not to be so
long, but that the instrument of it may afford time for other Duties.

Actions ought to follow, or accompany our words, and our hands readily to
execute that which our mouth promises. Is it, said Andrenio, that the Hands
are called Manus, Diligent Hands.
from Maneo, denoting by an antiphrasis their duty of continual employment.
They are called so, replied Critilo, not from their continual employment, and
unwearied motion, but from that constant permanency they ought to retain in
their travels, or because they are the Fountain from whence Manare, to flow.
spring our works of Piety, and they like branches from the Hearts roots, which
are laden with Fruit of famous, and immortal Actions: by their Palms are
obtained victorious Laurels, and they are the Source from whence distill the
precious sweat of heroic Labors, and the Ink which memorizeth their Actions
to all Posterity. Do thou not consider, and admire their artificial, and
commodious composure, which are as Slaves and Servants to the other Members,
and are fitted to serve all our necessities? they help us to hear, assist our
Tongue, and give a life, and vigor to our Actions; they administer Meat to our
Mouths, Flowers to our Smell; they are prospectives to strengthen our sight in
a large view, and help some so to discourse and reason, as if their Genius and
Wit were more lodged in their Hands, then in their brain. So that they are the
officious Ministers to all our Necessities, they defend us, clean us, cloth
us, cure, and protect us, and sometimes rub, and ease our itching: All which
offices, said Artemia, because they agree with Reason, Nature has ordained
them in number, weight, and measure; In the ten Fingers of the Hand consists
the beginning and principals on which numbers are founded; So that all Nations
count till they arrive to Ten, afterward proceed in Multiplication. Weight it
self is judged by waving with the hand, and guessing at its quantity. This
punctuality is necessary for information of Man who operates in number, weight,
and measure; and to raise our thoughts yet higher, the Tables of the Law were
included in Ten Precepts, that Men might not only carry them in their Heart,
but that so small a bulk might be likewise portable in the Hand. These put in
execution, the intent of the Soul, which are not imprinted on those common
lines which divide the Palms, but signified and made manifest by their own
Works. These are they which form our Letters, and with silence speak in
Writings, the three principal Fingers concurring with an admirable dexterity in
the several Offices, the first fortifies the Motion, the Thumb teaches, and the
Middle as corresponding with the Heart, rules and directs; that our Writing may
record the Testimonies of Valor, Subtlety and Truth; since then that the hands
put the Seal and Stamp on Virtue, it is no wonder if other Members of the body
should in Courtesy, and Estimation, seal them to their Lips, and give them a
Besolas Manos, in gratitude for their Works of Virtue. And because we now
anatomatize Man, and contemplate from head to foot his Mysterious being; it
would not be from our purpose to cast our Eyes on his Feet, and consider his
steps and progress as he moves; the Feet are the Pillars and Foundation on
which the Body is established, The firmness of the Feet.
they tread the Earth, and trample on it in contempt; they make it serviceable
to the Bodies burden, and measure out the paces of their stage, that they may
tread on a plain, and secure foundation. I observe, said Andrenio, and admire
too the firmness with which Nature has planted the Body, for lest it should
fall forward, it has placed the Feet before, nor stagger on either side, it
has underpropt it with equal supports, but yet you cannot deny, but she has
negligently overseen the dangerous Precipice of a backward relapse, where the
hands cannot with their usual diligence apply themselves to their help; which
inconveniency might be easily remedied by enlarging the same proportion of the
Feet as much behind, as before. This is but a fond conceit, replied Artemia,
for this would give Men occasion to retreat backward from the path of Virtue,
whose unconstant humor being apt to retire, would give a fuller turn, had they
found in Nature encouragements for this motion.

Such is the outward proportion of Man, and visible Anatomy, whose harmony of
powers, proportion of Virtues, agreement of affections, and passions, is a more
interior inspection, and must be referred to Philosophical conclusions. Yet
above all, I would have you know, and admire that principal part of Man, the
Original of all the rest, the Fountain and Spring of Life, which is the Heart.
The Heart, replied Andrenio, What is that? and where is it placed? It is,
answered Artemia, the King of other Members, and therefore is placed in the
Center of his Dominions, The Heart.
greatly and inwardly conserved, and is sometimes in Latin called Cura, or
Care; Cor.
for that which rules and governs, is always placed in the Center. It has also
Offices, the one is to be the Fountain of Life, infusing strength and courage,
by its Spirit, into other parts, and the other, which is the principal, to be
the cause of Affection, and in which are blown into a Flame the smallest
sparks, and warmth of Love; and therefore, considered Critilo, it is always
scorched like the Phoenix; and its place, proceeded Artemia, is fixed in the
middle, denoting how much our Affections ought to be moderated, and not to
exceed the bounds of Reason. Its form is with a point downwards, as if an
Indivisibility were enough to touch the Earth, but upwards is of a spacious
breadth, enlarging it self to receive the bounty of Heaven, and greedy to suck
those dews, which can only content, and satisfy the Soul; it has the Systole,
and the Diastole. Wings not only to fan or cool its boiling heat, but also to
raise it higher, and make it soar to the upper Region; its color is ruddy and
sanguine, the Emblem of Charity, and from hence springs the best Blood, to show
that noble Persons should be qualified with best Hearts. It was never so
unworthy as to betray, though so indiscreet as to err, by being more careful
to prevent misfortunes, then cautious against the surprise of Felicity; but
what we ought most to esteem, is its cleanness, not engendring Excrements, like
the crude digestion of other parts, it having an obligation on it of Purity,
especially in the formality of Life, which makes it breathe and pant after the
most sublime perfection. In this manner let us leave the wise Artemia in
Philosophical discourses, applauded by the Acclamations of her Scholars, whilst
we consider the inventions, and policy of deceiving Falismund.

Who being vexed, for the escape of Andrenio, and some others, as blind as he,
from the toils of his Labyrinth, both out of sense of scandal to his
Reputation, and also of that ill consequence it might bring by its example,
made him treat of the fullest extremity, and excess of revenge. To which
purpose he dealt first with Envy, the assassinate and destroyer of the Good, a
subject sit to be made Actor of the most horrid Villainies, and to her he
communicated the ground of his distastes, and entrusted to her Art the sowing
of the Weeds of Malice, and planting this Root of Anger amongst the rabble and
scum of Vice. This was not a Work very difficult to so skilful an Artist, being
assisted also by that acquaintance and familiarity which Malice had obtained
amongst the Vulgar, by a long habitation in their homely Cottages, ever since
which time, bad Intention, the Mother of the two Sisters, Flattery and Malice,
drew out their brood from the nest of their nothing, to advance them with as
much Ambition as the most aspiring Vice: So Flattery fled to the Court, not the
direct way, but yet at last arrived there, where she was introduced with the
welcome entertainment of all, that in few hours she became intimate and privy
to all Consults; but Malice had not so good encouragement, or hopes to
Preferment, being neither well spoken of nor courteously looked on, an affront
sufficient to burst with Choler her haughty Stomach, and her Speech and Liberty
being restrained, and uncivilly treated, she took a resolution of voluntary
Banishment, and changed her station to inhabit with the rural Clowns, where she
was received with a dull kindness, and adored with a devotion of fond
simplicity. There she might triumph, because speak, discourse at large, and in
rude appellations vent the rancour of Malice, which she calls the plain dialect
of evident Truth; with this Policy she insinuated so much into the esteem of
the people, that they resolved to reserve her, from any that might ravish her
from them; and therefore, have buried her within their own Bowels, where those
are sure to find her, who least desire her. In this opportune conjuncture came
Envy, who began to sow her Seeds, and to affect people with a sense of anger
against Artemia. She called her another Circes, or one worse, and that she
would appear most deformed, were that cloak of Pretensions stripped from her
nakedness. That she had destroyed Nature, robbed her of her true Solidity, and
plain Simplicity, and by a fond affectation, defaced her original Comeliness;
taxed her of Ambitious Covetousness, in depressing Nature, and usurping the
Birthright of a Legitimate Heir. Know that since the Government of this feigned
Queen has been introduced in the World, all is adulterated and corrupted; so
that every thing bears another Face, her whole proceedings being effects of
Fraud and Falsity: hence it is that Men are not what they were wont, nor worthy
to be accounted the Race of former Ages; for Antiquity, as it is venerable, so
it is best, and Men with time grow worse, having lost the candid simplicity of
Infants, are also stripped of that Livery, and Badge of Innocence. Farewell that
noble Offspring of ancient Worthies, those defenders of Truth, and Solidity,
whose Yea, was Yea, and No, no: but now contrarily Men are become malicious,
and revengeful, all is Deceit, and Policy, which they style with the honorable
Title of Artifice; so that he who is most dextrous in this, has the greatest
advantage in all exercises, he is renowned both in Arms, and Science, and to
this pitch and height has Sin proceeded, that Malice is now more predominant
in a Child of seven years, then formerly in a Man of Seventy. Women from top to
toe, are a continued tale and blot of Falsity, as spruce and pert they are as
Daws, full of Policy and alluring Fraud; this feigned Queen subverts
Republiques, destroys Families, exhausts the most immense Treasures, gives
encouragement to the vanity of Modes, and Fashions, and consumes more in the
adorning of one Woman, then formerly was required to cover and cloth a Nation,
with the honest and simple Garments of Necessity. In our Diet she has taught
us to vitiate our Palates with luxurious Dishes, of which formerly our
simplicity was ignorant, and knew no more then to satisfy Nature, and not by
adulterated Meats to provoke Appetite to be overcharged in Gluttony: she boasts
that Men are not Men but by her polishment, who only makes them vicious and
dissolute, blinding their Eyes with false Apparitions, giving no occasion for
their Judgment to interpose it self, as a Sun to scatter these Clouds of
Falsity. With these scandalous reproaches, she so incited the revenge of her
vile Multitude, that all with an unanimous consent conspired to ruinate her
Palace, exclaiming, and crying, Let the Witch die. And scarce could Moderation
prevail to keep off these Flames, which threatened its Ashes. With this the Wise
Queen perceived the Vulgar to be her enemies, and though the presence of daring
Champions were then wanting, her own Policy supplied the defect. But the manner
of her Conquest, and the Stratagems by which she triumphed, and was delivered
from the dangers of the base and rude Rabble, is delivered in the following
Crisis.

The Tenth CRISIS.
The dangerous passage for Robberies.
IT is the vulgar Error of preposterous Man to make Ends of the Means, and
Means of the End; for that Country which should only serve for a passage to
him, he takes up for his Habitation, and makes that his Inn, which should only
be the way of his Pilgrimage: Men often begin where they should end, and end
where they should begin. Wise and provident Nature introduced delights for
diversion, whereby the operations of life might be eased, and aleviated, and we
enabled to run the sedious course of this World without faintness, or
discouragement; but here it is, where Man does most confound, and dishonor
himself, becomes more Brute than the Beasts, degenerates from himself, in
making an epicurial pleasure the ultimate term, and his life subservient to a
bestial appetite: he eats not now that he may live, but he lives that he may
eat; he rests not to recover new strength for next days labor, but labors not
that he may be insensibly surprised with drowsiness; his Lust provokes him not
to an intention of propagating his own Species, but of indulging his Luxury; he
studies not to know, but to forget, and be acquainted with himself; he makes
not use of his Tongue for necessity, but to please himself with the vanity of
his own talk, so that he makes not Recreations a means to continue life, but
his life a means to continue pleasure; hence it is, that all Vices have made
Delight their General; this is the Defender of the Appetite, the Captain of the
Passions, which violently drags Men to accompany Sin, and lays a force on their
yielding Affections; let then the wise Reader observe, and learn to reform this
common absurdity, and that he may be admonished by the misfortunes of another,
let him observe those accidents which happened to the discreet Critilo, and
unwary Andrenio.

How long, said angry Artemia, (then most constant, when most disturbed) shall
the neglect of this incult Vulgar, despise, and contemn my Lectures? How long
shall inhumane barbarity reproach and scorn my Wisdom? How long will it be
before your own ignorant audacity shall confound it self? By Heaven I swear,
that since your boldness has proceeded to this uncivil Language, The
punishment of Fools.
as to style me with the name of Enchantress, and Circes; this very night in
chastisement of your Folly, I will raise so powerful a Conspiracy, that the
very Sun shall revenge my Quarrel, who withdrawing the comfort of his bright
rays, shall commit you to the punishment of thick darkness, which is the
blindness of your own Vulgarity. Thus did she treat them as their Folly
deserved; for knowing that in base Spirits severity prevails more then
courtesy, she stroke in them a terror of her power, and so amazed them with
the persuasion that her Fame was obtained only by Magic Enchantments; that
they grew cold and faint in their purposes, and changed the resolution of
assaulting her Palace. Their Courage began then to fail them, when they saw the
Sun really to withdraw his Light, and by Points to eclipse himself in their
Hemisphere, fearing an Earthquake might follow, as usually the Elements
conspire to perfect the destruction of a falling Adversary; thus all
discouraged fled, as is ordinary in all commotions of the people, whose sudden
Insurrections raised with heat, and fury, as soon vanish with a panick terror,
so they stumbled in the dark, and not distinguishing their Foes, converted
their Swords one against another, and so ended the War in a miserable
slaughter. By this Victory Artemia found opportunity with the rest of her
instructed Family to escape from the midst of these barbarous Incendiaries, and
to deliver the Treasures of curious observation, and Jewels inveloped in the
eternal and memorable Writings of unperishable Philosophers, and other esteemed
leaves from the rapacious hands of envious Ignorance. And so went they forth,
assisting with Instructions our two Travelers Critilo, and Andrenio; the
latter of which amazed at so strange a Miracle, believed her Magic extended so
far as to influence the Stars, and that the Sun it self was obedient to her
Charms, which made him the more reverence and adore her, and even to over act
his part in the praises he gave her. But Critilo undeceived him, telling him,
that this Eclipse of the Sun was but an effect of the Celestial motion, which
Artemia foreseeing by her Astronomical knowledge, took advantage of this
occasion, calling that the power of her Art, which was only the effect and
course of Natnre.

Artemia consulted much with her learned Disciples, in what part of the World
to fix her residence, all agreeing in an unanimous resolution no more to enter
into Country Villages, and therefore propounded diverse places for their secure
and convenient habitation: many times she propounded Lisbon, Lisbon.
not only for being the most populous place of Spain, but one also of the three
Empires of Europe; for if other Cities have some appellations from their
chiefest excellencies, in this may be united, and meet the Glories of all as in
a common Center, and bear the name of faithful, rich, healthful, and abundant;
for never was a Portugues a Fool, whose first. Founder was the wise Ulysses;
nor was the fantastical humor of the Nation so much an obstacle to her
entrance, as was the confusion there, which is contrary to the quietness which
Speculation requires. Again, she cast her thoughts upon the Royal Madrid,
Madrid a Village, and not a City.
the Center of Monarchy, where Perfections concur to the hieght and chiefest
eminencies, but yet she could not fix her choice on that which her Stomach
nauseated, not so much loathing the filthiness of the Streets, as the mire of
corrupted Hearts; for besides the prejudice she boar to it, for being a
Village, she was no less displeased with it, for being the Babylon of Nations
of different Inerests. Sevill was no sooner nominated, but it displeased her,
Covetousness and Lucre being enemies, with whom she admits no Treaty The Fleet
formerly came up to Sevill.
, and that indigested Stomach of her Plate was highly displeasing; her
Inhabitants are neither black nor white, but as the twilight of Nature stand as
Neuters to Truth and Falsity; they speak much, and perform but little, which is
the common disease of Andaluzia. Upon Granada she made her Cross, Granada,
and Cordova she called Caludry. Cordova,
Salamanca reads the Pandects of the Laws, Salamanca.
and makes Men rather Learned then Wise, teaching Men to plead at the Bar, and
in what manner to form a Battery against Riches. She once resolved to pitch her
Residence in the plentiful Zaragoza, Zaragoza.
the Metropolis of Aragon, the Mother of a famous Line of Kings, the Supporter
of the great Pillar, and the Basis of Faith, famous for Convents, and
Indowments of the Church, beautiful in magnificent Edifices, and populated with
the Religious Inhabitants of undeceiving Aragon; but the haughtiness of their
Spirits was a fault outweighing her other Perfections, and that kind of
original Folly which mixed with all her actions, were no less displeasing and
ungrateful. The cheerful, noble, and flourishing Valentia abounding with all,
Valentia.
that is not substance, was the next propounded to her election, but here she
feared that with the same easiness wherewith to day they received her, to
morrow they would eject her. Barcelona, Barcelona.
though Rich, and when it shall so please Heaven, the ladder to scale the
Italian Fortresses, the stop of Golds continual current and motion, the
sanctuary of the Judicious amidst Barbarity, was not yet esteemed a secure
retirement, being a place where we must always walk with our Beard turned over
our Shoulders. Leon, and Burgos.
Leon and Burgos were situations too near the Mountains, having more in them of
Misery then Poverty. Santiago displeased her in nothing, but being in Galitia.
Valladolid seemed a place not inconvenient for her dwelling, Valladolid.
and therefore determined to journey thither, supposing Truth could no^ but
inhabit with plain simplicity; but the prejudice she conceived against the
Court, diverted her from hence, (having been formerly the Court of Spain) and
still retaining too fresh a memory and savor of her past condition. Of
Pamplona was made little mention, Pamplona.
being a place like to Navarre, consisting of nothing but Points and
Punctilio's. In fine, by the Election of this Catholic Queen, was preferred
the Imperical Toledo, Toledo.
confessing she was never so passionately affectionate to any Seat as to this.
For this is the Forge where Men are fashioned, this is the School of Rhetoric,
all Court, and City, and more since the sponge of Madrid, has sucked out the
dregs from thence: Corruptions may chance to enter here, but not remain. In
other parts many have their Wits in their Hands, but here in their Foreheads.
And though the censure of some is, that Toledo never produced any of a profound
and deep Judgment; howsoever Artemia kept still constant to her resolution and
choice, extolling its Wisdom and Learning, saying, That one Woman there has
spoke more pith and substance in a Sentence, then a grave Philosopher of
Athens, in whole Volumes of his Writings. Let us, said she, hasten thither to
the Center of Spain, not for its situation, but for the real confluence and
concourse of all Virtues. Thus traveled she on with her discreet Attendants,
amongst whom were Critilo and Andrenio, who with no small advantage and
improvement to their Judgments, kept them company until they came to that way
which leads to Madrid, and there taking their leave with many acknowledgments
and expressions of gratitude, acquainted her what important occasions called
them to the Court in search of Felisinda; she therefore giving them her
Benediction, armed them against all Assaults, with necessary Instructions,
telling them withal, that since they were resolved to go thither, they would be
careful not to mistake their way, because there are many Paths which lead
thither. By this means, replied Andrenio, we cannot Err, since all Paths direct
the same course. This is the great danger, said Artemia, for amongst so many
Roads is the most difficult choice of a secure passage; for many have been lost
in the Royal Highway. Go not therefore by the way of curiosity in seeing, for
that is the Road of Fools, nor yet by that of pretention, for that way is long,
and tedious, and few there are which obtain the end: nor by the way of Suits,
or Contentions in Law, for it is always chargeable and the journey long: the way
of Ambition is unknown, and those who follow it are disrespected, Entrances to
the Court.
and that of Interest is an unbeaten Path, trod by none but ignorant
Forraigners; that of Necessity is dangerous, being environed by multitudes of
Hawks and Birds of Prey; that of Delight and Sensuality is so foul and dirty,
that from our Knees we step up to the Ears, and thus bemired we are plunged and
stopped in our progress, the way of living is but short, and you shall soon
arrive at the end; that of Servitude is Death, that of Eating has no end, and
that of Virtue is unknown, and in this ambiguity you have no way but to abide
there as little as you can; for believe me, in Madrid a Man can neither live
well, nor die well. Observe above all, where you enter, for many come in by
Santa Barbara, and some by the Street of Toledo: some of refined Spirits pass
the Bridge, and others come in by the Puerta del Sol, and stop in Anton Martin,
some come in by Laua Pies, but more by Vnta manos, but the most ordinary
passage is not by the Gates, which are few, and those shut. With this parted
the wise Artemia to the Throne of her Estimation, and our two Travelers to the
Labyrinth of the Court.

And so traveled they together, easing their journey with discourses they made
of the admirable Excellencies of Artemia, whose strange Miracles and Prodigies
made them glory in her Power, and in the happiness and advantage they had
obtained by her profitable Society. To these thoughts they were so intent, that
unsensibly they fell into one of the most dangerous Snares, and Adventures of
Life; for on a sudden they saw a numerous multitude both of Men and Women,
bound and mannacled, whilst Thieves robbed and ransacked their Coffers. We are
undone, said Critilo, for we have now run our selves unawares into the hands of
Robbers, The Universal Robbery.
who usually swarm in this Road: here they are now pillaging and were they
satisfied with the Spoils alone, it were well, but are so cruel, that they Rob
and Murder, and afterward deface the countenance of the Slain with Wounds and
Scars, that they are not to be known who they are. Andrenio was so terrified at
this, that fear had already deprived him of his courage, and color, but
recovering himself a little; What shall we do, said he? Shall we fly, or hide
our selves from their sight? You Phrygian, or inconsiderate like, replied
Critilo, propound late Remedies, their Eyes have already discovered us, and
their Voice commands us under their power; wherefore we must now go forward,
and be contented to submit our hands and necks to their Chains, they looked on
one side and the other, and saw a multitnde of passengers of all conditions,
Nobility Commons, Rich, and Poor; nor was their kindness more indulgent to the
Women; for they were all bound and corded to the Trees of themselves. At the
sight of this horrid Spectacle Critilo and Andrenio sighed, and passed through
the Spoils to see who those cruel Assassinates were, but could not come to have
a full sight of any; they beheld one and another, all seemed to be involved in
the same misfortune, and yet none knew who had ensnared them; at length,
espying an ill looked Fellow, they all concluded that he was one. This, said
Andrenio, must be he, with that unlucky look, and such also must be his Soul.
You may guess what you will, replied Critilo, of his equivocating eye; and yet
methinks I am more afraid of that squinting Fellow, for may we believe Artemia,
they never shoot with the aim of Reason; take care of a pouting Lip for those
are always of a surly and morose humor; that other with a flat Nose promises
Cruelty and danger in his disposition; he with a tawny Face, looks like a
Master of Bridewel, and he with a snarling Look puts me in mind of the Hangman
at Tyburne; and that other blustering Boy, and angry Brow, seems always to
threaten a Storm and Tempest; then they heard another speak with low whispers;
This, said they, must needs be a person, who admonishes us of what we should
beware; but he was one, who sucked up his words with a Hum and a Hau, and as he
drew in his Breath, he swallowed down Men. They heard another snusfle through
the Nose, and him they avoided, for that accent through the Nose declared him a
true Champion of Bacchus, and Venus; they met with another worse, who spoke so
hoarse, that he could only be understood through a Trunk. In this manner they
examined all, nor yet among these Captives did they espy any one who had
committed the Spoil. What means this, said they, what are become of those
pillaging Rogues who have risled these Passengers? Since none are here of those
who can Steal by the snipping of the Sissers, or that can leave us naked,
whilst they cloth us, or unfeather our Nests, whilst they enwrap us in the
quilts, who can mistake their yard, when they measure, The Common Robbery.
and bear down their Scales without weight, who is it rules here, who borrows,
who recovers, who executes, does none detect the faults of the Merchandise,
does none entice the Customers, are there no Ministers, nor Scriveners, no
Keepers of Books? Why who then Robs? Where are these Tyrants of so much
Liberty? Scarce had Critilo said thus, but something between a Woman and an
Angel, answered him, Hold, I go: and having newly bound two confident
Presumers, She was as I say, a beautiful Woman, not rude, and unfashioned, but
of a courtly behavior, affable, and courteous; she showed a fair face, and
outsight to all, but evil actions. Her Forehead was more smooth, then serene;
she looked on none with an ill eye, and yet all were enchanted with her
bewitching emissions; Le: Nostrils were white, which was a sign that she was
not ill affected with Fumes, and Vapors; her Cheeks were Roses without Thorns,
her Teeth when she smiled and laughed at the World showed like so many rows of
Pearl, or Ivory. The Knots she tied with such air, and negligence, that her
dexterity and art appeared pleasant, and her very sight was enough to
captivate; her Tongue doubtless was of Sugar, for her words distilled Nectar,
and her two Hands made signs of affection, for never did she extend a real hand
in friendship, though ordinarily her Arms made indissoluble twinings, with
counterfeited embraces, the more easily to entrap and entangle in her snares;
so that none could probably suspect an Aspect so promising to be guilty of
Theft or Robbery: Nor was she alone, but assisted by a flying Squadron of
Amazons, beautiful and active, which continually bound one, or other, executing
the Commands of their supreme Lady. But it is well worth our observation, All
Fools.
that the Captives they mannacled, had the election of their own Bonds, and
many so willingly submitted to the Servitude, that they brought their Chains
with them; some were fettered with Chains of Gold, others with Lockets of
Diamonds, an invicible tackling for such feeble Captives; many they bound with
Garlands of Flowers, and others as their humor pleased them, with Roses, for
only to encircle their Brows was an Enchantment sufficient to enfeeble their
hands; another they saw tied with one Lock of a fair and golden Hair, which
though at first he thought to rend with the smallest force, yet at last it
proved more strong then a Cable, which held him Anchored, whilst he tumbled in
the Storms and Tempests of Love. Women ordinarily were bound with Threads of
Pearl, with Bracelets of Coral, and embroidered Ribons, which seemed something,
and their value nothing. The Courageous, and Valientons of the World, after
some few bravadoes and blustering words, contentedly submitted with the rest to
the loss of Liberty: and what is very admirable they enticed many of their
Comrades with Feathers, and Plumes, and these were in a Prison the most secure
of any; persons of greater quality, they pretended to mannacle with small
twists, from whence hanged Shells, Keys, and Links, which bound them so fast,
that their whole strength could not break them; there were Bolts of Gold for
some, of Iron for others, all being equally content, and as safely secured; but
what I admired most. was that in wanting Chains to imprison their numerous
Captives, they committed some to the Bonds of Women's embraces, which though,
but feeble, were yet the Chains of the most robustous Champions. Hercules was
ensnared in a tender Thread, and Sampson with some hairs, they cut from his own
head. One they would have bound with a Chain of Gold, which he himself brought
with him; but the extremity of his Covetousness would not endure the cost,
Covetous.
but desired rather the cheaper courtesy of the Rope; another companion of
his, they pinioned with the Strings of his own Purse, one they bound with his
own Storks Neck, and another with his Estridges Stomach, till they could secure
others with links of savoury Sallats, who were so much pleased with their
Fetters, that the very licking of their Fingers was a pleasure to them; some
grew frantic with joy to see themselves fettered with Laurel and Ivy Wreaths;
which is not so much as that others should turn fools at the melody of their
own Music. In this manner these wanton Robbers assailed the innocent and
unwary Travelers, ensnaring the Feet of some, fettering the Necks, and Hands,
of others, binding their Eyes, carried them away as Spoils, robbing and
depriving them of their Hearts. But what made a Tragedy of these comic Scenes,
was one who wounded the hands of those she bound, devouring, and gnawing their
Bowels, Envious.
making their torments the delight of others, and Hell and the Wrack, a
Paradise and Glory of their Enemies. Another there was so prittily furious,
that she strained the Cord until the Blood started forth, at which they were fo
much pleased, that they drank it in full Bowls to several Healths; and what is
most pleasant, after they had bound so many, they would persuade these silly
persons that they had touched none. But they coming now to execute the same on
Critilo and Andrenio, and asking them with what Fetters they would choose to be
mannacled; Andrenio as young and inconsiderate, suddenly resolved them, and
told them with Flowers, believing that this would rather be a Garland, then a
Fetter, or Binding; but Critilo seeing there was no way to resift, desired they
would tie Andrenio to him with the Strings of some ancient, and Oraculous
Volumes, which though it seemed a new sort of Binding, yet in fine they were
contented, and so satisfied his desires.

And now this courteous and wanton Tyrant commanded they should beat a March,
with which she carried her Spoils in triumph, and yet with so much gentleness,
that though they were dragged with Chains, yet being rivetted to the Socket of
their Hearts, they so voluntarily followed, and submitted to their contented
Servitude; The Iun of the World.
that there was no need to enforce obedience on such willing Slaves; for some
posted on the Wings of Wind, others slided along with a good Air, the most
stumbled as they went, and all were involved in inextricables toils. They soon
arrived at the Gates of a place, which neither was a Palace, nor yet a Cottage,
but those that understood it best, called it an Inn; their entertainment was
not on free quarter, nor the House lent them longer then for a nights repose.
The building was Stone, and of so attractive a Virtue, that it drew the Hands,
the Feet, the Eyes, the Tongue, the Heart, as if these Members had been Iron,
and those Walls the Loadstones of pleasure, cemented so close and strong, as if
Pearls had been a principal ingredient in that Mortar. This pleasant Inn
without doubt was the Center of Delight, the Paradise of Content, and a Mass of
those delitious Enjoyments which Sensuality could invent. The golden Palace of
Nero, in which he turned Steel into Gold, was but a Cottage in respect of this;
the resplendence of Eliogahalus his House, was obscured and benighted by the
glory and brightness of these Beams, and the very Castle of Sardanapalus, was
in comparison hereof a Stye or Dunghill of its own Beastliness; Over the Gate
was engraved this Motto, The Delightful, Good is profitable, and Honest.
Critilo ruminating on the Inscription; This said he, is to be read backwards.
How backwards, replied Andrenio? I read it forward. But if you read it
backward, it goes thus, The Honest Good, is Profitable and Delightful. But I
shall not dispute of this, only give me leave to say it is one of the most
delightful places thy eyes have seen. What an excellent Fancy had that Builder
who contrived it! In the Front there of were seven Pillars, and though the odd
number might seem to carry some disproportion in it, yet it was in emulation of
that which Wisdom had erected. These gave an entrance to seven other lodges or
habitations of Princes, Prove. The House Wisdom built upon Seven Pillars.
whose Agent this Pretty Robber was; so that all those which she captivated,
she lodged and quartered so much to their contentment, that every one had the
election of his own Prison. Many entered by the Chambers of Gold, The Chambers
of Vice.
called so, because they were covered with Golden Shingles, and Beams of Plate;
the Walls were of precious Stones; it cost much to get up thither, and when
they were above, all the pleasure was with Stones. The highest and most lofty
Rooms were the most dangerous, yet notwithstanding the gravest Heads were the
most forward to mount thither. The lowest quarter was the most convenient and
delightful; for the Walls being of Sugar, were eaten into, or mouldred away,
the Mortar was tempered with exquisite Wines, and the Clay kneaded into Biscuit;
many crowded to get in here, who affected to be esteemed Men of the highest
Gusto and Palate, and had reduced eating to a Science. On the contrary there
was another Room furnished with red, and paved with Daggers; the Walls were of
Steel, and Doors beset with Firearms, the Windows were Portholes for Cannon,
and from the Ceeling, instead of Mosaic Work, hung down dangerous Knobs,
threatening the death of the careless Lodgers, and yet there wanted not Guests,
though they paid the Hire with their own Blood. Another Chamber there was
painted blew, whose excellency consisted in diminishing or shadowing the
comeliness and beauty of others. The Furniture hereof was of Dogs and Griffins,
and gaping Mouths of Wild Beasts, and the Materials were Teeth, not of an
Elephant, but of a Viper, and though it boar a fair outside, yet they say the
inward parts of the Walls were perished by some internal corroding quality. But
the Room most useful of all, was on a plain Floar, which though it had no
Stairs to go up it, was yet full of Seats and Benches, and well furnished with
Chairs and Cushions. It seemed a house of China, without upper Chambers; its
Materials were Tortoise Shells, where all the World took up their Habitations;
those that entered here went so slow, that the place being long, they could
never arrive to the end; but the green Lodging was the best of all, being the
Apartment of the Spring, where Beauty reigned; it was called the Knot of
Flowers, for all was flourishing within it, till time and age come to crop the
Blossom; many Lillies were there turned into Violets; all who entered in,
crowned themselves with Roses, which soon faded and turned into Thorns, and the
Flowers became dry and withered as the Grass, and yet this was generally the
most delightful place, which afforded the most general diversion for all
Humors.

Amongst the rest they forced Critilo and Andrenio to enter into one of those
Lodgings which their own fancy should like best. Andrenio being rash and in the
flower of his age, thrust himself amongst the Beds of Roses, bidding Critilo go
in where he pleased, for at the end they should all meet in the Center. Critilo
being much urged to choose his entrance, replied, That he never followed the
current of the Multitude, but went always contrary, not that I think by this I
say, to excuse my entrance, but I desire it may be at the door where none else
have passed. How is that possible, replied they, since there is no door here
which stands not continually open to the throngs of Guests, some laughed at his
singularity, and wondered to see a Man so differently disposed, and his Humor
formed of a disagreeing mould and nature to the vulgarity of the World. I must
confess, said he, it is only this, which makes me refractory to the general
humor, for my entrance is where others go out, and my eyes fix themselves
rather on the end and conclusion, then on the principles or beginnings: And
with that turning himself about; the house appeared so changed and
metamorphos'd from the appearance it had at the first view, that he could not
say it was the same; for all that mass and pife of stately Buildings, seemed an
unfashioned and rude heap, the beauty of those gilded Beams appeared only the
glistering of rotten Wood, the pleasure, and delitious sight turned to horror,
and the whole Fabric stood continually tottering, and threatening its own
ruins. The Stones had not now only lost their Magnetic virtue, but followed
behind their backs, inviting the very Pebbles of the Earth to rise against
them. The delitious Gardens were become overgrown Fields of Thorns and
Thistles; and as Critilo observed with much admiration, that those who smiling
entered in, returned again with tears in their eyes, sighing out their
lamentations and complaints of their Misfortunes. Some they flung out of the
Windows of that Chamber, which looked into the Garden, amidst Hedges of Thorns,
which pierced their Bodies with an infinity of Wounds, and thus pained in this
Hell of Torments, breathed out their cries to Heaven for assistance. Those who
had ascended up the highest, had the soarest fall, one of whom fell from a
lofty Pinnacle or Turret of the Palace, with as much contentment to others, as
of misery to himself; for all stood gazing on him as he tumbled, being
delighted to see him fall, and he having his Wings clipped, could soar no
longer, but fell with irreparable ruin; those that beheld him, crying out,
that he deserved so much, and worse, for Evil ought to be his Portion, who
never did Good. But he which moved pity in some, was one, on whom the Moon had
more influence then the Stars: This was an unfortunate Person, who in his fall
lighted on a Dagger which past his Throat, and thereby wrote in Characters of
his own Blood, The first Attempt, without a Second. Critilo observed, that
through those Windows which formerly appeared of Gold, but now of Dirt, were
flung out some naked, others so bruised, as if their shoulders had been beaten
with Bags of golden Sand. Others fell down through the Windows of the Kitchen,
and of these their Bellies suffered most in their fall, which turned their
Stomachs; one there was, and but one, that went out at the Door, whom Critilo
observing, went to salute him, and coming nearer to him, the Stranger made a
stop, as if he knew him. Heavens guide me, said he, where have I seen this man?
I have certainly seen him, though I cannot remember where; Is not this Critilo,
demanded he? Yes, and who are you? Do you not remember when we were both
Companions in the House of the wise Artemia? O! now it comes into my mind, said
Critilo, Are not you he of the Omnia mea mecum port. The same, said he, and
that has been the only Spell to deliver me from these Enchantments. But what
means did you use to make this escape? The way, replied he, is short and easy,
and with the same facility do you but only desire it, and I shall unbind you;
see but those blind and dumb Ignorants, whose assent of their Will is the only
Bond that ties them; for in desiring and wishing only to be freed, they
immediately obtain their Liberty. With that Critilo only desired his freedom,
and his Chains dropped off. But tell me Critilo, how it came to pass that thou
did not enter into this common Prison and Captivity of the World? Because,
replied he, I followed Artemia's council in not settiug foot or step on the
beginning, till my hand could reach and take hold of the conclusion. O happy
man! but this is too mean a praise for thee: for thou art not a Man, but an
Intellectual Spirit. What is become of your Companion, who was younger than
your self, and less wary? I was about to enquire the same of you, said he, if
you had seen him within, for he having without any reason precipitated himself
in there, will, I fear, run the common misfortune, and at last be cast out
among the vile Refues of this deceived Generation. Through what Gate did he
enter? Through that of pleasure. This is the worst of all, said he, for his
Exit will be the later for it, and perhaps not until Vice and Time weaken his
Body, and strengthen his Judgment. But is there no means left for his remedy,
demanded Critilo? There is only one, and that something difficult. What is it?
Only to will; for let him follow my course, and not stay till necessity drive
him forth; for it is better to take his opportunity and advantage to go forth
on his own legs, and rather willingly pass out at the door, then to be
compelled and thrown headlong from the Windows. I have one request to you, said
Critilo, which my modesty denies me leave to demand, and savours more of Folly
then favor. What is it? that since you have gained the clue of this winding
Labyrinth, you would return in again, and with that Rhetoric you are used to
undeceive others, to persuade, and instruct him, how to wish and desire his own
freedom. This will be but to small purpose, said he, for though I find and
speak to him, yet his humor will scarce give way to the Counsels of an unknown
Adviser; for oftentimes the examples and entreaties of acquainted Friends
prevail more with Affection, then arguments and persuasions can with Reason. It
were better you went in your self, for your friendship must needs be more
prevalent then my word. I should willingly go in, said Critilo, but I fear that
not knowing the way, I may wander, and loose my self, and in this manner we may
both be destroyed. Let us resolve on this to go both together, for a double
diligence is very requisite in so important an attempt; so you shall be his
Guide, and I his Friend. The proposition was so well accepted, that they
suddenly went about to execute it; but the Guard gave them a stop at the
entrance, upon suspicion that Men of such grave looks, and countenances were
not come to be disciples, but enemies to their Kingdom: But yet, pointing to
Critilo, for him, said they, I have order to admit. This made them both to
retire back, and have recourse to a second consult. And now considering well of
the entrances and goings out, the many twinings and turnings of the Labyrinth
which was all Palace, and being absolutely resolved to enter, they made a full
stop in the middle way. Hold, said Critilo, let me make you this other
Proposal, which is, that we change Clothes, that you take mine, which are well
known to Andrenio, together with a sufficient commission to procure you credit;
and thus being disguised, you may deceive the Guard, and take off all jealousy
of our design, the device did not dislike him, and so clothing himself like
Critilo, he was with freedom admitted entrance

In the mean time Critilo entertained himself without, in viewing the continual
falls, and destructions of those, whom they violently hurried from the Windows
of their own Perdition. The Ruin which comes by Vice,
A Prodigal he observed thrown down by Women from the Beds of Roses, upon a
Bush of Thorns, where being naked, the Prickles tormented him in every part;
his Nose being battered in the fall, caused him to snume ever after, and this
imperfection remained for his whole life, every one laughing made his nose the
common subject of their wit, and derision. Such was the loathsomness and
detestation which this Man and his Consorts had of this Sin, that they
continually spit upon their delight, and in revenge cast forth a perpetual flux
on the Bestiality of their Sin. Those who rounded in By-ways of repose,
lingered something in their fall, but being down, were more sluggish to arise;
for mere idleness had deprived them of all active motions of Life; and these
being a people of an unprofitable weight to the Earth only served to fill up
the number of Mankind, and to suck the fat of the Earth; and having never done
any thing with dexterity, being once down had neither courage nor strength to
recover themselves. But in the Lodgings of Arms and Weapons, there was heard so
great a noise, and confusion, that it seemed a Hell or Bedlam, from whence
proceeded Men so hacked and torn by those blows they had received, that they
spit Blood from their valiant Breasts, and vomited also that of their Enemies,
which they had drank in plentiful Bowls, so usually does Revenge, extort our
Victories from our hands. Only those of the Lodgings of Poison, remained
secure, whilst they beheld the miseries of others, delighted themselves whilst
others lamented, and one there was, who that another should break an Arm, or
pluck out one Eye, would loose both; they laughed whilst others wept, and
lamented at what was the common joy, their pleasure being to rejoice at the
miseries of others. Critilo stood all this while looking on this unhappy end,
and at the evening of a day of some years, he perceived Andrenio appear at the
Window, amidst the Thorns of those Flowers he had elected; at which he was
affrighted, fearing his total destruction; but he durst not call to him, lest
he should discover himself, but made signs that he should remember and meditate
on his deceived condition; but how and which way he got down, is related in the
following Crisis.

The Eleventh CRISIS.
The dangerous Golf of the Court.
WHen we have seen a Lion or Lamb, in them we discover the full nature and
disposition of the Species; but in seeing a Man, we see but one, and his humor
and condition too, almost unknown. All Tigers are naturally cruel; the Dove
innocent, but every Man is variously disposed and tempered. The generous Eagle
engenders a Brood like himself; but noble Worthies are not sure to propagate
their elevated Spirits in their Posterity; nor is the vicious Father certain to
make his Son Heir of his depraved Works, as well as of his Fortunes. For every
one has his several pleasure, his different behavior, and fashion, and
opinions in all ages have found heads, and brains like those that first
invented them. Wise Nature has bestowed on every man a Countenance and
Complexion peculiar to himself, a Voice and Gestures different from others to
serve sor Characters, and marks to know him by, that so the Good may not be
confounded among the number of the Bad; that Women may be distinguished from
Men, and that none may pretend to conceal his own faults under the guise of
another. There are many who spend much time and study in knowing the nature and
quality of Herbs: but how much more would it import, and advantage them to know
the nature, and operations of Men with whom they are to live, and die; for all
are not Men who appear so outwardly, but horrible Monsters and Rocks so called.
Acroceraunian Rocks in the gulfes of great Populations. There are wise Men
without Works, aged Men without Experience, Youths without Subjection, Women
without Modesty, Rich without Compassion, Poor without Humility, Lords without
Nobility, Commonwealths without Government, Deserts without Reward, and Men
without Humanity: These were the reflections of this wise person, in sight of
the Court, after he had rescued Andrenio with so exemplary prudence. Whilst
Critilo stayed for Andrenio at the Free-Gate, he observed him at the Window
involved in the common danger; howsoever he comforted himself with this, that
there was none now could tempt him farther, before he might take the Garland
from his Head, the which having done himself, he untwisted it, and having tied
some other Bows to it, made a Roap, and thereby let himself down, and without
any danger, or hurt, had the happiness to come safe to ground. At the same time
also appeared his wise Instructor at the door, a double joy to Critilo, who now
thought it not time to use Complements, or Embraces, but hasted away as fast as
they could. Only Andrenio turning his Head to the Window, said, Hang there thou
Cord, the Ladder of this my Liberty, and trophy of eternal memory to be
dedicated to my undeceived condition. Their way was the direct road to the
Court, which this wise Philosopher called a Falling upon Scylla to avoid
Caribdis. Howsoever he accompanied them to the Gate, being much taken with
their society and converse, which was the best pastime of this tedious journey,
and travel of our Life. Let me know, said Critilo, what House this is, and
inform me of what passages, and accidents have happened to you. The wise
Philosopher by the courtesy of Andrenio, taking the upper hand, Know, said he,
this is the deceitful House, the Inn of the World; The Gate at which Men enter,
is Delight, The Tyranny of Delight.
and through which they go out, is Charge and Expense. That famous Robber is
Volusia, whom we call Delight, and the Latin Voluptas; she is the gracious
Protectress of Vice, and draws Mortals to their Execution on the Slid or
Delight. This is she who enslaves and captivates Men, imprisons them where they
please, some she lodges in upper Rooms of Pride, others in the Dungeon and
Cellers of Sloth, but none inhabit the Middle, all situations being Extremities
in Vice. All enter in, as you see with Songs and Music, but go out with no
other melody than their own Sobs, except the Envious, who do all things in a
contrary humor. The remedy not to miss of the End, or be destroyed in the
Conclusion, is to cast an eye first upon the beginning, which was the counsel
and advice of the wise Artemia, and the only means for me to escape secure; And
for me, said Critilo, not to enter in, for I usually go with more content to
the House of Sorrow, then of Mirth, for the Holy Days of Rejoicing, are always
the Vigils of Repentance; Believe me Andrenio, he that founds his Beginnings in
his pleasure, shall end in his sorrow. It is sufficient, said he, that this way
we tread is full of Snares, for thereby we become more wary; nor without reason
has Fraud set a guard at the beginning to intercept our entrance. O house of
Fools! what little respect have thou deserved? O false Enchantment of bewitched
Loadstones, which at first attract and entice, and then betray; God deliver us,
said their Philosopher, from what begins with the smiles of Content. Never
flatter your selves with prosperous and easy success of the first Beginnings,
but attend always to the difficulties of the Conclusion. The experience of this
I have tried in the Inn of Volusia, and in that Dream which ought to awake and
revive you.

It is reported that Fortune had two Sons, both of a most different nature, and
disposition. The eldest was handsome, The Twins of Fortune.
and of as smiling a countenance, as the other was ill-favored and frowning;
their conditions and natures, as usually it happens, being read in the Index of
their Foreheads. Their Mother did accordingly habit them in such Garments and
Dress, as did best denote their humors, and distinguish their conditions, The
eldest had his Clothes embroidered by the Spring with Roses, and Gilliflowers,
and between Rose and Rose was inserted a G. which served for a hyrogliphick,
and was interpreted by some to be Gracious, Gallant, Grateful, Great; the
Lining was of white Ermins, which rendered his Aspect cheerful and smiling, so
as it betokened an inward serenity of Mind. The other was clothed in a
different manner, in a Black, or Mourning Buckram, worked with Thorns, and
Briars, and between every one an F. Characters of his foul, fierce, furious,
false disposition; his countenance and look struck terror to all that beheld
him. In this Garb they went forth from the House of their Mother, to the
School, or to the Market. The eldest was adored by all, invited to receive
entertainment, the doors of their Hearts were opened to him, and the whole
World followed him, esteeming their Eyes blessed which saw so gracious a Youth.
How much more happy their Arms which could embrace him? The other despised
found none so courteous, or charitable as to admit him to any access, but as
from a scourge or plague fled at his approach; when necessity, or convenience
drove him to enter into their Houses, their Gate was shut against him, and his
importunity returned with blows, that so banished from the Society of all, he
found no place to make his residence, whether he should now live or die, was
the subject of his Melancholy contemplation; his rage not being able to suffer
longer these injuries, he chose rather to die, that he might live, then to live
that he might die; but as contrivance is the effect of Melancholy, his Brains
began to work, and thought on a Plot, which is always more available then open
force. For considering how powerful Fraud was, and the several Wonders she
continually performs, he determined one night to search her out, for Light, and
Fraud are inconsistent together. In a wearisome search of Fraud he spent much
time, but yet arrived not to a sight, or view of her; for in every place they
said she was, but he found her in none. He was persuaded she could not be
absent from the House of the Fraudulent, The House of Fraud.
but first in his way he searched the House of Time; who told him, she used not
to reside there, for that he was an enemy to Falsity, and endeavored to
undeceive the World; but his words were believed too late; from thence he went
to the House of the World, The World.
which was always deemed for a Deceiver; but was answered here, that he never
deceived any, though they desired it; but Men deceived themselves, and desired
to be blind, that they might be cheated. With that he went to Falsity, and to
his demand, was answered, Alas fool! with what Tongue, or Face, can I tell thee
Truth? In this very answer, said he, thou have told me Truth, but yet where
shall I find it? for if it be so difficult to find out Fraud in the World, it
must be impossible to discover Truth. From thence he went to the House of
Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy.
believing Fraud was never absent from thence, and here, the answer he received
was as unsatisfactory as at other places, for she turning her Neck like her
crooked intention, shrugging up her shoulders, simpering with her lips,
contracting her eyebrows, and lifting up her eyes to Heaven with a soft and
demure Voice, told him she knew no such persons, nor ever kept such company,
though at that time they were both in the same League and Conspiracy with her.
From thence he went to the House of Adulation, Adulation.
a Palace of no small Magnificence, and here it was told him, that he was ill
advised in coming thither; for though I lie, said she, I deceive none, for my
words are such gross Hyperbolies, and apparent Falsities, that the Judgments of
the most simple and ignorant cannot but perceive how clearly I flatter them,
and yet notwithstanding, they are tickled at my vain and exorbitant Praises,
and remunerate me well for so unprofitable an Office. Having thus such ill
success in his search, Is it possible, said he, sighing, that the World should
be so full of Deceit and Fraud, and yet I should not meet it, that the World
should resound with it, and every corner should lament the injuries received by
it, and yet my self the only Unfortunate in this wished encounter? Perhaps I may
find her hid within the Curtains of the Marriage Bed, for there will I seek
her; he asked the Husband, and the Wife, both of them confessing there had been
so many, and such false Caresses between them, that neither could complain
their real embraces were returned by the other in a more flattering way, than
themselves had given them. Then he enquired also in the Merchants shops, under
the lined Cloaks of the Ufurers, and amongst the undone Creditors; who answered
him, that Fraud was not there, for indeed it is not there where it is evidently
known to inhabit; the same replied all Tradesmen, affirming, that such could
not be deceived, for he, who knows where Fraud lies, and yet ventures on it,
cannot complain of receiving injury; with such ill success as this despairing
of his intentions, and made desperate, was resolved to try his last hopes, and
to find her out, though it were in the House of the Devil; so thither he went,
which was at Genoua, I mean at Geneva; but Fraud fiercely raged, and thundering
out Curses and Execrations, cried out, Who I, said she, Deceit? I Deceit? How
well is my Innocence, and my Pains rewarded, wherewith I desire to unblind the
World; I promise them not Heaven, but Hell, I set not a Paradise before their
Eyes, but continually threaten their persevering Sins with sulphurous Flames,
who notwithstanding, as not affrighted, pursue after me, and upon hard
Conditions are Slaves unto my Will; How then can this Plain-dealing be styled
Deceit? At this reply, as fully satisfied, he departed away, and giving another
turn, came to the House of the Deceived, being Men oftentimes good, and
credulous, of a candid nature, and disposition, were apt to admit Fraud, and to
give credit to false appearances; but they assured him it was not there, but in
the House of the Deceivers; for those are right, and most truly Fools, who
endeavoring to deceive others, have the whole weight and misfortunes of their
bad intentions retorted on themselves. How is this, said he, the Deceived tell
me the Deceivers retain it, and they, that the Defrauded; for my part I believe
both the one and the other entertain her, and are possessed with her, though
they are ignorant of it. In this inquisitive search Wisdom met him, not he her,
and gave him this true information. Unfortunate wretch, said she, whom seek
thou, or why searchest thou any other then thy self? Do thou not know that he
who seeks Deceit, shall never find it, its nature lies, in being concealled,
and in once discovering it, it is no more the same; get thee to the House of
some of those who deceive themselves, for from them it is never absent. And so
it proved, for entering into the House of the Confident, the Presumptuous, the
Covetous, the Envious, at last he found it, but much disguised and painted over
with the color of Verity; he communicated to her his misfortunes, his
affronts, the disgusts of the World, and expected from her, as an Oracle, some
remedy and ease of his discontents: Deceit looking well upon him, said, thou
look like the Picture of ill-luck, thy ill-favored countenance speaks thee
so, and yet thou art worse then what thou seem; notwithstanding be of good
courage, for neither my diligence nor policy shall be wanting in this, in which
I am glad to find occasions wherein to manifest to the World my power. O! how
well we two are matched. Be courageous, for if the first step in a Cure, is to
find and discover the root of the Disease, I have done the like in your grief,
and know the cause and original of its arise. I know and feel the pulse, and
temper of Men, though they are ignorant of me; I know on which foot the ill
arbitrament of their Will halts, and goes lame; for believe me, thou art not
abhorred because thou art evil, but because thou appearest so; these Thorns
embroidered on your Coat, make Men afraid, and so start at them, which changed
for Flowers, would give a kind invitation to all to follow you; leave but all
to my management, and in a short time the World shall adore you, and your
Brother fall into the common disgrace. I have already thought the way, and with
that taking him by the hand, they went both together into the House of Fortune,
whom after Fraud had saluted with the usual Complements, Fortune said, that she
had need of a Guide as being blind. Whereupon Fortune's Son offered this Fraud
for her service, declaring the conveniences and advantages she might receive
by it; and running into high commendations of the Youths towardlyness, and
discretion, that he knew more tricks and evasions then the Devils Scholars; and
above all, that he desired no other pay or reward, then his own Merits; Fortune
accepted the profer, and admitted Fraud to her House, which is the whole World.

Upon this all things began to forsake their usual conrse, nothing remained in
its proper Center, nay the very course of time it self, Fortunes Guide.
was diverted with an unknown motion; for this Guide or Conductor of Fortune,
directed her always contrary to her intentions; if she desired to bless the
head of the Virtuous with her presence, the unlucky Boy wantonly led her to the
house of the Vicious: when necessity or convenience required her haste, he
stopped her progress, when slowly she should move, he fixed her Wings to fly, and
so shuffled, changed, and confounded her Actions, that all went preposterously
disordered; the Gifts and Favors she should bestow on the Wise, became the
undeserved Blessings of Ignorance, and the Cowards Brow was encircled with the
Laurel of the valiant Conqueror, and so changed her hands, that she unjustly
bestowed both happiness, and misfortunes, on those who least deserved them.
Thus she strikes out of season, when neither time nor subject requires it; she
wounds the Pious and Virtuous, and with a back-blow of Poverty, knocks down the
wise and industrious; and to the fraudulent and deceitful gives her hand with
all promises, and protestations to make them as prosperous as now we see them.
How often have her blows erred and unhappily fallen on those whom all bewailed?
she destroyed Don Balthazar of Lunniga, when he should have begun to live; also
the Duke of Infantado, the Marquis of Aytona, and other Worthies, when the
unstable condition of that Age most required their Government, and Prudence to
support and conduct it; she gave a back blow of Poverty to Don Luys of Gongora,
and to Augustine of Barbosa, and to other eminent Men, when she ought both to
have crowned their years and actions with reward; and yet this unlucky Boy
excused himself, that these Men like unseasonable Fruit came out of time, their
age being in the reign of Leo the Tenth, or of Francis King of France, not in
the corrupt years of this present age. What affronts has she done to the
Marquis of Torrecuso, and afterward triumphed in saying, had he not done
something in War, he should quickly have been forgotten. By another shot her
Bullet erred in hitting Don Martin of Aragon, though the Crime was so evident,
that she could not but confess her fault: Again she seemingly consented to
honor Azpilgueta Navarro, with a Cardinals Hat, for his liberal Endowments of
a famous College; but sporting with him one day at Hotcockles, she gave him
such a blow on the Hand as struck him to the ground, and whilst a Chorister
came to help him up, the unlucky Boy laughed, saying, that such as these have
no need to live, whose Memory and Fame shall never die; to others we continue
life indeed, who humbly receive it, and thankfully repay it. She had great
thoughts of favoring the Monarchy of Spain with much happiness and success;
Spain.
and in reward of their Catholic Christianity to bestow on them the Indies,
and other Kingdoms, with many Victories; but instead hereof both Fortune and
her Guide leaped on a sudden into France, to the amazement of the whole World;
which piece of unconstancy she excused, by saying, that the Race and Seed of
Spains former Worthies was quite extinct; that France was no longer to be
accounted rash and unconsiderate, but wise, settled, and firm to her principles;
and to conceal the hatred which her Malice bears to Piety, she consented to the
success of the Venetian Republique in some Conquests against the Ottoman power,
Venice.
obtained by their own Valor. A Miracle indeed that the World has admired;
The Otoman Family.
till the reason she gave cleared the wonder, saying, she was tired in carrying
the Ottoman success up so steep an Ascent by mere force, whilst they neither
contributed thereunto either by Wit, or Industry; in this manner all things
were shuffled together, fortunes and misfortunes were confounded, and rested on
the heads of those that least deserved or expected them. The Plot being now
ripe to be executed, it was observed, that at night when Fortune undressed her
Sons, for none she would trust with this office of disposing their Clothes, but
with great care ordered it her self, and laid them in several places, that she
might not mistake when she clothed her Children again. Deceit was very active
to take advantage on the present opportunity, and changed the place of their
Clothes, those of ill fortune into the place of good, and those of good into
the place of bad: In the morning Fortune, as unwary as blind, clothed Virtue
in the Garment of embroidered Thorns, and made Vice gallant with his elder
Brothers Flowers; which being set out in the Sophistries of deceit, made so
glorious a luster and beauty, that all the World adored his footsteps, and
entertained him both in their Houses and Hearts, believing it was Virtue they
then received; and though some at the cost of their own experience, told and
informed others of the Error, yet few believed them; for seeing Vice to be so
gallant and gentile, they could not be persuaded to judge amiss of that, which
they so much affected. Since that day Virtue and Vice have been confounded, and
the World deceived; for those who embrace Vice with low thoughts of Sensuality,
The beginning of Vice.
have speedily found themselves deceived, and too late entertained thoughts of
repentance. But on the contrary, those who being undeceived have closed with
Virtue; though the Thorns of his Garment have pricked and tormented them, at the
first embraces, yet at the end they found the fruit of true content, The Ends
of Virtue.
and lived in the serenity of a calm Conscience. How flourishing and fair seems
their own beauty to some, and how deformed after, and disfigured with a
thousand infirmities; how wanton is Youth, but how soon does time benumb their
Joints? how plausible does Dignity appear to the Ambitious, and the weight of
Government to be eased by estimation; Changes, Burdens.
but afterward how burdensome do they find it, and how to their shoulders
faint under so heavy a pressure? How pleasing do the Cruel imagine revenge, and
bathe themselves in the Blood of their Enemies; but afterward their whole Life
is pangs and pricks of Conscience to him whose Stomach cannot disgorge the
draughts and surfets he has made in Blood. Even stolen water is sweet, and the
rich is pleased to trample on; and make a prey on the poorer. Yet aftewards
with how much violence is he compelled to make restitution. Let the Glutton
surfeit himself in his curious Diet, and please his Palate with delitious Wines;
but what satisfaction can these make for his Plethory of Body, from whence
proceed Dropsies, and Gouts which twinges his Joints, and enfeebles the Nerves
of his whole Body. The Lascivious will not loose his sensual copulation, though
he buys his delight with the price of his own Body. The Covetous embraces
thorns in his Riches, which torment and disturb his sleep, and loses his
Heart in them, without enjoying of them. All these design to bless their
Families with the pleasing appearance of delight, which indeed is but a
concealed evil, and not a contentment, but a torment, and a deserved reward for
their fond mistake. But contrarily how difficult, and steep is the ascent to
Virtue at first, yet afterward what satisfaction is there in a good
Conscience? With how much trouble do we undergo an abstemious Temperance, and
yet in that consists the health both of Soul and Body? How intolerable appears
Continence, and yet in that we enjoy Life, Health, and Liberty? He who contents
himself with Mediocrity, lives; the humble possesses the Earth, and makes his
enemies to be at peace with him; but above all, what peace accompanies him, and
how savoury is the odor of his good fame? What sweet Fruit has sprang from
the bitter root of mortification? Though silence seems an effect o^ Melancholy,
yet the wise never repented he had held his Tongue: so that Virtue since that
time went always clothed outwardly with Thorns, but inwardly with Flowers
different to Vice, which therefore let us distinguish under that Character, and
embrace in despite of common, and vulgar deceit.

They were now come in sight of the Court, when Andrenio looking on Madrid with
a great deal of pleasure and attention. The wise Philosopher asked him, what he
saw? I see, said he, the A true Spanish Rodemontado.
Royal Mother of so many Nations, the Crown of the two Worlds, the Center of so
many Kingdoms, the Jewel of both the Indies, the Nest of the Phoenix it self,
the Sphere of the Catholic Sun, crowned and encircled with Perfections as
Rays, and with noble Arms as Lights. But I see, said Critilo, a Babylon of
confusions, a Paris of dirt and filth, a Rome of changes, a Palermo of AEtna's
smoaks, a Constantinople of mists, a London of pestilence, an Algier of
captives. I see, said the Philosopher, Madrid the Mother of all perfections on
one side, Madrid not a Mother, but a Stepmother.
and a Stepmother on the other; for as the chiefest rarities address
themselves to the Court, so in like manner do Vices swarm there, being
introduced by those which know not how to bring other then the vicious habits
of their own Countries. For my own part, I will not go in, as I have already
told you, but bringing them to the Bridge Milvio, he there left them. But
Critilo and Andrenio adventured in by the street of Toledo, and presently they
happened into a Shop where Wisdom was to be sold; Critilo asked the Bookseller
if he had a clue of golden Thread to sell them: but he did not presently
apprehend his question, for those who only read the Titles of Books, are seldom
learned by them; but another standing by, a graduated Courtier both in years
and experience, said, You little understand them, for it is a compass they
desire to sail by in this Ocean and Golf of Circes. I understand you less, said
the Bookseller, for here is neither Gold nor Silver sold, but only Books, a
more precious Commodity then either. It is this, replied Critilo, we look
after, and one especially which may give us some Councils, and Instructions how
to govern our selves in this twining Labyrinth. So then, said the Bookseller,
it seems that you are Strangers, and if so, make use of this Manual, it is no
Tome, but rather an Atome, and yet it shall serve to guide you to the North of
Felicity it self: here take this, which I have seen do Miracles, it being that
which instructs us in the art of being Men, and teaches us to keep a society
worthy of those who are so: Critilo took it, and read the Title, which was
Galateus of the Court. What is the Price, said he? Sir, said the Bookseller, it
has no price, it is above account, and is worth more to him who carries it;
these Books we do not sell, but pawn for two Ryals, for the World affords not
sufficient Riches whereby to make their estimation. At this speech the Courtier
gave such a loud laughter, that Critilo admired at it, and the Bookseller was
put out of countenance, and asked the reason why he so laughed. To which he
replied that the absurdity of what he said was worthy of it; for the whole
matter which the Book treated of was Ridiculous: I see now, said the
Bookseller, that Galateus is no more then the Elements of Morality, the A, B,
C. of Breeeding, nor yet can it be denied; but it is a golden toy, both
plausible and important, and though but little, yet it can make men great, and
teach them to continue so. Nothing less true then this, replied the Courtier,
for this Book, said he, taking it into his hands, is Heterodox, and might be
worth something, did it teach Contraries: In those innocent times when men were
such, Galateus reprehended.
these rules and precepts were fitly calculated for that age, but in these
times we now live, they are like Fruit out of season, or like Almanacks out of
date: these were Lessons for ancient days when they used Cross-bows, but this
is an age of more dangerous Artillery; believe me they are of no value, and
that your own selves may confess the same, hear me these first Lines, he says,
That observing the Rules of discreet Ceremonies, we ought not to stare him in
the Face with whom we speak, as if we would espy some Mysteries in his Eyes.
Consider how good a Rule this is for these times, in which the Tongue has lost
that tie and string which united it to the Heart. Where then should we look, on
the Breast? It is true, it were good to pierce as far as the Heart, had it the
transparent Glass to cover it, which Momus desired; for though our eyes were
fixed to observe his postures, and our sight attentive to discover changes in
his countenance, yet our greatest attention can scarce guess at the language of
his interior thoughts; how far short then must we come of this end, in not
beholding him. Let us then look on him, pierce him with the quick darts of our
Eyes, look Nose to Nose, and yet pray Heaven the point of our attention may be
so subtle and sharp as to read his Soul in his Face; to observe if he changes
his Color, if he knits his Brows, or his Heart muffles, and plays within him.
This Rule, as I say, was good and civil in better times: but now Wise men will
not esteem in unmannerly, unless they could procure the inestimable Felicity of
such Associates, whose words and actions have no need of being tried by the
constancy of their countenances. Hear also this other, for it much pleases me
as often as I read it, that it is a barbarous Slovenry after we have blown our
Nose, to look on the Snot in our Handkerchief, as if the filth were Pearls or
Diamonds which proceed from our Brain. This, Sir, said Critilo, is a fancy as
Court-like as subtle; but yet in Criticisms of this nature, we shall never want
words, or arguments for both parts. Not so, replied the Courtier, for you
understand it not, but in respect of the Author, who must pardon me, and teach
me better. For I say yes, let every one look on it, see and know his filth, and
corruption he casts forth: let the confident Sophister know that he is but a
snotty Charlatan, for though he is unable rationally to discourse, or scarce
Logic enough to know his Right hand, has yet high thoughts of his own
abilities: let him who has an elevated opinion of his own fancy know, that
those are not Sentences, or Subtleties which he conceives, but a dull offspring
of his Brain, which is distilled through the Limbick of his circumflexed Nose.
Let the dainty Lady persuade her self, that she is not such an Angel as her
Servant speak her, that it is not Amber, through which she breathes, but a
Kennel and painted Pipe to convey Corruption. Let Alexander undeceive himself,
that he is not Son to Jupiter but to Putrefaction, and Grandchild of nothing.
And let every man know that the Divinity he conceives in himself is but humane
imperfection, a bubble of vanity, and that the wind and smoke of conceit which
rises to his head, dissolves into filth and nautious humors. Let us all
understand, and know our selves, that we are but Vessels of unclean stenches,
when we are Children we are Snotty, when Old Phlegmatic, when in our middle
Age, we are Choleric and subject to the superfluity of Imposthumes. Another
thing he says is altogether unprofitable, which is, that a well fashioned Man
ought not to pick the Wax out of his Ears, and paste it between his Fingers.
Let me ask you, Sirs, who it is that can do so? for in whose Ears has the
importunate discourses of one or other left it? For this is an age wherein Men
have but little Wax in their Ears, it had better he had encharged us, not to
suffer the rapacity of the deceitful to pick it out, or the close Leach to suck
it forth, or to suffer Scriveners, or others, whom I will forbear to mention,
have so free a passage to the Organ of our Hearing. But I am most scandalized,
that he should call it clownish, for one being in company to take out his
Sissers, and clip his Nails. This I confess I cannot but esteem a most
pernicious Doctrine, for suppose that men are apt to omit the paring of their
Nails in secret, how much less should they be in public; it were better to
command them this office before the whole World, as the Almiranto of Naples
did, for every one must needs be offended to see those long Nails some wear,
that their Sissers may not be said so much to clip as to share them; let them
cut off those claws of Rapine so close, that they may touch the quick. There
are some so charitable as to frequent the Hospitals; to cut the Nails of the
poor, it is true, it is a great Charity; nor would it be less commendable to
enter into the House of the Rich, and shorten those Claws of Rapine by which
they have made themselves as great as rapacious, having stripped the Poor, and
thrust them from their doors, or at least reduced them to that misery, that
they have need of the charitable reception of an Hospital.

As little reason had he to recommend to us the civility of taking off our
Hats, as a token of kindness and respect; for now they take not only off the
Hat, but the Cloak and Coat, and strip men of Honesty to the very Skin,
Courtesy Deceit.
and flea him alive, and then tell the good man, that it is out of kindness
they treat him no worse. There are others who so much observe this Rule, that
they enter with a Cap on wheresoever they go; and thus you see, that this rule
is like the others. Another that I read now, is against all Morality. I wonder
it has not incurred a general censure, and dislike; he says, that a man
should negligently move his feet, not observing at every step where he sets
them, but set them there, where by chance or occasionally they fall. This I
deny, for might I counsel any, I should advise them not to transgress or
surpass the bound, and point of that Reason, which is in conformity to the Law
of God; let a man look and see that he does not pass the limits of his Estate
and Fortune, lest he fall into that Precipice, in which many have perished.
That he treads not on a narrow Line without leisure, and due consideration, for
this is for a man to measure his own abilities, and to weigh his own Burden;
that he strain not his hand nor foot to reach farther than he is able; this I
advise and counsel: That he consider where he set his foot, see where he
enters, and where he goes out, that he makes a firm footing in the middle, and
not in the dangerous brims and borders of extremes: for this is to go well, and
secure. Another thing he says, that it seems like a Fool for a Man to go
talking with himself; but with whom can a man discourse better, than with
himself? What Friend, has he more faithful, and sincere? Let him speak, and
tell himself the truth, for none else will; let him ask and hear the Voice of
his own Conscience; let him consult, and advise himself, and believe that all
others admonish only for their own advantge and interest, that they are ill
keepers of secrets, and would even betray the very shirt of the King D. Pedro.
His Bloody Shirt.
The next thing he says, is, that in our discourse we should not use much
action, for that is to pump out our Soul, as well as our Body. He says well in
this, if he to whom we speak is attentive; but not if he be deaf, as often Men
are in those things which concern either them or us most; if he sleeps we have
need to awake him, and there are some, though brayed in a Mortar, are still
unapprehensive, and incapable Subjects of the lowest Reason; for what can a Man
do less when he sees his Auditors both dull of apprehension, and unattentive to
his words? Of necessity we had need with the Pestle of our Speech to beat it
into their Brains, for unless it be violently inculcated, they will scarce
admit it into their Ears. That a loud, and high Voice is inconsistent with
gravity, is according to those unto whom we speak; for believe me, words of
Silk are not agreeable unto Cloth ears, and he who actuates not his words with
his hands, gives no life to his Speech, but stands with that composedness, as
if he were Angling, or still in expectation the Fish should bite, it were a
good business if we could by this means distinguish good hands from bad; let me
prise those which are good, for then they seem to reach Heaven it self, an
grasp it in their hands. Thus, with the Authors leave I must be of a contrary
opinion to him; for let every Man Do and Say, let him not be all Words, but
sometimes Actions, and Executions, Sayings and Doings.
let him speak truth, and if his hands are endued with dexterity, let him
interpose them on all occasions.

As this Author has some rules superfluous, so he has others idle, and
foolish, and this is one; that a Man when he speaks to another, should not
approach very near to him, least he bespatter him with his Spittle; for there
are some so indiscreet, that they ought to advise before they speak, and bid
them beware of Agua va, as they do at Madrid, when they empty the Chamber-pots
at their Windows.
Water, that the Hearers may retire at some distance, or arm themselves against
the torrent, and these are such who ordinarily speak with a continual motion,
without Parenthesis, Coma, or Period. For my own part, I think it more
dangerous to be subject to those Fires some cast from their Mouth, then the
sprinklings of Spittle, and more dreadful are those Flames of Malice, of
Murmurings, of Flattery, of Obscenity, and Scandal, which issue from them.
Worse also are the foams of Rage, and more need had he to advise us of a flood
of Choler: let him rather reprehend the emissions of Poison, which proceed from
under their lips, for to discommend spitting, is Childishness: Small hurt can
the shrill noise of a Quail do us, God deliver us from the swift Bullet of
injury, from the Shaft of the Throat, from the Wildfire of Treason, from the
Pikes of sharp Tongues, and from the Artillery of Slanders.

Another Precept he has as ridiculous as the rest, That when we speak with
another, we should not lay our Hands upon his Breast, and twine his Buttons
till they fall off. I say yes, let us feel the Pulse of his Breast, touch his
Heart, examine how it beats He means those who never unclose their inward
Garments viz. their Thoughts to none.
, try if he have Loops on his Wastecoat, for there are some have not: let us
pull him by the Sleeve who goes astray, and another by his Skirt, that he may
amend his crooked ways, and so far remember himself as not to be Frantic. The
next that follows, is what was never so much as mentioned in any Commonwealth,
no not in Venice it self, nor in any time of former age, which is, that we
should not in our eating fill both Cheeks at once, as being a great piece of
Clownery: This you see is a Lesson, which the most curious, in their dress and
behavior, least practice, being that which fills up the wrincles of the Face
most, and sets off their beauty to best advantage. Another is, that we should
not laugh loud: and yet there are such ridiculous mockeries in the World, that
a man cannot contain himself by deriding them in his Sleeve only; but he must
necessarily burst into an excess of laughter. The next is like the former, That
we should not chew with our Mouth shut; how good a Rule is this, for the nature
of this Age, in which there are so many hungry Wolves, that the best security
we can take, is scarce sufficient to preserve a morsel within our Mouths from
rapacious hands. What would become of us then if our Mouths were open? for in
no occasion it imports us more then in our eating and drinking to keep them
shut; which was the Rule that the Marquis Spinola, observed when he invited the
ceremonious Henrico to his Table; but that our Author may be punctual in all
points, he forbids us to belch; for though it be healthful, yet it is clownish;
believe me, let all cast out those bad Fumes engendered by ill concoction, those
windy puffs, that swell them, of which those are most full, who are emptiest of
substance: and I wish they may at last work out those Fumes from their heads,
and therefore when they sneeze may God help them to cast out the Wind of their
Vanity, that we may wish them joy of so fair a riddance: for all may know by
the filthiness of the Breath, how corrupted the Air is when out of its place.
Yet there is one Precept of Galateus has much pleased me, and seems very
sound, that so may be confirmed that common saying, There is no Book without
something good, and commendable; he therefore premiseth as a capital Precept,
and fundamental point of his ceremonious Office; that a Gallant of his making,
should endeavor above all to shine with the Endowments of Fortune, and upon
the Basis of Gold to erect a Scheme of Courtesy, Discretion, Gallantry, and
other Parts, which commend an accomplished Gentleman; for if his Fortunes be
small, his Treasury of Knowledge, will be esteemed but Poor; nor shall he have
the reputation of Wise, Discreet, Courteous, as if his inward Perfections were
to be set off with an outward foil; this is my opinion of Galateus. If this
does not content you, said the Bookseller, because he treats of material
Ceremonies, his Doctrine being only of outward carriage: Here is then, and it
may be better to your liking, the judicious and grave Instruction of Iuan de
Vega, which he gave his Son when he sent him to the Court: This sublime
Doctrine is not delivered with the affected gravity of a Portagues, but is as
much as the Count of Portalegre could say when he sent his Son upon the like
occasion. The Count of Portalegre.
This Work, replied the Courtier, is too sublime, and high for me, and fit for
those only who move in the supreme Sphere of the Commonwealth; for he is not to
be esteemed a judicious Workman who shall think to fit a Dwarf with the Shoe
of a Giant; believe me there is no other Book which Art could form more for the
purpose, or accommodated to the humors of Madrid; I know that my Heterodox and
perhaps Stoical Tenants may have caused Men to censure me as Cynical; yet I
shall sooner prefer Truth, then flatter others in their own sense and fancies.
Let me tell you the Book, that you should seek, and read, is Homer's Ulysses.
But hold, and let me declare my self, lest there be a mistake; Do you think the
dangerous Golf he writes of, is in Sicily, and that the Sirens inhabit on those
Sands with their Faces like Women, and their Tails like Fish, or that the Cirze
performs her Enchantments in her Isle, and the proud Cyclops in his Cave? Know
that the dangerous Sea, is the Court environed with the Cylla of Deceit, and
Caribdis of Falsity: those Women you see pass yonder so wantonly Modest, and so
desolutely composed, are the true Sirens, and false Women, whose end is
monstrous, and the remembrance of them displeasing. It was not sufficient that
cautious Ulysses stopped his Ears, unless he had bound himself to the Mainmast
of Virtue, and flying from these Enchantments, steered his Ship to the Haven of
Security: There are Cirzes, who with the force of Magic Charms, have bewitched
men in that manner, that they have transformed them into Brutes. What shall I
say of so many Cyclopses, as foolish, as arrogant, who having bnt one eye, have
yet fixed that on the Objects of their own appetite, and presumption. This very
Book you turn over, shall, as I say, direct your steps, and teach you like
Ulysses to escape this Rock, and as I hope, divert you from those monstrous
encounters, which threaten your destruction. Upon this recommendation they took
his counsel, and passed forward, much guided by what the Courtier had advised,
and Ulysses taught. They met with no Friend nor Kinsman, no Acquaintance,
because they were poor, and in a mean condition.

Nor could Critilo discover his desired Felistuda; and so finding themselves
destitute of all relief, and despised because in want, Critilo determined to
make use of the virtue of some Oriental Stones, which the favor of the Seas
had reserved to him in his Shipwreck: but especially to make experience how
well the solidity of his Diamond could conquer difficulties, and whether the
rich Emerod (as Philosophers write) had the virtue to reconcile Wills, and gain
Affections. With that he brought them to light, which at the same time worked
such miraculous effects, that he soon obtained the good will and wishes of all
those of the best Blood of Spain, the most gallant, discreet, and
understanding, were ambitious of his acquaintance. So great was the Fame of
this Diamond, that it betrayed them into the Covetous hands of some Soldiers,
but were freed from them by a multitude of Friends, who courted their
Friendship, and desired to be of their Kindred; they gained more Cosins then a
King, and Nephews then a Pope, all which the Fame of this Diamond had created.
But the most pleasant accident was that which happened to Andrenio, for in
passing through the great Street to the Palace, came a Page to him, gaudy in
his Livery, and free in his Garb, drew out a fold of a Letter, which he kept
close up, giving him only leave to look on the Firm which was subscribed a
Cousin and Servant of yours; in it she congratulated his safe arrival at the
Court, much complaining that he who was of so near Blood to her, was yet so
much a Stranger and unknown, with all desiring him not to fail to come and see
her, for that Page was there to direct him the way, and show him her lodging.
Andrenio was much surprised to hear the name of Cozen, who believed he had no
Mother; but being more excited with curiosity to try the event, then with hopes
of unknown embraces, together with the Page went directly to the house; But
what strange successes befell him there, is related in the following Crisis.

The Twelfth CRISIS.
The Charms of False Sirens.
THough Solomon was the wisest of Men, yet he was the most deceived by Women,
and having been the most amorous person in the World, he was best able to give
a Character, and a report of their Nature, which was this, That an Evil Woman
is a great Evil to Man, and his worst Enemy; she is more strong then Wine, more
powerful then a King, and being all Falsity, is not afraid to bid open defiance
unto Truth. Less dangerous to us are the Rancours, and Malice of an Enemy, then
the Embraces, and Caresses of a false Woman, said he, who spoke the wisest; for
less hurtful is it, to be pursued by the threatening Dart of a Man, then to have
a Woman follow our steps with pretensions of Love. She is not one Enemy alone,
but many complicated in one; and in her has Malevolence placed its Ammunition,
and Artillery against us, she is composed of Flesh to discompose carnal Man;
the World clothes her, and that she may conquer Man, makes a World of her, and
the Devil over those Garments which the World gave her, casts a Cloak of
deceitful Embraces. She is a Gerion of Enemies, the triple Cord, and Snare of
our Liberty, which is hardly broken. Hence doubtless it is, that all the evils
of the World have Attributes of the Feminine Gender, as the Furies, Destinies,
Sirens, Harpies, for all those Evils may be united in the wickedness of one bad
Woman: Different Passions have their several times, and seasons of age, in
which their strength is most vigorous to encouter Man, some in Youth, others in
Old age; but a Woman without respect of years, is an importunate Tormentor in
all Ages; neither is Youth secure from her, nor Ripe, nor Old age; neither the
Wise, nor Valiant, nor yet a Saint can say that he is invulnerable in those
temptations: for she as a common Enemy always wages War, and yet is so
familiar, that she has corrupted all the Servants of the Soul to assist and
favor her; the eyes consent to the entrance of her Beauty, the Ears are
ravished with her Voice, the hands attract her, the Lips whisper her name; the
Tongue resounds her praises, the Breast sighs after her, and the Heart closes
with her. If she be beautiful, others seek her, if ill favored, she seeks
others, and had not Heaven provided that beauty should be the ordinary Throne
of Folly, The Throne of Folly.
there would not have remained a Man with breath, if liberty be esteemed the
formality of life, O! how amazed Critilo endeavored to deliver deceived
Andrenio, but with small success and advantage to either. For Andrenio departed
blind to seek light at the House of Fire and Flames, he consulted not first
with Critilo, fearing his severe life would prevent him; wherefore guided only
by a silly Page, he walked sometime through turnings and windings of many
Streets discoursing in this manner, My Lady, said the Boy, the honest false
Syrena lives retired from the World, estranged from the Tumults of the Court,
which is a life she chooses both as most agreeable to her melancholy humor, and
as most healthful and pleasant, whilst she diverts her self in the sweet Air of
the Country, and in her cheerful Gardens. At last they came to a house which in
outward appearance promised no great commodiousness, much less magnificence,
which took much off from the expectation of Adrenio, and at the beginning
displeased him: but as soon as he entered in, he seemed to have been enwrapped
into the Palace of Aurora, for the entrance was first into an open Court, a
capacious Theater of Miraculous appearances, and the House quiet, and still,
without noise, or disturbance; Instead of firm Atlantes the Pillars to support
it, the Court was encircled with beautiful Nymphs most artificially worked, and
engraved, bearing on their tender shoulders a Heaven crowned with Seraphims,
but not with Stars; in the center or middle spouted a pleasant Fountain,
emitting successively Flames and Water; it was made in the form of a Cupid,
attended on by the Graces, Love Weeping burns.
and by their Hands supplied with Darts, which continually shot a scorching
Shower both of Water and Fire: These Floods past continually through Pipes of
Alablaster as white as Snow, and gliding swiftly along, one part of the Stream
seemed to pursue the other, murmuring afterward at those whom at their first
source their bubling Voice seemed to flatter. At the end of the Court stood a
green Cypress, which appeared beautiful to a curious Eye; its Bows were more
luxuriant then fruitful, all Flower and Blossom, but nothing came to maturity,
nor proved correspondent to the preceding hopes: It was encircled with
delightful Flowers, which sent forth odours of a strong fragrancy. The Birds
also seemed to bid him welcome, and a gentle breath of Air whistling through
the Trees, joined in confort with the Birds. All which he esteemed as happy
omens and courteous salutations to bid him welcome, or indeed rather to bid him
farewell. The Garden was fitted to nourish pensive thoughts, for whosoever
walked in it, fell into melancholy and deep imaginations. Andrenio went still
toward the pleasures, and delights of the middle, where the Spring stood
spinning Flax into Jasmines, I mean the vain Venus of this Cypress, for never
was Cyprus without Venus. Cyprus and Venus have the same signification.
At his coming Falsirena went forth to meet him, and counterfeiting a Sun in
her smiles, and forming a Half Moon with her Arms, enclosed him in the Heaven
of her Embraces. Sometimes she chid him, anon she spoke kindly, often
repeating, O Cousin! O dear Andrenio! thou art as welcome as desired; and as she
spoke she changed her tone at every word, and stringing Pearls thread by
thread, she twisted and interweaved Falsities. How is it, said she, that having
a house so solely devoted to your. service you should obscure your self in an
Inn; perhaps the poor entertainment you may find here would move you nothing,
yet the obligations of Blood and Consanguinity which I have to you might invite
you. I look on you, and cannot but call to mind the beauteous Features of your
Mother in your Countenance; in truth you very much resemble her, nor can I
sufficiently wonder that you should be so strange here, but I consider that you
are a Novice and a young Courtier. Madam, said he, I must confess I am
something amazed to hear you say, you are my Cousin, who am ignorant of that
Mother that brought me forth; nor do I think my self ungrateful or stupid in
it, in disowning them who neglected me; I have none of my Blood, nor Kindred,
such a Product, and Child I am nothing; advise your self, and consider better,
if you may not probably mistake me for some of a more happy and fortunate
condition. Alas, said she, Andrenio no, I know you well, know who you are, that
you were born in an Isle encompassed with the waters of the greatest Seas: I
know very well, that your Mother and my Aunt, and Mistress, O! how beautiful
she was, and therefore unfortunate, how modest and discreet a Lady, but how
like a Danae, she escaped from Deceit, how like a Helen in her flight, how like
a Lucretia from violence, and like an Europa from spoils? Felisinda thus
arriving here, for so was her name of blessed memory, Violences of Love.
Andrenio was much moved to hear her named for his Mother, who he had heard was
the Wife of Critilo: Which passion and change in him was well observed by the
Falsirena. Andrenio urged much to know the reason of this accident; for I have
heard oftentimes, said he, of this Name. To which she replied, that you may
know I do not lie, take these particulars: Felisinda was married with a
Gentleman as passionate in her love, as discreet, who was prisoner in Goa, who
yet at her departure carried him impressed on her Heart, and you in her Womb,
as a Pawn and Pledge of her Matrimonial Bed; but the time being expired, and
her Travels coming on her, brought forth you in an Isle, giving heaven
innumerable thanks, which had so providently preserved both her credit, and
safety; neither would she trust her Maids the enemies of secrecy, but
committing her self to the strength of her own Valor, and Honor, was the only
Midwife to bring you to light, and casting you on the Earth, more compassionate
then our own Bowels, committed your helpless Body to the Mantles of Grass, and
to the protection of pious Heaven, which was not deaf to her prayers, but
provided you a Nurse, though a Beast, which was not the first time, nor shall
be the last, that they as Substitutes have and shall supply Maternal absence.
Oh! how often she has told me this, with more tears then words, by which one
may easily perceive with how much Passion she related it. How much will she
rejoice when she sees you, and in what manner will she now make amends for her
unhumane cruelty, to which once she was compelled through the sense of her
Honor.

Andrenio was much amazed to hear the riddle of his life thus expounded, and
comparing these particular circumstances with his former knowledge; his tender
disposition caused him to burst into tears, and to dissolve his heart into
drops through the conduct of his eyes. Let us leave off, said she, leave off
the thoughts of past sorrows, and let not ancient griefs recover a new force to
oppress your heart; Tears ease Sorrow.
let us go up, see my poor, but now only happy Cottage: bring us a Banquet, and
Collation, for in this house never can want a kind entertainment: Thus we may
now fancy them going up the Stairs of Porphiry, or of the Perfidious; but we
shall soon find them coming down with eyes like Cats, grown dim at the Rays of
the Sun in his brightest Sphere, and winking at the Moon in her several
Changes: Every Room was observed to be square, and well-ordered, the Roof of
admiral artifice, which resembled a Heaven, at the sight of which many
contemned the real glory of the celestial Stars. There were Mansions and
Habitations for all times, and seasons, even for those that are passed, and all
rarely worked, and adorned; she continually told Andrenio all this is yours, as
it is mine. During this delitious Collation, the Graces entertained him with
Songs and Music, and the Circes enchanted him. There is no way now, said she,
Cousin, but you must stay here, and you shall need to be at no farther charge,
then at the cost of your own pleasure: order that your Portmantles be brought
hither, and though this House shall furnish you with all conveniences, yet I
would not have you loose any thing of your own; your self shall not need to go
forth for any thing, for my Servants shall readily perform your commands in
bringing hither your Baggage, and satisfying the Reckoning which is due in your
Inn. It is necessary, replied Andrenio, that I should go my self, for know that
I am not alone, but the favor you do must be double, and be bestowed on
another besides my self, for I must give an account of this to Critilo my
Father. How, to your Father, who is he, said Falsirena? I call him Father, who
has performed the office of it, in being my Tutor; and if your Relation be
true, he is my natural Father, for he is the Husband of Felisinda, the
Gentleman who was Prisoner in Goa. Go, said the Falsirena, go instantly, and
stay not one minute before you return, and bring Critilo with you, for I will
neither eat nor sleep till I am blessed again with your return. Thus parted
Andrenio, accompanied with the same Page, one of her own Creatures, and her
most faithful Spy: when they were come to their Lodging, they found Critilo
much troubled, and in a thousand thoughts; but so soon as Andrenio saw him, he
cast himself down at his feet, kissing his hands, and saying, O Father! O
Tutor! for my very Heart and Mind tells me the same. What Novelty is this,
demanded Critilo? You know, answered he, it is not strange for me to style yon
so; for besides those ancient obligations I have to you, my Blood cries now in
my Veins, and acknowledges you to be him, who begot me; for know, Sir, that
you have not only given me my being, but by your instructions have produced in
me, those qualities which become a Man, and my Mother is your Wife Felisinda:
This relation I received from a Cousin, the Daughter of my Mothers Sister, and
at this instant I am returned from her, to inform you so much. What means this
of Cousin, demanded Critilo? this name sounds not well to me. Why not, said
Andrenio? for she is a Woman well-fashioned, and seems discreet, let us return
to her, where we shall hear again related this never unwelcome History. At this
Critilo stood something in suspense, and though he heard these particular
circumstances, yet he feared the many inventions and artifices of the Court.
Howsoever, as we all are, being credulous of what he desired, under pretense of
informing himself better, they both went to the House of Falsirena. It seemed
not now the same, but something better adorned, with a state and gracefulness
that made the resemblance of Heaven. You are welcome, said she, Critilo to this
your House, whose want of being acquainted with it can only be an excuse for
not honoring it before. My Cousin, I believe has already informed you of
those mutual ties and obligations we have of Blood, and Kindred, and that his
Mother and your Wife the beautiful Felisinda, was my Aunt, and Mistress, to
whom I owe more for her courteous offices of friendship, then on the score and
natural tie of Blood: I have sufficiently felt the want of her, and already
bewailed it. At this Critilo started, and said, Is she dead then? No, replied
she, not so bad, for her absence is sufficient; her Parents are dead,
principally caused by a discontent they took, to see, that amongst so many
Rivals, which stood in competition for her Beauty, her constancy to you, would
give her leave to make choice of none. She afterward, under the charge and
protection of that great Prince Ambassador now in Germany for this our
Catholic Monarch, went to accompany her Kinswoman the Marquess, with whom she
now lives happy, and contented, and may God in his good time return her again
to us in safety: but I remained with my Mother, her Sister, and though alone
and thus deserted, yet with sufficient support to maintain our necessities both
of Life, and Honor; but as misfortunes come not alone, so I having first lost
her, soon after, my grief having a little pause, I lost my Mother too, whose
death I partly believe was occasioned by her absence: My Kindred now remaining
are my only comfort, to all I owe duties of kindness, Virtue being my study,
and my endeavor to inherit the honor of my Parents, as being one of those who
owe most to the Piety, and good example of their Ancestors: This is my House,
but hereafter no more to be named mine, but yours for ever, as long as your
life shall last, and may it be as durable as Nestors. Let me now conduct you
into some of my Rooms, and chiefest Galleries, which they found full of Roses
and Perfumes; all of them were hung with admirable Pieces and Pictures limbed
by the most artificial Pencils; in some of which they saw described the Success
and Tragedies of their own lives, which they with astonishment beheld, admiring
as well the Art, as the plain Description of this unknown History. Now not only
Andrenio, but also Critilo, was persuaded of her affection, and of the reality
of that information she gave them; so that making their excuses with
thankfulness, they began to contrive the sending for their Baggage, and amongst
that, some precious Stones, which were left of the ruins of Critilo's perished
house; which being brought, and they had over-viewed them, he judged them a due
Present for Ladies of Pleasure, with whom he now drank in a full Cup to the
health of Falsirena; which Jewels after she had much commended for the luster,
and perfections of them, she commanded some of her own to be brought, which she
cheerfully desired him to enjoy; but Critilo rather beseeched her to keep his
for him, and she as gracefully accepted the Profer. Critilo still sighed for
his lost Felisinda, and one day at Table proposed to make a journey into
Germany; but Andrenio already enamoured and captivated with affection of his
Cousin, diverted the discourse, much displeased to hear of his departure, and
she cunningly praised his resolution, but yet propounded difficulties, and
advised him to prolong it, until a time of better convenience. But there
offering now an opportunity, that he might be entered into the service of the
great Phoenix of Spain, which went to crown her self with the Eagle of the
Empire. Andrenio had no farther excuse, yet whilst he prepared for the Journey,
Falsirena made a motion of seeing the two Miracles of the World, the Escurial
for Art, and Aranjuez for Nature, the parallel lines of the Sun of Austria in
his several times, and seasons. But Andrenio was so blind in his Passion, and
his Eyes so wholely darkened, that he had no light remaining to see other
curiosities of Art, or Nature: for the Falsirena having bewitched him, Critilo
in vain used persuasions and reasons for his departure, but at last his sight
not only left him, but his hearing, and from blind he became deaf also. In fine
Critilo resolved, though unaccompanied to pay that just debt to his curiosity,
lest afterward he should be troubled he had not seen the high admiration of
all, or his fancy, and imagination check him for contemning the sight of the
greatest Wonder in the World. So that thither he went alone, Escurial.
though to admire for many. He received in this great Temple of the Catholic
Solomon, the only Fabric excelling the Hebrews glory; not only a satisfaction
equal to his former thoughts, but an amazement in excess: for there he saw the
ostentation of Royal power, the triumph of Catholic Piety, the perfection of
Architecture restored; the Pomp both of ancient and modern curiosity, the last
essay of growing Art, and where Greatness, Riches, and Magnificence concurred
in one Center. From hence he went to Aranjuez, the constant habitation of the
Spring, the Country of Flora, Aranjuez one of the King of Spain 's Country
Houses.
her Arbor of Delight in all Months of the year, the Preservative for Flowers;
the Center of Delights and Content: by both which Wonders, he remained with
such admiration imprinted in him, as well sufficient for his whole life to
administer matter of contemplation. From thence he returned again to Madrid,
much pleased to have satisfied his curiosity, intending to lodge again in the
House of Falsirena: but now he found it shut more close then a Treasury, and
more silent then a Desert: his impatient Servant knocked often at the door, and
the sound of every stroke made an Echo in the heart of Critilo. The Neighbors
being disturbed with the continued noise, bid them not trouble themselves any
more, for there lived none, they all were dead. Critilo startling at that,
replied, Did there not live a principal Lady here, whom not many days ago I
left well, and in good health? One hearing him say Good, laughed. Pardon me,
said he, I do not believe it, nor is she a person of good quality, added
another, who consumes her time in youthful pleasures. Nor yet a Woman, said a
third, but a Harpy, and the worst Woman of this worst and present age.

Critilo could scarce persuade himself what he desired not to hear, but turned
back again to demand if Falsirena dwelt not there: But in the mean time one
came to him, and told him, that he should not trouble himself; for it was true
that not many days ago, there was one dwelt there; a Circes, and a Siren, for
her Enchantments, and one that could raise Tempests, and vexatious Storms; for
besides that, she was wicked, and dissolute; she was a famous Witch, a renowned
Enchantress having the power to metamorphose Men out of their own shapes into
that of Brutes, and particularly into Asses, not of Gold, but of their own
Folly and Poverty. In the Streets of this Court walk thousands converted into
shapes, not humane, because abused with all kind of beastly affections. That
which I can assure you for truth is, that in those few days I have been an
Inhabitant here, I have seen many enter in, but none go out, and in as much as
this Siren is half a A Maremaid.
Fish, she fisheth away their Wealth and Livelihood from all that know her;
their Jewels, Clothes, Liberty, Honor, and that her Frauds may not be
discovered, she changes every day. I do not mean her conditions, nor customs,
but her place and residence, leaping from one end of the Town unto another;
that it is impossible to have the least hopes to find her: Another trick she
has, being the compass by which she steers the course of her Policies; and
that is, that when a Forraigner comes rich and wealthy, she presently informs
her self, who he is, and from whence and to what purpose he came, endeavoring
to know the particulars of his Name, and Family, and so accordingly calls her
self by the name of Cousin, or Sister, and gives her self some Appellations of
their House, and Family; she changes as often Names, as Places, sometimes she
is Cicilia, anon Sirena, Ines, Teresa, Tomasa, Quiteria: and with these Arts
she destroys and ruins others, but triumphs her self, and grows rich with the
spoils; but Critilo could not satisfy himself, with the belief of these
Stories, and therefore desirous to enter in, demanded if the Key were at hand.
Yes, answered one, I have it committed to me in courtesy to admit those in,
who comes to see it. With that he opened it, which when they had entered: This,
said Critilo, is not the House, or I am blind; the other was a Palace. It is
true replied he, whilst it was enchanted, and the most of this nature are so,
Here are no Gardens, but heaps of Moral silth, the Fountains are become
gutters, and sinks to convey ordure and corruption; and the stateliest Rooms
are but Sties, and nests of uncleanness. Has this Siren fisht any thing from
you? tell us the truth. I must confess yes, some Jewels, Pearls, Diamonds; but
what I am most sensible of, is the loss of a friend, I know not whether most by
her fault, or his wilful obstinacy, or whether in the form of a Beast, sold to
his own own Lusts, he wanders through this City. O my Andrenio! said he,
sighing, where art thou? He sought him in every house, which gave occasion of
Mirth to some, but to himself of Sorrow, and so taking his leave of them, he
retired to his former Lodgings.

He gave a thousand turns through the Court, and none could give any account or
advice concerning him; for of a good, and happy success, there are but few
informers, he having with diligence broken his Brains, and drained his Wits to
discover him, at last he resolved to return again, and consult with Artemia,
and so he departed from Madrid, The Sixth Sense.
according to custom, poor, deceived, repenting, and melancholy. He had not
gone far, before he met with a Man of a far different disposition then those
that he had hitherto seen, he seemed to be a strange Prodigy of Nature, for he
had six Senses, one more then ordinarily Men are endued with. This was a
Novelty to Critilo, for many with less then five he had seen, but none with
more. Some there are without eyes that see not clearly, but grope in the dark,
stumble against Blocks, and yet never slacken their pace, not knowing where
they go. There are some that are deaf to words, and capable of nothing but the
sound of air, of noise, of flattery, vanity, and falsity; there are some who
have no smell, and least of any, smell out the savor of their own Houses at
home, whilst all the World besides receives it hot in their Nostrils, and those
whom it least concerns, have the strongest Sent of it; These senseless Animals
are stuffed in their Heads against the Smells of a good repute, either of their
own, or that of their enemies, and having Noses only to wind the sent of small
Punctilio's of Honor, are not touched with the fragrancy which proceeds from
the perfume of true Virtue: There are some also without any kind of Taste,
disrelishing all things of substance and wholesome Nutriment, and are
distasteful in their Society; others being unsavory to them, as they are to
others: Another thing they hinted, which was very observable, that he had met
with many, and those he could nominate who had no feeling, and least in their
hands, where that sense commonly is most tender; for they handle not their
affairs first, and make trial before they proceed; but being hurried with a
certain eagerness, their hands neither ponderate their actions, nor their
reason compares them with former examples. But he whom Critilo thus
occasionally met, was one different to all others; for besides those five
Senses which were most acute and vigorous in him, he had another Sense, which
was more advantageous then all the rest; for it is that which gives life to
Men, and awakens them to discourse, and searches out the most hidden secrecy,
contrives, invents remedies, gives us tongues, with confidence to speak, feet
to run, and wings to fly, and a prophetic spirit to divine future accidents;
and this is necessity, it is a thing very admirable and useful, for though the
Object wants, yet the defect is supplied by the ingenuity it begets: it is
witty, inventive, cautious, active, acute, and is a Sense which for its
excellency has preheminency over all the others.

Critilo had no sooner this knowledge of him, but how well, said he, may you
and I join in company together; I am glad I have met with you, and though
misfortunes do usually attend me, yet now I account my self happy, and so
related to him the whole story of the misfortune which had befallen him in the
Court. I believe you, said Egenio, for so was both his name, and nature, and
though my Journey is to the Grand Fair of the World, published on the Confines
of Youth, and Manly age, the great Gate of Life; yet to serve you, let us go to
the Court, where I will employ all my six Senses in search of him, and whether
Man or Beast I make no doubt, but to discover him: so having entered in, they
sought him with all attention; first on the Theaters, and amongst the
Comedians, in the commonest Streets, in the openest Markets, where they met
great Mules tailed one to the other, every one followed treading on the heels
of him that went before; their Baskets were so laden with Gold and Silver, that
they groaned under their Burden, their Sumpter-Cloaths were fringed with Gold,
and Silk, and some of these wore Plumes of Feathers on their Heads, being
oftentimes the Trappings of Beasts, The Nobility.
and their Pectorals of Gold made a gingling as they moved. He may be some of
these, said Critilo. No, replied Egenio, for these are, I mean, have been great
Men, on whose backs the heavy Burdens of the Commonwealth have been laden; and
though you now see them gallanty adorned, yet take but off their rich Saddles,
and you shall discover their backs so galled and festered, that there is scarce
a place free from the Boyles of Vice. See if he be amongst any of these Country
people, who drag and draw the Cart with creaking Wheels. Nor none of these
neither, for these cast their eyes downward, having no thoughts of Honor, and
therefore contentedly suffer. See yonder is a Parrot which calls us, perhaps it
may be he. No, no, don't give ear to his call, for this is but a Flatterer,
which never meant what he speaks. There is a kind of a Politician of this sort,
that has one thing in his Beak, and another in his Heart; a Prater which only
repeats the words of others, Idle Praters.
that imitates Men, but is not such, and goes clad like a Parrot all in green,
expects to receive the reward of Jests, and accordingly receives it in earnest;
nor does this formal Cat seem to be he which hides his Claws and shows his
Beard. There are many, said Egenio, of this sort who lie at the catch, and
strike not only at open, but at secret and guarded evils; but to judge rightly,
we may call these Men of the Pen; and that old Dog which stands barking yonder,
What is he? He is a bad Neighbor, one who never spoke well of any, A Backbiter.
he is emulous, of a bad intention, melancholy, and that passes for one of the
seventy. I know he cannot be that Baboon which makes mimical Faces, and screws
himself in so various postures in yonder Balcony: O he is a grand Hypocrite!
who would seem, and only imitate good Manners, and Piety of the Religious, and
yet is not so; he may be some grave Accountant, or some Licenciado, some Clerk,
or Writer of Burlesque; and being a Man always in jest, never deals in earnest,
but is made up all of flashes, and little substance. A place where Lions are
kept.
Nor can he be amongst the Lions and Tigers of the Retiro, for those are a
People made up of Processes, Writs, and Executions. Nor yet is he amongst the
Swans in this Pond: for those are Scriveners and Lawyers, Men of the Quill.
Yonder I see an unclean Beast prodigally wallowing in the Mire of his own
beastly Appetite, which he calls and believes to be Flowers. If it be any it
must be he, replied Egenio, for these are the Unclean and Lascivious, who are
so choked in the filth of their own vile Delights, Dishonest.
that whosoever sees them, does abhor and abominate them, and these think the
Mire to be Heaven, and smell not the ill favor which proceeds from the
Putrefaction of the World, which they esteem to be a Perfume, and a fragrant
odor, far excelling the sweetness of Paradise; let me see if this be he. No,
no, it is not he, but a Wretch whose Riches and pampered Body, shall at his
death make a joyful day for his Heirs, and feast for the Worms. Is it possible,
complained Critilo, we cannot find him amongst all these Brutes we have seen,
nor amongst these many Droves we have encountered? Neither drawing the Coach of
the Harlot, nor carrying the Chair of one greater and heavier then he; nor is
it he who sits in his Litter in false Latin, and out of it scarce in good
Spanish, or that Pack-house of corrupted Customs. Is it possible these Circes
should disfigure and disguise a Man in this manner? Thus may Sons beguile their
Fathers, and make them mad with jealousy that they are not their own, who are
not content only to strip them of the Garments of their Bodies, but of those
also of their Mind, degrading them of the very formality and essence of Man:
But tell me Egenio when we find him thus changed into a Beast, how can we
reduce him him again, and restore him to his former condition and shape of Man?
When we have found him, replied he, the business will not be difficult, for
some have perfectly recovered and become themselves, though others have always
retained some tainture and savor of their former condition. Apulejus was worse
then any, Apulejus.
yet with the Role of Silence, an admirable Medicine against Folly was
recovered of his infirmity: for material pleasures being well ruminated, and
our own corruptions considered, it is a sovereign means to take off the mask
which makes them appear amiable. The Companions of Ulysses were metamorphos'd
into Beasts, and with tasting the bitter Root of the Tree of Virtue, recovered
the sweet Fruit of Humanity. We will give him some Leaves plucked from the Tree
of Minerva, which are planted and highly esteemed in the Garden of the courtly
and learned Duke of Orleance; and if not, we will give him some leaves of the
moral Sage you know of, and I am sure it will prove an infallible remedy to
bring him to himself, and to restore his lost Reason.

They having thus given a hundred turns with more pains then success, at last,
said Egenio, I have considered of a better device; let us go to the same house
where he was last, and perhaps, raking there amongst the filth and ruins of
it, we may find this lost Jewel: so thither they went, entered in, and sought
him with much deligence. This is but lost time, said Egenio, for already I have
narrowly searched that place. But hold, said Egenio, let me apply my sixth
Sense, which is the only remedy in this condition. And now he observed that
from one great heap of lascivious filth proceeded a Smoke very thick. Here,
said he, is fire, and removing some moral Rubbish and Uncleanness, there
appeared the Door of a horrid Cave, which when they had opened with some
difficulty, they saw by a confused twilight of infernal Flames, many disanimate
Bodies stretched out in the Cossins of their Sensualities. There were some
young Gallants as shallow and short-witted, as they were long haired; some also
learned Men, but Fools, rich old Usurers, whose Eyes, though open, yet saw
nothing; for some blinded them with a Linen Napkin cast about their Eyes; some
had no other life then what they gave signs by their Sighs and Groans. In fine,
all were frantic, a sleep, and naked, no not a Rag left them to make a
Winding Sheet, wherein to bury their inanimate Bodies. In the midst of these
lay Andrenio so changed and disfigured, that his Father Critilo scarce knew
him. But then he cast himself upon him and wept, and called aloud to his deaf
ears; his Hands were as cold as Clay, no Pulse beating, nor any symptoms of
Breath or Life. Egenio observed that that dim Light, which was not the light of
a Torch, but of a Hand proceeding out of a Wall, which though pale and cold,
was yet adorned with Bracelets of Pearl, purchased with the the Sighs and Tears
of many; the Fingers, which were ringed with Diamonds, bought with Falsity,
burned like Tapers, though they gave not so bright a luster, as that Fire which
scorched and consumed their Bowels. What dead man's hand is this, said Critilo,
one that was hanged? No, replied Egenio, of the Hangmans rather, which
destroys, strangles, and stifles Breath: They had no sooner removed this a
little away, but suddenly they began to revive; for whilst this did burn, their
sleep was so profound, that there was no possibility to awake them. They
endeavored to extinguish it with Water, but could not, for this is the fire of
Naptha, blown by the blasts of amorous sighs, and is more enflamed by the water
of tears; but the way is to cast dust and earth upon it; for Fire, though as
violent as the infernal, is smothered by it. This being done they all awaked,
and every one began immediately to excuse the fault which had brought him into
that Lethargy: the graver sort much ashamed alleged that the disease was
epidemical, and that these flames of uncleanness were not only nourished in dry
Fuel, but in the sappy moisture of greener Sprouts; the Juditious exclaimed
against their own folly, and that Paris in affront to Pallas, was young and
ignorant; the Discreet called it a double madness. Andrenio amongst the
Benjamites, or younger Sons of Venus, had a Dart pierced through his Heart; and
now seeing and acknowledging, Critilo went toward him; What do you think now?
said he. How well has this wicked Woman treated you? in leaving you without
Estate, Health, Honor, Conscience, hereafter by experience so dearly bought,
you will give both credit to my words, and add caution to your self. With that
they all unanimously began to exclaim against her; some called her the Cylla of
Ivory, others the Caribdis of Emerods, a painted Pestilence, Poison in Nectar.
Where there are Reeds, said one, there is Water, where is Smoke, there is Fire,
where evil Women are Devils. There is no greater Evil then a false Woman, said
an experienced Don, except it be two, for then it is double. There is enough
comprehended in this, said Critilo, that they are witty in nothing but in Evil.
To which Andrenio replied, that he must ingeniously confess, that
notwithstanding all this Evil they had cast upon him, he could neither abhor
nor forget them; for I assure you, of all those excellencies the World boasts
of, as Gold, Silver, Stones, Palaces, Gardens, Flowers, Birds, Stars, Moon, and
Sun it self, there is none of that Beauty to me as the Woman; nor can Heaven it
self afford me more happy bliss and felicity then one of the Female Sex, that
is amiable in her Countenance, and kind in her Embraces to me.

These are lofty expressions, said Egenio, but let us go from hence, our time
here is misspent, and those Invectives I have to utter against a false Woman,
are such, that our time is too short to vent them: So we will double down the
Leaf for our discourse in the way. In this manner they all went forth, and
proceeded to the Light disguised to others, but better known to themselves, to
visit the Temple of their own amazement, there to render thanks to undeceiving
Light, hanging upon her Walls the Spoils of their Shipwreck, and the Chains of
their Captivity.

The Thirteenth CRISIS.
The General Fair of the World.
IT it a report of ancient times, that when God created Man, he imprisoned the
licentious nature of Evils in a profound Abyss, which some say was in the
fortunate Islands, and from thence they take their Name and Appellation; for
there he restrained the exorbitancy of Crimes and Troubles, Vice, and
Punishment, War, Famine, Pestilence, Infamy, Sadness, and the very Pangs and
Torments of Death it self. These he linked and chained one within another, and
not trusting to these vile Canalia, made a Gate of solid Diamond, which he shut
with a Padlock of Steel, the Key thereof he delivered to Man's Free Will, to
make his Enemy the more sure, giving him to understand that unless he opened
the door, they could never escape out to all Eternity. Contrariwise he gave
freedom to all other good things in this World, namely to Felicities, Virtue,
Content, Peace, Honor, Health, Riches, and Life it self, permitting them to
walk and range the World as they pleased; so Man lived happily till the Woman,
moved out of her own curious Fancy, was impatient to discover what was
contained in that fatal Cavern; so that one day taking Man in an amorous humor
by her Caresses and Embraces, she hugged from him his Heart, and with that the
Key; which she no sooner obtained, but without farther consideration, she
rashly set her hand to open the Prison, where Evils were enclosed. The Key was
no sooner put into the Hole of the Lock, but the Universe trembled, and the
bolt thrust back, out came a Flood of Evils, which crowding in multitudes, flew
like a whirlwind through the whole circumference of the World. Pride the
Captain of the Band took the Front, and met with Spain the first Province of
Europe, Spain.
and finding it a place agreeable to its humor, resolved to take up his
habitation there, where he now lives and reigns, set in the same Throne of his
Kindred, self-estimation, contempt of others, desire of sovereignty, and to be
commanded by none. Much is he pleased to be styled Don Diego, and to boast his
Lineage and Blood from the Goths, to make great ostentation to praise himself,
to speak high and hoarse, and that with gravity, disdain, action, and with all
kind of presumption, which is not an affectation only of the Nobility, but an
humor common to every Plebeian. Covetousness overtaking Pride, and finding
France in the hands of none, France.
possessed it self of it, from Gascoigne to Picardy. Its beggarly Family spread
misery in every part, a base ignobleness of mind, and a servile disposition fit
to be made the Slaves of other Nations, who apply themselves to vile and mean
Offices, selling their selves to bondage for Interest; their toil always
laborious, their bodies naked, their feet unsho'd, unless with Wooden Clogs.
Sabots, all Workmanmanship being cheap by the multitude of such Slaves. In
fine, a disposition to commit the most base and vile attempts for Money, that it
may well be said that Fortune, compassionate of their low Spirits, made some
recompense for the common baseness in the rare Endowments of their Nobility,
who so much differ in excellency from the vulgar people, that they are become
two Extremes, without a Middle. Deceit passed into Italy, Italy.
taking deep Root in the Italians Breasts. In Naples for their Words, In Genoua
for their Dealing; for in that whole Country is the Army and Kindred of Falsity
numerous and strong; Deceit, Artifices, Inventions, Plots, Treasons, all which
they style the effects of honest Policy, the order and good management of a
profound Brain. Anger took another course, and passed into Africa, Africa.
and her adjacent Isles, being pleased with the fierce and rugged conversation
of the Alarves, and African Monsters. Gluttony with her Sister Drunkenness
(exempting that precious Margarite of Valois) has devoured both upper and
lower Germany; Germany.
for there they spend days and nights in luxurious Diet, their Estates and
Consciences are drowned in their Bowls; and though some are drunk but once,
yet it is a continual intoxication their whole life; These Vices in War devour
Provinces, lay Fields waste, and for this reason Charles the Fifth composed the
belly of his Army of Germans. Inconstancy flew into England, England.
Simplicity into Poland, Infidelity to Greece, Barbarity into Turkey, Craft into
Moscovia, Morosity into Sweadland, Injustice into Tartary, Deliciousness into
Persia, Cowardice into China, Rashness to Iapan, and Sloth coming late, found
all places taken up before, and no room left, that so she was forced to pass
into America, and take up her habitation amongst the Indians. Luxury, that
famous and renowned piece of Gentility, as great, as powerful, esteeming the
bounds of one Province too narrow a confinement, at last extended it self
through all the World, filling it from one end unto the other: and so
incorporating it self with other Vices, has taken so deep a root in every
Nation, that it is hard to be resolved which part is most polluted with this
growing infection. Woman being the first subject which Evils encountered, made
her their first Prey, and from head to foot swelled her with the Venom of
Malice. This was the discourse Egenio used to his two Companions, after he had
conducted them out of the Court, by the Gate of Light, Puerta del Sol or the
Gate of the Sun, which is one of the Gates of Madrid.
which was of the Sun, to bring them to the grand fair of the World, published
in the great Empire which divides the pleasant Meadows of Youth, from the ruff
and rugged Mountains of Manly age, where multitudes of people flock to buy and
sell, some such as the most discreet came only to see and observe the
conditions of the vulgar; they entered through the broad path of convenience,
the universal Garden of pleasure, and contentment; some praising what others
abhorred; as soon as they set footing on one of these entrances, for many there
were, came two prating Sophisters, which they called Philosophers, one of one
Sect, and the other of another; for all men are divided into several opinions,
and every head begets a fancy like his own Brain. Socrates invited them (for so
the first was called) to one part of the Fair, where those Commodities were
sold, which most conduced to accomplish a Man, and to enrich him with the
Treasury of unperishable Virtue; But Simonides (for so the other was named)
told them, that all the Merchandises of the World were reduceable into two
Classes, Honor, and Profit; Interest.
Honor was always full of Vapor and Smoke, and empty of Substance, or
Solidity; but the other was an inexhaustible Mine of Gold, the Coffer of
Riches, and a Compendium of all Worldly advantages. This I profess to you, but
the choice I leave to your own Arbitrament. These different offers greatly
perplexed their friends which way they should incline, their opinions being as
disagreeable as their humors; and as they were thus divided, came a Man to
decide the difference; in his hand he brought a piece of Gold, with which he
rubbed theirs, pretending to know them thereby. What does this man mean, said
Andrenio, I am, replied he, the cunning Critic in judging Men's affections, the
Touchstone of their Humors. How, said Andrenio; the Touchstone? This it is,
said he, showing him the Gold. That is a strange Touchstone, said Andrenio,
for it is the Gold that is tried, rather then the Stone. It is true, said he,
but the Touchstone of Men is Gold, and those to whose hands it cleaves, are
not true, but false Men: So that a Judge to whose clammy Palm the Gold sticks,
we presently condemn him for a tried Man, and dismis him from his Bench of
Judicature. That Prelate that hoards his Fifty thousand Dollars rent, is not so
much to be esteemed golden Mouthed, for his Pious and florid Sermons, as his
Chest is for the Treasure it amasses. That Officer that struts in his Gold
lace, and is clincant, and Vapors in his Plumes of Feathers, shows that he
has displumed his Soldiers, and does not succor them like the valiant
Borgonon D. Claudius Manricius. That Cavalier who Rubricks his Executions with
the Blood he has drawn by the instrument of extortion from the Poor, is indeed
no Gentleman. When the Wife goes gallant, and the Husband poor, it breeds
suspicion. In fine, all these whose hands are not clean, nor well wiped from
the clammy Birdlime of Interest, cannot be Men of honest integrity. And so you,
pointing to Andrenio, to whose Palms Gold will stick, and leave its impression,
pass over to this side. But he, pointing to Critilo, who has not that clammy
Palm, nor has the print of Coin on his Fingers ends, let him turn up by this
way of Integrity. But that he also, replied Critilo, meaning Andrenio, may do
the same, it is necessary I should follow him.

And thus going forward, they began their discourse by the rich Shops on the
right hand, where they read an Inscription, Here is sold the best and worst,
and going in, they found that they were Tongues, the best were those that held
silence, which they bit between their Teeth, and fixed to the roof of their
Palate; and a little farther stood a Man making signs that they should be
silent, so far he was from crying his Merchandise. What is it this Man sells,
said Andrenio; and with that the Seller clapped his Fingers to his Mouth. How
shall we know in this manner what it is you sell? Without doubt, said Egenio,
he sells silence: It is a Merchandise rare and important, said Critilo, I
thought the whole store had been spent in former times, or that it was a drug
now, and in no demand. This Commodity is brought from Venice, especially
Secrecy, Secrecy.
which is a Fruit that these parts do not produce. Who is it then that spends
it? This, replied Andrenio, is a Commodity for melancholy Hermites, Anchorites,
and Monks, who only know the use of it, and suck from it their best advantage.
For my part, said Critilo, I believe the most that use this, are generally, not
the good, but the bad. For the dishonest conceal their sin, the Adulterers
dissemble their Uncleanness, the Assassinate covers his Cruelty, the Thief
enters with the silent steps of his Woollen Socks. In fine, Sin as ashamed of
it self, arrives not to that Impudence, as to blow a Trumpet before it, but
treads softly, speaks not high, and goes veiled in all its Enterprises: But the
World is changed now, replied Egenio, and this age is arrived to that pitch of
impudence, that those who should be silent speak most, and the debauched person
boasts in the number of his iniquities. You shall see another, whose Nobility
is disgraced by his unseemly Carriage, and whose lascivious pastimes give him
but small content, unless they appear impudent and shameless in the face of the
World. The Fencer who plays Prizes, is proud of the many Scars in his Face. The
amorous Boy is pleased to have his Locks and Features commended. The dissolute
Wife neglects her Household affairs, only to dress her Face. The Thief is not
ashamed of the Gallows, and the Ambitious pleads for a Title to inscribe over
the list of his base Ancestors. In this manner we see the worst and most
wicked, are those who in the World make the greatest noise and bustle. Who
then, Sirs, are those who buy? he that acts and does not speak; he who performs
him Employment, and says nothing, is like Harpocrates, who never incurred the
censure of any. Let us know the Price, said Critilo, for I would buy some
quantity, for perhaps this Commodity is not to be afforded in another place.
The Price, replied they of Silence, is Silence also, how can this be? For if
that which is sold, is Silence, how can the Price be satisfied with the like
return? Very well, for the benefit of ones Silence is repayed with that of
another; for one replies not, because the other speaks not, and all say do you
be quiet, and we shall be silent. Then they passed hence to an Apothecaries
Shop, where there was an Inscription written, Here is sold the Quintessence of
Health; a thing, said Critilo, of no small Excellence, so that he was
importunate to know, what it was, which they told him was the Spittle of ones
Enemy. This, said he, I should rather call the Quintessence of Poison, being
more mortal and venomous, then the foam of the Basilisk: for I should rather a
Toad should spit on me, a Scorpion sting me, a Viper bite me, then to be
bespattered with the Froth of an enraged Enemy. The Spittle of a faithful and
true Friend is Balsamic, and the only Remedy to cure our Infirmities. You do
not yet well understand me, said Egenio, for the flattery of a Friend is a more
dangerous Charm; that Passion by which he encourages our faults, that affection
by which he dissembles our infirmities, and persuades us that our Estate is
better then it is, hastens his Friend who is sick with the abundant humors of
his sins into the Grave of his destruction. Believe me a true censure will
better advantage him, though distilled from a bitter Potion which an enemy
administers, for that scowers out the spots of his Honor and Reputation, and
cleanses the stains of Fame; for as it takes off the acrimony of the envious
from us, so it keeps us constant and close to the line and point of Virtue and
Reason. After this some others called them to another Shop in great haste, for
the Merchandise was almost all sold and exhausted, and that was Truth, and this
was the only time to buy it. Of which asking the Price, they told them, it was
now given freely, but hereafter the smallest quantity would be inestimable, and
not to be sold, though we would buy it with our dearest sight. Another cried
out heartily to come and buy, for the longer they stayed, the more they lost, a
Commodity which could never be purchased hereafter, and no Price could redeem
it, and that was Time. Another cried his Ware, which he sold for nothing, and
the value great; and that was Admonition, a thing which Fools buy at their own
cost, and the Wise at another. Where is Experience sold, demanded Critilo? a
thing of an inestimable value; and for that they directed him a great way off,
to the Shop of Years. And where is that of Friendship, demanded Andrenio? This
is not bought, said they, though many sell it: but bought friends are not
indeed such, nor are they worth any thing. In Letters of Gold in another place,
was wrote, Here are sold all things, and that for Nothing: Here I will go in,
said Critilo: but there they found the Merchant so poor, that he was totally
naked and stripped of all, forsaken, and nothing in his Shop; so they asked how
his Dealing was correspondent to his Motto? Very well, replied the Merchant.
But how is it you sell all things without Price? Yes, by despising of them,
setting no value nor estimation on them; for he who can overruled himself, and
do thus, is Master of the World, embraces all in his Arms, and he who
contrariwise esteems and adores them, is rather the Slave and Servant, then
Master of them. Hard by was wrote, He who gives to another, bestows on himself,
and those who receive are obliged by the Gift. This they supposed to be
Courtesy, Courtesy.
and civil respect which honors all the World. Here is sold, cried another,
that which is every Man's own, and not another. This is not much, said
Andrenio. Yes, said the Seller, but it is, for many sell that Diligence they
perform not, and the favor and interest which they have with others, and many
times those actions and labors they never sweated or labored for. Thus
passing from one Shop to another, they met with one, where Merchants with much
trouble and perplexity drove away their Customers, and discouraged all that
came to trade with them. Do you sell, or not, said Andrenio? I never saw so
absurd an action, that the Merchant should deny access to their Chapmen, and
hinder their own Profit and Sales. What is it you mean by this? With which they
uncivilly treated them, and desired them to be gone and Trade farther off. Do
you sell, said he, or not? What is it Fraud, or Poison? Neither one, nor other,
but rather the most esteemed Jewels of the World; for it is Estimation it self,
Estimation.
which a reservedness only can preserve: familiarity destroys it, and intimate
society disenobles it; This is agreeable, said Critilo, to that saying, That
Honor inhabits at a distance, and that there is no Prophet in his own Country;
and that were the Stars themselves fixed near us, they would in few days loose
their Luster and Esteem; so ancient years are valued by the present, as the
Sages of our times will be the admiration of succeeding ages.

Yonder, said Egenio, is a rich Jeweller, let us go thither, where perhaps we
may buy some precious Stones at a cheap Rate, in which are not on-Lustre, but
Virtue also; being entered in, they found the discreet Duke of Villa Hermosa in
person there, desiring the Lapidary to show him some of the finest sort, and of
greatest estimation. He answered that he would, for he had some of great Value
and Price: and as all expected some rare oriental Stone, some Diamond, or
Emrod, whose sparkling brightness chears up those who behold it; he drew out a
piece of black Jet, as dull and melancholy as himself. This, said he, excellent
Sir, is a Stone the most worth your estimation and value; in this has Nature
instilled the quintessence of Virtue; into this has the Sun, the Stars, the
Elements, conspired to drop their most precious Spirits and influence. At these
high expressions, they were all amazed, and remained silent, giving way to the
discreet Duke to spend his Judgment; who replied, What is it you mean by this?
Is not this a piece of Jet? What then can this Lapidary pretend by it? What
need is there of all these extravagant praises of it? Does he take us for
Indians? This, said the Jeweller, is more precious then Gold, more profitable
then Rubies, more bright then the Carbuncle: Pearls are not to be compared with
it. In fine, it is the Stone of Stones. The Duke not being longer able to let
him run on in these extravagancies; Is this more, said he, then a piece of Jet?
No, replied he, Why then do you give these exorbitant commendations of it, for
of what virtue or beauty is this Stone? Or what Novelty or strange effects have
been found lately in it? It is not pleasing to the sight, as these of a shining
and transparent Luster; nor is it Physical or Medicinal, as the Emrod, nor
Comfortable as the Diamond, nor Purifies as the Saphyr, nor an Antidote against
Venoms, as the Bezar, nor can facilitate Birth like the Eagles Stone, nor is a
remedy to ease Distempers; for what more then can it serve, then as toys for
Children? Your Excellency, said the Lapidary, must pardon me, for it is only
useful for Men, and those of the wisest sort, for it is the Philosophers Stone,
which teaches, and instructs us in the Precepts of Morality, and in one word,
that which most imports, it gives us Rules which way to guide the course of our
lives. In what manner? by contemning and scorning the World, by yielding to it
in nothing, that neither Cares should weaken our Stomach, nor Troubles make us
start from our Sleep; nor as fond Fools affect the World too much, but to walk
as free and disinslaved, as the King of it, made us; this is to live, this is a
business in whose right management the World is most ignorant. Give it me
hither, said the Duke, for I will chain it in my House, and enclose it in the
most secret Drawers of my Cabinet. Here is fold, cried one, a Sovereign remedy
against all Diseases; to which there crowded such a multitude of Customers,
that the Shop could not receive their Feet, but their Heads being empty, and
without substance, were more easily contained in a narrow compass. Andreuio
impatiently desired them, to give him suddenly of that Merchandise; and they
told him Yes; for we know you have need of it, and therefore have Patience;
Patience.
but he presently after again importuned them to dispatch him. Sir, said the
Merchant, have I not already given it to you? How given it me? Yes, replied
another, I am an eyewitness of it. Andrenio growing angry hereat, denied it
with fury. It is true, replied the Seller, though he has no reason neither in
what he says, for though they have given it to him, yet he has not received
it; wherefore be patient and expect it: The Seller having thus wearied the
expectation of his Customers, desired them to retire, and give way for others,
having that which they came for. What means this, replied Andrenio? Do you
affront us, see with what patience we attend, give us our desires, and we shall
soon depart. You may go, said the Merchant, for I have already given it you,
and that twice. To me? You have only bid me have Patience. How precious a
Commodity, laughing aloud, said the Merchant, is this? It is so admirable a
remedy against all disastures, that all generally, from the King to the
Peasant, that are not Masters of it, are unarmed Soldiers against the Worlds
Revolutions. Here is, said another, to be sold what all the Riches of the World
have not value enough for to buy. Who then can trade for it? Those who will not
loose it, was replied. And that is Liberty: Liberty.
a thing which we ought most to esteem; for not to have our dependence on
another Will, especially to be disingaged from obedience to an ignorant Ruler,
or of him, whom we would be ashamed to own, not only for our Master, but for a
Servant; for there is no pain nor trouble greater then to have men impose
weights on our heads, and to make them serve instead of Backs for Burden.
Amidst this came in a Chapman into the Shop, who told the Merchant he would
sell him his Ears; at which motion they all laughed; but Egenio especially, who
informed them, that it was the principal thing, and first that we should buy; a
thing as useful as any, for as we have bought Tongues to keep silence, so let
us buy Ears that we may not hear, which will be of excellent use being set on
the shoulders of a strong Poror Miller. In all this Fare, it was a rare sight
to sind one, who sold his own Commodities; things also not esteemed, for what
they are, but for what they appeared, and Men not seeing, nor hearing with
their own Eyes, and Ears, but with those borrowed from others; whose very Taste
was regulated by another Palate; and their whole Knowledge and Judgment
beholding to their own Credulity and others Information. But a thing very much
observed was, that the famous Men of the World, as Alexander, the two Caesar's,
Julius, and Augustus, and others of that Rank, and Order of time, together with
the Moderns, as the invincible Captain Don Iuan of Austria did much frequent a
Shop on which there was no Inscription; Don John of Austria.
their curiosity of knowing the mystery thereof, and the unwillingness of the
people to inform them what was to be sold, made them more desirous and
inquisitive; besides the Merchants were those, who were the most Discreet and
Judicious. There must be some deep mystery in this, said Critilo; and going to
one of them, asked him privately, what was their sold? Who replied, that there
was nothing sold, but given at a high Rate. What is that? It is that
inestimable Liquor, which makes men Immortal, Deifies their Memories, and makes
them only known, and chronicled in the World, whilst millions besides are
buried in perpetual oblivion; as if they were not only dead, but never had
lived: all confessed it was a precious thing, saying, What an excellent fancy
had Francis the First, Matthew Corvinus, and others. Tell us if there may be any
left for us? Yes, said they, there may be, upon condition you repay as much, I
mean of your own Sweat; for so much as a man sweats with his Industry and
Travel, so much does he obtain of Fame and Immortality. The Virtue of Critilo
seemed deserving of it, to whom they gave a Glass of that Immortal Liquor; who
looking on it with much curiosity, believing to see the influence of the Stars
smile upon it, or some quintessence of the Suns Rays, or some distilled Spirits
of Heaven, he found it to be nothing but a little Ink mingled with Oil; and
therefore in contempt he would have thrown it away, had not Egenio hindered
him; for know, said he, that the Oil of the Students Lamp, and the Ink of
Historians, mixed with the Sweat and Industry of famous Worthies, and sometimes
with the Blood of their Wounds, compose an Immortality of Fame. In this manner
the Ink of Caesar Deified Achilles, and that of Virgil, Augustus; Caesar was
immortalized by his own, that of Horace renowned his Mecoenas, that of Iovius
his invincible Captain, the Ink of Peter Matheus, Henry the Fourth of France;
but the reason why all arrive not to this pitch of excellency, is because they
want success in their Enterprises, or at least the fortune of a good Historian
to transfer them to Posterity.

Tales Milesius sold Works without Words, saying his Deeds were Men, and words
only Handmaids to them, or Servants of the Female Sex. Sapientia prima est
stultitia caruisse.
Horace says that the first step to Wisdom is to be free from Folly. Pitacus,
another of the Wits of Greece, moderated exorbitant Prices, and reducing all
things to the just balance of ne quid nimis. There were many reading an
Inscription, which was, Here is sold the Best at a bad Price; but few came into
the Shop. Do not wonder, said Egenio, that this should be a Merchandise, so
little esteemed of in the World. Some wise men, said the Merchant, trade here
by returning good for bad, and thus employ their Talents with no small
advantage and happy returns. This is a place, said another, neglected by all,
every one being suspicious, that he who is his greatest Friend to day, will to
morrow be his Enemy; and indeed few Countrymen of Valentia enter here no more
then they do into the Shop of Secrecy. Valentia a Province in Spain.
At the end of all, there was a common Office, to which all people applied
themselves to know the value and estimation of every Commodity, but the way and
means how to prise and rate them, was odd and strange, it being to beat them in
pieces, to spoil, burn, and in fine, to destroy that which we most love, and
value, as our Health, Estate, Honor; in short, what is either dear or precious
to us: Is this (said Andrenio) the way to raise Estimation? Yes, replied they;
for till our Folly has made us sensible of the want of Goods, either of Nature
or Fortune, our Judgments can never set the due Price, and value upon them.

At the request of Andrenio they passed to the other part of the Fare of Humane
life, notwithstanding the unwillingness of Critilo to be drawn with them, for
oftentimes to please Fools, Wise men err: On this side there were many Shops of
different conditions each from the other. The first Inscription was, Here is
sold him who buys. This is the first step to Folly, said Critilo. And pray God
it proves not mischievous to us, replied Egenio. Notwithstanding which saying,
Andrenio had precipitated himself in, had not they pulled him back, warning him
of the danger, and that his entrance there was the Gate to Captivity. To
confirm which they saw some afar off, and those none of their smallest Friends,
captivated in Chains, and sold Slaves to unworthy Masters. On another Shop it
was written, Here is sold that which is given. Which some guessed to be
rewards. Others the remuneration and Presents of these times. Without doubt,
said Andrenio, it must be that which is given, and bestowed too late, which is
as much as not to give, and deserves a thankless return. No, said Critilo, it
may be Gifts, or Alms, bought with Demands; for Requests cost a certain
reluctance of Nature, fearing to receive the discourtesie of a denial. But
Egenio said, they were the Gifts of this vile World. How bad a Merchandise is
this, cried one at the Gate; but however they were impatient to enter in, and
when they returned again, they complained of most accursed Ware; for if you
possess it not, you are tormented with a desire to enjoy it; when you have it,
your care to keep it, is troublesome; and when you loose it, you consummate all
your misery with vexation. They observed another Shop full of nothing but empty
Glasses, and Chests, and yet full of People. To this hurly-burly and crowd came
Andrenio, and asked, seeing nothing, what was sold there? They answered Wind
and Air, and something else, both of less substance and advantage. And is there
any that will buy it? Yes, said they, and some are so covetous of it, that they
esteem their whole Estates too small a Price wherewith to purchase it. That
Chest yonder is filled with Flatteries, and sold at the highest Rate; In that
Glass are words the Price unvaluable; In that Box is a Conserve of Favors,
generally asked for and demanded; That vast Trunk is swelled with Falsity, a
Commodity of more Demand then Truths, especially if Craft and Cunning can for
three days conceal the Fallacy. As the Italian says, In tempo di guerra bugia,
cometerra. Is it possible, considered Critilo, that any man should buy Air, and
pay himself with it too? Do you wonder at this, said they, What is there in the
World but Air, All Air.
take that from Man, and you shall soon see what then remains. And yet here is
sold something less then Air, which notwithstanding is very satisfactory, and
Men are paid sufficiently with it; for there they saw a young smock-fac'd Lad,
actually dealing out many and rich Jewels, Caresses, and Gallantries, which
always go together, to an ugly Jade, of whom he was enamoured; and being asked
what he thought pleasing or amiable in her, He answered, a certain Mien and
little Air she had. And is it but a little Air, said Critilo, and yet is it
capable to enkindle so much Fire? There was another Fellow, that was delivering
out many Ducats, to some, that should kill his Adversary; and said one to him,
Sir, what hurt has he done you? Done me, said he, he has not done much; but
there was a kind of word which he spoke; -- What was it, Affrontive? No, said
he, but yet methought, he spoke it in a certain Manner, and Air, that offended
me much, Alas, said Critilo, is it not so much as Air, which is likely to cost
you and him so dear? here was one great Prince to be seen that consumed all his
Estate and Revenue in Parasites, and Buffoons; and he said, he did it because
he was pleased with their Gestures, their Fasnion, and Behavior; and in that
manner at a dear rate are sold the Punctillio's of Honor, the Vanities of the
Mode, the Air of Songs, and a Debonaire Behavior.

But that which was beyond all admiration, was a certain Woman so fierce, that
she run through the Market like an infernal Fury, scratching and tearing all
that came to her Shop, crying out, Who buys Sorrows, Headaches, Potions to
break Sleep, bad Dinners, and worse Suppers; and yet whole Armies entered in,
and the worst was, that when they came to number them, few remained alive, and
such as did, came forth all besmeared with Blood, and with more Stabs and
Wounds then Marquis Borro; Marquis Borro.
and notwithstanding such as saw these passages, and newly came, did not
forbear to enter in. Critilo was startled to behold so much Cruelty. See, said
Egenio, how many Evils entice and ensnare poor Mankind, Gold moves his Avarice,
Delight affects his Luxury, Honors raise his Ambition, Meats please his
Gluttony, Ease cherishes his Sloth, only Anger affords naught but Blows,
Wounds, and Death, and yet many Fools and Madmen purchase it at the dearest
Rate.

There stood another making an Outcry, Here are sold Bonds and Fetters of
Matrimony. Some came to cheapen them, and asked whether they were Bands of
Iron, or Women? That is all one, said he, for they both hold fast alike, and
for their Price, you may have them for nothing, or something less. How can that
be, said one? what less then nothing? It must certainly be a bad sort of
Merchandise. What, Women? and those cried too, considered another: for my part
I will have none of them, neither seen, nor unseen, known nor unknown.
Howsoever there came one, and he demanded a handsome Wife, which they sold him
at the Price of an Aching-head; and the Match-monger assured him, that the
first day would be his own happiness, Marriage.
but that for other days he must be content to share them with other Men.
Another came, who was well warned hereby, and he would have an ugly Wife. And
for this, said the Seller, you shall pay with a perpetual trouble. They invited
a young Man passing by to take a Wife; but he answered, that it was too early
yet for him; And asking the same of an ancient Man, and he said it was too
late. But when another, who thought he had more discretion then the rest, asked
for a Wise Woman; they brought him out a most ill-favored Creature, all Bones
and Tongue. But said one wiser then he, Let me, good Sir, have one that is
agreeable to me in all things; for I am assured that a Woman is the other half
of a Man; for that at first they were both really one, till God separated them
for not obeying his Divine Command; and this is the cause why man seeking his
other half, is transported with a vehement propensity toward the Female Sex.
You have some reason, answered they, but it is very difficult for every one to
find his other half, for all things are confused and shuffled together; so that
the half which belongs to the Chollerickman, we give to the Phlegmatic, that
of the Melancholy to the Cheerful, that of the Handsome to the Hard-favoured,
and sometimes that of a young Man of Twenty, to an old decrepid Dotard of
Seventy; which is the occasion that most married Men live in a repenting state.
But Mr. Matchmonger by your leave, said Critilo, you have no excuse in this,
for the inequality is sufficiently apparent between fifteen years and seventy.
What would you have me do, replied he, they are blind, and will have it so, and
the reason hereof is, Sir, because that they, being Girls, desire speedily to
be Women, and the Men being old and doting, turn Children, and as ill luck
will have it, when they have not young Men by their sides, they are displeased
to have such lie by them, who are troubled with Coughs, Ptisicks, and Rheumes.
But as to this Woman now, there is no remedy, take her as you desired; but the
Chapman reviewing her again, found that she came short in two or three
particulars, both as to her Age, her Quality, and her Riches, and willing then
to disclaim his Bargain, declared she was not agreeable to his desire. Take her
however, said he, for in time you may accommodate her to your Mind, for
otherwise she may become much worse; but have a care you afford her not all
that is necessary, for in giving her that, she will quickly come to arrogate
that, which is superfluous. One being invited to see a Wife, was much praised
for his answer, That he would not choose a Wife by his Eyes, but by his Ears,
and in reward thereof obtained one, who had a good Fame for her Dowry.

At length they were invited to the House of Good Cheer, where there was a
Banquet prepared. This must be the quarter of Gluttony, said Andrenio. It may
be so, replied Critilo, but those that enter seem the Eaters, and those that go
forth appear to be the Meat that is devoured: and here were rare Sights, for
there was a great Lord set up in State, encircled with Gentlemen, intermixed
with Dwarfs, Buffoons, and Flatterers, like the Ark of -- he eats well, but the
account was large, for they avouched that he had eaten One hundred thousand
Ducats a year Rent, which account was passed without any question or scruple.
Critilo considering hereof, said, how can this be? for he has not eaten the
hundred part of what they pretend. It is true, replied Egenio, but what he has
not devoured, these have. Then according hereunto, said he, let them not say,
that such a Duke has a hundred thousand Crowns a year, but only a thousand,
and that the rest only consists in troubles and vexations of Mind. There was a
sort of people like Camelions, that sucked in Air, and pretended that they grew
fat with it, but at length all vanished into Air. Some eat all, and some drank
all, some sucked in their Spittle, and others chewed upon an Onion; and at
length those that eat were eaten themselves, and that to the very Bone. In all
these Shops was sold nothing of substance, or true benefit; howsoever on the
right hand, were Wares of the most precious quality, and Truths of the purest
Touch, which were sold to Men's own selves; such as these, The Wise man is with
himself; and God is All-sufficient. In this manner they came out from the Fare,
discoursing as they went. Egenio being other then what he was before, because
now rich, intended to return to his Lodging, for in this life, we have no
House, or abiding Mansion. But Critilo and Andrenio resolved to pass the Gates
of Virile Age in Aragon, of which the famous King gave this testimony, that he
was born to make as many Knights of St. Iago, as should be Conquerors of
several Kingdoms, and comparing the several Countries of Spain to the different
Ages of Man, attributed the robustious and manly Age to that of Aragon.

The Conclusion, Being the Universal Reformation.
IF Men change their inclinations every seven years; how much more must their
Judgments alter in every Period of their four Ages. He that understands little,
or nothing, lives but by halfes; the Faculties of our Souls are feeble in our
infancy; and the common or inferior, as well as the more noble Powers lie
buried in an unsensible Infancy, exercising only an animal Life, and increasing
with a Vegetation like Flowers, or Plants. But the time comes when the Soul
proceeding out of its Mantles, enters into the Jovial Stage of Youth, which
being Sensual and Luxurious, is most naturally expressed by such Epithites. He
that understands little, indulges his Genius, and pursues those Inclinations,
to which Youth and Nature prompt him, neglecting the use of the sublimer
Faculties. Howsoever at length, though late, he arrives at the Rational Life
which appertains to Man; his Judgment being awakened, he reasons, and
discourses, desires to be esteemed, The Employments of Manhood.
thirsts after great Actions, embraces Virtue, cultivates Friendships, pursues
Knowledge, treasures up Wisdom, and attends to every noble and worthy Action.
He that compared the life of Man to the swift current of a Stream, did apply an
apt similitude rightly fitted to the transient condition of Humane nature,
which glides away like a passing Water. The life of Man compared to a Stream.
For Infancy is a lively Brook springing from amidst little Sands, the Muck of
our Bodies being produced from the Dust of nothing. It twinkles as bright as a
little spark, it smiles, but does not laugh, it runs after the little bubbles
of Wind, tumbles amongst the Pots, and binds it self with the green Stays with
which the Nurse keeps it from falling. But Youth fallies forth like an
impetuous Torrent, runs, leaps, precipitates its Waters like Cataracts, bubbles
on the loose Pebbles, turns into a thousand Eddies, troubles the clearness of
its Streams, and casts all into Froth, and Fume. But the fury of this Brook
tumbling into the Age of Manhood, glides then with a more quiet Stream, and is
as smooth, and still, as it is deep: It then diffuses it self without noise
toward some good end or design; it overflows the Meadows to make them fertile
and rich; it encompasses Cities, to carry their Vessels of Provisions, and
fortify them against their Enemies; and in short enriches whole Provinces with
all things necessary and useful. But alas! at length this placid River comes to
discharge it self into the froward Sea of Old age, emptying every drop of it
self into the profound Abyss of Infirmities, and Diseases: Here it is wherein
Rich men loose the vigor of their strength, their pleasures, and the
remembrance of their very names: Here it is wherein the shattered Vessel drives
to Leeward, leaking in a hundred places; and being beaten on all sides with
Gusts, and Storms, is at length cast away, being shipwracked in the Gulf of the
Grave, and swallowed up in the Sands of perpetual Oblivion.

Critilo and Andrenio, our two Pilgrims of Life, were now arrived in Aragon,
which Travelers call, The Good Spain, Aragon the Good Spain.
where being entered, they found themselves engaged in the greatest stage and
course of Humane life. They had now insensibly passed the cheerful and pleasant
Fields of Youth; and the plain and wanton Paths of Delight, and were ascending
upwards on the steep Mount of Manly age, which was full of sharp Rocks, covered
over with Briers and Thorns, and in every respect a most difficult, and
troublesome passage. Andrenio, like such who would arise unto Virtue, strained
hard to mount aloft, he labored and sweat, and was out of breath; whilst
Critilo encouraged him with prudent remembrances, and comforting him in a way
where no Flowers grew, with the prospect of Trees above laden and overcharged
with Fruit which were more plentiful, and in greater abundance, then the leaves
of those Books which they carried in their hands. At length they were got so
high, that they seemed to be raised above all that this World contains, and to
rule and govern inferior things. What is your opinion, said Critilo, of this
new Region? Do not you think that we do now breath in a more pure Air? Yes
indeed, replied Andrenio, methinks we now carry another sort of Air with us. We
are entered into a good station, where we may repose, and recover our strength.
Let us now reflect, said Critilo, on the Journey which we have made. Do not you
observe those green and trampled paths, which we have left behind us, how mean,
how vile do all those matters seem, which we have already passed? How childish
and vain appears every thing in respect of that great Province into which we
are now entered? How empty and void do past matters appear? How little do they
show from our sublime place of residence? It were a madness to return to them
again by the same steps which have wearied us already without satisfaction or
contentment. And here we will leave our Pilgrims in the Confines of Aragon,
having attained to the Virile, and robustious Age of Manhood.

FINIS.

