The Loyal Baptist: OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE BAPTIZED BELIEVERS. CONTAINING I. His
humble Resolution to be a constant Conformist to the Scriptures, and especially
in these four great Duties, viz. 1. To Honor all Men. 2. To Love the
Brotherhood. 3. To Fear God. 4. To Honor the King.
According to 1 Peter 2. 17. II. His unfeigned endeavor for Unity in the Truth
with the Church of England; wherein is showed what (...) a distinction in
Communion between the Parochial (...) those of the Baptized Believers: Wherein
fourteen (...) lately published by Mr. N. T. M. A. in defense of
Infant Baptism, are considered, and answered. III. His Plea for
Church Assemblies to be permitted to the Baptized Believers. To which purpose
is declared, IV. The Nature of his Call to Christianity, and to the work of the
Ministry. OCCASIONED By the great and long continued Sufferings of the Baptized
Believers in this Nation.

BY THOMAS GRANTHAM, a Servant of Christ.

Job 21. 4. As for me, is my complaint to (...)? And if it were so, why should
not my Spirit be troubled?

Causabon's Birth of Heresy, c. 3. p. 11. In all Ages Men have never been
contented with the true Adoration instituted by God: But instead of external
Signs instituted by God, -- they have forged and brought in their own
Inventions.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Tho. Fabian at the Bible
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

The Loyal Baptist: OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE BAPTIZED BELIEVERS. BEING ALSO An
Earnest Persuasive to them and all Christians, to study to be Quiet, and do
their own Business, in these important Particulars, VIZ. I. To Honor all Men.
II. To Love the Brotherhood. III. To Fear God. IV. To Honor the King.
Delivered in two Sermons upon 1 Pet. 2. 17.

By THOMAS GRANTHAM, a Servant of Christ.

My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to change.

Prove. 24. 21. But -- whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye?

Acts 4. 19. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Tho. Fabian
at the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

To all the Baptized Believers in England, etc. Grace and Peace through Christ
our Lord be multiplied.
THE great Apostle St. Paul, having taught the Christian Churches in Creet
their Duties toward God, and toward Caesar; and leaving Titus (a Messenger of
the Churches) behind him there, very strictly warns him to put them in mind of
their Subjection to Principalities, and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.
Knowing how impossible it would be to propagate the Profession of Christianity,
if Christians did not adorn their Profession with a meek and harmless
Conversation toward all Men, and especially by their Obedience to those in
Authority.

And considering the manifold Temptations that attend Christians in these days
upon that account, I thought it my Duty, as one that has obtained Mercy to be
faithful, to do my best in giving warning to my Brethren, lest any of them
should be ensnared with ill Principles, or specious Pretenses, to speak or do
any thing that may be inconsistent with Gospel-Rules, either in things relating
more immediately to Almighty God, or to the King's Majesty, and those that are
in Authority under him.

Such heady Persons there were in the Apostle's Days, and therefore the less
strange if now some such be found in the best of Churches, as are not afraid to
speak Evil of Dignities: All Ages and sorts of Christians have been troubled
with such Evil-Workers. And as it has been the care of faithful Men all along
to protest against them, that the Truth (which such Wretches only profane by
their Profession of it) might not be worse thought of because of them; So let
it be our care to bear a faithful Testimony against all such in these Days.

And I beseech you Brethren, whom God has made as Guides to the rest, that you
give all diligence to teach and instruct those under your Charge, in the Duties
which pertain to every state of Life; as well as in things which pertain to the
Worship of our Gracious God: For these are the things which become sound
Doctrine, and of these our Obedience to Magistrates is not the least. I commit
the ensuing Discourses to the Consideration of all Christians, and to the
Blessing of God, and remain,

Your Brother, and Servant in the Gospel, THO. GRANTHAM.

The Loyal Baptist: OR AN APOLOGY FOR THE BAPTIZED BELIEVERS. BEING ALSO An
Earnest Persuasive to them all, to study to be Quiet, and to do their own
Business, in these important Particulars, VIZ. I. To Honor all Men. II. To
Love the Brotherhood. III. To Fear God. IV. To Honor the King.
Delivered in several Discourses upon 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all Men, Love the
Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the King.
THis great Apostle, St. Peter, having preached Christ in many Countries,
thought it meet to leave some Monuments of his holy Doctrine with all the
Churches. And having in two sacred Epistles assured them of the certainty of
the Doctrine which he had preached, and that it was no Fable or new Device, but
the very Truth which from the Beginning God made known to his Prophets: He then
exhorts them to Stedfastness, and to hope to the end for the grace or fullness
of Glory, which shall be brought to all true Christians at the revelation or
second coming of Christ.

He warns them to beware of Sin, chiefly that root of Malice, Envy and
Hypocrisy, (for these are usually complicated in one): for as it gave being to
all our Misery, and has been all along the ruin of Nations, Churches, and
Communities; so we are advertised that it will abound toward the end of the
World.

To avoid this damning Iniquity, we are willed to consider our new Birth, and
as newborn Babes to evidence our delight to be in the sincere Milk of the Word
of God, not in the Vanities of this World, where we are but Pilgrims and
Strangers; assuring us, that as Christ is the sure Foundation to support his
Church: So, (however some Builders do set him at naught) he is the Head of the
Corner, and will certainly in time confound the Disobedient, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8.

Howbeit, lest Christians should be too impatient of the seeming delay of
Christ's Exaltation, and of the manifold Tribulations which in the mean time
they must suffer; he further warns them to be of an obedient and submissive
Spirit to such as are in Authority, and to adorn their Profession, by an honest
Conversation, as the best way to silence their Opposers; For so is the Will of
God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men, 1
Pet. 2. 15. For tho it be very true that all Christians are the Lord's Freemen,
1 Cor. 7. 22. yet they may not maliciously despise any Man, nor dishonor any
Man, much less any that are in Authority: Christianity being indeed the
greatest Obligation that any Man can be under, to preserve and cheerfully to
give to all their Dues, in respect of Love, Honor, Fear, Tribute, Custom, etc.
God is to have the things which are God's, Princes the things which are theirs,
and all Men (as well those that are not Christians as those that are) must have
that Love and Honor which is their Due even from the Servants of Christ.

Thus then we approach the Text; which calls upon us to Honor all Men, Love
the Brotherhood, to Fear God, and to Honor the King. In which Directions is
briefly contained the whole duty of a Christian Man. As,

1. His Duty in general to Mankind, Honor all Men. 2. His particular Duty to
the Church of God, Love the Brotherhood. 3. His special Duty to Almighty God,
Fear God. 4. His Obedience to the Higher Powers, Honor the King.
In opening these Words, we shall consider the genuine import of them.

1. Honor all Men. (1.) The Word Honor here, according to the Greek, may be
understood thus, Esteem all Men highly, value all Men at an high Price, or
count them precious: And hence, Tremelius reads the place Omnem Hominem in
Honor habit, have all Men in high Esteem or Honor. And in this Direction is
implied that lowly and gracious Spirit, that friendly and amicable Temper which
all Christians should have and evidence toward Mankind: for he that is not of
a lowly Spirit, cannot Honor all Men. (2.) By All Men, we must not here admit
of the exception of any Man as such; but forasmuch as they are all the
Offspring of God, it is the Will of God that a due esteem be given to them
all, as the most noble part of his Creation under the Sun; -- And but a little
lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8.

2. Love the Brotherhood. By Love here we may safely understand, a more special
kind of Love than that which we owe to all Men, which is well expressed, in the
2 Epist. of John, Whom I love in the Truth, for the Truths sake which dwells
in us. Hence some of our Translators render the Words thus, Love Brotherly
Fellowship. And the Rhemists tells us, that This Speech often commends the
Unity of all Christians among themselves.

3. Fear God. The Original imports an awful dread, or such a Fear as causes
Trembling; and it is the same Word used, Mat. 10. 28. where it is evident such a
Fear is intended: But rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and
Body in Hell. By the Fear of God therefore in this place, we must understand
the dutiful Observance of his revealed Will (for so the Fear of God is
sometimes taken) as ever we expect to see his Face with Comfort: and here the
Fear of Man is excluded, because it brings a Snare, Prove. 29. 25. and is a
fatal prevention to the Service of God.

4. Honor the King. (1.) The Word (...) does not barely signify Honor, or
Esteem, in this place; but a magnificent or splendid kind of Honor: for so
has the Lord ordained for his Vicegerents, giving them the Title of Gods in
Psalm. 82. 6. (2.) It is carefully to be considered what King is immediately
meant in our Text: he could be no King of Israel, for the Kings of Israel had
failed long before this Epistle was written; and tho Christ was born King of
the Jews, yet he did not enter upon his Regality with respect to the Government
of that, nor any other Nation: but plainly tells us, His Kingdom is not of this
World. Nor did the Apostle speak of any Christian King, for as yet None of the
Princes of this World knew Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 8. The King therefore here
immediately intended was an Heathen King, the King of the Romans, who at that
time (as Historians relate) was both of very wicked Life, and Idolatrous in his
Religion, calling himself Pontifex Maximus, as being chief about the Worship of
Jupiter. And yet, S. Peter will have him honored even by those who had put
themselves under the Yoke of Christ, their Heavenly King. And St. Paul expressly
requires the same, Romans 13. 1. Wherefore from the Text thus explained, we
should learn these four things.

I. That Christians must by no means be of an haughty, scornful, nor wrathful
Spirit toward any Man; but of an humble and gentle Behavior, to pay the Debt
of Honor to all, and to esteem them precious. II. Brotherly Fellowship, Love
and Concord, are to be sought for, and maintained by all Christians, one with
another, as such. III. Christians must have an awful Fear of God before their
Eyes, that in Matters of Religion they may serve him only, and not provoke him
by sinful Courses, nor by the Fear of Man. IV. Christians are bound by
Gospel-Rules to be good Subjects to Princes, to honor their Persons, and
conscienciously to obey their Authority.
These Propositions do harmonize with the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness.

For the First; That Christians must by no means (as they tender their claim to
the venerable Title of Christian, and to any part in the Kingdom of Christ) be
of an haughty, scornful or wrathful Spirit against any Man, is a Doctrine
needful to be proclaimed by an heavenly Herald, by the Voice of an Archangel,
even to that part of the World called Christendom: For who can sufficiently
bewail the almost utter Absence of this gracious Spirit, which abounded in the
Author and first Professors of Christianity; and the undeniable Appearance of a
Spirit of a quite contrary nature at this day, in all parts of the World where
Christ is named? From whence come Wars and Fightings? Come they not hence, even
from Pride? as it is written, Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride comes Contention.
What greater Injuries, Indignities, and Dishonours can be offered by Mortals
one toward another, than are amongst the several Orders professing
Christianity? yea, very often by Men of the same Order, one toward another? So
very far are the generality of Christians from obeying the Voice of our Text.
And look how far they are gone from the Spirit of Humility and Tenderness,
which leads all that have it to esteem Mankind very precious; so far they have
lost the Christian Religion, as will appear in proving the first Proposition.
To which purpose,

1. We shall give precendency to our Lord Christ, who perceiving an haughty
Spirit peeping forth in his chosen Disciples, even then whilst the very Mirror
of Meekness and Humility was before their Eyes, does solemnly denounce unto
them, (and in them to all Christians) that except they were converted, and
became as little Children, they should by no means enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Luke 18. 15. And therewithal gives notice of a Woe impending or coming
upon the World, from that Spirit of Pride and Ambition, in this so early an
appearance of it, which yet notwithstanding seems to have overrun the Church
in all Ages, to the Scandal of Religion. But would so small a Fault in the
chosen Disciples, (as it may seem, in respect of that which is now every where
to be found) shut Heaven against them, unless those converted Souls were
converted in that Case? Let us tremble to think of this.

It Is clear from this Instance, that such as are of an haughty Mind, cannot
honor all Men. They are Bladders puffed up with this Wind; break this Bladder,
there is mere Emptiness. Their Goodness vanishes, when they cannot lift
themselves above others. Whereas the truly gracious Soul studies how to serve
God, and all Men for his sake; and thus to honor them, is the greatest Respect
that any Christian can give to Men. Thus did our Lord himself honor all: He
took upon him the form of a Servant. Phil. 2. 7. And indeed his great Design in
his Life and Doctrine, was to restore Mankind to a State of Grace, and
Reconciliation with God, and thereby to Amity and Concord one with another.

2. Next to our Savior, let us hear his beloved Disciple John. He often speaks
to the whole Church under the Title of Little Children; and the Metaphor is
very fit for Christians, as in other respects, so chiefly in this, to put them
in mind, they must in no wise be of a lofty and wrathful Spirit. He tells us,
the Love of God is not in those Men, who have the Pride of Life in them, 1 John
2. 15, 16. They cannot honor, esteem, or count all Men precious, till that
Image of Christ, which stands in Humility, be formed in them.

3. The Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. does not only teach the Brotherhood,
that they must show all Meekness to all Men, and give no Offense to Jew nor
Gentile; but puts himself (as becomes all true Ministers of Christ) for a
Pattern to the Flock. Tho (says he) I be free from all Men, yet I have made my
self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more. -- I am made all Things to
all Men, that I might by all means save some. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. How
precious did he count the Jewish Nation! (tho they generally hated him) he
could be content to be undone himself, rather than they should be lost. Romans
10. 1. And no less concerned for the poor Gentiles, that they also might be
happy. Romans 15. 16. And hitherto did tend the Scope of all his Labors, to
warn, teach, and to present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 1. 28.

4. And forasmuch as the Tongue is the ordinary Witness of the Spirit of Pride,
and that whereby all Men are incident to dishonor one another, he strictly
obliges all Christians to let their Speech be always with Grace, seasoned with
Salt, that they may administer Grace to them that hear them. Col. 4. 6. And he
that will obey our Text, to honor all Men, must remember that he speak evil of
no Man, (an Impiety which God knows even reigns amongst Christians.) The Tongue
is an unruly Member, a World of Iniquity. And hence the Apostle James is very
bold, telling us, our Religion is vain, if we bridle not that Member. Jam. 3.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13. How can that Tongue be fit to bless God, to profess the
Christian Religion, which is exercised in cursing, speaking evil, or wishing
ill to any Man? My Brethren, these Things ought not to be. Does a Fountain give
sweet Water and bitter at the same place? This is not to be found in Nature,
nor to be expected in Grace. Christians must be known to all Men by their
Fruits of Righteousness, Meekness, Goodness, and Faith; otherwise Men shall
never be moved to glorify God in their behalf.

5. That Christian who will honor all Men, must love all Men; without this, he
cannot esteem them, nor count them precious. Whom we love not, we have no
delight to honor. It is in a manner peculiar to the Christian Doctrine, that
Men should love their Enemies, pray for them that persecute them and
despitefully use them. Let us therefore pay this Debt, to honor all Men in
Love. He that will do this, must bear Mankind upon his Heart in Prayer and
Supplication. 1 Timothy 2. 1. This is a Lesson for Christians, as such, they must
love their Neighbors as themselves, and all Men are their Neighbors. The
Royal Law obliges them to it; Jam. 2. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law according
to the Scriptures, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well; but
if ye have respect to Persons, (that is, love one, and hate another) ye commit
Sin, and are convinced of the Law as Transgressors. Were Christians filled more
with this Fruit of the Spirit, we should see an end of these Animosities,
opprobrious and abusive Epithets, or Brands of Reproach and Infamy, which are
daily cast upon Men, and too frequently found among Christian Men. It is to be
lamented, that Men who are precious in the esteem of God, should not be
esteemed so by one another.

But honor all Men, says our Text; and the Arguments to enforce the Duty are
many, of which, some we will urge in this place, and the first shall be this:

First; They are Men as well as our selves, our Equals by Creation, the
Workmanship of the Hands of the same God; and therefore are we bound to honor
all Men, as Men; nor can we slight, despise, or dishonor them, but we
dishonor our selves: For they are Flesh of our Flesh, and God has made of one
Blood all Nations of Men, to dwell upon the Face of the Earth; and he is the
God of the Spirits of all Flesh. And thus we have all one Father; as one God
has created us, we are all his Offspring: not as some profanely have said,
that Man is no more God's Offspring than an Hog; for he did not consult the
Creation of any thing, as he did the Creation of Man, Genesis 2. Nor did he breath
into the Nostrils of Hogs, the same Spirit of Life and Wisdom which he breathed
into Man. David admires the Goodness of God in the degnified State of Man,
Psalm. 8. 4, 5. And let us beware of base thoughts concerning Man, lest we value
him no more than the Beasts of the Field, and so dishonor him, whom God
created in great Honor, and to this day (notwithstanding his Fall) has set
him over the Works of his Hands. All Men are our Brethren, let us honor them
as such; for what Brotherhood soever we attain, yet our humane Fraternity is
antecedent, and not made void by any Post-Fraternity, which is good, but rather
more indeared. This was seen in St. Paul, the nearer his Relation was to God
upon the account of Christianity, the more was his Love, and the greater his
Sorrow for his Brethren according to the Flesh, Romans 9. 2. Let not Christians
think, that their Relation, nor Obligation of Nature to Mankind, is destroyed
or made less, by their being Christians; such a vain Conceit will alienate us
from our own Flesh, and make us quite pervert the Text, which puts us in mind
that our Religion does strongly engage us to honor them all. It was a Virtue
in the Philosopher, who would not be accounted of this or that Nation, Tribe,
or City, but entitled himself a Citizen of the whole World; meaning, he had an
equal respect for Mankind; and if his Relation might be an Honor, he would be
related to them all, that he might honor them all.

Secondly; Christains must honor all Men, because God himself has honored
them all, setting his Love upon them, and manifesting it to them, and that
diverse ways: As,

1. In the common Acts of his Providence, of which we have an excellent Account
in the 107th Psalm, to which I refer you. It is he that gives them fruitful
Seasons, filling their Hearts with Joy and Gladness; he gives them Life and
Breath, and all things. Hence they (even all Nations) are called his People,
and the Sheep of his Pasture, Psalm. 100. 1, 2. and upon this very ground are
required to pay their Debt of Thankfulness unto him.

2. God has greatly honored Mankind in the gracious Act of Redemption; I say,
in this he has greatly esteemed all Men, and counted them very precious. That
God has done this for all Men, nothing can be more plain than these
Testimonies: There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, who gave
himself a Ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2. 6. We see Jesus made a little lower than
the Angels, for the suffering of Death. -- That he by the Grace of God should
taste Death for every Man. Heb. 2. 9. For all have sinned, and come short of
the Glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption
which is in Christ Jesus. Romans 3. 23, 24. He is a Propitiation for our Sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World. Surely he that
against the Light of these plain Testimonies, can or will think that God
neglected the greatest part, or any part of Mankind, in the most important
Business of Redemption, must needs have a very low esteem and dishonorable
thoughts of that part of Mankind, cannot value them much above the fallen
Angels or Devils, for whom no Ransom was given; and consequently they cannot
honor all Men. The Devils are but Sinners, shut up to the Judgment of Eternal
Fire, without means of Recovery; and these Men, that narrow up the Redemption
of Man to the Elect only, shut up the remainder of Men in that Condemnation
which is inevitable. And what Honor can belong to such? How should we count
them precious, if indeed God hated them from all Eternity? It is not saying,
That we know them not by Name, and therefore ought to honor all Men, that will
salve the Business: For the truth is, if we heartily honor all Men, we must be
sure that God would have us do so; and of this we cannot be sure, if we think
God made them only to damn them: For if the Esteem or Honor which we give to
all Men, proceed not from sincere Love to them, and Desire of their Happiness,
it is but Hypocrisy, no true Honor; for the Honor which we owe to all Men, is
not founded upon any thing wherein they are dignified above us, but upon those
Blessings or Favors from God, which are common to us all, and wherein he has
made no difference between one and another. And therefore if we truly esteem,
love, and wish all Men well in the Case of their Salvation, me must believe
that God does so too, or else we cannot do it heartily. Augustine's Speech here
is worthy of Remembrance; O vehement Love! that God for Man's cause can
vouchsafe to become Man! Who can hate Man, whose Nature and Likeness he beholds
in the Humanity of God? Surely, if God has not loved all Men in Christ, we have
no cause to count them precious, because we see them not favored in the
Humanity of God.

3. That our God counts all Men precious, may be seen in the Order given, that
the Word of Peace or Reconciliation may be preached to all Men, or, to every
Creature; to be made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. Mat. 28.
19. Romans 16. 26. Surely this Message, with the Messenger and Messengers that
brought it to all Men, does stupendously evidence, how precious God accounts
all Men. He may justly demand, What could have been done to evidence my Love to
Man, and the precious Esteem I have of him, which I have not done. Has he not
sent his Apostles, whose Words have gone to the uttermost parts of the Earth?
Romans 10. Yea, he has sent his Son, whom he has made Heir of all Things; yea,
he has sent thus to those that would not accept these Tokens of Love,
Estimation, or Honor. John 1. 11. Mat. 21. 38. Surely it is an Act of Honor
toward the Party visited, when the King comes to visit the Beggar, yea, the
Traitor. Whence is this to me, said Elizabeth, that the Mother of my Lord
should come to me? And whence is this to Man, or what Honor has God conferred
upon Man, that our Lord himself should come to Man, to redeem him by the Death
of the Cross, and to make all Men see what is the Fellowship of this mysterious
Piece of Godliness, (which is God manifest in the Flesh, etc.) by the Light of
the Gospel?

Thirdly; Christians must honor all Men, because this is one effectual way to
recommend the Way of Christianity, or the Truth which we profess, to the
acceptance of all Men. And hitherto may be referred these and the like Rules;
Walk in Wisdom toward them that are without. If you salute your Brethren only,
what do you more than others? The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle toward all Men. Render to no Man Evil for Evil, but overcome Evil with
Good. Showing all Meekness to all Men. Giving a Reason of the Hope that is in
you, with Meekness and Fear. That Christian that shall walk toward all Men
according to these Rules, shall certainly honor all Men, and greatly recommend
the Truth to them all; for thus shall he himself become an Epistle of Christ,
read and known of all Men. 1. Cor. 3. 2.

I shall conclude this first Doctrine with a solemn Protestation against all
such as would set up their Religion by Violence, Blood, and Treachery, by what
Name soever distinguished; for if this be their Scope, they have not known
Christ, nor the Divine Power of Christianity. Cain leads the Van to this
unreasonable Troop, who never did nor can honor all Men, till they be
delivered from this Principle: No, they desire to kill, that they only might be
honored. By this unchristian sort of Christians, what unspeakable Butcheries
have been committed! Hundreds of Thousands in a neighboring Nation, in this
Age, cruelly destroyed. What Hangings, Burnings, and Tormentings all Europe
over! And this pretendedly to advance Holy Church! As if our Savior's House
must be built with Blood, when yet he plainly tells us, he came not to kill
Men, but to save them, and sharply rebukes his Disciples, when such a Spirit
appeared in them.

And have we not seen a refined Generation, (as they would be thought) peeping
forth, with the Name of Blood, or the smiting Principle, written on their
Forehead, with direction to their Proselites to pray, that God would destroy
all Oppressior and Oppressors from off the face of the Earth? Lord! what is
this? The greatest part of Mankind peradventure are Oppressors in one thing or
other; and must a Christian pray for their Destruction, or for their
Conversion? Sure the latter is the Duty of all Christians. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. They
cannot desire such a woeful Day, but that Mercy may be extended, knowing that
themselves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, living in Malice, hateful, and
hating one another. Tit. 3. But alas! do not these Men pray for their own
Destruction? Who sees not that such a Principle is pregnant with Oppression? O
let all Christians beware of it. And let us pray for them that hate us,
persecute us, and speak all manner of Evil against us falsely, for his Names
sake, who has called us not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake.

Thus leaving all Men of bloody, violent, and treacherous Principles, to
consider what Spirit they are of; how unlike our Lord Christ; how different
from the Primitive Christians; how contrary to Humanity it self, which teaches
all to do to others (not as they do) but as we would they should do to us: We
shall proceed to the next Point of Doctrine, grounded upon the second Direction
in the Text, Love the Brotherhood.

Doct. II. Brotherly Fellowship, Love and Unity is carefully to be endeavored
and maintained by all Christians.

This Brotherhood being not natural, but spiritual and mystical, admits of a
twofold Consideration:

1. In the largest Sense the Word (and Use of it in Scripture) will bear. 2. In
a more strict and special Sense.
In the first, we must comprehend all that own the holy Scriptures for the Rule
of Faith, believing in the only true God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (for
these three are one); that Christ died for our Sins, and rose again for our
Justification; that live soberly, according to the general Rules of
Christianity, tho they may be diversely persuaded in the Methods of Christian
Worship. Or I could be content, (if the State of Christianity would bear it in
these Days) to express my self in this Case in the Words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.
2. All that in every place call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; among
whom he found Diversities of Opinions, as well as Disorders in practice of
Ordinances. Not that he allows either, but labors to reform both, yet so as he
would preserve Amity among them as they were Brethren, tho some of them were
carnal, 1 Cor. 3. others allowing themselves a very dangerous Liberty in
religious Matters, even to eat Things sacrificed to Idols; some doubting of the
Resurrection, others very loose in their Devotion at the Lord's Table; they
were some tumultuous, others otherwise vicious, 2 Cor. 13. Now whether the
Apostle, in his Exhortations to Unity, intends, that notwithstanding these
Errors they should hold ample Communion with the Erroneous; or whether, upon
adhering to Reproof by him given, and their obeying the Epistles which he sent
to them, he obliges them to maintain and uphold their Communion, is the
Business to be considered.

The first it is not like to be, for then few Errors, either in Doctrine or
Life, could break this brotherly Fellowship among Christians. And then to what
purpose are these Rules given? Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. Romans 16. 17.
Withdraw your selves from every Brother which walks disorderly, etc. 2 Thessalonians.
3. 6. Surely all that can be required, as to Unity with these Christians, is a
brotherly Compassion, to encourage what we can the Truth they hold, or the Good
they do; to hold with them in the common Cause of Christianity, against the
common Enemy of it. I conceive the latter to be the only safe way, viz. That
notwithstanding their great Carnality, Weakness of Judgment, or Frowardness in
their erroneous Opinions, etc. if now they would receive the Counsel of the
Lord's Messenger, or which the Lord by his Messenger had sent unto them, that
then the Brotherhood once found among them should still continue, tho they had
too evidently forfeited their Privileges. Thus to take the Apostle's meaning,
is to make him harmonize with himself. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any Man obey not our
Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may
be ashamed; yet count him not an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. But to
take the Apostle in the first Sense, would make him irreconcilable to or with
himself. So then, Paul did not advise the Faithful at Corinth, to hold ample
Communion with those of ill Life, and erroneous Principles in the necessary
parts of Religion, such as the Resurrection, and Separation from Idolatry
doubtless are; for he that denies the first, denies Christ to be risen, makes
the Apostles false Witnesses, and the Faith of Christians vain. 1 Cor. 15. 1,
2, 3. And the second makes Men incapable to serve God: Ye cannot drink the Cup
of the Lord, and the Cup of Idols (or Devils.) 1 Cor. 1. 10.

Let us then consider the second, or more strict Sense of the Word,
Brotherhood, in our Text. And here we must take it, as it pertains to truly
constituted and well-governed Societies of Christians: For undoubtedly God
intended to have the Christian Religion stated and maintained in all Nations,
according to the pristine Simplicity of the Gospel, without the mixtures of
Legal Ceremonies, or humane Innovations: For when Jesus gave commission to his
Apostles, to teach all Nations, baptizing them; and then, to teach them to
observe all Things whatsoever he commanded them. Mat. 28. 19, 20. and gave
being to this Order, to continue to the end of the World, it must needs be
highly rational on the part of all such, as do piously stand to this Form of
Doctrine, as explicated and delivered to the Churches, Romans 6. 17. Heb. 6. 1,
2. And consequently it must needs be very pleasing to God, and commendable in
the Church, that his Institutes be kept with the greatest exactness, as they
were delivered at first, 1 Cor. 11. 2.

For if once Variations in either the Doctrinal or Practical Parts of the
Christian Religion be admitted, there can be no certain duration of any Truth.
A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, Gal. 5. 7. And this the Apostle
speaks too, with relation to the Imposition of some Legal Rites, which once had
a Divine Original and Use in the Church of God, and yet now could not consist
with obedience to the Truth. Gal. 5. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you,
that you should not obey the Truth? Hence Saint Paul would not give place to
St. Peter himself, (when too much symbolizing with legal Ceremonies, Gal. 2.)
that so the Truth of the Gospel might continue in the Churches of Galatia;
plainly showing, that as Light and Darkness cannot dwell together, so the
Gospel is exclusive of legal Ceremonies and humane Innovations. And seeing all
must grant, there has been a very great departure from the Truth of the Gospel,
both in Doctrine and Practice, there cannot be a better Method (I suppose)
thought on, to amend what is amiss in the Christian World, (and thereby to
restore true brotherly Fellowship) than that used by our Lord, Mat. 19. 8. to
reform a Corruption among the Jews, and such an Error too as had a show of
Scripture-Authority for it, (I mean the Case of Divorce) yet our Savior
suppresseth that Custom, by referring to the primitive Institution of Marriage;
From the Beginning it was not so.

And upon this Text, how well does our Brethren (I mean the Sober and Pious in
the Church of England) defend themselves against Popish Innovations, both in
Opinion and Practice? One of them speaks thus: As touching each of these
Errors, we can say with our Savior, in this present Correption of the
Pharisees, that from the Beginning it was not so; and we care not whence they
come, unless they come from the Beginning. This has ever been (says he) the
Rule, the warrantable Rule to reform a Church. When Esdras was intent on
building the Temple, he sent not to Ephesus, much less to Rome; he did not
enquire into the Rituals of Numa Pompilius; but had recourse for a Temple, to
that of Solomon; and for a Rite, to that of Moses. Indeed for Things merely
indifferent, (as he observes) there must be preserved a Liberty in all Churches
to consult and do for the best. I dare not say as he, To make Constitutions;
(for that is a great word) but to manage her Affairs with Decency, Order, and
Charity.

But to come more directly to our Doctrine, which is, Brotherly Fellowship;
Love and Unity is carefully to be endeavored and maintained by all Christians.

Certain it is that our Love, as Christians, may go much further than our
actual Communion in all things Christian, may do; and yet this Love it self is
a kind of Fellowship. The Angels have Fellowship with us, and acknowledge
themselves our Fellow Servants, Rev. 19. 10. and yet they do not partake with
us in all our acts of Religion, but only by approbation and corroboration, in
things which are well done. Now the best or most orderly sort of Christians
cannot conceive a greater disproportion between their Churches, and the
Churches of the most erring (if but wellmeaning) Societies that conscientiously
profess Love and Obedience to Christ: And even hence, we are obliged to hold as
much Brotherly Fellowship with them, as we can, especially that of Love and
Brotherly Compassion. For when we consider, that even some of all sorts of
Christians will rather dye, than basely deny their Lord and Master, we cannot
but have Fellowship with such in our Spirits, whilst it is the same (and not a
feigned Christ) to whom they show their utmost testimony of Love.

And this Consideration alone, may suffice to take away that imbitteredness,
which is too often found among Christians dissenting one from another: Let
their Appellations be what they will, so that they believe in the true Christ,
and live well, being also faithful to what they know. And tho they be never so
angry with me for opposing them in their Traditions, or erring Notions
otherwise, yet I must have a Brotherly tenderness toward them all for the
Truths sake which dwells in them. But now, for ample or full Communion, I see
not how that can be attained and maintained, but where there is antecedent to
it, an Union both in Doctrine and Practice, in things necessary to the true
Constitution and Government of the Church of Christ. And seeing also our
Differences about these things are not small, or trivial; it cannot (I think)
be better ordered, than that a Friendly Distinction, and Brotherly Forbearance
be permitted as to ample Communion; for that Men cannot comfortably nor
peaceably join together till they be agreed in these things.

I see not that the difference betwixt Paul and Barnabas was so great (as to
the thing about which they differed) as the things about which Christians
differ in these days; and yet its certain their Contention being great (for
(...) signifies provoking, gauling, and imbittered Speeches, and Minds, say the
Learned) it is certain they could not transact their Affairs in the Gospel
together, but apart. And this was written perhaps to show, that a competent
Unity in Judgment must precede our actual Communion, and till that be attained
among us, there is a necessity (in regard, partly of human Frailty, and partly
in regard of some precious Truths) to forbear one another, without destroying
the Truth to which we have attained respectively.

And this is the greatest Love we can extend to one another, under these
difficult Circumstances.

1. To pity and heartily to pray one for another; for the Servant of the Lord
must not strive but be gentle toward all Men, in Meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves.

2. There must be all Patience exercised, and Compassion showed to the
Ignorant, and those that are out of the way, especially where the scruple is
tender and conscientious. And in the mean time, the faithful Minister of God
must hold fast the form of sound Words, he must teach the same Doctrine which
was committed to his Trust by the Apostles. He must warn others that they teach
no other Doctrine. He must not give place to Jewish, or other Fables. And the
Church must so walk in Christ, as they first received him, rooted in the
Foundation-Principles, established and built up in him: Not carried about with
every Wind of Doctrine, but speaking the Truth in Love, must endeavor to grow
up into Christ in all things. In a word, it is the Duty of this Brotherhood to
stick close to the whole Council of God, and not to partake with other Men's
Sins, or Errors in Life or Religion; which cannot be done, where contrarieties
in Doctrine and Practice about things necessary to the true State and
Government of the Church of Christ, are allowed in the same Fellowship or
Community.

Love the Brotherhood. This Fraternity are in a special manner to love one
another.

1. Because God himself has loved them with a special kind of Love: And if God
so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 3. It is happy when the
Love of Christians is founded upon this bottom, viz. the Manifestation of God's
Love to them, and not upon any thing of human Excellency; for this is to have
Men's Persons in Admiration, and not to admire this, Behold what manner of Love
the Father has bestowed upon us!

2. Because this is the sweetest Manifestation, that we are the Children of
God; for in this is manifest the Children of God, 1 John 3. 10. namely, that
they love their Brethren: And every one that loves, is born of God. And our
Savior makes it the true Character of Christianity: By this shall all Men know
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, Joh. 13. 35.

3. Because this is the uniting Grace among Christians, this makes their
Society sweet, their Fellowship desirable, its a Fellowship of Love, Phil. 2.
1. This makes them like David and Jonathan, they are bound in one Girdle, and
their Love was wonderful.

4. Because this makes the Sufferings of Christians easy; when those that
suffer love them, in defense of whose Faith they do suffer; and see themselves
beloved of their Brethren, even then when all Men seem to hate them. This made
Paul himself rejoice in his Sufferings, Phil. 4. 10, 14. I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly, that now at the last your care of me has flourished again, -- Ye have
well done that ye have communicated with me in my Affliction.

Let us touch the things briefly, which may be sure Evidences of this Brotherly
Love.

1. If then we love the Brotherhood, we are much concerned about them in our
Thoughts. For what is the Object of a Man's Love, is the Subject of his
Meditation. All true Lovers know this by Experience; and let the Love of the
Brotherhood exceed our Love in other cases. An instance of this Love we have in
St. Paul, Col. 2. 1, 2. For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for
you, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my Face in the
Flesh: That their Hearts might be comforted, being knit together in Love, etc.

2. If we love our Brethren, we bear them much upon our Heart in our Prayers;
we cannot forget them if we rightly love them. Paul made mention of him in
every Prayer of his whom he dearly loved, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Let all Christian
Brethren do so too, for we cannot do less for any of them, or for many of them
we can do no more.

3. If we love the Brotherhood, we will esteem them highly, according to the
Virtues which we see in them, 2 John v. 1, 2, 3. And whom we love we will
commend, and advance as much as we can, because it is the native Property of
Love to do so; as appears in the interchanges of Love in the Song of Solomon,
between Christ and his Church: and is the way too, to increase Love, as all
Experience shows.

4. If we love our Brethren, we will to our best defend their Reputation
against those that injure them. Thus Paul vindicated not himself only, but
those faithful Ministers which were with him, when some reported of them that
they walked after the Flesh, and said, Let us do Evil that good may come; whose
Damnation, for such vile Reproaches against the Servants of Christ, he avers to
be just.

5. If we love the Brotherhood, we will to our Power relieve their Necessities.
For He that has this Worlds Good, and sees his Brother want, and shuts up
the Bowels of his Compassion, how dwells the Love of God in him? And says
another Apostle, If a Brother or Sister be destitute of daily Food, and ye say,
Be ye filled, and give them not those things that are necessary, what does it
profit? Wherefore let Love be without Dissimulation. Let it be fervent. For to
this end were our Souls purified in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, even
unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren, 1 Pet. 1. 22.

6. The last Evidence. If we love the Brotherhood, we will seek and preserve as
much as we can, the Peace of the whole, and the Prosperity of every part. Pray
for the Peace of Jerusalem (says David) they shall prosper that love thee; for
my Brethren and Companions sake I will now say, Peace be within thy Walls, and
Prosperity within thy Palaces. How greatly does the true Son of David, our Lord
Jesus, pray for this Blessing upon the whole Church, That they all may be one,
as he and his Father are one? And what Christian will not tremble to think of
doing any thing against the tenor of his blessed Prayer?

I will conclude this point with a solemn Protestation against those Evils
which chiefly hinder the love of the Brotherhood; and the first is Pride.

1. Only through Pride comes Contention (says the Spirit); when Men are
admirers of themselves, Proud, Boasters; they soon become despisers of those
that are good, and Enemies to the Love of the Brotherhood. Diotrephes being got
to this point, presently makes havoc of the Church, by casting the Brethren
out of the Church that showed their brotherly Love to the traveling Ministers.
And why? because he loved to have the Pre-eminence, insomuch as he spared not
to undervalue the Apostle himself. Aproud Professor cannot love the Brotherhood.

2. As all proud Men are Enemies to brotherly Love; so most of all such as take
themselves to be infallible about things most disputable, being vainly
confident that God is opposed when their Impositions are not obeyed. These Men
commonly drive furiously, rend and tear, if their Mandates meet with dislike or
non-reception. These Men will ever stand strenuously upon Niceties, and make
things which are doubtful, and merely indifferent, to become necessary.

3. Those who make Gain their Godliness, are great Enemies to Brotherly Love,
these are called greedy Dogs by the Prophet, greedy Wolves by the Apostle;
these seek their own, not the things of Christ. They are Enemies to him; their
God is their Belly, they mind earthly things; they change with every Wind for
Preferment. They are Lovers of their own selves. They teach things which they
ought not, for filthy Lucres sake. They love not the Brotherhood, but their
Money.

Thus much to the second Point. We come now to the third part of our Text.

Fear God.

Hence the Doctrine has been propounded thus.

Doct. III. Christians must have an awful Fear of God before their Eyes, that
in Matters of Religion they may serve him only, and not provoke him by sinful
Courses, nor by the Fear of Man.

To come rightly to the performance of this Duty, we must endeavor to have a
right knowledge or Belief of this God whom we are to fear, for this our Savior
makes to be the weighty part of our Religion, Faith, and the Fear of God. Now
in this Faith, which anteceeds the Fear, Worship, and Service of God, we must
consider the Essence and Attributes of God. In the first, he is infinitely
beyond the reach of our knowledge, or finding out unto Perfection. Job 4. 24. It
is but a small portion that we know (or can know) of him in this World.

Faith therefore satisfies it self, with knowing that God is: or, that there is
one God. That he is a Spirit Psalm. 90. 2. Rev. 4. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Psalm. 147.
5. Prove. 15. 3.
Eternal, Pure, Omnipotent, Immutable, Invisible, Merciful, Faithful, Holy,
Just and Good; and that he is infinitely and perfectly so, and whatsoever else
may be said to represent him Great and Glorious; Great in his Sovereignty and
Dominion, Glorious in his doings toward the Children of Men. In a Word, Faith
apprehends or believes this God to be, whatsoever his Word declares him to be,
which together with his works of Creation and Providence are the Intelligencers
to Mortals, his good Spirit also helping and illuminating all that heartily
seek after him. Howbeit this Faith is not of the same magnitude in all that
have it, but it is of the same Nature, -- To all that have obtained like
precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 1.

To fear God, is indeed a Duty incumbent upon all Men, and not upon Christians
only. And for the better performance of this great Duty, it is good to know the
Cause, why Mankind of all other Creatures is bound to fear God; I say, Mankind
only, of all sublunary Creatures: for from other Creatures God expects not
this, nor do they pay it to him, not having capacity, and so no necessity on
them to do it. But they are subjugated to the Fear of Man, who is placed over
them as Supreme, Psalm. 86. 7, 8. Genesis 9. 2. Indeed I do not find that this Fear
and Dread of Man, was upon the Creatures below him, till after the Earth was
accursed. It is true a Dominion was given Man over them in his innocent Estate,
Genesis 1. 28. But that he should have ruled them with Rigor, as now, I find not,
but do conceive that the terror of Man to the brute Creatures, and their
Disobedience to him, are Effects of the Curse; and its certain the Curse was
the Effect of Sin. But in these things let us not be too curious.

Now whether in case Man had not sinned, he should have been obliged to fear
God as now, or whether he should have properly feared God at all, may be
enquired here? To which it may be answered, That seeing God had endued Man with
excellent Reason and Judgment, and yet put him in a mutable State, and gave him
notice that his state was such, when he gave him a Law with a Penalty upon the
Breach of it. In the Breach of which he should surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. It
follows that Man was even then bound to Fear, and to stand in awe of his
Majesty from the beginning before Sin was upon him. So that Sin is not the
Original Cause of the Fear of God, but his Bounty toward Man, and absolute
Sovereignty over him, are the Grounds of it. And hence we may learn, how just,
how necessary it is for us who are of the fallen race of Adam, not only for
that we are under these Original Obligations, and for that the Covenant which
we are under as Christians, tho a Covenant of Grace, yet is truly conditional
(whatever some murmur to the contrary) to fear the God of Heaven, and to stand
in awe of his Majesty. Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of God! on
them that fell, Severity; but toward thee Goodness, if thou continue in his
Goodness: otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Romans 11. 22. Heb. 4. 1. But it
is furthermore our Duty, for that we are more subject to err than Adam was, for
all grant he had Free Will, and Sufficiency of Ability to stand had he used it.
But tho some of us do hold we have a liberty of Will, yet we must all confess
our Power to be very small, without intervening Grace, either to resist
Temptations, or to do acts of Righteousness. Not that we are sufficient to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5.

There is a Distinction of Fear toward God much spoken of, to wit, a servile
Fear, and a filial Fear. The first they would exclude from a Christian. But if
by servile Fear be intended no more than to fear God, as a good Servant is to
fear his Master, I can see no reason to exclude it: If I be a Master, where is
my Fear? says the Lord. Mal. 1. 16. It seems God's Servants must fear him. But
perhaps the meaning of the distinction is this: By filial Fear is meant an holy
Dread, lest we do any thing that is evil, or leave undone the thing that is
good; and by servile Fear, is meant a Fear of Punishment only. If this be it, I
shall say little to it, believing, whoever makes this distinction, would have
all Men, and specially Christians, to fear God so as to depart from all Evil,
and to do Good, lest Judgment be the Portion of their Cup from the Lord.

Fear God; that is, stand in awe of his Majesty, worship and serve him, and him
only. 1 Samuel 12. 14. Only fear the Lord, and serve him with all your Heart.
Psalm. 45. 11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4. 10. This is God's Right, we
must only pay it to him. When Peter was put upon this Strait, whether to please
or fear Men, when his Service to God was the matter in question, his Speech was
very frank and resolute, Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God,
to hearken unto Men more than unto God, judge ye. This then must ever become
good Christians in matters of Religion, to stick close to that which is right
in the sight of God, however it may be countermanded by Man. The Condescensions
of holy Paul were so wisely attempered, as even then when he was made all
things to all Men, and paying his debt of Love to the Wise and Unwise, so as to
be without Law to them that were without Law, and under the Law to them that
were under the Law; yet he was not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ; he would not sin to please any, nor do Evil that Good might come: For
the Fear of the Lord is clean, the Beginning of Wisdom, and that which must
keep us company all our days; else we lie open to the fiery Darts of Satan,
which will both hit and hurt, where the Fear of the Lord is absent. Therefore
blessed is the Man that fears always. This is that Grace which held Joseph
back from Uncleanness, Nehemiah from Self-endedness in God's Service, when
others made it burthensom: This did not I, says he, because of the Fear of the
Lord.

Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, says the Apostle. I
trembled in my self, that I might rest in the Day of Trouble, says the
Prophet. I exceedingly fear and quake, said Moses. I am so troubled I cannot
speak, said David. And shall we not exceedingly fear, and stand in awe of that
Majesty, which made these Pillars in the Church to tremble? Beware of a stupid
and careless Spirit, for that will soon prove a revolting Spirit. Jer. 5. 22,
23. David makes that awful Fear of God an express Duty to all; Psalm. 76. 7.
Thou, even thou art to be feared; and who may stand in thy presence, when once
thou art angry? Without a godly Fear no Service to God is acceptable. Heb. 12.
And he is therefore greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints.

Thus much in general. We shall now endeavor to describe the Man that walks in
the Fear of God, in a few Particulars. And,

1. He that truly fears God, worships and serves him, must be delivered from
the Fear of Man. When David is considering how to fear or serve God aright,
Psalm. 119. 45. he tells us, he will walk at Liberty; he will have his Heart
free from that which hinders due Obedience to God. And as to Matters of
Religion, Christians are Christ's Freemen. And therefore our Savior (who was
the most faithful to Caesar that ever Man was) in this Case absolutely
prohibits the Fear of Man; Fear not him that can kill the Body. And it is
certain, the Fear of Man brings a Snare, as appears in the Case of the
Pharisees: They could not confess Christ, tho they believed in him, for they
feared to be put out of their Synagogues; they loved the Praise of Men more
than the Praise of God. He that thus fears Man, cannot fear God. Let us hear
the Apostle Paul, he is plain; Do I now persuade Men, or God? (that is, do I
preach the Doctrine of God or Man?) if I yet pleased Men, I should not be the
Servant of Christ. We see here the Difference between a faithful Christian and
Minister of Christ, and those that serve the Times: The latter always preach
something that is of Man, lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of
Christ; the former fears neither Men nor Angels, so as to give consent to
another Gospel, or any thing which perverts the Gospel of Christ. Gal. 1. 4 to
11.

2. He that truly fears God, will give to God the Things which are God's. This
Rule, of all others, should be observed by Christians, because it proceeds from
Christ himself, upon such a special occasion, Mat. 22. 21. as wherein the Right
of Kings, and God's Right over Men are enquired into, and the Case determined
by the Lord Christ, to the silencing his captious Adversaries. Caesar's Right
must be given, and God's Right must not be withheld. Earthly Things, or our
Obedience in Civil Cases, is here stated upon Caesar; there is therefore a
necessity, that Obedience in Religious Cases be due to God, or else he has
nothing peculiar in or over us. Since therefore God Almighty has reserved all
religious Obedience to himself, and that we must every Man give an Account of
himself unto God, 2 Cor. 5. Let all that fear God, give to him in religious
Performances, the Things which have his Image and Superscription upon them,
lest he reject both the Offering, and the Offerer, with, Who has required this
at your hands? Did not God provide by his express Law, that his Sacrifices
should not be changed at Man's Will, a good for a bad, nor a bad for a good?
Lev. 27. 10. Does not Isaiah cry out against them that presumed to change God's
Ordinances, as Breakers of the everlasting Covenant? Isa. 24. 5. It fared very
ill with Nadab and Abihu, for offering that Fire which God commanded not.
Levit. 10. 1, etc. The Corinthians were smote with Sickness and Death, for
profaning the Lord's Table with their own Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 22, 30. David
himself was afraid of God, when he altered the manner of carrying the Ark of
God, 1 Chronicles. 13. And this Instance made him afterward give to God the Things
that were God's, namely, to serve him in due Order, 1 Chronicles. 15. Let the Use of
all be, to provoke us to serve God with godly Fear, to stand in awe of his
Word, to serve him with all possible exactness, according to the very Rules
therein contained, that we may have the Commendation of good and faithful
Servants, as it was in the Case of Noah, Genesis 6. 22. Thus did Noah, according
to all that God commanded him, so did he.

3. He that truly fears God, will ever preserve a good Conscience toward God.
But this can never be, where the inner Man is not pure, and the Heart delighted
with the Service of God. Of some we read, that they profess high, but their
Minds and Consciences are defiled, Tit. 1. 16. Others that so walked before the
Lord, as to gain this Reputation, that they did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect Heart. 2 Chr. 25. 2. Now God is he
that perfectly knows the Heart, and searches the Heart, and takes pleasure in
Uprightness; and he knows, and will make all Men know, that as the wilful
Nectlect of Duties, I mean religious Duties, are an Evidence of an evil
Conscience; so the keeping back part, or serving God deceitfully, or serving
God under a color, without Conscience of the Service, are the same, and shall,
with the Persons so worshipping him, be rejected, as those that do not fear
God. For it shall come to pass in the Day of the Lord's Sacrifice, that he will
punish them that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham; and them that
are turned back from the Lord, and them that have not sought the Lord, nor
enquired after him. Zeph. 1. 5, 6.

4. He that fears God, will not resist the Power of Princes; yet will he do
what God commands, tho all the Princes in the World forbid him; nor will he do
what God forbids, tho all the Princes in the World should command it.

What our Christian Obligations to Princes are, I hope to show, in handling the
next Direction in our Text. We are here only to show, that no worldly Power can
make void what God commands, nor make that lawful which God's Word forbids. The
God of Heaven forbids worshipping or bowing down to Images or Idols, Exodus 20.
Nebuchadnezzar commands the contrary, Dan. 3. 4, 5. under pain of suffering the
fiery Furnace. Now this was a mighty Prince, to whom God had given a Kingdom,
and great Glory; yet Shadrach and his Companions would not do his Command, but
told him plainly, They would not serve his Gods, nor worship the Golden Image
which he had set up. Dan. 3. 18. It has been the Unhappiness of Earthly Gods,
to countermand the Commands of the God of Heaven, without which there would
have been but few Martyrs: But the greatness of their Multitude shows the
certainty of this Truth, That God's Will must be obeyed, what Troubles soever
attend us from the Princes of this World for so doing. Indeed I find this
Doctrine owned by most. For the Papists themselves, upon Acts 4. 19. say thus:
If any Magistrate command against God, that is to say, forbid Catholic
Christian Men to preach, or serve God, this same must be their Answer, (meaning
that Answer which Peter gave, etc.) tho they be whipped or killed for their
Labor. And Dr. Fulk allows the Note, but yet would not have the Papists to
have any benefit by it, (so partial are Men, when uppermost.) We see then, by
consent of Christians generally, the Voice of God must be obeyed in Things
religious, tho the Princes of the Earth say Nay. And to this agrees the holy
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 23. Princes sat and spoke against me; that is, they sat
on the Throne, and dereed Things against him: But thy Servant did meditate in
thy Statutes. He would not depart from the Ways of God, tho he was persecuted.
Psalm. 119. 161. Princes perfecuted me without a cause, but my Heart stands in
awe of thy Word.

But here it may be fit to obviate an Objection.

It will be said, Tho it is true, that all that fear God, are bound thus to
obey God, and not Man, in Matters of Religion, and to suffer patiently, rather
than to sin; yet whether in Things indifferent, which are neither commanded nor
forbidden; if Princes here make ufe of their Authority, Christians are not
bound to obey actively? As for Example, about the Place of Worship, etc.

To this it may be answered; Seeing God has forbidden no Place, if that were
all the Business, he were a mad Man that would not actually obey; and
consequently he is bound to obey Authority in every Case that is like it; as
thus: It is a Duty for a Nation, in a time of common Calamity, to humble
themselves by Fasting and Prayer; and doubtless it is best this be done at the
same time, and none so fit to order this as the Magistrate: If therefore
Authority command the tenth, twentieth, or thirtieth Day of such a Month, for
such a Service, I doubt not but he should be guilty of Sin, that should in this
refuse such Time, merely because it is appointed by the Magistrate's Authority.
And if there be an hundred Cases of this kind, the same Answer must be given in
them all, for ought I see; or else under pretense of fearing God, we shall
dishonor the King, which is a Sin of an high Nature.

Tho Christians be Subjects to Princes, yet Princes are Subjects to God, and in
the Sphere where God has set them, can do nothing more pleasing to him, than to
promote the Interest of Religion, by discountenancing Profaneness and
Irreligion, and by giving Encouragement to the Lovers of it. But then as they
are Subjects to Christ, they are Fellow Servants with their Subjects, (yea, the
Angels think not themselves too high to be called so, Rev. 19. 10.) and
therefore must with their Subjects be obedient to one Lawgiver, even Jesus, and
not assume Power to make Laws for the Consciences of Men in Religion, nor to
force them to go beyond their Knowledge and Faith in Things of that kind, seeing
what is not of Faith is Sin, and we must every one give an Account of himself
unto God.

5. The last Particular I shall insist upon, as necessary to the true Fear of
God, is to avoid Covetousness and Worldly-mindedness. Covetousness is said to
be Idolatry. And he that is a covetous Person, makes little further use of
Religion, than to be a Cloak for his Iniquity; he fears not God, he serves not
the Lord Christ, but his own Belly; for this he preaches, for this he prays,
and without this he will do neither. These are the Men that make Merchandise of
the Word of God, supposing (as the Apostle says) that Gain is Godliness. I
meet with a notable Passage in our English Chronicles; in the sixth Century,
it is said, The Clergy of Britain set all their Mind to serve God, and not the
World, the Heart, and not the Belly: Wherefore then were they had in great
Reverence and Honor. But as they increased in earthly Treasure, so they
decreased in heavenly Treasure. Fab. Chron. 5 part. cap. 134. Let all that fear
God, beware of this evil Disease, especially such as are Ministers of Christ.
No Man can serve two Masters; ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says our
Savior, Mat. 6. 24.

Thus much of the Fear of God; let us now consider the Debt which we owe to our
King.

Honor the King.

Although by the Order of our Text, we are to speak of this weighty Subject in the
last place, yet it is not the least part of our Duty: For as the ancient
Christians were wont to speak, so it remains an eternal Truth, That as God is
above the Emperor, so none other is above the Emperor but God. And consequently
our Duty, next to Almighty God, is to our Prince; as we see here in our Text,
the Honor of the King is provided for, next to the Fear of God. We have
already showed, in the opening of the Words, that the King here meant, or
immediately spoken of, was an Heathen King, and a great Idolater in his
Religion; and yet the Holy Ghost does here oblige all Christians, even of the
highest Rank, to honor such Kings, Peter himself, and consequently all his
Successors not excepted; for indeed he had learned this Obedience of one higher
than himself, even Jesus Christ, and therefore must needs recommend the same to
all Christians. And hence the Doctrine is,

Doct. IV. All Christians are bound by Gospel-Rules to be good Subjects to
Princes, to honor their Persons, and conscienciously to obey. their Authority.

1. To evince this great Truth, it may be needful to show, That Kingly Power or
Government is of God. Not in the Sense (profanely objected by some Writers)
wherein Plagues, Diseases, and Punishments are of God; for the Apostle Paul
does expressly contradict such an ungodly Exposition, Romans 15. 1, etc. wherein
he avers, even of the same Kingly Power spoken of by Peter, That it was
ordained of God; that the Magistrate was God's Minister to the Christian Man,
(as well as any other) for Good, to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.
Which Word, Minister, refers evidently to him that bears the Sword of Justice,
and not to the Power only, which yet he affirms to be of God, and confirms it
by this Argument, For there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be, are
ordained of God. And this is the only comfortable Ground of Obedience to the
higher Powers, to be well satisfied in this, that whether it fall out our
Obedience shall be active or passive, yet therein we conform our selves to the
Will of God, or to his Ordinance; And he that shall resist the Power, does
resist the Ordinance of God.

2. That Kingly Government is of God as clearly, if not more clearly than any
other Form of Government, is very plain from the Text it self, considered with
the Context, verse. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, etc. Where Supremacy over all Persons in Things
Civil, is so clearly given to the King by God himself, even over Governors, as
well as the People governed, that it must in no wise be denied.

3. If it be objected, that tho the Power Magistratical be of God, yet the Form
or Mode of it is of Man, because (according to the Greek) 1 Pet. 2. 13. may be
read thus, Submit your selves to every humane Creature. To this I say; The
Words, Humane Creature, are better understood of the Laws made by Humane
Authority, than of the Magistrates themselves: For as the most high God, and he
only, can give Being and Power to a Divine Law, insomuch that no Power on Earth
can create such a Law; so Earthly Gods, and none but they, can create and give
Power to an humane Law; and Laws thus made, are rightly called Humane
Creatures, or Ordinances of Men, (as our English expresses it.) And when Laws
are thus made, tho they should happen to be ill Laws, (as it sometimes happens
to be so) yet they must be obeyed, (either actively or passively) because the
Power Magistratical must not be resisted; only the Error of an ill Law must be
refused by all faithful Men, especially in Matters of Religion, as we have
showed before.

4. This great Power which God has given to Kings and Rulers of the Earth, to
make Laws, is (as I conceive) the chief cause why they are called Gods, Psalm.
82. 6. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the most High:
That is, because of that resemblance which they have to God himself, being
decked with Power and Majesty, to make and execute Laws (in this lower World)
which concern the Children of Men as such.

5. And as to the Form of Kingly Government (for this is all that I can find in
my Text): Let us hear what God himself says. By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice; by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth. What can be said more in this case? If any shall say, it is not God, but
Wisdom that speaks these Words, Prove. 8. 15, 16. I answer, it is Folly that
makes the Objection, for this Wisdom is the Voice of God, because it is the
Wisdom of God. Kings are called the Lords Anointed. And not only the Kings of
Israel, but even Heathen Kings also. Isa. 45. 1. Thus says the Lord to his
Anointed, even to Cirus. Now Cirus was King of Persia, Ezra. 1. 1.

6. If yet it be said, that Government, but not the Form of Government, is of
God, but of human Choice, etc. I answer, I speak not of a Government to be
formed, and not yet in being; but of one established: and therefore, I say, the
distinction is dangerous. But how shall it be a Power or Government without its
Form? Does God make an Ordinance or any thing else without Form? If so, what
can you call it? It is the Form that gives every thing to be, or at least to be
called what it is. It Is bad venturing to say, that God makes an Ordinance, and
leaves Man to form it, as to the Essentials of it. And seeing no Nation can
long endure, without Government, nor that Government subsist without Form. It
seems necessary that both be acknowledged to be of God; and consequently, where
the Form of Government is Regal or Kingly, it is of God, and as such to be had
in Honor.

That God does by his Providence order and permit Men to transact, order, and
settle the Mode of Government, in Nations which yet are unsettled in that
respect, does not prove that the Form or Settlement when made is not of God, or
not to be esteemed so; because in such an emergency, the Voice of the People,
together with God's Providence, must herein be acknowledged the Voice of God.
For thus in an ordinary way is that Saying true, By me Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth. It was the most high God which gave Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom, Majesty,
Glory and Honor, Dan. 5. 18. who then may question his Regal Power to be of
God? It Is ill murmuring, worse disputing, worst of all to fight against God.
Surely, if Nebuchadnezzar must have this Honor given to him as King, even by
Daniel that Servant of God, because by the Almighty he was thus exalted, although
otherwise he was a sinful Man, a great Idolater; it must needs resolve all
doubts that may arise, about the warrantableness of Kingly Government, and all
Christians Obedience to it, with respect to all Kings under whom they live,
whatsoever.

If it be objected, that some may usurp Kingly Government, and some that have
it may abuse it.

I answer; Tho this be true, yet it is nothing to the purpose; for this is
incident to all other Forms of Government. And when God permits such things,
it is usually for the Sins of the People, as it is written, For the
Transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, Prove. 28. 2. He gave
them a King in his Wrath: But this was because Israel had rejected God, and his
Prophet Samuel. Otherwise God had promised to give his People a King, Numb. 23.
21. Yea, the Government of Moses himself was after a sort a Regal or Kingly
Government, Deuteronomy. 33. 4, 5. If then it so fall out, that Kings or other Rulers
do oppress their Subjects, I know no remedy for the Subject but Prayers and
Tears, that God would turn their own Hearts more to his Fear, and the Heart of
their Prince toward them; (For the Hearts of Kings are in his Hands:) And with
patient Suffering, and humble Supplication, to seek for Favor. For Rebellion
must by no means be admitted, For it is as the Sin of Witchcraft; being against
God, as well as against the King, because it is against the Ordinance of God.
And hence Tertullian well said, The Christian knows that the Emperor is
constituted of God. And says the Prophet, I have delivered all these Countries
into the Hands of Nebuchadnezzar: Who then may take them out of his Hand? Sure
none but God, who sets up one, and puts down another, as pleases him. For he
that gives can only rightfully take away, and he does so when Men abuse what he
gives. Mean, Mean, Takel Vpharsin, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished
it, -- and given it to the Medes and Persians, Dan. 5. 25, 26.

If it be objected from that Passage, They have set up Kings, and not by me;
that Kingly Government is of Man, not of God.

I answer; This rather proves the contrary, for here a disorder only is
reproved in the way of doing that, which they could not do rightly but by him,
that is, God. They so set up a King, as they rejected God, that he should not
reign over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Hence it was that Samuel gave them that Reproof
and Exhortation, 1 Samuel 12. 20. Ye have done all this Wickedness, yet turn not
aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your Heart. But God
did not deny them a King: No, but he had given them direction how to choose them
a King, Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, 16. And most certain it is, that of all Civil
Governments which God has set up in the World, Kingly Government is the most
frequent, and permanent, so far as the Scripture gives any account of this
Matter: And indeed it holds the nearest resemblance to that Government which
God himself exercises over the World in general; For he is King of Kings, and
his Kingdom rules over all.

Let us then come more directly to the Text, Honor the King. And,

1. Of the Honor which we owe to his Royal Person. We must esteem it very
highly, and behave our-selves toward him with that Fear and Reverence which
belongs to him, as placed next unto God. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King, Prove. 24. 21. Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God
the things which are God's. So the Text, Fear God, Honor the King. We see the
King holds the next place of Honor unto God. Hence Tertullian, personating
the Christians of his time, says, We honor the Emperor as a Man next unto
God. And says Optatus, Above the Emperor there is none but God, who made the
Emperor. If we will honor the King's Person, or esteem him highly, we must
not only upon all sit occasions, give him (with Reverence) his Place and Titles
of Honor; but also defend his Person with the hazard of our own, as those did
who would not suffer King David to hazard himself, saying, Thou art worth ten
thousand of us. Let us hate to think or speak evil or contemptuously of him
whom God has exalted, and set over us.

We find a remarkable Instance of true Love and Loyalty to a Prince, 2 Samuel 15.
19, 20, 21. Here tho Ittai was willed by the King, not to put himself in danger
for him, yet he answers thus, As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King
lives, surely in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in Death, or in
Life, even there also will thy Servant be. This poor exiled Stranger (for such
he was) shall rise up in Judgment against many native Subjects, who have done
quite contrary hereunto even in our days.

2. We must Honor him in Love. Sincere Love, and Loyal Affection, as he is
King, can in no wise be wanting in a good Subject: Nor can we honor the King
heartily, if we do not love him entirely. Now he that truly loves his Prince,
has him much in his serious Thoughts, especially when he prays to the God of
Heaven: He will not then forget him whom he truly Loves, whom he honors in
Love. If he love him, he will pray for him; perhaps that is all the good he can
do his Prince; and in this a mean Subject may serve his King, as much as any,
so that his Prayer be Serious and Godly. It is highly observable, how the duty
of making Prayer for all Men, and particularly for Kings and Rulers, with
Supplication, Intercession, and giving of Thanks, is required of Christians;
especially of those in the Ministry: That by the Ministers constant and devout
performance of this Duty in behalf of all that are in Authority, the Hearts of
the People may be more endeared toward their Prince, and themselves hereby
instructed to perform their Duty, and manifest their Love to their Governors
in like manner, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. And to enforce the Exhortation to this Duty,
the Apostle tells us, that it is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior, verse. 3.

3. The next Demonstration of honoring the King, shall be taken from the
manner of our Language, and the matter of our Discourse when concerned to speak
of him, or of his Doings. In these we must hate the thoughts of Scurrility, or
reflecting Expressions; for the Tongue is the Index of the Mind, and we are
expressly forbidden to curse or speak evil of the King, even in our Bedchamber;
for these things are so odious, that Providence will fight against such as do
so, and the Iniquity of such doings will return upon the Offenders: For a Bird
in the Air shall carry the News, and that which has Wings shall tell the
Tidings, Eccles. 10. 20. Are they not marked out in Scripture for the worst
sort of Men, that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities? More daring and
presumptuous than Angels, who are great in Authority, and may lawfully do more
than Men, yet they dare not bring a railing Accusation against the Devil, who
is the Prince of Darkness; but they refer the wrong done to them unto God, who
both can and will rebuke him. But why may not the good Angels rebuke Satan? Why
they know (as wicked as he is) he could do nothing about the Body of Moses, nor
any thing else, without License from the Almighty: He must indeed be withstood
in his Temptations, but he must not be railed on it seems. And then what manner
of Men are they that will take Liberty to rail on their Princes, if they do not
what they would have them? Nay, tho they should do Evil, yet must they in no
wise be evil spoken of. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the
Ruler of my People, Exodus 22. 28. Acts 23. 5.

Object. But have not the Prophets reproved Kings when they did Evil?

I answer, Yea; God reproved them by his Prophets frequently. And no doubt that
Men of God, such as have Commission from him, may and ought to deal faithfully
with Kings and Rulers, when they do that which is Evil in the sight of the
Lord. But this is that which is intolerable, that the Errors or Infirmities of
Princes should be made the Subject of Men's Discourse: Surely they are rather to
be lamented before the Lord in secret. Is it meet to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? and to Princes, Ye are ungodly? Job 34. 18. The true Sense of these
Interrogatives is, No. It is by no means thus to reflect upon a King. St. Paul
having spoken rashly, Acts 23. 5. corrects and excuses himself, by saying, I
wist not, Brethren, that he was God's High Priest: For it is written, Thou
shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of my People. Let Christians beware of this
evil Disease which reigns in these days. Let them remember, They are bound by
Gospel-Rules to Honor the King, next to God himself.

Thus much of the Honor which we owe to the King's Person.

Let us now consider, how we are obliged by Gospel-Rules to obey his Authority.
And here,

1. Let the Subject consider how much God has set him below his Prince, for
Obedience seldom issues from a lofty Mind. It Is not impossible for a Subject,
in conceit, to be a Prince's Mate, and then Subjection is Death to him. That
Passage concerning Mephibosheth, the Son of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 9. 8. was written
for our Learning. When he considered the Majesty of King David, and his own
Condition as a Subject; What is thy Servant (says he) that thou should look
upon such a dead Dog as I am? Such self-abasing Thoughts in a Subject
(especially those of low degree) does argue an Heart full of desires to honor
him whom God has exalted as his King, and a Mind willing to obey him. Let
Christians learn by this Example.

2. Our Savior has led us the right way: Give unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's. But what things are they? Why the Things which bear his Image and
Superscription. Whose Image and Superscription is this, says Christ? They say,
Caesar's. Therefore, says Christ, Give unto Caesar, etc. We may hence fairly
infer, that whatsoever bears the King's Authority, or is required in his name,
must be obeyed. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto those
that are sent by him. Mark, if they be sent by him, they bear his Image, or
Superscription, they represent the King; submit, submit, either Actively or
Passively, here is no resisting, for here comes Caesar. Only here it must be
minded, Caesar's Superscription is only to be put to the Ordinances of Man.
None can put a Divine Character upon a Law but God; and we must give to God the
things which are God's, Divine Obedience, or Obedience in all divine things, to
God; Civil Obedience, or Obedience in all civil things, to Caesar. Thus has our
Savior divided the matter of Christians (and all Men's) Obedience to God, and
to Caesar. Let us hold to this most just Settlement, a better cannot possibly
be given.

3. St. Paul will have Christians Subjection to Caesar, to proceed from them of
pure Conscience, or for Conscience sake, Romans 13. not only Wrath. And of this
Reason wills that we give all the Assurance that we can to Princes, that we are
heartily their Subjects; And willingly obedient in all things which concerns
their Government over us. This Principle of Obedience in the Heart, will make
our Obedience to Princes delightful and durable; they that have this good
Principle in them, will never be weary of any reasonable Labor, Service, or
Hazard for their King: where it is wanting, the King can put no confidence in
them. This is so reasonable, so necessary, that he that has not such an Heart
for his Sovereign, is unworthy the name of a Subject: He is no Subject. From
this Principle, we are to pay tribute also, Romans 13. 6, 7. and not grudgingly.
And when Princes see Men ready, in conscience of their Duty, to serve them as
God's Vicegerents; how naturally will this draw back again the influence of all
Princely Favors? That Prince who is thus happy in the Obedience of his
Subjects, will doubtless, as a Loving Father, contrive the best to make his
Subjects happy under his Government.

4. How clearly is our Duty to our Superiors delivered by St. Paul, Tit. 3. 1,
etc. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work. Let the Power be in this or the
other Form (for all Nations have not the same Form of Government) you must not
dispute that, you must cheerfully obey, as becomes Men of a ready Mind, to do
the good commanded by Magistrates; you must not ask whether they be Heathen
Kings, or Christian Kings: You must obey all Kings or Magistrates, For they are
God's Ministers, attending on this very thing; i. e. the Government of the
World: a very necessary thing, without which human Society cannot subsist. Here
is no Limitation of time for your Subjection to Princes, Powers, and
Magistrates; you are under this Obligation so long as St. Paul's Epistle to
Titus is Canonical. Let not then any idle Dream of the change of Dispensations
subvert you from the simplicity of the Gospel-Rules delivered in this great
Case, in which the Happiness of Christian Men, as such, is much concerned: For,
who shall harm them if they be careful Followers of that which is good? 1 Pet.
3. 13. But if it so fall out, that notwithstanding your care in this matter, ye
must suffer for righteousness sake, then happy are ye, etc. for still religious
Obedience is due to God, and must be paid to him.

5. This place, Tit. 3. 1. commands Christians to be ready to every good work.
Obj. What if the Powers command otherwise? what then? For answer to this, we
know we have an Obligation to obey God antecedent to that of our Obedience to
Kings (as has been showed.) He commands us to abstain from every appearance of
Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Wherefore if the Power shall be so unhappy to command
otherwise, as it fell out in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5. there the
Penalty must be patiently endured. And then the Powers are still obeyed. And
tho some vainly upbraid us, that there either is no such thing as Passive
Obedience; or that our Obedience in this is like the Obedience of a Felon, when
he goes to the Gallows, etc. Such blind Byards may be pleased to know, the
Felon has ordinarily nothing to choose, but must necessarily dye: whereas the
suffering Christian has Life and Liberty offered if he will but worship so, or
so. Now here he chooses rather to suffer, than to do that which he conceives (at
least) to be sin in the sight of God, that so he may be a faithful Witness for
God; and therein a Blessing to his Prince and to his Nation, which is his only
way to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men; whose unwary Objections reflect
not only upon all true Martyrs since the World began, but upon Christ himself,
who for this cause was hated and persecuted, because He bore witness to the
Truth, Joh. 18. 37. and that the Works of the World were Evil, John 7. 7.

6. But if it should happen that Princes should some way entrench upon the
Civil Rights of their Subjects? What then must we do? What then? Why it is
dangerous to contend with them in such cases; we are taught otherwise by the
Example of our Savior, in his direction to St. Peter, in the case of paying
Tribute to the Roman Magistrates, Mat. 17. 25, 26, 27. For it is evident from
this place, that our Savior was not obliged by Law to pay Custom or Tribute,
but was free in that case; yet it being demanded, he advises Peter to pay it,
both for himself, and his Master: So careful was he to avoid Offenses, that he
will pay Tribute, and advises his Followers to do it too, tho it be in their
own wrong. A good precedent to all Christians to be humble, and not to contend
with Authority in or about indifferent things: Would God they would consider it.

7. But it may here be demanded, Whether Princes may not warrantably punish
such as submit not to the Religion by them established, from the Example of
King Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7. 26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the
Law of the King, let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment?

I confess, this Objection requires a serious Answer. And with submission to
better Judgments, I shall say a few Things in Answer to it. And it seems by the
Scope and Contexture of the Commission given to Ezra by Artaxerxes, that these
Things are evident:

1. That the King did not himself embrace the Religion of the Jewish Nation,
but retained still his former Religion; for tho he did fear the God of Israel,
yet he never calls him his God, but the God of Heaven, and the God of Ezra, etc.

2. That God had by a special Providence, and Motion from himself, disposed the
Heart of the King of Persia, to give free Liberty to the Jews, which were
Captives in his Dominions, to go forth to serve their God; verse. 13. I make a
Decree, that all they of the People of Israel, and of his Priests and Levites
in my Realm, which are minded of their own free Will to go up to Jerusalem, to
go with thee, -- to do whatsoever shall seem good to them, after the Will of
your God.

3. The King does not only give a present Supply to Ezra, as a
Free-Will-Offering to the God of Israel, verse. 15. but also provides for his
necessary Supply for the future, out of the King's Treasury, verse. 20.

4. The King fearing the Displeasure of the God of Israel against himself and
his Sons, does require Ezra, that whatsoever was required by the God of Heaven
should be diligently done.

5. The King also empowers Ezra to set Magistrates and Judges over the People,
and in so doing, gave Ezra a Magistratical Power, or made him a Magistrate; and
so gives Order, that whosoever would not be obedient to him should be punished,
verse. 25, 26. This is the Sum of the Commission given to Ezra by the King of
Persia.

In all which, nothing appears, that any of his Subjects should be compelled to
alter their Religion, nor be forced to be all of one Religion: But a free
Liberty is given to the Jews, (as well as to others) to serve their God
according to his Law, and a Restraint laid upon them that would hinder them.
And Ezra is empowered (indeed) to punish those that were under the Law of
Moses, according to that Law, if they would not do it; and such as withstood
his Authority, as a Magistrate, which he received from the King, were to be
punished by the Law of the King of Persia, who had the Power of Life and Death
in his hand, which the Jewish Nation had not at this time.

6. We may learn hence, that it is indeed a blessed Thing for all Kings to fear
the God of Heaven, and to advance the Interest of Religion in their Dominions;
and it is as evident, that Religion must always be settled according to the Law
of God, with the greatest Care that may be, and none punished for keeping the
Law of God; but for breaking the Law of God, and the Law of the King, which did
concur with the Law of God. Here were great Punishments assigned; and yet not
to be insisted on too rashly, in the Times of the Gospel, nor in Cases purely
Evangelical, or of the Christian Religion, as it is dignified above the
Principles of common Reason and Morality: In these Cases I cannot see how it
should be in the power of Magistrates to compel any against their Will, seeing
it is God, not Man, that makes Christians. Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his Workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them. And God gives none the Privileges of his Children,
until they be his Children; nor are they his Children, till they be born, not
of Blood, nor of Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. John 1. 12, 13.

7. Nor must we deny, but acknowledge, that God's Vicegerents are authorized by
the Almighty to be Keepers of both Tables, so as to defend his Sovereignty, and
to encourage true Religion, against Atheists and Idolaters, that worship a
Creature instead of the Creator; for so it is written, Job 31. 26, 27, 28. If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in Brightness, and my Heart
has been secretly enticed, or my Mouth has kissed my Hand; this also were an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied God that is
above.

Now let us write (or desire the Lord to write) the Words of our Text in our
Hearts; Honor all Men; Love the Brotherhood; Fear God; Honor the King. Surely
that Christian, that shall make it his Business to do these things heartily,
shall be acceptable to God, and approved of Men; there shall be no occasion of
stumbling in him. But if Christians be too busy to inspect Matters of State, or
to meddle with those that contrive or project any thing to the disturbance and
subversion of the Government in the Kingdoms where they live, they shall never
be able to recommend their Religion (be it never so good in it self) to the
acceptance of their Governors, nor to obtain from them to be Nursing-Fathers to
it; but shall certainly expose themselves to the Displeasure of God, as well as
to the Wrath of Princes. And God himself will vindicate the Honor of his
Ordinance of Worldly Government, against all that despise it, as well as
against all that abuse their Power in it; for there is no Respect of Persons
with God. Romans 2. 11.

Let me therefore exhort you, my Brethren, (as you know it has been my manner
these thirty Years) to follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness; to study to be
quiet, and especially in troublesome Times; to fear the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21. Many have undone
themselves by itching after Changes in Worldly Government. God only knows what
is best for you, and for the Nation. They that are weary of this, are soon
weary of that; few know what they would have; and who is able to devise any
thing that will please all Humors, and suit all Interests? Bless God for your
Prince, and for the Peace you have enjoyed under him, and pray for him, and for
all that are in Authority, that under them (if the Will of God be so) you may
lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. They that will not
pray for all that are in Authority, do not fear God, for they contemn his Word,
1 Timothy 2. 1. They do not love, and so they cannot honor the King.

You are at present under Sufferings, for the conscientious performance of what
you believe to be your Duty toward God in Matters of Religion; humble your
selves under the mighty Hand of God, and suffer patiently what Trials it shall
please God to exercise you under, that (as our Apostle has it, 1 Pet. 1. 7.)
the Trial of your Faith being much more precious than that of Gold that
perishes, tho it be tried with Fire, might be found unto Praise, and Honor,
and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. I say no more; the Lord direct
you. AMEN.

NOW if it shall please God, to bring this faithful (tho unpolished) Discourse
to his Majesty's Royal Hand, I do hereby in all Humility prostrate my self at
his Royal Feet, with this humble Supplication.

That it would graciously please his Majesty, according to his wonted Goodness,
and Princely Clemency, to consider and pity the distressed condition of many of
his faithful Subjects, who dissent from the Church of England in the case of
Infant Baptism, and some other Ceremonies, and cannot in Conscience to God
conform to them; nor deny the exercise of their Religion, of which they are
convinced, and persuaded to be according to the Will of God.

O let our Lord the King consider, that this is the greatest strait that any
honest Christian can be put upon, either to deny what he believes to be true,
or profess that to be true, which he believes to be otherwise.

O let the God of Heaven be always his Majesty's Chief Counselor; That by his
direction he may rightly distinguish between those that are harmless in his
Realm, and such as have abused his Kindnesses (which have been very great, and
thankfully to be remembered) and that the present Severities against the
Innocent may be abated and removed, lest they be made miserable in their Native
Country.

God Almighty bless the King, etc.

FINIS.
The SECOND PART of the APOLOGY FOR THE Baptized Believers, Wherein the GROUNDS
of INFANT BAPTISM Are REVIEWED: In ANSWER to Fourteen ARGUMENTS, delivered by
Mr. Nathaniel Tailor, M. A. in a SERMON on Matthew. 28. 19. entitled, (...). And
therewithal, The Reasons of the Separation of the Baptized Believers, from the
Pedobaptists, modestly propounded. Upon the occasion of their great and
long-continued Sufferings.

By T. Grantham, a Servant of Christ.

LONDON; Printed for the Author. 1684.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE Baptized Believers, etc. PRESENTED To all Pious and
Well-disposed Christians in the Church of ENGLAND.
SECT. I.
Honored and Beloved Brethren,
TO prevent a Mistake, and to remove an Aspersion too frequently cast upon us,
be pleased to know, that tho we differ from you and others, in some things
relating to the Constitution and Government of a true Church, yet we do not
therefore arrogate to our selves alone the Christian Name, nor exalt our selves
in our Imaginations above others; but do believe and hope, that the Number of
the saved Ones will be gathered out of all sorts of Christians, who heartily
love God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and live holily and charitably among Men,
tho they be diversified in respect of Ceremonies, by reason of the Place and
Government where they live: Yea, we have Charity for all Men, who are faithful
to the Means of Grace afforded them, how small soever, knowing that our God
delights in Mercy, and does not exact the utmost Farthing of any Man.

But for all this, as it is certain there has been abundance of Errors
introduced among Christians, so it has pleased God to raise up a People still
to testify against them, (the Memories of whom are blessed, tho they were
frequently persecuted.) So we believe it a Duty incumbent upon us, to bear our
Testimony to what Truth we know, and not to partake with any in their Bypath
in Life or Religion, and yet endeavor as much as in us lies, after Unity and
Concord with all that fear God, and own the Christian Profession.

To which purpose we have humbly proposed what we thought concerned us, in
order to a better Understanding and Compliance, in our Friendly Epistle to the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, published some Years ago, but
has not been publicly taken notice of, till lately one Mr. Tailor, a Person of
Worth for his Integrity, and Zeal for the Protestant Interest, and for his
gentle Disposition toward such as fear God, tho differing from him in the Case
of Ceremonies.

It has pleased him (I say) to take notice of our said Epistle, and to offer
something in order to a Composure of Differences, which I confess, with him, to
be a thing greatly to be desired. But then he is pleased to show us nothing of
Mitigation, or Hopes of the removal of the Things which has occasioned our
Disunion, but does rather wholly charge the Cause of Division upon us, and
supposes our Difference about Baptism, to be the chief Cause of our dissenting
from the Church of England.

But tho this is indeed a matter of great Importance, because true Baptism is
antecedent to Church Communion; yet that which is greater in our Judgment, is
that open Profaneness, which, God knows, reigns and rages in the Church of
England, and therewithal, the utter Neglect of Discipline to reform those
Iniquities; and also that persecuting Spirit, which appears even in too many of
the Guides of the Church, by whose Cruelty our Sufferings have been much
augmented.

For these Causes we have thought our selves concerned to make this our
Christian Apology, in which we crave leave to use that Freedom of Speech which
the Matters depending do require. And yet, seeing we must acknowledge that we
are not infallible, (as neither does the Church of England pretend so to be) we
shall speak under Correction, and by the help of God, with resolution to submit
to a clear Conviction, if indeed it shall appear, that the Things wherein we
dissent are justifiable on the part of the Church of England; but till this be
done, it would be Hypocrisy and Baseness in us, to violate our Consciences in
Things pertaining to Religion, to obtain Favor from Men; for if we should so
please Men, we should not be the Servants of Christ. Gal. 1. 10.

And we do the (...) desire to be heard at this time; partly, for that Mr.
Tailor is pleased to impute Folly to us, in separating from the Church of
England, because we allow of the most of the Thirty Nine Articles; but
especially being thereunto required by some of Eminency and great Authority in
the Church of England, who also told us, That unless we could show, that the
Church of England does hold some Error in point of Faith, or that she does
practice something in her Religion which is sinful, we cannot justify our
Separation from her. And whether we be able on this wise to vindicate our
present Separation, is the Business which we pray may be seriously considered.

SECT. II. A brief Account of the Reasons why the Baptized Believers cannot
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church of England.
REserving all due Honor to the Church of England, so far as she holds the
Truth in the Thirty Nine Articles, and as she is a good Fortress against much
Popish Superstition and Idolatry; we shall humbly make our Objections in three
Particulars, 1. Concerning Infant Baptism. 2. Concerning her Discipline. 3.
Concerning her Imposing of Ceremonies.
From all which we think we may safely argue thus:

It is lawful, just, and needful, to maintain a prudent and friendly Separation
from such a Church, as does believe, hold, and maintain such Things, as are
evidently and actually destructive of that Christian Liberty, wherewith Christ
has made his Churches free; and of that sacred Baptism, and holy Discipline,
which Christ ordained to continue in all Churches to the end of the World.

But the Church of England does believe, hold, and maintain such Things, as are
evidently and actually destructive of that Christian Liberty, wherewith Christ
has made his Churches free, and of that sacred Baptism, and holy Discipline,
which Christ ordained to continue in all Churches, to the end of the World.

Ergo, It is lawful, just, and needful to maintain a prudent and friendly
Separation from the Church of England in her present Parochial Constitution.

Supposing the Major is not to be denied by any Christian, we shall endeavor
to make good the Minor.

To begin with Sacred Baptism. It is evident from the Scripture, and partly
from the Confession of the Church of England, that the Things prerequisite to
Baptism, on the part of every one who is to be joined with the Church Militant,
or to be baptized, are these: 1. They ought to have the Gospel preached, or
some way made known to them. 2. To believe the Gospel. 3. To repent of Sin.
And, 4. Willingly to put on Christ in Baptism. Or to express it in short: They
are, first, to be dead with Christ; and then, secondly, to be buried with
Christ by Baptism.

Now that the Church of England does hold such Things as are evidently and
actually destructive of this Baptism, may in our Judgment be thus proved:

1. She believes, holds, and does teach others to hold, That all, or the very
most of her Church Members are regenerate, without hearing the Word of God,
without Faith, without Repentance, or any Knowledge of God; and so believes what
neither we, nor any Body else can understand to be true, and errs in Faith.

2. Yet she does not believe that her Members are regenerate at all, till she
cross or sprinkle them with Water; neither does she know (because she has no
ground to believe) that Infants are thereby made anew, so as to become the
Children of God, and Heirs of Heaven; and believing this without possibility
(ordinarily) to know it to be true, she errs in Faith.

3. She believes, and maintains, that those ought to be baptized, whom she
knows do not, cannot believe, nor repent, nor in any measure know God, nor any
Duty of Religion; and herein she errs (as we conceive) concerning the Faith.

4. She believes and maintains, that Sponsors do believe and repent for
Infants, or that Infants do perform Faith and Repentance by their Sponsors; and
believing these things, and teaching her Youth to believe them, without any
ground from the Word of God, she believes amiss, or errs in Faith.

5. She holds, that Persons may lawfully be baptized when they are asleep, and
does actually pretend to baptize Infants when they are asleep, which we think
verily must needs be a very great Error both in Faith and Practice.

6. She believes, holds, and maintains, that Crossing or Sprinkling is a lawful
way of Baptizing, when indeed it is no Baptizing at all. Insomuch as those that
use that Mode, dare not speak as they act, saying, I sprinkle thee in the Name,
etc. their Conscience bearing them witness, that the sacred Act of baptizing in
the Name, etc. cannot be expressed by the word, Sprinkling: They therefore
believing what they know is not true in this matter, must needs err in Faith,
as well as in their Practice. And this Error has in a manner destroyed the way
of Baptizing used by John Baptist, Christ and his Apostles.

7. Thus tho we grant, that the Church of England is no less zealous for the
Doctrine of Baptism than our selves, yet it is apparent to us, that she has
accidentally lost this holy Ordinance, both in respect of the Subject and
Manner of it, and in the due Use and End of it, which was not appointed (nor
fitted) to receive new-boru Infants into the Church Militant. And by this
unwarrantable Change she has defaced the State, and lost the Praise of a true
Church, 1 Cor. 11. 2. because she has not kept this Ordinance, as it was
delivered by Christ and his Apostles; but has rather suppressed it, and much
oppressed those that labor to restore it to its due Use and Practice in all
Churches, which is a great Aggravation of all these her Errors in Faith and
Practice, concerning Sacred Baptism.

SECT. III. Concerning Discipline.
WHat manner of Discipline the Church of Christ ought to observe, is
sufficiently declared, Matthew. 18. 1 Cor 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Tit. 3. and other
places. And it is very well expressed by a Minister of the Church of England,
in his Def^nce of the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, in these
Words: The manner of proceeding in Excommunication is, first by gentle
Admonition, and that once or twice, given with the Spirit of Meekness, even as
a Brother, if the Fault be not notoriously known, and next, by open
Reprehension; afterward by public Sentence of the Church, to put him from the
Company of the Faithful, to deliver him to Satan, to denounce him an Heathen,
and a Publican, if no Admonition will serve, and the Crimes and Persons be very
offensive. Thus he.

And to this Discipline we can heartily subscribe, it being indeed the very
same which is religiously observed by the Baptized Believers in this Age and
Nation.

But where now shall this Discipline be found in the Church of England? Does
any one Assembly, or Court, of the Church of England observe it? Or does she
not practice that in her Courts, which is too evidently destructive of it? For
so far as we can understand, instead of this brotherly Admonition, Men are
clandestinely presented and accused, and often excommunicated for they know not
what. What Man is now taught or bound by any Order of the Church of England,
that in case his Brother trespass against him, by defaming his Reputation,
offering Injury to his Person, or by wronging him in his Substance, to take
that brotherly Course prescribed to all Christians, Mat. 18.? Or if he would
take this Course, what Congregation is empowred or allowed to hear or determine
the Strife, as Sin is in such cases committed against God? We see not how it is
possible for the Offended, to do his Duty in an orderly way to the Offender; if
he go about it, he shall probably be derided both by Teacher and People: So far
is he from obtaining Justice against the Offender, in any Congregation of the
Church of England, because the ancient Discipline is an unknown thing to the
People generally. And for want of this Christian Government, are Men
continually exposed to Suits and Troubles in Courts of Law, wherein the Poor
can have small Help; as it is written, Eccles. 5. 8. (old Translation) If thou
see the Poor to be oppressed, -- marvel not, -- for one great Man keeps
touch with another, and the mighty Men are in Authority over the Poor.

3. But that which is more grievous: We do not see that open Profaneness can
be met with, or suppressed by your Discipline: For suppose a Man be given to
Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, and lascivious Talking, (as God knows, a great
Number of the Members of the Church of England are known to be such) your
Discipline seems to have no power in such Cases: for thus says one of your own
Ministers:

Who minds Canon 109, that prohibits common Swearers, common Drunkards,
notorious Whoremasters, and Whores, etc. from the blessed Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper? Do not even Bishops hear Men swear a thousand Oaths, and either
do not, or dare not use any Discipline against them?

But now if a good Man do not stand up, and bow to the Altar at the Name of
Jesus, when the Creed is read, because he dares not pay greater Reverence (in a
religious way) to any Writing, than he pays to the holy Scriptures; If he dares
not use the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, nor sprinkle his Child, etc. then
shall he be prosecuted as a great Sinner, cast to the Devil, and laid in
Prison; yea, he is sentenced already: For in Canon 6. thus we read: Whosoever
shall affirm, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England are --
superstitious, or such -- as Men who are zealously and godlily affected, may
not with any good Conscience approve them, use them, or as Occasion requires,
subscribe unto them; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored,
until he repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.

4. Thus (as we conceive) the Discipline of Righteousness, Mercy, and Charity,
established by Christ, is laid aside; and a Mercenary Court set up, holding the
Traditions of Men, instead of Christ's Institutions, in Ecclesiastical
Government, who also live voluptuously upon the Sins of the People. But as for
the Reformation of evil Manners, or the making Peace and Concord, alas! it is
not sought for, nor indeed expected from these Courts. And as the Reverend
Grosthead said at Rome, when he saw all things ruled by Money, so may I say of
the Courts under consideration, O Money, Money, what will thou not do there? As
for the opprobrious Language prohibited by the Canon, we think it uncomely for
any to use it, tho we dissent from the Ceremonies themselves.

SECT. IV. Concerning Imposing of Ceremonies.
1. ALL Divine Ceremonies ordained by Christ, or his Apostles, we reverence,
and religiously observe and keep, as they were delivered.

2. That any Church since their days, has just power to make and ordain Divine
Ceremonies, to be any necessary parts of the Worship of God, we see no ground
to believe; much less, that such Ceremonies may lawfully be imposed under pain
of Excommunication, Banishment, Imprisonment, Loss of Estate and Life. For tho
it is certain, God has given power to the Rulers of the World, to make, change,
or disannual Laws in point of Civil Government; yet we believe all the Power on
Earth cannot make one Institute or Divine Ceremony in Religion. And therefore
we cannot but think the Church of England erred from the Rule of Righteousness,
in decreeing Rites and Ceremonies which God has not commanded.

3. For when we see how sharply foam were reprehended by St. Paul, for bringing
the Christian Churches in Galatia under some Legal Ceremonies, which once had a
divine Original and Use in the Church of God, as Invaders of the Liberty
wherewith Christ had made them free; averring also, That if they were subject
to them, Christ should profit them nothing. Gal. 5. 1, 2. We can see no ground
to free the Protestants from Sin, who either take up Scriptureless Ceremonies
from the Papists, or invent Ceremonies themselves; but least of all, when they
force Men, will they, nill they, to conform to such Ceremonies, or else to be
ejected, and delivered up to Satan. And surely it was very unreasonable for her
Bishops to consent to a Law, that pious Men, only dissenting in these things
See the 35th of Elizabeth.
from the Church of England, should be banished, or else hanged as Felons,
without Benefit of the Clergy. And we humbly desire, that the Severity of that
Law may be considered and mitigated.

4. But if it shall be said, That the Ceremonies of the Church of England, (as
the Sprinkling of Infants, the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, bowing to the
Altar, to name no more at present) are not sinful; then how shall we be ever
able to reprove a Papist, for using holy Water, bowing to the Image of Christ?
etc.

Certainly, if we must submit to the Ceremonies of the Church of England, in
her present Constitution, we must submit to theirs too, where they have power
on their side to enforce them. But he that shall impartially consider what a
learned Protestant has said of the Sinfulness of that one Ceremony of the Sign
of the Cross in Baptism, in his Book entitled, Against Symbolizing with
Antichrist in Ceremonies, will see great cause to avoid touching with any such
Inventions, however they may be supposed to have had an harmless Use among
Christians at the first.

But who sees not, that when such Ceremonies have got the Reputation of
Religion upon them, and are forced on by humane Laws, what incredible Miseries
they have brought upon the Christian World? How have they lorded it over Kings
and Kingdoms, over the Estates, Liberties and Lives of Christians? Who sees
not, that being thus set up, they are sometimes more set by, than sincere
Faith, and an holy Life? as if all true Religion (and Loyalty too) were only to
be judged of according to Men's Submission to those Humane Innovations. For it
is notorious, even in this our Land, that let a Man but conform to all the
Ceremonies, he shall live honorably, let his Life be never so debauched
almost: But let a Man refuse these Ceremonies, out of conscience to God,
because they are not from Heaven, then he is Envy's Mark, let his Life be never
so just and harmless. Such Effects should lead us to consider what the Causes
are.

And because we are speaking of Ceremonies, we crave leave to enquire, What
means the Ceremony of the Ring in Marriage? Why are we forced not only to use
it, but to use it in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost? The Church of England blames the Papists for saying Marriage is a
Sacrament; but shall we then make a Sacrament of a Ring? Sure you make the Ring
as sacred in Marriage, as you make the Water in Baptism. Such Usages as these,
we fear, give the Papists too much cause to use this Speech, A Protestant is
but a Papist scared out of his Wits.

It is not then any thing of Prejudice or Obstinacy, which makes us to stand
off from the Communion of the Church of England, but an unfeigned Desire to
serve God aright, and a godly Fear, lest by touching with these unwritten
Traditions, we should bring our Souls under Guilt in the sight of God. Howbeit,
if any can convince us, that the Church of England is justifiable in these
things here objected, we shall suspect our selves to be mistaken in other
things, which we here mention not.

Now may it please the God of Heaven, to put it into the Hearts of the Guides
of the Church of England, to consider these things.

1. That none of these Ceremonies about which we differ from them, are required
of Christians in the Holy Scriptures. And that therefore, 2. To enforce them by
Excommunication and Penal Laws upon the Consciences of Men, is more than God
requires of you, or any Body else.
And surely if the making these things necessary to our Communion were but
removed, so that Things which are not delivered in the Word of God were left at
liberty, we should not stand at so great a distance from the Church of England,
as now we do: For tho we are verily persuaded, that these Things objected
against by us are Errors, and therefore prudently to be amended; yet we believe
the imposing of them is a thousand times more offensive in the sight of God,
and more grievous to the Souls of Men, because (as we conceive) God's Authority
is then usurped by Man, and Men's Fear toward him is then taught by the
Precepts of Men.

And yet we know, and indeed must confess, that many Things, as to the more
convenient performance of Religious Services in a Church Way, are left to the
Prudence of the Church, guided therein by the general Rules in the Word of God;
and some Things also (which are not of the Essence of Christianity) will seem
doubtful to some, and clear to others. And therefore there will be a continual
Necessity of brotherly Forbearance one toward another, in some sinless
Ceremonies, as many Things may be so esteemed, whilst not made the Boundaries
of Communion, and forced upon Christians against their Consciences. For
Example: tho Sitting be the most safe Gesture at the Lord's Table, because
nearest to Christ's Example; yet if any in Humility, and of Devotion to God,
think it their Duty to receive kneeling, this surely cannot justly offend any
Christian. And thus also bowing at the Name of Jesus, being left at liberty,
when, where, and upon what occasion the Conscience of a Christian may be most
pressed to do it, need not offend any, tho it is apparent such bowing is not
the meaning of the Text, Phil. 2. 10. And the same may be said of well-composed
Prayers; so that still such Forms be used as a matter of Christian Liberty, and
not imposed by Law as necessary.

And could Things be managed with such Moderation, (as certainly the State of
the Inhabitants of this Land does much call for it) in a friendly and brotherly
Spirit, it is hoped our Animosities would abate, and Charity would endear all
that are upright toward God one toward another, tho laboring under many
Weaknesses, or dark Circumstances. But whilst one Party stands up with a Sword
in their hand, or with power to thrust Men into Goal, and rifle their Estates,
unless they will all submit to their Will and Pleasure, not only without, but
perhaps in some things against the Word of God, (the pretended Rule to all
Protestants in Matters of Religion) this lays a Necessity upon all that are of
Noble and truly Christian Spirits, to testify against such Cruelty, and unmanly
Proceedings, and to assert the true Christian Doctrine and Liberty, and
Christ's Sovereign Authority only, to make Laws for his Church, as such, although
for so doing they suffe the Loss of all Things which are dear to them in this
World; and therewithal, to stand off from the Communion of such unreasonable
Men, as have not learned to do to others, as they would have others to do to
them under their differing Opinions, when in a state of Subjection to those who
differ from them.

Thus much briefly of the Reasons or Causes of our Separation. We will now
consider what Mr. N. Tailor brings to make good Poedobaptism. And the rather,
because he says he has defended Infant Baptism both by Scripture and Reason.

Let us hear how he does this.

Mr. NATHANIEL TAYLOR'S Fourteen Arguments for Infant Baptism, considered and
answered.
BEfore we answer his Arguments, we will take notice of some of his
Concessions. And,

1. He says, Baptism of Water is not absolutely necessary to Salvation. page 2.

2. He tells us, St. Paul joins the Word of God with this Baptism, in order to
the purifying Christ's Church, that acting on the Soul, and this terminating on
the Body. And that St. Peter's Assertion is clear that it is not Water
purifying the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God that
saves. page 7.

3. He tells us also, That the premising the Word DISCIPLE (Matthew. 28. 19.)
implies none to be capable of Baptism, who are not Disciples of Christ, and
Members of the Church. page 10.

4. And further, That Christ would have his Ordinances performed by an external
Administration, wherein the subject might be in the nearest capacity of
understanding. page 81, 82.

5. He grants, That Childrens Baptism, and Church Membership, are not mentioned
in the New Testament. page 51.

From all which a Man may very fairly argue, and conclude against
Infant Baptism thus.

If Infants are undoubtedly saved without Baptism; and are Members of Christ's
Church without Baptism, and that the Word of God must act upon the Soul in true
Baptism, so as that the Subject of Baptism must have the answer of a good
Conscience: And if none be capable of Baptism, till they be Disciples of
Christ, according to Matthew. 28. 19. and ought to be in the nearest capacity of
understanding what is done in the external administration of Baptism. And if
Infant-Church-Membership and Baptism be not mentioned in the New Testament;
then Infants ought not to be baptized.

But all this is true, says Mr. Tailor: Therefore I conclude Infants ought not
to be baptized. And thus his Book (I will not say (as he) may be soon blown
away; but it) may seem to be soon answered: And his learned Title very
unsuitable. For how shall (...) be (...), when it is not mentioned in the new
Testament; can that be Orthodoxal Baptism which is not mentioned there? Sure
this is incredible.

But let us hear his Arguments, by which he undertakes to vindicate
Infant Baptism both by Scripture and Reason.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 1.
If our Christian Privileges be as great as the Jews were, then our Children
are rightly baptized: But our Christian Privileges are as great as the Jews
were: Therefore our Children are rightly Baptized.

ANSWER.
Because Mr. Tailor says he offers his Reasons for Infant Baptism, in order to
a composure of Differences, and I do believe he means as he says; I shall
therefore endeavor to answer them with all Love and Sincerity, as becomes a
Christian. And, I say,

1. That upon a fair Distinction, both Propositions may be denied. For, if the
Question be of external Privileges only; then whether we respect outward
Advantages in the World, or Rites and Ceremonies in the Church pertinent to
Infants; the Minor is to be denied: for the Jews were under a sure Promise of a
fruitful Land, and external Peace and Glory, as a Nation, whilst they did truly
walk according to the Laws of God, of which Advantages their Children were
partakers as well as others. But on the other side, the Christian Church by how
much she is more faithful, by so much the more is she subject to Persecution:
As may be seen in the differing estate of the faithful Church at Smyrna, Rev.
2. 8, 9. and the unfaithful Church at Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17. Or if we rerespect
Rites and Ceremonies, then it is certain, even in the Judgment of all
Christians, the Jews had more Ceremonies belonging to their Infants, than
belongs to Luke 2. 22, 23, 24. Exodus 13. 2. Lev. c. 12.
Christian Infants. For besides the Rite of Circumcision, there was an Offering
to be offered for them, and they were to be presented in the Temple, and to
partake of the Passover, Exodus 12. 47, 48. (and therefore Mr. Tailor does ill
to deny it, page 92.) Whereas the Poedobaptists only contend for the external
Rite of Baptism to belong to their Infants.

But if by the Word Privileges in the Argument be meant some higher thing than
external Ceremonies, then the Minor is true: For as God was gracious to Infants
in the Jewish Nation, as to the Business of Salvation: So is he such to the
Infants of every Christian Nation in the World.

But if now you be displeased, because I do not prefer, or at least equalize
Christians Infants with Jewish Infants, in respect of external Ceremonies. Then
let me freely tell you, that I do believe the Privileges of Christians is
greater than the Jews, even in this, that God accepts our Infants to his Grace,
and to Glory, without imposing the Burden of any Ceremony at all upon them.
For seeing he has by the Gospel taken away that bloody Ceremony of
Circumcision, and by our Lord Christ declared Infants to have right to the
Kingdom of Heaven, without imposing any Ceremony upon them instead of
Circumcision, I say, herein our Privileges are greater than the Jews, and in
this Sense I confirm your Minor. But then I deny the Consequence of your Major:
For you may plainly see that our Christian Privileges (when compared with the
Jews) stand not in having external Ceremonies, but rather in being freed from
them. Even as it cannot be doubted but that the Children of Seth, Henoch, and
Noah, etc. had as great Privileges as the Jews, and yet it is certain [and
plainly confessed by Augustine] that they had no Ceremony or sign of
Regeneration belonging to them that we read of. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 15. cap.
16.

Thus your chief Fort being demolished, what Reasons you bring to defend it
signify nothing; however we shall meet with them in the following Arguments.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 2.
Those who were Circumcised under the Law, may be baptized under the Gospel:
But Children were Circumcised under the Law: Therefore they may be baptized
under the Gospel.

ANSWER.
1. I answer to the Major. If by [Those] you mean all those that were
Circumcised under the Law: Then the Major is not true. For first, all
Male-Servants which were bought with Money, must needs be Circumcised, they
might not else dwell in the Family: (Genesis 17. 12, 13, 14. Exodus 12. 44, 48,
49.) But no such imposition is laid upon Families under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 7.

2. If by [Those] you mean Infants, then I deny your Major: For tho Infants
were Circumcised under the Law, it does not follow that Infants may be Baptized
under the Gospel: Nor do your Arguments, brought to make it good, prove it at
all. For,

1. Tho Baptism succeeds Circumcision as the Sacrament of initiation, yet it
does not follow, that the same Persons, or Persons no otherwise qualified than
the Infants of the Jews, or Servants bought with Money, are to be admitted to
Baptism; because Circumcision belonged to the natural Seed of Abraham as such,
whether in the Covenant or no (as in the case of Ishmael,) and to his Servants
as such. But Baptism being the Sacrament or washing of Regeneration, belongs to
those who are born from above (as such); Hence it is said, Gal. 3. 28. We are
Abraham's Seed, because we are Christ's, so, as to have crucified the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts: Gal. 4. 24. And not that they are Christ's,
because they are Abraham's Seed. This vast difference therefore between the
Communicants of the Church Jewish, and the Church Christian, shows a great
difference between the carnal Ordinances of the Law, and the spiritual
Ordinances of the Gospel: so that it is no good arguing from Infants Right to
the one, to their Right to the other.

2. You say our Children are as capable of being Baptized, as the Jews were of
being Circumcised. But this is denied: for the Jews had a Command to Circumcise
Infants, and that made them capable of that Ceremony; but without a Command
none were capable of it: For some Infants might be as capable of Circumcision
in respect of Strength, on the seventh Day, as others on the eighth Day; but
the Command not empowering any to circumcise till the eighth Day, made all
Children that died before the eighth Day incapable of Circumcision. Again, you
will not say that any Man, as such only, is capable of Baptism, because you
grant they must first be Disciples, and, as such, baptized. Nor will you say,
that all Infants, as such only, may be baptized, because you do not think God
has required the Infants of the Turks to be baptized. So then, unless you can
show that God has required our Infants to be baptized, they have no capacity
for it. We conclude then, whatever may be urged as a Capacity for Baptism, yet
without a Command from God, to baptize our Infants, is mere Will Worship and
Presumption.

3. You say, That the Precept of receiving Parent and Child into Covenant
stands unrepealed to this day. But if by receiving into Covenant, you mean a
receiving to the Duties of the Covenant, what you say is not true; for the
Covenant of Circumcision is repealed. Gal. 5. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you,
If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And there was never any
Covenant, but the Covenant of Circumcision, which obliged Parents to bring
their Infants to the Ceremonies of Religion: So then Infants are not under the
Burden of any Ceremonies of Religion at this day. I marvel you should here
say, There is no Countermand of the ancient Jewish Practice of receiving
Children to Circumcision. Either the Printer has wronged you, or else you hold
the Jews are yet bound to circumcise their Infants.

4. You argue from Christ's being proposed as Mediator of a better Covenant,
that therefore this great Privilege (you mean, bringing Infants to Ceremonies
of Religion) is not repealed. But the Truth is far otherwise; for the Covenant
of Christ as Mediator, is therefore better than the Covenant of the Law,
because he has taken these Ceremonies out of the way, and accepts poor Infants
without any other Ceremony instead of them; yea, the Covenant is therefore
better to Believers themselves, in that they are obliged but to a very few
Ceremonies, whilst the Jews labored under a burthensom Yoke of many
Ceremonies. And if your way of arguing were good, it would prove, that the
Gospel is worse to Believers, than the Law was to the adult Jews, because they
had abundance of Religious Privileges, to wit, Ceremonies, and Believers have
but a very few. Now who would think, that wise and good Men should thus grope
at Noonday?

5. You quote Acts 2. 38, 39. and say, that this Text expressly avers your
Conclusion. But it is certain, the Promise there, is not of bringing Infants to
any Ceremonies, and so does not at all favor your Conclusion; for the Promise
being of the pouring out of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to the
Prophecy of Joel, concerns not Infants in Infancy, says Dr. Jer. Tailor. And
as for the Precept in the Text, [to wit, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you,] it is as certain that concerns not Infants; for Infants are just Persons,
which need no Repentance, and consequently as little need the Baptism of
Repentance. I rather therefore adhere to Dr. Jer. Tailor, than to Mr. Nath.
Tailor in this Case; and I find that Erasmus and Diodate do expound this Text
as we do.

6. Now, Sir, your great Strait seems to be this: You think the Children of
Heathens have as great Privileges as we allow to the Infants of Christians. Let
me answer freely; I do believe, that through the Grace of Christ their Infants,
dying such, are in as sure a capacity for Salvation as our Infants. And why
should this offend, that seeing Infants are equally concluded under Sin in the
first Adam, God should have equally Mercy upon them in the second Adam. Nay,
does not Mr. Tailor himself tell us, p. 4. That it is dreadful to believe, that
all Infants which die unbaptized, are damned. And that any of them shall be
damned, he cannot prove, seeing he says, He cannot implead them of Sin, in not
being baptized, being not capable of desiring it. Well, I thank him for this,
and shall requite him by granting, Christians Infants are more happy in some
gracious respects, than the Infants of the Heathen, being the Seed of many
Prayers, and piously devoted therein to Almighty God from the Womb, and have
the Advantage of an early Education in the Christian Religion, that they may be
as timely baptized as may be: On the other side, the Infants of the Heathens
are perhaps devoted to Idols, as the Jews did sometimes devote theirs to
Moloch. But yet, as we do not think that God sent the Jews Infants to burn in
Hell, because their Parents burnt them to Moloch; so neither ought we to think,
that he will punish the Infants of the Heathen with Devils, because their
Parents devoted them to Idols; for as for poor Infants, what have they done?

7. You answer not our Objections, by saying, The Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17.
10, 13. is permanent to the Worlds end, etc. For tho this were true, yet that
the Ceremonies which there accompany that Covenant, were to continue to the
World's End, and should pertain to Infants to the World's End, you neither
believe your self, nor can any Man prove, that any Ceremonies by Order from
Christ should belong to Infants to the World's end, seeing it is granted, that
Infant Baptism is not mentioned in the New Testament. And if I yield you your
five Considerations following, page 33. I do not see that you gain any thing as
to the Point in question; I therefore proceed.

8. I think you mistake, where you write that we say, Those that had Right to
Circumcision were a spiritual Seed; for we know that the Carnal Seed had Right
to it: What therefore you would build upon this Mistake falls of it self. But
whereas you would infer, that Baptism, as well as Circumcision, belongs to the
carnal Seed, it is certainly a great Error. It is true, some that are
Hypocrites may come to Sacred Baptism, but then they profess (at least) to be
otherwise, and are not admitted as Hypocrites, nor as Men only, (as you seem to
urge, Numb. 2, p. 34.) but as they declare themselves Christians, or spiritual.
And therefore it is said of the whole Church, Ye are all the Sons of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ. Gal. 3. 26, 27. And again, Col. 2. Ye are circumcised with the
Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. [Therefore, Romans 6.] we are buried with
him in Baptism. And besides this, your Church makes Baptism a visible Sign of
an inward or spiritual Grace; and does affirm of all whom she admits to
Baptism, that they are regenerate, and born anew: Which shows that in this
Point we agree, that the inward Work of Grace should be in all that are
baptized.

9. I grant, that Jeremiah and John Baptist were sanctified, or separated to
God from the Womb, the one to be a Prophet, the other to be the Forerunner of
our Lord Christ; yet I deny, that these extraordinary Cases are to be made the
Rules for us to baptize by. God knows what we will be from our Birth to our
Death; but these Things are hid from us. Things revealed and commanded belong
to us. We may not presume to think either of Men or Infants above what is
written; to say, this is sanctified from the Womb, and that not; this is a
Believer, and that not, etc. But show us a Rule to baptize Infants, and we will
dispute no further.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 3.
Those who are within the Covenant of Grace, may be baptized: But Children are
within the Covenant of Grace: Therefore Children may be baptized.

ANSWER.
1. The Major being taken universally, for all that are in the Covenant of
Grace, then it is to be denied; for God never made that the Rule of Baptizing.
Nay, when Circumcision was in the greatest use, yet all that were in the
Covenant of Grace were not to be circumcised. Such were the many Thousands of
Male Infants, who died before they were eight days old; these were in Covenant,
and their Salvation as sure as if they had been circumcised. The Females also
were in Covenant, yet not to be circumcised. If you say they were not capable,
learned Authors tell you otherwise, and name some Nations who circumcise both
Sexes to this day. By this you see your Major runs upon a false Supposition.

2. And if by those who are within the Covenant, you mean some of those, then
your Argument comes short of the Question, viz. Whether all that are in the
Covenant of Grace may be baptized? But let us try your Minor. The Covenant of
Grace has two parts, 1. A Declaration of God's Mercy in Man's Redemption; in
this respect I grant, Infants are within the Covenant of Grace. 2. A
Declaration of Man's Duty in point of Faith and Obedience; in this Sense I deny
Infants to be in the Covenant. Let us hear therefore how you confirm your Minor.

3. You say, It is verified, in that Baptism is the Seal of the Covenant now,
as Circumcision was under the Law, etc. And therefore those who are under the
participation of the Covenant, may be admitted to the Seal, etc.

4. But why do our Brethren of the Church of England speak of the Seal in the
Singular? They used to tell us, the Covenant has two Seals, to wit, Baptism,
and the Table of the Lord. And I will abide by it, that the Lord's Table is as
truly a Seal of the Covenant, as Baptism. Yet you deny Infants this Seal, tho
you know when they first baptized Infants, they also brought them to the Lord's
Table, and this custom continued six hundred Years. But I deny your
Consequence; it follows not, that all that are in Covenant may have the Seal of
Baptism. And you tell us, That God's Grace is universal, page 37. yet you will
not say that Baptism is universal; it belongs but to those who restipulate, and
enter into Covenant upon the Terms of Faith and Repentance. Acts 8. 12. When
they believed, etc. they were baptized, both Men and Women. And here the City
of Samaria generally received the Gospel, and yet not an Infant baptized.

5. But how shall I understand you, where you say, That Children never excluded
themselves from the Covenant of Grace, because not actual Unbelievers, and none
but such were ejected? And where you presently say, They have the Covenant
belonging to them with their believing Parents? Have Infants no benefit by the
Covenant of Grace, unless their Parents believe? Alas! poor Infants! But sure
God does not exclude Infants from the Covenant of Grace, made for Mankind in
Christ, because their Parents believe not; No, I will hold to your first
Saying, That none but actual Unbelievers are rejected.

6. That the Holiness mentioned, 1 Cor. 7. 14. is only Legitimacy, or
Lawfulness of Birth, you would have to be only a Gloss of the Anabaptists. But
how can you fairly take it for any other, seeing it is taken immediately from
the Sanctification of the unbelieving Husband, as the word [else] being rightly
referred, makes evident. Upon which Consideration, Erasmus expounds this place
expressly as we do, yet he was a Poedobaptist. And Austin long before him said,
Whatever that Holiness is, 1 Cor. 7. 14. it is certain it is not of Power to
make Christians, or remit Sins. Sir, if you consider the Scope of the place, 1
Cor. 7. you will find, some in that Church were in doubt whether they might
dwell with their unbelieving Yokefellows. St. Paul resolves the Doubt in the
Affirmative, and gives this Reason for it: The unbelieving Husband is
sanctified to the believing Wife; and if he were not so, their Children were
unclean, but he being sanctified, their Children were clean; for Marriage is
honorable among all, and the Marriage Bed undefiled, Heb. 13. Therefore let
not the Husband put away his Wife, nor the Wife depart from her Husband.

7. What you say further to this Argument, being built upon a wrong
Supposition, viz. That we deny Infants to be within the Covenant of Grace,
falls of it self. For we say with you, till they by actual Unbelief exclude
themselves, the Grace of God extends to them, as well as to others, in respect
of their Salvation.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 4.
Those who have right to the Blessings of the Covenant, have right to Baptism:
But Children have right to the Blessings of the Covenant: Therefore they have
right to Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. This Argument is upon the matter the same with the former, and therefore
upon the former distinction the Major is denied: for tho Infants have right to
all the Blessings of the Covenant which they have need of, yet they have no
right to the Duties of the Covenant, which they have no need of, because God
requires no Duties of them.

2. And tho you say, that our Concession (that Infants are within the Covenant
of Grace) proves that Infants have right to all the Privileges of the Covenant;
Yet this is contrary to your own Judgment, for you your selves deny them right
to the Lord's Table, and indeed all other Privileges, as much as we do, except
your Crossing and Sprinkling them. What you say further here, is often
repeated, and will be considered in the following Arguments; and if I repeat in
my Answers, you have compelled me.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 5.
Those who are capable of being engaged in Covenant with God, are capable of
Baptism: But Children are capable of being engaged in Covenant with God:
Therefore Children are capable of Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. This Argument, (as most of the rest) may be retorted thus; They that are
capable of being engaged in Covenant with God, are capable of the Lord's Table:
But Infants are capable of being engaged in the Covenant, etc. Ergo, They are
capable of the Lord's Table. Which sufficiently shows the unsoundness of your
Argument. But let us examine the proof of your Major.

2. To this purpose you tell us, That Infants are in the Power of their
Parents, to dispose of, as to Temporals and Spirituals. And your Reason is,
because Parents are obliged to take the greatest care imaginable of their
Childrens Souls, for their Education in the Fear of God. Well, now I see why
you use not the word Infants, but Children, all along in your Arguments: you
know that Infants, such as you Sprinkle, are not capable of any Education at
all. They cannot be taught the Fear of God. They then cannot be engaged in
Covenant by the Means of Education, nor can they in that State be brought up in
his Service, in respect of Religious Ordinances: So that instead of proving,
you have lost your Minor.

3. What you argue, from Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12, 14. will never prove that Infants
are capable of entering into Covenant with God in their own Persons; but that
their Parents did engage to bring them up in the Laws of God; and what this is
to the purpose, I do not imagine. Is it therefore my Duty to baptize my
Children, without a Command from God to do so, merely because by the Covenant
of Grace, and Rules of Christianity, I am to do my best to teach my Children
the Fear of the Lord? This is very inconsequent, and will as much oblige me to
bring my Infants to the Lord's Table, as I have showed. This last you will not
allow, because God requires it not; and for the same Reason I refuse to bring
my Infants to Baptism, tho I believe it my Duty to do all that I can to engage
them in Covenant with God, by Christian Education in the Fear of God, that they
may serve him in all his Commands and Ordinances blameless.

4. Wherefore in Answer to your Argument: If by Infants being capable of being
engaged in Covenant with God, you mean the Parents engagement to educate them
in the Fear of God, etc. Then I deny your Major, and say, Those who are only
capable thus to be engaged with God in Covenant, are not capable of Baptism.
But if you mean, a personal and actual entering into Covenant with God, then I
deny your Minor, and all the Experience of the World confutes you.

5. You shall never be able to prove that Infants are capable of Fasting and
(...) Duties, tho you seem to affirm it; and what (...) the Beasts) and that
Fast was pleasing to (...) arises to prove that either Infants, or the (...)
any Duty to God, nor that they are therefore to be brought to the participation
of Baptism, nor any other Religious Ordinance, without Order from God to do it.
Yet if a Man were disposed to Syllogize from hence after your manner, he might
as strongly plead for one Error, as you do for another.

6. The Capacity of Jewish Children for Circumcision, or other Rites of the
Law, depended chiefly on the Will of God to order it so. Prove that it is his
Will to have Infants baptized, and we will not mention their Incapacity. If it
be not his Will, wherefore is it done? Who has required it?

Mr. Taylor's Argument 6.
Those who are Members of Christ's Church, ought to be baptized: But Children
are Members of Christ's Church: Therefore Children ought to be baptized.

ANSWER.
If by the Church of Christ, you mean all that since the Death of Christ, shall
be saved; then I deny the Major. For the Infants of the poor Indians may be
saved, yet in your Judgment they ought not to be baptized. But if by the Church
of Christ, you mean only such as are in the actual Profession of the Gospel:
Then I deny the Minor, and retort your Argument thus.

1. Those who are Members of the Church, ought to continue in the Apostles
Doctrine, and in Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. But etc.
Ergo, etc. The Major is proved, Acts 2. 41. 1 Cor. 10. They continued
steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers. We being many, are one Body and one Bread, for we are all
partakers of that one Bread. These things were spoken of the whole Church,
which was in these Places engaged in the actual profession of the Gospel. Now
see how you can defend your self against my Minor, and therein you will easily
see the infirmity of your own.

2. But to prove your Minor, you say, The Children of the Jews were with their
Parents Church Members under the Law, and that Law is not yet repealed. But if
by their Church Membership you mean, their Right to, and their Parents Act in
bringing them to Ceremonies in Religion, the contrary is true. The Covenant of
Circumcision being repealed, as it was an Obligation to the Children of Israel,
and never made with any Nation since; nor any other Covenant extant where such
things are imposed upon Infants.

3. That the Children of converted Jews, lost not their Privileges, is not
true, if by Privileges you intend Ceremonies; but if by Privileges you mean a
being delivered from the Law of Ceremonies, then I grant it. And it is
certainly a greater Privilege that Children are under a declared Right to the
Kingdom of God by Christ, and his gracious blessing a part of them, as a Pledge
for the whole, than if he had ordained a Law to baptize them in order
thereunto. And it is also certain, that the Jewish Churchstate, being dissolved
upon the Death of Christ, and the Gospel Church, confirmed in the Gift of
Tongues, etc. No Person could rightly stand a Member of the Jewish Church,
which was the only Church that ever had command from God to bring their Infants
to Rites of Religion.

4. You still urge, that the Gentiles had equal Privileges with the Jews. And I
grant they have greater Privileges, but not in Rites and Ceremonies, but rather
in being accepted without them, as touching their Infants, and with a very few
as touching themselves. But you say further, That the Children of Parents who
did not believe, were rejected; therefore the Children of believing Parents, or
Gentiles, are Church Members. And here, I confess, I know not how to reconcile
you to your self, where you say, None are excluded from the Covenant of Grace
but actual Unbelievers, page 26. Sure the Son shall not dye for the Sin of the
Parents, so as to go to Hell with them. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
Right?

5. You say, Children are either Members of the visible Church of Christ, or
else are visibly of Satan's Kingdom, there is no Medium between these two.

Surely I did not think Mr. Tailor had been of this Opinion! No Papist can say
worse of poor Infants. Here you condemn many thousands of Infants; God give you
a better Understanding. Are Infants of Jews, Turks, and Indians all of the
visible Kingdom of Satan? No, I will believe my Savior, who says, It is not
the will of his Heavenly Father that one of these little ones should perish,
Mat. 18. 14. And sure I am, that none are truly of Satan's Kingdom, but such as
are his Subjects. For he has no right over any by Creation, and Purchase, as
God and Christ have. Now it being clear, that Infants are none of Satan's
Subjects, it must needs be very injurious, to say they are visibly of his
Kingdom. But being Created by God, and Redeemed by Christ, and never offended
in their own Persons, it is rational to think they are in God's Favor, as it
appears the Infants of the Ninevites were, Jonah 4. In his gracious Arms we
shall therefore leave them, and proceed.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 7.
Those who are Disciples of Christ may be baptized: But Children are Disciples
of Christ: Therefore Children may be baptized.

ANSWER.
1. The Minor is denied. Infants are not Disciples of Christ, neither does God
and Christ own them for such, as you affirm. But you bring Acts 15. 1, 2, 10.
to prove it, and say, That the Yoke which the Jews would have laid upon the new
converted Gentiles, was Circumcision, which pertained to Children who were
Circumcised the eighth day, and yet it is laid too upon the Disciples Necks.
But Sir, do you think this to be rational, that because the Jews would have
laid the Yoke of Circumcision on the Necks of the Disciples, that therefore all
were Disciples upon whom they would have laid that Yoke? sure this is a very
unlawful Consequence: No better than this; You would lay the Yoke of Crossing
and Sprinkling upon Infants, therefore all are Infants upon whom you would lay
the Yoke of Crossing and Sprinkling. Again, they that were preserved in the Ark
of Noah were Men and Women: Therefore all that were preserved in the Ark of
Noah were Men and Women. You may easily see these Consequences are very untrue,
and verily so is yours. For tho the false Apostles would have laid the Yoke of
Circumcision upon the Necks of the Disciples, yet all were not Disciples whom
they would have Circumcised: for it is said, They taught the Brethren, except
they were Circumcised, etc. they could not be saved. But you cannot imagine
that they taught Infants.

If Acts 15. be diligently read, it will expound it self; for verse. 19. the
Disciples are said to be such as from among the Gentiles were turned to God.
And all that are called Disciples, verse. 10. are called Brethren, and as such
they are written unto by the Assembly, verse. 23. And the Epistle is said to be
read to all the Multitude (meaning of the Disciples,) who thereupon are said to
rejoice for the Consolation: Sure these were no Infants.

2. But you say, They are Disciples in that; tho Man cannot teach them, yet God
can, and may. Well, I thank you for your Ingenuity. It is true (as you say) Man
cannot teach, or make Infants Disciples; and then to be sure, they are not
intended by our Savior to be made Disciples, by what he says in your Text,
Mat. 28. 19. For all that are to be made Disciples, by that Commission, are to
be made such by Men: So that you are evidently besides your Text, in all that
you say to this Argument, and you are beside your own Exposition of your Text
also, which I will here set down, as you give it, page 10. (...), Going to
Disciple all Nations, instruct them in the Principles of my Religion; and then
being Disciples, baptize them: So that there is a Discipleship pre-existent to
Baptism; and indeed the premising the Word DISCIPLE, implies none to be capable
of Baptism, who are not Disciples of Christ, and Members of his Church. These
are your Words. It Is true, you say Infants will be proved to be Disciples. But
surely, not by saying as you do here, that God can make them Disciples, or
teach them: For it is no good arguing from what God can do, to say he has done
it, or will do it. For God can, of the Stones in the Street, raise up Children
unto Abraham, but I may not therefore say the Stones in the Srreet are the
Children of Abraham. You say indeed, that God has given several instances of
his teaching several from the Womb, but you can neither name the Persons, nor
show us what he taught them; however if you could, such miraculous Operations
are not given for general Rules. God once taught a dumb Ass to speak, and to
reprove a Prophet; but it would be bad arguing from this instance, that Asses
are Disciples: And yet this is a clearer instance of God's teaching the Ass,
than you can give of his teaching any Infant.

3. But seeing you put Infants Discipleship upon the account of God's teaching
them, you must have some competent ground to believe that he has miraculously
taught them, before you baptize them; or else you destroy your Exposition of
the Text, which avers, That there is a Discipleship pre-existent to Baptism.
And when you shall show me the Infant whom God has taught, or made a Disciple,
I believe I shall not oppose your Baptizing that Infant, and this is as much as
you can desire.

4. But you say further, That God has promised to teach Children. What, Sir,
in their Infancy? Let us see your Proofs; Isa. 54. 13. All thy Children shall
be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children. John 6.
45. It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. Every
Man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me.
Certainly had you read those Texts with their Coherence, and considered, that
our Savior himself in the latter expounds the former, you would never have
imagined, that God here promises to teach any Infants, much less all the
Infants in the Christian Nations; for it is very apparent, they that are taught
according to these Scriptures, have heard and learned of the Father, so as to
come to Christ. And indeed the meaning is, that God speaking to us by his Son,
(who is very God, 1 John 5.) had now made good that gracious Promise, Isa. 54.
13. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. But you have another Text,
Acts 10. 47. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, who
have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Now he that reads this place, will
easily see, that the Persons here spoken of were only such as were assembled to
hear Peter, in whatsoever they should be commanded of God; and that the
Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the Word. Which place therefore can with no
show of Reason be brought, to prove that Infants are taught of God. However,
when you shall find an Infant, that has received the Holy Ghost, as well as the
Apostles; then for my part I shall not forbid Water, that you should baptize
him, provided you first be baptized your self.

5. You will have Infants to be Disciples, because Christ (you say) commands
the receiving of them in his Name; and you quote Luke 18. 16, 17. Mat. 19. 13.
Luke 9. 47. I have carefully read all these places, but can find no Command to
receive Infants in the Name of Christ, much less to receive them by Baptism. It
is true, Christ called a little Child unto him, and said, Whosoever shall
receive this Child in my Name, receives me. Now this Child was able to know
what Christ said, and is no fit Instance to prove an Infant of eight days old
to be a Disciple of Christ; neither does this Text call this Child a Disciple,
but the Disciples are distinguished from it. And yet it (and so any little
Child) may be a good Precedent even to Disciples, to learn Humility and
Simplicity by; and so may a Lamb or a Dove serve to teach us to be humble and
harmless, yet they are not therefore Disciples. Neither can the receiving this
Child, (or any other in like case) be understood of receiving them by Baptism;
for then you may read the place thus, Whosoever baytizeth a Child in my Name,
baptizeth me; but this is both false and absurd. And besides, he that is
baptized, may be rather said to receive Christ, than he that baptizeth, in that
Action. Or would you make our Savior to say, He that baptizeth an Infant in my
Name, receives me? If so, I would know by what Authority you take the word,
receives, for baptizing in the first place, and in the second for something
else. Surely, if to baptize an Infant in the Name of Christ, be a receiving of
Christ, it is an easy thing to receive Christ, especially for the Priest, who
pretends to baptize Infants daily. But sure it is as much the Duty of other
Christians to receive Children in the Name of Christ, as the Priests; for the
Word is, Whosoever shall receive this Child in my Name; and therefore it cannot
be meant of baptizing them, and then these Scriptures prove not your Argument
at all.

6. You urge, that Infants are Members of Earthly Kingdoms, and I grant it; and
also I grant, that they belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, and so are of the
Universal Church: But this proves not that they are Disciples at all; for the
Infants of Heathens are Members of Kingdoms, and may go to Heaven, and yet you
think they are no Disciples for all that. And if Infants may in some Sense be
said to be God's Servants, Psalm. 119. 91. yet this proves not that they are
Disciples; for all Creatures, as well sensitive, vegetative, as rational, are
said to be his Servants, yet all Creatures are not Christ's Disciples.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 8.
To whom Christ grants Imposition of Hands, to them belongs Baptism: But to
Children Christ grants Imposition of Hands: Therefore to them belongs Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. If the major Proposition be taken universally, that to whomsoever Christ
granted imposition of Hands (or touching) in any case, that to them belongs
Baptism, then the Major is not true; for he touched or put his hand upon the
dead, yet Baptism belongs not to the dead, Luke 7. 14. If it be said, Christ
touched the Bier, not the Dead; I answer: He touched the Childrens Clothes,
when he took them in his Arms; but he took the dead Damsel by the hand, and
said, Talitha, cumi, Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise. Mark 5. 41. Thus much to
the Major; now to the Minor.

2. If by laying on of hands, you understand that which by Christ's Doctrine,
Heb. 6. 2. is made a standing Ordinance in his Church, and in order next to
Baptism, as is evident you do; then I deny your Minor: For that Ordinance was
not yet instituted, nor useful, because the End of it was not yet to be
received; for the Spirit of Promise was not yet given, nor as yet to be given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. Wherefore your Misinterpretation
of Mat. 19. 13, 14, 15. is injurious to Truth, and would prefer these Infants
to the Apostles, in the reception of the First Fruits of the Spirit, unless you
think Christ laid hands on the Children, without obtaining the End or Essect of
the Service. So then it is clear, that this laying on of hands, or touching
Infants, (for so it is expressed both by St. Mark and St. Luke) cannot with any
fairness be understood of that laying on of hands which follows Baptism, and
therefore is no Proof at all for your Minor.

3. The Church of England does not believe that Infants are fit Subjects for
laying on of hands, and therefore does not understand this Text, Mat. 19. of
that laying on of hands which follows Baptism; neither does Mr. Tailor himself
believe that Confirmation belongs to Infants: If otherwise, they are very
unfaithful, in that they were never known to lay hands upon any one Infant for
confirmation, as I can hear of. But how comes it to pass that Mr. Tailor will
baptize Infants, when yet he confesses their Baptism is not mentioned in the
New Testament, and yet not plead for their Confirmation, till they be capable
to own their Covenant made in Baptism, when yet he pretends, (tho I dare say he
believes it not) that Text, Mat. 19. 13, etc. is express for that laying on of
hands which follows Baptism, to be granted to Christ to Infants? page 56.

4. Mr. Tailor says, That Christ confirmed, or laid hands on the Baptized. I
shall entreat him to make this plain, for I would gladly see it well proved;
however, I am sure his Doctrine orders it to be done, and that is sufficient.
What you say further here, is either what we oppose not, or what is answered
elsewhere, save only your last Particular, which now we shall consider.

5. Their coming to Christ (say you) is their becoming his Disciples or
Proselites: Suffer them, (...) to be Proselites to me. If to this I should
answer, with Tertullian, Veniant ergo dum adolescunt, etc. Let them come
therefore when they are grown up; it will be thought too little, tho God knows
(how hasty soever Men are to get them sprinkled) they are slow enough to bring
them to Christ, when they are capable to be taught; I will therefore answer
further: Do you think that when Infants are brought to a Priest to be sprinkled
and crossed, that then they are brought to Christ? Or can Christians no other
way bring their Infants to Christ? Or do no Infants belong to Christ, but those
who are so brought? These Things will not be asserted, I think, yet let us go
as far as we can by the Light of the Text. By this Example of Christ, I think
the Ministers of Christ may lawfully pray for a Blessing in behalf of all the
Infants of those that shall desire it; and that it is well done in those
Parents that do desire the Prayers of the Church, or her Ministers, for their
Infants. And this is as much as can be fairly urged from this Text, as imitable
for us. For the touching by our Savior's hands, may be a Point too high for
us, unless we will also touch the Dead, etc. which (I hope) is not written for
our Example. But now if the Minister will needs baptize my Child, because I
bring it into the Congregation, and desire Prayer to be made to God for his
Blessing upon it, he herein goes beyond the Example of Christ, and beyond the
Text, and therefore there I must leave him, his (...) notwithstanding. For
(...) ex verbo (...), quod est advenio quoniam veniebant, est Ethnicis ad
Judaismum, says the Learned, and I think Infants cannot change their Religion,
nor was it fit to call an Infant of a Jew, a Proselite when it was brought to
Circumcision; and consequently as improper to call the Child of a Christian a
Proselite. However, all that can lawfully be done to proselite an Infant (if
you will needs have that Term used) is but to devote them to Christ by Prayers
for his Blessing, but not a Syllable for baptizing them.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 5.
If the Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to the Covenant, then it
entitles them to Baptism: But the Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to
the Covenant: Therefore the Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to
Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. The Consequence of the Major may well be denied: for tho it should be some
ways true, that the Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to the Covenant,
yet it follows not, that it entitles them to the performance of, or submission
to the Things which they understand not, nor are able to perform. And whither
would such a Consequence lead us, if we should follow it? What Duty should not
Infants be entitled to, as well as to Baptism? But let us see whether the Minor
be well proved; you quote Acts. 2. and think it a clear place to prove that the
Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to the Covenant. But this Text says
not a word to that purpose; for Peter derives the Title both of Parents and
Children from the Promise of God: and builds the Title of all the Called of the
Lord, and of them that were afar off also, upon the Promise of God, and not
upon the Faith of Abraham himself. Besides, the Promise here is of the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, and therefore not pertinent to Infants, as I have showed: Here
is therefore no proof at all of your Minor. I think it were better to say, that
by Faith a Christian knows his Child has an interest in the Covenant of Grace,
than that his Faith entitles his Child to it. I fear this Minor is a very
dangerous Assertion, and that partly because the Consequence of such an Opinion
is to shut out all Infants from the Covenant of Grace, who have not faithful
Parents to entitle them to it: And in truth it seems to swell with too much
boldness, and carnal presumption; but I spare you.

2. The Faith of the Jews and Proselites did not entitle their Children to the
Covenant of Grace; but they themselves being incorporate into that
Church State, their Children, by express Command from God, had a Title to legal
Privileges: but the Covenant of Grace (for that is it we dispute, tho you leave
out the Word Grace in your Argument) extended to Infants by God's free
Redemption, which he purposed for them, in Christ, from the Foundation of the
World; or else what shall become of the many thousands of Infants of
Unbelievers?

3. You can never prove, that the Faith of the Jailer, or Lydia either, did
entitle their Infants to the Covenant, for you cannot prove they had any
Children. And it is so exceeding plain, that all that were baptized in these
two Families were Believers, that I wonder much that you should say, that on
the believing of the Jailer and Lydia, the whole Families were baptized. Pray
read Acts 16. 32. to the end, and you will find that they that were baptized,
were actual Believers, and capable of being consolated by the Apostles.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 10.
Those who are capable of the Kingdom of Heaven, are capable of Baptism: But
Children are capable of the Kingdom of Heaven: Therefore Children are capable
of Baptism.

ANSWER.
1. The Major being taken universally, for all that may go to Heaven, it may
very well be denied; for Mr. Tailor dare not deny a Capacity of Salvation to
some of the Infants of the Jews, and yet Mr. Tailor himself does not think they
are capable of Baptism; for he makes the Faith of the Parents necessary to the
entitling them to Baptism, which in this Case is wanting.

2. That the greater includes the less, is not universally true; for Women have
a capacity to go to Heaven, yet they have no capacity to be Bishops, which is
less than going to Heaven. Infants are not capable of the Lord's Table, which
is less than to go to Heaven. Indeed, this Argument being admitted to be good,
would bring Infants to all Privileges in the Church-Militant, as well as to
Baptism; for thus a Man might argue: Those who are capable of all the
Privileges of the Church Triumphant, are capable of all the Privileges of the
Church Militant, (for the greater includes the less): But Infants are capable
of all Privileges in the Church Triumphant; Ergo, etc. And if it be
unreasonable (as you say it is) to deny the external Sign, to those to whom
Christ has granted the internal Grace; pray, why are you so unreasonable, as
to deny your Infants the Sign of the Lord's Table, seeing you affirm they are
regenerate, and born of Water and the Spirit? But if you were put to prove,
that Infants, whom you sprinkle, have the inward Grace which entitles to
Baptism, you would never be able to make demonstration to your own, or any wise
Man's Satisfaction; for is not the inward and spiritual Grace, Repentance,
whereby Sin is forsaken, and Faith, whereby the Promises of God are steadfastly
believed? And what Infant did you ever know thus qualified for Baptism?

Mr. Taylor's Argument 11.
All who are Believers, ought to be baptized: But Children are Believers:
Therefore Children ought to be baptized.

ANSWER.
1. The Minor Proposition, that Infants are Believers, is not true. And I
answer in the Words of Dr. Hammond, who says, (Letter of Resolut. p. 297.) I
shall profess to be none of those that are concerned in the Question, Whether
Infants have Faith? I freely confess to believe, that Faith is so necessarily
founded in Understanding, that they that have not Understanding, cannot have
Faith, whether actual or habitual. And Dr. Jer. Tailor tells us expressly,
Whether Infants have Faith? is a Question to be disputed by Persons, that care
not how much they say, and how little they prove. Thus these two Pillars of the
Church of England explode your Argument, as an egregious Error.

2. And for that place, Mat. 18. 5, 6. by which you would prove Infants
Believers, the Learned of your own Church expound it to a contrary Sense, and
take the little Child that believes, to be a true Christian, that has laid
aside all worldly Pride, whereby he is become abject in the sight of the World.
I shall not contend with you about the proper signification of (...),
(professing my self no Scholar) tho Ludovicus Vives uses (...) for an
Houshold-Servant. But it is sufficient to my purpose, that you dare not say
Infants are actual Believers; (nay, you confess, they have not actual Faith:
And for imputative Faith, (if there be any such thing) yet it can be no Rule
for the baptizing any Body, seeing it is not revealed to whom Faith is imputed;
and whilst you say, God may esteem Infants as Believers, another may as well
say, he may esteem them as baptized also); I say, your granting Infants have
not actual Faith, you can take the word, believes, Mat. 18. 6. only by the
Figure called Prosopopoeia, if you will needs have the Child an Infant of Days.
And if it be good arguing from hence to the Baptism of Infants, then you may
argue as strongly for baptizing the whole Creation, (if you can tell how) for
it is said to groan, expect, and wait for the manifestation of the Sons of God,
and to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption. Romans 8. 19. We conclude
then, that it is not a figurative Faith, but an actual Faith, (at least by
profession) that entitles to the reception of Baptism.

3. We do not say, that God will impute Unbelief to Infants, but only to those
that refuse to believe; and tho we know Infants are not Believers, yet we do
not say or think they are Unbelievers, they being not capable to sin against
God in that case, or any else. And Unbelief presupposes a capacity in the
Subject, and means sufficient, to believe, and yet the Creature refuses to
believe. The Sin of Unbelief therefore being no way chargeable upon any Infant,
it follows by necessary Consequence, that they have no capacity for Faith.
Neither do we pretend to judge Men's Hearts; for tho God has ordered Faith to be
a Pre-requisite to Baptism, yet we are only to judge of the Profession of Faith,
not of the Sincerity of it. And as it is true, as you say, that Infants cannot
play the Hypocrite; so it is true, they cannot play the Christian, and therefore
not fit for the Duties of Christians, of which Baptism is one.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 12.
They who are capable of the Ends of Baptism, may be baptized: But Children are
capable of the Ends of Baptism: Therefore they may be baptized.

ANSWER.
1. If by the Ends of Baptism, you mean the Things which concern God's Mercy in
the Redemption of Man only, then the Major is denied; but if by the Ends of
Baptism, you mean the Things required on Man's part, then the Minor is not true;
for Mortification and Vivification are the Ends of Baptism on Man's part, of
which Infants are not capable; for they cannot put off the Body of the Sins of
the Flesh, nor have they any need so to do, neither can they rise to Newness of
Life. And tho I grant, (and have often said it) that we ought to devote our
Children to God in the best manner we can; yet to go beyond the Word of the
Lord under that pretense, will neither profit us, nor our Children.

2. What you say here, of Baptism being a Seal to Infants, etc. is answered
before. And surely the word Heathen, (so often used by you) as it imports
sometimes an Enemy to God, (yet being of it self of no ill signification)
Infants are not so to be accounted Heathens; nor does the word, Christian, as
it imports a Follower of Christ, belong to Infants. So that this is only a
Noise of Words, to talk that our Infants are not distinguished from the Infants
of Heathens, tho I have showed a difference between them.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 13.
Whom the Church of Christ ever received to Baptism, may still be baptized: But
the Church of Christ has ever received Children to Baptism: Therefore they may
be baptized.

ANSWER.
1. The Minor Proposition is not true, and therefore I do deny, that the Church
has always received Infants to Baptism. And indeed you do not so much as
pretend any thing from the Scriptures to prove it, but, before, do honestly
confess, That Infant Baptism is not mentioned in the New Testament; and
therefore certainly it will be impossible to prove, that the Church did always
receive Infants to Baptism. And it is also very observable, that Eusebius, who
wrote the History of the Church for four hundred Years after Christ, does not
so much as mention Infant Baptism at all.

2. But how then does Mr. Tailor prove his Minor? Why, his chief Author to that
purpose is Mr. Walker, in his Book called, A modest Plea for Infant Baptism;
which Book in that part has been answered by Mr. De-Laune, to which I refer the
Reader. The Sum of which Answer is to prove, that all Mr. Walker's Testimonies
from Antiquity for Infant Baptism, for the first 300 Years after Christ, are
either invalid, or taken out of forged and spurious Books. And it is more than
sufficient to balance Mr. Walker's and Mr. Taylor's bold Assertion, That the
Catholic Church has always received Infants to Baptism, by the contrary
Testimonies of Ludovicus Vives, and Dr. Barlow; the first expressly saying, In
old Time none was brought to Baptism, but he was of sufficient Years to know
what that mystical Water meant, and to require his Baptism, and that sundry
times. The other tells us, There is neither Precept nor Practice in Scripture
for Infant Baptism, nor any just Evidence for it for about 200 Years after
Christ.

2. You say, That for many hundreds of Years the Question [about
Infant-Baptism] was not moved. But this is a great Mistake; for Tertullian did
question it, as an unwarrantable Practice, in the beginning of the third
Century; as is showed by Mr. Tombs, and others, who have diligently enquired
into the ancient Customs of the Church.

3. The first Instance which you bring for the Practice of Infant Baptism in
our Nation, is that in King Ina's time, about the Year 692; but we can prove it
was opposed by the Britain Bishops two hundred Years before this. See Fabian's
Chron. part 1. fol. 107.

4. You say, The deferring of Baptism among the Ancients, was not for their
questioning Infant Baptism. But sure, if they did think themselves too young to
be baptized, at twenty or thirty Years of Age, they could with no reason think
their Children old enough for Baptism at seven or eight days old. Extremes have
undone all; they were too slow, and you are as much too quick. But the proper
time for Baptism is, when Men attain to the new Birth; Baptism is therefore
rightly called the Washing of Regeneration.

5. You seem to hold, That Infant Baptism was lawfully practiced by God's
People before Christ, and even from the Apostles Time since Christ: But I
wonder by what Law; you give us none but Mr. Walker's Book, which is very well
answered by Mr. De-Laune, in his Book entitled, Truth defended. And I am sure,
the best Antiquity says nothing for you.

Mr. Taylor's Argument 14.
That Doctrine which introduces many Unchristian Consequences, is erroneous:
But the Doctrine of the Antipoedobaptists Introduces many Unchristian
Consequences: Therefore the Doctrine of the Antipoedobaptists is erroneous.

ANSWER.
1. The Minor Proposition is not true; for our Doctrine in the Case of Baptism
is true, and Truth does not introduce any erroneous Consequences. Now that our
Doctrine is true, appears thus: Because it fully agrees with your Text, Mat.
28. 19. even as it is expounded by your self, in these Words, (...), Going to
disciple all Nations, instruct them in the Principles of my Religion; and then,
being Disciples, baptize them. This you say, and this we say; the only
difference is, We do as we say, but You say and do not: You therefore must
needs be in the Error in this case.

2. But let us hear what you have against our Doctrine. First, you say, It
opposes the whole Current of Scripture, nullifies many Scripture-Promises and
Privileges, and destroys the Covenant of Grace, as the premised Pages manifest.
But I hope the premised Answers do manifest the Charge which you bring against
our Doctrine to be very unjust. And seeing you are the Men, and not we, that
have changed the Ordinance of Baptism, you may justly fear the Censure of the
Prophet, Isa. 24. 5. for breaking the everlasting Covenant. See the Place, and
consider it seriously.

3. You say, Our Doctrine introduces the World into Gentilism or Heathenism,
and makes Christ's Church always gathering, and never gathered. But how can you
say this, seeing we are for the teaching or discipling all Nations, and every
Person in the Nations, as they are capable, and God gives his Ministers
opportunity; and we take the same way to do this which the Apostles used;
according to our Ability; i. e. to preach the Gospel to every one that will
hear us, and to bring up our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord? And what tho the Church be thus always gathering, does not Mat. 28. 19,
20. warrant this Practice to the end of the World? and if you do not thus
gather your Children to Christ, they will never be Christians by your Crossing
and Sprinkling them.

4. Your talk of excluding Infants from the Covenant, is answered before, and
proved untrue; what you add, of our introducing of despair of the Salvation of
Infants, shows your Self-contradiction. For now you seem to make Infant Baptism
so necessary to Salvation, that if they be not baptized, we must despair of
their Salvation: Than which what can be a more erroneous Consequence of your
Doctrine of Poedo-baptism?

5. It is apparent that our Doctrine makes the Covenant established by Christ
better than yours (whatever you say here to the contrary); not only because we
assert the Grace of God in the Business of Salvation to extend to Infants more
generally than you do: But also for that it shows, God has not imposed any
Ceremonies upon them, as he did upon the Jewish Male Infants of eight days old.
Whilst your Doctrine makes your Crossing and Sprinkling them of such
importance, as that if it be denied them, despair of the Salvation of Infants
is genuinely introduced, page 74. As if God had tied the Salvation of all the
Infants in the World to a Ceremony. Thus does your Doctrine make the Covenant
established by Christ, worse than the Law of Moses; for under it the greater
part of the Infants of the Jews were saved, without being Circumcised, to wit,
all the Females, and all the Males under eight days old: But you have no hope
for Infants Male or Female, tho but of a day old, if it be not sealed with your
pretended Baptism. Lord, whither will Men go when they forsake thy Word! They
will make Christ an Impostor, if Infants be not capable of Baptism: See Mr.
Taylor's Book, page 72. n. 5.

6. You say, Our Doctrine equals the Children of Christians with the Children
of Turks, etc. But we have showed the advantage to be on the part of the
Children of Christians. And what if God, willing to magnify his Mercy and
Goodness, has provided a Savior for the innocent Babes (dying in Infancy)
throughout the World? What need this trouble any Body? must our Eye be Evil,
because his is thus Bountiful? We know that he has concluded all under Sin,
that he might have Mercy upon all. And if God has not Mercy on poor dying
Infants, so as to save them all by Christ, pray show what Mercy he has upon
them? Sure it had been a Mercy they had never been born, but not one Iota of
Mercy to be born, only to cry, dye, and go to Hell. Can you think that such
Doctrine befriends the Covenant of Grace? I think not.

7. To what you say (or have said) about the Form of Baptism, you much mistake
us if you think we do not baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. The Article of our Faith, which you point to, was not written (as I
conceive) to teach any to dispense Baptism in different Forms of Words, but to
show that the Name of Son is to be taken, as he is our Lord and Savior. Yet
let me tell you, that I can show it under the Hand of some now in your
Ministry, that says Matthew. 28. 19. does not empower any to use that Form of
Words in Baptism, and shows also that the Learned are not agreed in that
Matter. However, I am one with you, as to the use of the Form there set down,
and no other.

Of the manner of using Baptismal Water.
1. Mr. Tailor grants, the Mode of Baptizing is laid down by our Savior, and
expressed in the Word Baptizontes, baptizing them, Mat. 28. 19.

Now this is very well, and I am glad he has done this Holy Ordinance so much
right, as to acknowledge Christ to lay down (in his Commission Mat. 28. 19.) the
Manner or Mode in which it ought to be performed. But then, I am sorry to see
my good Friend so soon forget himself, as in the very next Page to tell us,
that the Mode of Baptizing is an indifferent thing; left to the Prudence of the
Church, whether to dip or sprinkle. Neither of them being commanded, nor either
of them absolutely forbidden by the Precept of Baptizing. What shall I say to
this? If Baptizontes be the Precept for Baptizing, and yet commands nothing,
neither to dip nor to sprinkle, nor absolutely forbids either, sure then we
keep no Command in doing either, nor do we break any in omitting both. Pity it
is, that Men to uphold their own Tradition, should thus fight against both
Scripture and Reason. For, if our Savior, by the Words baptizing them, command
nothing, then its best to do nothing; if he command both dipping and
sprinkling, then both must be done; if he command but one of these, then but
one of them must be done: Let him choose which he will, he must choose but one.
But yet he tells us otherwise, page 76. for says he, The Word (...) equally
admits of both Significations, as is granted by the best Critics: And quotes
chiefly Mr. Walker's Doct. of Bapt. p. 60. to p. 64. For answer, I say, if the
word (...) do equally signify dip and sprinkle, then unless we will be unequal
we must do both; or else show which of them may lawfully be omitted.

As for Mr. Walker's Book, I have seen it, and observed that he plays with the
Word (...), till he makes their Signification altogether uncertain, and sets
the Learned together by the Ears about the meaning of these Greek Words. And
indeed, according to Mr. Walker, no Man can certainly know when he hits right
upon the thing to be done in Obedience to this Precept, Baptizing them. As if
our Lord should leave his Apostles, and they leave us to guess at his meaning;
in a Passage wherein he commands nothing certainly. And yet to go round again,
however we use Water in the Name, etc. we can hardly go besides the meaning of
Christ: For if we dip the Subject in the Element of Water, we are right; if we
sprinkle it upon any part of the Body, (for you can assign no one part more
than the other) we are right still; if we dip the Head only, or only the Foot,
we are right; if the Head, or Breast, or Hand only be sprinkled, still we are
right. Now who can think, that our Savior should use an ambiguous Word, which
is to guide us in matter of Fact? Do not Men that thus deal with the Word
Baptize, make him the Author of all our Contests in this Case? And assuredly
Mr. Walker has run many a one into a maze, about the meaning of (...), and I am
sorry to see Mr. Tailor to follow him. But since he refers me also to Mr.
Leigh's Crit. Sac. He shall do well to mark what he says (even as quoted by
Mr. Walker, p. 36.) the reason (says he) why (...) is put pro Lotione and
mundatione, is, because such as are immersed (that is, dipped) come out of the
WATER washed or cleansed.

So then, to Baptize, is to dip the Subject in the Element in the Name, etc.
and that which is no small, but a most importent Confirmation of that Mode (and
only that) is the Baptism of Christ's own Person; for Mr. Walker cannot deny,
that the Greek in Mark 1. 9. being rightly rendered in English, is thus read;
Jesus came -- and was baptized of John INTO JORDAN, and therefore he may be
confident he was not sprinkled, for it would be nonsense to say he was
sprinkled into Jordan; but good sense and plain truth too, to say he was dipped
into Jordan. And yet for all this, Mr. Walker fights stoutly both against Truth
and Reason, leaning only upon the single Authority of Bernard, and will have
Sprinkling to be meant or signified by the Word Baptize, as well as Dipping.
And Mr. Tailor says the same, tho many learned Writers contradict them both.

But it shall suffice here to set down two, both equal in Learning and Virtue
to these our present Opposites. The first shall be that truly Famous Man, Dr.
Jer. Tailor, in his Rule of Conscience, l. 3. c. 4. If you would attend to the
signification of the Word, BAPTISM signifies plunging in Water, or dipping with
washing. And says Keckerman, Immersion not Aspersion (that is, dipping not
sprinkling) was the first institution of Baptism, as it does plainly appear
from Romans 6. 3. Syst. Theol.

But for all this, Mr. Walker pretends Antiquity for Sprinkling, and it is
strange to see what learned Men will say, when they are set to defend Error. We
will but touch two of his most ancient Instances, that you may see the bottom
of the business.

1. He goes as high as the second Century, and takes an instance of sprinkling
from the service of the Demons (that is, Devil-Gods) but why so? Because he
supposes the Heathen used sprinkling in the Service of their Demons, in
imitation of the Christians Practice. But the truth is, it is more to be feared,
that unwary Christians did fall to imitate the Heathens; for we are told so in
effect, even by a learned Popish Author, which for the plainness of the
Testimony, I will here faithfully transcribe. He says, -- This chief Chair of
the Church being translated from Antioch to Rome: He [Peter] and his
Successors, were very careful and vigilent to reduce the Christian Religion
(being as yet indigested, unpolished, and little practiced) and the Professors
thereof, into better Order and Uniformity, out of the Law of Moses (which
Christ came not to abolish, but to fulfill) out of the Civil and Politic
Government of Romans, Greeks and Egyptians, and out of both sacred and profane
Rites, Laws, and Ceremonies of other Nations, but most especially by the
wholesome Doctrine and Direction of Christ Jesus, and the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit. See a Book called, The Manners, Laws and Customs of all Nations, page
151. Behold here the Springs of Human Inventions and Ceremonies.

Mr. Walker's second Instance, is a Story of one sprinkled with Sand, instead
of Water (the Water being scarce, and the Party like to dye): but alas they
could not dip the Sick into the Sand, and however their Zeal may be commended,
their Action is not to be commended at all: It shows their Folly, for it is
better to be without a Ceremony, when we cannot possibly have it in God's way,
than to set up our own Devices in the stead, and place, and use of it. For I
will (says God) have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

And thus we shall leave Mr. Walker to consider his Sandy Foundation for his
sprinkling Infants.

2. Mr. Tailor says, Sprinkling cannot nullify Baptism, and therefore our
dissenting Brethren are to blame, to make our Baptism to be essentially
corrupted, and not to be accounted Baptism, because not performed by Dipping.

To this I answer; When our Savior commanded to baptize, he commanded but one,
not diverse kinds of Actions; and to do that, which is not only contrary to his
own blessed Example in this very thing, but also such an Act as cannot with any
equity of Speech, or good Sense, be called Baptism, is to err essentially in
the performance of it. And so great is the difference between Dipping and
Sprinkling, that such as sprinkle Infants dare not speak as they act, when they
pretend to baptize: No, they dare not say, I sprinkle thee in the Name of the
Father, etc. which they might well say, if the word Baptize does equally
signify dipping and sprinkling.

We are not therefore to blame, to labor to have this Ordinance kept as it was
delivered, for sure if it be our Duty to keep God's Ordinances, it is our Duty
to keep them as they were observed by Christ, and the Primitive Churches. And
so far as the manner of doing this command of Christ is essential to the
Ordinance, dipping is of the essence of it, without which it cannot be called
Baptism.

Again, All the Scriptures which command to baptize, do expressly command to dip
the Party to be baptized, and therefore Mr. Tailor is to blame, to say, There
is not one place of Scripture which in express Words commands Dipping, page 59.
Yea, Sir, your Text, Matthew. 28. 19. commands Dipping: For were (...) translated
into plain English, it must be rendered by dipping. And I pray Sir, consider,
whether you could not with a good Conscience translate it so? And on the other
side, Whether your Conscience would not accuse you, should you translate the
Text, Teach all Nations, sprinkling them? I dare say no Man dare thus read the
Text. Why then do they thus act? Shall we speak one thing, and do another? So
speak ye, and so do ye, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty; to
wit, the Gospel.

3. What you urge from the Legal Washings, has been answered by the Learned of
our way, and particularly by Mr. Danvers, who says, I have carefully examined
all the Places in the Old Testament, where the word Dipping or Baptizing is
mentioned, and do find it is expressed by the Hebrew Word, (...), as Minceus
and Dr. Hammond observe. The Septuagint do render the Word Tabal in the Hebrew,
by (...), and with all the Translators, both the Latin, Dutch, Italian, French,
and English, do translate to dip; the Word rendered Washing, being another Word,
as the following Scriptures inform you, Genesis 37. 31. Exodus 12. 22. Lev. 4. 6.
and 17. 14. and 6. 16, 51. Levit. 9. 9. Deuteronomy. 33. 24. John 3. 5. Numb. 16. 18.
2 Kings 5. 14. I cannot think therefore, that you can conscionably parallel
Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 11. with the Jewish Washings, which are expressed by the
word (...), not the word (...) (as Mr. Danvers further shows.) And sure I am,
that Romans 6. and Col. 2. is so very clear for our way of baptizing, that the
Learned of your way do grant these Places allude to the ancient way of
baptizing, which (say they) was by dipping the Party into the Water.

4. What you say of your Sprinkling to be as significant as Dipping, is not
true; for indeed unless it be commanded to signify the Death, Burial,
Resurrection of Christ, and our Mortification and Vivification, it can signify
none of these things. Otherwise every time you wash your hands, might signify
what is signified in your Baptism; yet you will not say it does so. And the
same Answer may serve to what you say, of Sprinkling and Dipping, being equally
obliging; for unless God has given them to oblige, they have no obliging
Nature or Virtue in them.

5. What you say of the Searcity of Water, can be no Plea for you that have no
want of it, whatever it may be for them that have it not. But sure, where God
gives not Straw, he will require no Brick. He does not make Baptism so
necessary, that we shall perish if we cannot, but rather if we will not obey
him therein.

6. Your Surmise, that Dipping seems an indecent thing, is indecently said,
both by Mr. Walker, and your self, seeing it may be done as decently as your
Sprinkling; for your Talk of transparent Garments, shows your unacquaintedness
with the right way of Baptizing. And know this, your ruffling Ladies in their
gorgeous Apparel, may work upon your pravity of Heart sooner, than to behold
and humble penitent Sinner, clothed in comely, tho mean Garments, to be buried
with Christ by Baptism.

7. To your Objection about the Coldness of the Climate, you need but put on
the Garment of Love to God and his Truth, and act from a Principle of Faith,
and you need fear no Ill, tho this Path may seem to you as the Valley of the
Shadow of Death. Yet if any Person be really weak of Body, and cannot be
satisfied to delay, (as I confess that may be dangerous) there may such care be
taken, as in the Eye of Reason no Inconvenience need be feared. And if the
Water be frozen, (as you object) surely he that will allow us to thaw that for
our natural, will not blame us, if we do so for our spiritual use.

8. Does plunging or dipping take away the Understanding? Why, not more now
than in Christ's Time. And is it so necessary that the Understanding act in the
Duty? I marvel then why you baptize Persons (as you call it) when they are
asleep.

9. What you say of the great Labor of dipping, and the Impossibility for one
Man to baptize 3000 in one day, and that it is therefore unreasonable to think
the Apostles did dip all that they baptized, etc. I answer; First, you grant
then, that they dipped some that they baptized; prove now that they sprinkled
so much as one, and the Dispute is at an end. Secondly, But Sir, what need was
there for one Man only to baptize the three thousand? Acts 2. 40. Does not Mr.
Walker himself suppose, that there were of the hundred and twenty Disciples,
eighty two in a Ministerial Capacity, to wit, the Seventy two, besides the
Apostles? Surely they might easily baptize three thousand in a few hours.

But you will now prove the Lawfulness and Reasonableness of Sprinkling; let us
hear what you say.

1. You now make Sprinkling not only equally signified in the word, (...), but
to be more congruous with its genuine Signification; your reason is, (...)
being a Derivative, can admit of no larger Signification than its Primitive
(...), which we find (say you) in the History of Nebuchadnezzar, when like a
Beast, (...), he was wet with the Dew of Heaven.

But for Answer; 1. I say, this Place in Dan. 4. will never prove, that
Sprinkling is more congruous to the genuine Signification of (...), than
Dipping: For Nebuchadnezzar being seven Years to live with Beasts, out of
Habitation or House, was sufficiently washed, especially being probably naked
too; so that this kind of wetting holds some resemblance with plunging in
Water, there being no part free from the Water thus rained upon Nebuchadnezzar:
In which respect, it seems, the Septuagint renders or expresses his lying open
to the Snow, Hail, Rain, or Dew, so long a time, by the word, (...). And, 2. My
Answer is, That the Greek here is Hyperbolical, and not properly to be
understood; and our Translators knowing this, did not (as I suppose) translate
the Word according to its proper Signification, our Language not well bearing
it in that case, but according to the thing which was to befall Nebuchadnezzar.
And it seems very disingenuous, for you to conclude from this Hyperbole, that
Sprinkling is more congruous to the signification of (...), than Dipping, tho
in so saying you contradict most of the Learned that have interpreted the word,
(...). And I am sure, (and you know it much better than I can tell you, for my
Learning is nothing, when compared with yours,) that our Lexicons,
Dictionaries, and Grammars, do make the prime Signification of (...) to be a
dipping, as they do who dye Colors; and Scapula does not make (...), nor
(...), to signify Sprinkling at all.

2. What you say in your 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th. Particulars, is answered before;
but here you say, The Church was never confined to that Mode of Dipping, but
had several Ways of baptizing, dipping, or sprinkling, etc.

I answer: What Usages the Church has had, is not the Question; but the Ground
of her doings is the matter of our Enquiry: But yet I will venture to say, she
was always confined to dip, if she kept that Ordinance according to Christ's
own Example, which I think is a better Expositor of the word (...), than any
Lexicon in the World.

2. The Alteration of the manner of this Ordinance, has not only occasioned us
to say, You that only cross and sprinkle are not baptized; but the Muscovites
declare the Latin Church to be unbaptized for the same reason. For this you may
read Daille on the Fathers, lib. 2. p. 148. where he tells us; The Custom of
the Ancient Church was to plunge those they baptized over Head and Ears in
Water, as Tertullian, Cyprian, and Epiphanius testify. And this is still the
Practice of the Greek and Russian Cnurch at this day, as Cassander de Baptismo,
page 193. And yet notwithstanding this Custom is now abolished by the Church of
Rome; and this is the reason why the Muscovites say that the Latins are not
rightly and duly baptized. Thus he. Nor is this the only Cause why we think
your pretended Baptism a Nullity, for your Error about the Subject is more than
the other.

3. What you say further is, to make us believe that Christ did not go into the
Water; that the Eunuch went to the Water only, because the Preposition (...)
signifies ad, to. But your Conscience will tell you, it signifies into, as well
as to; and indeed you grant it: and then to what putpose do you quarrel our
Translation? However, we have proved that Christ was baptized in the River: and
it is expressly said of the many Thousands which came to Jordan, that they were
all baptized in the River, confessing their Sins. Now, Sir, here (...), cannot
be rendered to the River, nor with the River, (without egregious Folly) and then
it is very plain, that they were all dipped in the River; for it had been
absolute Folly to go into the River to sprinkle the Face, Hand, or any other
part of the Body. Seeing then they went into the River to baptize, it shows it
cannot rightly be done without going into the Water: and therefore of necessity
we must understand, Dipping is the only true Mode of Baptizing.

4. I marvel how any wise Man can look upon that Text, John 3. 23. John
baptized in Enon, -- because there was much Water there, and so much as think
Sprinkling to be a lawful way of baptizing. If he will use any of his Wit, he
cannot but infer, Baptism could not be rightly done with a few drops of Water,
seein John chose Enon, because there was much Water there. And what tho (...)
signify many Waters? yet it does not signify many Rivers; but by the Noise of
many Waters, is often meant the Noise of much Water in one Source or Channel.
However, you say, the Greek signifies the Confluence of these two Springs,
Jordan and Jaboc; but yet you are unwilling that they should yield so much
Water as might suffice to dip in. And yet the Scripture tells you elsewhere,
that Jordan overflows all her Banks at certain times; and Lithgow, that was at
it, will give you an account, that it is a River sufficient to dip a bigger Man
than your self in.

But here, you say, is no mention of dipping. Yes, Sir, but there is; for when
you hear, that John was baptizing in Enon, he was either dipping or sprinkling.
The latter would make the Speech absurd and nonsensical; the former therefore
was his Business, for he was dipping in Enon, near Salem, because there was
much Water there.

Your Church therefore is very much to blame, in leaving the Way of Truth, and
following her own Tradition, and is therefore the cause of our present
disunion, and will be till she turn to the Truth, both in the Subject and
Manner of Baptism, or at least forbear to impose upon us without Authority from
Heaven.

What you add, by way of answer to some of our Objections against Infant
Baptism, is answered in my Reply to Dr. Stillingfleet, and Mr. J. Barret, which
is bound up with my Book of Primitive Christianity, and to that I will refer
you. What you add about Sureties or Godfathers, etc. I shall not take notice
of at this time, and indeed the usage is so odd, that Dr. Jer. Tailor well
said, if it had been God's will to have had them, It is to be supposed he would
have given them Commission to have transacted the Solemnity with better
Circumstances, and given Answers with more Truth; for if the God Fathers answer
in the Name of the Child (I do believe) it is notorious, they speak false and
ridiculously. And this is even enough to say to such an Innovation: But what
absurdity is it, which being once made a Cannon by learned Men, will not find
some to daub it up with untempered Mortar? Could Men but remember Nadab and
Abihu, Lev. 10. they would fear to add to, or take from the Ordinances of
Christ, under what pretense of Piety or Prudence soever.

Thus Sir, I have briefly answered your Arguments, and hope I have not mistaken
your Sense in any Passage I except against. And for a Conclusion, I crave leave
to say, That the way to obtain that Unity which is so desirable, between the
Baptized Believers and the Church of England, is not to fall to it by
Disputation, but by proposing what Abatements may be made about such things as
are not mentioned in the Scripture, (as this of Poedo-Baptism) is not) or at
least what mitigation may be hoped for, as to the imposition of such things:
And on the other side, I trust in the Lord that you shall call for nothing from
us, wherein we may submit without sinning against God, but we shall gladly
hearken to you.

In the mean time, constant Prayer to God for the Blessing of Truth and Peace,
and friendly conference between the leading Men on both parts, may do much to
further so good a Work, specially if his Majesty would be graciously pleased to
permit such friendly Treaties. But of writing many Books there is no end.

SECT. IV. A Plea for the Church Assemblies of the Baptized Believers.
MAny and very great has been the Sufferings of the Baptized Believers in this
Nation, since the publication of the Act, entitled, an Act to prevent and
suppress seditious Conventicles. And if the meaning of the said Act be to
restrict all Christian Assemblies, (except the Parochial) to the number of four
Persons, besides the Families where they do assemble, We see not how we can,
with safety to our Souls, conform to the Limits thereby prescribed. But
forasmuch as the said Act pretends only the prevention and suppression of
Seditious Conventicles, We humbly conceive, that those who are free from
Seditious Designs in their meeting together to worship God, are rationally
acquitted from the Imputation of Sedition; and consequently no Man can
conscienciously prosecute any of us upon that Statute, being utterly unable to
prove any such Crime against us; nor could any ever yet convict us of such an
Evil, nor, by the Grace of God, shall they (I hope) ever be able to do it.

Upon a due Enquiry it will evidently appear, that it is the Lord himself that
has ordered his People to convene or congregate, for the better discharge of
the great Duties of Prayer, Preaching, and the Celebration of other his holy
Ordinances; to which holy Ends he has allowed, not four Persons only, but the
whole Church, in any Town or City, to come together into one Place, among whom
also such as do not believe the Gospel, are allowed to appear, in order to
their Illumination, and this without any limitation in respect of Number: So
that it seems to exceed the due Bounds of humane Power, to use Restraint, where
God has given such gracious Liberty. 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24, 25. Jam. 2. 2, 3. Heb.
10. 24.

Forasmuch then as God has not given any Power upon Earth, to forbid any
Christian, or such as desire to know Christ, to hear his Word at any time, or
in any place; but on the contrary, commands every Man that has an Ear, to hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 2. 7. saying, To day if ye will
hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, Psalm. 95. 7. Proclaiming to every one
that thirsts, to come and take of the Waters of Life freely: Isa. 55. 1. To
whose gracious Invitation the Spirit and the Bride (the Church) agrees,
saying, Come, Rev. 22. 17. It must needs be very dangerous for any Man to say,
Do not come, when they desire to drink of these living Waters, which flow in
the lively Preaching of the Gospel of Christ. And how can we think that our
gracious God, who in Things pertaining to this Life, will not allow us to say
to our Neighbor, Go away, and come again to morrow, and I will give, when we
have it by us, Prove. 3. 27, 28. will ever accept us with a Well-done, good and
faithful Servant, if in the more weighty Matters of his Law we put Men off with
delatory Answers? Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of
Salvation.

It must be granted, that the Church is the Light of the World, a City set upon
a Hill, that cannot be hid; whilst therefore we are conscionably, and (we
trust) groundedly persuaded, that we are a part of this Church, a necessity
lies upon us, to make manifest the Savor of the Knowledge of Christ in every
Place. For as it was truly said to Christ, That no Man does any thing in
secret, and himself desires to be known openly: So neither must the Church of
Christ obscure her Light by a secret Profession of Christianity, lest she
contradict her own Prayer, and the Practice of the Primitive Churches, held
forth in these Words: God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his Face
to shine upon us, that his Way may be known upon the Earth, and his
Saving-Health among all Nations. And now, Lord, behold their Threatenings, and
grant unto thy Servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy Word. -- And
they spoke the Word with boldness. -- And they overcame him by the Blood of the
Lamb, by the Word of their Testimony; and they loved not their Lives unto the
Death. -- And became Followers of the Churches of God, having received the Word
in much Affliction, with Joy of the Holy Ghost.

And if for the like faithful Testimony we must still suffer, as we have done,
we shall rejoice, as Christ has exhorted us. The Church is taught of God to
hold fast, not her Faith only, but also the Profession of her Faith; and this
not by Starts and Girds, as Men give them License or Toleration, but with all
constancy, and without wavering. And surely our Lord foreseeing, and by his
Apostles foreshewing what would come to pass, required that this Profession be
held without wavering in the Business of Church-Assembling, Heb. 10. 25.
because without such Assemblies, the whole Service of God (in a Church Way) is
like to fall to the ground.

This Duty, as it is of greatest importance, so it is founded upon Heavens
Authority: Forsake not the Assembling of your selves together. And it is
granted by the learned Protestants, That against the Law of God or Nature no
contrary Custom does ever prevail. [Dr. Field of the Church, lib. 4.] He that
does any thing by Command from the King, contrary to the Command of God, does
not fear God, (says Dr. Savage, Chaplain to K. Charles II, in his Dew of
Hermon, p. 36, to 39.) And, speaking of the first Preachers of the Gospel, he
says, Their Rulers enjoined them not to preach Christ, and therein they did
well to disobey; for otherwise they had not feared God, inasmuch as tho their
Rulers were above them, yet God was above them both. -- For in commanding any
thing contrary to the Word and Will of God, they abuse their Power, either
through their Ignorance or Wilfulness; and in that case merely Passive
Obedience is to be yielded. These latter Sentences are the more remarkable,
being written by one of his Majesty's Chaplains, in Answer to a Book written by
the Baptized Believers in this Age, entitled, Sion's Groans for her Distressed;
which Book, whilst he pretends to confute, he has confirmed it, in the main
scope and Intent of it.

As it is impossible, by Mulcts and Penalties to overcome the faithful
Professors of the Truth, (for that which is of God, Men cannot overthrow, Acts
5. 39.) so neither will those that are zealous for Error, be vanquished by that
way. And the mischief is, their Errors are by their Sufferings made the more
taking with those of weak Judgments. What then is the result of Persecution for
Religion? Is it not commonly this, That the Hypocrites or Timeservers do fill
that Church which has the Power of the Magistrate on her side? And suppose she
have the Truth on her side, yet those Temporizers come not to her Communion for
the Truths sake, and therefore cannot be a Blessing to her, nor she to them;
nay, these shall, the soonest of all others, betray her, when ever Time shall
minister occasion; for those who are not true to God, and their own Conscience,
will never be faithful to Men. They worship not the King of Heaven, but the
Earthly Crown and Scepter, much like Euripus, carried headlong sometimes this
way, sometimes that way. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 21.

But, shortly, to sum up what is or might be further said in this Case.

1. To restrict our Assemblies to the Limits of the said Act, is to obey Man
rather than God, who gives liberty, without limiting the Numbers of those that
meet, to worship him in a Church Way. And whilst we believe our Assemblies are
true Churches, we must endeavor to meet in God's way, whoever countermands it.

2. For thus to limit our Assemblies to the Number of Four; will certainly
destroy all our Church Assemblies: For, suppose some Congregation or Church
consist but of an hundred Persons, these being divided into Fours, have no
Church-Assembly, unless every of these four be a Church. And if the Magistrate
have just power to divide us into Fours or Fives, he has power to subdivide us
into Two's, and by consequence to dissolve all our Assemblies. I confess, a
small Number may constitute a true Church. Gregory Thaumaturgus, tho a Bishop,
had a Church consisting but of seventeen Persons. [Basil. de Spirit. Sanct.
cap. 29.] Our Savior has promised his presence, where two or three are met
together in his Name. But then in his Name, signifies in his Authority, and
according to his Appointment. Now Christ has no where appointed, that four, and
no more, should come together into one House or Place; no, tho an hundred
Persons be come together, if more do come, they cannot be prohibited by all
that Power which God has given to Man, as we have showed.

3. Our zealous Countrymen of the Parochial Way, would think it very unlawful
to be limited in their Meetings to fours or fives; and yet they ought to be
restrained from Seditious Practices as well as others; and we do by as good
Right think it unlawful for us to be so restrained. We hope our Legislators did
not intend at all to exalt their Authority against the Lord, whose Power is
above all. But yet when these Laws come to be executed upon good Men, by the
Industry of mercenary Fellows, merely for worshipping God, then are they turned
into Snares to the ruin of the Innocent, and dishonor of that Power which gave
them being. And all this falls out, for want of better provision in the said
Laws, to convict Men of Sedition, than only because they were observed to
preach or pray.

4. Wherefore, being fully satisfied that our Assemblies are true
Church Assemblies, and that upon the strictest enquiry we are able to make into
the due Nature and Order of such Assemblies, we conceive our selves
indispensibly bound by the Word of God, the Examples of the first and best
Churches, and the Tie of Conscience, as regulated by a sincere Love of
Religion, to hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering or
changing, by reason of the Change of Times, or Man's Laws. Being also
rationally persuaded, that the more public and free Men are to serve the Lord,
the less danger of Sedition. Wherefore, with innocent Hearts, and pure Hands,
(as to any Design of Sedition) in the strength of Christ, we will keep his Way,
and let the Lord do with us as seems him good.

SECT. V. Of the Baptized Believers Call to Christianity, and to the Work of
the Ministry.
WHen our Savior commanded his Apostles to teach all Nations, and to preach
the Gospel to every Creature, We do not doubt but their performance of this his
gracious Will, may truly be said to be the calling of the Gentiles, or Nations:
And that Men enjoy a great Mercy (for which they ought to be very thankful) to
be born in a Nation to whom the Gospel has been preached, and received by their
Progenitors: And that it is also a great Blessing to be born under the
Government of Christian Princes; and we believe we ought to love and honor our
Nation, and the Rulers of it, upon this very account (as well as for the
Obligation of Nature and Laws) viz. because they assert the Interest of Christ
Jesus in general as well as we.

Nor is it our Business to destroy the State of Christianity received in any
Nation; nor at all to despise the Ministry that conscientiously upholds it (but
only to labor that Christianity may be delivered from the Errors that have
encumbred it, by reason of the change of Governments and Interests, or
Corruptions of the Ages past.) And in this Consideration, as we look upon our
Nation to be a Christian Nation; so we count our selves much more happy in
being Members of a Nation that owns the true God, Christ Jesus to be the
Savior of the World, the Scriptures to be holy and true, and that Faith and
Holiness is the way to true Blessedness, than to have been of any other Nation
whatsoever.

But yet for all this there is a great Truth in the Words of Tertullian, i. e.
We are not born, but made Christians. And therefore, we do not think that our
mere Birth of Christian Parents does qualify us, or give us an actual Right to
Christ's Ordinances; but to this end we believe, and know, that every Person
ought to have the Gospel preached, or some way made known to them, and that a
work of real Grace (or the new Birth) at least by a solemn Profession, must
precede our Baptismal Covenant; to this the Scriptures give full consent, John
1. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 23. And thus we, and ours (so
many of them as the Lord our God does call by the preaching of the Gospel) are
actually incorporate with the Church of Christ Militant, and engaged
thenceforth in the high and holy Calling, and actual Profession of the
Christian Religion.

2. But now, Whether we have any lawful Call to the work of the Ministry, is
the business to be a little considered, partly, for that some of our late
Persecutors were pleased to suggest the contrary; and partly to put our selves
upon the strictest Trial, even in this case where we are supposed to be the
most deficient.

The Questions in this case to be resolved, are,

1. Whether a succession of Ordination from Man to Man, down from some of the
Apostles, be absolutely necessary to a due Call to the Ministry? or, 2. Whether
the same Means that is of Authority sufficient to make Men Christians, be not
also sufficient to make Ministers?
In answer to these Questions, we shall do little more than offer what we have
formerly written upon this Subject. And tho the Papists are the Men who stand
most stiffly for Succession, as necessary, yet of late we find our Friends of
the Church of England looking that way, as if they would justify their
Ordination in a successive Line from Man to Man, through the Papacy: which
thing is disclaimed by Dr. Luther, with the greatest vehemence, in these words.
Whosoever loves Christ, ought to endure any thing, rather than to be ordained by
the Papists; because in their Ordinations all things are carried with such
wicked preposterousness, that if they were not mad, and blind, they would
perceive how they mock God to his Face; -- being stricken with an universal
blindness, they do not so much as know the Word of God, specially the Bishops
who ordain. -- Let me be counted a Fool, a Knave, a Liar, if there be any one
of them, ordained by them, who dare say, that at such time as he received
Orders, he was commanded to dispense the Mysteries of Christ, or to teach the
Gospel, -- but they ordain Sacrificers of the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass,
and to hear Confessions, etc. Thus far Luther. And the Oath which they take at
their Ordination (as set down by Mr. Bullinger) is very un-gospel-like, the sum
of it is in these Words, That the Priest will be a true Subject to the Pope,
obey the Decrees of the Fathers, and of the Church (i. e. the Roman Church) and
that he will persecute Heretics.

Beza censures all Ordination taken from the Papists. Let us hear him speak.
What ordinary Vocation is that which you say the first Reformers had, excepting
some few of them, is it not the Pall? Shall we think then, that the Popish
Orders are valid, in which there is not any preceding enquiry into manners? No
such Enquiry or Procedure, as is inviolably to be made, or observed, by Divine
Right in Elections, and Ordinations, -- Shall we think so highly of their
Ordinations, that as often as any false Bishops are converted to true
Christianity, immediately all the Filth, Uncleanness, and Impurity, collated,
is washed away? Nay, but with what Face or Conscience will he be able to
forsake Popery, and not abjure his irregular Ordination? or if he do abjure it,
how can he by virtue thereof claim Authority to teach?

Thus these two Pillars of the Protestant Reformation, are so far from deriving
their Call to the Ministry, through the Papacy (as some late Protestants
pretend to do) that they do utterly reject any Ordination which comes from
them. Nor was Luther and Beza ordained after they came from the Papists. (Mr.
Stub's Occas. Quaer.) But Beza is said to defend his Call to the Ministry, by
Instances of those that were called extraordinarily, as Isaiah, Daniel, Amos,
Zecharias, etc.

These things premised, we may assume, that either of these ways (as approved
by our Reformers respectively) could we go to defend our Call to the Ministry,
as well as they: Being first, many of us, ordained by those who received
Ordination from you, and some may run with you to Bishop Cranmer, who was
ordained by the Papacy; and then proceed, till we come up to Clemens, or
Lucius, and so to St. Peter.

And as for the pretense of Beza, or Luther, about their extraordinary Call,
it is not impossible for us to give as fair a Demonstration of it, as either of
them, (specially if we take the Rules given by Mr. Beza, to judge of such a Call
by, to be cogent, viz. good Life, sound Doctrine, and the Election of the
People.) But to be plain, we do not very well like either of these ways. Not
the first, it is so sordid, as that the Papists themselves in deriving their
Call through the Papacy, are forced to take it from so many false pretended
Popes, or Diabolical Popes, even Witches and Devils incarnate (by their own
confession) that they make but a lamentable Succession of it in the end. And
especially, if Stapleton may be regarded (tho a Papist) who tells us, That it
is not a bare and personal Succession, but lawful Succession, which is a note
of a true Church; and defines that to be lawful Succession, when not only the
latter succeeds into the void rooms of those that went before them, being
lawfully called thereunto, but also hold the Faith which their Predecessors
did. Now let this Rule be honestly stood by, and we are sure the Papists shall
never be able to prove a Succession of many points of their Faith, and
Doctrines from the Apostles, whilst the World stands, and consequently neither
can the Protestants derive a lawful Succession from them.

We like not the second way, for we will not compare with Isaiah, Daniel, Amos,
nor Zechariah, in respect of their immediate Mission. But this we say, That our
Call to the Ministry is no otherwise extraordinary, than our Call to believe
the Gospel is so; or, as it stands clear from all the idle Ceremonies used by
Papists, or others in their Ordinations, or as it is ordered (as near as we
can) according to the Word of God. And is the sacred Word of Power to beget us
to God, and by the assistance of his Spirit to make us his Children, or
Christians? and is it not of Power or Authority sufficient to enable us to
worship God in his own Ordinances, which were made for Christians, and not
Christians for them? This seems justly ridiculous.

We make no doubt but that it is easy with God (and no extraordinary thing) to
raise a People to himself, in a Nation where all have corrupted the way of
Christianity, (or lost the State and Praise of a true Church) merely through
his Blessing upon the reading and diligent searching of the Scriptures, (I
speak of a Nation where the Scriptures are received, as that is our case.) The
Truth is, all the ways of God's Worship, are (in the Word) made ready for us,
and laid at our Doors, and we do but take up gladly, what others let lie as
useless things, that they may hug their own Devices.

But now to silence a Papist for ever (which some will think to be a difficult
undertaking); do they not allow (even by the Pen of the Learned Bellarmine,
chap. 7.) that even an Heathen, that is not baptized, may administer Baptism in
case of Necessity? And this they esteem a valid Baptism. And why then may not
we, when God has opened our Eyes to see any other Truth, as well as that,
enter upon the dutiful observance of it in the best way we can, our
Circumstances (especially the case of Necessity) being considered? For is not
Necessity as good a Warrant to take up the practice of, or to restore one Truth
as well as another? Certainly, one Ordinance is as sacred as another, and where
Churches are settled, ought to be dispensed in the most honorable way, and by
the most fit Instruments, even Christ's Ministers. Wherefore, till the Papists
shall recall their opinion about Baptism, and prove a Succession as necessary to
Baptism as Ordination, they can with no show of reason, insist upon the
necessity of Ordination to be founded upon Succession. But further,

It Is evident from the Scriptures, (Acts 13.) that a Succession is not
necessary to true Ordination; for tho the Apostles were yet living, it was not
thought necessary that they should impose Hands upon Barnabas and Paul: but
this is done by gifted Men, or the Prophets that were in the Church at Antioch.
The only question here to be resolved is, Whether this laying on of Hands was
for Ordination? The Papists do hold it was; some Protestants deny it; but some
Protestants do affirm it. Mr. Churchman, in his History of Episcopacy, tells
out of Chrysostom, That tho Paul was an Apostle neither of Men, nor by Men, yet
as for the Work to which he was separated, ask the said Father (says he) and
he will tell you, (...), That it was the Office of an Apostle, and that he was
ordained an Apostle here, that he might preach the Gospel with greater Pewer,
-- And certainly that he had not the Apostleship before, may be made manifest
by that which followed after. But tho some Protestants doubt whether this were
Paul's Ordination (tho the matter is clear of it self) yet here is the
Ordination of Barnabas without all question; and then it is evident that there
was an Interruption of Succession in the case of Ordination, even in the
Apostles Days, and therefore by no means to be held to be necessary in our
Days, who are so far removed from the times of the Holy Apostles, that in vain
do Men think to find a clear and undoubted Succession, of any one Ordinance
from them. Wherefore we may safely conclude, that where the Truth of the Gospel
is received, with the Gifts of God's Spirit (as that was the case at Antioch)
there is a sufficiency of Power on the Persons so gifted, with the advice of
the Church to send forth, or appoint Men to the work of the Ministry; although
it is true, this course is most warrantable in the case of necessity, and in no
wise to be done in contempt or wilful neglect of that way, which is more
ordinary and regular. Howbeit, to tie all Power of Ordination so strictly to
the Persons of Men ordained, by such as were ordained by the Apostles
themselves, would in all likelihood throw the Power of Ordination out of the
Church of God at this day; especially if we stand upon the due Election and
Qualification of Persons so claiming Succession from the Apostles themselves.

And because due Qualifications, and Election, is as necessary to a true
Minister of Christ, as Ordination, seeing it is most certain, that unless God do
first make Men Ministers, it is impossible for the Church (rightly) to make them
Ministers. We shall here add, That besides his moral Virtues, and Spiritual
Gifts, he that is regularly called to the Ministry, must first be a true Member
of the Church, and chosen by a true Church to that sacred Employment. And then
we may boldly (yet modestly) suppose, that true Ordination (at least in some
part of it) is only found in the Congregations of Baptized Believers at this
day: For, where true Baptism is not, Ordination cannot be regular. Again, due
Election is found amongst them, whilst neglected both by Papists, and
Prelatists. And further, the true Form and Order of Ordination is found in our
Churches. The first is evident of it self, No Baptism, no due Ordination; is a
Truth without exception among all that own Ordination. And for the second, it is
certain none are ordained to any Office in the Baptized Churches, till elected
by the consent of the Church, or the Major part, to whom they are to minister.

And herein they follow the Footsteps of the Apostles, Acts 1. when one must be
chosen in the room of Judas, the 120, which was the whole Assembly, allowed the
choice of two: and good reason there is, that where all are equally concerned,
they should all be satisfied in the choice of such, as to whom they commit the
care and feeding of their Souls.

When the seven Deacons were to be ordained, the whole Church is consulted,
Acts 6. and the Election made by them who knew the qualification of the Persons.

And as holy Scripture, so Antiquity stands with us in this case. The Nicene
Council, writing their minds to the Church at Alexandria, concerning some that
were to succeed other Bishops, gives these Directions: If so be they shall seem
to be worthy, and the People shall choose them. What Rules were to be observed
in respect of their worthiness for Ministerial Employment, may be gathered from
Clement, Epist. ad Corinth. Having (says he) made trial of them by the Spirit,
to be Bishops and Deacons. And again, Others well approved of, should succeed
into the Office and Ministry, who therefore have been constituted, -- by famous
and discreet Men, with the good liking and consent of all the Church, -- and
who withal, have of a long time had a good Testimony from all Men.

Leo gives the same direction (Epist. 84. c. 5.) charging, That none be
ordained against the Wills and Petitions of the People: And again, Epist. 49.
The Custom was that he should be chosen of all, that was to be over all, and
wills, that the liking of the People and their Testimony be sought: That in
Ordinations, the Rules of the Apostles and Fathers ought to be observed; that
he that is to be over the Church, should not only have the Allowance of the
Faithful, but the Testimony also of them that are without.

Cyprian is as clear for us, (Ep. l. 1.) The People who full well and perfectly
know the Life of him that is to be ordained Bishop, are to be present, and to
be chosen with their allowance, who know the Conversation of every one. And he
brings Salinius (his Colleague) for Instance, who was chosen by the Voice of
the whole Brotherhood, and the Judgment of the Bishops which came together.

Each Church stands free (says Dr. Bilson, Perpet. Govern.) by God's Law to
admit, maintain, and obey no Man as their Pastor without their liking; and that
the Peoples Election depends on humane Fellowship, and first Principles of
humane Society and Assemblies.

Dr. Field informs us, That this Right of the People has been invaded many
ways: 1. By great Personages and Magistrates. 2. When the Bishops grew to great
Pomp, and the Clergy began to be enriched by Benefices, Elections were, and to
this day are made according to the Interests of the Rich and Strong, whilst the
People are not only deprived of, but become ignorant, that any Right remains in
them to choose their own Ministers or Pastors.

Now this Privilege, tho lost in most National Churches, is restored and
maintained in the Baptized Churches, where none are elected Messengers,
Bishops, or Deacons, without the free Choice of the Brotherhood where such
Elections are made. And after such Election of Persons of known Integrity and
competent Ability, we proceed to Ordination, with Fasting and Prayer, and the
laying on of Hands, according to the Scripture; Acts 13. 3. When they had
fasted and prayed, they laid their Hands on them, and sent them away. Thus for
the Ordination of Messengers, (which after the manner of some are called
Bishops.) Acts 14. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church,
and prayed with Fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they
believed. Acts 6. 5, 6. And they chose Stephen, a Man full of Faith, and of the
Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas,
and Nicholas, whom they set before the Apostles; and when they had prayed, they
laid their Hands on them. Thus for the Ordination of Deacons. All which
Apostolical Practices are religiously restored and observed in the Churches of
the Baptized Believers, without any devised Adjuncts of our own or others. By
all which it may appear, they have a lawful Call to the Work of the Ministry.

Here I meet with an Objection; It Is doubted by some, whether a Man having
received Ordination as a Presbyter, may afterward have Ordination as a
Messenger of the Churches of Christ, the Objector supposing that the first
Ordination is sufficient, only the Church must give him another Commission.

This Objection I answer three ways: 1. By Antiquity. 2. By Reason. 3. By
Scripture.

1. Antiquity is directly against this Objection, being rather for a threefold
Ordination than only one, as I shall show by and by. But first, I marvel how
the Objector would give a Man a Ministerial Commission without Ordination, the
Church having no other way at all to give Commissions but by Ordination; nor
can any Man tell us, how she can give her Commissions Ministerial, but by the
very Act of her Ordination; and according to the Nature of her Ordination,
such, and no other is her Commission.

Now our Ancients understood this, and therefore did usually bring Men
gradually to the degree of a Bishop, (i. e. a Messenger, according to the
Scripture, Bishop, or Overseer, being a Name common to Elders in the Primitive
Times.) Thus Chrysostom was Socrat. l 6 c. 12, 13.
first ordained a Deacon, then a Presbyter, after that he was ordained Bishop
of Constantinople, by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria. And says the learned
Bilson, In the Primitive Church they were first Deacons, and upon Trial, when
they had ministered well, and were found blameless, they were admitted to be
Elders; and after that, if their Gifts and Pains so deserved, they were called
to an higher degree: so that every one, by the ancient Discipline of Christ's
Church, before he could come from ministering to governing in the Church of God,
received thrice, or at least twice, Imposition of Hands.

2. Reason tells us, that every Man that is called to the Work of the Ministry,
ought to have a Commission (that is, an Ordination) commensurable to his
Ministry. It is Christ's peculiar to give Commission by the Word of his Mouth
only, the Church cannot do so; she must confer Ministerial Authority in some
solemn Rite or Ceremony. This is plain in the case of Deacons, it was not
sufficient for the Apostles to say (of Persons eminently qualified) we order or
appoint them to serve Tables, or, look ye to the Poor: But besides their great
Qualifications and Election, they must receive their Commission or Authority by
Prayer, with the laying on of hands, else they have no Commission. In like
(...) be solemnly ordained, before the Holy Ghost has made him an Overseer of
the particular Flock committed to his Charge. And then in reason, if he have a
far greater Charge afterward committed to him, he has need of a Commission
(that is, an Ordination, for other Commission there is none) to enable him to
take care of many Churches, and to plant new Churches in the World. We read not
of any Messengers, that acted as such in that great Trust, without an
Ordination agreeable to their Work; and it is ill venturing to send Men out
with a Commission too short for their Employment, it being irrational so to do,
and without any good Example. Let us see then what the Scripture will say in
favor of our Answers.

3. The Apostles had a twofold Apostleship; the one limited to the Jewish
Nation, Mat. 10. the other of extent to all Nations, Mat. 28. If they were
ordained to either, then they were ordained to both; and the latter seems to be
the more solemn and formal Ordination, not only for that when Christ had given
them Order what to do, he lift up his Hands, and blessed them, Luke 24. 50. but
also gave them Order to tarry at Jerusalem, until they were endowed with Power
from on high. When their Work was particular or limited, they had a limited
Commission; when their Work was universal, they had an universal Commission.
Sure the Church, who has no way to give Commissions but by Ordination, shall
do well and wisely to follow Christ, the Author of all her Power, when she
delegates or gives it forth to any of her Ministers. This Answer may suffice,
yet we add:

Barnabas is confessed to have been one of the Seventy Disciples, and had a
divine Authority from Christ to preach the Gospel to the Jews; but when he is
sent to preach to the Gentiles, he has a new Commission, even an Ordination,
as appears, Acts 13.

FINIS.

