The Grand Problem briefly Discussed: OR, CONSIDERATIONS ON THE True NATVRE and
LIMITS OF OBEDIENCE and SVBMISSION TO GOVERNORS. WITH Respect to the Different
Forms OF AN Absolute and Limited MONARCHY.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

Licensed, November. 1. 1689. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Mercer at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and Sold
by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THE great prejudice which has oppressed the minds of many very Good and
Honest and well-meaning men, with a kind of Turkish Submission to the pleasure
of their Governors, however Arbitrary and Illegal their Proceedings have been,
has risen (I conceive) from their taking this one wrong method to determine
the true bounds of their Obedience, viz. That they seek directions herein from
the Laws of God without due regard to the Laws of our Realm. For, though we
readily yield to the Holy Scripture the highest respect and veneration; though
we acknowledge it a full and ample Rule of Manners as well as of Faith,
directing all the Offices of humane Life among all degrees of men from the
highest persons to the lowest; though it strictly requires us to render to all
men, to Caesar as well as our poorest Neighbor, their due; yet it no where
determines men's Civil Rights and Properties.

For, as the Kingdom of Christ was not of this World, so He left the affairs of
this World to be managed by the Laws of the World. It is indeed impossible the
Scripture should determine all Controversies about (meum and tuum) men's Civil
Rights, what is mine, and what my Neighbors, what is Caesar's due, and what the
Peoples; and this because of the frequent alterations in Families, and
alienation of Estates, and the almost as frequent vicissitudes of Government,
the several Acts of Condescension in Princes, and new Grants of Liberties and
Immunities. Upon these accounts the Laws of the Land must be taken into
Consideration together with the Precepts of Scripture to decide the Subjects
Duty.

And the contrary opinion is such an error, as if it had universally obtained
must needs have of late proved fatal to us, not only in the loss of our Civil
Rights, but what is infinitely more considerable, the benefits of our Reformed
Religion.

If therefore this Paper (which contains a double Scheme, representing the
Subjects Duty in a different manner, according to the different Form of
Government) may prove effectual to obviate or remove any mistake in this case;
to settle the Minds of Men in a good liking of, and due Submission to the
present Government; to the Peace and Quiet of the Nation: or have that effect
more publicly which it had on some private persons, to whose only use it was
at first designed, 'twill be satisfaction enough to the Author, if he has in
the least contributed to the Service of his Country, and not troubled the
Reader to no purpose, nor spent an hour or two in vain.

THE GRAND PROBLEM BRIEFLY DISCUSSED: The QUESTION. What Obedience is due from
Christian Subjects to their Sovereign Prince?
THE Resolution of this must be with due regard to the Nature and Quality of
the Government under which we live. For,

1. In an absolute Monarchy the Subjects Obedience must be absolute, and
universal, or unlimited, viz.

1. Either Active Obedience to all lawful Commands, or full compliance with the
Kings will in things not forbidden by God. 2. Or Passive Obedience, and
Submission to his pleasure instead of performing his Commands when contrary to
the express Laws of God.
First. The former of these proved.

(1st.) From Scripture: Eccles. 8.4. Where the Word of a King is there is
power; and who may say unto Him, what do thou? St. Matthew. 22.21. Render to
Caesar the things that are Cesars. Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God. 1. Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, to the
King as supreme. (2d.) From Reason: Where the Prince is absolute, or free from
the limitation of any Laws, there the Subjects Obedience must be proportionate,
and measured only by the Princes Edicts.
But if the will of the Prince be contrary to that of God, if his Edicts and
the Laws of the Gospel cannot be Reconciled, the Apostles determination is
obvious, Acts 5.29. We ought to obey God rather than men. And if this exposes
the Subject to persecution and punishments to suffer the effects of the Kings
wrath. Here is the place for the

Second sort of Obedience, Passive; or Submission and Non-Resistance, Proved.

First from Scripture-Precept, Romans 13.2. They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. And verse 5. Ye must needs be subject not only for wrath
but also for Conscience sake. 1 Pet. 2.19. This is thankworthy if a man for
Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. And verse 20. If when
ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently this is acceptable with God.
So that in all Cases here is either Obedience or Submission enjoined. And the
business being thus stated by the Laws of God, how can it be capable of any
alteration from a mere Civil Constitution? What signifies a Law of man in a
matter before determined by the Law of God.

Secondly, From Scripture-Example: Our Lord Christ submitted to the most unjust
sentence of death, and would not use the assistance of Angels or Men against
that Authority under which He lived; but commanded Peter to put up his Sword
when drawn in his defense, St. Matthew. 26.52. St. John 18.11. The like
submission was practiced by the Apostles, Acts 5.41. Rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.



Romans 8.29. 1 Pet. 2.21.

Thirdly, From the Example of the Primitive Christians under the persecution of
Heathen Emperors; Particularly, from the Celebrated instance of the Thebaean
Legion.

And what avails it to say that the Laws of the Empire were against these
men? Shall the Laws or Customs of Men, in themselves sinful and unjust, make
them Criminals, whom the juster and superior Laws of God and Nature declare
Innocent?

And to say that they wanted power to defend themselves, is to contradict
approved History, and those pious Fathers of the Church who wrote Apologies for
them.

4thly. Finally, From the Nature of Martyrdom: If men might defend their Lives,
Liberties or Religion it self by force of Arms against their natural and
Rightful Prince what place could their be for Martyrdom, which seems a
voluntary suffering of death in the cause of God and Religion, and for the sake
of Truth and a good Conscience? For what thanks is it to that man who dies for
his Religion, when if it were in his power he would rather kill his Persecutors
(though lawful Governors) than suffer himself to be put to death by them?

These are the principal Arguments for Obedience, or at least submission and
Non-Resistance to Governors in all Cases, which we allow to be very good and
cogent, in debitis circumstantiis, where the Covernour is absolute: But that
they do not affect the Subjects of our English Monarchy, will I presume, be
granted by them that seriously and impartially weigh the following
Considerations.

II. In a mixed Government or limited Monarchy, the Obedience due from the
Subject is supposed Conditional or limited, whose Rule and Measure is the Laws
of the Land where we live in conjunction with the Laws of God. And then
Obedience is,

Either (1.) Active to all Lawful Commands, i. e. in things enjoined or at
least not forbidden by the Laws of God, and the Laws of the Land.

Or (2.) Passive, or Submission to the Kings pleasure in suffering patiently,
instead of performing such his commands as are contrary to the Laws of God, but
not contrary to the Laws of the Land; and consequently, it is the suffering
Legal Penalties though undeserved.

With this Restriction must all those Texts be interpreted which in Scripture
require Obedience, or Submission. For, If the King goes about to oppress or
destroy his people without authority from God, and against the plain Laws of
the Land, it seems reasonable that He may be opposed (at least to some degree)
by his People or Subjects.

For though a Prince is Gods Vicegerent and ought not to be Murdered or
Deposed by his Subjects, his person being Sacred and reserved only to the
Divine vengeance: yet that He may (when other means prove ineffectual) be by
force compelled to keep within the limits of the Law, seems reasonable.
Because, otherwise the Laws are mere trifles and insignificant Formalities. To
what purpose are Acts of Parliament made to confirm our Liberties and
Properties, if after such confirmation we are no more sure of enjoying them
than we were before? Why are great Revenues settled on the Crown by the peoples
gift, for the grant of some new privilege, or confirmation of former Grants, if
notwithstanding this, the Prince at pleasure may trample upon all without the
least control? Certainly had Parliaments known such a power inherent in the
King incapable of Restriction, they would have saved their own and the Nations
Money, and not have parted with it, to facilitate (as it may happen) their own
destruction.

That Government in general is of Divine Institution, there can be no Question,
St. Paul says Romans 13.1. There is no Power but of God. -- but the
specification of this power or the different forms of Government, may depend on
the pleasure of Men. As the Husbands power over the Wife is from God, yet that
this man in particular rather than another should exercise that power was at
first from the designation, consent and choice of the Woman her self: so, the
Magistrates power is from God; yet the exercise of it by few or many hands; by
one absolute or by one limited by certain Laws and Rules, depended originally
on the consent and approbation of the people: for certainly the Scripture has
not determined which of these should be done.

We read indeed the words of God Himself, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings Reign -- and
St. Paul spoke of absolute Emperors when he said Romans 13.1. The powers that be
are ordained of God: But it does not follow from thence that no other form of
Government has Divine Authority: For, 1. As to the former Text, the verse next
following will prove Aristocracy to be jure Divino as certainly as that proves
Monarchy to be so. Prove. 8.16. By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the Earth. And 2. As to the latter place, if St. Paul had lived when
Rome was a Commonwealth, what should hinder but that he might have preached the
same Doctrine? might he not have said of the Consuls, Senate, Tribunes, etc.
The powers that be are ordained of God?


If Monarchy then be said to be jure Divino, it must not be understood
exclusive of all other Forms of Government, but either in a general sense, as
it must be acknowledged the best, and subject to fewer inconveniences than any
other Form; and as being the most agreeable to right Reason, and the voice of
Nature, being the first of Governments. And that which is still every where
found among such people as have only the light of nature to direct them. Or
Finally, as it best represents the supreme authority of God on Earth. Earthly
Magistrates being Gods Representatives do best appear to be so in a Monarchical
State. But that Monarchy is strictly and properly of Divine institution cannot
be defended;

(1.) Because then, all other Forms of Government are wicked Inventions, under
which it must be unlawful to live; the which I think none will assert. (2.)
Because then the Monarch sins against God if he parts with the least branch
of his prerogative without express license from Heaven: and then our English
Government it self, though Monarchical, must also be condemned.
It seems therefore (as I conceive) very plain, that though the Kings power be
from God, whose Vicegerent He is, and not the peoples Creature, yet He may be
limited in the exercise of that Power by the Laws of the Realm, made by the
free consent and approbation of Himself, and his people.

And this seems to have been the opinion of our Three last Kings. The Blessed
Martyr Charles the I. Declared [from New-Marked,] That the Law was the measure
of his power. and at another time, That his Prerogatives were built on the Law
of the Land.

King Charles the II. in His Speeches to his Parliaments, several times
declared his Resolution, To make the Law his Rule, and to Govern according to
Law. And King James the Second in His Speech at His first sitting in Privy
Council, reciting a Calumny that had been reported of Him, That he was a man
for Arbitrary Power, to assure us of the contrary, he says, I know the Laws of
England are sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as I can wish.

By which it appears, That as the Kings of England are not absolute; So the
Obedience which their Subjects owe them, should be measure by the known Laws of
the Land.

If therefore the King requires that which is not forbidden by the Law of God,
but yet is beyond that authority which the Constitutions of the Kingdom have
assigned Him, his Subjects may (for the sake of peace, avoiding of scandal, or
such like end for the public good) comply by a voluntary concession with his
will: but they are not in Conscience bound to obey. And if He pursues such
illegal practices extravagantly, designing to subvert the peoples Civil or
Religions Rights, to introduce a false Religion and Arbitrary power, and
enslave not only the present, but all future Generations; His Subjects are so
far from being obliged to assist Him in such illegal and destructive Projects:
That on the contrary, they ought according to their stations to resist such
proceedings, defending themselves and their own Rights, not offending Him, or
retaliating injuries, but refusing to put in execution such illegal designs.
And if they would unanimously resolve on this, they might be safe, since He can
never destroy them but by their own hands. Indeed there will never be wanting
men of mean Fortunes and base Principles ready instruments to serve the worst
designs of Tyrants; and if such be put into Office to oppress the Subject
contray to Law, we know by our ancient Constitution, their Commissions are
illegal, and they can have no more authority thereby, than such as take purses
on the High way, and may be treatd accordingly. This is so evident that it
needs no argument to prove it, and therefore I shall mention only what I before
hinted, viz. That unless this be granted, the Laws fail of the end for which
they were made, and are no safeguard to the people.

That the Nature of a Christians Obedience being stated and determined by the
Laws of God in Scripture, the subsequent Laws of man cannot alter it. I Answer,

viz. That by the Laws of God, every Government ought to be Monarchical; and
every Monarch absolute as the Roman Emperors were to whom the Primitive
Christians were Subject. But there can be no proof of this from Scripture; and
consequently, if a Monarch may be under Legal limitations, He can expect no
other than Legal Obedience from his Subjects, notwithstanding those Texts of
Scripture.

Hence also, the Examples of our Savior Christ his Apostles and primitive
Christians are improperly urged against us, who live under a different
Government, to infer absolute submission to the will of the King, though they
may well be urged to infer such Submission to the Government, i. e. To the King
acting within the limits of Law. For, it may happen that by the Laws of the
Land a King may have power to inflict sore penalties on his Subjects for
refusing to do what they are restrained from doing by the superior Laws of
God; and then they must needs submit how great power soever they had to resist;
for the Laws of Religion allowing no resistance, nor the Laws of the Land
according to which they are supposed to suffer, they can have no pretense at
all for resisting.

And here is the opportunity for passive Obedience and bearing the Cross. And
this was the condition of our pious Martyrs in Queen Mary's Reign; they were
put to death unjustly, but yet according to the Laws of the Land, and by the
authority with which the Laws armed their Sovereign against them; For these
Laws being interpreted their own Acts by their Representatives (or of the major
part of them, by which the rest ought to be concluded) when executed against
them, ought to be patiently submitted to without the least Resistance.

This also our Dissenters take to be their Case on whom penalties have been
inflicted for Nonconformity: They pretend Conscience against Conformity, as if
it were forbidden by the Laws of God; yet being upon that account adjudged
Criminals by the Laws of the Land, they ought to suffer patiently the effects
of those Laws, however innocent themselves, or however grievous and unjust
their penalties.

As to the for-cited Examples.

Our blessed Savior submitted to the powers that then were, and the sentence
of Death was passed upon him by a Judge whom he acknowledged to have power given
him from above. And though the power was abused to the injury of the innocent,
yet a private person was not to avenge himself, but commit his Case unto God.
Besides the great end for which our Lord came into the World to do and suffer
the will of Him that sent him for the Salvation of men obliged Him to acquiese
and submit, who otherwise might have commanded twelve Legions of Angels to his
rescue.

Then as for the primitive Christians, who when more numerous than their
Enemies would not in the least resist their persecutors: not when they had
opportunity and capacity to resist as particularly the Thebean Legion. Of which
there are various opinions.

1. Some say, it was not lawful for them to resist because the Laws of the
Empire were against them and their Religion. But this I conceive is not
satisfactory; for, it may justly be questioned how these Laws, improperly so
called, could oblige the Christians to such strange submission and
condescension, when they seem destitute of Equity, and just authority; of
Equity? because condemning innocent persons; and of authority, because contrary
to the Laws of God and Nature, and not enacted by any consent of the people,
being only Edicts or Proclamations of the Emperor. And the Emperors authority
must be founded on one of these, viz. The Laws of God, and Nature, or the
consent of people. And if his Edicts were contrary to these it seems strange
that they should lay on Christians that great obligation of suffering death
without Resistance. 2. Others imagine these Christians not to have understood
their duty aright, and that they ought according to the Laws of Nature to have
defended their lives against unjust violence, but that they were under such a
prejudicial mistake as the Jews were who refused to fight against there enemies
on the Sabbath Day; and consequently were rather to be pitied than imitated.
But 3. I conceive the best and truest account of these pious men submitting to
their persecutors even to death, is this, not only that the Imperial Laws were
against them; much less that they were ignorant of their Duty or Liberty of
self-defence* But that they knew it was the positive Will of God, that they
should glorify Him (when called to it) by suffering death.
For, as it was the will of God to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect
through suffering, Heb. 2.10. So it was his will also to bring his followers to
glory the same way, by Patience and sufferings, unto which St. Peter says of
Christians, 1 Pet. 2.21.] Ye are called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps, i. e. as often as they
were called to it by order of Divine Providence. And this frequently happened
while the supreme power was in the hands of Heathen Princes: so long, it was
the method of God to establish, confirm and propagate his Church by the blood
of Martyrs voluntarily dying for that Religion which they could have defended
with the Sword, had not their Holy Faith restrained them from such means. And
hereby the Heathen Rulers might learn, that the Kingdom of Christ was not of
this world; that as He intended not by admitting men into his Society, to
infringe any of their just and natural Rights: so He wanted not the assistance
of their power to Plant or support his Church and Spiritual Kingdom, which He
caused miraculously to increase and prosper by those very means of persecution,
blood and slaughter, by which they endeavored to destroy it.

But after that the powers of the Earth were themselves added to the Church, it
was but just that as the Church imparted to them spiritual good things: so she
should partake of their carnal. Accordingly the Christian Emperors gloried in
being Defenders of the Faith, enriching the Church with Revenues, dignifying it
with ample privileges, supporting it with Laws, and defending it with the power
of the Sword: And by these means God now preserves his Church, as He did before
by miracles. And after the Church has thus acquired many Civil Rights, and the
protection of good and wholesome Laws, it would be vain presumption for
Christians to neglect the use of these means to defend themselves against the
violence of Tyrants, and expect that God should deliver them by some miraculous
method.

As the Children of Israel in the Wilderness were miraculously sustained with
Quails and Manna, and water out of a Rock, and clothes that waxed not old: But
after they were settled in Canaan they had not those extraordinary Provisions,
but were to live by their labors, tilling the ground and reaping the fruits of
the Earth; and it would have been strange presumption in them to have omitted
these endeavors, and sitting still, have always expected to have been fed
with Quails and Manna: So the Christian Church, was in the first Ages under
Persecution as in the Wilderness preserved by an extraordinary and miraculous
Providence. But after the Church was incorporated with the Civil State, and
enjoyed peace and the protection of humane Laws, it was no longer to expect
such favors, And for any now to quite the security of Laws against the
violence of Persecutors, and rely only on Divine Providence for deliverance, is
like expecting Quails and Manna in Canaan; it is to tempt, rather than dutifully
to rely on, Divine Providence.

Finally, As to the last difficulty, viz. That according to this account there
would be no such thing as Martyrdom. 1. I grant there is not that place for
actual Martyrdom, the Church being now under a limited Government, as there was
under an absolute one in the primitive times. And what though the Church be
altered in some such circumstances? Then it had frequent miracles, which now
are ceased, as well as the opportunities of Matyrdom. 2. To those that desire
this Glory I may say as the Apostles did to some that were fond of
Circumcision, He is not a Jew only who is so outwardly: so neither is he a
Martyr only who expires in the flames; but he also who in disposition of Soul
is resolved and ready to suffer if called to it. Besides, There are (no doubt)
many instances of Mortification, Self-denial, extraordinary Charity, etc. as
great and as difficult, and as meritorious as the plain suffering death by the
Sword or Axe of an Executioner. Let us labor to excel in these, and so we may
obtain a reward equal to the glory Martyrdom.

Now as to our present circumstances I cannot conceive what can be urged
against these things, but Either

(1.) The Obligation of our former Oath of Allegiance: or (2.) The public
Declaration against taking up Arms against the King upon any pretense whatever.
1. As to the former, I think the matter of that Oath is expired as certainly
as if the Nation had been absolutely conquered. For though all the people were
not, the Governing part was, and the Government it self utterly unhinged. And
if any thing was done in those Revolutions which scrupulous persons now
dislike, to be sure they were not accessory to it, and may therefore now submit
as conquered persons; especially if they desire protection from the present
establishment.

2. As to the Declaration, It must be construed Secundum Analogiam Legis, not
to make the Prince absolute. But upon condition the Fundamental Constitution of
the Government be preserved, it is then unlawful for Subjects, (any or all) to
take up Arms against their Sovereign.

FINIS.

