The Grand INDICTMENT OF HIGH TREASON Against the Marquess of Argyle, AT THE
Instance of His Majesty's Advocat: EXHIBITED To the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND,
WITH An Account of what has followed since thereupon.

Printed for the Author. 1661.

ADVERTISMENT.
READER,
THis Grand Indictment differs only in two or three Articles from the other
printed Charge at the instance of Sir James Lamond.

The Grand INDICTMENT OF High Treason, Against the Marquess of Argyle.
ARCHIBALD Marquess of Argyle, you are indicted and accused, and are to answer
at the instance of Sir John Fletcher Knight, His Majesty's Advocate for His
Majesty's interest: That whereas by the Laws of God expressed in Holy Writ, by
the Laws of Nations, by the common Law, and by the municipal Laws and Practice
of this Kingdom, especially by the third Act of the first Parliament of King
James the first, and by the first act of King James the 6 Parl: 18. of blessed
memory, and by several other acts of Parliament, all good and loyal Subjects of
this Kingdom are bound and obliged perpetually to acknowledge, obey, maintain,
defend and advance the Life, Honor, Safety, Dignity, Sovereign Authority, and
Prerogative Royal of their Sovereign Lord and King, their Heirs and Successors,
and privilege of their Crown with their lives, Lands and Goods; to the utmost
of their Power, constantly and faithfully to withstand all, and whatsoever,
Persons or Estates, who shall presume, preass or intend, any ways to Impugn,
Prejudge, or Impair the same, and shall no way Intend, Attempt, Enact or do any
thing to the Violation, Hurt, Derogation, Impairing or Prejudice of His
Highness Sovereign Authority, Prerogative, and Privilege of His Crown, or any
point or part thereof: And whosoever does the contrary to be punished as
Traitors, and to forfeit their Lives, Lands and Goods. Likewise by the 25 Act
of the 6 Parl. of K, J. 2. and by the 75. Act of the 9 Parl. Q. M. All rising
in fear of War against the Kings Person or Majesty; All attempting to raise any
band of men of War, Horse or Foot in warlike posture, without special license
of the Kings Majesty, and all suppliers of them in help Redress or Counsel, are
punishable as Traitors, Likewise by the 43. Act of the 3 Par. K. J. 1. and by
the 134 Act of the 8. Parl and by Act 10. of 10. par. and by the 205 Act of 14.
Par. of K. J. 6. It is Statute and ordained, That no Subject of whatsoever
function, degree or quality shall presume or take upon him publicly or
privately to declaim, speak or Write any purpose of reproach, slander, disdain
or contempt of His Majesty's Person. Estate or Government, or tending to the
dishonor, hurt or Prejudice of His Highness, his Parents or Progenitors: Or to
meddle in the Affairs of His Highness, and his Estate present, bygone, or in
time coming, nor to deprive his Laws and Acts of Parliament, nor misconstrue
his proceedings, whereby any mislikeing may be moved betwixt the Kings Majesty,
His Nobility and loving Subjects, under the pain of losing their Lives, Lands
and Goods, and others therein contained: As also all hearers of any such
leasings, slanderous speeches or words, and concealers thereof, without
apprehending of the Authors (if it lie in their Power) as reveal not the same
to his Majesty or such of his Judges or Officers, and are mentioned in the said
Acts, are liable to the like punishment, as the principal Offenders.

Likewise by the 130 Act of the 8. parl. of K. J. 6. it is statute and
ordained, That none of His Majesty's Leiges and Subjects presume or take upon
hand to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the Estates of Parliament, or to
seek or procure the innovation or diminution of the Power and Authority of the
same, under the pain of Treason.

Likewise by the last Act of the 3 Par. of K. J 5. and by the 33. Act of the
first Par. of K. J. 6. all burning of Houses or Corn, and wilful fire rising is
declared Treason, and the Committers thereof are to be Punished.

Likewise by the 51. Act of the 11 par. of K. J. 6. It is statute and ordained,
That the murder and slaughter of what somever His Majesty's Leiges, where the
party slain is under the Trust, Credit, Assurance and Power of the slayer, all
such murder and slaughter shall be Treason, and the Persons found culpable
shall forfeit Life, Lands and Goods.

Likewise by the 37. Act of 2. parl. K. J. 1 and by the 144. Act of the 12.
Parl, K. J. 6. All Receivers, Suppliers or Intercommoners with any Traitors,
are punishable by forfeiture as the Traitors themselves.

Likewise by common Laws and practice of this Kingdom, all Concealers and not
Revealers of any malicious purpose of putting any violent hands on the sacred
person of our Dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, or purpose of killing or
putting him to Death; and all Advisers, Counselors, Aiders, Abettors or Havers
of any accessions there to, are punishable as Traitors.

Nevertheless, it is of verity, that you the said Marquess of Argyle, having
laid aside all fear of God, Loyalty to His Sacred Majesty, and to His Royal
Father of ever blessed Memory, natural Duty and Affection to your native
Country and Country men, and respect and obedience to the Laws of all well
governed Realms, the Common Law, and the Laws, Statutes, Acts of Parliament,
and practices of this Kingdom, and having traitorously intended and purposed
the eradicating and subverting the fundamental Government of this Kingdom: At
least the enervating, viola^ing, derogating, or impairing the Sovereign
Authority. Royal Prerogative of his Majesty, and privilege of the Crown, You
for carrying on of your said wicked purpose, having gathered and convocated
together in a hostile manner, a great many of your Friends, Servants, Vassals,
Followers and others of His Majesty's Leiges, without any warrant license or
Command from His Majesty; and therewith under pretext of opposing such as by
you were the nicknamed Anti Covenanters; and opposers of the work of
Reformation (but who indeed were faithful Assertors of his Majesty's lawful
Authority) having marched to the foard of Lion in Athol in the month of (...)
1630 (...) there did in your tent, and in presence of a great many Gentlemen
and others publicly declare, That it was the opinion and Judgment of many
Divines and Lawyers, that a King may be deposed for desertions, venditions, and
invasions: And that howbeit that your words were in abstracto from any King.
yet that the sense and meaning thereof might appear to be of the then Kings
Majesty, your dread Sovereign, you immediately did subjoyn and say to the late
Mr. John Stuart, of Ladiwel; And Mr. John, you understand Latin.

Likewise considering the condition of the Kingdom, and the oppositions that a
great many of the People were in to His Majesty; particularly you the said
Marquess, and your Accomplices and Followers; it is clear that the said words did
not only treasonably reflect upon Kingly Government, as being subject to the
People, who might in the cases aforesaid depose a King: but also it is clear,
that your meaning also, and intention thereby was, that the Kings Majesty, your
dread Sovereign might be so dealt with: And the said Treasonable speeches were
so vented by you, of design to usher in your many Treasonable actions and
practices done by you unto His Sacred Person, Dignity, and Authority* which
doubtless did occasion, and was mainly instrumental both in his deposition and
cruel murder: Which wicked and Treasonable speeches, the said Mr. John having
thereafter reported, you most cruelly and tyrannously did prosecute him to
death, as a Leasing-maker betwixt the Kings Majesty and His good Subjects,
howbeit you could not be but conscious of the Truth of what he had reported.

Secondly, In prosecution of your foresaid wicked and treasonable purposes, you
having marched with the said Forces to the House of Airly, belonging to his
Majestys Right trusty and well beloved Cozen and counselor James Earl of
Airlie, which was then kept for His Majesty's Service and Authority, After you
had forced the rendition of the said House, and destroyed the Woods and
Plantings of the same, and Hearied and Destroyed the said Earls Friends and
Tennants, His Majesty's good Subjects, you did slight and demolish the said
House; and to express your hatred against the said Earl, merely for his Loyalty
to His Majesty, did seize or by those under you did cause seize upon the House
of Forther in Glenyla belonging also to the said Earl, and without any color
or pretense of offense did wilfully, most treasonably, and contrary to the
foresaid Acts of Parliament, raise fire in the said House, and thereby Burnt
and Destroyed the same, and hail Furniture therein.

Thirdly, In further prosecution of your treasonable Plots, and Machinations
against His Majesty's Person and Authority, contrary to the foresaid Laws and
Acts of Parliament, in Anno 1640. you in an hostile manner, did most
treasonably lay siege to His Majesty's Fort and Castle of Dunbarton then
fortified and kept for his Majesty's service by Col. Henderson having His
Majesty's Warrant and Commission for that effect, and forced the said Colonel
to render the said Castle to you; out of which most treasonably you caused to
be transported and carried away a great many of His Majesty's cannon and other
Ammunition, appointed for defense and security of the said Castle.

Fourthly, Not withstanding that his then Majesty had in Anno 1641. Come
himself in Person to this Kingdom, and most graciously condescended to all such
Acts as were required of him (how unjust soever) for securing and pleasing the
People, and settling a peace; and that he had past one Act of Oblivion, to
indemnifie all such as had formerly been in opposition to His Majesty within
this Kingdom, and that he had conferred upon you the Title and Dignity of
Marquess, as a Mark of His Royal favor, and put you in places of greatest
trust in the Kingdom: And that you had sworn and promised in the Abbey of
Holyrudhouse, that in case any trouble or commotions should happen to be raised
in England by any of his discontented Subjects against him, you would assist
and defend him against all such to the hazard of your Life and Fortune: And
that His Majesty had parted from this His Ancient Kingdom, as was said and
acknowledged by all, a contented Prince from a contented People: yet
nevertheless His Majesty being forced and necessitated in anno 1642. To leave
His Parliament in England then sitting at Westminster, and His Royal Palace of
Whitehal, and betake himself to defensive arms, for maintenance of his Royal
Person. Dignity and Authority, and to protect the same against an Army of
Sectaries, who maliciously, traitorously, eruelly and treasonably did invade
the same; you contrary to your Allegiance, duty, obligations and recent promise
aforesaid; did by your self and accomplices, to fortify and strengthen the said
Rebels and Sectaries. and in direct opposition to His Majesty's Person and
Dignity, did call or cause to be called a pretended Convention of Estates in
anno 1643. without any shadow or color of lawful Authority, and you and they
so convocated did take upon you the supreme Authority of the Kingdom enter into
League with His Majesty's enemies, impose Subsidies and Excise upon the People,
and raise an Army of his Majesty's own Subjects, and therewith entered His
Majesty's Kingdom of England, seized upon His Majesty's Towns and Forts there;
and killed, murdered, plundered and destroyed His good Subjects, and in open
and pitched fields fought for, with and in behalf of the said Rebels, against
His Majesty's Forces, which in effect was the rise and cause of all the
subsequent ruins and disasters that besel His Majesty or His loyal and good
Subjects thereafter.

Fifthly, in anno 1645. after your return from England, to show your implacable
malice and hatred to all such as had any dependence upon, or affection to His
Majesty, you by your self, and others under your command, or at your
direction, did most treasonably raise most wilful fire, and burn the House of
Menstrie Lyfrented, by the Countess of Sterling, and in her possession, and all
the movables and furniture, there extending to a great value, notwithstanding
that the said Countess was an honorable aged Woman; and who, and her deceast
Husband, the Earl of Sterling, by all observances and dutiful respects obliged
you, so far as in them lay; thereby adding to the said act of Treason, the
height of oppression and ingratitude.

Sixthly, in the year, 1646. You by your self, or those under your command, or
for whom you were answerable, or whom you might have stopped or impeded. did
take in the House of Tewart, belonging to the Lord of Lamond, and the House of
Escoge, belonging to Lamond of Ascoge and after Articles of Capitulation drawn
and subscribed by the Lord of Arkinglas, and other Officers under your
Command, did most treasonably in manner aforesaid, under trust and assurance,
as said is burn the said House of Ascoge, cruelly hang kill and murder a great
many of the said Lairds of Lamond and Ascoges friends and followers, as is more
fully expressed in the Summons raised at their instance and mine for His
Majesty's interest against you, and which is repeated as a part of this Article.

Seventhly, You having traitorously intended the utter ruin and extirpation of
all faithful and Loyal Subjects who had given Testimony of their faithfulness
to His Majesty's dearest Father, of ever blessed memory; and having with an
Army of your Accomplices, Associates, Vassals, Servants, Tennents and followers
in anno 1646. marched to Kintyre, where a great many of His Majesty's
well-affected Subjects of the name of Mac Donald, Mac Coull, and others, whose
names are not particularly known to the number of 300 or thereby had fortified
themselves for their security, against your oppresssion and violence in the
House of Lochehead and Dunnavertie: And you with the said Forces, at least, a
part of the said Forces having marched to the said House of Lochehead, the
Gentlemen and others therein, without making the least opposition, and
declaring that they had refuged themselves to the said place for shelter and
Protection, did render up the said House and themselves upon assurance, that
they might freely and quietly return and live at their own Homes; according
thereto, they were dismissed and sent Home, where they remained in peaceable
manner by the space of (...) days, Notwithstanding thereafter, you and the
forces aforesaid having besieged the Castle of Dunnavertie, during the said
siege, there were several Rendezvous appointed for the said Gentlemen to make
their appearance, which frequently they did, and were still dismissed, until
such time as those who were within the said House of Dunnavertie had rendered up
the said House and them selves, to be disposed upon at the mercy of the Kingdom
or pretended Committee of Estates: And that notwithstanding thereof, you and
your said Accomplices had most perfidiously, treacherously and treasonably, (and
for which also you are hereby endicted) slaughtered and murdered, or caused to
be slaughtered or murdered, the number of 260. of them, or thereby they being
under your trust, assurance, credit, or power, and did dispose upon the rest of
them at your own hand, without any lawful warrant, to Captains, William Hay,
and Archibald Campbel, to serve in the French Wars: then and hereafter you
caused, appointed a new Rendezvous of the said Gentlemen, who were in the House
of Lochehead, and their followers who having appeared in frequent manner, you
caused to be singled out fifteen or sixteen of the said Gentlemen, who were
that night sent to the said House of Lochehead, and the next morning brought
forth by you, or such as were under your Command, and most perfidiously,
cruelly, and inhumanely, without any Order of Law. or Form of Process Civil or
Military, hanged and murdered. And to aggravate the said cruel and barbarous
crime, It is of verity, That one of the said Persons so murdered being an old
man, and having one son, of age not above sixteen or seventeen years the father
immediately before his death did depone, that his said son had never carried my
Arms offensive all his life time, but that he had still been at Schools; and
that some few days before, he had come from Glasgow, the place of his
Education, to visit his Parents, and therefore did earnestly supplicate, in
regard of his innocence, his life might be spared: Notwithstanding you, and the
bloody Actors of your purposes were so unmerciful, as not to hearken to the
said so just desire of the said dying old man, but forthwith the said young
innocent boy was cruelly also hanged to death. Likewise not content with the
aforesaid unheard of horrid acts of cruelty, you in the month of (...) 1640.
years, or one or other of the months thereof, by your self and Followers, or
such whom you might have stopped or let caused to be transported from the Isle of
Ila, to the Isle of Jura, to the number of two hundred persons of all sexes and
ages, where all means of livlihood and subsistence being withdrawn from them,
they in a most miserable manner were pined and starved to Death by Famine,
except some very few, who outlived the rest, and were relieved and carried out
of the said Isle by boats, accidentally coming by: Likewise the person of (...)
Mac Donald, alias Colmac Gillespy, or Colkittoche, being in anno (...) ordained
by the Parliamenr, or Committee of Estates thereof to have been brought from
prison out of the House of (...) where hethen was, and where he had been kept
by you and others in your time, many years before to Edinburgh, that the causes
for which he had been kept, and so detained in prison, might have been known,
and he having for that end been brought in a ship the length of the road of
Leith; you for preventing such information of your cruelty and oppression
exercised toward him, and many of his friends and relations, which he was able
to have given and made out: you in manifest contempt and scorn of the Authority
of that Parliament, under which you your self acted, caused take the person of
the said Colkittoche forth of the said ship, and after you had carried him to
your own lands and bounds, cruelly caused hang him to Death,

Eighthly, Notwithstanding of the manifold acts of mercy and favor, dignity,
honor and trust conferred upon you, by your then Dread Sovereign, for
reclaiming of you from your disloyal and treasonable practices, plots and
machinations, against His Sacred Person, Dignity and Authori^y; he being sore
pressed and reduced to great straits and extremities by that Army of Sectaries
before mentioned, with whom you had formerly joined as said is. And having in
that exigence and difficulty rather chosen from an innate principle of
affections of his Country men to cast himself over in the hands of the Army of
his Majesty's Subjects of his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, for shelter and
preservation of His Royal Person. Nevertheless, you the said Marquess of
Argyle, being the chief Ring leader of that factions party, who then swayed the
Estate and Affairs both in Council and Armies in the said Kingdom, did so
contrive and complot, and by your influence so prevail, that after all fair
offers made by his Majesty, and His earnest desire to have come and lived in
Scotland, until such time as all differences in both Kingdoms had been settled;
That a pretended Act of Parliament was made for abandoning and leaving His
Majesty to the disposal and mercy of the inveterate Enemies of His Majesty
and Government, the said Armies of Sectaries. And that your acting in, and
accessions to the said Affair might be the more evident and clear; and to
aggravate your eminent and singular guilt therein, you your self went to
London, where you basely under pretext of satisfaction for the Arrears of the
said Army, raised by the pretended Authority of the pretended Convention of
Estates, in anno 1643. as said is treacherously and Treasonably, gave up, at
least condescended to the upgiving of your Dread Sovereign and Master, and that
as being empowered so to do by the Kingdom of Scotland; and thereby did rub an
indelible mark of reproach and infamy upon the whole Nation to all generations,
so far as in you lay. And further to clear your foresaid treasonable dealings,
accessions to, and correspondency with that infamous party of the said Army,
who carried on the said abominable and detestable act, you being at the same
time in a pretended joint Committee of both Kingdoms, while as the English
therein did call in question whether the Scots Army would sincerely concur with
them in their said Treason and Treachery, you after many arguments used in
their Favors; earnestly desired them to have patience for a little time and it
would appear by somewhat to the Officers of the Army, how far they intended to
concur and go along with them. Likewise within few days after there was a
Vindication and Declaration emitted in name of the said Armies, whereby it was
held forth, that in case His Majesty would not condescend to all the desires of
both Kingdoms* which was no less then the divesting himself of all Regal Power,
Civil, Ecclesiasstical or Military in State, Church or Armies, they would
deliver him up; which immepiately after the payment of 200000. Lib. basely and
Treasonably was done by you and them.

Ninthly, In Anno 1648. His Majesty's Royal Father being contrary to all Laws,
Divine and Humane, most unchristianly barbarously and treasonably detained and
kept prisoner within the Castle of Newport in the Isle of Wight, by a party of
Factious, disloyal and rebellious Sectaries: The Estates of Parliament then
conveened by his Majesty's Authority, having taken he said inhumane,
treasonable and cruel usage to serious consideration, they found this Kingdom
engaged in honor and Duty to resent so horrid and unheard of cruelty and lose
majesty, and obliged to use their utmost endeavors to relieve him out of the
hands of such wicked Usurpers, and to restore him to the former exercise of His
Royal Authority in Freedom, Honor, and Safety; for effectuating whereof
after all other fair ways essayed, upon mature consultation had, they found
that the only probable means was the raising of an Army of His Majesty's good
Subjects, which was accordingly Statute and Ordained by Act of the said
Parliament, against the carrying on of which, so just laudable and necessary a
duty, you did most violently and eminently oppose your self, not only by
arguing, voting against, and using all other means in your power to obstruct
the same but also after the same was past in an act of Parliament, you did most
contemptuously and treasonably publicly dissent from, and enter a Protestation
against the same; and not bei g therewith content, after the said Army in
pursuance of their Duty and allegiance had marched into His Majesty's said
Kingdom of England, you shortly thereafter in the month of (...) in contempt
of the aforesaid Authority, and against the preservation of His Majesty's
Person and Authority; Did most treasonably convocate an Army of factious,
seditious and Rebellious Subjects in opposition to the said Army, and
therewith committed diverse and sundry outrages, murders, slaughter, plunders
and vastation: upon the persons and estates of diverse of His Majesty's good
Subjects, and therewith invaded several Cities and Castles, seized thereupon,
and upon the Magazen with Arms and Ammunition therein: And at that time the
said Rebellious Army of Sectaries of England, being upon the borders, you
fearing and apprehending that the force and power raised by you should not be
able to withstand His Majesty's good and Loyal Subjects, who were then risen
and ready to rise in Arms for asserting and vindicating His Majesty's Just
Authority, you did most basely, treacherously and treasonably call into your
aid and Assistance the said Army of Sectaries. Likewise you your self went in
person to the House of Mordington belonging to the Lord Mordingtoun within a
mile of the English borders to the end foresaid, you did meet with the vile
Usurper Oliver cromwell, Commander of the said Army, with whom you had several
private meetings and consultations and thereby persuaded and so prevailed with
the said Traitor, that he thereafter marched with the said Army to Edinburgh
and the places thereabout, and which march and incoming of the said Oliver you
might have undoubtedly hindered: in so far as it can be made appear by clear
proofs and Testimonies of famous persons. That it having been complained upon
to him at the said House of Mordington, that by reason of his lying there with
such a great number of Soldiers, the Lord Mordingtons tennants would
undoubtedly be ruined: He the said Oliver made answer, that he could not help
the same, for his staying and going did depend upon you, and that he was ready
if you desired, to march back to England; at least, you did contrive, advise or
consult the rising and convocating of the said seditious, factious, and
rebellious Army; at least was one of the number your self, present and with,
and assisting to them in arms; at least, did vote, counsel or persuade the
incalling of the said Army of Sectaries: and they being so brought in, you did
countenance, assist, concur and consult with them, or their Commanders, or some
of them in public or in private at Edinburgh, and in the Cannongate in the
house called Lady Homes Lodgings, and in diverse other places. As also, you did
most villanously and traitorously contrive, counsel or vote, to the drawing up
of a Letter directed to the Traitor and abominable Usurper; wherein you and
your accomplices did engage your selves, in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland,
to employ your utmost endeavors, that none who had been active in, or
consenting to the engagement against the said Sectaries, or had been in arms at
Sterling, or elsewhere, in maintenance or pursuance of that engagement, should
be employed in any public place or trust within this Kingdom whatsoever,
without advice or consent of the Kingdom of England; as the said Letter dated
the sixth day of October, 1648. more fully bears. As also, you did draw up, at
least did counsel, advise or vote, to the updrawing of certain Instructions
given to Sir John Chiesly who was sent by you and your accomplices as
Commissioner to the pretended House of the Parliament of England, dated October
17. the year aforesaid; wherein you desire, that the Noblemen, Gentlemen of
quality and considerable Officers of the army, that went into England, under
the command of Duke Hamilton, and who were then prisoners, might be kept as
pledges for the peace of that Kingdom; by which not only have you endeavored
most unnaturally to enslave your fallow Subjects and Contrymen to the power
of Strangers: But most treacherously and treasonably, as an unworthy ungrate
Patriot, done what in you lay to destroy the life of your own dread Sovereign,
and the Royal Authority in him and his Succession, and to subject the Honor,
liberty, power and Government of this His Majesty's ancient and free Kingdom,
to the command, lust and tyranny of ane faction of Foreign Traitors and
Usurpers. As also, you upon the fourth day of May thereafter, having taken upon
you most treasonably, the Supreme Authority of this Kingdom, gave warrant under
your hand for issuing out a Proclamation, declaring that the wives, children
and families of James Lord Ogilby (...) Lord Rae, Lewis Marquess of Huntly
therein designed Lewis Gordon, son to the Marquess of Huntly, John now Earl of
Middleton, therein designed John Middleton of (...) sometime designed General
Major, should be no longer under the protection of this Kingdom, and that such
course should be taken for transporting them out of their Country to Foreign
parts, as the Estates of Parliament or their Committee should think fit.

Tenthly, After His Majesty's dearest and most Royal Father, of eternal and
most blessed memory, had been most unchristianly, inhumanely, horridly and
barbarously murdered, by the said abominable Traitor and Usurper Oliver
Cromwell, and his wicked accomplices, the devilish and treasonable courses,
plots, contrivings and actings of yours did not yet terminate: For there being
some motions for address to be made to His Majesty, by some of His good
Subjects of this His ancient Kingdom, as undoubted and rightful Successor to
His deceased Royal Father in the Imperial Crown thereof, that His Majesty might
come to His said ancient Kingdom, for exercising His Royal Power and Authority:
The said motion and purpose being so just and lawful, you, notwithstanding of
your great impudence, and daring, otherways fearing, that a direct opposing
thereof would prove altogether ineffectual; you in a most indirect way,
procured the application made for inviting his Majesty to be so clogged with
limitations, restrictions and conditions, to have been condescended to by his
Majesty, before his admission to the exercise of his Royal Government, as were
most destructive to his Majesty's dignity and authority, and most derogatory to
Monarchical Government; as are more fully expressed in the several Commissions,
Instructions and Addresses sent and made to his Majesty to that effect, and
public Proclamation of his Majesty at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, by you
and your Accomplices, Commissioners at Breda; all which are here repeated as a
part of the Libel brevitatis causa. And his Majesty upon consideration, that
the said unreasonable, unlawful and treasonable conditions were exacted of his
Majesty by you, and a few number of factious Subjects, who had by the
assistance of the Usurper and Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, thrust your self into the
Government of this his Majesty's ancient Kingdom: And trusting to the fidelity,
the loyalty and good affection of his other good Subjects, having
notwithstanding the said hard and unjust conditions, resolved to cast himself
upon the loyalty and affections of his other good and faithful Subjects; you to
obstruct his Majesty's purpose and resolution, yea, and so far as in you lay,
to fright and terrify him therefrom by your and your Accomplices cruelty execute
upon the Marquess of Montross, his Majesty's Commissioner, and who represented
his person in his said ancient Kingdom: caused to be most horribly and
inhumanely murdered the said Marquess at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, upon
the (...) day of (...) 1650. with all the circumstances of disgrace and
dishonor; which so much reflected upon his Majesty's Person, Dignity and
Authority, and upon the honor of all true Nobility; and are so recent and
fresh, with detestation, in the memories of all good Subjects and generous
spirits at home and abroad, that it is not fit to be mentioned or repeated
here: But his Majesty still continuing in his former purpose and resolution,
and after a most tedious and dangerous voyage at Sea, having by the providence
of Almighty God, happily and safely arrived in his said ancient Kingdom;
shortly thereafter, the cruel bloody Murderer and Usurper Oliver Cromwell, in
pursuance of his Majesty with a powerful Army of Sectaries by Sea and Land,
invaded his said Majesty's ancient Kingdom: For opposing of whom, an Army being
raised, while both the said Armies were in the field, you most treacherously
and treasonably kept correspondency, and had intelligence with the said
Usurper, by writing to, and receiving Letters from him, without his Majesty's
private consent or warrant; at least by sending to, and receiving Messages from
him by word of mouth. And further, to advance the design of that abominable
Regicide, after ye had by your indirect means, plots, advices or contrivances,
gotten his Majesty removed from his Army at Leith: You by your influence upon a
few number of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, your self being one of
the number then met at St. Cuthberts Church, commonly called the West Kirk,
prevailed so, that for the weakening of the hands of Friends, and strengthening
the Enemies, there was in a most clandestine and surreptitious manner an Act,
as of the said Commission of the Kirk, made, printed and published, wherein
besides many reproachful and slanderous expressions of his Majesty and his
Royal Ancestors, more fully expressed in the said pretended Act, bearing date
August 13. 1650. it was declared, that you disclaimed, and would not own his
Majesty's Interest, because of his refusal to subscribe and emit a Declaration
offered to him; and which Declaration was contrived and drawn up by you, and
contains many scandalous, seditious, imperious, reproachful and treasonable
Expressions, not only against his Majesty's Authority and Government, but also
against his Royal Father and Mother, and others his Royal Progenitors, as is
more at large expressed in the foresaid Act of the date above-written, and
Declaration bearing date the (...) day of (...) the same year: of which
Declaration there needs no more be said, than that the circumstances by which
his Majesty was enforced to sign the same, are enough known to the World, and
that the worthiest and greatest part of his Majesty's ancient Kingdom, did,
even then detest and abhor the evil usage of his Majesty in that particular,
when the same tyranny was exercised there by the power of you and a few evil
men your Accomplices, which at that time had spread it self over his Majesty's
Kingdom of England; at least you and your Accomplices did ratify and approve the
said Act of the West Kirk, and consent thereto; and at least you did deal with,
and press and force his Majesty to sign and subscribe the Declaration foresaid;
at least you were Author or Contriver, Adviser or Counselor, Perswader or
Voter, or Assenter, Assister, Aider or Abetter of the foresaid Restrictions,
Limitations and Conditions, and of the foresaid Murder of his said Majesty's
Commissioner and manner thereof, and of the keeping of the said correspondence
with the said Invader and Usurper, and of the said Act and Declarations, or one
or other of them, or art or part thereof, or of one or other of them.

Eleventhly, After it had pleased God to suffer the Monster of men and cruel
Regicide Oliver Cromwell, so far to prevail against all his Majesty's endeavors
for recovering his just Right and Interest in this and in his other Kingdoms,
and over all the Armies and Forces raised by him for that end, so that he was
necessitated to refugeat himself with Foreign Princes and Estates: Howbeit at
his Majesty's Coronation, you in presence of God, and great many of the
Nobility of this Kingdom, and others therein conveened at Scoon the first of
January 1651. did swear to be faithful to the Crown, and true Leidgeman to his
Majesty; yet nevertheless, contrary to the said Oath, and notwithstanding the
many favors, honors, benefits and Acts of Indemnity conferred upon you, and
contrary to the Laws and Acts of Parliament above expressed, you did most
perfidiously, ungratefully and treasonably in anno 1653, or 1654, not only
according to your bounden duty, not rise in Arms, and join with the Earls
Glencairn and Middleton, which were commissionated from his Majesty for
hindering the further progress of the Usurpers, and expelling them forth of
this Kingdom: But did in open Hostility join with the said Usurpers their
Forces; especially with the Colonels Overton, Cobbet and Twisleton; at least
with the said Colonels Cobbet and Twisleton, at least with Colonel Twisleton
when he was in the High-Lands in opposition to the said Earl of Glencairn, at
least joined with them or one or other of them in Counsel; Did take and relieve
Prisoners, did furnish several pieces of great Cannon, to the number of
Fourteen in anno 1653, or 1654. as also an number of Muskets to Colonel
Aldred then Governor of Air, which Cannon, or a great many of them were taken
out by you of his Majesty's Castle of Dumbartoun, at the time and in manner
above-exprest; and likewise you did take Pay from the said Usurpers for a
Company of Foot under them and in their Service, thereby openly and clearly
making it appear what you did intend by all your more covered and private
machinations, plottings and treasonable actings against his Majesty's dearest
Father and himself. Likewise, to make it appear what intimacy and power you had
with the Usurper, you not only did term and call the actings of his Majesty's
Forces against you and the Usurpers, Rebellion; but also, you in anno 1654. did
take upon you Power to bring off such as were in that Service, and to give
Remissions therefore under your own Hand, particularly to John Mackdougal of
Dunolich, as the same under your Hand the said John will verify.

Twelvthly, The said Oliver Cromwell, that Monster of Men, vilest of Traitors,
most cruel Murderer, bloody Tyrant and Usurper, having reached, as he thought,
the end of all his Devilish plots, and Treasonable Machinations, by usurping
the Domination and Authority of his Majesty's three Kingdoms, and settling the
same, so far as in him lay, upon him and his Family; you conceiving the same so
fixed and riveted, that in humane probability it was not possible to be removed
or shaken, that you might avowedly reap the Fruits of your former more covered,
vile and damnable plottings, Contrivings and Actings for the said Archtyrant
and Traitor; you then pulled off, and laid aside the Mask of pretended Loyalty
and Religion, under which you had all along formerly lurked, thereby having
deceived and cheated a great many of his Majesty's good Subjects from their due
Allegiance and Loyalty, under your hypocritical fair pretenses of your
Affection and Zeal for Religion, Prince and Country, to the utter Ruin (if not
of Souls) of many of their Bodies, Estates and Fortunes, and did openly in Face
of the World, discover your self in your own Colors, appearing and acting
profestly and publicly in behalf of the said Usurper, against his Majesty's
Person and Authority; in so far as in the month of (...) 1650, the Usurper
Oliver, at least after the decease of the said Usurper, the succeeding Usurper,
his Son, being most treasonably and tyrannically proclaimed chief Magistrate and
sole protector of all his Majesty's Dominions and Territories thereto
belonging, at the Mercatcrosses of his Majesty's Cities of Edinburgh and
Dumbartoun, you having apparently, for such like Services done, or to be done,
received from the said Usurper Oliver, one Precept drawn upon the Exchequer of
Scotland for payment to you of 12000 l. sterling or thereabout, did with your
personal presence countenance and assist the said tyrannical and treasonable
Proclamation thereby, so far as in you lay, divesting his Majesty of his just
and Royal Interest and Right, and establishing the same on the Persons and
Families of the said Usurpers. Likewise, not long thereafter, the said Usurper,
the more to establish himself in his usurped Government, having called a
pretended Parliament, consisting of a pretended new coined House of Peers, and
certain persons of his Majesty's three Kingdoms, as a House of Commons to sit
in Westminster. You did procure your self elected Commissioner for the Shire of
Aberdeen, at least did accept of a Commission from them; albeit both by the
Nobility of your Birth, and your non residence within the said Shire, you was
in Law incapable to be so elected, at least ought and might have refused to
accept any Commission. Nevertheless, having voluntarily, and of your own
accord, embraced the said Charge and Employment; you thereupon took Journey,
and went to London, and most basely, perfidiously and treasonably, sit, voted,
and otherways acted in the said Usurpers pretended Parliament, by whom his
Majesty's Right and Interest was disclaimed and abjured, and the same owned
only in the said Usurpers Person, as a Member of the said pretended House of
Commons, to the high indignity and contempt of his Majesty's sacred person and
Authority, the utter Destruction of Monarchical Government, the Dishonor of
this Kingdom, and the great disgrace of your own Family and Posterity.

Thirteenthly, You the said Marquis, to make it further appear to the World,
that it was always your purpose and Intention to destroy his Majesty's
Authority and Government, and to oppose his Restoration to his Just Right and
Interest to his three Kingdoms, at a Provincial Assembly holden at Inverary, a
little after the Defeat of his Majesty's Army at Worcester, The Ministers
praying for his Majesty after the accustomed manner, you did most villainously
and treasonably rebuke them, saying that they were but Fools to pray for a
malignant and wicked King, whom God had rejected, and would never restore him
again; or some such like words to that purpose. And also, you being at London
in the time of the Usurper Oliver, you said in presence of diverse persons of
Quality, That you wondered how People could be so mad as to call home a Family
whom God had rejected, or such words to that purpose: Likewise after your home
coming to Scotland you openly in a public Meeting, at James Masterton's in
Nidderies Wind, in presence of several Noblemen and Gentlemen, boasted, That ye
would own any thing you had done in these things bygone; and that if it were to
do, you would do it again; howbeit ye had known that all that had come would
have come: Thereby presumptuously taking upon you by outward success, to give
Judgment upon the hidden and secret Counsels, and determinations of Almighty
God, and thereby to alienat the affections, duties and allegiance of his
Majesty's good Subjects, and to harden and confirm others, such as are
otherways disposed in their wicked courses toward his Majestles Person and
Authority.

Lastly, That your monstrous and execrable Treason may appear to all the World,
it is of verity, that in the year 1648, at a private conference betwixt you,
Oliver Cromwell, and Colonel Ireton; the said Oliver complaining of the many
Difficulties that attend their Affairs, by reason of the diverse designs which
his Majesty had on foot from time to time against them, you the said Marquess
made answer, That their danger was great indeed, in regard, that if any of
these designs should take effect, they were all ruined; and thereupon gave your
positive Advice, that they should proceed to the questioning of the King for
his Life; assuring them that they could never be safe until they had taken away
his Majesty's life; at least, you did know of the horrible and treasonable
design of murdering his said Majesty, and did most treasonably conceal, and
not reveal the same, until after the said horrid deed was committed, and so
past prevention or remedy. At which time, in Anno 1649, publicly in face of
the pretended Parliament then sitting, you told, that the Usurper Cromwell had
told you, That England and Scotland would never be at peace, while the King
were put to death: By all which particulars respectively, above rehearsed, it
is clearly evinced, that you were and are Author, Contriver, Deviser,
Consulter, Adviser, or art and part of all the foresaid crimes of Treason, and
other above libelled, or one other of them in manner above declared; and
thereby has incurred the pains and punishments of high Treason, and others
contained in the Laws and Acts of Parliament above written: which ought and
should be inflicted upon you with all Rigor, in example to others in all time
coming.

31 January 1661.
ORdered, That the abovewritten Dittary be given to the Marquess of Argile, by
a Herald or Pursevant, and he to answer thereto, upon the eleventh Day of
February next to come.



Edinburgh, At the Parliament House, February 13. 1661.
THe Marquess of Argyle (being accused of High Treason, at the instance of Sir
John Fletcher, his Majesty's Advocat for his Interest) was brought to the Bar:
His Lordship humbly desired but to speak a few words before read the
Indictment; assuring to speak nothing in the Cause it self. Whereupon he was
removed a little, and after some Debate, the House resolved that the said
Indictment should be first read. Then his Lordship desired that a Bill which he
had caused his Advocats give in to the Lords of the Articles, (desiring a
precognition, with many reasons urging the necessity of it) to which he had
received no answer, might be read before the said Indictment; which being
likewise refused, the said Indictment was first read; and after the reading
thereof, the Marquess (being put off his first thoughts) was compelled to this
extemporary Discourse following, as it was faithfully collected from several
Hands, who writ when his Lordship spoke.

May it please your Grace,
MY Lord Chancellor, Before I speak any thing, I shall humbly protest my words
may not be wrested, but that I may have Charity to be believed; and I shall
with God's assistance, speak truth from my heart.

I shall my Lord, resume Mephibosheths answer to David, (after a great
Rebellion, and himself evil reported of) says he, 2 Samuel 19.30. Yea, let him
take all, for as much as my Lord the King is come home again in peace into his
own house; So say I, since it has pleased God Almighty graciously to return his
Sacred Majesty to the Royal Exercise of his Government over these Nations, to
which he has undoubted Right, and was most unjustly and violently thrust
therefrom by the late tyrannizing Usurpers.

It is, my Lord, exceeding matter of joy to us all, that that Iron-yoke of
Usurpation (under which we have these many years sadly groaned) is now broke,
and with much freedom this High and Honorable Court of Parliament are meeting
together, under the refreshing warm Beams of his Majesty's Royal Government,
(so much longed for by our almost starved expectations;) and I do earnestly
wish his Royal Presence upon his Royal Throne amongst us; but since at this
time that great happiness cannot probably be expected, I am glad that his
Majesty's Prudence has singled out such a qualified and worthy person as my
Lord Commissioner his Grace to represent himself, whose unspotted Loyalty to
his Majesty we can all witness.

I cannot, my Lord, but acknowledge, that these two grand Mereies, which
comfortably attends my present condition; one is, The high thoughts I
deservedly entertain of that transcendent and Princely clemency wherewith his
Sacred Majesty is so admirably delighted, abundantly evidenced by many noted
and signal testimonies in all the steps of his Majesty's carriage; as those
most gracious Letters, Declarations, and that free and most ample Act of
Indemnity, granted to all his Majesty's Subjects, (excepting some of the
immediate Murderers of his Royal Father) to eradicate any timorous Jealousies of
his Majesty's gracious Pardon (which might happily arise by serious reflectings)
convincing them forceably of their own miscarriages in these unhappy times of
distraction: The effects, my Lord, of which Princely deportment, I am
confidently hopeful, his Majesty has experimentally, and shall find, prove one
effectual Cement to concilliate the most antimonarchick and disaffected persons
[excepting some of those barbarous Phanaticks] in all his Majesty's Dominions,
most willingly to the subjection of his Majesty's Royal Scepter; and with a
perfect hatred abominate all disloyal Practices in themselves or others, in all
time coming.

The second is, my Lord, When I consider that my Judges are not such as we had
of late, [Strangers,] but my own Countrymen; both which jointly [together with
the real sense and solid convictions I have of my innocence of these calumnies
most unjustly charged upon me] encourages my hopes the rather, to expect such
dealing, as will most sympathize with that clement humor [to which his Sacred
Majesty has such a natural propensity] and such equal administration of
Justice [void of all byassing prejudices] as will be most suitable to such a
high and honorable Meeting.

I shall therefore, my Lord, desire to use Paul's answer for himself, being
accused of his Countrymen, may not be mistaken, he having a learned Orator
Tertullus accusing him, Acts 24.14, 15, 16. as I have my Lord Advocat; Paul's
was Heresy, mine of another nature; but I must say with him, That the things
they allege against me cannot be proved; but this I confess, in the way
allowed by solemn Oaths and Covenants, I have served God, my King, and Country
[as he said] which they themselves also allow.

I shall, my Lord, remember [not with repining, but for information] my hard
usage, never having had my Hearing, nor allowance of Pen, Ink, nor Paper, nor
the comfort of seeing my Friends freely, until I received this Summons, which
was in effect a Load above a Burden; Enemies, both Scots and English, out of
Malice calumniating me for all the same things, excepting what relates to his
Majesty's most Royal Father of ever glorious memory.

Therefore, my Lord, I beg charity and patient hearing, not doubting but the
wisdom and goodness of the Parliament will be so favorable, and not as the
inconsiderate multitude [as a learned and able man Sir Walter Raleighs Preface
to to the History of the World.
writes, says he,] As we see in experience, That Dogs they always bark at them
they know not; and that it is their nature, to accompany one another in those
clamours; so it is with the inconsiderate multitude, who wanting that virtue
which we call honesty in all men; and that special gift of God [which we call
charity in Christian men] condemn without hearing, and wound without offense
given, led thereunto by uncertain report only; which his Majesty King James
only acknowledges to be the Father of Lies: I shall not desire to be in the
least mistaken by any that hear me: But sure I am, it is pertinently applicable
to my case.

I entreat your Lordship likewise to consider the words of another notable man,
Speed in his History.
who says, As the tongues of Parasites are ill Balances to weigh the Virtues
of Princes and great Men, so neither should theirs, nor other men's blemishes be
looked upon as they are drawn with the deformed Pencil of Envy or Rancour;
which do always attend Eminency, whether in place or virtue. I shall not, my
Lord, be so presumptuous as to arrogate any thing to my self in this, only I
want not the two Companions; for I am but a weak man, subject to many failings
and infirmities, [whereof I do not purge my self] for as we must confess to God
Almighty, Psalm. 130.3. if he should mark iniquity, who can stand? Neither shall
I say, That there cannot a Hole be discovered [as the Proverb is] in my Coat;
and it cannot but be so with any, specially such as have labored in such times
business; but I bless the Lord, that in these things which have been, and are
here cast upon me, I am able to make the falsehood and misconstruction of them
palpably appear.

My Lord, before I mention any thing in particular, I must show this honorable
Meeting of Parliament, and all that hear me, [who doubltess have various
apprehensions of my being present in this condition,] that I am here rather as
my misfortune, nor my injury; wherein I desire to explain the difference, as
Plato and Aristotle does very well; calling injuries such things as are done
purposely with a wicked mind; and misfortunes, such things as are done with a
good mind, though the events prove bad, yet we could not foresee them.

So, My Lord, I shall take God to record (who must judge me one day) upon my
Conscience, That what I did, flowed not from any injurious principle to any,
though I acknowledge the events were not still so succesfull (which was my
misfortune) indeed; but it has been my Lot often in these times, wherein I and
many others have been inevitably involved, to be by the malicious tongues of my
calumniating enemies, misconstructed for the worst; yea, even in many things
that the Lord was pleased to make succesfull: for the truth of this, I may, I
hope, safely appeal to many in this Honorable House, who can abundantly
witness my faithful and Loyal Endeavors for both my King and Native Country:
whereof I should be very sparing to be an Herald my self, were not the
contrary so impudently affirmed. There are five main calumnies that I desire,
my Lord, to satisfy all that hear me a little in; to the end that the rest of
less moment may be likewise in its own due time heard afterward abstract more
from personal prejudice.

The first Calumny is, my Lord, concerning that horrid and unparrallel'd Murder
of his late Royal Majesty of eternally blessed Memory; I do here publicly
declare, that I neither desire, nor deserve the least countenance or favor, if
I was either accessory to it, or on the counsel or knowledge of it; which to
make clearly appear, is under Oath of the Parliament Books 1649, whereof I was
the first starter my self, to the intent we might both vindicate ourselves, and
endeavor a discovery, if any amongst us had any accession to that horrid and
Villainous Crime; as also in my latter Will which I made going to England, in
anno 1655 or 1656, fearing what possibly might hereafter be obtruded by any
upon me or my Family upon that account, I set it down to clear my posterity,
That I was altogether free of that detestable and execrable Crime, or of any
prejudice to his Majesty, in either person or Government: I left this with a
very worthy Gentleman, I believe well known to your Lordship, and never saw it
since, so your Lordship may be pleased if you will to call for it and try the
truth; whatsoever other thing maybe in it, I hope, my Lord, this opportunity is
a mercy to me, to have that vile calumny amongst many others against me to be
cleared.

And, my Lord, to make this particular yet more evident, I did still, and do
positively assert, that I never saw that monstrous Usurper, Oliver Cromwell, in
the face, nor ever had the least correspondence with him, or any of that
Sectarian Army, until the Commands of the Committee of Estates sent me, with
some other Noblemen and Gentlemen to the Border, in anno 1648, to stop his
march into Scotland after those who retired from Preston fight; neither after
he left the Border in the year 1648, did I ever correspond with him, or any of
that Sectarian Army, so unsatisfied was I with their way, after the wicked and
sinistrous courses he and they were upon afforded evident presumptions for us
to apprehend, that he and they intended prejudice to his Royal Majesty; only
one letter I received from Sir Atrhur Hesilrig, to which I returned answer,
That he might spare his pains in writing to me, for I blessed the Lord who
taught me by his Word, To fear God and honor the King, and not to meddle with
them that were given to change; though Sir Arthur be now dead, yet he
acknowledged to several in the Tower, that he still had my Letter: and when I
was there, I often desired he might be posed and examined about it; which I can
presently instruct. And during, my Lord, my being in England neither in London
nor Newcastle in anno 1647. There was not any thing so much as mentioned
concerning his late Majesty's person; all that ever I heard of, was in public
Parliament 1647. The Commissioners papers at London, and the Committee Books at
Newcastle will clear this fully.

The second calumny is anent the inhumane Murder of Duke James Hamilton: My
Lord, it is well known my great respect to that truly Noble and Worthy person,
whereof (upon all occasions) I gave ample testimonies, and can yet convince any
of his friends with the reality of it; and evidenced my true sorrow for the
wicked cruelty committed upon him; But indeed I cannot deny I refused to
complement Cromwell on his behalf, he having, my Lord, been immediately
preceding, so instrumental, and so very active in that most horrid and
lamentable Murder of his late Sacred Majesty, and if I had done otherwise,
undoubtedly it had been a more black Article in that Lybel now read, than any
that is in it.

The third Calumny is, That which breeds a great part of these groundless
Clamours (tho it be not in the Indictment) is my Lord Marquis of Huntly's
death; wherein I may truly say, I was as earnest to preserve him, as possibly I
could, (which is very well known to many in this Honorable House) and my not
prevailing, may sufficiently evidence I had not so great a stroke nor power in
the Parliament as is lybelled; And, my Lord, for his Estate, I had nothing in
that, but for my own absolutely necessary relief, and was ever most willing to
part with any interest I had therein, getting his Friends (who professed much
Zeal for the standing of the Family] engaged for warrandise to me, of any
portion that should happen to fall my satisfaction; and to evidence that I was
no means to harm the Family, I stood with my Right betwixt all Fines and
Forefeitures of Bonds, and accounted for any thing I could receive; and to
manifest yet further, that the burden of that Family was not from any extrinsick
cause to themselves, I have under the old Marquis his own hand, and his Sons,
George Lord Gordon, who was a very worthy young Nobleman, the just Inventory of
their Debts, amounting to about one million of Merks, in anno 1640. It would I
fear, my Lord, consume too much of the Parliaments precious time, to hear many
other circumstances to make this particular more clear, which I shall at this
time forbear.

The fourth Calumny is, the death of the Marquis of Montrose; There are many in
this House, my Lord, who know very well I refused to meddle either in the
matter or manner of it; and so far were we from having any particular Quarrels
at one another, that in anno 1645, he and I were fully agreed upon Articles and
Conditions contained in a Treaty past betwixt us; the Gentleman is yet alive
who carried the messages both by Word and Writing betwixt us; and it was
neither his fault nor mine that the business did not end at that time, which is
kown to all, proved very obnoxious to the Kingdom thereafter.

The fifth Calumny is concerning my dealing with the English after Worcester
fight; It is well known, my Lord, to many, that my self, and the Gentlemen of
Argyleshire, my Kinsmen, Vassals and Tennents, endeavored cordially to engage
all their Neighbors about them on all hands, against the English, which they
did not prevail in, but was most unhappily made known to the English Commanders
for the time; which they cau^ed immediately publish, as a very notable
Discovery, in their news Books; which occasioned two sad disadvantages to us:
for they not only crushed our Attempts in the infancy, but also determined the
severer Resolutions against us; whereby two strong Regiments of Foot, Overtouns
and Reads, and very near the number of one of Horse, under the Command of one
Blackamour, were sent to Argyle, and when Dean came there, it pleased God to
visit me with a great distemper of sickness, as Doctor Cunninghame, and many
others who were with me, can witness, what my Lord, I was pressed to when I was
violently in their hands, may be instructed by the paper it self, written by
Deans man's own hand yet extant to show, which I did abolutely refuse upon all
the hazard of the uttermost of their malice; as also what I was necessitate to
do, is likewise ready to be shown, whereby I was still continued their Prisoner
upon demand.

I shall, my Lord, add one Reason more to clear this (besides many other
weighty public Reasons and Considerations, which I shall forbear to mention at
this time, it being more natural to bring them in by way of Defenses afterward)
my own Interest, and of all Noblemen and Superiors in Scotland. It may be
rationally presumed, that I had been a very senseless fool, if ever I had been
for promoting such an Authority or interest over me, as levelled all, and was
so totally destructive to all that differenced my self and other Noblemen, from
their own Vassals, (which many says I was too earnest in) Yea, it being
absurdly derogative to all true Nobility; and my Ancestors and I (as is said in
that Libel) having had so many Titles of Honor, Dignity, and eminent places of
Trust conferred upon us by his Majesty's Royal Predecessors and himself, (all
for our constant Loyalty and adherence to the Crown at all occasions (as the
Records and Histories of this ancient Kingdom holds forth, besides the
Narratives of all our Grants) and asserting the just privileges thereof
against all opposers) I did, my Lord, ever (even when the English were at the
intolerable height of Usurpation) declare my true abhorrence to a
Commonwealth Government, which was well known to them all. I was not indeed,
my Lord, very dissatisfied when there was Rumors spread abroad of Cromwels
being made a King, as some here present can witness: For I told them it was a
most probable way for his Majesty; and the more it were encouraged, would tend
the more to Cromwell, and their deformed Commonwealths Governments Ruin, and
promote his Majesty's just interest the more. My Lord, I shall not much blame
my Lord Advocat for doing his endeavor [it being an essential part of his
Function to accuse] but I must say, That it is very hard measure, that so able
a man has taken near as many Months, in taking pains to prompt as many Enemies
as his persuasions could possibly invite, to vent out the highest notes of
their malice, and laying out search by them for, and collecting all the bad
Reports, or rather, to give them their genuine term, I may call them a confused
Mass of the common Clashes of the Country, thereby to devise misconstructions
of all the public actings, of both Parliaments and Comittees, during the late
troubles, and with strange and remote inferences to adduce all those to the
channel of my particular actings; he has taken, I say, my Lord, as many Months,
as I have had days, to answer them, being an exceeding disadvantage. But my
Lord, that is not all, I am likewise extremely troubled, that he labors in that
Libel all along to draw an obscure vail of perpetual oblivion over all my good
services; and specially my faithful and loyal endeavors in restoring of his
Sacred Majesty to the Crown of this his most Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and
the exercise of his Majesty's Royal Authority therein, with my cordial
endeavors for his Majesty's Restitution to the rest of his Dominions also,
which his Majesty both knows, and has been pleased often to acknowledge it to
have been good service; yea, and many present in this Honorable House knows,
that I extended both my Zeal and Affection to the utmost of my Power for his
Majesty's Service in that particular, which I willingly acknowledge nothing, my
Lord, but my duty, whereunto I was tied both by natural, civil, and Christian
Bands to my Sovereign, and specially such a King of whom I may say well [as I
have often affirmed] That he is a King in whom the Lord has been pleased to
take such pleasure, as to possess his Majesty with so many superlative degrees
of Excellency, that will certainly exalt his Majesty's Fame both in our Age,
and to subsequent Posterity, above all the Monarchs in the World; so, that my
Lord, we may consequently discover a high Demonstration of the Lords singular
Kindness, and special providential care for us his Majesty's Subjects, in
preserving such a rich Blessing as his Sacred Majesty (in whom the Happiness of
these Nations is wrapped up) under the safe Wings of his Divine Protection, I may
say, Psalm: 56.2.
even when the extravagant malice of men would have swallowed him up.

After my Lord had ended this discourse (being heard by all very attentively,
without any Interruptions) Thus the Lord Advocate spoke to my Lord Chancellor.
My Lord, what can the Marquess of Argyle say to the opposition at Stirling, in
anno 1648. The Marquess replied, That he found my Lord Advocat endeavored to
bring him to debate the particulars [which he hoped should be cleared at
another more convenient time) and waved answering the thing it self, but
insisted thus: My Lord Chancellor, I have [informative only] hinted a little at
the main things which I am often charged with, my Memory cannot fully reach
all, neither will time permit to circumstantiat these particulars, which I have
only touched in the general; nor is it my purpose at present to fall on the
debate of any of that Libel [not having yet consulted the Process] by reason
these Advocats your Lordship was pleased to allow me, have not yet all
embraced, and the excuses of my ordinary Advocats [in whom I had confidence]
being admitted as relevant. And their Gentlemen, that has been pleased [in
obedience to your Lordships Command] to come here with me, not being much
acquainted with matters of this weight, and not having embraced till within
these two or three days: So that they are strangers altogether to my case] I
shall therefore my Lord, humbly desire, that a competent time may be allowed
me, that I my prepare my Defenses, and I shall [God willing] abundantly clear
every particular in that Libel. And also my Lord, I humbly desire, that these
other Advocats, who were ordained by your Lordships to assist me [and after the
Honorable Lords of Articles had heard them, rejected their excuses] may be now
reordained to consult and appear for me.

The Marquess his Advocates entered a Protestation, that what should happen to
escape them in pleading [either by word or Writ] for the Life, Honor, and
Estate of the said Noble Marquess, their Client might not thereafter be
obtruded to them as Treasonable, whereupon they took instruments.

The Marquess assured my Lord Chancellor, That he knew not of any such
Protestation to be presented, and that it flowed simply of themselves;
whereupon my Lord Chancellor desired the Marquess and his Advocats to remove,
till the House should consider both of my Lords desire, and the Advocats
Protestation.

The Marquess and his Advocats being removed. The House [after some small
debate] resolved, as to my Lord Marquess desires, his Lordship should have till
the 26 of February to give in his Defenses in Writ, and ordained Mr. Andrew Ker
to be one of his Advocats.

As to the Advocats Protestation, the House resolved, That they could not be
allowed to speak Treason either by word or Writ but upon their peril, only
allowed them in the general, as much as in such cases was indulged to any. The
Marquess and his Advocats being called in, my Lord Chancellor intimated the
foresaid Resolutions of the House, both in reference to my Lord Marquess, and
to the Advocats Protestation.

When my Lord Chancellor had done, the Marquess spoke as follows;

My Lord Chancellor,
THere is one thing that had almost escaped me, anent that opposition at
Stirling, 1948. That my Lord Advocate was speaking of, That it may not stick
with any of this honorable meeting, I shall ingenuously declare, that after
the Defeat at Prestoun, I was desired to come and meet with the Committee of
Estates (meaning those who were in the then Engagement) And being come with
some of my Friends to Stirling, fearing no harm, and suspecting nothing, I was
Invaded by Sir George Monro, where several of my Friends were killed, and my
self hardly escaped, which is all that can be said I acted in Arms as many here
knows.

My Lord, Not that I am any ways diffident; but I shall in due time clear every
particular of that Libel; Yet I am not a little troubled that some who have
heard the Calumnies therein; may let them have such an impression (being
asserted with such confidence) as to conceal a possibility, if not a
probability of their being true; I shall therefore desire so much Charity from
this honorable Meeting, that there be no hard thoughts entertained till I be
fully heard.

The Marquess therefore with the joint concurrence of his Advocates, humbly
desired, that the Bill (containing many pungent Reasons) for a precognition of
his Process, given to the Honorable Lords of Articles, might be read and
considered, in plene Parliament.

To which my Lord Chancellor replied, that it had been formerly refused at the
Articles, and that it would not be granted.

So his Lordship was carried back to the Castle.

Edinburh, March 5. 1661. At the Parliament House.
The Marquess of Argyle being called in, gave in a Bill containing several
weighty Reasons, desiring a continuation till the Meeting of Parliament to
Morrow. His Lordship being removed, after a long Debate, it was carried against
him by two or three Votes; and his Lordship being called in, my Lord Chancellor
told him it was refused, and ordered his Lordship to produce his Defenses,
whereupon he spoke as follows;

May it please your Grace,
MY Lord Chancellor, This Business is of very great concernment to me, and not
small in the preparative of it to the whole Nation; Yea, it may concern many of
your Lordships (who are sitting here) and (your Posterity;) And therefore I
desire to have your Grace (my Lord Commissioner) and the remanent Members of
this honorable Meeting, your patience to hear me a few words without prejudice
or misconstruction, which any thing I can say is often obnoxious to.

I shall my Lord begin with the Words of that Godly King, Jehosaphat that good
King of Judah, (after he was come back in peace to Jerusalem) in his
Instructions to his Judges, he desires them to take heed what they do, for they
judge not for Men, but for the LORD, who is with them in the Judgment.

My Lord, I shall speak another Word to many young Men, who were either not
Born, or so Young that it is impossible they could know the beginning of these
Businesses, which are contained in the Libel against me (being all that has
been done since the Year 1638,) so that they might have heard by report, what
was done, but not why, or upon what Grounds, and what some have Suffered, but
not what they have deserved. -- Therefore I desire your Lordships Charity,
until all the particulars and several Circumstances of every Particular be
heard, without which no Man can Judge rightly of any Action. For as it is well
observed by that incomparable Grotius, that Aristotle asserts, that there is
more certainty in the Mathematics than Morals, for as Grotius has it, the
Mathematics separates Forms from Matters, as betwixt Straight and Crooked
there is no midst, but in Morals, even the least Circumstances vary the Matter,
so that they are wont to have something betwixt them, with such Latitudes, that
the Access is near sometime to this, sometime to that Extreme; So that betwixt
that which ought to be done, and that which ought not to be done, is
interposed, that which may be done, but is nearer now to this, than to the
other Extremity, or part, whence ambiguity often arises? The particular
Circumstances are so obvious to every understanding Man, that I need only to
mention them.

Polybius my Lord makes much of his History depend upon these three, Concilia,
Causa, et eventus; and there are likewise other three, Tempus, Locus, et
Personae, Counsels, Causes, Events, Time, Place, Persons.
The change whereof makes that which is lawful duty, unlawful, and on the
contrary, so likewise in speaking or repeating words, the adding or paring from
them, will quite alter the sense and meaning; as also in writing, the placing
of the Comma's or Points, will change the sentence to a quite other purpose
than it was intended.

Maxim, which I do not mention as always undeniable; but when there is no
lawful Magistrate exercising power and authority in a Nation, but an invading
Usurper in possession, esteeming former Laws, Crimes; In such a case I say the
safety of the people is the Supreme Law.

Maxim, which is not questioned by any, and it is, Necessity has no Law; for
even the Moral Law of God yields to it, and Christ's Disciples in David's
example: For this Seneca says, Necessity (the defense of humane imbecility)
breaks every Law; Nam necessitas legum irridet vincula, Necessity scorns the
fetters of Laws: So he that answers that Libel, The long Parliament revived,
speaking of this last Parliament (which his Majesty calls, a blessed healing
Parliament,) he says, the necessity to have it, may dispense with some
formalities: so Ravenella (so much esteemed in matters of Scripture) after he
has divided necessity in absolute and hypothetick, makes that of submitting to
Powers of absolute necessity: Josephus also, my Lord, that famous Historian,
when he mentioned David's speech to his Children, after he had made Solomon
(being but younger brother) King, he exhorts them to unity among themselves,
and submission to him and his Authority; for if it should please God to bring a
foreign sword amongst you you must submit to them, much more then to him who
is your brother, and one of your own Nation.

Maxim, (my Lord) Inter arma silent leges; and it is well known, that diverse
retours and other things in Scotland, were done in consideration of times of
Peace, and times of War.

Maxim, Ex duobus malis minimum eligendum est cum unum eorum nequeunt evitari,
says Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian, cum diversa mala inter se comparantur
minimum eorum locum boni occupat.

Maxim, No man's intention must be judged by the event of any Action, there
being oftentimes so wide a difference betwixt the condition of a Work, and the
intention of the Worker.

Maxim, It cannot be esteemed Virtue, to abstain from Vice; but where it is in
our power to commit the Vice, and we meet with a Temptation.

As I have named shortly some few Maxims, my Lord, I shall humbly tender some
weighty Considerations to your Lordships thoughts:

Israel.

the subjects actions, when the lawful Magistrate is in the Nation, and when he
is put from it, and so forced to leave the people to the prevalent power of a
Foreign Sword, and the Invader in possession of Authority.









ad lucrum captandum, and those done ad damnum evitandum; that is to say,
Actions to procure Benefit, and Actions to shun detriment.



England, even to all (except to some of the immediate Murderers of his Royal
Father) that it cannot be doubted, that the same will be wanting to his People
in Scotland, who suffered by them (whom his Majesty has graciously pardoned)
even for their dutiful Service, and affection to his Majesty.

Therefore without thought of any prejudice to the Parliament, or this
Honorable Meeting, I must make use of my Lord Chancellor of England his words,
though in another case, saying, There cannot too much evil befall those who do
the best they can to corrupt his Majesty's good Nature, and to extinguish his
Clemency: For his Majesty's self declared his Natural Inclination to Clemency,
in his Speech to both his Houses of Parliament in England, whom he has (with
all his people) conjured, desired, and commanded, to abolish all Notes of
Discord, Separations, and difference of Parties, and to lay aside all other
Animosities, and the memory of past Provocations, and to return to a perfect
Unity amongst themselves under his Majesty's Protection; which is hoped all
your Lordships will concur in, having so worthy a Pattern to follow: And as
these are his Majesty's Inclinations expressed, so it is suitable to the Arms he
bears as King of Scotland, which is the Lion, whose Motto is known to all.

-- Nobilis est ir a Leonis
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.
Which is to say, To vanquish and subdue the Proud, and spare such as are
submissive; of the which Number I am one: And for that effect, in all Humility,
present this humble Submission to his Majesty, and your Grace, my Lord
Commissioner in his Majesty's Name.


