Hear the Church: OR, AN APPEAL TO THE Mother of us All. BEING AN EPISTLE TO
All the Baptized Believers in England; exhorting them to Stedfastness in the
Truth, according to the SCRIPTURES. TOGETHER With some farther Considerations
of seven Queries, sent to the Baptized Believers in Lincolnshire, concerning
the Judge of Controversies in Matters of Religion. In Three PARTS. By THOMAS
GRANTHAM.

And they shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned into
Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 4. But I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture
of Truth, and there is none that holds with me in these things but Michael
your Prince, Dan. 10. 21. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1687.

TO THE READER.
THere is nothing, which Men sincerely Religious, do more heartily desire, than
that all Men were so too; and because they are fully satisfied that they are in
that very Way which most truly leads to Life, they therefore strive that all
may know it and walk in it.

And truly this is my Case, my Hearts Desire and Prayer to God for all Men is,
that they may be saved. And as I believe it has pleased God to show me the
Path of Life, I cannot but do my best to show it to others; for as some by
their Labors, have been helpful to me, so I hope mine may be helpful to others.

When I call the Primitive Christian Church at Jerusalem, the Mother of us All,
I allude to that Place, Gal. 4. 26. Interpreters, (so far as I have observed)
take Jerusalem there, for the Gospel Catholic Church; now this Church had its
Beginning, and this Beginning was at Jerusalem; and because in the Progress of
Christianity in the World, for near one thousand seven hundred years, there has
abundance of Errors crept in, and much truth in the ancient Simplicity of it
rejected, I think it highly rational, that (all prejudice being laid apart) Men
should seek with the greatest diligence, for their greatest Security, into the
State of Christ's Gospel Church, as by himself established; for whatsoever has
not been planted by our Heavenly Father, is nigh to its being rooted up.

God Almighty direct us all, is the hearty Prayer of thy Friend,

Thomas Grantham.
Let the Reader further take notice, that these Papers were originally written
upon several occasions; otherwise some things repeated, would have been
otherwise. Let thy discretion bear with this.



Hear the Church.
The First PART.
Containing, by way of Preface, a particular consideration of the State of the
first Christian Church at Jerusalem, and the Reasonableness of appealing to
Her, as The Mother of us All.

IT is evident to all such as have conversed with the Histories of the Ages,
which have been since the coming of our Lord, to make known and establish all
things in the Kingdom of Grace, in the first Church at Jerusalem; that there
has been great striving among the Christian Churches for some Honor and
Prerogative above the rest. Sometimes the Church at Alexandria, sometimes the
Church at Constantinople, and especially the Church at Rome, pressing very hard
for Precedence of Honor, and Pre-eminence of Power; few minding the poor
afflicted Church at Jerusalem, the true Mother of all true Christian Churches;
when yet the Holy Ghost has left a high Commendation upon those who do follow
Her, both in the effectual Reception of the Gospel, not as the Word of such or
such a man, (though preached by Apostles) but as it is in truth the Word of
God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. and also (not in persecuting, but) in suffering like
things of their Contrymen, as they did of the Jews. And we desire, and hope
that there may be yet, all due consideration had by all Christians in these
days, of the Heavenly Frame and Holy Walking of that MOTHER CHURCH.

Unto whom was committed, in the first place, the Principles of the Oracles of
God; unto whom our dearest Lord was a personal Minister, and did actually
Dispense to, and Communicate with them, in the Divine Mysteries or Ordinances
of the Christian Religion; upon whom was poured the most excellent Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Spirit of Promise. It was this Church, from whom (according
to the Prophets) the Law of Christ should first go forth, Isa. 2. 3. Mich. 4.
1, 2. Here was the House of the Lord established in the top of the Mountains,
and exalted above the Hills, that all Nations might flow unto it: an Honor not
given to other Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 36. What, came the Word of God out from
you? No, this was the Glory of another, For out of Zion shall go forth the Law,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Which by special Order from Christ was
fulfilled, when he gave Commandment to his Apostles, that Repentance and
Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name, in all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. And here it was that the Spirit gave utterance unto the
Apostles, to preach in all Languages, that then some of all Nations (who were
at that very time at Jerusalem) might hear from thence the joyful Sound of the
Gospel, and consequently, keep the same Holy Doctrine in all Ages and Nations,
as it was there delivered, and confirmed by diverse Signs and Miracles, and
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Math. 28. 19, 20. Heb. 2. 4. Act. 2.

Forasmuch then, as all Churches, in all Ages and Nations, are indispensibly
bound to follow this Church, in the Observation of all things whatsoever Christ
commanded them; we hold our selves concerned, at this time, to declare our
unfeigned Assent unto the Truth of the Gospel, as it was here delivered; and
our humble Resolution to keep the Ordinances of Christ, as they were here
practiced (not doubting but the same was received in all Churches at the first)
being confident of this very thing, that a safer way cannot be found for the
security of our Souls, from the manifold Errors, which since the Plantation of
this Church, have been obtruded upon the Consciences of Men, in most parts of
the Christian Nations.

To the intent then that we may avoid Error, and cleave to Truth, we shall
consider particularly (though very briefly) the Frame of this Heavenly
Building, in respect of her Foundation, her Form of Government, and the Way of
her Worship, in order to her Perfection. And First,

We find her Foundation-Principles to consist in six particulars, called, the
beginning of the Word of Christ, which Articles are therefore called the
Foundation, because of the Relation they have to Christ, who is a Foundation to
his Church, as held forth in his own Doctrine, and other Foundations than
Christ so held forth, can no man lay.

Of such importance are these Sacred Principles, that we find the Ancient
Christians used to call them the Christian Catechism. Chrysostoms, Testimony is
this; That all these are fundamental Articles; that is, that we ought to repent
from dead Works, to be baptized into the Faith of Christ, and be made worthy of
the Gift of the Spirit, who is given by imposition of Hands; and we are to be
taught the Mysteries of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment. This Catechism,
says he, is perfect. And indeed in the whole New Testament, we meet not with
such an excellent Epitome of the Christian Doctrine as in this place, which was
written to this Mother Church.

It Is true, we have some mention of a Form of Doctrine delivered to the
believing Romans: And Timothy is commanded to hold fast the Form of sound
Words, which he had heard of St. Paul; Christ is said to be the Apostle and
High Priest of our Profession, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we are
willed to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. But none of these
places do show us, as the Text under consideration, what this Form of Doctrine,
this Form of sound Words, this Profession, and this Faith was, in respect of
the Composition, and Foundamentality of them; nor can there any thing be
assigned, that is so properly the Analogy or Rule of Faith, as these Principles
of Catechism.

Happy had it been, if all Christian Churches had held fast this Catechism,
though no more had ever been composed; Unity in the Truth would have been
better maintained by this one, than by so many as are now extant. And sure this
being of Divine Composure and Authority, the Principles of the Oracles of God,
the Beginning of the Word of Christ, must needs outweigh all others, being but
of Human Composition. To begin with the first Principle of this Church, let us
consider.

1. Repentance from Dead Works.
We are first to consider why Repentance is put in the first place, even before
Faith; sure it is because no unrepenting Sinner can have the Faith of
Justification; therefore this Principle of the Christian Faith must follow
Repentance. There is indeed a Faith (which we may call the Faith of Mankind) to
believe there is a God, that will both punish Sinners, and reward the
Righteous, and this Faith must needs precede Repentance, Heb. 11. 6.

This Repentance, as it was a Principle of this Mother Church, comprehends
three things, a true Sense of Sin, in the exceeding sinfulness of it; in which
respect it is said, They were pricked at the heart, and cried out, or said, Men
and Brethren, what shall we do? Act. 2. 37. which is accompanied with Godly
Sorrow, and with Amendment of Life, without which, Repentance is rather to be
repented of, than to be esteemed any part of the Foundation of Christian
Religion; Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted
out. Act. 3. 19. Without which Repentance, there is no Remission. Luke 13. 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all perish, says our Savior. How blessed had it
been, if this Doctrine had been preached, and Men brought to the Obedience of
it, before they had been admitted to Membership in the Church of Christ? The
not keeping to this Rule, has filled all National Churches with unregenerate,
unconverted Persons, to the Scandal of the Christian Religion.

2. Of Faith toward God in this Mother Church.
The Excellency of the Faith of this Mother Church, appeared in these things:
That they gladly received the Word of the Gospel of their Salvation. Act. 2.
40. To the illumination of their Souls, and the expelling the darkness of
Error and Unbelief; by this Faith they had their Hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, and their Confidence in God had a great Recompense of Reward, in
the Love and Expectation of which, they willingly endured a great Fight of
Afflictions, whilst they were made a Gazing-stock, both by Reproaches, and
suffering the spoiling of their Goods with joyfulness; and were willingly
Companions with, and charitably compassionate toward, those that were in Bonds
for Righteousness sake, working the Work of God, ministering to the Saints,
laboring in Love: all which are Arguments of true and lively Faith. Heb. 6.
10, 11. Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34, 35.

He that reads and considers this Excellent Epistle, written to this
Mother Church, wherein we may be sure no new Doctrine is delivered but the same
corroborated which they had received, shall find that the true Knowledge and
Belief of Christ was amongst them, in respect of his Divinity, Chap. 1. in
respect of his Humanity. Chap. 2. in respect of Priestly Office and Sacrifice,
with all other Offices to which he was appointed of God, in the residue of the
Epistle, of which we cannot now speak particularly.

3. Of the Doctrine of Baptism in this Church.
The Lord Christ had fully taught the Guides of this Mother Church the Doctrine
of Baptism both by Word and Example; and thereby had informed them of a
threefold Baptism. The first delivered by Precept, himself making the People
Disciples, by teaching them to repent and believe the Gospel, and then
appointing his Disciples to dip them in the River, in which respect it is said
that Jesus made and dipped (or Baptized) more Disciples than John, Mat. 4. 17.
John 4. 1. John 3. 22. His own example being an unquestionable Rule for the
manner of Baptizing, he being Dipped of John into Jordan, as the Greek has it,
Mark 1. 9. and then coming up out of the Water. And of this whole Church it is
said, their hearts were sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and their Bodies
washed with pure water. For Baptismal Water is therefore purer, because it is
Sanctified for our Religious use, both by the Person of Christ, and by the Word
of God. And of this Church, was first required, that every one of them should
repent, and then be Baptized; and of them it is also said, that they that
gladly received the Word preached by St. Peter, were baptized, Acts 2. 38, 40.

They were also instructed concerning the Baptism of the Holy Spirit; it being
the Promise of the Father made to all the called of the Lord, and was
particularly applied to them, and poured upon them in the way of Faith and
Obedience.

To be willing to be Baptized with Afflictions for Christ and the Gospels-sake,
they were also taught by our blessed Savior in his Discourse with some of his
Disciples, and by his own Sufferings, Luke 12. 30. of which they were also
partakers, Heb. 10. 32. as also all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must
expect the same. And it would be considered by what Rule any man can take upon
him to make Baptism the first Principle, seeing Christ himself has made it the
third Principle? and by what Rule any man can call Sprinkling Baptizing? Dare
they speak as they act? that is, dare they say, I sprinkle thee in the Name of
the Father? etc. Would not their Conscience fly in their Face if they should
so speak? and yet behold, they prevaricate in action, and lie in expression in
that which they call their Baptism; God will surely send the proudest
prevaricators in this case a Quo warranto for their presumptuous dealing herein.

Of the Laying on of Hands in this Church.
There are two great Blessings belong to all true Christians, Remission of sin,
and the Gift of the Holy Spirit; the first is consigned to then in Sacred
Baptism, the second in Prayer, with the laying on of Hands, in which way this
Mother Church received this Blessing, as is evident from the ennumeration and
order of the Principles of her Catechism, and also from this Testimony, that
great Grace was upon them all, Acts 4. 33. as also in that it is expressly said,
that this Church continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, a Principle
whereof is Prayer with Laying on of Hands; and from this Church this Doctrine
and Holy Practice was carried by the Apostles to Samaria, Acts 14. for it is
not to be imagined they would there innovate, a practical principle, which had
not first been taught in the Church at Jerusalem. But God bearing witness to
this service of Prayer and Laying on of Hands at Samaria, with the same
Blessing of the Holy Spirit, fore-received at Jerusalem, confirms it as an
acceptable and needful Service for all Churches. And accordingly it was
received in the times next succeeding the Apostles days, as many witnesses
testify, amongst whom Tertullian thus, Dehinc manus imponitur, etc. After
Baptism the Hand is imposed by Blessing, calling and inviting the Holy Spirit.
Tunc ille Sanctissimus, etc. Then that most Holy Spirit most willingly descends
from the Father upon the Bodies which are cleansed [meaning in Baptism] and
blessed.

Of the Resurrection of the Dead taught and believed in this Mother Church.
In this Church it was where the Apostle gave witness with great Power of the
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, in whose Resurrection assurance, yea very full
assurance is given to all men, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead,
both of the Just and the Unjust. It was here that our Savior showed himself
alive after he had been dead, by infallible proofs, being seen of his Disciples
forty days, conversing with them of the things concerning his Church and
Kingdom. It was here that many dead Bodies of the Saints did arise, and come
out of their Graves, and went into Jerusalem, and appeared to many, after
Christ was risen; which was a full proof, that the Resurrection is of the same
numerical Bodies which are laid in the Graves, disrobed only of mortality and
all imperfections. And this is that Resurrection of the Dead here called a
Principle of Christ's Doctrine, and of the Foundation of this Mother Church.

Of the Eternal Judgment Believed by this Church.
It was to the Guides of this Church to whom our Savior first made known this
great privilege, that they should sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, at that time when he should sit upon the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 19.
28, who also is appointed of God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead, Act. 10.
42. which great Article is here recounted among the principles of Catechism,
Heb. 6. 2. and called the eternal Judgment, not only for that it is the last
Judgment, but because the effects of it shall be perpetual, the pains to be
imposed in this sentence of Judgment shall be of eternal duration to all wicked
men, who have contemned the Gospel of their Salvation, and judged themselves
unworthy of Eternal Life, even that Life which then shall be given to Eternity,
to all such as have held fast the beginning of their Confidence, and the hope
of this their rejoicing steadfast unto the end, Heb. 3. 14. As therefore the
Tares are gathered and burnt in the fire; so shall it be in the end of the
World. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of
his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do Iniquity: And shall cast
them into a Furnace of Fire; there shall be wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.
Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.
Who has ears to hear, let him hear. Matthew. 13. 40, 41, 42, 43. Lo the eternal
Judgment taught by Christ's own Mouth, let all men be admonished to prepare for
this Judgment, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Of the farther Order and manner of Worship used in this Mother Church.
This did especially consist in frequently assembling themselves together, to
teach and preach Jesus Christ, Acts 5. 42. or for the ministering of the Word of
God and Prayers, Acts 6. 4. In which we find no Liturgies, or Forms of Prayer
devised or imposed by the Apostles, but these Services were performed by the
aid of the Holy Spirit, which as they were given for the work of the Ministry,
so it is evident they have a remanency in the true Church till the whole be
perfected, Ephesians. 4. and it is this Blessed Spirit which helps the Church to
make* Intercession according to the will of God, Romans 8. 27. They were all very
frequent at the Lord's Table breaking the Sacred Bread, in remembrance of the
Lord Christ, giving thanks to God by him, Acts 2. 41, 47. nor needed they any
Mass Book or Common Prayer Book, to direct them in either: Christ's own*
Institution of his Holy Table, and the holy Prayer which he had taught his
Disciples, with other Heavenly Rules contained in the Holy Scriptures, was
abundantly sufficient, and are so still, to every Faithful Man of God [and
Minister whom God and his Church has called to that Work] to furnish him to
every good work.

It is also excceding plain that the Holy Table of the Lord is here called the
breaking of Bread. And therefore, though that Holy Bread and Wine be the Body
and Blood of Christ, yet they are these, in such sort, as they are also the
Bread of the Lord, and the Cup of the Lord, 1* Cor. 11* 27. And forasmuch as
the Apostle here, and in the next verse, does expressly call the same things, by
these different titles, the Body and the Blood: the Bread and the Cup: we must
of necessity take him to speak Figuratively in one of these, but in the latter,
to wit, Bread and the Cup, we have no Figure (save that the Wine in the Cup is
taken for the Cup, which is an usual form of speaking;) and therefore of
necessity these Words, Body and Blood, must be understood to be mystically,
spiritually, or figuratively in the Bread and Wine, and not the Bread and Wine
to be mystically, spiritually, or figuratively, in the Body and Blood of Christ.

It is also as certain that the whole Church ( this Mother Church, Acts 2. 42*)
did then receive both the Bread and Cup of the Lord, as that any one of them
did partake of both, the whole Service being expressed by a Synecdoche, a part
for the whole, which yet will better appear, in that this Ordinance ought to be
received by every Recipient, as he is a Member of Christ, not as he is a
Minister: It Is true, as I am a Minister I dispense this Mystery, but I receive
it as a Member, says St. Paul; For YE being many, are one Bread, and one Body.
For WE are all partakers of that one Bread.

It was unto this Church, or the Guides of it, unto whom our Blessed Savior
delivered that Mystical Doctrine, which offended so many of his Disciples, John
6. 53. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you, which yet cannot be rightly
understood of a corporal eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, because he
expressly says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me, has
everlasting life, Verse 47. And it is certain there were many that did truly
believe on him at that time, among whom S. Peter, and the rest that stood by
him, when so many forsook him. Now these things must all be true. 1. That none
of Christ's Disciples had Life in them at that time, but such as did eat the
Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ. 2. That S. Peter and the rest of the
Faithful, had eternal Life in them at that time* 3. That the Lord's Table was
not yet instituted; And therefore from these Premises it follows that our
Savior speaks not here of his Disciples now eating and drinking his Flesh and
Blood in the Lord's Table, and therefore cannot with any show of Truth or
Reason, be understood of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood carnally, or
corporally, but spiritually, even by believing in him.

Of the several Orders of Ministry in this Mother Church.
This Church was endowed with a threefold Order of Ministry; 1. Messengers or
Apostles, whose work was more especially to gather, constitute, and take care
for the Church in general. 2. Elders, whose work was especially to feed the
Flock committed to them in particular. 3. Deacons, whose work more especially
was to take care of the Poor, and to distribute the Alms of the Church to the
ends for which they were given, and consequently all Churches ought to maintain
this Order of Ministry, unless they can show that God has repealed this
Ministry, in part or in whole. It Is true, some things were pertinent to the
Apostles here, which were temporary and extraordinary, which Churches in
after-Ages are not to expect; but it is also true that some things were
ordinary, and fixed in that Office, for the continual use of the Church, and
therefore to remain for ever viz. Their care for all Churches, their travels
and labors to plant and settle new Churches, their withstanding false
Apostles, as themselves are true Apostles. Their authority to appease strife
and contention which may arise among particular Pastors and Churches, which
things being demonstrated in our Christianismus Primitivus (to which we refer)
we shall not here enlarge.

This part of the Apostolical Office, was conferred on many in the Apostles
days, who were also entitled the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 2. 1, etc. which
in English, is, Messenger of the Churches. Of this Order was James the Lord's
Brother in this Church at Jerusalem, and such were Timothy, Titus, Sylvanus,
Andronicus and Junia, with others. A Ministry as needful as any, both for the
unity of Churches, and the management of the most important affairs of the
Gospel, both in the Church and in the World, as experience may convince men if
nothing else will do it. And here it were easy to bring in the full Test of
the best Antiquity, but this Letter will not bear it.

Of the Discipline or Government of this Mother Church.
It was unto the Guides of this Cuhrch to whom our Blessed Lord first gave
Rules for the Government of his Church, Mat. 18. whence we learn that in cases
of personal Trespasses, and sins of Infirmity or Weakness, all possible Love,
Patience and Charity, should be exercised by one Christian toward another, and
the Offender, upon confession of his fault, forgiven, unto seventy times seven
Offenses: so abundantly should Charity appear among the Members of Christ. But
it was also in this Church where wilful Iniquity was punished with great
severity, as the Hypocrisy and Deceit of Ananias and Saphira; and the like
severity was showed against Simon Magus for his Pride and Covetousness, in
aspiring to a Ministry for which he was not qualified, and to which he was not
called by Heaven's Donation and due vocation from the Church, without which,
woeful experience has taught the Chrian Nations, that it is in vain by Money,
or for Money to make Men Ministers in the Christian Church.

In this Church was held the first and best of General Councils, for settling
the Churches in peace, when troubles did arise among themselves, by means of
false Teachers, etc. And because the Churches in all Ages and Nations, may have
perpetual need of such helps, it shall not be amiss that we consider the
Quality and Authority of such Assemblies, lest otherwise we be abused by
Usurpation and Tyranny: and first of the occasion of the calling this present
Assembly, Acts 15.

This Assembly was called upon the greatest occasion that ever was, namely, the
Repealing, or rather showing the Repeal, of many Divine Ordinances, and freeing
the Christian Church from their Obligation; because they were either fulfilled,
or too burdensome for his Church, as indeed St. Peter avers, they were so
heavy, that neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear them; And the
endeavors of this Council was successful to the removal of them, and the
settlement of the Churches in the Faith; and to the great increase of their
number, Asts 16. From whence we may safely conclude, that if Moses's Ceremonies
which were from Heaven, were a hindrance to Peace and growth in the Christian
Church, much more must all Ceremonies devised, and imposed by Human Force and
Power only, be an obstruction to it. Let us therefore stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and not be entangled in the Yoke of
Bondage, whether of Legal, or other devised Ceremonies.

As for the quality of the persons, of whom this Assembly did consist, it is
plain they were Messengers, Elders and Brethren, and these did all freely
deliberate upon the matters in question, offering their Reasons pro and contra;
and the Dicision was made, not by the interposition of Power Apostolical, but
by the clear evidence of Truth and Reason, to which they all agreed. The
Apostles acting here as Grave Fathers, giving free Audience and faithful
Advice, to which when all agreed, the conclusion was made in all their names,
as appears, Acts 15. 22, 23. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church, to send chosen men of their own Company to Antioch, and wrote
Letters by them after this manner; The Apostles, Elders and Brethren send
greeting unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles, etc. From the sweet
concord here, we suppose all Churches should do well to constitute their
general Consistories of such, seeing such helps she may have still, in things
ordinary to each Office, if she render not her self unworthy of them.

Now for the quality and authority of the Decrees, made by this, or succeeding
Assemblies, the case is clear of it self; These were such things as seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, not that the Holy Ghost now revealed them, but brought to
remembrance what the Scriptures had said concerning them, and partly by what
before that time had been showed unto St. Peter by a certain Vision of God's
accepting the Gentiles, though not cleansed according to Legal Purification.
And therefore till the Holy Ghost reverse those Decrees, they are to oblige all
Churches to keep them inviolable. And in this point (as indeed in all the rest)
the Baptized Churches in this Age do stand a witness against the disorder and
disobedience of most of the Christian Nations in the World; who make no
Conscience of abstaining from Blood, etc. though they know the true Churches
did Religiously observe these Decrees for several hundreds of years after.
Tertullian tells us, The custom of Christians is to abstain from all Blood, and
things Strangled, so that it is not lawful for them, when they feed at their
Tables to meddle with the Blood of any Beast.

It is further safely concluded from hence, that all decrees of General
Councils are so far obliging only, as the things decreed are proved to be true,
and not because they are decreed in Council only; for here St. Peter proves,
that Churches are free from the obligation of Legal Ceremonies, because they
wear a Burden too heavy to be born. 2. Because God had accepted them already
without them. And James [the Angel of this Church] proves or confirms the same
by the Scriptures, and these Arguments, and Probations, satisfied the Assembly.
And it is certain, the things prohibited by these decrees, were always
forbidden, even to Noah and his perpetual Generations, Genesis 9. 12, etc. Nor
does this Assembly excommunicate or anathematize all that shall doubt of the
Necessity of their Determination, but very sweetly tells the Brethren they
shall do well to comply with their advice; for they knew that every Church had
Power to punish offenders, and to them they seem to leave that Care, and not to
take the Power of any Church out of their Hands, as the manner of some is.

Of the Case of Infants, or whether they were admitted to Baptism in the
Mother Church?
In all that is said of the Plantation and growth of this famous Church, or in
that excellent Epistle, which was a long time after written to them, there is
not one Word to be found of any one Infant being brought to Baptism; and
therefore we hold to the Negative of this Question; and it is observable, that
though here Infant-Circumcision was absolutely excluded, yet is there no
Argument urged for it from their Baptism, which had been very considerable, had
there been any such usage in this, or the Gentile Churches. And because it is
granted now by many, and these the most Learned too, (among whom the Papists)
that there is no Scripture for Infant Baptism, etc. But that it stands upon the
Authority of Ecclesiastical Tradition; all that we shall say to that Plea in
this place is, to desire any Man to show who delivered this thing to the
Churches, and by what Authority, whether divine or human? For seeing Tradition
signifies a thing delivered, it is fit the Person or Persons delivering such a
thing, should be known to be Persons lawfully empowered to deliver such a
Tradition, before we can with safety receive it. It is said of the Roman
Christians, that the Light of Piety shined in their Minds when they heard
Peter, but they were not satisfied with once hearing neither satisfied with the
Unwritten Doctrine that was d^livered* but earnestly besought St. Mark, (whose
Gospel is now in ure) that he would leave in Writing unto them the Doctrine
which they had received by Preaching, etc. Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. Chap. 15. We see
that the Church of Rome esteemed the Gospel in Writing, above the delivery of
it in Preaching, though they heard it from Peter himself. Sure they are not the
same now as then* for Tradition (from whom it is hard to say) is more now to
them than the Scripture. And the Scripture nothing to them, but as delivered
and interpreted by Tradition.


But how then shall Infants be saved if Baptism belong not to them? I answer,
out of the mouth of St. Peter, Verse 11. By the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
they shall be saved. And sure a man might as well ask how can Infants be saved
without Faith and Repentance, seeing it is said, he that believes not, shall
be damned: and except ye repent, ye shall all perish, etc. And what answer
could any wise man make, save this? the grace of God suffices them, having
Christ's express word for it, that to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; and
this he spoke to unbaptized Infants too, which is therefore so satisfactory
that we need no other evidence. If any man say the words which St. Peter spoke
in Council, Acts 15. 11. are not meant of Infants, and therefore not pertinent
to my purpose. I shall only desire him to consider, that those words were
spoken in opposition to this position, That without Circumcision, after the
manner of Moses, the Gentiles could not be saved: Now we know, it was after the
manner of Moses to Circumcise Infants, and therefore doubtless these false
Teachers did question the salvation of Infants dying without Circumcision.
Therefore these words of St. Peter, which teaches that by the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ both Jew and Gentile shall be saved, have their clear extent to
Infants as well as to any other persons whatsoever: I shall here only refer the
Reader to what we have farther written, in a Treatise upon this Subject,
entitled, The Controversy about Infant-Church-Member-ship and Baptism
epitomized.

Of the Reverence due to Saints, Angels, and to the Blessed Virgin in
particular, according to the usage of this Mother Church.
It was in this Church where the Holy Virgin, Mother of our Lord, had her
Conversation and Society, being with that select Company, consisting of an
hundred and twenty names, Acts 1. 15. among whom this most blessed Woman is
expressly named, and by whose Presence this Mother Church was honored above all
others. And here is the last mention that is made of her in the holy
Scriptures. And this honorable mention of her by name, and as the Mother of
our Lord, (which doubtless calls for great Reverence in the hearts of all God's
People) is all the honor that the Word of God does here confer upon her. This
Church makes no Prayers to her, nor to Christ in her name, nor taught the
succeeding Churches to do so; yet surely she was the greatest Saint that ever
was; and if we have no ground from any direction, nor President in the
Scripture to perform such Devotion to Her, we cannot with any show of Reason,
or pretense of Truth, do it to any other Creatrue, Saint or Angel, whatsoever.

And it is remarkable, that though this Church had occasion to make express
mention of David in their Prayers, Acts 4. 25. yet do they not use his
Intercession at all: But this Honor they give to Jesus Christ, that through
his Name such things might be done, as might confirm the Truth against all
Opposers. Nor does the Holy Ghost give any notice of the Worshipping of Angels,
Saints, nor the Holy Virgin in particular, in that Sacred Epistle, which was
sent to this Church after the death of Blessed Mary, the Mother of Jesus; so
that this Mother Church* seems altogether unacquainted with such Devotions: And
much more may we assure our selves, they paid no such Devotion to the Images of
these, or of any of them. If any affirm the contrary, we answer them in the
words of Jerome, Non Credimus quia non Legimus. And with Apollinarius, we dare
add nothing to the perfect words of the New Testament, whereto nothing may be
added; and wherefrom nothing may be taken away, by him that will lead a life
agreeable to the Gospel. Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 14.

Thus Brethren I have for your sakes (as well as others) taken a fresh view of
the State of this most Primitive Church, to whose holy pattern, through the
Grace of God, you have diligently labored to conform your souls, her
Principles are yours, her Government in good measure is yours, if in any thing
any of them be otherwise minded, my hearts desire is, that God would speedily
reveal even the same unto you, and then it is to be hoped that all well
disposed, will in time see themselves concerned to adhere to the truth of your
Principles, in the very Order wherein you maintain them.

Hear the Church: OR AN EPISTLE TO All the Baptized Christians in England;
Exciting them to Stedfastness in their Holy Profession, under their various
Trials, and great Afflictions.
The Second PART.
BRETHREN,
AS it has pleased God to exercise you many years with various Trials and
Afflictions, for your Faithfulness to the Christian Religion (in respect of the
Restoration of it to its ancient Purity) both in the Form and Power of it,
wherein you have labored hitherto, and have not fainted, but, by the Grace of
God, have attained to some degree in that behalf, above what has, as yet, been
attained by the generality of your Countrymen, for which you owe the greatest
Thankfulness to Almighty God. And having (as I verily believe) laid a right
Foundation for a true Church State, you are indispensibly obliged to go on unto
perfection, as the first Churches, which were built upon the same Foundation,
were expressly required and exhorted, Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3.

In which Holy Profession, being by the Grace of God, one with you, and also
called to the Ministry and Office of a Messenger of your Churches [which I
mention, because it is the most despised Office amongst all Christians, as it
seems to have been in the Apostles days. 1. Cor. 4. 9.] do hold it my Duty, at
this time, to endeavor to strengthen you (in what I may) in your Holy
Profession; as also to call upon such as have been shaken in mind by the
violence of those Temptations which have befallen them in common with their
Brethren.

For as it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, (as
those undoubtedly shall, who draw back from the Truth they have once embraced
unto Perdition) so I am very confident, that for any to fall from the Truth, as
it is professed by the Baptized Churches, is the most dangerous of all other,
they being indeed the nearest to the Truth, in the Pristine Order and
Simplicity of it, of all sorts of Persons, who own the Honorable Appellation of
Christian. For,

What sort of Christians can with any Confidence look upon, or bring themselves
close to the Rules of St. Paul's Catechism, The Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, Repentance, Faith, Doctrine of Baptisms, Laying on of Hands,
Resurrection of the Dead, Eternal Judgment. Christ as received in the Power and
Order of these Principles, becomes a Foundation to his Church, in which respect
the Principles are here called the Foundation also.
Heb. 6. 1, 2. (as the Ancients used to call it) except the Baptized Churches?
To say nothing of others, can they of the present Roman Catholick-Church, in
any wise square themselves, or justify their present Church State by the Rule
of those Sacred Principles, in the simplicity of them? No, these Principles of
Christ's Doctrine, will in no wise be concordant with the Catechism of the
present Roman Church, seeing a Doctor of their own has told us, that if the
Scriptures must be our Rule, etc. they must all cross the Cudgels to the
Anabaptists; which is a plain giving up the Victory to the Baptized Churches,
unless a better Form of Doctrine can be assigned than this is, which will never
be. Yea, so pressing is this place from the true Institution of the Ancient
Christian Religion, that the Rhemists seem to be under no small difficulty how
to express themselves about it: For thus they speak upon the Text, Heb. 6. 1,
2. We see hereby (say they) what the first grounds of Christian Institution, or
Catechism, were in the Primitive Church, and that there was ever a necessary
Instruction and Belief of certain Points, had by Word of mouth and Tradition,
before men came to the Scriptures, which could not treat of things so
particularly as was requisite for the teaching of all necessary Grounds. Among
these Points were the twelve Articles contained in the Apostles Creed; The
Doctrine of Penance before Baptism; the Manner and Necessity of Baptism; the
Sacrament of Imposition of Hands after Baptism, called Confirmation; the
Articles of the Resurrection, Judgment, and such like: without which things
first laid, if one should be sent to pick his Faith out of the Scriptures,
there would be mad Rule quickly.

1. It Is highly observable from hence, that the first Grounds and Principles of
our Churches (which indeed are no other than what men read, Heb. 6. 1, 2.) are
openly acknowledged, by our most Potent Opposites, to be the same which were in
the Primitive Church, received for the first Grounds and Institutions of
Christianity, or Christian Institution and Catechism. That in the Primitime
Church, these Grounds were held in the very Order now observed by the Baptized
Churches; particularly, Repentance before Baptism, and Imposition of Hands
after Baptism. Sure this is a full Testimony, that the Institution of the
Baptized Churches (now wrongfully called Anabaptists) and theirs only, is truly
Apostolical. Whilst all the Paedobaptists in the World (among whom, the
Papists) have quite subverted this Order, giving their supposed Baptism before
Repentance, and that unto Persons that are not capable of Repentance.

2. They tell us there was a necessary Instruction and Belief of certain Points
had by Word of Mouth and Tradition, before men came to the Scripture* Admit
this to be so, in respect of such parts of the Holy Scriptures as were then
unwritten, when the Apostles first preached the Gospel; yet it is certainly
false, in respect of such Books of Scripture as were then in being; for it is
evident that our Blessed Savior propounded the Text of Scripture, Luke 4. 17,
18, 19. and thence preached to the People, and commanded his Hearers to search
the Scriptures, John 5. 29. He did not send his Hearers to Tradition, as the
Papists do.

The great Apostle of the Jews, St. Peter, even then when he was filled with
the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 17. preached from, and notably confirms his Doctrine by
the Scriptures, Act. 2. not by Tradition. And Philip, Acts 8. 35. began at the
same Scripture which the Eunuch read, and preached to him Jesus, without making
any use of Tradition. Apollo being mighty in the Scripture (not in Tradition)
convinced the Jews, showing (not by Tradition) but by the Scriptures, that
Jesus is the Christ. So did the great Apostle of the Gentiles, St. Paul, Acts
28. 2^. Persuading men concerning Jesus, out of the Law and the Prophets (not
out of Tradition) from Morning to Evening; and the best sort of St. Paul's
Hearers, searched the Scriptures daily, (not Tradition) to see whether the
things spoken by him were so.

3. Nor can the Papists tell us what one Point of Necessary Instruction or
Belief was delivered by Word of Mouth, which is not now contained in the Holy
Scripture; if otherwise, let them assign some necessary Point of Faith or
Instruction, such, as without which, we cannot know and serve God truly and
fully, and be saved eternally, which is not contained in the Holy Scriptures.
But as this will hardly be attempted; so let me exhort you, Brethren, to beware
of all manner of Principles and Doctrins, which have any tendency to weaken or
invalidate the Authority and Sufficiency of the Scriptures, which the Apostle
avers to be of that sufficiency (even before all the Books of Sacred Scriptures
were extant) as to furnish the Man of God thoroughly to every good Work. And
then certainly, he who is in all Points of Faith and Instruction, a good
Christian, according to the Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures, will be
out of the reach of any just reprehension, though he know nothing of the
unwritten Tradition, so much pretended and admired by the Papists, or others.

Being thus secured in your Principles, from the very concession of your
Enemies, and by the Authority of the best and most Sacred Antiquity, even the
Holy Scriptures, you have no cause to fear the most important difficulties,
wherewith possibly we may be tried in these days. And that we may the better
see how the case stands between the Baptists and the Papists, with respect to
the two great Ordinances of Christ, to wit, Holy Baptism, and the Holy Table of
our Lord Jesus Christ; we will here take a View of the one, and of the other,
in a distinct Column by it self, the better to discern their Disparity.

The Manner of Baptism among the Baptized Believers, commonly called
Anabaptists.

Baptist.

The Manner of Baptism among the Papists, commonly called Roman Catholics;
taken out of the Roman Ritual, by a Learned Hand translated into English.

Papist.

THE Messenger or Elder being attired in comely Raiment, not much different
from the rest of his Brethren, first, Preaches the Gospel to every Mark 16. 15.
Creature that is capable and willing to hear, and when by hearing they have
Romans 10. 17.
received Faith, the Minister explains the Doctrine of Repentance from dead
Works, and of Faith toward God, for the further Illumination of the Disciples
understanding, in the knowledge of the only Joh. 17. 3.
true God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that they may obtain Eternal Life.

The Minister does oopen the Doctrine of Repentance Acts 2. 38.
in three parts especially, i. e. as it consists in a due sense or knowledge of
the sinfulness of sin: In true Sorrow for sin committed, especially against
Almighty God. The necessity of forsaking Tit. 2. 12.
the Conversation of sin, and to walk righteously, soberly, and godly in this
present Life.

The Doctrine of Faith is explained concerning the Object, in respect of Mat.
28. 19, 20.
the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, into whose Name the
Party is to be baptized, and especially concerning Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2.
2.
buried, and risen aagain; and therewith is showed, that in Baptism we are to
die unto Sin, to Romans 6. 4.
be buried with him in Baptism, to rise to a Holy Life, and so to put on the
Lord Jesus Christ in Baptism, as to be born Joh. 3. 3, 5. Ephesians. 5. 26.
of Water and of the Spirit through the Word.

The Minister does open to the Party to be Baptized, the whole Doctrine of
Baptisms; First, That of Water, which is the Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission Mat. 28. 18.
of sins, in respect of the Power by which it is commanded, Mat. 28. 18. Act.
2. 28. Act. 22. 16. Romans 12. 13. Heb. 10. 22.
the extent of it, to every repenting Sinner; the end of it to be a Pledge of
the washing away of sin, and to give us admission into the Church of Christ, to
draw near to God in Prayer, with full assurance, having the Heart sprinkled
from an evil Conscience, by Faith in the Blood of Christ, and our Bodies washed
with pure Water, even the Water of the Baptismal Covenant, called the washing
of Regeneration.

2. That of the Holy Spirit, the Promise of the Spirit being made to all Acts
2. 38.
that our Lord does call, and therewith does explain the fourth Principle of
Christ's Doctrine, Laying Act. 8. Act. 19.
on of Hands, with Prayers, as the Means appointed of God to obtain that
Blessing, even the Promise of the Spirit Gal. 3. 14.
through Faith in the Word of Promise.

3. The Baptism of Affliction Mat. 20. 22, 23.
is also opened, that the Sufferings of Christ (called by himself a Baptism)
may not be feared, but patiently endured, according to the Will of God. This is
the Sum of the Doctrine of Baptism, taught by the Baptized Churches.

The 5th and 6th Principles of Christ's Doctrine, are likewise particularly 1
Cor. 15.
opened, concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and chiefly of Christ's being
raised Bodily from the Dead, as the most Acts. 17. 31.
sure pledge that the Dead shall be raised Bodily: and the eternal Judgment, in
which every man shall receive according to the 1 Cor. 5. 10.
deeds done in the Body, whether good, or bad.

To all which the Party to be Baptized, declares his assent, in the best Acts.
2. 40.
man^er he can; showing also his sense of Sin, and sorrow for it, his purpose
to live holily; his Faith in Christ his Savior the only Son of God, and Mark*
1. 5. Acts: 8. 36, 37.
that it is his desire to be Baptized according to the Will of God. And then
the Minister, with the Congregation, or persons present, do make Prayer and
Supplication to Almighty God, to receive the returning sinner, and to bless and
sanctify his own Ordinance to him. And then the Party to be Baptized, being
clothed with convenient Garments for decency, he is had to the Water, where,
calling upon Mark 1. 15. John 3. 23.
the Name of the Lord, he is dipped into the River, or Water, by the Minister,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and Acts 8. 38. Mat. 28. 19.
of the Holy Ghost.

And as in every thing Christians are to give thanks, so this whole Service is
concluded with farther prayer, and thanksgiving to this effect, That as it has
pleased God to call his Servant, or Servants out of their sinful state, and to
bring them into the way of Truth, so it would please him to enable them to
persevere to the end, to his Glory and their own Eternal Comfort.

Nor do we put any Vow, Covenant or Promise upon any Person, save only what the
very Nature of the Baptismal Covenant it self does in its own evidence carry
along with it, it being our greatest care, neither to add to, nor to diminish
ought from the holy Ordinances of Christ, but to keep them as they were
delivered at first to the Church of God* 1 Cor. 11. 2.

AFter many preparatory Prescriptions, the Priest being dressed in a Purple
Robe, calls the Infant to be Baptized by his Name, and says, What ask thou
of the Church of God? the Godfathers answer, Faith. The Priest says again,
What shall thou get by Faith? The Godfather replies, Eternal Life. Then adds
the Priest, If therefore thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and thy Neighbor as thy Self.

Next, the Priest blows three gentle Puffs upon the Infants Face, and says, Go
out of him thou unclean Spirit, and give place to the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter. Then with his Thumb he makes the Sign of the Cross on the Infants
Forehead and Breast, saying, Receive the Sign of the Cross, both in thy
Forehead and in thy Heart. Take the Faith of the Heavenly Precept, and be thy
Manners such as thou may now become the Temple of God.

Then follows a Prayer, that God would always protect this his Elect one
(calling him by his Name) that is signed with the Sign of the Cross.

Then laying his Hand upon the Child's Head, he comes to the Benediction of
Salt, of which this is the Form.

I exorcise or conjure thee, O thou Creature of Salt, in the Name of God the
Father Almighty, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Power of the
Holy Ghost, I conjure thee by the living God, By the true God, By the Holy God,
By the God, which created thee for the safeguard of Mankind, and has ordained
that thou should be consecrated by his Servants to the People, entering into
the Faith, that in the Name of the Holy Trinity, thou should be made a
wholesome Sacrament for the driving away the Enemy. Moreover, we pray thee, O
Lord our God, that in sanctifying, thou would sanctify, this Creature of
Salt, and in blessing, thou would bless it, that it may be to all that
receive it, a perfect Medicine, remaining in their Bowels, in the Name of the
same Jesus Christ our Lord, who is about to come to judge the Quick and the
Dead, and the World by Fire. Amen.

Then the Priest putting a little of the Holy Salt into the Child's Mouth,
says, Take thou the Salt of Wisdom, be it thy Propitiation unto Eternal Life.
Amen.

Now follows another Exorcising of the Devil, wherein he is conjured as before,
then the Priest signs the Infant again with his Thumb on the Forehead, saying,
And this Sign of the Holy which we give to his Forehead, thou cursed Devil,
never dare thou to violate, by the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Priest puts his Hand on the Infants Head, and makes a Prayer in order
to his Baptism, then puts part of his Robe upon the Child, and brings him
within the Church, saying, Enter thou into the Temple of God, that thou may
partake with Christ in Eternal Life. Amen. Then follows the Apostles Creed, and
the Paternoster, etc. Then follows another Exorcising or Conjuration of the
Devil.

Then the Priest takes Spittle out of his Mouth, and touches therewith the Ears
and Nostrils of the Infant; when he touches his Ears, he says, Epthapha, be
opened; and touching his Nostrils, he says, for a sweet smelling Savor.
Another Conjuration follows in these Words; Be packing, O Devil, for the
judgment of God is at hand.

Then the Priest asks the Infant, whether he renounces the Devil and all his
Works, and all his Pomps? in three questions, and the Godfathers answer
distinctly to them. Then the Priest dips his Thumb in holy Oil, and anointing
the Infant with it on his Breast and betwixt his Shoulders in the figure of a,
saying, I anoint thee with the Oil of Salvation in Christ Jesus our Lord, that
thou may obtain eternal Life. Amen.

Then the Priest puts off his Purple Robe, and puts on another of White, and
asks three questions out of the Creed; and receives the Godfathers answers,
then asks this question, whether the Infant will be Baptized? and receiving the
Godfathers answers to that, He pours Water thrice upon the Child's head, and
recites over it our Savior's Form of Baptism, doing it each time at the
naming of the three Persons.

And now comes the Chrysm or holy Ointment, in which dipping his Thumb and
anointing the Infant on the Crown of the Head, in the Figure of a, He thus
prays; O God Omnipotent, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
Regenerated thee of Water and the Holy Ghost, and who has given* thee pardon
of all thy Sins, I anoint thee with the Chrysm of Salvation, in the Name of
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Eternal Life. Amen.

And next after follows the Pax tibi, and wiping of his Thumb and the anointed
Head, he takes a white linen Cloth, and putting it on the Child's Head uses
this Form, Take the white Garment, which thou may carry unspotted before the
Tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may have Eternal Life. Amen.

And lastly, he puts a lighted Candle into the Child's, or Godfathers hand, and
says, Receive the burning Lamp, and keep thy Baptism blameless; keep God's
Commandments, that when the Lord shall come to the Wedding, thou may meet
him, etc. concluding all with, Go in peace, and the Lord be with thee.

There are more Conjurations and Ceremonies added, etc. But let these suffice
at present.



Now Brethren, as it is an Observation, that White being compared with Black
does seem more white; so the true Baptism according to the Scripture (and
graciously restored in the practick part among you) being thus compared with
the supposed Baptism of the present Roman Church, must needs seem more lovely,
and the wretchedness of their devised Fables become more manifest to all men.
Let us now see whether they have been more happy in the other great Ordinance,
The Holy Table of the Lord.

Baptist.

The manner of the Baptized Churches in Celebrating the Holy Table of the Lord.

Papist.

The manner of the Celebration of the Bread and Cup in the Mass, taken from Dr.
Willit in his Synopsis Papismi.

THE Congregation being met together, and having spent part of the day in
Preaching, and Prayer, commonly toward Acts 20. 7.
the Evening, and ordinarily upon the Lords Day, the Table is decently
prepared, and the Bread and Wine set upon it also in decent manner.

The Messenger or Elder does excite the People to due Humility, and Reverence
in their approaching to the Holy Table of the Lord, showing the occasion and
Authority by, and upon which it was Instituted for a perpetual Ministry in the
Church of God. The great Use and Mystical signification of it, as Christ is
evidently set forth in his Crucifixion, or bitter Death upon the Gal. 3. 13.
Cross, as the alone Sacrifice, once offered for the Sins of Men, and that
there is no more Offering for Sin, but the Offering Heb. 10. 12, 14.
up of Christ once for all.

Then he puts them in mind of the qualifications, necessary on their part to
the due Reception of that Divine Ordinance, without which they will come
together for the worse, and not for the better.

Then taking the Bread Mat. 26. 26.
into his hands, he calls upon God in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, for a 1
Cor. 11. 23, 24.
Blessing upon the Bread, that it may be Sanctified for that holy use for which
it was ordained by Christ, and that by Faith, all that are to partake of that
Bread, thereby may feed upon the Body of Christ, John 6. 35.
which is the true Bread, and by him live for ever.

Then he breaks the Bread, pronouncing the words of Christ, This is my Body,
etc. wills the People to receive it in remembrance 1 Cor. 11. 26.
of Christ, and as showing forth the Death of Christ till he come the second
time without sin to Salvation.

In like manner he takes the Cup, after the 1 Cor. 11. 25.
People have received the Bread, and with Prayer suitable to that great
Mystery, it being sanctified, he pours out of the Wine, remembering the words
of Christ, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, etc. partakes of it
himself (as he did also of the Bread) and gives it to the Deacons to
Communicate to all the Congregation, and they all drink of it.

Then some word of Exhortation 1 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17.
is given to the People under the consideration of the unspeakable Mercy of God
in the gift of his Son to dye for us, that we might live Eternally with him:
all is concluded with Prayers to the Lord for all his Blessings, in the most
joyful manner that the Minister is able Mat. 26. 30.
to express them, and then usually something is given to the Poor, as every
man's heart makes him willing, being not constrained thereunto, but as the love
of Christ constrains him.

TO say nothing here of the Roman Church, denying to give the Cup to the
People, the Priests only drinking of it; nor of the Priest only partaking of
the Bread and Cup in diverse of their Masses, the People only looking on:
neither of their Adoration of the Elements of Bread and Wine in these words, I
Worship thee, I Glorify thee, I Praise thee. Nor yet of that Passage in the
Communion of the Mass, Let us Worship the Sign of the Cross, which are things
too large to be discoursed in a Letter; It shall suffice to set down the manner
of their Celebration. 1. All is done in an unknown Tongue, which the People
understand not. 2. The Benedicamus Domino, is sung ten times together, and Ite
Missa est is sung thirteen times, with long and tedious Notes. 3. The Priest is
to say diverse Prayers privately to himself. 4. He is taught by the Rubric to
make thirty several Crosses upon the Bread, the Cup, the Altar, and his
forehead. 5. Their Gestures are as follows.


The Priest boweth his Body, and lifting up himself, kisseth the Altar on the
right side; then he boweth again, and looks toward the Host [that is the
Bread] he joyneth his hands, wipeth his fingers, lifts up the Host, then he
lifts up his eyes, and boweth himself, and lifts up his eyes again, he
boweth again, and lifts up the Host above his forehead; then he uncovereth
the Cup, and holds it between his hands, keeping his thumb and his finger
together.

Then he boweth and lifts up the Cup a little, then to his Breast, or above
his Head. He sets it down again and wipeth his fingers; then he spreads
his Arms across. He boweth his Body, rising up, he kisseth the Altar on the
right side. He smites his Breast; uncovering the Cup, he makes five Crosses
with the Host beyond the Cup, twice, on each side under the Cup and before it.

Then he lays his hands upon the Altar, the Deacon reaching him the Paten, he
puts it to his right eye, then to his left, he makes a Cross beyond his
head with it, he kisseth it and lays it down.

Then he breaks the Host in three, holding two pieces in his left hand and
one in his right over the Cup, which with a Cross he lets fall into it.

Then he kisseth the Corporas: the Deacon takes the Pax from the Priest,
gives it to the Subdeacon and he to the Quire. Then humbling himself, he
first takes the Body, and then the Blood, so he goes to the right horn of the
Altar, the Subdeacon pours in Wine, and the Priest rinseth the Cup, and
washes his hands turning himself to the People.

Comes again to the Altar, and turns to the People the second time.

Then bowing his body, and closing his hands, he prays to himself: he rises
again, making the sign of the Cross, and bowing again, goes from the Altar.



Thus, Brethren, I have given you a brief account of the Ceremonious
Observations of those who would be thought the truest Church on Earth, though
they have assuredly changed the Ordinances of our Lord more than any sort of
Christians; I have also set before you the purity and simplicity (and yet the
great utility) of these two great Ordinances, that you may be more inwardly
affected with them, but especially with him whom they so excellently represent,
for to this end are they ordained to set forth Christ and him Crucified.

Of all the difficulties with which you are likely to be tried in respect of
your Religious Profession, that Question which concerns the Judge of these and
other Controversies in Religion, is like to be the most dangerous, because you
have been little exercised in it; as also because many persons of great
Eminency and Authority are deeply radicated and very expert in an opinion
diametrically opposite to yours, for they say, that the living voice of the
Church, assembled in a General Council of her Bishops and Doctors, is the only
infallible Judge to determine all Controversies in matters of Faith and
Religion.

On the other side, We have been taught, and have constantly believed that it
is all Christians Duty to rely chiefly, and before all things, upon the
Authority and sufficiency of the voice of God himself, as he speaks in the Holy
Scriptures, as the best, and only infallible Decider of all Questions that
shall arise, (especially in the Christian Church, and since the holy Scriptures
were written and received) about matters of Faith and Religion.

And indeed it seems very strange that any man should think there is a better
Judge than God himself, of what is true, and what is otherwise, in matters of
Religion; and to be sure he speaks to us with the greatest Certainty, and
Authority, by the holy Penmen of the Scriptures. And it is as strange that the
Church, who must derive all her Light and Authority from God and his Word,
should appeal men to her self rather than to him: methinks they should say to
us (as Caesar's Substitute said to St. Paul) Have thou Appealed to God, as he
speaks in his Scriptures? to God and his Scriptures shall thou go. And
especially when this is the question, What sort of Christians are the true
Church of Christ? for it seems then the most unreasonable thing in the World,
that any Party contending for this Title [The Church] should be her own Judge;
and seeing the Church cannot by merely avouching (upon her own Testimony only)
that she is the Church, make any proof or demonstration that she is so, it
remains then, that we must have some Infallible Rule by which to find the
Church. And now if God himself does not reveal to us who is his Church, we
shall never find her; nor does he reveal this, but by the Testimonies of the
Scripture, there must we find the Church of God, or no where. For none but
Enthusiasts pretend to any other Revelation in this Case; and to speak feeely,
I doubt the Papists are more then a little Enthusiastical; for rather than let
God's Word decide this Question about the Church, they will fly to Miracles,
as if a false Prophet may not show a Sign, or a Wonder, yea, and that Sign and
Wonder come to pass too, and yet the thing he brings it to prove, be nothing
but a lie: see Deuteronomy. 15. Surely he that shall pretend to work a Miracle or
Wonder in these days, to prove such, or such a People to be the Church, I
should the more suspect both him and his Church; because we have a sure Word of
Prophecy confirmed by Miracles already, which Word, does as fully set forth the
Church, as it sets forth any thing; insomuch as men may as well call for
Miracles to prove there is a God, and that this God is true, as to call for
Miracles to prove the true Church.

Indeed the Church of Christ being once found, then all wise and modest men
will readily lend an Ear to her in all things, and especially when she
undertakes to expound the dark or mysterious points of our Religion, or offers
her Judgment in things doubtful, [for as for the common point of the Christian
Faith, he that is a wise and good Man, and no ways biased by Interest, may
perhaps know these things, as well as the Church, or at least, such as call
themselves Churchmen.] But to be bound to adhere to any Church in these days,
as to a people which cannot possibly be mistaken in any matters of Faith, or
Religion, seems to be an Atribute too high for any Society of Sinful men, [and
there is none that lives and sins not.] For seeing God has not told us any
such thing, That the Church cannot Err or be Mistaken, it ought not to be
spoken: and if it be only proper to the Almighty to say He cannot lie; It must
not be said of the Church, that She cannot lie, lest he reprove us, and we be
found Liars. Romans 3. 4. Let God be true, and every Man a liar, for thus it is
written; and again, Hos. 11. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with Lies, and the
House of Israel with Deceit. This was the Case of the ten Tribes: and though
Judah be justified as to these Impieties, yet Chap. 12. 2. God tells them he
had a Controversy with them also. Certain it is that famous Churches have
erred in matters of Faith, and others were as liable to err as they, no Church
being herein privileged above another, for any thing that God has said in his
Word, but he every where exhorts his People to beware of Sin, Error, and
Apostasy, and commands every one that has Ears, to hear what the Spirit says
to the Churches: but he does not say to any of them that they cannot Err,
therefore we are not to hear such a story of any Church. Mat. 16. 18. Is a
gracious Promise indeed, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church of Christ, as founded upon himself, in the true Faith of St. Peter. But
this Promise belongs to all true Churches equally, yet no man ever durst affirm
from hence, That no true Church can possibly err. And St. Peter, who understood
this Promise, never told any Church of his Planting, that they could not Err;
but rather tells them they may err, so as to fall from their stedfastness, and
be led away with the error of the Wicked. Indeed if any Church could be
assigned here on Earth that cannot err, or be deceived in matters of Faith, it
were the easiest thing in the World to find the Truth, having once found the
Church; for we should have no need to know any thing but what that Church
speaks, and to receive her Determinations as God's Oracles: but then I consider
again that we should perhaps have great inconvenience also. For, if all the
Decrees made by General Councils be obliging to us, and were bound up together,
we should never be able to read them, nor I doubt, to understand them; it will
then be our best, at the long-run, to take Sanctuary at the Word of God, as our
Guide, and Superior to the Church.

But I consider farther, that no man makes any particular Church this Guide,
but does refer us to the Universal Church, as assembled in a General Council.
Surely either this is to make as many Universal Churches at least as there has
been Ages since Christ was upon the Earth; or if all make but one Universal
Church, the direction given to follow her Sentence, is scarce practicable; for
how long will it be before a man can be assured, what was held, and what was
rejected by the Church in all Ages? indeed there are Men born of great
confidence, who will tell us that the Catholic, or Universal Church has
always held such Doctrines, and such Traditiors as are unwritten, etc.

Now it highly concerns all Christians, as much as in them lies, to make sure
work with such bold Talkers, about the truth of the things which they affirm,
especially about the truth of the Antiquity of these things, that is, that they
appear by some Divine Record to have been delivered to the first Churches, by
Men approved of God, to be the deliverers of Divine Institutes; and if they
fail here, it will be ill venturing to follow them in their after-enquiries.
And there is the highest Reason in the World to stand as strongly as possible
for the first Age; for such pure and undoubted Antiquity is necessary in our
Case, from the tenor of our Blessed Savior's Argumentation against the Jews,
in opposition to a Tradition, or Mosaical Precept in the Case of Divorce, Mat.
19. 8. From the beginning it was not so. For seeing the Apostles did faithfully
deliver the whole Counsel of God to the first Churches, condemning all that
shall teach otherwise than they had taught the the Doctrine of Godliness; or
that should not consent to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it is therefore necessary to bring all Doctrine* and Practices in the
Christian Church to the Test of the most pure and Primitive Antiquity; for that
Church which has that Argument fairly on her side, cannot fail of all other
Arguments, which can be any way necessary for her Justification; for indeed
this first Argument does infer all the rest, and they that have not this, have
none of the other; which thing being well considered, look back upon your
Principles (O ye Baptized Christians) and upon what has been said for them,
even by your Adversaries, and take comfort; for whoever boasts of the best
Antiquity, it is certain that you only have it.

For what is the most ancient Record? Doubtless the Holy Scripture; and if so,
let the question be about Christ and his Church, there must we find them both,
or no where. If any Man like not this Doctrine; let him show me, if he can,
these lovely Objects without being beholden to the Scripture. Some I have known
to attempt this, but with lamentable success, being soon driven to a shameful
silence; and indeed the whole World must depart into utter silence as touching
this great Mystery, Christ and his Church, unless the Word of God, (as it is
delivered in the Holy Scriptures) through Faith, makes us wise in these great
Concernments of Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 14.

Let men allege all the Authors in the World, and all the Tradition that ever
was, if the Holy Scriptures must not be their own Evidence, and so capable to
command our Belief of them; then for the same, or rather more forcible Reasons,
then any Man can bring against the Scriptures, all Authors and all Traditions
shall be dumb and useless as to the production of the least iota of Divine
Faith; so that the Papists at the long-run (must if they know how) show us
their Church without Scripture, or any Author, and without Tradition also, as I
have formerly written unto you, being provoked thereunto by seven Queries sent
by a Learned Papist, who in his last to me, does undertake to deliver himself
from this difficulty after this manner; We may (says he) prove the Church by
the Holy Scripture, and the Scripture by the Church, and this by a Regressus
Demonstrativus, without a vicious Circle, because we suppose them both
sufficiently proved, and prudently accepted for such, by all the Motives of
Credibility, as Miracles, Holiness, etc. by which Christ proved himself and his
New Gospel. But as for the Sense of the Scripture, I have more than
sufficiently demonstrated, that the Scripture it self cannot bear witness for
it, but that this must be had from a Living Judge, viz. the Church, the
Infallible Interpreter of Gods Word.

To this I answer briefly: That is a vicious Circle, out of which no man can
lawfully deliver himself, but must run in a Round without end; and truly such
is this Circular Argumentation of my Adversary, he will prove his Church by the
Scripture. 2. He will prove the Scripture to be true by his Church, and he will
prove his Church true by the Scripture, before the Scripture be proved true;
and he will prove the Scripture to be true, after it has proved his Church
true. This Meander is no way to be avoided that I can see, but by suffering
either the Scripture, or the Church to be its own Evidence, for his
Demonstrative Regress makes his Case worse; for by it, they be both
sufficiently proved, before either of them be proved, and both prudently
accepted, before either of them be accepted; and which is most strange of all
the rest, these things are all done before the Scripture has any sense known;
for of this he is the most of all confident, that the Sense of the Scripture
must be had from a living Judge, viz. the Church, the Infallible Interpreter of
God's Word. So that this is the Conclusion of the whole Matter: The Scripture
without Sense must prove the Roman Church, and the Roman Church must then give
the Sense of that Scripture, which had no Sense before, when it proved Her to
be the Church; here is indeed a Regressus, but no such thing as a
Demonstrativus.

Methinks wise men should consider that the Holy Scripture is its own
Interpreter in a great, if not the greatest part of it, the New Testament being
the best Interpreter of the Old Testament, and of it self also in many places:
for Example; It tells us in one place, that the Heavens must receive Christ
from the time of his Ascension, till the times of refreshing shall come from
the Presence of the Lord. Act. 3. 21. And hence we hold, that no Christian must
say that the real Body of of Christ, which ascended to Heaven, is upon the
Earth, till he shall be sent the second time, [for God shall send Jesus, says
St. Peter] because the Scripture tells us in another place, That if Jesus were
on Earth, he should not be a Priest, Heb. 8. 4.

It is therefore as plain as plain can be, that the Papists make void the
Priesthood of Christ, and contradict St. Peter himself, when they tell the
World that the real Body of Christ which ascended into Heaven, is now really,
carnally, corporally present upon the Earth, that is, upon their Altars, and in
the Hands and Mouths of their Priests and People, as often as they celebrate
Mass, and consequently he is so far from being received into Heaven till the
time of his second coming, that he is, according to their own Opinion, received
bodily upon Earth ten thousand times, and in ten thousand places, to his being
once received bodily into Heaven. Sure their Opinion is directly against the
Scripture, as sure as their Transubstantiation is directly against the best
Sense, and the best Reason, with which Almighty God has endowed the best of
Men, as has been clearly evidenced by many learned Discourses; among which, I
would commend to your Perusal, one lately published, under the Title of A
Discourse against Transubstantiation: Printed this Year, and sold by Mr. Aylmer
at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange, Price Six Pence.

My Learned Adversary, and indeed the Papists generally, do urge us vehemently
after this manner, admitting that the Church is to follow the Rule of God's
revealed Word in all her Definitions; yet they hold it extremely irrational,
that all that can read it, should be his own Interpreter of it, for so, say
they, He will be his own Judge. And as in a Nation where no Judge of the Law is
appointed, there can be no Justice, but every man will be his own Judge; so
likewise, unless there be a Supreme Judge in Matters of Faith, to wit, the
Church, from whom no Appeal may be allowed, there can be no end of
Controversies, etc. This Objection is considerable: to which I say,

1. What my Adversary means by God's revealed Word, I do not very well
understand, but I doubt he extends that Term farther than the Holy Scripture,
else I am sure enough, the Church of Rome has no revealed Word of God to follow
in very many of her Observations: but to let this pass at present, I answer to
the Objection thus;

2. It seems to be built upon many dangerous Suppositions, such as these, That
we ought to rest upon the Sentence of a Priest (for we must hear the Church out
of his Mouth) for the state of our Soul, as on the Sentence of a Judge in a
Civil Court for a matter of Debt, etc. and that we are no more bound to search
the Scriptures for Eternal Life, than to search the Statute-Book for our
Temporal Life [nay, here I do them no wrong, for they will permit us to read
the Statute-Book, but they forbid us to read the Holy Scripture.] It supposes
the Priest cannot deceive us; when the Prophet tells us, that though the
Priests Lips should preserve Knowledge, and that we should seek the Law at his
Mouth, yet they had caused many to stumble at the Law, because they had been
partial in the Law, Mat. 2. 8. It supposes, whoever falls under the Sentence of
the Priest, is as surely damned, as he is cast or hanged, that falls under the
Sentence of a Judge in Law. [Which may be false, for the Priests did jointly
sentence our Blessed Savior, Saying, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to
die. It Is true, whatsoever the Church does bind on Earth, is bound in Heaven;
but then nothing is bound on Earth, unless she judge righteously; for it is
written, that the Curse causeless shall not come, Prove. 26. 2. and seeing she
may be deceived, (at least by false Witnesses) She may condemn the Innocent,
though She had no mind to do so, which shows She is not infallible, whatever
men talk to the contrary.] I do not like this Opinion, therefore because it
leaves not Liberty for those whom the Church condemns, to appeal so much as to
Almighty God, who knows the Hearts of all men, whilst the Church knows them
not. But I answer to the Objection, by saying,

1. There is a Judgment Authoritative; this indeed must be referred to the
Church, and no wise Man ever thought otherwise, and the Members of the Church
must be content to abide the Sentence of the Church, though they be innocent,
till God clears their Innocence; but all this while we suppose the Church we
speak of, to be a true Church, and that She judges according to Evidence; and
yet because She knows not all Secrets, nor all things contained in the
Scriptures, we also suppose She may possibly mistake, though never so Honest.
But,

2. There is a Judgment of Knowledge or Discretion, by which Men receive the
Truth of the Gospel, as understanding, and so believing it to be so; and by the
same Judgment he refuses what is false, as understanding it to be so; and till
his Understanding be well informed, or rationally satisfied by convincing
Evidence, he cannot, if he have the Understanding and Spirit of a Man, do
either the one or the other. And hence it is, that Salvation, (and consequently
the means to obtain it) are offered to men in the manner of choice, Josh. 24.
15. Choose then this day whom you will serve. Heb. 11. 25. Moses chose rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season. And forasmuch as all Men are not called at the same moment, but
some receive the Truth in their Youth, others in their middle Age, some not
till Old Age; all the Liberty which we contend for, is, that Men may have the
free use of the Means* by which they may know the Truth, and be allowed to
understand it before they be admitted to Sacred things, that they may not only
be able to give a Reason of the Hope that is in them, but also be able to do
(as they are also exhorted) Prove every man his own Work, that he may have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6. 4, 5. Thus much in
answer to this Objection.

There is no Man living that would more gladly (than my self) give to the
Church of God, all that Honor and Obedience which God has allowed Her; but to
say, She cannot err, is to make Her more like God than She is. I think all that
can be safely affirmed, is, That She shall not sail so, as utterly to cease
from being, but that God will have a Church in the World, to be his Witness to
the end of the World, though the Apostasy be never so great, or seemingly
universal. And as it pleased God to foreshew the great Apostacies, which should
be found among the Christian Nations: So he was graciously pleased to intermix
some words of comfort, that when it should so fall out, that the Spouse of
Christ should be like the Dove in the secret places of the Stairs; Cant. 2. 14.
or thrust into Prisons, and out of sight, which might cause the Faithful even
to think there was no Church remaining (like that of the Prophet, who desired
rather to die than to live, because he thought the Faithful had utterly failed,
and himself left alone) I say, that then they should remember that the Gates of
Hell should not prevail against the Church, and therefore God has always had a
Church, however she might be obscured.

Finally, Brethren, my Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you, is, that you
may be of one Mind and Judgment in all the Will of God, and especially in these
Sacred Principles before mentioned, and in the Constitution of your Ministry,
in respect of the Threefold Order of Ministers, under which the first Churches
were undoubtedly governed, viz. Messengers, Elders, and Deacons. And I do the
rather advise to this, because some have been pleased to publish in Print, that
there are only two Offices remaining in the Church of Christ, viz. Elders and
Deacons; This Presbyterian Principle, will, I fear, undo such as receive it.
They boldly tell us, that the Office of Timothy and Titus was Temporary, as if
they had none to succeed them. What I have formerly written in the defense of
the first of these Offices, is extant among you, and as yet unanswered, and to
that I refer you.

Our Divisions have been, and will be, if continued, very prejudicial to the
Truth it self; and our Adversaries know how to make use of them against us, and
our Holy Profession, though they cannot be Ignorant of the great Divisions
which were in the Churches in the Apostles Days, nor should they be ignorant of
their own; and to the end they may see they are no more happy in that matter
than their Neighbors, let them consider what Bernard has written of them, as
he is quoted by the Learned, in Cant. Sermon. 33. His Words are to this effect.

From whom shall the Church hide her self? All are Friends, and all are
Enemies; all are Kinsfolks, and all are Adversaries; all are Household Servants,
and there is none at peace; all are Neighbors, and all seek but their own
Profit. They are Ministers of Christ, and serve Antichrist; they do walk in
the Honor of the Goodness of the Lord, unto whom they do no Honor. Thereby
comes that Beauty of the Harlot, which thou see daily in their Apparel, as
the Players of Comedies. As in the Apparel of a King, thereby thou see the
Gold in the Bridles, Saddles and Spurs. Thereby are the Tables beautified with
Meats and Vessels: Thereby comes Drunkenness and Gluttony: Thereby proceeds
the Harp and the Viol: Thereby are the Presses running over, and the Garners
full, answering the one to the other: Thereby are the Boxes full of Ointment
and sweet Savor: Thereby are the Purses filled. Therefore would they be, and
are the Princes of the Churches. The Provosts, Deans, Archdeacons, Bishops,
Archbishops, and these things come not lawfully, but because they walk in the
business of Darkness.

Behold now in Peace my bitterness is most bitter, It has been before bitter
in the Death of Martyrs, afterward more bitter in Controversy with Heretics;
now it is most bitter in the manners of those of our own House. We can neither
chase them away, they are so mighty, and multiplied without Number; the Sores
and Plagues of the Church are entered into the inward parts, and are incurable,
and therefore is her Bitterness most bitter.

And in Psalm. 90. 6, 11. O Lord Jesus, thou have multiplied the People, but not
increased their Joy; all the Christians almost, do seek their own Profit, they
have removed the Offices to shameful Gain, and into Works of Darkness, and the
Health of Souls is not searched for, but the Pleasure of Vices: Therefore are
they shorn: Therefore do they frequent Churches, and sing Psalms.

They contend most impudently daily by Process, for Bishoprics,
Arch-Bishopricks, etc. There remains nothing, but that the Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, be revealed.

And on the Conversion of St. Paul. Alas, O Lord God, for these are the first
which do persecute thee, whom we do see to love the highest Places in thy
Church, and do hold the Principality, and by Power and strength have taken the
Arches of Sion, and afterward freely have set all the City on fire. Their
Conversation is miserable, the Subversion of thy People is pitiful. And
speaking to the Pope, he says, This Mortal Corruption has not begun in thy
days, but I pray God it may end in thy time. In the mean time thou art
apparelled and decked up very gorgeously. If I durst speak, thy Seat is rather
a Pack of Devils then of Sheep. Did St. Peter do so? Did St. Paul mock after
that sort? Behold the murmuring and complaint of all Churches, they do cry out
that they are cut in pieces, and dismembered. There are very few, or almost
none, that do not fear the streak or Wound. Thus far Bernard.

Let not then the Papists contemn or despise us, because of some Defects, in
respect of Unity, neither let us despise them, because of the Discords which
have been, or are among them. Let us beware of the cause of those Calamities,
and strive only for the true Form, and due Power of Godliness, then shall the
Spirit of Hatred, which has inserted it self amongst Christians, be rooted
out; and then shall that great Badge of Christianity, unfeigned Love, (even the
Love of God, shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost) possess the Room of
all our bitter Contentions. That thus it may be, is the Prayer of

Your Loving Brother, Thomas Grantham.
Written in the Year 1685.
Postscript. Concerning the Original Manuscripts of the Holy Scriptures.
BRETHREN,
BEcause our Learned Adversaries are wont to amuse weak Christians, by telling
them they knew not the Originals, etc. I thought fit to transcribe part of what
I have formerly printed in Answer to this specious Objection; In the
Introduction of my Book of Primitive Christianity, how vain and pernicious this
Talk is about the Original, will appear, when you consider, That no man living
ever saw the very Papers in which the Prophets and Apostles did write the first
Draughts of the Holy Scriptures, and therefore none have the Originals, but
only Copies of Scripture. And let not this offend any Man: for,

It seems to have been the best for all Christians, that after many Copies are
taken and spread in many Nations, these first Draughts should not continue
long; for had any now but so much Confidence, as to say they have these very
first Sheets of Paper to show, how might they trouble the whole World with such
a Report? and how might they abuse the World, and all the Churches in the World
at pleasure? as by adding or taking away, and who should correct the Original?

Suppose the Roman Church had those Manuscripts in their Hands, what Mists
might they cast upon the Nations, and who could come to the sight of them to
discover any such abuse? and the same may be said of any other potent Party.

But now the Originals being no where to be found, but yet a multitude of
Copies extant, and the same translated by multitudes of Men into several
Languages; by this means all are forced to be more peaceable than perhaps they
are willing to be, since they have only Copies of the Divine Oracles, and
others have Copies as well as they, so that they can none of them pretend to
have ever seen the Original, and therefore can they less quarrel about their
Copies. Thus has God's Wisdom disposed herein, better for his Church than She
could have thought or desired.

And it is worth observation, that scarce any of the Churches to whom St. Paul
wrote, had the Original sent to them, (except the Galatians) but had only
certain Copies written by diverse Hands. For Instance, The Epistle to the
Hebrews was written by Timothy, as it is said in the Postscript. The Epistle to
the Romans was written by Tertius. Four Persons wrote the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, Postscript. Two Brethren wrote the Second Epistle, Postscript.
Tichicus and Onesimus wrote that to Colossus. All these Churches had only
Copies, and for ought appears, never saw the Originals.

And what if some of these Copies did accidentally vary some Word or Tittle,
are the Sacred Epistles ever the worse, so long as the Holy Doctrine therein
contained, was not injured? Can we think that when the Holy Apostles preached,
that they had still the very self-same Phrases? This were idle to imagine, and
yet they had the self-same Gospel to preach in every Place.

I speak not this, as if I approved of altering the Holy Writings; no, not in
the least iota; yet if accidentally, in Transcribing, or Printing, there should
be some such Failure, I do not think that by and by that Copy were to be
rejected, or the Authority of the Scriptures therefore to be called in
question, that men might set up themselves above it. Some under pretense of
being the Church, and others pretending the Spirit, whilst they both reject the
Church and the Spirit, as held forth in, and speaking by the Holy Scriptures. A
plain Instance of this, we have in the Papists, and most Paedo-Baptists, who
whilst they seem to admire General Councils, Fathers, etc. they regard not the
Decrees of the best Councils and Fathers, which were held by the Apostles and
Elders, and Brethren at Jerusalem, who among other things, forbid the eating of
things strangled, and Blood, which the Church observed for several hundred of
years after [for indeed they were delivered to the Churches to be kept, not to
be broken, Acts 16. 1, 2.] and yet without all Conscience of these Decrees,
they feed upon Blood, etc. And on the other side, how ridgidly do they impose
the Decrees of the Trent Councils, in the Case of Transubstantiation (though
never heard of before it was there invented) insomuch as they have punished
with the cruelest Death, such as in Conscience could not subscribe unto it. God
give them a better Understanding, and more Moderation for the future.

But ye, Brethren, as you have received these Holy Decrees among the rest of
the Heavenly Rules left unto us by the most Ancient Fathers, even the Apostles
of our Lord, so walk in them, and keep the Ordinances as they were delivered by
them, who received them of the Lord. Now the Lord increase our Faith, that we
may be able to stand fast in the Truth, and to overcome all Difficulties. So
prays your Brother,

Thomas Grantham.

Hear the Church, etc. OR, AN EPITOME OF THE CHIEF CONTROVERSIES BETWEEN THE
PAPISTS, AND THE Baptized Believers. By THOMAS GRANTHAM.

Let that therefore abide in you which you have heard from the Beginning: if
that which ye have heard from the Beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall
continue in the Son, and in the Father, and this is the Promise which he has
Promised us, even Eternal Life, 1 John. Unto the perfect Words of the
New Testament nothing may be added, and from which nothing may be taken away,
by him that will lead a Life agreeable to the Gospel. Apollinar. l. 5. c. 14.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1687.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Friend,
IT is now about six and twenty years since it pleased a Learned Papist to send
seven Queries to the People commonly called Anabaptists, in the County of
Lincoln, about which many Papers were exchanged, and in the Year 1662; some
part of them were Printed under the Title of the Baptist against the Papist, or
the Scripture and Rome in Contention about the Supreme Seat of Judgment in
Controversies of Religion. To which the Querist never replied in Print, but
only sent me a few Notes in Manuscript; which seven Queries, with my seven
Anti-queries I shall annex to this Epistle.

The Truth is, I did then, and do still look upon this sort of
Christian-Adversaries (so I call them) to be the most subtle, as well as
coherent with their Principles, keeping close to their Arguments, and using all
very much the same Mediums: and were the Truth with them (as in many things I
am satisfied it is not) this very thing would be their high Commendation.

But missing the Heavenly Mark (more is the pity) they must needs be the more
dangerous, wherein they stand opposed to the Truth, of which being very
sensible* I cannot, as I love plain Truth, and the Souls of all Men, but
endeavor as much as in me is, after a Christian sort to undeceive (if it may
be) some of them, and to prevent others from being deceived by them.

I speak not this as fearing them, but as truly loving them, as they bear the
name of Christians, and doubtless are as zealous in their way as any, tho I do
verily believe they are under the greatest mistakes of any that prof^ss the
Christian Religion, except professed Enthusiasts.

That I treat them in Love is no new thing, let my Words written more than
twenty years since witness, now in my Epistle to the Reader thus you find them.
Not that I envy those of the Papal Church, or desire them any evil; Not that I
desire they should be exposed to a Suffering Condition for matters of Religion,
or that they should be denied any liberty in that Respect which I desire my
self, nor for any other prejudice (God knows) do I publish this small
Treatise, etc.

And what I said then, I say now, being verily persuaded by the Scripture, and
all good Principles which I could ever meet with, that they and all men [living
soberly and quietly under the Government] ought to have at least a friendly
connivance under our differing sentiments from the established Form or Order of
Worship, etc. But I am no Dictator, I must leave these things to the pleasure
of God, and the prudence of our Governors, only this is my Determination, in
Christ's strength to live and die faithful to what I know of the ways of Truth,
and to my own Conscience. Praying constantly for the happiness of my Prince,
and all his peaceable Subjects.

Tho. Grantham.

Hear the Church: The Third PART.
CONTAINING AN EPITOME OF THE Controversies depending between those who are
commonly called PAPISTS, and those commonly called ANA-BAPTISTS: Occasioned by
Seven Queries propounded by a Learned PAPIST.

LET the Christian Reader know, that it is no idle Conceit of the Parts of the
Author, above his Brethren, nor yet above his Adversaries (many of whom are
undoubtedly Men of very rare Parts and Accomplishments) which moves him thus
to appear, and to call forth all the Strength of Rome in Argument to defend
their Church and Religion against the poor Baptized Churches in this Nation:
But it is only the Clear Evidence of Truth, on their side, as contained in the
holy Oracles of God, which gives Boldness to this great Undertaking. Which in
all due Humility, Christian Love, and yet with holy Confidence, is thus
attempted, for a fair Trial of the Case or Cases depending between the Parties
above mentioned. In the Name of God therefore let us proceed to the Particulars
of the Seven Queries sent to the Baptists by a Learned Papist, which indeed
contains the Sum of the Controversies between the said Parties.

Papist Query 1. Baptist Anti-query 1. Whether we are to resolve all
Differences in point of Religion, only out of the Written Word of God? What
Controversy in point of Religion can you resolve without the Written Word of
God? And whether the written Word of God be a perfect Rule for Matters of
Religion?

The first Part of this Anti-query concludes in the Negative; the latter Part
in the Affirmative, and affords (as I think) this undeniable Argument,

That which is the only perfect Rule to all Christians in the greatest Matters
of Religion, and that without which neither Christ, the Church, nor Christian
Religion can be known, is the only infallible Rule by which all Controversies
in point of Religion, are to be resolved.

But the Holy Scriptures are the only perfect Rule to all Christians in the
greatest Matters of Religion; and that without which neither Christ, the
Church, nor Christian Religion can be known.

Ergo, The Holy Scriptures are the only infallible Rule by which all
Controversies in point of Religion among Christians are to be resolved.

Papist Query 2. Baptist Anti-query 2. How know you precisely what is the true
Word of God? Whether some Book must not of necessity speak for it self [or be
received for God's Word upon its own Evidence?] and whether the Holy Scriptures
do not best deserve that privilege? And whether it be not too great presumption
to say, There are no Holy Books, but those which you and we have received for
such, seeing those which we have, tell us there were other Holy Writings, which
never yet came to our Hands, nor to yours?

Forasmuch as no Society of Christians in these days can bear witness to the
truth of any thing upon their own knowledge, sight, or hearing (as the Apostles
did, 1 John 1. 2 Pet. 1. 16.) for scarce so much as one hundred years, and this
their Testimony, also, being but of human Authority, it remains of necessity,
that some Books of Record must be received upon the Authority of the Author, in
whose Name they speak, and the Divine Evidence of the Matter contained in them;
and hence we argue, the Sufficiency of the Scriptures own Authority, to command
our reception of them, speaking to us in the Name of God, and carrying in
themselves Divine Evidences in respect of the matters therein contained.

Papist Query 3. Baptist Anti-query. 3. How know you that your Copies and
Translations of the Bible, are the true Word of God, since the Original
Writings are not come to your Hands? What Copies and Translations of the
Scriptures have you that are more true than ours? And where are the Original
Manuscripts of the Prophets and Apostles?

Seeing it was not the Pleasure of the Divine Wisdom, to preserve, and present
to all Nations, the very first Pieces of Paper in which the Divine Oracles were
written; but rather to preserve many Copies, and cause them to be spread
throughout the World. And seeing no sort of Christians dare pretend to have
Translated any of those Copies by an infallible Pen, but only according to the
best Skill they have acquired or learned in the Original Tongues; It would
better become all Learned Christians to bend their Minds to rectify (what they
may) any Imperfection or Mistake that may be in any of the Translations, rather
than by such Queries as this, to open a Gap to Unbelief and Irreligion.

And though much might be said (by a captious Person) against the English
Translation of the Papists, yet to prevent vain Jangling, we refuse not to be
tried in the Cases depending in these Queries* and Anti-queries, either by
their Translation of the Bible, or by that which is allowed by Authority? And
seeing no Papist is able to produce the prime Originals, let them beware how
they quarrel with our Copies, lest some quarrel with theirs: and ^so instead of
Edification, they bring forth nothing but vain Contention: and show themselves
ungrateful to God, and mischievous to men. For what man of any Modesty would
upbraid another, because he never saw the Original Writings, when neither
himself, nor any man living ever saw them, nor is ever like to see them?

Papist Query 4. Baptist Anti-query 4. Where we differ about the Sense of the
Word, by whom must we be tried? The dead Letter cannot explain it self. When we
differ about the true Church, or the Meaning of Authors [ be they Fathers, or
Councils] by whom must we be tried? These cannot speak for themselves, more
than the Scriptures: And whether, the Scriptures being compared together, do
not explain themselves? Also, whether this be not an opprobrious, and
ignominious Speech, for you to call the Scripture a dead Letter? And whether
the true Lovers of the Scriptures, ever vouchsafed them such ill, and indeed
improper Language?

Of all the Seven Queries, this is the most difficult; see what we have said to
this Difficulty in our precedent Epistle. Let the Papists prove themselves to
be the true Church, and the Contention about the Power of the Church to decide
Differences which may* arise about the Meaning of the Scriptures, will with
more ease be brought to a period. In the mean time, as we must every one give
an account of our selves to God, so it is the Duty of every Christian to labor
to understand the Scriptures, Mat. 24. 15. Pro. 22. 20, 21.

Papist Query 5. Baptist Anti-query 5. What clear Text have you out of the
Scriptures, for the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father, and the Son?
Or for changing the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday? Or for prohibiting
Poligamy, or Infant Baptism? And whether there be not as clear Texts to prove
unwritten Traditions, Purgatory, and the Real Presence? Whether the Baptism of
the true Church be not One? And whether the one Baptism be not expressly found
in the Scriptures? and whether the Scriptures do not prohibit all Baptism of
Water, beside that one? And whether the Papists have not confessed, in many of
their Books, that Infant Baptism is not found in, nor grounded upon the
Scripture? And then, whether it be not clear, that all the Texts, which speak
of Baptism in Water, do prohibit Infant Baptism? Also, whether John 15. 26. and
14. 26. and 16. 7. be not clear Texts, that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father, and the Son? Also whether 1 Cor. 7. 1, 2, 3. do not as much prohibit
one Man for having two Wives, as one Woman for having two Husbands? And,
whether it do not clearly prohibit the latter? Also, whether there be any
thathold the First Day of the Week under the Notion of a Sabbath, among the
Baptized Churches; and yet whether there be not clear proof for the Religious
Observation of it, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Also, whether it be not absurd for
you to ask for clear Texts, to prove unwritten things? Also whether Purgatory,
and the Real Presence, as you hold them, are not plainly destructive to some
Articles of the Christian Faith.

For, is not this the Faith of all sound Christians?

1. That Almighty God does love no Creature in this World, so much as the
Creature Man; nor does he take any Creature on Earth into that nearness of
Union with himself, as the Souls and Bodies of those that shall be saved. 2.
That the blessed Body of Christ, after his Ascension into Glory, admits of no
Change, either by Addition to his Substance of his Flesh, and Blood; or
Diminution of any part thereof from either.
Now it is most certain, that the Opinion of the Real Presence by
Transubstantiation of Bread and Wine into the very Body and Blood of Christ,
God-Man, does evidently militate against these clear Truths, with the greatest
opposition, as will appear by these Considerations following,

1. Though the Love of God to Mankind, especially to all that shall be saved,
is exceeding great; yet it is certain, he never died, nor ever will SO take
them into Union with himself, AS to Transubstantiate their Bodies into the
Divine Substance of Christ, and so make their Flesh of the same Essence with
himself, as he is God Blessed for ever.

And therefore it is in no wise to be believed, That God Almighty so loves the
Creatures, Bread and Wine, as to turn, or transubstantiate the very Substance
of them, into the very Substance of the only Son of God, whom we believe to be
of one Substance with the Father.

It is also further to be considered, That though the two Natures in Christ, i.
e. the Divine, and Human, are united after an unspeakable manner; yet no
Christian does believe, that God did transubstantiate the Substance of the
Humane Nature, into the Substance, of the Divine Nature, and that the Forms of
Flesh and Blood only does remain. How then is it at all credible that God
should Deifie the Creatures of Bread and Wine, by turning them into the Divine
Essence, as well as Human, to be worshipped with the highest degree of
Adoration which is proper to God himself? Con. Trent. Dr. Willet Synops. Papis.
p. 561.
Sess. 13. Can. 6. And the Words of Bellarmin are very plain; God (says he) is
verily and truly to be worshipped, Mat. 4. But Christ in the Eucharist, is very
God; Ergo.

Thus much of the First Proposition. And for the Second;

2. It is to be considered, That if the very Substance of Bread and Wine, be
really transubstantiated into the Substance of Christ's Flesh and Blood, then
they do either remain that same Substance of Christ's Flesh for ever, or else
they are after some time either annihilated, or turned to Corruption. But to
say either of these, is flatly to deny, or oppose express Scripture, which
tells us, That the Flesh of Christ saw no Corruption, and that he continues
ever. And Acts 2. 27. Heb. 7. 24.
for the first, that Bread and Wine, after the Words of Consecration, remains
for ever, of the Substance of Christ's Real Body, it is no way credible. For
then the Body of Christ must have received a mighty Augmentation since its
Ascension. For,

If all the Bread which has been consecrated for almost 1700 years, shall be
supposed to be all in one place, at any time (as sure the whole Flesh of
Christ's Body is so) it might, for Magnitude, compare with a Mountain. And if
all the vast quantity of Wine, which has been consecrated for the like space
of time, were supposed to be collected (as sure all the Blood of Christ remains
in his Body, being impossible to be shed since he went into Heaven) it might
compare with a considerable Fountain of Water. But both these are so very
absurd, that it is hoped no Christian will affirm them; and therefore that
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which necessarily infers these, and many more
Absurdities, is by no means to be received.

If the Papists shall reply, and say, That though the Bread and Wine be really
turned into the Flesh and Blood, Body, Soul, and Divinity of Christ, yet it is
not necessary that they remain so for ever; I shall earnestly desire them to
show us what becomes of it then? And I ask whether by such reply they do not
make the Real and Glorious Body of Christ the most mutable thing in Heaven and
Earth, being, according to this Doctrine, subject to be really made, and unmade
every day, and that in a thousand places on the same day?

If any (who are little acquainted with the Doctrine of the present Church of
Rome) shall question whether they do indeed hold so gross an Error, as to
teach, that the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist is turned into the very
Substance of the Divine Nature of Christ, as well as his Humane Nature; he may
see it fully asserted by a Learned Papist in a certain Catechism, entitled, An
Abridgment to Christian Doctrine, the last* Edition, Printed at Doway, 1661.
page 194, 195. in these Words.

Quest. What is the Blessed Eucharist?

Answ. It is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; true God, and true Man, whole
Christ, under the outward Forms of Bread and Wine. This Catechize is Printed
with the approbation of William Hide. D. D. President of the English College
at Doway*


Quest. In what manner is Christ present under these Forms?

Answ. By the true and Real Presence of his Divine and Human Nature, and not
Figuratively only, as some would have it. God in Mercy open the eyes of all
that are thus blinded with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which Word
Transubstantiation, the Papists confess is not found in Scripture. See the said
Catechism, page 196.

Papist Query 6. Baptist Anti-query 6. Whether Universality both for time and
place, be not an evident Mark of the true Church? What Church can you name that
has that Mark? And whether the Woman which St. John saw (called Mystery
Bablyon) be not meant of Rome? and whether her Cup was not universally
received, so that all Nations were made Drunk thereby?

Papist Query 7. Baptist Anti-query 7. Whether you have really this Mark? that
is, whether you can fetch out of all Ages, and Nations, Professors of your
Religion; in particular you are desired to name but one, or two in the first
six hundred years after Christ of your Profession; for example, such as held
the sole sufficiency of Scripture for the deciding Controversies, and denied
the Lawfulness and Usefulness of Infant Baptism? Whether any man can show this
Mark, as it is here called for, without the help of Human History? and whether
Human History be infallibly true, so as to be a ground for Divine Faith? and
whether those Human Records which concerned Christian Religion for the first
three hundred years after Christ were not the most of them burnt by the
Persecutors of Christians? and whether those which remain have not been much
altered? and whether they are not in many things contradictory? Also, whether
Infant Baptism was so much as heard of in the first Century, and then how
should any be named which denied the usefulness of it in this Age? And whether
the first clear mention of it be not from Tertullian? and whether the Learned
do not confess that he opposed it in the third Century as an irrational and
unwarrantable Custom? Also, whether that Church, whose manner of admitting
Persons into her Communion, her Constitution and Government, are according to
the Scriptures, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Heb. 6. 1, 2, etc. be not the true Church of
Christ?

And whether the Baptized Churches (commonly called Anabaptists) do not excel
in these Particulars, all other Churches whatsoever?

Of all the Marks of the Church, so much stood upon by the Papists, this of
Antiquity leads, and indeed it is of that importance, that if they fail of this
Mark they are like to miss all the rest, and that they must fail of the best
Antiquity, in the case of their Baptism (without which they can have no true
Church) will with much ease be made evident.

1. Because by their own Confession Infant Baptism (which is the Baptism of the
present Roman-Church) is not grounded upon the Scripture. Here they fail of
Scripture-Antiquity, which is the best. 2. Because they have not one Credible
Witness for Infant Baptism* in the first Century after Christ* 3. Because it is
acknowledged by themselves, that they have changed the manner of the
Administration of Baptism from Dipping to a little Sprinkling, which indeed is
no Baptism.
Whereas on the contrary, the best Antiquity is as clear for our Baptism [ i.
e. Believers Baptism] as the light of the Sun, many thousands of Believers
being Baptized by John Baptist, and more by Christ (or his appointment) John 3.
23. and 4. 1. three thousand Believers Baptized in one day, Act. 2. 40. And
multitudes of Believers being Baptized in every Age since the Institution of
Baptism, yea all the Ancient Fathers for the first three hundred years, (if not
for the first six hundred years) after Christ were Baptized Believers, so that
I should think the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against our Church in the Case
of Baptism, whether we consider the Subject, Manner, End and Use of Holy
Baptism, Whereas,

The only Witness which is pretended by my Learned Adversary for the first
Century is Dionysius the Areopagite, mentioned, Acts. 17. 34. Who is said to
speak thus, in a Book entitled Eccles. Hierarch. cult. The Custom of our
Mother the Church in Baptizing Children is not to be contemned, nor to be
judged superfluous, nor indeed to be credited, if it were not an Apostolical
Tradition.

Truly this Author speaks not like a Man that was satisfied in this Point of
Infant Baptism, and such is the faintness of his Evidence, that methinks he
should leave a suspicion upon every man that reads him, that he did not know
what to say, nor whereof to affirm, but leaving every man to think of the Words
as he pleases, we will hear what the Learned have said concerning this Book
Eccles. Hirarch.

First, They put it down in the Catalogue of Forged Writings, and Cajetan a
Papist denis that Work to be written by Dionysius: Their Reasons are,

1. Because he never makes mention of St. Paul in that Book, who was the happy
Instrument by whom Dionysius was converted: and yet he extolls Hierotheus as
his Master. 2. Because he writes of many Orders, of Popes, Priests, and Monks,
of which the first Age had none. 3. Eusebius and Jerome in their Catalogues
never make mention of this Book. And Gregory the Great does say it was not
written by Dionysius. 4. Illiricus has ten very considerable Reasons, why this
Book was written long after the Death of Dionysius, one is this, The Author
talks often of the Distinction of the Quire, and the Church: whereas (says he)
the Christians had no such Churches an hundred years after Dionysi^s's time.
This Author therefore will never bear so great a weight* as to prove Infant
Baptism to have been either taught or practiced by the Apostles.
Being thus found destitute of all Antiquity in the first Age, let us hear what
one of their own Chronographers tells us concerning both the beginning of
Infant Baptism and the want of any Evidence for Infant Baptism, in this Nation
till more then three hundred years after Christ.

Robert Fabian, a Papist, in his Chron. part 5. c. 118. fol. 105. tells us, the
Faith had endured in Britain from the time of Lucius (the first Christian King
in Britain) near upon the season of four hundred years, and odd, and then in
the next The present Baptized Believers only do hold to the old Religion at
least in the Point of Sacred Baptism
Chapter he gives account of Augustine* the Monk coming into England, and how he
prevailed with some Bishops to observe his Orders. And in Fol. 107. he says,
But for all this there were of them that said, that they might not leave the
Custom which they so long had con^inued, without the Assent of all such as used
the same. Then Austin gathered a Synod, to the which came seven Bishops of
Britains, with the wisest men of the famous Abbey of Bangor. But first they
took Counsel of an Holy Man, whether they should be obedient to Austin or not.
And he said, if you find him humble and meek, as to Christ's Disciple
belongs, that then they should assent to him, which meekness they should
perceive in him, if he at their coming into the Synod, or Council, arose
against them. When the said Bishops entered the said Synod, Augustine sat still
in the Chair and removed not, wherefore they were wroth and disdained him, and
would not obey to his requests. Then he said to them, Since ye will not assent
to my Hests generally, assent to me especially, in three things.

The first is, That you keep Easter Day in due Form and Time, as it is Ordained.

The Second, That ye give Christendom to Children.

And the Third is, That ye Preach unto the Anglish the Word of God as I
afore-time have exhorted you: and all the other Deal I will suffer you to
amend, and reform among your selves. But they would not thereof.

From this Passage it is very evident, that Infant Baptism came not into this
Nation till about four hundred years after the Gospel was first Received here;
and therefore the Papists must needs fail of Antiquity here, and must, (if they
will do us right) give place to the Baptized Believers, not only in the Case of
Believers-Baptism, but also in respect of the denial of Baptism to Infants,
seeing these seven Bishops, and the wisest Men of Bangor withstood Augustine
the Monk, in that point then, as we withstand the Papists in that point now.

And as we have suffered many hard things, even to the burning of our Bodies in
Smithfield, for bearing witness to the Ancient and True Baptism of Christ, even
so it fared very ill with those that withstood Infant Baptism, etc. in the Days
of Austin; for Fabian relates how they were many hundreds of them murdered; and
Mr. Fox seems to lay the Fault upon Austin. I conclude with these two short
Arguments,

1. The present Church of Rome cannot possibly prove her self to be the true
Church of Christ; Ergo, the present Church of Rome is not the true Church of
Christ. 2. The present Church of Rome has no true Baptism; Ergo, She is no*
the true Church of Christ. Let the Papists defend their present Church against
these Arguments [the Grounds whereof are delivered truly in the precedent
Discourses] without which, all they can say, will signify little; for what
Power soever the Church has, it is little to them, unless they make good proof
that they are the true Church of Jesus Christ.
FINIS.

