The Marquess De Grana, the King of Spain's Viceroy in the
Spanish-Netherlands, His Mandatory Letter to all Commanders, Officers, and
Soldiers, to Resist the French, and Repel Force with Force.
Done out of the Original from Brussels.
THE Peace of Nimeguen having been concluded upon such Conditions, as France it
self desired, We had all the reason in the World to hope, That this Peace would
have been put in Execution, and Observed on their Part. But instead of
contenting themselves with the Advantages which they have got by their Demands,
and which we were willing to Sacrifice for the Repose of Christendom, They have
retarded for several Months the quitting of the Garrisons which should have
been surrendered back to his Catholic Majesty, wasted by excessive Quartering
of Soldiers those Places which should have been restored, as well as those
which really and truly belonged to him, and Ruined all his Majesty's Subjects,
as well by Extortion of Contributions, beyond the Time limited by the
Eighteenth Article of the Peace, as by several undue Exactions and Sums already
paid, and oppressive Quota's with which His Majesty has been charged. And
although after all this, and the opening the Conference of Courtra, for an
amicable reconciliation of all Differences between the Two Crowns, we did not
expect any other Acts of Violence, the Commissioners named on both Sides were
hardly arrived at the Place appointed, but the French entered Hainault and
Flanders, with a great Army, with an intention, as they have done, to make
themselves Masters of the City of Chievres, and several other Towns and
Villages. They have got the Possession of Charlemont, through their Threats of
a general Invasion into these Countries, two Months before the Time prefixed by
the Treaty of Peace, to restore that Fortress, or else to procure the Surrender
of Dinant, and after that kept both those Places to themselves. And farther
having a design to encroach always upon their Neighbors, and make themselves
sole Arbitrators of their Privileges, they have Erected a Pretended Chamber of
Reunion at Metz, they have caused to be adjudged to themselves, under
unsufferable pretenses, the County of Chiny, and other Lands and Territories
belonging to His Catholic Majesty. And to make good those Proceedings never
before practiced in Times of Peace, the said French have caused several Bodies
of Armed Forces to invade and pillage the Countries belonging to his Most
Catholic Majesty; carried away, and received Ransoms of several Prisoners;
possessed themselves of almost all the Dutchey of Luxemburg, with several Lands
in the Provinces of Hainault, Namur, and others; blocked up the City of
Luxemburg it self, and made all his Majesty's Subjects deeply sensible of all
the Effects of a fierce and cruel War.

And though his most Catholic Majesty, out of his desire to preserve the Peace
of Christendom, had made use of none but Friendly means to stop these
proceedings, they have all proved ineffectual, notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances made on his Part at the Conference at Courtray, where the most
Christian King's Advocate could not be brought to give any Answer to the
Complaint about renewing of open Hostility, for which Reparation ought to have
been made in the first place; and not to do as they did, set on foot at the
same time, and press with a great deal of heat, New Pretensions to Alost and
other Places, the unjustness of which Pretensions, when it came to be laid
open, and that the King's Advocate declared his willingness to refer himself to
the Decision of the Commissioners of the Two Crowns, or in Case their
Judgments were equally divided, to that of Arbitrators to be equally chosen on
both sides, according to the Contents of the Treaty of Peace, yet the
Conference was broken off by the French Commissioners, who declared to those of
His Catholic Majesty, that his most Christian Majesty, having intelligence,
that the Great Turk was designing a War against his Imperial Majesty, was
resolved to leave no cause of Jealousy or Suspicion, which might hinder the
Christian Princes from Opposing the Common Enemy; for which reason he resolved
to raise the Siege of Luxemberg, and refer his Differences with Spain to the
King of Great Britain. However though the French Commissioners were not ignorant
that the Spanish Deputies were not qualified to accept of the said Arbitration,
and had also told the other, that they had received no Order about it, yet the
French departed, refusing to receive so much as one Paper more, under pretense
that their Commission was out. Which was all one as if his Catholic Majesty
had been obliged to refer his Differences with France to one single
Arbitration, chosen by the most Christian King, contrary to the Law of Nations,
and the Tenor of the Treaty of Peace, procured by the Mediation of the King of
Great Britain. In the Execution of which, nothing could have been more Natural
than to have made use of the same Mediation which was several times sought by
his Majesty and his Allies, and accepted by him, in pursuance of the kind
Offices which the King of Great Britain had offered to that purpose. But
France regarding nothing so much as the enlaging her Dominion, has refused this
Mediation, and Marshal D'Humiers upon the last Day of August past, and the
fiftieth of the Siege of Vienna, the Brigadeer Dasfeld, to give us Notice, That
the most Christian King not having been able to obtain any Satisfaction in
order to his Pretensions to Alost, and other Places mentioned in the Paper
exhibited by his Advocate at Courtray, had sent him Orders to Rendevouz his
Army and to enter those Countries, and yet all this while pretending he would
Act nothing against the Peace, if he were not interrupted in his Design, and
that the Spaniards did not oppose his Demands. Which seeming to us so much the
more Astonishing, in regard it belonged to France to pursue her Pretenses by
the regular means propounded in the Treaty of Nimegen, or to enter into a
Negotiation by the Mediation of the King of England, and that therefore it was
a manifest Contradiction to pretend at the same time, not to Act against the
Peace, and yet employ force of Arms to obtain that by Violence which was to be
at the Disposal of Formal Justice.

We therefore upon the whole returned this Answer to the Brigadeer, That his
Commission strangely surprised us; That we thought our selves in a profound
Peace; and that the Treaty of Nimeguen had distinctly explained and determined
how all differences were to be adjusted in an Amicable manner; that no man
could well believe, especially considering the present Condition of
Christendom, that ever any alterations would have been made so contrary to the
said Peace; That his most Catholic Majesty had an Ambassador at Paris, and the
most Christian King another at Madrid, where the Demands should have been
propounded on both sides, That his Majesty had entrusted him to defend, not to
surrender up those Provinces, or any part of 'em.

But the King of France not content with so rational an Answer, and continuing
to put his Claim to the decision of a War, has caused several Body's of Armed
Forces to fall with ruin and havoc upon the Territories and Subjects of his
Catholic Majesty, without taking the least Notice of the kind offers of the
King of England, or of what the Pope has tendered by his Extraordinary Nuntio,
and others of the Allies. He has seized upon the Cities and Towns of Lessines,
Beaumont, Chimay, Walcourt, Bovignes, and others, where his Troops for these
five Weeks and more have committed and still continue to commit all manner of
Violences in all parts under Obedience to his Catholic Majesty; sending their
Commands for the payment of vast Contributions double and treble what was paid
in the War. They have fallen upon his Majesty's Subjects, they have taken away
their Cattle, and Corn, and other Provisions, carried away Prisoners, beat down
Houses, and committed an abundance of other Enormities, which visibly tends to
an Absolute Breach. Seeing therefore, we have used all Amicable Means, since
all Interposition and Mediation proves in-effectual, nor can prevail to bend
and molifie the Rigor, with which the French Troops continue to overwhelm His
Majesty's Subjects to their Total destruction, and while the Injuries they
endure do but serve to bring a greater continually upon 'em, acd fot that they
have most feelingly besought us, not to permit them to be reduced under the
Servitude of France, by such a ruinous Desolation. We find our selves obliged
by the Duty of our Charge, to give Order to all Generals, Governors of
Provinces, Sergeant Majors of Battalia, Particular Governors, Commanders,
Chiefs, Masters of Camp, Colonels, Captains, and all other Officers and
Soldiers, as well Horse as Foot, of what Nation or Quality soever; and to all
his Majesty's Subjects, to Oppose all such Attempts and Proceedings of the
Enemy, in the Territories of his Majesty, to repel Force by Force, and to make
use of such means as God and Nature has afforded them, to defend and guard
themselves from the unheard of Violences and Cruelties which they commit.
Commanding you hereby to be Conform to these Commands, and to do and cause to
be executed all things according to the Tenor of these Presents, by all that
are under your Commands.

Brussels, October. 12. 1683. Signed, O. H. M. D'ALCARETTO.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey. 1683.


