THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. John Row OF Crediton in Devon.

Follow me as I follow Christ.

1 Cor. 11. Whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.

Heb. 13.7. LONDON Printed for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1673.

TO THE READER.
THe Verity and Reality of Religion is Exemplified in the Lives of holy men.
Whoever will please to peruse the following Narrative without prejudice, Two
things will appear with great evidence unto him; the one is, that this Person,
whose Life and Death are here faithfully reported, did both in his Life and
Death firmly believe Religion to be a Real thing, and lived and died as
believing it to be most Real: The other is, that there was some other Principle
(what ever it was) that carried him beyond the common principles of Humanity,
and the highest Seize of the most Refined Morality. Both which, if duly
considered, will plainly Demonstrate, first, that Religion is not a mere piece
of Hypocrisy or an empty show without substance; when as, it is evident that
some have believed it to be a Real Thing, and lived and died as believing it to
be so. Secondly, this also will appear, that there is a Superior Principle
(besides those common Principles which are left in Humane Nature, and those
Improvements which Morality may advance men unto) that has acted some Persons.
Both these Considerations confirm the Verity and Reality of Religion. And
truly, the more Credit may be given to the Testimony of this Holy Man
concerning the Reality of Religion, partly, because he was known to have a
Capacity, and Abilities of Mind, to understand the affairs of the world, and
Worldly Interests, as well as most men; and partly, because he had experimented
what was in Religion for the space of Fifty years; and after so long
experience, when he came to die, gave this Testimony concerning it, that it was
no Notion, it was a Reality. The Memory of this Holy Man is still fresh with
many that are yet alive; and, as it is Probable that several of his Friends and
Acquaintance may remember many Remarkable Passages concerning him which are not
here inserted, so they may possibly meet with some things in this Narrative
(especially such things as relate to the more inward Part of his Life) which
they were not acquainted with before. What ever benefit any may receive by the
Publication of this Persons Life, it is earnestly desired that all the Glory
may be Ascribed unto God, and nothing Attributed unto Man.

THE PREFACE.
HAving by a friendly violence, prevailed, that the ensuing Relation, which has
for more then ten years space been confined unto privacy, should now be exposed
to public view, I cannot but conceive my self in duty obliged, to usher it
into the world with this Preface, thereby to declare mine own just sentiments,
grounded on personal observations, touching the Spirit and Life of this great
Saint here Characterized. And indeed, to speak the truth, I find it no
difficult matter to engage my Pen, in a task so pleasing to my Spirit;
especially considering how much the Notion, but how much more the Practice of
Christianity is banished out of the world; yea, may we not say from the Hearts
and Lives of too many great pretenders thereto? O what a deluge of Atheism is
as it were in a few years broken in on us? How many Professed Atheists, yea,
whole Societies of that Profession are there? And what is the main design of
such, but to persuade us, that Religion is but a Blind of Hypocrisy, or a mere
Notion without Reality? Yea, to come nearer home, how much practical Atheism,
(which is a Monster worse then Speculative) is there to be found even among the
Professors of Religion? What contradictions are there in men's lives to the
Faith they profess? How disagreeing are the Actions of many Professors, from
the principles of their Profession? And how much is the holy Name of the great
God hereby blasphemed? Oh how far do the lives of Professors now adays come
short of that Purity, Simplicity, Heavenly-mindedness, holy conference, and
Activity for God, which shone, with so much luster and Beauty, in the
Christians of the foregoing, and beginning of this Age. What a great Testimony
did they give to the Religion they professed, by the Sanctity and Piety of
their Conversations? How much did they both demonstrate and adorn their
profession, by the Integrity of their Actions? For men are more apt to believe
our Works, than our Tongues; our Deeds have greater efficacy to persuade, then
our Words: A good Life is the most potent demonstration of good principles.
Exemplary visible Piety is, not only most Beautiful, but also most efficacious,
to beget the like disposition in those that behold it; as also to take off
those prejudices, which ill-minded men take up against the ways of God. These
and such like contemplations, have made me the more pressing and importunate,
to get the following Narrative made public; thereby to give check to the
growing Atheisms, both speculative and practical, of this Age; as also to let
professors see, what raisures in exemplary Godliness have been attained unto,
and they likewise ought to aspire after.

But to detain thee no longer in the Porch of this Sacred Temple, I shall give
thee a little Image of this holy man, whose Life and Death is more fully
related in the following Story. Crediton in Devon, was anciently very famous,
by reason of some eminent persons who have been born or seated there. But what
adds more to its honor upon the truest and best account, then that Mr. John
Row lived and died there? What a bright and Influential Star was he? How
accute, solid, judicious, and comprehensive was his Intellectual capacity? What
a great measure of prudence, as to civil affairs, was he endowed withal? How
publick-spirited was he, as to the good of the place where he lived? How many
Controversies and Lawsuits, did he by his happy interposure and mediation,
prevent or end? Oh! what a public good was he to poor Crediton, and the parts
adjacent? How free hearted, and ready to assist those that needed either Advice
or Relief? Was not a considerable part of his time, strength, and estate laid
out for the good of others? And Oh what an universal esteem and Affection did
he hereby gain from all, even the worst?

As for the inward frame of his Spirit, he had a deep insight into, and feeling
acquaintance with the great mystery of Faith and Godliness. His Light was not
merely Notional or Traditional; but real, distinct, and affective, derived from
the Father of Light. The self denial and Humility of his Spirit was very
illustrious in the whole of his life: Oh, how much would he abase self, and
magnify free grace in all the good he received or performed? Albeit he was
filled by God with great measures of grace, yet how empty was he of
self-fullness? The more gracious God was to him, the more vile he was in his
own eyes: Was not self-love greatly swallowed up in and by the sense of Gods
love to him? What delight did he take in concealing that grace which was
conferred on him, under an humble self-abasement before God and men? He lived,
the most that ever I knew any, in a continual separation, not only from the
world, but also from himself. He seemed to me to have arrived unto the greatest
abjuration of self-sufficiency that ever I met with. Oh, how much did he depart
from himself day by day, that so he might more entirely enter into and live in
Christ? What a generous design had he to abandon every part, not only of sinful
but legal self, for Christ? But yet the less he lived in the Spirit of his own
Gifts or Graces received, the more he lived in the Spirit of Christ his head.
Oh, what an amorous union with, and value for Christ did he gain by the Ruins
of self-love? The less he was in his own eyes, by so much the more did he
magnify Christ? His works did praise him, but how much did his tongue, heart
and life praise Christ? Yea, how much did he rejoice to see Christ glorified by
others, as well as by himself? I must confess according to my best knowledge, I
never knew any that did more cry down self, and cry up Christ, than this now
glorified Saint. How willing was he to render unto Christ, whatever he received
from him? Thus, as the Rivers receive new supplies by emptying themselves into
the Sea; so did this holy man by returning the acknowledgement and improvement
of all his grace unto Christ the Ocean of all. As Humility kept him low in his
own eyes, so Faith raised in him an high esteem of Christ. As he went unto
Christ for all grace, so he ascribed all unto him. Thus he made Christ all in
all. He seemed so laborious in the ways of Godliness, as if there were no
Christ to trust unto; and yet he was so much in Faith and dependence on Christ,
as if there were nothing to be done on his part. As for his diligence in the
work of God, that he ascribed to Christ; but as for any negligence he was
guilty of, that he ascribed to himself. His will stood strongly Bent for God.
Oh! what a pure, sound, single, entire, upright heart for God had he? How did
Divine Love bend his will, and purify the intention thereof, keeping it in a
firm adhesion unto God? What spiritual Affections for Christ, balanced with
saving light, was his heart possessed withal? How much did he fear God under
Smiles; love him under frowns; hope in him under difficulties; desire and enjoy
him under all other enjoyments? What a beautiful Harmony was there between his
will and the Divine Will? Yea, how much did he live, and die, in the Sovereign
Will? When the Lord took from him any dear Relation, what a correspondence
with, and Acquiescence in his royal pleasure did he discover in his deportment?
How Passive yea Active in concurrence with the will of God, was his will under
all chastisements? How little covetuous or thirsty after his own will was he?
Oh, what a flexible, humble, meek, and broken will toward God was there
discovered in him, and yet lo! how inflexible and stiff was his will as to
whatever had the appearance of evil? how patient, calm, and submissive was he
in his own cause, and yet what an ardent zeal had he for the concerns of his
Lord? How much could he condescend to the will of the meanest for their good;
and yet how little would he stoop to the lusts of the proudest?

As for the constant established tenor of his Spirit in walking with God, not
only in Religious dutys, but also in his civil Affairs, I have much admired it:
Yea, I cannot but tell the world, what I have often mentioned in private, that I
verily believe, this holy man enjoyed more of God in his civil employments,
then many Christians do in their spiritual Retirements and Devotion. I have
taken him when newly come of a crowd of secular affairs, and have found him
more spiritual in his converse, then I find the most of Christians after their
most serious exercises in religious worship. And, I remember he then told me,
(what I hope I shall never forget) That this was his course every day, to
examine what had been Gods carriage toward him, and what had been his carriage
toward God. A Golden Rule for Heart examens. Oh, what an estrangement from a
worldly Spirit, had he in all his worldly concerns? How were his Thoughts,
Principles, Inclinations, Affections, and Actions, molded into a fit frame for
walking with God? Was not this the main business and exercise of his Life? How
much time did he spend in the service of his Lord; and how little was he taken
up with self-concernments? What a serious lively affectionate communion with
God had he, not only in, but also out of duties? How much was his end ever in
his eye? And with what vigorous activity did he pursue the same? How much was
his heart with God, in eating, walking, commerce, and all parts of civil
Conversation? What a curious vigilant eye had he on his Spirit, to secure it
from all violent passions, and irregular motions? How unwilling was he to let
pass the least occasion presented for receiving, or doing good? How little was
there of a Vacuum in his Life, for tentation to fill up? What an equal uniform,
and harmonious life did he lead?

In sum, He was one of an Universal Spirit for Godliness: The Yoke and Cross of
Christ were pleasant and familiar to him. Oh, how strict was his life, but his
heart large toward God and men? How much did he vindicate the Reality of his
Religion, by living at a more than ordinary rate in Religion? It was his great
Aphorism, both living and dying, That Religion was a Real thing: And how much
did he demonstrate the same by the power thereof in his life and conversation:
What an Heaven of Holiness and Happiness did he find in his way to Heaven? What
a Tranquillity of Spirit did he arrive unto in this inferior world? Was not his
life, by reason of the equality of its parts, like a circle, which every day
began and ended in God? What a constellation of graces seemingly contrary, did
there shine forth in his Conversation? How knowing in the deep mystery of
Faith, and yet how humble was he? What a blessed mixture of zeal and meekness
appeared in him? What a Majesty mixed mith a sweet Affability was there in his
presence? How much did he advantage men that knew him by giving them such a
bright shining example of visible Godliness? I would not exceed in mine esteem
of persons or things; but yet, I must confess, I cannot but admire the grace of
God that shone so illustriously in this eminent Saint: And I think, I may say
it without injury to truth, or person, that to my best remembrance, I have not
seen any one clothed with more visible and shining grace, then this Holy man,
whose Lise and Death thou will find Characterised in the following story: The
memory of whom I trust will ever be as a living Sermon to me, and such as had
the privilege of converse with him.

As for the Relation here given of him, by my Dear Friend, I must beg this
favor of thee, that thou will not pass thy judgment till thou have read the
whole, and seriously considered the same; and then, I am apt to persuade my
self, thou will conclude with me, that thou have here offered to thy View, a
grand exemplar of Real Visible Godliness, which deserves thy serious attention
and Imitation.

Theophilus Gale.

THE Life and Death OF Mr. John Row.
JOhn Row, His Birth and Infancy.
the Son of Lawrence Row, was born in the Parish of Shobrook, in the County of
Devon, in that famous year 1588. When he was an Infant he was set aside in his
Cradle for dead, but it pleased God to put it into the heart of one of his
Sisters, who had a little more spirit and resolution then the rest had, to
resolve with her self, that she would go and look upon him once more; hereupon
coming to the place where he lay, and putting her hand to his mouth she
apprehended she felt a little breath; being encouraged by this, some means were
immediately used, so that he began to revive, and the Lord was pleased to
restore him to life who had been given up for dead, intimating (as it were) by
this so Early and Signal a Providence, that he had reserved him for some more
then ordinary use; and this the Course of his life did abundantly show.

After he was come to some years, His Education.
he was sent by his Parents to the Grammar-Schoole in Crediton (an ancient Town
in Devon-Shire) where he attained to such Proficiency both in the Latin and
Greek Tongues, that he was well nigh ripe for the University, and had
accordingly been sent thither in order to the Ministry, but that it pleased God
to take away his Father a little before the intended time; so that the
intentions which his Parents had of training him up for the Ministry could
never be accomplished. Thus the Lord, in his Wisdom, was pleased to take him
off from that, which others, by considering what his After-Life and Abilities
were found to be, would have judged him most meet for. So that we may hence
learn (to use an expression of his own) how that We do often err in our
judgments of things, and that God sees not as men see. Being frustrated in the
hopes he had of going to the University, he did not however loose that little
Learning, the School had afforded unto him; only the Greek, thorough dis-use,
was somewhat worn out with him; but he still retained so exact a knowledge of
the Latin Tongue that it was of great use to him, unto his dying day.

For his Parts, His Parts.
He was of a Sharp and Pregnant Wit, of a great, deep, and Penetrating
Judgment, he himself was wont to complain of some deficiency in his Memory,
but that defect appeared more to himself, then it did unto others; for others
judged him to excel in that, as well as in other Abilities of the Mind.

As for his Natural Temper and Disposition, His Natural Temper.
he was a man of great Ingenuity, of much Candor and Sweetness, those that knew
him most intimately, thought him to have as Noble and Generous a Soul, and to
be as far from any thing that savoured of a Base, Ignoble, and Sordid Spirit,
as ever any that they knew. He was exceeding Affable and Courteous unto all,
and that without the least show or suspicion of seeking his own ends by it: His
temper led him to be most sweet and kind unto all, and there was not the
meanest person that could say he was neglected or despised by him: He was very
careful to give a due respect unto all, and no one was ever more curious to pay
a just Reverence to those that were above him in Rank and Quality.

In his Behavior, he was most Humble, His Behavior,
Sweet, and Conversible, as ready to hear others speak as to speak himself, and
he would for the most part give them leave to speak, before he would be forward
to speak himself. His Natural Temper was so sweet and amiable, as that there
was scarce any that knew him but loved him, and honored him. And this
(together with his Grace) was elevated to such a pitch as that there was not
the worst of men that had any thing to speak evil of him.

And yet (that which is not common, The mixture of Authority with his Natural
Sweetness.
but is somewhat a rare conjunction) although his Natural Candor and sweetness
were such, yet he was a man of a great Presence, and of great Authority: He was
seldom known to speak in any serious Matter, but his speech carried a
wonderful, and peculiar kind of Authority with it. And there was so great a
Majesty in his conversation as that some (and those who were reputed both wise
and godly beholding the Excellency of his spirit, The Luster of his
Conversation.
the Luster of his graces, and how much his Conversation differed from the most
of men) have professed that when they were in his Company, they have had an Awe
left upon them, and could not be so free whilst they were in his Company, as
when they were amongst others.

But the main thing which this Narrative is intended for, is to speak of his
Grace, and to show what that Eminency in Holiness was which the Lord brought
him unto. And this, if the unworthy Relator may have but the happiness to
express and delineate as it was in him the Original Copy, he doubts no tbut the
Life of this Holy Man will prove a Pattern as worthy of our Imitation as any
this Latter-Age has produced. And if any thing seem to be defective in the
life of this Holy Man the Readers are to be entreated, not to impute it so much
to the defect of worth or merit in him (for as much as all that knew him
intimately, do unanimously acknowledge that there was much more in him than
could easily be expressed or declared by any) but unto want of skill in that
Hand which undertook to draw his Picture, and to give the Character of him
which is here represented.

Now that we may proceed in order, we shall begin with the first Rise of the
work of God in his Soul and afterward see what Progress it made, and to how
great a measure and pitch of Holiness the Lord brought him, in the conclusion.

When he was but young, and of tender years, his Parents did (according to
their measure), The beginning of the Work of Grace in his heart.
instruct him in the Grounds of Religion, and did also cause him carefully with
themselves to frequent the Public Ministry in the Congregation, and by this
means he came to have the first Tastes and Relishes of Religion in his heart.
When his Father was dead, Mr. Row went from his Mother to live with Doctor
Bodley (brother to the famous Sr. Thomas Bodley founder of the University
Library in Oxford) a man of Eminent Piety, and Exemplary Holiness, and who was
then the Minister and proper Incumbent of the place where Mr. Row was born,
and his Parents lived. From this Holy man, and Eminent Person for Sanctity Mr.
Row learned much, and very much of the work of God upon his soul must be
attributed to him, as the Instrument, and as he learned much from him, so he
was not a little beloved by him, the Doctor bearing as tender a respect to him,
as if he had been his own Child. Living thus with Doctor Bodley, and afterward
for a season with another Gentleman (viz.) Mr. Thomas Gale of Crediton, (who
also was a godly man) Mr. Row had opportunity frequently to go to London,
where he heard some of the ablest Preachers, and such as were then most in
Reputation, as Dr. Gouge, Mr. Stock, and others, and by them he was much helped
forward in Spiritual Knowledge, and quickened in his Love to the ways of God:
But Doctor Bodleys counsels, together with his Holy Example (he being a man of
an Austere Life and of a most Strict Conversation) seemed to be that which had
most Influence upon him, and to leave the greatest Impression on his heart; for
nothing was more familiar with him throughout his whole life, then to be
speaking upon all occasions what he had seen and heard and observed in him. The
Sermons also and Preaching of Doctor Bodley was of great use to him; for this
was Mr. Rows observation concerning him, that whatever the Subject were the
Doctor had been treating of, yet still when he came to the Application, the use
he would be sure to make of it, should be to drive men unto Christ. This
Doctrine was so rivetted into Mr. Row and had so deep a root in him, as that
all that knew him intimately must say this of him, that they never knew any
that was a greater advancer of Christ or did more inculcate this great
Principle upon all that he was called to speak unto. viz. That their main Care
should be to deny themselves and to live upon Christ for all.

As for a more particular discovery, what were the first workings of God upon
his heart, it was expressed by himself in a Paper of his own writing, in this
manner as follows: Having before in the same Paper related the mercies of God
toward him, and his care and providence over him in his infancy and childhood,
he adds.

Neither did my gracious God cease to do me good in the days of my youth:
whereat I may justly admire; Oh the depth and Riches of his unchangeable Grace!
for here were I able to set out the true Idea of my then deformed heart and
life! But better it is to confess the same to my gracious God, and to pray him
not to remember those sins of my youth; both which I have done, (viz) both
confessed them and begged pardon of them, and by Gods Grace intend to do to my
dying day.

Yet thus much I think fit to unfold for the praise of the glory of Gods Grace
that, whereas, I was by nature prone to all sins, of all kinds, especially to
those two monsters, Pride and Voluptuousness, and in the latter of these an
inventer of new kinds of sinning; yet the Lord gave me not up to mine own
hearts lusts altogether: But even then began not only to restrain me, but also
by the means of Grace to do me good. O Lord, my salvation is of thee alone; for
if ever any should be saved by their own merits, very likely was it that I
should have been farthest off, for thou resistest the proud. But the gifts and
calling of God are without Repentance: Hence it came to pass that the same
gracious God (who out of his unchangeable Love ordained me to Life) stirred up
the Spirit of Doctor Bodley to admonish me to take heed of my pride and those
over-weaning conceits of my self which he espied in me, and counseled me to
buy a Bible and to read the same: which Admonition and counsel the Lord was
pleased to bless, in such wise, that Ever since that time, I have in some weak
measure kept a constant course of reading the Scriptures, except some few short
intermissions, by which means I do acknowledge to the glory of my God, that my
poor soul has received no small benefit.

By this Relation of his own which was written with his own hand (together with
some other passages of his Life, which hereafter are to be inserted) it appears
that Pride, and the Love of Pleasure were his Master-sins in the days of his
youth. Hence was it that he would often say in his familiar discourse that
Lase, Pride, and Pleasure, were the great sins of youth, He would also very
frequently speak of this Passage, that there was but one thing which he mainly
desired in his youthful days, which if it had been granted to him, would have
proved to be his ruin; and that was, that he might have had the same Liberty
allowed unto him by his Parents, which another vain young man, whom he knew,
had granted unto him, who afterward came to a Miserable End. This passage he
would mention often, to show what a mercy it was that he was so restrained, and
that God gave him not his own Will.

After the Lord had thus begun his good work in Mr. Rows heart by the
counsels, preaching and holy conversation of Doctor Bodley; he continued in
the Doctors Family for some time, which was as long as Dr. Bodley lived. The
Doctor after some experience of him, perceiving his Ingenuity, Fidelity, and
Inclinations to Religion, bare a very great and tender affection toward him,
and such was his affection, that he having no child of his own, intended (as
was verily supposed) to have done much for him at his death: But the Doctor
being surprised with somewhat a sudden Sickness (whereof he died) and not being
able by reason thereof to do what he intended, Mr. Rows hopes were wholly
frustrated of enjoying any thing that the Doctor purposed to do for him. And
this event he looked upon (as he was wont ever after to construe it in his
familiar discourses with his friends) as the Wise Providence of God toward
him, that he might see his whole Dependence to be on the Lord for what behad.

About the Twenty fifth year of his Age he was disposed of in Marriage, His
Marriage.
concerning which because there were some Providence that were remarkable, and
that he himself thought worthy to be remembered (as it appears by the Register
that he kept of them) we shall relate what himself has written.

When I was desirous to enter into the State of Marriage, I was assailed with
Covetousness, Voluptuousness and Ambition, and would surely have undone my self
by some, or all of these Evils, had not my gracious God, by disappointing my
unsanctified desires for seven years space or more, prevented my Folly.

Oh what a misery is it for vain youth to have its will! Oh what a blessing to
bear the yoke betime! especially when God will open the Ear to discipline, (as
blessed be his Name) he did mine at the last. And here I may justly break out
into admiration of the Riches of his Grace, that brought light to me out of my
darkness, I mean a great Light of Grace into my Soul, by occasion of the great
Darkness of mine own sin, into the which I fell. My Pride went before my fall,
so sin drew on sin, and sin was punished with sin; yet (O depth of Grace) this
Fall was the cause of my Rising, I mean in Grace. Thus my gracious God did me
good by mine own Evils, and made my greatest sins occasions of my great
Humiliation. And although Voluptuousness, Ambition and Coveteousness, were the
Idol-sins of my youth, yet my gracious God preserved me from the gross acting
of those sins, either by Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Tneft, or any other
unlawful way of Gain: I say that it was my gracious God that preserved me, and
therefore let his name have all the Glory: as for me, I should have run Mad in
Pride with Nebuchadnezar, and burst asunder in Coveteousness with Judas, and
drowned my self in a daily course of Delicacy with the Glutton that St. Luke
mentions, had I not been kept by the power of God alone: Only, only, to thy
name O Lord, be the praise.

My desire of Marriage was corrupt through my Coveteousness, Voluptuousness,
and Ambition, as I have said, and my gracious God crossing those unsanctified
desires of mine for diverse years, did at length teach me to desire Marriage for
better ends: And having begun to set my mind in order, he also brought on the
blessing, for first he prepared my heart to seek him by Prayer for a meet
helper, and then he opened his Ear, and granted my request; so that even in the
same day wherein he had stirred me up in a more then ordinary manner to seek a
blessing in my Marriage by Prayer, he was pleased to give me evidence that he
had heard me, in sending to me an honest Christian, which came to me on
purpose, to break the matter for Marriage with her, which afterward God gave me
to wife.

This match Satan attempted to hinder, by stirring up a near friend of mine to
fail in performance of his promise made to me for my preferment: which justly
might have alienated the minds of my wifes parents from me, but that my
gracious God would not suffer Satan to do me that mischief, yea more then so,
he gave me grace to seek reconciliation with that Friend of mine which had so
deeply wronged me.

So far are the words of his own Relation written by himself. The Family into
which he matched, was a Godly Family, who did the sooner embrace Mr. Rows
motion, because of that which they had heard concerning his Affection to
Religion. The person whom he took to Wife, was a very godly and sincere woman,
although one that walked in Darkness and had no assurance of Gods Love the
greatest part of her days; and that appears by this Passage, which we may not
therefore omit, because Mr. Row himself has Registered it, as one special
experience of Gods Love toward him. When his wife lay Sick, and was upon her
Death bed, she complained that she had no assurance of the Love and Favor of
God, and that when she died she should be taken to Glory in Heaven: hereupon
Mr. Row besought the Lord very earnestly for her, and the Lord was so far
entreated as a little before her death, to assure her of her Glory in heaven,
and this in somewhat an unusual extraordinary manner, giving in such a secret
Hint and Intimation to her soul as this, I will Glorify thee.

After Mr. Row was Married he continued four years in the house of his Father
in law at Pinhow in Devon. a place (as himself has recorded it in the
Memorial of his own experiences) enriched with diverse worldly contentments,
but all embittered thorough the want of the Ministry of Gods Word. And what he
adds in the same place, may not be omitted. There (says he) had I just occasion
given me to repent of my former fulsomness and weariness of that heavenly
Manna. But here again my gracious God that never cease to do me good, did as
well provide the Plaster as give the Wound. He wounded my Conscience by the
want of the Ministry in my own Parish of Pnin, bringing to my rememberance my
sin in undervaluing the plentiful Ministry which I had once enjoyed: but he
healed the breach again, not only by forgiveness and repentance, but also by
providing for me the Ministry of a worthy servant of his in a Neighboring
Parish.

But to proceed in the Narrative of his Life. His remove to Crediton.
Mr. Row being weary of living any longer in the house of his Father in Law by
reason of the want of the means of grace in that place (although, as has been
said, he enjoyed at least for a season (for how long it was he had that
happiness, the Relator has not come to the knowledge of) the labors of a
faithful Minister in an adjacent Parish) and hearing that there was an able
Preacher at Crediton he had a great desire to remove his Family and Habitation
thither, and accordingly did so; taking his leave of his wives Relations, he
went and settled himself and family in Credition, on purpose to enjoy the means
of grace; and there continued to his dying day: And according to this example
of his own, he would often exhort his children and acquaintance that their
first care should be to place themselves under a Godly and a powerful Ministry;
and for this purpose he would often mention that text, Can. 1.8.
Go forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides the
Shepherds tents.

Not long after his coming to Crediton he was made High-Constable, His
Executing the office of High-Constable.
in which office he continued about Twenty years; during which service, his
care, diligence, and zeal, was such for the suppressing and punishing of Vice,
that his Name became a Dread and a Terror to all the Profane that were near to
the place he lived. And as his zeal was great, so his wisdom, Charity and
Compassions were no less; he would first seek to win Offenders by his loving
counsels, and gentle admonitions, before he would use the severity of the Law
against them; and his great care was to let men see that it was their Vices,
not their Persons that he aimed at. And such was the Presence of God with him,
such the Authority and Majesty that shone in his carriage and behavior, that
although he was forced to punish many for their misdemeanors that would not be
otherwise reclaimed, yet none had power to lift up an hand against him, or
scarce to move their tongues against him to his hurt or prejudice. One instance
was remarkable.

A certain Ruffian being punished by (...) for his misdemeanors, vowed the next
time he met him he would certainly stab him, and being put into the Stocks for
some offense he had committed against the Law; his rage was such, that not
being able to have his will on Mr. Row, he struck at the stones with his knife
for very madness. After this Mr. Row met the same person when he was at
liberty, and might have had opportunity to wreak his malice and revenge upon
him, but it pleased the Lord so to overpower him that he was as a man struck
dumb and had not a word to say.

Many of his friends seeing his abilities and fitness would often solicit and
press him to take the office of a Justice of Peace, His Modesty.
but such was his Humility and Modesty, that he would by no means yield to it,
saying that he had neither Ability nor Estate for it, and that it was the way
to make Authority contemptible when inferior Persons were put into such
Places. His care to cut off occasions of offense.
He was very careful to cut off all occasion of offense from such as would be
ready to take offense; being wont in his younger days to use Shooting with Bow
and Arrows for his Recreation sake; after that, meeting with an Offender
against the law, he rebuked him for some misdemeanors that he was guilty of,
the man replied why might not he do that as well as he Shoot with Bow and
Arrows: after this Mr. Row laid aside his Recreation, and would never shoot
with Bow and Arrows more.

He was a man of a very Peaceable temper, His Peaceable and Peacemaking
Disposition.
he never loved to foment differences, but sought all he could to compose them
and if there were at any time any distance between him and others, the fault
was usually theirs, because he could not bear or comply with some corruption of
theirs, but would seek their reformation. And as he was of a very peaceable
disposition himself, so he was a great Peacemaker; a great part of his time
was spent this way in making up and composing of differences between others,
many a quarrel was taken up by him this way, many Law Suits prevented, many
differences between near relations reconciled, and the Lord was pleased to give
him such a blessing and success in these undertakings, that his hands were
seldom empty of this work, so that he was many times so much engaged and taken
up in the businesses and affairs of other men, that he could hardly get liberty
to mind or prosecute his own. He said, upon occasion given him, to a relation
of his that he might have increased his own estate much more, if he had spent
that time in following his own affairs which he spent in the businesses and
affairs of other men, but what he did in this kind he did it out of duty and
Conscience. Such indeed was his Charity and Compassion to others, that none
ever was known to be more Concerned for others, or more Naturally to care for
the good of others then he was; He made their Conditions his own, he had a deep
Sympathy with their distresses, and in his Prayers he would as affectionately
pray for them as for himself; and when he had undertaken any of the affairs and
businesses of other men, he would act as vigorously in their behalf as if it
were his own concernment, although he neither did, nor expected, to reap any
advantage to himself by it.

He was forty years of age before he attained that great blessing of Assurance,
His Assurance.
which he kept ever after, and never lost it after he had once attained it; so
that he enjoyed that singular privilege viz. the assurance of the love of God
for the space of Thirty years and more; The means by which he maintained and
preserved his assurance was (as he himself said) by a diligent and constant use
of all the means of Grace both public and private, and taking an account of
his heart once at least every day. And as he had by these means, a constant
assurance of his estate, so that he was never left to a total doubting of his
estate, after he had once received the assurance of it; so he had at some times
more special experience of the Witness and Testimony of the Spirit together
with that of his own Spirit. Concerning which particular, because the children
of God do naturally desire to have all the light that may be given in about it,
(it being a secret and hidden thing, and unknown to any but those that have it,
and the experience of the most holy men being in this case most considerable,
and that upon which the greatest weight may be laid) I shall set down a little
more at large the thoughts and experience of this holy man about it. In one of
his Letters he thus expressed himself. Besides assurance in a way of reasoning,
His Judgment and experience concerning the Testimony of the Spirit.
God is pleased some time in conversing with him to make it out, by secretly
hinting in some one precious promise. And in another Letter he expressed
himself more fully. In answer to your desire, to receive a few of my thoughts
and experiences concerning the witness or Testimony of the Spirit in assurance.

I do acknowledge (to the glory of God) that God has given to me some
experience of his love (and at sometimes more then at other times) in the
Testimony of his Spirit bearing witness with my Spirit concerning mine
adoption, and so consequently of my justification, sanctification, and eternal
life: But this is better felt then expressed; yet in some measure as the Lord
shall enable me. I will endeavor to answer your desire herein. First that
there is ( as appears Romans 8.16.) such a blessed Privilege given to some of
Gods elect on earth, as to have the Spirit it self to bear witness with their
Spirits that they are the Children of God.

Again, that this Testimony is given to believers after that they are
effectually called to grace, as appears Ephesians. 1.13. and by the which they are
(as by a seal) assured of the grace of God. But that every one that is
effectually called to grace, has this Testimony presently given, I dare not
affirm, but do rather think that some may wait a longer time then others before
they do receive it: for mine own part I believe that I was effectually called
diverse years before the Lord gave me this assurance.

Again, the truth of this Testimony of the holy Spirit in my own soul, I have
discerned from false flashes, and unsound comforts by this, that this testimony
does always when it comes raise the soul to more desires after more intimate
union and communion with God; works more self-abborrency, and more care to
please God, and fear to displease him, and (in a word) drives me nearer to God,
whereas false flashes leave the soul loose.

Again, for the continuance of this blessed testimony in the soul, I do find
that an holy humble constant waiting on God, and Communion with him in his
ordinances joined with a constant care and endeavor to walk with him in
uprightness in all the duties of my particular calling and relations are
blessed means to keep up and increase this assurance; but the neglect or
remiss usage of these does diminish the oil of this blessed Lamp; and
unsanctified liberty so far grieves the holy Spirit as to suspend this
Testimony for a time.

What the nature of this witness of the Spirit, was he said, (as it is in the
precedent letter) that it was better felt then expressed, only being once asked
about it, he answered, It was a secret overpowering, that I am his, and he is
mine I am my well-beloveds, and my well-beloved is mine. He was wont to observe
that the most likely means to attain assurance was to propound spiritual ends
to our selves in the desiring of it; not to desire it merely that we might be
at quiet, and free from trouble in our Consciences, but principally to desire
it for this end, that by the knowledge and apprehension of Gods love to us, we
might be enabled to give the Lord the glory of his own grace, and be carried
out to higher pitches in obedience. In his discourse with some friends he had
such a passage: There may be a great deal of selfishness in seeking Peace; I
find it best when I am come to the greatest heights of peace, to study my duty,
what it is that God would have me do, and to follow him there, otherwise I meet
with a Cloud.

His manner was (as has been partly hinted before) to make up his accounts
every day, and the method that he used in his meditation, was to consider what
God had done for him in the day, and what his carriage had been toward God:
and he would say when he considered what Gods carriage had been to him, there
he saw that God had been doing him good in a constant tenor; but then when he
reflected upon himself, there he saw many failings: and he said there was so
action done by him that was ever no good, but there was some cireumstance or
other that he saw himself imperfect and defective in: and it was a remarkable
speech of his: I have accounted it a greatpitch when the Lord has showed me
some defects in my best actions, that I may go clean out of self unto Christ.
By this daily and constant exercise of his in reviewing his life and actions
every day, he kept and maintained much Peace of Conscience; and this was one of
the great things that God did for him, that usually at the close of every day,
after the casting up of his accounts, and humble and fervent prayer, the Lord
made it out to him, as he himself expressed it, that All was pardoned. In this
way was he carried on, until at last he arrived to as great an habitual
persuasion, and as constant an apprehension of the love of God as any has been
known to have attained in this latter age, so that he walked in the light of
Gods countenance from day to day; and his way was to study and contemplate the
love of God toward him in every thing; and much of his Prayers ran this way,
that his faith might be strengthened to see and behold the love of God in all
the passages of his life, that so he might (as Abraham did) give the Lord glory
by believing. Therefore he would often expres himself in Prayer after this
sort: Oh that we might behold thy infinite and eternal love constantly, so far
as finite creatures are capable that the apprehensions of thy love might draw
us up again to love thee. And he would say, We are apt to take notice of some
of the greater and more remarkable passages of the love of God; as, if the Lord
gave us some great deliverance, or gave us some signal answer of Prayer, or
bestowed upon us some special blessing which we had much desired; but our
Heavenly father did not only do us good in these great things, but he was still
doing us good in a constant tenor even in the least things.

And as the Lord did much for him in this kind, His fear of loosing assurance.
so he was very jealous of loosing this blessed privilege, viz. the sense that
he had of the love of God and the light of his countenance which he walked in.
There were two things, he said, that he mainly desired of God; the one was,
that having been a Professor of Religion so long, he might be kept from
scandalous sins: The other was, that God would not hide his face from him; for
he said he was a man of a low Spirit, and without Gods presence he could not
subsist; and therefore (said he) I saw it necessary to be kept under affliction
that I might be humble, for God would not reveal himself to proud souls.

Besides this habitual peace and assurance which he enjoyed, His Comforts.
he had many particular comforts from the Lord at several times and upon
several occasions. He said there was great familiarity between God and his
people after they had walked much with him. When he lay down to rest at night
he had usually that promise spoken over to him, Fear not Abraham I am thy
shield and thy exceeding great and rich reward. When he had been desiring such
pitches of holiness, he had often such hints as these are, I will satisfy
thee; When he was under any special afflictions he had some special comforts
and supports from God; When the Lord took away his first wise, he was troubled
in himself about the disposing of his children; then the Lord comforted him
thus, They are thine but for a time, but they are mine for ever, and this he
said satisfied him. Another time having been exercised with a fit of the stone,
he wrote to a near Relation thus: These are to let you know how fatherly God
deals with us, though afflicted yet not forsaken; that which sweetens all my
afflictions is that inward peace which the Lord is pleased to give me in all my
outward pain. Many more instances of this kind might be produced. The Answers
he had to prayer.
When he was in any special strait or difficulty and needed counsel and
direction what course to take, the Lord did always first or last (after earnest
seeking of him) make out his way unto him. He never sought God in any great
affair or extraordinary concernment but he had some answer or other from him;
he was sure always to have this general answer that God would do him good, and
that he would order things in the best way, The Discoveries he had from God
conceruing future events of Providence. Psalm. 25. Genesis 18.17.
and often times he had more particular intimations of the mind of God. The
Lord did also many a time give him secret hints beforehand of what he was about
to do, as afterward came to pass according to the tenor of these Scriptures:
the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. And, shall I hide from
Abraham the thing that I do. When any great thing was approaching relating to
himself, his family, or the Church, he had usually some warning and intimation
from God beforehand concerning it; one time he was observed to be very sad, and
in his discourse he would say that God had seemed to intimate to him as if so
be that he intended to make some change in his family: whether this intimation
were for trial or no, and the Lord intended to moderate him to these earthly
comforts, or whether the Lord intended indeed to take away some one of his
Family, either himself or some other (he said) he would not determine; however
he made this use of it to set himself and his family in order: not long after
the Lord took away a near Relation, which proved a great affliction to him: and
long before his own change he had many clear intimations of it; and other
instances might be given (and some that were more rare and extraordinary) but
that it may not be so meet to mention things of this nature, forasmuch as some
possibly might make an ill use of them: For indeed this we may say of him,
although the Lord did many extraordinary things for him, and things that were
not usual or common, yet he did not expect them, neither did he (as Luther
somewhere speaks of himself) indent with the Lord that he should give them unto
him, much less would he boast of things of this nature to others. He was
content with the plain, naked word, he was a great magnifier of it, there all
his study and delight lay, as will appear more hereafter: and although he met
with many extraordinary things in his own experience, yet he spoke of them very
sparingly, and to a very few. And this he did (as he said) partly to avoid the
occasion of Spiritual Pride in himself, partly least weaker Christians should
be discouraged who had not attained to what the Lord had done for him, and
partly that such who never knew what belonged to such things, might not make a
scoff of them when they heard them.

He was a man much in Prayer and Meditation, His Excellency (...) Meditation.
as for Meditation, the Lord gave him a singular Ability that way; and this
made him a wise Man and a wise Christian: he would seldom give an answer in any
serious matter but he would first pause a while; and he would say, he should
account it a great happiness, if when ever he were to speak in any serious
matter, he might have the liberty, or could remember with himself, to muse for
a little space.

He was much delighted in a saying of Dr. Prestons, and did often mention it,
that the greatest Musers were the best Artists. He was so much taken up in
Meditation that he often found himself spent by it, and he would say that
Meditation was a spending thing. Before he rose in the morning he would
sometimes lie meditating an hour or two together: If he were riding or walking
(if he were not engaged in company and discourse with others) he would still be
in some contemplation or other. If he were going about some worldly affair, he
would first contrive his worldly business, and then he thought he might be at
the more liberty, and would reserve the rest of the time that he had free for
Meditation of some Divine matter. He seldom prayed in secret, but he used some
meditation before, and it was a memorable speech of his, that he preferred a
short Prayer after long Meditation before a long Prayer without Meditation.
When ever he had heard a Sermon, he spent a considerable time in meditating of
what he had heard: And he would say, if he might be in such places where he
might have opportunities to hear more frequently, he should not like it so well
to hear much, unless he could have liberty to digest it by Meditation. In
meditating of the things he heard, he would diligently look into all the texts
that were quoted in the Sermon; and for this purpose would often mention that
famous instance of the men of Berea, whom the Holy Ghost takes notice of to be
more Noble than those of Thessalonica, Acts. 1.11.
for this very cause, because they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so. This way of Meditation helped him greatly, insomuch that by a
diligent inquiry into the Scriptures that were quoted, and musing upon what he
had heard, he was carried much farther sometimes then what the Preacher himself
touched upon; and when he came to repeat the Sermons in his family (according
as his manner was to repeat most of the Sermons which he had heard; His way in
repeating Sermons.
he always repeated both the Sermons on the Lords day, and that on the Lecture
day, and many others which he heard occasionally) having Meditated on them
beforehand, he would clear up those points that had most difficulty in them, or
had been more darkly delivered; and if the Preacher had been of meaner parts
and gifts, and the things which had been delivered might not seem so useful,
he would so explain and illustrate that which others apprehended the Preacher
defective in, as that the Sermon was always rendered profitable in his
repetition of it. After the repetition of the Sermons on the Lords days, he was
wont to call his children and servants to an account, of what they had learned
and could remember of the things that had been taught them; When he found any
that had been careless in treasuring up the good word which they had heard, he
would reprove them, and admonish them for their negligence, and show them the
danger that they were in by neglecting, or not profiting by the means of grace;
When he found any that were more forward and apt to remember the things which
had been taught them, he would commend and encourage them, and he would often
inculcate that speech of our Savior, To him that has shall more be given, but
from him that has not shall be taken away even that which he has. And
although he was a man of great Authority, and when there was occasion, would
speak with mighty Authority, yet when he came to discourse with his children
and servants, about the things they had learned, he would express a great deal
of familiarity, condescending in a familiar way to the meanest of their
capacities, and thereby insinuating himself into their affections, begetting a
love in them to the word, and taking opportunity thereby to make things more
plain and easy to their understandings.

He was much and often in Prayer, His frequency in Prayer.
besides his exercises, in secret and in the family (of which we shall speak
hereafter) He oftentimes prayed with his yokefellow alone, and if any great
occasion had fallen out in the day, he would still retire himself to ask
counsel and a blessing from the Lord: Once every month he always kept a private
day by himself (besides what he did upon particular occasions) to seek the Lord
by fasting and Prayer, the better to prepare himself for the Lord's Supper, and
then also he had much upon his heart the concernments of the Church. And if
ever any affliction befell him, or his family, or any of his relations, his
constant course was to seek the Lord in an extraordinary manner. So likewise if
there were any great business he was to undertake, or any more eminent strait
wherein he needed Divine counsel, providence, and protection, he still set
apart some time to seek God in a more then ordinary manner, and his success was
answerable, for he had always some gracious return or other; Besides the set
times of Prayer which he observed, he was full of occasional ejaculations; He
was seldom known to be out of a spiritual frame, and in that frame his heart
was darting up one holy ejaculation or other. He was most punctual in keeping
his times and seasons for Prayer, reading, and Meditation; Whatever his worldly
businesses were (which were sometimes many and weighty) he was very loath to
abridge himself in his wonted course for these exercises, and if he were
necessitated at any time to be shorter he would be sure to redeem the next
opportunity to regain what he had been deprived of. He was wont to say when he
did hasten over holy duties out of an over eager desire to follow his worldly
business, he did many times meet with a cross in his business, but when he did
take his ordinary time, God did make his other business to succeed the better,
or else his mind was brought to submit to the will of God.

He was seldom known to pray himself, His great Affection in holy duties
or to join with others in Prayer, but his heart was much affected, and carried
out with much holy zeal and fervency; In his old age his heart would melt
frequently, and he would often be dissolved into tears, and his affections
seemed to be as green and vigorous as the affections of young Converts use to
be. When he joined with others he was far from an oscitant and careless
carriage, His behavior was so reverent, and mixed with so much affection, as
that the Minister under whose Ministry he sat, would profess he found himself
very much helped and quickened by the observance of his affection: If at any
time he found the least decay or deadness coming upon him, that was his
greatest trouble, and far more then any outward affliction. In one of his
letters he expressed himself thus; having spoken before in his letter of a
bodily distemper that lay upon him, he goes on thus, That which troubles me
now is the distemper of my Spirit because I find my self less lively in holy
things, and more unactive then formerly. Yesterday (blessed be God) I found
some reviving.

When he awoke in the morning, His private Exercises in the morning.
if it were before the ordinary time he was wont to rise, his manner was to
spend some time in meditation, and the subject of his Meditation for the most
part was somewhat of the great work of Redemption, and he employed his thoughts
principally to meditate on the eternal sacrifice of the Lord Jesus, which was
offered up to the Father for the taking away of the sins of his people; and
according to this his own practice he would counsel his children, every Morning
to take a turn at the Cross of Christ, and to think of his sufferings, and that
would be a means to make them love Christ the more. When he was rising, and
dressing himself in the morning, he would let fall some holy instructions or
other on them that were about him: After he was ready, his first work was to
retire himself into his closet where he spent a considerable time in reading,
Meditation and Prayer; His daily practice was to read every morning some part
of the Scriptures with some commentary thereupon, and after that, to meditate
on what he had read, and being much taken with the Spirituality and
Judiciousness of Calvin's expositions he made the greatest use of him to help
him in the understanding of the Scriptures.

After he had thus finished his private exercise of Prayer and Meditation on
the word he had read, His morning exercises in the Family.
he was wont to call together his family, and communicate unto them what he had
learned from his own meditation, and the expositions of godly Divines on the
word that he had read; and what ever his worldly occasions had been, he would
scarce ever omit this exercise with his family, but every morning would open
some portion of the Scripture to them, and give them some holy exhortation from
it; and this was his practice for 20 or 30 years together; Such was his modesty
and humility in the managing of this work, that although he was of a great
Judgment himself, of long experience and had a deep insight into the things of
God, yet he would say he would not take upon him to interpret the meaning of
such or such a text, but he would acquaint them what he had learned from godly
Divines. By this constant course of reading, and daily perusing the expositions
of Divines, joined together with his own Meditation he became a man expert and
mighty in the Scriptures: So that when he came to speak to his family he would
open the Scriptures with much clearness and solidity, and the Lord endued him
with a wonderful ability to make things plain and familiar to the capacity of
the meanest. And when he came to make applications of things to those of his
own family, he would be sure to consider what every ones condition did require,
those whom he feared to be still in the state of nature, he would lay open to
them the danger of their condition, and what a sad thing it was for them to
remain out of Christ; and what ever the matter was he had been speaking of, his
exhortation would be sure always to center in this to press them to look after
Christ, in whom the Father had laid up all grace, and from whom they must
expect to receive all grace. His exhortations were set on with a wonderful
strange authority; there was so great a presence of God with him, that many
(besides those of his own family) who came occasionally to be in his house,
will have cause to bless God for him to eternity.

After he had spent a quarter of an hour or a little more in this way of
exhortation, he would close up the mornings exercise with prayer, in which he
would not be long, but his prayer was so substantial that he would comprehend
the whole of Religion (and as it were a body of Divinity) in a short Prayer.
His prayer seemed to be nothing but digested meditation and that acted by the
Spirit of God. Hardly one expression could be spared, every passage had its
weight. He never used a form, but the substance and materials of his Prayers
were for the most part the same, though he still took in the other necessitys
of his family as the providence of God gave occasion: Some that have heard him
pray have thought they never saw grace acting more purely then in his prayer;
his prayer seemed to be the pure language of grace rather then of nature or of
parts. The main scope at which his payers was levelled was the glory of God; he
was still carried above himself to eye the glory of God, and therefore the
stream of his prayers would usually run thus, Lord glorify thy self in our
salvation, glorify thy self in bestowing this or that grace upon us. The
matter of his prayer was still commensurate to the word, what the word required
as duty from Christians either in relation to their general or particular
callings, or in relation to the various providence they might be under, that
was still the matter of his prayer. One thing he was most eminent in, he had a
very large and comprehensive Charity, he would still take in the concernments
of the Catholick-Church, and he would be sure to pray for all the election
where ever they were. Once he was observed to let fall such an expression as
this in prayer, We pray thee pardon the sins of thine here, and every where,
and those that ever shall be.

In the evening before Supper if he could obtain any liberty he would spend
some time in reading the works of some eminent Divine: His evening exercises.
He took most delight in Dr. Prestons Books; and he had been so conversant in
them that most of the eminent passages in his writings became very familiar
with him; after that he betook himself to his constant course of Prayer and
Meditation. After Supper he would cause his children and the young scholars
that were in his family (of which he was never without some for many years, who
were sent to the Grammar School and were placed by their Parents in his family
to enjoy the benefit of his instructions and holy example) to read each of them
a Chapter one by one: when this was done he would call together the whole
family, and then he would spend the rest of the evening in Catechizing of them,
or else in Repetition of some Sermon that had been preached on the week day.

When the Sabbath was approaching his care was to prepare for it, His Care in
keeping the Sabbath.
and he would endeavor so to order his worldly affairs, as that he might have
dispatched his business in season, and so have the more liberty in the evening
to set his heart in order for the duties of the Sabbath. When the Sabbath was
come, he would spend most of the morning in secret prayer and meditation; and
he was wont to be shorter in the mornings exercises with his family upon that
day, then at other times, that so they might not be hindered from the public
ordinances. His care was to be at the beginning of Public worship, and he was
wont to say it was more fit that they should wait for the Minister, then that
he should wait for them, and he would often mention that example and speech of
Cornelius We are all here present before God to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God. Acts 10.
When the morning Sermon was done, the little time he had before dinner he
would spend in perusing his notes of the Sermon, and meditating on what had
been delivered; as soon as dinner was ended, he would repeat the Sermon to his
family: after that was done, the time of public worship in the afternoon drew
on, then he would hasten to the Congregation; when public worship was ended he
would first spend a considerable time in secret, the rest of the evening was
spent in the repetition of the Sermon that was preached in the afternoon, and
calling his family to an account of the things they had learned.

His esteem and reverence of godly Ministers was exceeding admirable; The high
esteem he had of godly Ministers.
if a Minister had been never so mean, and of never so low parts and gifts he
would show a singular respect to him, and according to his own example he would
be most frequent in this exhortation, to exhort his children to have an high
esteem of the Gospel Ministry, and he would often press upon them that passage
of our Savior, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me: He would
also mind them of that passage of St. Paul, that faith comes by hearing, and
hearing is of the word of God. He was went to tell them that God could (if he
had pleased) speak to us himself immediately, but the Lord condescended to our
infirmites, and chose tospeak to us by men like our selves, and to this purpose
he would often bring the instance of Cornelius, the Lord could have spoken to
him himself, or caused the Angel to speak to him, but he bids him send for
Peter and he should tell him what he ought to do. He could not endure that any
should account the Ministry Antichristian, and he would upon all occasions
vindicate the Authority of the Gospel Ministry against those that would impugn
it, and he would say, unless we do firmly believe the Ministry to be the
appointment of Jesus Christ we cannot so profit by it as we ought to do.

He would say it was lawful for us to covet the best gifts, if we might enjoy
them, but we must not despise the meanest: he said, when you come to the
Ordinance, the business is between God and you, and whether the instrument be
of meaner or of greater parts, yet this is the portion that God will give out:
He likewise said that there was not the meanest Sermon that ever he heard but
the Lord did him good by it.

Another passage which he let fall was very remarkable, When I meet with a
Sermon that does not like me, I first look into my self to see if there were
nothing amiss there, and if there were no fault there, I would then scan it
over again. He would say we many times blame the Minister when as the fault is
our own that we have not prayed for him as we should have done. His love to the
word was such, that although there were two Ministers in the place where he
lived which supplied the Lords day, and a lecture once in the week, yet even in
his old age he wouldride six or seven miles to enjoy the benefit of the
weekly-Lecture that was at Exeter.

His desires were carried out much in order to the Conversion of souls; His
desire of the conversion of Souls.
there was scarce a prayer that he made, but he would pray with great affection
for those of his family, and all others that belonged to Gods election that
were yet uncalled in, in all his exercises in his family his main drift lay
that way, he would still be speaking somewhat that might make them see their
need of Christ, and the main thing he would press upon them was that they would
labor to get into Christ, and to make sure of Christ.

He was very tender and compassionate to them that were under temtation and
distress of Conscience, His Compassion toward such who were under temptation.
and several that were under trouble of mind did resort to him, and some did
abide in his family for a season the better to enjoy the benefit of his prayers
and counsels, and the Lord was pleased so far to hear his prayers and to bless
what he spoke to them, as they went away with more Peace and satisfaction, His
own temptations.


And as he bare a tender respect to others in their temptations so he was not
without his own temptations; it is true, his assurance touching his estate,
that remained firm and unshaken. Once indeed (he said) in a sickness he had a
very strong assault from the Enemy but it was but short; the temptation was,
that he was an Hypocrite, and all that he had done was in Hypocrysie; hereupon
the Lord put it into his heart, that suppose it were so, yet now he should cast
himself upon the grace of God in Christ, and immediately the temptation
vanished: but though he had not many assaults of this kind, yet he was not
without his other temptations. The great temptation that he complained of in
his elder years was Infidelity. A year or two before his death he complained to
a near Relation that he had been troubled with temptations that were very
grievous and bitter to him, and the temptation was, whether there was such a
one as Christ or no, and whether there had been such actions done by him: the
next morning after the temptation had been upon him, these words were dropped
into him, I was Crucified for thee, I have shed my blood for thee, this brake
and melted his heart exceedingly, that when his temptation was of so grievous a
nature that the Lord should so condescend unto him, and when he spoke of it, he
spoke of it with Tears.

He had also several other Conflicts; insomuch that he once break out into this
expression, Oh it is hardkeeping up until we come to heaven it is hard
fighting. Another passage he had to this purpose, Before we receive the Crown
we must strive and finish our course, temptations will arise, but blessed is
the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the
Crown of Life. He said he had been ten years striving against one corruption,
and at last the Lord brake the neck of it. Another time he said I have been
striving against the height of my Spirit these forty years. His Afflictions.
And as he had his inward conflicts so he was seldom without some outward trial
or affliction: He said it was one of his exercises every morning, to expect
what God might try him with in the day, either afflictions or temptations: and
he had another passage to the same purpose, I thought I had undergone many
trials, so that now I might hope to be quiet, but still the Lord provided some
new. In a Letter of his to a near Relation, he said that his life it was made
up of mixtures of encouragements and difficulties: In the same letter he adds,
I do think it may be much conducing to the glory of God and to our advantage if
we still expect such mixtures, knowing that we are thereunto appointed, and
that so we may in every days success entreat the Lord for grace suitable to our
infirmities and necessities: whereas if we should limit the almighty to have
our wills satisfied, we may displease him, and create crosses to our selves.
And as he was seldom without some exercise of affliction or other, The benefit
he had by affliction.
so his afflictions were of singular use to him, he said when ever he was out
of the way, the Lord showed him clearly that he was so, and that this or that
was not right; and usually he did it by affliction; and this was one of his
experiences which was remarkable, he said, he never had any Chastisement in all
his life but the Lord had showed him some miscarriage by it. His afflictions
made him pray much, and that was his constant course, when any great trial or
affliction befell him, to set a part some time to seek God in an extraordinary
manner: His great prayer when he was under affliction was, that he might be
made partaker of Gods Holiness by it. When his family had been visited with the
smal-pox, he said, he had been mightily stirred up to pray that this Visitation
might end in the Reformation of the family, and that they might set to the work
of God with all their might, and this was usually the fruit of all his
afflictions to quicken him to more activity in the ways of God. When one of his
relations had been sick, he wrote thus to him, Truly I perceive the Lords mind
is to wean us from the world and from self; now the Lord accomplish the good
pleasure of his will in us to the utmost that we may cleave unto him wholly and
fully by the wisdom and strength of the Lord Jesus in us; be not dismayed at
your afflictions God will turn them to good. A few years before his death the
Lord was pleased to try him, by suffering his house to be on fire; this fire
happened on a Saturday night about ten of the Clock in the night, his family
being the most of them in bed, and himself asleep: Being awakened out of sleep,
by some that first descried the danger, and called upon him to arise for his
preservation; the first thing that the Lord put into his thoughts was that in
the midst of Judgment he would remember Mercy, and the Lord was pleased to
answer his prayer eminently, for only his outhouses were consumed, and his
dwelling house was preserved, which yet was joining with the other, and in an
apparent danger but that the providence of God was wonderfully sEen in its
preservation, many of his friends, and neighbors, and of the poor people of
the town came to his assistance in this time of distress, and though all his
goods were removed out of the house, and those which were poor and necessitous
might have taken several things, yet such was the love and reverence which the
people of the place did generally bear to him, and the experience they had of
his Charity and readiness to do them good, that there was not one that had a
heart or an hand to take any thing that was his, but all his goods that were
carried forth were preserved entire, without so much as the loss of any one
thing: but this did not comfort him so much, as that the fire was quenched so
seasonably, and things so soon set in order by the help of his friends as that
he and his family had the liberty to attend upon the Ordinances the next day,
and to keep the Sabbath according to his wonted manner. This affliction of the
fire he attributed to the neglect of a duty in not putting away a servant (whom
he had often admonished but was not reformed) having had thoughts and
resolutions often of putting him away, but being slack in performing his duty
herein he conceived that this was the reason why the Lord so corrected him.
Another time when the Lord had made some breach upon his estate, and he had
suffered a considerable loss, he said the Lord had showed him, that if he
leaned too much upon these things he would, take away all. At another time he
speaking concerning afflictions in the general he had this expression, for mine
own part I do acknowledge to the glory of God that our only wise God and
heavenly father has taken the best course with me, Oh how lazy had I been and
worldly, if the Lord had not hedged up my way, but blessed be God that will not
suffer me to live after the flesh.

He was very apprehensive of the least mercy, and a curious observer of every
passage of Providence. His observing God in all his Providence.
When his house had been in danger of being set on fire at another time; and
writing of it to a near Relation, he expressed himself thus, the Lord make us
really thankful, and teach us to render for all mercies and deliverances,
especially for that great deliverance from wrath to come, and for the hope of
eternal life which God that cannot lie has promised. Much of his walking with
God lay in this, he was very curious to observe the least check or rebuke from
providence in every thing that befell him; and if he met with the least cross
he would presently go and humble himself before the Lord and pray that he might
understand his meaning in it.

His great Scope and design was, The Constant design he had to glorify God.
that he might glorify God in the whole course of his conversation, he
studiously watched and observed all opportunities for that end; and his great
prayer was that where ever he came he might either do good or receive good: And
he would pray that we might not only glorify God, but that we might glorify
him intentionally. And as this was his prayer, so all that conversed with him,
did easily perceive that this was his design; he did not speak of the things of
God customarily, and because others did, but if opportunity were not offered,
he would seek it to fasten some good discourse upon those that were in company
with him before he parted from them. The Minister that preached at his Funeral
had this passage concerning him, The general Bent and Biass of his Spirit was
toward God and toward his name, the very quintesence of his Spirit was carried
that way, and that intensively and constantly; I did never observe in him, that
ever he intended any thing more, or minded any thing so much as the glory of
God; did you converse with him about worldly affairs he would reduce you by
little and little to some heavenly discourse, there would all the lines of his
Circumference center. His humility indeed and modesty was great, if he were in
the company of godly Ministers, or others that he took to be his superiors, he
would first wait to see whether they would speak any thing for edification, if
he perceived them to be silent or more slack, he would endeavor to engage them
in good discourse, or else before they parted would set it on foot himself. And
if he had been long in company with others and nothing had been spoken to
edification, if was a great trouble to him. When he spoke of the things of God,
he spoke of them with great Majesty and Authority; he was seldom known to speak
of the things of God, but the weight of the things he spoke of was upon his
Spirit, and he spoke as a man that had his heart wholly taken up in them,
Religion and the things of God were become as it were natural to him; and look
what vehemence of Spirit and intention of affections others do discover in the
prosecution of their other affairs, the same did he manifest in the ways of
God; his heart was still affected when he spoke of the things of God, and as he
was affected himself, so he did for the most part affect others: When he spoke
by way of counsel or reproof to any, he would choose as much as might be to
speak in the words of Scripture, that so (as he said) they might rather hear
God speaking then hear him speaking, and so consequently what was spoken might
carry the more authority in managing of reproofs, he would use great wisdom
and compassion, his great care was to order his reproofs so that it might
appear he did no way aim at the disgrace of the person that was reproved, but
only at his reformation, and his Souls good. And as he was a faithful reprover
of others, so he loved reproof himself, he often said he had met but with one
in all his life that would be so faithful a friend as to tell him of what he
apprehended to be amiss in him, and he loved him the better for it all his life.

He was very eminent for his Heavenly mindedness, and his Heavenly affections,
His Heavenly mindedness.
that our conversation might be in heaven, whilst our dweling place was here on
earth. And as he prayed so he lived: he said, Methinks I look upon all the
things of this world as Pictures of things in the other world. At another time
he had a speech to this purpose, Surely, if God shall be all in all hereafter,
the less we have to do with the creature here (more then needs we must) the
more like we are to that life. Another time he said, I am ashamed very much
sometimes that I should delight in the creature so much and delight in God no
more. One time when some of his children were coming to visit him, fearing out
of his godly jealousy lest they might be transported too much with a mere
natural and carnal joy, and not make that heavenly and spiritual improvement of
their meeting, he writes thus to them before their coming, When Moses and
Elias appeared in glory at the glorious transfiguration of Christ in the Mount,
the talk they had (as St. Luke says) was touching the decease of Christ, which
he should accomplish at Jerusalem; and we among (other things) may thence also
learn that it is an heaven-like disposition in midst of all our earthly
enjoyments to think and talk of our departure hence: And as I write this to
you, so I speak of it here that both you and we may mingle our meeting here on
earth with such thoughts and discourse as may mitigate the present bitterness
of any afflicting providence, and may contain our Spirits in an even temper by
the expectation of that uninterrupted and eternal joy that we hope one day to
enter into when we shall meet, never more to be separaced. In another of his
letters he expressed himself thus, We have but an inch of time on earth, and
then we enter into eternity; Oh then let us pray continually, effectually,
fervently, that our way may be right, and our hearts upright to the finishing
of all his wills in duty according to our relations unto all well -- pleasing.

He was a man of a very tender Conscience, The Tuederness of his Conscience.
sensible of the least slip and failing, and though none was ever known to be
more Charitable to others, and to make a more Charitable construction of what
was done by others, yet none was ever more severe against himself, or more
curious to espy the least sinful defect or irregularity in himself; when he
perceived the ebullitions of pride, self-love, covetousness, infidelity: When
he saw the least mixture of carnal and self ends in his good actions: When he
observed how prone he was to be byased by man-fearing, and man-pleasing (as he
expressed it) from his dutiy: This was an inexpressible trouble to him, and he
would bewail these things with more bitterness then many are wont to do their
grosser sins: If he had at any time unawares and of a sudden spoken (although
others it may be apprehended it was not so) an uncomely word as he thought,
unsuitable to the gravity which he conceived became him as a Christian, he
would bewail it greatly, and could never be at rest in himself, till he had
prayed the persons that he supposed might take offense would pass it by. He
would be often complaining of his infirmities, it was rare to hear him speaking
of his comforts or spiritual joys, but he would be very frequent in discovering
what he found amiss in himself; and many things that are very much slighted by
others were curiously observed by him. In one of his letters he expresses
himself thus, My unthankfulness (besides my other sinful infirmities) grieveth
me sore, and I am jealous of myself least the fear of the Rod do trouble me
more then my grief for sin. In another letter he has this passage, I have
found and do find a great difficulty (as in other things, so) in this of
health, to keep that narrow way of the Lord, for I find by woeful experience
that I am often slipping out either by too much indulgence, or too much
severity, which may rather be termed cruelty, the Lord make us wise to avoid
both these extremes. His great care was to keep himself not only from such
things as were in themselves sinful and unlawful; but to abstain from all
appearance of evil, and to cut off occasion of offense from those that might
seek it, or be apt to take it. He said he had found by many years experience
that the great difficulty that lay upon the Saints, it was in the use of things
lawful and indifferent, and he said, he had often been unawares overtaken this
way sometime by the leading aside of his own corrupt nature which was ever
willing to take the largesT size, and sometime by the mistaking of others who
had misapprehended his intentions and made an evil construction of his actions,
yet God hereby had made him more wise and circumspect. Hereupon he would advise
to forbear a lawful recreation at some time and place, rather, then by the use
of our Christian liberty occasion the censures of any that were loose and large
walking, though unjustly raised.

Another thing wherein the eminency of the grace of God in him appeared, His
Eminency in self Resignation.
was the Resignation of himself and all he had to the will of God, the nature
of grace is very much seen in this, which we will as God wills, and our wills
do follow and not anticipate the Divine and uncreated will, this holy man
attained a great excellency in this kind; it was his great exercise to pray up
his will into a one-ness with the will of God, he observed it was very incident
to our natures to desire to bring down Gods will to ours, but it was much
better for us to pray up our wills into his: when any difficulty lay before
him, and his natural affections and inclinations would have carried him such a
way, His first work was not to pray so much that he might obtain that which
nature would desire, but that this will might be brought up to the will of God,
and that his Spirit might be brought to an holy indifferency, and the Lord did
eminently answer him herein; for before the issue of providence was discovered
his will was usually brought up to the will of God, and in several great Cases
and emergencies in his life wherein he was much concerned, he has been known
to say, Touching the issue and success of such a business I have received power
through grace to acquiess in the will of God when it is manifest. And as it was
his great exercise to be much in self-resignation so he made it his endeavor
to resign all he had unto the Lords dispose. After he had heard of the welfare
of some of his Children, he thus expressed himself, And now what thanks can I
render to God for you all, only I desire to give you all up to God that has
given you to me for a time: His advice also to his Children was to follow his
example herein, and to give up their nearest comforts to the Lord daily.

His great desire was to be spiritual in all he did, His uprightness.
and that grace and not nature or fleshly wisdom might sway him in every thing.
When a near Relation desired his advice and connsel in a business of
concernment, before he came to give his advice he said, Oh that I might be
wholly spiritual that no carnal respects might blind mine eyes, and this was
his constant course, when ever he was engaged in any difficulty, or to manage
any business wherein he might be much concerned as to the issue of it, his
first care was to mind his duty, and to study which way grace would teach him
to act, and his great care was that grace might have the principal sway in all
his actions, that so it might appear to himself and others, that not his
natural affections or the principles of fleshly wisdom and carnal policy, but
grace and the word of God had led him forth to what he did. He was wont to say
that Duty was ours, but the issues and successes of things belonged to God, we
should therefore study what our own duty was, and leave the issue and successes
of of things to God. When one had desired his advice in a business of
importance and great difficulty, he wrote thus, This one thing let us with
incessant importunity crave of the Lord, that in this as in all other things he
would teach us the way we should go, and that we may walk with God, and follow
him fully in the integrity of our hearts, and then leave the success on his
care who is the only Wise and Almighty and our Father.

His advice was, His advice how to understand the mind of God in difficult
Cases.
that in all Cases of Conscience we should seek resolution from the word, and
in difficult cases we should ask the counsel of some faithful Minister, For
(said he) the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and we were to enquire the
law at his mouth, and God had appointed pastors and teachers for the perfecting
of the Saints, and for that advice we were to take from godly Ministers he
would say, that which they spoke out of the Pulpit was to be preferred before
that which they spoke occasionally and in a more private way of discourse for
it was to be supposed that they had consulted much with God, and had studied
and prayed hard for that which they had delivered in public, and therefore
more authority was to be given to it, then to any occasional or sudden counsel.
He said also that for a right understanding of the mind of God in difficult
cases, the best way was to reduce things to their first Original, and the first
beginning they had from God, and to look to the first foundation of them.

His desire was to be always in the exercise of grace, His Desire to be always
in the exercise of grace.
and to mind and attend present duty: He was much delighted in the saying of a
godly Minister, which afterward he was wont to use in his familar discourse
that a Christian ought always to be in duty; according to this he made it his
great study to consider what it was that God called him to at present, and what
the present duty was that God put him upon. When he went to visit any, he would
consider what his call was to go, and what opportunity he might have to do or
receive good, and he much bewailed needless and complemental visits, as things
which did eat up and consume much precious time; when he used any bodily
exercise or lawful recreation, he would do this as duty, because he said it was
the will of God we should preserve health, and when he followed his earthly
affairs, he would do this as duty because he said it is the will of God that we
should honor him in a particular calling. His great care was to make his
particular calling subservient to his general calling; he would still endeavor
to manage and order his earthly affairs so as that they might not entrench upon
the duties of Religion, nor he be abridged of fit and convenient time for the
more immediate service of God.

Religion was become so spiritually natural to him, How natural Religion was
become to him.
that he seemed to be wholly turned into it; what ever he did, and spoke, for
the most part, did not only savor of grace, but it seemed to be wholly guided
and acted by grace. Grace seemed to have made a perfect conquest of nature, not
but that he had the remnants of the body of death which he complained of as
bitterly as any, but grace had so great sway and command in him that there was
little else but grace appeared to the view of others.

He said, heretofore when he was carnal he could have wished many of the
Commandments razed out of the book of God, but now he found his heart in some
measure made suitable to the Law. He thought his heart never in a right temper
but when he could delight in the ways of God, and would frequently mention that
Scripture, blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in
his Commandments: Such was the delight and complacency that he took in the ways
of God; and the satisfaction that he found in them, that not years before his
death, he had such a speech as this, which he spoke with much solemnity, If I
were sure that as the beast dies, so dies the man, yet would I not choose to be
otherwise then I am.

Amongst those many graces that he was Eminent for: His living by Faith on
Christ.
that which seemed to be most eminent in him was his Faith and living upon
Christ, this was the true root from whence his other great seize in
Christianity did arise. It was the great exercise of his life to go wholly out
of himself, and to live wholly upon Christ for all. His most familiar
expressions in prayer were such as these, Take us wholly out of self, and let
our whole dependence be upon Christ. Make us one Spirit with Christ, and let us
be acted by his Spirit, that so we may not live so much as Christ may live in
us. It has pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell, out of his
fullness let us receive grace for grace: Thou have appointed him to be wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, all in all unto thy people, make him so to us.
This was his constant and most familiar language, and as the Bent of his Spirit
lay most this way so he accounted this his greatest perfection. It was a
memorable speech that he used to some that had a great esteem of him for that
singular holiness and sanctity that they knew to be in him, The highest thing
that I have attained unto, it is to go quite and clean out of my self, and to
roll my self wholly upon the grace of God in Christ. After all the grace he had
attained unto, he accounted it his greatest perfection to deny himself and to
live wholly upon Christ herein imitating the blessed Apostle, who, after the
greatest measures of holiness that he had attained, yet made it his great
desire to be sound in Christ. This holy man was so curious in this point of
living entirely upon Christ, as that he never suspected himself more, or
thought worse of himself, then when he found a secret inclination to look to
somewhat in himself, and could not find himself so clearly brought off to acts
of self-denial. One passage of his was very remarkable to this purpose, I have
been apt to question my condition much of late, because when I have found
things amiss within me, and have found out any salve I would be quiet, and did
not deny my self fully to rest on the grace of God in Christ. The great counsel
which he would ever be inculcating on his children, it was that they should
labor to deny themselves more and more, and study Christ, and learn him more
and more. He was scarce ever known to give any holy exhortations to any (in
which he was most frequentand abundant) but still he would be sure in the close
to admonish them to look to Christ for all grace; and what everduty he had been
exhorting them unto, he would still put them in remembrance that the grace and
strength by which they were to perform this, was to be expected from Christ
alone.

And as he was eminent for his living by faith on the Person of Christ, His
living by Faith on the promises.
so likewise he was eminent for his living by faith on the Promises, and
resting upon the Lord in all his straits: when he could but take sanctuary in
some promise, and find out some word of God for his faith to rest upon, he
thought himself secure; he was delighted in the mentioning of that passage of
Abraham, that Abraham gave God glory by believing, he thought that the highest
way of honoring God it was by trusting of him on his naked word and promise.
It is true he was often assaulted by temptations of infidelity (as has been
hinted before) but these were but occasions to make him pray more fervently,
and his Faith got the deeper root in the conclusion; the main stream of his
prayers in his older years ran this way, that he might not stagger at the
promise through unbelief, that he might be established in Faith, and that his
Faith might not fail: and the Lord heard him herein, for his Faith held out in
its strength to the very last, as will appear when we come to relate the
passages of his death. When ever he was in any strait or difficulty and knew
not which way to turn, the Lord bare up his heart in believing that he would
make out his way at last, and provide for him some way or other. One time
having complained to a near Relation of some touches of the stone and other
infirmities that he labored under: he added, But the Lord Supports me, in whom
I trust also that he will support me. When he told his friends that he
endeavored to answer their desires in praying for them, he would say he did
indeed pray for them daily but it was with much weakness and infirmity, yet
(said he) our trust is of acceptance in the Lord Jesus which sits at the
right hand of the Father and makes request for us.

But that which was the Crown and Ornament of his other graces, His singular
Humility.
was his singular humility. As his grace and experience was extraordinary, so
he had a more then ordinary measure of humility. No expression was more
familiar with him then that of the Apostle, accounting himself the chief of
Sinners. There was no corruption that he did oppose or set himself against more
then Spiritual Pride. He would often mention that passage of St. Peter, God
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble: when ever he begged any
other grace from God, he would still beg humility as that which must prepare
him, and make him capable of receiving that grace. His expressions in prayer
were such as these, empty us of self, that we may be full with thy fullness:
that we may receive more grace, make us more humble. And as he was most
watchful against Spiritual pride in himself, so he would warn and admonish
others especially to watch against this corruption, Watch (said he) against
that stratagem of Satan, wherewith he usually assaulteth Souls in the growth of
Spiritual gifts, which is, to puff them up. Another time he spoke to this
purpose, As he said, fight not against small nor great, but only against the
King of Israel, so say I, above all fight against self and pride. Writing to a
near Relation, he had this expression, Truly I find in every days success the
Ebullition of that remainder of Pride in me, and I rejoice at your sensibility
of it, and I have you in remembrance as to this very thing I think I may say
daily. But as this holy man was most sensible of the stirring of Pride in
himself, so by his long and daily praying and striving against it, he got so
great a victory over it, that others that beheld him never saw greater
demonstrations of humility then in him. He was never known to boast of his own
excellencies, but he would often spoke of his infirmities, that so, as he said,
God might have the more glory, and himself shame. When he speak for God, or in
the cause of God, he would spoke with as great Majesty and authority as ever
any of so private a capacity as he was, was known to do; when he spoke of any
thing relating to himself, he would still abase himself and manifest the
greatest lowliness of mind and self-denial; and he loved not that others should
think too highly of him: To one that had a great esteem of him for that grace
of God that did so eminently appear in him, he wrote thus, Think of me no
otherwise then you see: only I hope I have obtained mercy to be faithful.

He was very curious in this to arrogate nothing to himself; The Love he had to
the glory of God.
his great care was to put off all from himself, and to attribute all to the
free grace of God, as St. Paul's expression was, not I, but the grace of God in
me. So when he was carried out to any special or eminent exercise of grace, he
would still express himself to this sort, I have received grace to do this or
that duty, or to believe this or that particular promise: And it was one of his
familiar sayings, let us remember to expect all from him, and ascribe all to
him. When he had heard of the grace of God in others, he would rejoice much in
it, and in this he had a peculiar excellency, he was never observed to envy the
gifts or grace of any, but rejoiced exceedingly to hear of the graces of
others, and blessed the Lord for the grace bestowed upon others as well as that
which was given to himself: He loved Holiness for Holiness sake, and therefore
when he saw it in any, he rejoiced in it as much as if it had been in himself.
When he had heard of the grace of God bestown upon some, he said, blessed be
the Lord for ever and ever, who are we that we should be able to will any thing
after this sort, the Lord keep it in the purpose of our hearts for ever, and
prepare our hearts to him. The great thing which he begged of God for himself
and his nearest Relations, was that God would make use of him and them some way
to be serviceable to him whilst they lived, and he said, one thing more have I
begged of God and shall beg, that both me and you and all that receive the
benefit may look up and give God alone all the glory. Herein lay the perfection
of his grace (and that wherein he came nearest to the holiness of the Saints in
heaven) that although he desired to be most serviceable and to be carried forth
in the highest way of exercising grace, yet when all was done, he desired not
that he might be eyed or looked upon the more, but his great desire was that
all that was done by him might be seen to be of God, and that he might be
admired the more. Writing to a near Relation, he had this passage, I pray that
God will make use of my self and you in such a way, as that God alone may be
seen and we not taken notice of at all, that he may have the glory and we may
not be seen. It was a mighty rejoicing to him to see Religion honored and to
hear of any passage of providence that made for the credit or honor of
Religion. When there was an old disciple an ancient Christian that had
professed Religion many years dyed, and had held out in his profession to the
end without any stain upon his conversation, he seemed to be transported with
an extraordinary joy, and could hardly speak of it without tears, Oh (said he)
such a one has left no stain behind him.

He was constantly affected with a great sense of Gods dispensations toward
the Land; The great Sense he had of Gods Dispensations toward the Land.
if there were any signs of Gods displeasure, and the Judgments of God seemed
to be approaching, or else the Land lay under Judgments at the present; his
manner still was to humble himself in a more then ordinary manner, and to stir
up himself to pray with more fervency. And he was wont to say he loved to look
above the Instruments, and the second Causes, and to transact all things
between God and him, and to consider what it was that God aimed at in every
dispensation. In the time of the late troubles he wrote to a near Relation to
this effect, We had here with us as loud Thunder as I remember ever to have
heard; our house in which I was did shake: the Lightning also then was
extraordinary, such as I never saw in all my life; I stood to behold how it
came forth at the breaking of the Clouds, and I saw (and so did many others
with me) that out of the midst of the Lightning there came forth diverse times
the likeness of fresh burning coals of fire, so redand sparkling as any hot
Iron can be when it is heated to the utmost in the Smiths Forge. These Signs
from heaven with the Sword drawn out on earth among us, do seem to speak alowd
that our provocations are very great: Join with us to entreat the Lord for
pardon and reformation: Stir up your godly friends to do the like. It may be
the Lord will hear and spare, because he warns, or it may be such seekers may
be hid or marked out from the common destruction, or if the outward man perish,
sure I am, the soul shall find mercy that seeks the Lord in truth, He will in
no wise cast out such a Soul.

In another Letter he wrote thus, at such a time fell abundance of rain, and
the waters were so high as has been seldom seen; many men's harvest is yet
behind, and great loss likely to ensue, our heavenly Father shakes the rod of
Famine as he has of the Sword: Oh let us pray that grace may turn all of us
that are his from our Iniquities.

In another letter speaking concerning the troubles and public distractions
that were in the land, he expressed himself thus, Methinks the voice of the
Gospel considered with the uncertainty of all things here below, does seem to
put us most seriously to resolve upon the setting of our affections on things
above; I hope it is our resolution with yours: But yet I think we and you need
more firmness in resolution, else why should our wise heavenly Father hold us
at such uncertainties, if he did not see this to be best for us.

In another letter speaking of the public troubles, he had this expression, I
believe that one end of our troubles may be to keep us up in a fervent frame of
praying, that we may pray up our selves more and more into that heaven-like
conversation in which the ancient Saints have been enabled to outlive their
troubles, and so I trust shall we. These few instances (amongst many more that
might be produced) are brought to show how sensible he was of Gods
dispensations toward the Land, and of public Judgments, and what his carriage
was under them.

He was a man of a sound Judgment, His soundness in the Faith.
and most stable in the Faith, insomuch, that though he had been a professor of
Religion for many years, and lived in such a time wherein so many opinions
sprang up; he never took up, much less was fond of any private, particular, or
novel opinion, but he always preferred the old Divinity (as he called it) and
liked that doctrine best which he knew to be held and maintained by the
generality of godly, sober, and Orthodox Diviner. Where he perceived any were
led aside into any erroneous or corrupt principle, by the subtilty of Satan and
their own weak Judgment; he would pray with great compassion and tendernss for
their reduction and recovery: and herein he was veryeminent: instead of
censuring others or quarreling with them about their opinions, he did
Conscientiously set himself to pray for them, and as he had opportunity, would
endeavor in the Spirit of meekness, by setting before them the clearest and
plainest texts of Scripture that were opposite to their opinions, to inform
them in the truth. And being sensible how much the work of Christ was hindered
by the falling away of many that had newly taken up the profession of Religion,
to vain opinions, his prayers ran much that way that the Lord would please to
reduce wandering Souls, and he would exhort others to do the like. Oh, (says he)
let us be earnest with our God to stablish us and ours and all his people in
the truth of the Gospel. His Charity


His Charity toward others was exceeding exemplary where he saw any thing of
Christ or sincerity though mixed with some errors in Judgment, and accompanied
with other infirmities, his Charity would pass over those defects, and embrace
that of the grace of God which he apprehended to be in them. He always loved to
make the best construction of the actions of others, and if the action of an
other could possibly admit of a good interpretation he would be sure to
construe it in that sense. It was a rule with him, never to speak of the faults
and failings of others behind their backs, except it were in these two cases,
either that it might some way or other tend to the persons reformation, or else
to warn others to take heed of such a one that might do them a mischief. And as
he laid a Law upon himself never to speak of the failings of others for
discourse sake, but only upon a weighty occasion and for a good end, so he
could not patiently endure to hear an evil report concerning others, and it was
the most unpleasing discourse to him to hear the infirmities of others blazoned
without a cause. He was most ready to distribute to the necessities of such as
were in want to his power, and many times beyond his power: His house was free
and open at all times for the entertainment of godly Ministers, and other godly
Persons that came to visit him; he was a lover of Hospitality, and spent a
great part of his estate that way. There were few weeks that passed wherein his
house was not a receptable to lodge and entertain some godly person or other.
And none was ever known to be more free, hearty and ingenious in the
entertainment and respect which he gave to others, whether they were his
familiar friends or strangers, the love and courtesy he showed to others, it
was truly such as the Apostle speaks of, and requires to be in us, Love without
dissimulation. What he did in this way of friendship and entertainment, it was
with so much freedom, cheerfulness, and openness of heart as that all those
unto whom he showed any kindness might easily perceive that what kindness he
showed it was done with all his heart, and he seemed to rejoice that he had an
opportunity of expressing kindness to them. He did Conscienciously set apart
some portion of his estate every year for Pious uses, some part of which he
gave to godly Ministers, another part he spent in an yearly allowance that he
afforded to some young students at the University, and another part of it was
given to such as were poor and necessitous, as providence gave occasion:
besides this the doors of his house were a constant relief to the poor of the
place where he lived, which were very numerous.

In his dealings with men he was most exact and just, His exactness as to moral
Righteousness.
he would rather injure himself, and part with his own right rather then do the
least wrong to any. When he drew near his end, having been entrusted with the
employment of considerable sums of money that belonged to several persons,
his great care was to dispose of things so, and to put every thing into such an
exact method and order, as that every one might have his own, and none might
receive the least wrong or prejudice, and this he did to the general
satisfaction of all.

When persons came to complain to him of their dissentious, What course he took
in making up differences.
and the breaches that were between them and others, he would exhort them first
of all to make their peace with God, and to labor to set all things right
between God and them, and then he said, God could quickly turn the hearts of
enemies and make them friends; and upon this occasion he would often mind them
of that Scripture, if a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his Enemies to be
at peace with him. His integrity and uprightness was such, and he had the
reputation of a man so unbyassed, and that would not be drawn to favor either
party more then the justice and equity of the cause did require, that both the
dissenting parties would refer the matter to him, and the whole business was
left to his single determination, and what conclusion and agreement he brought
things unto they were content withal and did yield to stand to it: And his
manner was (when he came to make up differences) oftentimes to begin with
prayer: And being once called to make up a difference between some near
relations, he made a motion that they might first begin with prayer, before
they entered upon the discourse, but this being refused, and one of the persons
there present discovering his unwillingness to embrace that motion, he soon
took his leave, and said to a friend that came with him, Oh, we shall be able
to do no good in it. And in making up of differences his care was not only to
bring the dissenting parties to terms of agreement, but his endeavor also was
to make the persons themselves friends, and to remove any exasperation or
bitterness that was between them, that so they might continue in love and amity
for the future; and he had a wonderful dexterity and ability to use proper and
fit arguments taken from the Laws of the Land on one hand, and from the Laws of
God on the other, to press them to come to terms of agreement; such was his
Love of peace, and his desire to make peace between others, that when it has
been a matter of cost, and something has been to be paid by one of the parties
for the satisfaction of the other, and the party that should have paid the money
has discovered his unwillingness to pay to, rather then the breach should not
be made up, or the difference remain between them, he has paid the money out of
his own purse.

He had often times money put into his hands by godly persons to dispose as he
saw cause, His manner in dispensing Alms.
and when some poor people (who were made acquainted with it) would come to him
for relief, he would be sure to give them some spiritualalms before he
distributed those corporal Alms that were committed to him, his manner was to
be dropping some holy counsel upon them, and to be acquainting them with the
knowledge of Christ, and if there were any notorious or scandalous sin that they
were guilty of, he would endeavor to make them sensible of it and to bring
them to repentance for the same.

He was a great promoter, His promoting Christian meetings tending to
edification.
upholder, and incourager of the meetings of the godly, namely, such as were
for prayer, holy conference, and such as tended merely to spiritual
edification. As for meetings to any other end; especially such wherein any
professing Religion did engage themselves about State Affairs to speak and
discourse about them (which he upon all occasions would declare against, and
say that private Christians had nothing to do with them) or such meetings as
were spent in talking and discoursing of opinions and controverted points, or
those wherein the time was spent merely in a vain ostentation of men's own parts
and gifts, and the spiritual good and edification of others not aimed at; he
was an utter enemy to such kind of meetings, and none was more averse from
them. This appeared by the caution which he used in setting down the Rules for
the ordering and regulating of such Christian meetings in which he would be
present. When first he began to set up this way of Christian Meetings in the
Town where he lived, some godly persons were offended, fearing lest such a
meeting might be the occasion for the venting and spreading of errors, which
were too rise at that time, and that it might be a means to take off persons
from their love to, and esteem of the Public Ministry; hereupon Mr. Rome, to
show the innocence and harmlesness of his intentions, and the intention of
those that were with him; drew up a paper to show what his ends were in those
meetings: the Paper written with his own hand was as follows,

Private meetings of Christians for the glory of God, in furthering the public
Gospel Ordinances; should be,

Not in the time of public ordinances.
Nor to the hinderance of Family Duties:
Nor in places, nor with persons of evil Report.
Nor to the hinderance of men's particular Callings.
Nor by night or other times suspected.
Nor for Controversies of Disputations.
But for the clearing and setting home of truth received in the public
Ministry, and in clearing Cases of Conscience arising thereupon, or otherwise:
And in such exhortations, admonitious, counsels, consolations, as conduce
thereunto, or are otherwise necessary.

In some convenient time of the day, for an hour or two at the most, and once
in a week at the most, except in some urgent case.

In some Family of good report, and among persons of good report.

Each one present having Liberty to speak one by one; to begin and end with
prayer for a blessing.

That the Minister of the place or some other approved Minister be defired to
be present.

Then presently to depart each one to his place and duty, and to walk sutably,
that the way of God be not evil spoken of.

This Paper was enough to satisfy all ingenious and unprejudiced persons; and
whereas it was feared that these Meetings might have been an occasion for the
spreading of Errors, the contrary effect was found, for by this means, the
godly of that place where these meetings were held, were kept steadfast in the
Faith. And this arose much from the wisdom which God had endowed Mr. Rome
withal; for his prudence was such in managing of those meetings, as that the
time which they spent together in them, was taken up, for the most part
(excepting only what time was spent in prayer) in discoursing of some main
Article of Religion, or some Catechetically point. And by this means, the
Christians of that place were so rooted and grounded in the Faith, as that they
were not so soon shaken by temptations, as many others were in others parts of
the Nation, who had not the principles of Religion so much distilled into them,
nor rendered so familiar to them.

To all that which has been already said, The great conjunction of the graces
of the Spirit in him.
this is to be added, as that which did most of all commend and set forth the
Grace of God in him and toward him. He did not only attain an eminency in this
or that grace, or some few particular Graces, but he arrived to a great
eminency in every grace, so that as there was no grace but it was very visible,
and might be clearly seen and discerned to be in him, so there was not one of
these graces but he seemed to excel therein, Holy affection and a spiritual
fervor in prayer and other acts of worship, zeal for the glory of God, faith,
humility meekness, patience, submission to the will of God,
heavenly-mindedness, charity and compassion to others, and the like graces,
were not only to be found in him, as they are more or less to be found in all
the Saints, but they were elevated to a greater height, and brought up to a
greater and more peculiar eminency that is commonly found in most Christians,
and there was such a special eminency in every grace as that it was hard to say
which grace it was that he most excelled in.

Having thus walked with God many years, His bringing forth more fruit in his
age.
he kept his integrity to the end, and that which was most remarkable, in his
elder years, he seemed to excel himself; he did not only retain the luster of
his former graces, but he grew more spiritual, and was more active and lively
in the ways of God: he spent more time in Prayer, meditation, and other holy
exercises, he was more abundant in holy counsels and exhortations. And this
was one of his speeches, Since our time is short, let us work the faster, and
watch and pray the more fervently: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments. He seemed to mind little else but spiritual concernments; grace
seemed to have the whole command of him. Being asked by one of his Relations,
that whereas in his younger years he seemed to be more inclined to passion and
perturbation, and was sooner moved when those that were under him had not given
him due observance, and done things according to his mind and expectation, how
it came to pass that now in his elder years he was more meek and patient, and
seemed to be little moved at any thing; he answered, it was not because he
found not the same things in his nature still: and that he found himself more
inclined to passion then before; but that the grace of God had now overcome and
overpowred him, and reduced him to the temper that he was in.

He had a long and a constant remembrance of his change before it came. His
expectation and longing after his change
And herein he was most like the ancient saints, he accounted himself but a
Pilgrim and Stranger upon Earth. Several years before his death, there was
scarce a Letter that he wrote to some of his nearest Relations, but he
expressed the sense he had of his approaching change. In one of his Letters he
expressed himself thus, our time of departure hence draws near: Oh pray for
us as we desire to do for you, that we may be found blameless at that day. In
another letter (after he had been sick) he said, Pray for me that I may not be
taken hence unready, nor yet my life be longer desired then all Gods work in
me, and by me be done. A year or two before his death he rejoiced much to think
that so much of his race was run; and expressed himself to this purpose, that
he would not for a great deal be set back, and have those years to live again,
that he had already passed over. Some five or six weeks before his last
sickness whereof he died, he thus expressed himself, I am old (as Isaac said)
and know not the day of my death, pray for me that I may be faithful to the
death.

About the beginning of December 1659. he fell sick of a lingering distemper, His
last Sickness.
which continued upon him for the space of ten weeks, before the Lord was
pleased to put a period to his race.

In the beginning of his sickness he had some intimation from the Lord
concerning his change: The Intimation he had concerning his change
and as there was no eminent thing that befell him in his course, but he had
usually some hint before from the Lord concerning it; So the Lord the better to
prepare him for it, had fastened the impression of his change upon him before it
came: When the Minister of the place where he lived came to visit him, and said
he hoped he might recover, he replied, he knew not how God might deal with him,
but he had received the sentence of death in himself. A little after the
beginning of his sickness, he wrote to some of his near Relations, Beloved in
the Lord, I am yet thorough mercy alive; and continue sick; my God deals
bountifully with me: who do acknowledge from my heart that I am a chief of
sinners, yet has he pardoned me, and will (ere long) receive me to be with
Christ, which is best of all: Pray for me that I may give God his due glory by
believing, and by holy submission and conformity to his will in life and death:
Blessed be God I have in my weak measure set my house in order. etc.

As long as ever he was able, His unweariedness in the Lords work to the last.
he continued praying with his family, and speaking to them something out of
the word; and when he found his spirits so low, and so much spent, that he was
not able to do as much as he had done formerly, he said it was the grief of his
Soul that he could do no more for them.

His whole carriage during his sickness, and at his death, His exemplary
carrage at his death.
it was suitable to his life, as he had lived exemplarily, so he died
exemplarily. The whole of his carriage at his death was, as one (who was an eye
witness of it, and was a judicious person) expressed it, as if it had been a
studied piece, his great care was that grace might be seen to act him at his
death, as his chief care had been to express it in his Life. He was naturally a
man of a timorous and fearful Spirit, but when he came to die, the grace of God
had so elevated him above his natural temper: that he was not only willing to
die, but he triumphed over death, and was no more concerned about it, then
only, that grace might act him at his death, as it had done in his life. He
delighted not to speak much in the time of his sickness; but for the most part
his time was taken up in a continued Meditation, yet something he spoke to all
that came to visit him, and that which he spoke, it was usually comprised in
some short sentence or other. His Dying Speeches and Counsels.
His most usual word to all that came to him was this, make sure of Christ,
remember that one necessary thing. At one time when some of the younger sort
were come about him, he said, make sure of Christ; and for encouragement, I
tell you that Religion is no vain thing, it is no notion, it is a reality, I
tell you so from mine own experience. Another time perceiving some young ones
to be talking one to another in a familiar manner, he said, he knew not what
thy were talking about, but commended their love, only they should be sure to
speak something for the edifying one of another, and they should have their
speeck seasoned with the salt of the word, for the Lord he hearkened and heard,
and there was a Book of remembrance written for them that feared him and
thought upon his name. At another time when there was a person of Quality came
to visit him, he said, hold on as you have begun, make sure of Christ, if I had
as much gold as would reach up to the sky, it would do me no good; my interest
in Christ is all my happiness. Another time his wife and children coming about
him, he said, I hope you have made choice of Christ; and he exhorted them to
cleave to him, withal he added, they shyould be diligent in the use of all the
means, but when all was done, they should be sure to depend upon Christ: and he
added farther, take heed of the world, for that is your greatest Enemy; I have
found it to be so. And to his children in particular, he said, deny your
selves, sinful-self, self-pleasure, and self\profit, and the delights of the
world; and seek your All in Christ, and in him you shall find All Sufficiency.
When some good people (who were wont to meet together to pray, and to build up
one another in the ways of God) came to visit him, he said, continue in prayer,
hold on, I am confident it is the way of God you are in. To the Minister of the
place that came to visit him often in his sickness, he said, Preach to win
souls, let all your preaching be to win souls. And to his own Son, a little
before his death, he wrote to this purpose, my Son, take heed to the Ministry
that thou have received in the Lord that thou fulfill it, this will tend to the
glory of God, the good of souls, and to thine account in the day of Christ, the
great Shepherd of the sheep. During the time of his sickness, some of his
Christian friends kept a Fast for him, as also in relation to public
concernments, and some being going from him to that exercise, he said, Pray for
me, but especially for the Church of God.

All the time of his sickness he had not the least cloud upon his Spirit, The
inward Peace and spiritual Comforts which he had in his Sickness.
neither was Satan permitted in the least to disturb his peace, when a Minister
that came to visit him, asked him whether he had any temptations, he answered,
No, blessed be the Lord the had none, so that although, all his life time, he
had been full of conflicts, yet when he came to die he had the most perfect
serenity: after he had been sick some weeks, he wrote thus to a near Relation,
I yet live thorough merey, and do continue weak but God deals very gently
with me; for my outward afflictions are tolerable, and his inward consolations
are full of grace and heavenly sweetness. These comforts abode and continued
with him to the very last, for at several times in his sickness, and the same
day that he died he was heard to say, he has left with me the Comforter: and
when, about an hour before he died, his natural Spirits being almost spent, he
brake forth into this expression, my grief is great, one of his Relations
standing by, said to him, you do not mean in respect of your spiritual estate;
Mr. Row replied with a little seeming displeasure, No, no, he has, and does,
and will support by his eternal Spirit. Thus the Lord was pleased to answer him
in that which had been his great desire for a long time, which was, that his
Faith might not fail, and that he might be kept up in the Faith to the last.
The night beFore he died, he had this expression, I have waited upon God for my
salvation, and blessed be God, I shall not be disappointed.

As his manner was in his life time, His Constancy in self-denial
so it was observed by those that were most about him at his death; He was much
in the acknowledgment of his own nothingness and vileness; and much in
magnifying the free grace and mercy of God toward him. The Minister that
preached at his Funeral had this passage concerning him. He was much in self
denial even to the last, looking on all that he had done as nothing, as dross
and dung, in comparison of Christ. At one time when his wife came to him and
said, she prayed that she might follow his steps; he replied, Follow Christ,
follow Christ, he has given you an example: Blessed be God for friends, but
blessed be God for Jesus Christ who has saved us from wrath to come.

His great desire was to be perfectly resigned up to the will of God, His
Constancy in self-resignation.
and therefore his great request to his friends when they came to visit him was
this, Pray me up into the will of God; and to some of his near Relations during
the time of his sickness he wrote thus, Pray for me and your selves, that we
may be taught and made able by the Spirit of Christ in us, to resign and
conform to our Fathers good will, that when Gods time is come, I may depart in
peace unto that longed for everlasting Rest, which the Lord Jesus has
purchased for me, and to which he will bring me; even so Amen. And in another
letter he wrote thus, I desire your prayers for me whilst I live, that I may
abide steadfast in the Faith of the Lord Jesus, whose I am, and by whom alone I
expect salvation, and that I may by Faith in the Lord Jesus, His Soliloquies
have power from him, by his Spirit, to submit and conform to his will both in
life and death. In the time of his sickness he was full of holy ejaculations and
Soliloquies; He had often that passage of Hezekiah, I am oppressed, Lord
undertake for me. And that passage of David, in the multitude of my thoughts
within me thy comforts delight my Soul: He would often cause the 16. Psalm, and
the 26. of Isaiah, the six first verses, to be read to him; and speaking to
himself alone, he would often repeat these words, Isa. 12.2. The Lord Jehovah
is my Strength and my Song, he also is become my salvation. Sometimes he would
say Come Lord Jesus, and then he would answer himself, Yea, he does come, he
comes leaping over the Mountains, and skipping over the Hills.

The great thing which comforted him, was, to think, he should be immediately
with the Lord, as soon as his race was at an end. When a Christian friend that
came to visit him, used such an expression, in discourse, as this, that the
Bodies of the Saints should rest in their Graves, as in a bed of Down: Yea, but
(says he) this day thou shall be with me in Paradise: Intimating thus much,
that though it were matter of joy to him, to think that his body should rest in
Peace until the general Resurrection; yet his greatest comfort lay in this, to
think that at the instant of dissolution, his soul should go to the immediate
sight of God. This appeared in the many ardent breathings, which he had in such
expressions as these, Come Lord Jesus; Oh how does my soul thirst for God: And
again he would say, Go forth my soul to meet thy God.

He was not only willing to die, but he longed to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. The last Sabbath but one before his death, he said, Oh what a blessed
Sabbath would this be, if this might be my entrance into my everlasting
Sabbath. At another time he said, Why should we not be willing to die, Christ
came from heaven to earth, to free us from sin and misery, and why should not
we be willing (...)

Gilberts Works.

Buroughs Gospel reconciliation.

His Earthly-mindedness.

Sympson of Unbelief.

Howsers Sermon preached in Jamaica.

In octavo and 12o.
Strongs Will of God subjected to the Will of man.

Geerings arrignment of Pride.

Durants Counsel and Comfort for dejected souls.

Harrisons Spiritual Pleadings.

Lawsons Examination of Hobbs.

Hobbs Creed examined by T. Teneson.

Sr. Henry Wottons Remains, with many additions.

Haughtons Rise, Growth, and Fall of Antichrist.

Perkins Catechism.

Sydenham for Infant Baptism.

Swaffeilds Saints Failings.

Wollebius Compendium, Latin.

Sangers word of Faith.

Harris's threesold State of man.

An answer to Biddles Catechism.

History of the Spanish Inquisition.

Mr. Vines Saints neerness to God.

Heavenly-mindedness and Earthly-mindedness, in two parts, with an Appendix
concerning laying hold on eternal life, by John Row Minister of Gods word.

The Worm that dies not, or Hell torments in the certainty and eternity of
them; plainly discovered in several Sermons, preached on Mark the 9th. the 48.
v. by that painful and laborious Minister of the Gospel, William Strong. His
own notes Published by Dr. Manton and Mr. Row.

The Fountain of life opened, or a display of Christ in his essential and
Mediatorial glory: wherein the Impetration of our redemption by Jesus Christ is
orderly unfolded, as it was begun, carried on and finished by his Covenant
transaction, Mysterious incarnation, solemn call and Dedication, belssed
offices, deep abasement, and Supereminent advancement, etc. By John Flavel,
Preacher of the Gosspel of Jesus Christ at Dartmouth in Devon.

Newly Reprinted.
Christ's power over Bodily diseases, by Edward Lawrence.

Redemption of time, by William Wheatly: with a Preface of Mr. Richard Baxter.

FINIS.

