THE Paedo-Baptists Apology FOR THE Baptized Churches, Showing The invalidity
of the strongest grounds for Infant Baptism out of the works of the learned
assertors of that tenent. AND That the Baptism of Repentance for the remission
of sins is a duty incumbent upon all sinners who come orderly to the profession
of Christianity.

ALSO The Promise of the Spirit ^eing the substance of a Sermon on 1 Cor. 12. 1.

To which is added A POSTSCRIPT. Out of the works of Dr. Jer. Tailor in
defense of imposition of hands as a never failing Ministry.

By Tho. Grantham.

Mr. Perkins on Gal. 3. 27. Baptism alone is no mark of Gods Child, but Baptism
joined with Faith, for so must the text be consideres. All the Galations that
believe are baptized into Christ.

Printed in the Year. 1671.

To the Reader.
Friend,
I Have a few things to say before thou read this ensuing Apology, and first,

The occasion of it is from the late unkind usages which the Baptized Churches
have received from the Paedo-Baptists, by violently dispersing their
Assemblies, by defacing and taking away their meeting places, by imprisoning
their persons, seizing and wasting their Estates, by injuring them in their
Trade by means of excommunications, by Writs de Capiendo and other penal
proceedings both confining their Persons and exposing them to great
inconveniences. And all this only (as I conceive for their conscionable
observance of the will of God in Preaching the Gospel to sinners ^^r the
obedience of faith, and for adhearing to that form of Doctrine once deli^ered
to the Saints Heb. 6. 1, 2. In which Doctrine and sufferings being through the
mercy of God a pertaker with them, I thought I might lawsully write an Apology
for them, or at least for the Truth professed by them. And that I might the
^ore effectually do this I chose to speak ^o their advers^ries by the learned
^ens of their own Doctors.

2. My design in writing this Apo^ogy, is to abate (if it may be) that great
enmity which has appeared generally between the parties concerned; and more
perticularly that spirit of opposition and disresp^ct which too much appears in
the more refined sort of the Paedo-Baptists, against such as labor to reform
(or rather to restore) the Doctrine of Baptism, to its first integrity and
estimation among all that profess the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, under what
Epethets or den^minations soever. And me thinks the truth should prevail with
all that do consider the authority and force thereof to be such that men are
constrained (as it were to speak for it though to the overthrow of their
dearest errors, so that we may say their Rock is net as our Rock, our enemies
being judges.

3. I have not injured the sense of my authors, and where I have added any
thing for explycation of any word or passage, I have distingushed the same
partly by a different Letter, and partly by this Character [] nor have I said
much in the Apology, as indeed it was not necessary, considering the evidence
of the word of God for us, and the Record which our opposers do bear in favor
of our Cause; and beside they that will may see what may be further said in the
case depending, if they please to peruse the Learned works of those of our way,
viz. Denn his Answer to Dr. Featley, Tombs, his Antipaedo-Baptist, Fisher his
Christianismus Rediv^vous, and many others.

4. The second part entitled Of the Promise of the Spirit, I though fit to be
annexed, because Acts 2. 38, 39. such as are Baptized with the Baptism of
Repentance for Remission of fins, have the promise of the Spirit made to them,
which being sought for in the way ordained of God, shall be received according
to his will for he is faithful that promised.

Thy servant in Christ, Tho. Grantham,

THE Paedo Baptists Apology FOR The Baptized Churches, etc.
THere is no point of the Christian Faith, of greater importance in order to
the composure of Divisions among such as conscientiously profess the Name of
Christ, then the Doctrine of holy Baptism, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins; for as many as have been Gal. 3. 27. Heb. 6. 2.
Baptixed into Christ have put on Christ. And where this foundation truth has
been neglected or essentially corrupted, there has ensued great disorder in
Religion, because the being of the Church (as visible) is so concerned therein,
that there can be no orderly proceeding in any Church Act, nor participation in
any Church Privilege, where Sacred Baptism is not Antecedent.

And though Reformation (or rather the restoration) of this Truth be hard to
accomplish, yet must we not be discouraged, but still pursue all lawful and
probable ways to effect it in this, as well as in other cases. And the way
which I have chosen to help on this needful work at this time is to show, that
(notwithstanding the discord in point of practice, yet) there is a very great
concord in doctrine, touching the main questions which concern this Heavenly
Institution, between the Paedo-Baptists, and the Baptized Churces. The
questions are these. 1. What are the Qualifications required of all such as are
to be bapt^zed. 2. What is the aue Act or right Form to be observed and done in
this solemn rite of Baptism.


Touching the first, the doctrine of the Baptized Churches is well known,
namely, That Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ are
prerequisites to the baptism of every sinner. And to this agrees the holy
Scripture with full consent, ^aying, Repent and be baptized every one of you.
Act. 2. 38. Mark 1. 5. Acts 8. 12, Acts 18, 8.
They were all baptized confessing their sins. When they believed Philip
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God etc. They were baptized
both men and women, many of the Corinthians hearing, believe'd and were
baptized. And hence this holy Ordinance is well called the Laver of
Regeneration; the Baptism of repentance, fo^th^ r^mis^ion of sins. Now let us
hear the doctrine of the Paedo-Baptists touching this question.

1. The Church of England both in her Articles and vulgar Catechism, delivers
her mind clearly to this purpose, that such repentance whereby sin is forsaken,
and such Faith as by which the promises of God are steadfastly believed, is
required of persons (meaning all persons) which are to be baptized, and that in
Baptism Faith is confirmed etc.

2. M^. Perkins) a Learned Son of ^he same Church) upon these words, ^each all
Nations baptizeing them. says, I explain the words thus* (mark, first of all
it is said Teach them, that is make them my Disciples by calling them to
believe, and to repent. Here we are to consider, the order which God observes
in making with man the Covenant in Baptism, first of all he calls them by his
word and commands them to believe and repent, then in the second place God
makes his promise of mercy and forgiveness* and thirdly he feals his promise by
Baptism -- they that know not, nor consider this order which God used in
Covenanting with them in Bapti^m deal preprosterously, oversliping the
commandment of repenting and b^leiving -- this is the cause of of so much
profaneness in the world -- we see what is done in Baptism, the Covenant of
grace is solemnized between God and the Party baptized, and in this Covenant
something* belongs to God, some to the Party baptized, the actions of the Party
baptized is a certain stipulation, or obligation, whereby he binds himself to
give homage to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. This homage stands IN FAITH,
whereby all the promises of God are beleieved, and in OBEDIENCE to all his
commandments. The sign of this obligation, is that the Party baptized
WILLINGLY yields himself to be washed with water.

3. Diodate on the same Text, teaches that Baptism is a Sacrament of grace in
remission and expiation of sins, and regeneration to a new life. And likewise
for a token that they are bound on there side (meaning such as are baptized) to
consecrate themse^ves to God, and to give themselves over to the conduct of
(...) Spirit, and to CONFESS his name PERPETUALLY. [Thus these three witnesses
do concur with the truth and therein do hold a concord with the baptized
Churches. And one would think there should now be no place for such a conceit,
as that Infants are fit subjects for the sacred ordinance of baptism, because
wholly incapable of these qualifications. Now whereas div^r^ things are
pretended as grounds for Infant Baptism, we shall briefly recount the
particulars which are chiefly insisted on, and then show how the same are
refelled or made void by some of the most learned Asserters of Paedo-baptism.
The grounds pretended are these.

1. The Covenant which God made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. who were to
be circumcised (to wit the makes only) in their Infancy, this is thought to be
a Type of baptism, and hence it is conceived that Infants ought ^o be baptized.

2. Christ's permi^^ing Infants to be brought to him, as persons to whom the
Kingdom belongs.

3. They being tainted with original sin, must be cleansed from it, which is
supposed to be done by baptism.

4. Because it is said except a man be born of water etc. he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. John 3.

5. Because Infants do not ponere obicem, and so are more fit for baptism then
adult Persons, as it is thought.

6. Because without baptism Parents can not hope the salvation of dying Infants
(as some think.)

7. The promise of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 39, is thought to belong to Infants,
and so they ought to be baptized because they are said to be holy.

8. Unless Infants be baptized it is thought God is worse to Infants in the
Gospel, then in the Law.

9. Infants are a part of all Nations, and the command for baptizing is of
extent to all Nations.

10. It Is thought the Apostles baptized Infants because they baptized whole
households, and it is said, it has descended to this very age as a Tradition
Apostolical.

To all which, Doct. Jer. Tailor (and others) in behalf of the baptized
Churches, do give answer as follows.

That this is a goodly Harangue, which upon strict examination will come to
nothing; that it pretends fairly, and signifies little; that some of those
allegations are false, some impertinent, and all the rest insufficient. Libert.
proph^. p, 228. to page 246.


For the argument from circumcision, is invalid (or of no wright) upon infinite
considerations, figures and types prove nothing, unless a commandment go along
with them, or some express ^o signify such to be their purpose: for the deluge
of waters and the ark of Noah were a figure of Baptism s^id Pe^^r: and if
therefore the Circumstances of one should be drawn to the other, we should make
Baptism a Prodigy, rather then a rite. The Pascal Lamb was a Type of the
Eucharist which succeeds the other as Baptism does Circumcision, but because
there was in the manducation of the Pascal Lamb, no prescription of Sacramental
drink, shall we thence conclude that the Eucharist is to be ministered but in
one kind? and even in the very instance of this argument supp^sing a
correspondence of analogy between Circumcision and Baptism, Which yet the
Baptists do not grant.
yet there is no correspondence of Identity: for although it were granted that
both of them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet there is nothing in
Circumstance of Childrens being Circumcised that so concerns that M^stery, but
that it might very well be given to Children, and yet Baptism to men of reason;
because Circumcision left a Character in the flesh, which being imprinted upon
Infants did its work to them when they came to age, and such a Character was
necessary, because there was no word added to the sign; but baptism imptints
nothing that remains on the body, and if it leaves a Character at all it is
upon the soul to which also the word is added, which is as much a part of the
Sacrament as the sign it self is It is a saying of Augustine, De trahe verbum
quid est aqua etc. Take away the word and what is water, nothing but water join
the word to the Element and it is made a Sacrament. This consideration is very
concluding against Paedo Baptism, for to the Infant, the word is as it were
taken away from the Element, and cons^quent y accordirg to Aug. it can be no
Sacrament to them at all.
for both which reasons it is very requisite that the Persons baptized should be
capable of reason, that they may be capable of both the word of the Sacrament
and the impress made upon the Spirit. Since therefore the reason of this pa^ity
does wholly fail, there is nothing left to infer a necessity, of complying in
this circumstance of age, any more then in the other anexes of the Type: and
the case is clear in the Bishops question to C^p^iu^, for why should not
Infants be baptized just upon the eight day as well as Circumcised, if the
correspondence of the rites be an argument to infer one circumstance which is
impertninent and accidental to the misteriousness of the rite, why should it
not infer all [especially such a material thing as the time of baptism, for if
the eight day be not determined, no man is able to assign the day of baptism,
which being delayed till the tenth or twentieth day, may by the same reason be
deferred till the Child have passed through its infancy, and become capable of
e^udition] and then also females must not be baptized because they were not
circumcized, but it were more proper, if we would understand it aright, to
prosecute the analogy of the type to the antitipe by way of letter and spirit,
and signification, and as circumcision signifies baptism so also the adjuncts
of circumcision shall signify something spiritual in the adherences of
baptism. And therefore as Infants were circumcised, so spiritu^l Infants shall
be baptized, which (according to some) is spiritual circumcision [which yet is
better expounded by St. Paul. Phil. 3. Where he makes the spiritual
circumcision to be the mind and spirit renewed, and the putting of the body of
the sins of the flesh] for therefore babes had the ministry of the type to
signify that we must when we give our names to Christ, become (...) Children
in malice, [for unless you become like one of these little ones you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven] said our blessed Savior, and then the ^ye
is made complete, and this seems to have been the sense of the p^imative
Church, for in the ages next to the Apostles, they gave to all baptized persons
mi^k and honey to represent to them their duty, that though in age and
understanding they were men, yet they were babes in Christ, and Children in
malice. But to infer the sense of the Paedo Baptists, is so weak a manner of
arguing, that Augustine whose device it was (and men use to be in love with
their own fancies) at the most pretended it but as probable [Lo here the
newness of the argument, from Infant circumcision, to Infant baptism.

[As for the Catholics they hold it an Ex manu controv^ under the probation of
diverse of their Doctors, Professors and Students in Theology. p. 372. to 377.
absurd thing to argue as the Protestants do, from the Covenant made with
Abraham and his seed, Gen 17. 7. Thus they speak. That prom^se concerns
literally pecuculiar pro^^ction, and ^orldly felicity, not the remission of
sins and everlasting Life, neither can we be sons of Abraham by carnal
generation, or by our carnal Paren^s (we are not Jews but Gentiles) but only by
spiritual generation (to wit Baptism) by which we are born to God, and made the
brothers of Chr^^t^ the Sons of Abraham, th^se (says St. Paul) are the sons of
Abraham, not who are the Sons of the flesh but of Faith Romans 4. 12. 13.

Again they deride the Argument drawn S. N. Antid.
from Infants being circumcised in order to their being baptized, calling it a
cunning argument by which it will follow that Females are not to be baptized,
etc.]

And as ill success will they have with the other Arguments as with this for
from the action of Christ's blessing Infants to inser that they are to be
baptize, proves nothing so much as that there is a great want of better
arguments, The Conclusion would be with more probability derived thus; Christ
blessed Children and so dismissed them, but baptized them not, therefore
Infants are not to be baptized, but let this be as weak as it is enemy, yet that
Christ did not baptize them, is an argument sufficient that Christ has other
ways of bringing them to Heaven. He passed his act of Grace upon them by
benediction and imposition of hands.

And therefore though neither Infants nor any man in puris naturalibus can
attain to a supernatural end without the addition of some instrument or means
of Gods appointing ordinarily, yet where God has not appointed a rule nor an
order, as in the case of Infants, we contend he has not, this argument is
invalid* And as we are sure that God has not commanded Infants t^ be baptized,
so we are su^e God will do them no injustice, nor damn them for what they
cannot help.

And therefore let them be pressed with all the inconveniences which a^e
consequent to Original sin, yet either it will not be laid to their charge, so
as to be sussicient to condemn them; or if it could, yet the mercy and absolute
goodness of God will secure them, if he take them away before they can glorify
him by a free obedience. Quid ergo fostivat innoceus alis ad remissionem
p^ccatorum? Was the question of Tertullian (lib. de bapt.) he knew no such
danger from their Original guilt, as to drive them to a laver of which in that
age of innocence they had no need, as he conceived* and therefore there is no
necessity of flying to the help of others, for tongue, and heart, and faith,
and predispositions to baptism; for what need all this stir? as Infants without
their own consent, without any act of their own. And without any exterior
solemnity, contracted the guilt of Adams sin, and are liable to all the
punishment which can with Justice descend upon his posterity who are personally
innocent; so Infants shall be restored without any solemnity or act of their
own, or any other for them, by the second Adam by the redemption of Jesus
Christ by his righteousness and mercies, applied either immediately, or how, or
when he pleases to appoint [and to this agrees that saying of the Apostle as in
Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive; and as by the disobedience
of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous] And so Austins argument will come to nothing without any need of
Godfathers, or the faith of any body else. And it is too narrow a conception
of God Almighty, because he has tied us to the observation of Ceremonies of
his own institution, that therefore he has tied himself to it. Many thousand
ways there are by which God can bring any reasonable soul to himself: but
nothing is more unreasonable, then because he has tied all men of years, and
discretion to this way, therefore we of our own heads shall carry Infants to
him that way without his direction: the conceit is poor and low, and the action
consequent to it, is too bold and ventrous, mysterium meum mihi and filiis
domus meae. Let him do what he please to Infants we must not.

Only this is certain, that God has as great care of Infants as of others, and
because they have no capacity of doing such acts, as may be in order to
acquiring salvation, God will by his own immediate mercy bring them thither,
where he has intended them; but to say that therefore he will do it by an
external act and ministry, and that confined to a particular, viz. This rite
and no other, is no good argument unless God could not do it without such
means, or that he had said he would not: and why cannot God as well do his
mercies to Infants now immediately, as he did before the Institution either of
Circumcision or Baptism? [^his query is worthy of serious consideration]
however there is no danger that Infants should perish for want of this external
Ministry, much less for prevaricating Christ's precept, nisi quis renatus fuerit
etc. For first the water and spirit in this place [according to some learned
expositers] signify the same thing: and by water is meant the ^ff^ct of the
spirit clensing and purifying the soul, as appears in its parralel place of
Christ's baptizing with the holy Ghost and Fire -- (but to let pass this
advantage and to suppose it to be meant of external Baptism [as that is the most
likely sense] yet this no more infers a necessity of Infants Baptism, then the
other words of Christ infer a necessity to give them the holy Communion, nisi
comediritis carnem filii hominis, and brberitis sanguinem non introibitis in
regnum ^aelorum; and yet we do not think these words sufficient Argument to
communicate them; if men therefore will do us justice, either let them give
both Sacraments to Infants as some Ages of the Church did, or neither, for the
wit of man is not able to show a desparity in the sanction, or in the evergie
of its expression; and therefore they were honest, that understood the
obligation to be parralel, and performed it accordingly, and yet because we say
they were deceived in one instance, and yet the obligation (all the world
cannot reasonably say but) is the same: they are as honest and as reasonable
that do neither. And since the antient-Church did with an equal opinion of
necessity give them Communion, and yet men now adays do not, why shall men be
more burdened with a prejudice and nam^ of obloquy for not giving the Infant^
one Sacrament, more then they ar^ disliked for not affording them the other. If
Anabaptist shall be ^ name of disgrace, why shall not some other name be
invented for them that deny to communicate Infants, which shall be equally
disgraceful, or else both the Opinions signified by such names, be accounted no
disparagement, but receive their estimate according to their truth?

Of which truth since we are now taking account from pretenses of Scripture, it
is considerable the discourse of St. Peter which is pretended for the
intitleing Infants to the promise of the holy Ghost, and by consequence to
Baptism, which is supposed to be its instrument of conveyance, it is wholly a
fancy, and has nothing in it of certainty or demonstration and not much
probability. For besides that the thing it self is unreasonable and the holy
Ghost works by the heighting and improveing our natural faculties, and
therefore is a promise that so concerns them, as they are reasonable Creatures,
and may have a tittle to it, in proportion to their nature, but no possession
or reception of it, till their faculties come into act, besides this, I say,
the words mentioned in S. P^t^rs ^rmon (which are the only record of the
promise are interpreted upon a w^a^ mistake; the promise belongs to you and to
your Children therefore Infants are actually receptive o^ it in that capacity,
that is the argument: but the reason of it is not yet discovered nor never will
[For indeed it is without reason] To you and your Children, i^s you and your
posterity, to you and your children when they are of the same capacity in which
you are effectually receptive o^ the promise. [Beside the promise of the Spirit
in this place is referred to the gift^ of the holy Ghost, an^ is therefore made
t^ those who had alread^ Se Diod te. in act 2.
received it in the quic^ning, or illuminating opperation of it, an^ is the
po^tion of beleivers as such, and i^ consequent to baptism. Acts 2 38, 39* and
is therefore wrongfully made an argument for the baptizing of Infants, wh^
(what ever they may have of the g^aces of the spirit a thing wholly unknown that
they have any such receipt of the Spirit.
yet) have neither need of, nor any capacity to use the gifts of the spirit and
therefore evident it is that this promise of the Spirit belongs not to Infants
at all]

And for the Allegation of St. Paul, that Infants are holy if their Parents be
faithful, it signify nothing, bu^ that they are holy by designation, -- [or
according to Erasmus they (to wit Infants Eras. parrap. ^n 1 Cor. 7.
born of such Parents as the o^e being a Christian the other not) are holy
leg^^^^ately; for the conversion of either wife or ^^sband does not disso^ve
the marriage which was made when both were in u^b^^eif. And however it is true,
that Au^tin was a great stick^er for Paedo-Bap^ism, yet he denis that any such
thing can ^e deduced from the text in hand, his words ^re these. lib. 3 De pec.
mer. remi^. It is to be held without doubling, whatsoever that sanctification
was, it was not of power to make Christians and remit sins. He might well say
so considering that the holiness of the child is derived from the sanctity of
the unbeleiver, as the word else being rightly referred does evince, 1 Co. 7.
14.]

And as the promiss appertains not (for ought appears) to Infants in that
capacity and consistance, -- yet Baptism is not the means of conveying the holy
Ghost, for that which Peter says be baeptized and ye shall receive the holy
Ghost, signifies no more then this; first be baptized and then by imposition of
the Apostles hands, (which was another mystery and rite) (...) shall receive
the promiss of the Father and this is nothing but an infinuation of the rite of
Confirmation, a^ to this sense expounded by diver^ ancient Authors; and in
ordinary Ministry, the effect of it is not bestowed upon any unbaptized
persons, for it is in order next after baptism: and upon this ground Peter's
argument in the case of Cornelius was concluding enough, a mojori ad minus,
thus the holy Ghost was bestowed upon him and his Family, which gift by
ordinary ministry was consequent to baptism, not as the effect is to the cause,
or to the proper instrument, but as a consequent is to an antecedent, in a
chain of c^uses accidentally, and by positive institution depending upon each
other) God by that miracle did give Testimony that the persons of the men were
in great dispositions toward Heaven, and therefore were to be admitted to
these rites which are the ordinary inlets into the kingdom of Heaven. But then
from hence to argue that where ever there is a capacity of receiving the same
grace, there also the same sign is to be administered, and from ^ence to infer
Paedo-Baptism, is an argument very fallatious upon several grounds; first
because Baptism is not the sign of the holy Ghost, but by another mystery it
was conveyed ordinarily, and extraordinarily, it was conveyed independently
from any mystery, and so the argument goes upon a wrong supposition. 2. If the
supposition were true, yet the proposition built upon it is false, for they
that are capable of the same grace, are not always capable of the same sign,
for women under the law of Moses although they were capable of the
righteousness of Faith, yet they were not capable of the sign of Circumcision,
for God does not always convey his graces in the same manner, but to some
mediately, to some immediately; and there is no better in^tance in the the
World of it, then the gift of the holy Ghost (which is the thing now instanced
in, in this cont^station.)

And after all this least these arguments should not ascertain their cause,
they fall on complaining against God, and will not be content with God, unless
they may baptize their children but take exceptions that G^d did more for the
children of the Jews, But why so? because God made a Covenant with their
children actually as Infants, and concin'd it by circumcision: well so he did
with our children too in their proportion. He made a Convenant of spiritual
promises on his part, and spiritual and real services on ours; and this
pert^ins to children when capable, but made with them as soon as they are
alive, and yet not so as with the Jews b^bes, for as they rite consigned them
actually, so it was a national and temporal blessing and covenant, and a
separation of them from the portion of the Nations, a mark^ng them for a
peculiar people, and therefore while they were in the Wilderness and sep^rate
from the commixture of all people they were not at all ci^cumcised but as that
ri^e did seal the righteousness of Faith, [Which whether it did any such thing
to an^ s^ve to ^braham only ^n much doubten] so by virtue of i^'s (...), and
remanem^y in their flesh, it did that work when the (...) came to age, But in
Christian Infants the case is otherwise, for the new Covenant being estab^ished
upon better promises, is not only to be^ter purposes, but also in a distinct
manner to be understood, when their spirits are as receptive of a spiri^ual act
or impress as the bodies of jewish children were of the sign of circumcision
then it is to be consigned; but the business is quickly at an end by saying
that God has done no less for ours, then for their children, for he will do
the mercies of a Father and Creator to them, and he did no more to the other,
but he has done more to ours, for he has made a Covenant with them and built
it upon promises of the greatest concernment. -- [And note further we have as
much ground of comfort concerning our dying Infants, as the faithful had for
the first two thousand years, during all which time, the Covenant of grace
reached to Infants, though there was no external ceremony to consign it to
Infants.] -- For the insinuation of the precept of Baptizing all Nation, of
which children are a part, does as little advantage as any of the rest, because
other parallel expressions of the Scri^ture do determine and expound themselves
to a sense that includes not all persons absolutely, but of a capable condition
as ado^ate ^um omnes gentes, and persallirae Deo omnes Nationes terra. [And
Nation shall rise against Nation, where Infants are excluded] and diverse more.
[But Erasmus has well expounded this text, where he restrains Eraz. par. on
Math. 28.
the baptizing to such as are repentant of their former life.

As for the Conjecture concerning the Family of Stephan^s, at the best it is
but a conjecture, and besides that it is not proved that there were children in
the Family; yet if that were granted it follows not that they were baptized,
because by [whole Families] in Scripture is meant all Persons of reason and age
within the Family, for it is said of the Ruler at Capernaum, that he believed
and all his house. Now you may also suppose that in his house were little
babes, that is like enough, and you may suppose that they did believe too,
before they could understand, but that is not so likely; and then the argument
from baptizing Stephen's Family may be allowed just as probable: but this is
unmanlike to build upon such slight and airy conjectures.

But tradition by all means must supply the place of Scripture, and there is
pretended a Tradition apostolical that Infants were baptized: but at this we
are not much moved, for we who rely upon the written word of God, as sufficient
to establish all true Religion, do not value the allegations of Traditions; and
however the World goes none of the reformed Churches can pretend this argument
against this opinion, because they who reject T^adition when it is against them,
must not pre^end it at al^ for them. But if we should allow the Topic to be
good, yet how will it be verified? for so far as it can yet appear, it relies
wholly upon the Testimony of Origin, for from him Austin had it. Now a
Tradition apostolical if it be not consigned with a fuller testimony then of
one person, whom all after ages have condemned of many errors, will obtain so
little reputation among those that kn^w that thing, have upon greater authority
pretended to derive from the Apostles, and yet f^sly, that it will be a great
argument that he is credulous and weak, that shall be de^ermined by so weak
probation, in matters of so great concernment. And the truth of the business
is, as there was no command of Scripture to obliedge children to the susception
of it, so necessity of ^ae^o-baptism was not determined in the Church till the
eight age after Christ, but in the year 418. in the Mileritan counsel (a
principal of A^r^ca, there was a Cannon made for Paedo Bapt* never till then, I
grant it was practiced in Africa before that time, and they or some of them
thought well of it, and though that be no Argument for us to think so, yet none
of them did ever before, pretend it to be necessary, none to have been a
precept of the Gospel, St. Austin was the first that ever preached it to be
abso^utely necessary, and it was in his heat and anger against Pelag^us who had
warmed and chafed him so in that question; that it made him innovate in other
doctrines, possibly of greater concernment then th^s, And that although this
was practiced anciently in Africa yet that it was without an opinion of
necessity, and not often there, nor at all in other places, we have the
testimony of a learned Paedo Baptist Ludovicus Ludovicus Vives.
Vives who in his annotations upon Augustine De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 27. afirms.
Neminem nisi adultum antiquitus sol^re baptizari. [And because th^s Testimony
is of great import I will set down the very words of Augustine and Ludovicus
Vives, as I find them in the English Edition of the said book of the City of
God, cap. 26. Where Augustine puts forth this question. What is the reason then
that we do spend so much time in our exhortations, endeavoring to annimate
th^se whom we have bapt^zed, either unto Virginity, or c^^st widdow-^ood or
honest and honorable marriage; Now upon these words [^hose whom we have
baptiz^d] Vives comments t^us, Least any man should mistake this place,
understand tha^ in times of old, no man was brought unto baptism, but he was of
s^fficient years, to know what that mistical water meant, and to require his
baptism, and that sundry times. -- I hear that in some Cities of Italy they do
for the most part observe the ancient Custom as yet. And it is to be observed
that in the Margent are two Notes, the 1. is that this is the old manner of
baptizing. The 2, That all this is left out in the Paris Edition, whence we may
note how the writings of the Ancients are abused, and how ingeniously it is
confessed, Paedo-Baptism is not the old manner of baptizing.

And here we will insert some other testimonies from the learned
Paedo-Baptists, touching the Novelty of Infant baptism. The first is out of
Robertus Fabianus his Chron. 4. Fabian.
part in fol. 107. where he brings in Augustine the Monk speaking thus to the
Britain Bishops* Since ye will not assent to my H^sts generally assent ye to
me specially in three things, the first is that ye keep Easter Day in due form
and time as it is ordained The second, THAT YE GIVE CHRIS^ENDOM TO CHILDREN,
etc. But THEY WOULD NOT THEREOF. This was about the fifth Age after Christ
whence its remarkable that Infant bap^ism was then opposed by ^he joint consent
of the Brita^n Bish^ps which were sent to the Assembly to consul^ the affairs
of Religion at that time. Our next testimony is from the Learned Casuist Hugo
Grotius Hugo Grotius
who tells us, To defer baptism till ripe years was in old time left at
liberty, now the observation is otherwise. Plainly giving the case that
Paedo-baptism is not the old way but a new observation. But here we will again
give place to Doctor Tailor, who says.

That besides that the tradition cannot be proved to be Apostolical, we have
very good evidence from antiquity that it was the opinion of the primitive
Church that INFAN^S OUGH^ NOT TO BE Anno 315.
BAPTIZED. And this is clear in the Con Ne^caes.
six^h Cannon of the C^unsel of Ne^^aesarea. The words (...)
have this sense. A woman (...) may be baptized when she please; for her
baptism concerns not the Child. The reason of the connection of the parts of
that Cannon is in the following words. Because every one in that confession is
to give a demonstration of his own choice and election, meaning plainly, that
if the baptism of the mother did pass upon the Child, it were not fit for a
pregnant woman to receive baptism, because in that Sacrament, there being a
confession of faith which confession supposes understanding, and free choice,
it is not reasonable the child should be consigned with such a mystery, since
it cannot do any act of choice or understanding. The Cannon speaks reason, and
it intimates a practice which was absolutely universal in the Church of
interrogating the catechumens concerning the Articles of the Creed, which is
one argument that either they did not admit Infants to baptism, or that they
did prevaricate egregiously, in asking questions of them, who themselves knew
were not capable of giving answer.

and to supply their incapacity by the answer of a Godfather, is but the same
unreasonableness acted with a worse circumstance; and there is no sensible
Tertul. lib. de Bap. cap. 18.
account can be given of it, for that which some imperfectly murmr concerning
stipulations civil performed by tutors in the name of their pupils is an
absolute vanity; for what if by positive constitutions of the Romans such
solemnities of Law are required in all stipulations, and by indulgence are
permitted in the case of a notable benefit acruing to Minors. Must God be tied,
and Christian Religion transact her mysteries by proportion and compliance with
the Law of the Romans? I know God might if he would have appointed Godfathers
to give answer in behalf of Children, and to be F^de-jussors for them, but we
cannot find any authority o^ ground that he has and if he had then it is to be
supposed he would have given them commission to have transacted the solemnity
with better circumstances, and given answers with more truth* and if the
Godfathers answer in the Name of the Child [I do believe] it is notorious they
speak false and ridiculously: for the Infant is not capble of be^ieving, and if
he were, he were a so capable of dissenting, and how then do they know Tertull.
lib. de baptis. cap. 18.
his mind And therefore Tertullian gives advice that the bap^ism of Infants
(...) be deferred till they could (...) an account of their faith, and the same
also is the counsel of (...). to quest. in ^. Baptisma.
Gregory bishop of Naziazum, although he allows them to hasten it in case of
necessity, for though his reason taught him what was fit, [Namely that none
should b^ baptized till they were of understanding yet he was overborn with the
practi^^ and opinion of his Age which began to bear too violently upon him, and
yet in another place he makes mention of some to whom baptism was not
administered (...) by reason of infancy.

To which if we add that the Parents of St. Austin, St. Jerome, and St.
Ambrose, although they were Christian, yet did not baptize their Children
before they were thirty years of age it will be very considerable in the
example, and of great efficacy for destro^ing the supposed necessity or
derivation from the Apostles [and for further evidence we may well allege in
this place, that of Theodosius the Emperor born in Spain his Parents being both
Christians, and he from his youth educated in the Christian Faith, who falling
sick at Thess^onica, was baptized and recovered of his sickness.

but however (Paedo baptism) it is against the perpetual analog^ of Christ's
Doctrine to baptize Infants, for besides that Christ never gave any precept to
bap^ize them, nor never himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any
of them, all that either he or his Apostles said concerning baptism, requires
such precious dispositions to it, of which Infants are not capable, and these
are faith and repentance, and not to instance in those innumerable places that
require faith before baptism, there needs no more but this one saying, he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. Plainly thus, faith Mark 6.
and baptism in conjunction Perseverence in Faith must here be understood, with
the Fruits of Faith also.
will bring a Man to Heaven, but if he have not faith baptism shall do him no
good. So that if baptism be necessary, then so is faith, and much more; for
want of Faith damns absolutely, it is not said so of the want of baptism.

Now if this decretory sense be to be understood of persons of age, and if
Children by such an answer (which indeed is reasonable enough) be excused from
the necessity of Faith, the want of which regularly does damn, then it is
sottish to say the same incapacity of reason and Faith, shall not ^xcuse them
from the actual susception of baptism which as less necessary, and to which
faith and many other acts are necessary predispositions when it is reasonably
and humanely ^eceived. The conclusion is that bap^sm is also to be deferred till
the time of ^aith, and whether Infants have faith or no, is a question to be
disputed by ^ersons that care not how much they (...)* nor how little they
prove.

1. Personal and actual faith they have none, for they have no acts of
^nderstanding, and besides how can any man understand that they have, since he
never saw any sign of i^ neither was he told so by any o^^ that could tell.

2. Some s^y they have imputativ^ Faith, but then so let the S^cramen^ be too,
that is, if they have the Parent faith or the Churches, then so le^ baptism be
imputed by derivatio^ from them also. -- For since faith (...) necessary to the
susception of baptis^ (and they themselves confess it b^ striving to find out
new kinds of fait^ to daub the matter up) such as the faith is, such must be
the Sacramen^ for there is no proportion betwee^ an actual Sacramen, and an
imputative faith, this being in immedia^^ and necessary order to that, an^
whatsoever can be said to take o^ from the necessity of actual Faith, a^ that
and much more may be said t^ excuse from the actual ^usception (...) baptism.

3. The first of these devices wa^ that of Luther and his Schol ar^ the 2 of
Calvin and his; And yet there is a third device which the Church of Rome
teaches, and that is, that Infants have habitual faith, but who told them so?
how can they prove it? what Revela^ion, or reason teaches such a thing? Are
they by this habit so much as disposed to an actual belief without a new
Master? ^an an Infant sent into a Mahumetan Province be more confident for
Christianity when he comes to be a, Man, then if he had not been baptized, are
there any acts precedent Concomitant, or consequent to this pretended habit?
this strange invention, is absolutely without Art, without Scripture, Reason or
Authority. But if there were such a thing as this abitual Faith, then either
all Infants have ^ or some only if all why do they deny bap^^sm to the Infants
which are horn of unbe^evers? must the child bear the unbelief of (...)
Parents? For they do ^^t only deny such Infants the Act, but the ^ight to
baptism because the children of ^nbelievers.
if some only have it, how know they these from (...) rest, since when they come
to years, there found a like barrenness of this grace (...) means be used to
beget it? but third where does the Scripture make an habit^^ Faith that which
intitles any person to ba^tism? Surely according to these conc^^^ no man can
ever tell to whom, or when (...) dispense baptism.] But the men are ^^ be
excused unless there were bett^^ grounds; but for all these stratage^ the
Argument now alleged again Infant baptism is demonstrable a^ unanswerable.

To which also this considerati^^ may be added, that if baptism be ^^cessary to
the Salvation of Infant upon whom is the imposition lai^ To whom is the command
give^ To Parents or to the Children, not (...) the Children, for they are not
cap^ble of a Law; not to the parents, (...) then God has put the salvation
(...) innocent babe^ into the power of others, and Infants may then be damn^^
for their Parents carelessness or m^lice. It follows that it is not necessary
at all to be done to them, to whom it cannot be prescribed by a Law, and in
whose behalf it cannot be reasonably entrusted to others with the appendant
necessity, and if it be not necessary, it is certain it is not reasonable, and
most certain it is no where in terms prescribed, and therefore it is to be
presumed, that it ought to be understood and administered according as other
precepts are with reference to the capacity of the subject, and the
reasonableness of the thing.

For I consider that the baptizing of Infants does rush upon such
inconveniences, which in other questions we avoid like Rocks which will appear
if we discourse thus.

Either baptism produces spiritual effects, or it produces them not: If it
produces not any, why is such contention about it? -- But if (as without all
peradventure all the Paedo-baptists will say) Baptism does a work upon the
soul, producing spiritual benefits and advantages; These advantages are
produced by the externa^ work of the Sacrament alone, or b^ that as it is
helped by the cooperation and predispositions of the suscipien^.

If by the external work of the Sacrament alone, how does this diffe^ from the
opus o^eratum of the Papist^ save that it is worse? For they sa^ the Sacrament
does not produce in effect, but in a suscipient disposed b^ all requisites and
due preparatives (...) piety, faith, and repentance, thoug^ in a subject so
disposed they say the Sacrament by its own virtue does i^ but this opinion says
it does it of (...) self without the help, or so much (...) the coexistence of
any condition bu^ mere reception.

But if the Sacrament does not d^ its work alone, but per modum recipien^es
according to the predispofition^ of the suscipient, then because Infant can
neither hinder it, nor do an^ thing to further it, it does them no benesit at
all. And if any man runs for succor to that, exploded (...) that Infants have
faith or any other inspired habit of I know not what how, we desire no more
advantage in the world then that they are constrain^d to an answer without
Rev^lation, against reason, common sense and all experience in the world.

The sum of the argument in short, is this though under another rep^esentment.
Either baptism is a mere Ceremony or it imploys a duty on our part, if it be a
Ceremony only, how does it sanctify us or make the comers thereunto per^ect?
If it imploy^ a duty on our part how then can Children receive it who cannot do
duty at all.

And indeed this way of Ministration makes baptism to be wholly an outward
duty, a work of the Law, a carnal ordinance it makes us adheare to the Letter,
without regard of the spirit, to be satissied with the shadows, to return to
bondage. To relinquish the misteriousnes, the substanc^ and spirituallity of
the Gospel, which argument is of so much the more consequence, because under
the spiritual Covenant, or the Gospel of grace, (...) the mystery goes not
before the Symbol (which it does when the Symbol^ are seals and consignations
of the grace, as it is said the Sacraments are) yet it always accompanies it,
bu^ never follows in order of time, an^ this is clear in the perpetual analogy
of holy Scripture.

For Baptism is never propounded mentioned or enjoined as a mean of remission
of sins, or of eternal life, but something of duty choice or sanctity is joined
with it, in orde^ production of the end so mentione^ k^ow you not that s^ many
as are Baptis^ in^o ^hr^st Jesus an^ Baptized into his death? There i^ the
mystery and the Symbol together and declared to be perpetually united (...).
All of us who were Baptized into one* were Baptized into the other, not only in
the name of Christ, but into his death also; but the meaning of this, as it is
explained in the following words of St. Paul, makes much for our purpose: for
to be baptized into his death, signifies, to Verse. 4.
be buried with him in baptism, that as Christ rose from the dead; we also
should walk in newness of life, That Is the full mystery of Baptism; for being
baptized into his death, or which is all one in the next words (...) into the
likeness of his death, cannot go alone; if we be so planted into Christ we
shall be pertakers of his resurrection, and that is not here instanced in
precise reward but in exact duty for all this is nothing but Cruc fiction of
the old man, a destroying the body of sin, that we no longer serve sin.

This indeed is truly to be baptized both in the Symbol and the Mystery what is
less then this, is but the Symbol only, a mere Ceremony, an opus operatum, a
dead Letter, an empty shadow, an instrument, without an agent to manage; or
force to actuate it.

Plainer yet whosoever are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, have put on
the new Man. But to put on the new Man, is to be formed in Righteousness,
holiness, and truth. This whole argument is the very words of St. Paul. The
major proposition is dogmatically determined, Gal. 3. 27. The minor in Ephesians.
4. 24. The conclusion then is obvious. That they who are not formed a new in
Righteousness, holiness and truth, they who remaining in the present in
incapacities, cannot walk in newness of life, they have not been baptized into
Christ, and then they have but one member of the distinction used by St. Peter,
they have that baptism which is a putting away the fi^th of the flesh [if yet
an human institute may be so called] but they have not that baptism which is
the answer of a good Conscience toward God, which is the only baptism which
saves us, and this is the case of Children and then the case is thus.

As Infants by the force of nature cannot put themselves into a supernatural
condition (and therefore say the Paedo baptists they need baptism to put them
into it [as if the ^^re ^e^e^ony of which only they are capa^'le could put them
into a supernatural con^ition] so if they be baptized before the use of
reason, before the works of the Spirit, before the opperations of grace, before
they can throw of the works of darkness, and live in ri^hteousness and newness
of life, they are never the nearer; from the pains of Hell they shall be saved
by the mercy of God and their o^^ innocence though they dye in puris
naturalibus, and baptism will carry them no further for that baptism that saves
us, is not the only washing with water, of which only Infant are capable, but
the answer of a good Conscience toward God, of which they are not capable till
the use o^ reason, till they know to choose the good and refuse the evil.

And from thence I consider a new that all vows made by persons under others
names stipulations made b^ minors* are not valid till they by ^ supervening
act, after they are of sufficient age do ratify the same, wh^ then may not
Infants as well mak^ the vow de novo as de novo ratify th^^ which was made for
them ab antiqu^ when they come to years of choice* If the Infant vow be invalid
till the manly confirmation, why were it (...) as good they staid to make it
till the time, before which if they do ma^^ it, it is to no purpose, this would
(...) considered.

And in conclusion our way is the surer way, for not to baptize Children till
they can give an account of their faith is the most proportionable to an act of
reason and humanity, and it can have no danger in it: for to say that Infants
may be damned for want of baptism (a thing which is not in their power to
acquire they being yet persons not capable of a Law) is to afirm that of God
which we dare not say of any wise and good man. Certainly it is very much
derogatory to Gods justi^e and a plain defiance to the infinite reputation of
his goodness.

And therefore who ever will pertinatiously persist in this opinion of the
paedo-baptists, and practice it accordingly they polute the blood of the
everlasting Testament. They dishonor and make a pageantry of the Sacrament.
They Ineffectually represent a sepulture into the death of Christ, and please
themselves in a sign without effect, making baptism like the Figtree full-of
Leaves but no fruit, etc.

Thus far the Anabaptists may argue, and men have disputed against them with so
much weakness and conf^dence, that they have been eucouraged in their error
[alias in the truth] more by accidentiall [alia^ real] advantages we have given
them by our weak arguings, then by any truth of their cause or excellency o^ of
their wit [so the Dr. is pleased t^ say but the evidences of our side sp^ak
otherwise] but the use I make of it as to our ppesent question (says the Dr.)
is this, that since there is no^ direct impiety in the opinion no^ any that is
apparently consequent to it, and they which so much p^obabillity, do or may
pretend to true persuasion they are with all means, Christian, fair, and human,
to b^ redargued, or instructed, but if they cannot be persuaded they must be
left to God, who knows every degree of every man's understanding, all his
weaknesses and strength's what impress each argument makes upon his spirit. and
how unresistable every reason is, and he alone judges his in^oce^cy and
sincerity: And for the question, I think there is so much to be petended [he
might say really urged] against that which I believe to be truth that there is
much more truth then evidence on our side [a strange saying of so wi^e a man as
if the truth in this case does not wh^lly depend upon evidence, since its a
positive and no moral precept] and therefore we may be confident as for our
own particulars but not too forward premtorily to prescribe to others muchless
damn, or kill or to persecute them that only in this particular disagree. Thus
far Doctor Tailor, for our appollogie.

To whom to add any more witnesses (though more might be brought) would be
superfluous. I therefore proceed to the next question, viz.

What is the due act, or outward form to be used in this sollemn rite of holy
baptism?

It may well be the admiration of every wise and good man how it should come
into the mind of such as pretend to be followers of Christ that holy baptism
should be performed by aspertion, or casting a few drops of Water upon the
subject, by the fingers of the administrator. The scriptures every where
teaching us that the original form was by imversion in Rivers or places of
much Water, Ma^^. 1. John. 3. Christ himse^f who surely would do nothing
superfluous or in vain, was baptized in the River, by John the first baptist,
who had his direction from Heaven, and his approbation from on high in that
very action Mall. 3. and chuss who were under the immediate direction of the
holy spirit the leader into all truth, found it necessary for the administrator
and subject to go both into the Water, for the due performance of this holy
Ordinance. Add thereunto that the proper signification of the word (...) when
used to express the action done in this service, is to dip or imm^rge the party
in the Element as is confessed by the learned Paedo-baptists themse^ves as we
shall see in the sequel.

And here we will still prefer the Church Litturgy.
of England who teaches us that the outward Sign or Form in baptism, is Water
wherein the party baptized is dipped, etc. And though she add [or sprinkled
with it] yet that her Conscience tells her that is not the right way appears,
in that she only assigns that by indulgence to such Infants as are in danger of
death, etc,

The Church of Rome also confesses Marq. of Worcest. Certam. Relig.
by a learned Pen, that she changed dipping the party baptized over the head
and Ears to a little sprinkling upon the Face.

Erasmus paraphrasing on the words, baptizing them, Mat. 28. says thus, if
they believe that which you teach them and begin to be repentant of their
former Life, etc. Then dip them in Water, etc. Walfridus Strabo de rebus
Eccl^s^^c 26. tells us, that we must know at ^h^ first believers were baptized
simply in Floods and Fountains.

The learned Grotius tel's us in his judgment on Infant baptism, That the word
(...) signifies to dip over the head and ears.

To whom we will join T^lenus whose Testimony is in these words Secundum*
Fisher.
Baptism is the first Sacrament of the new Testament instituted by Christ, in
which with a most pat and exact analogy between the sign and the thing
signified, those that are in Covenant are by the Minister washed in Water. The
outward Rite in baptism is threefold immersion into the Water, abiding under
the water, and resurruction out of the water, the form of baptism, to wit
internal and essential* is no other then that analogical proportion, which the
signs keep with the things signified thereby, for as the properties of the
water in washing away the defilements of the body, do in a most suitable
similitude, set forth the efficacy of Christ's blood in blotting out of sins, so
dipping into the Water does in a most lively similitude set forth the
mortification of the old man, and rising out of the water the virification of
the new. -- That same plunging into the water holds forth to us that horrible
gulf of divine Justice in which Christ for our sins sake, which he took upon
him, was for a while in a manner swallowed up. Abode under the water how little
a while soever, denotes his descent into Hell, even the very deepest degree of
livelesness, while lying in the sealed and guarded sepulcher he was accounted
as one truly dead, rising out of the water holds out to us a lively similitude
of that conquest, which this dead man got ^ver death, which he vanquished in
his own Den, as it were, that is the grave. In like manner therefore it is meet
that we being baptized into his death, and buried with him, should rise also
with him and so go on in a new Life, Romans 6. 3. 4. Col. ^. 12. Th^^ far Tile^^s.

Bishop Jewel in his defense, Appol. ^. 5. p. 308. brings the council of Worms
determining the manner of baptism; thus, In aquas demersio in (...), and ^u^sus
ab aquis ^emersio R^surrectio est.

The dipping into the water is the going down into Hell [i. e. the grave] The
coming out from of the water is the Resurrection. From all which Testimonies
(and many more that might be brought) it is evident beyond all doubt our
opposers being Judges) that whether we respect the signification of the word
baptizor the signification of the ordinance it self, or the consent of the
primitive. Churches in their practice of holy baptism, dipping the subject (or
party baptized) in the Element Water, is the due form of baptism, and therefore
sprinkling or crossing the face; is an humane innovation. Or,

Upon the whole matter these ten particulars are very apparent. First,

That Infant baptism was innovated, after the holy Scriptures were written
which appears both from the deep silence of the Scripture in that case, and
the confession of learned Paedo-baptists themselves.

2. That it came in stealing (as it were) being for a considerable time left at
liberty (a sign it was not from Heaven) for Gods ways are not to be left to
man's will be commands and it is man's duty to obey.
and was disliked by the Ancients who therefore dissuaded from it.

3. That which gave it its great advantage for a more general reception, was
this false opinion, that without baptism none could be saved. This says Mr.
Perkins does St. Augustine every where assirm.

4. That the Lords Supper was as eagerly pressed, to be necess^ry sor Infants
as baptism, and they continued in use together about Ex opp. Perk. S^e the
Scholast. discourse against Symbol with Antichrist.
the space of six hundred years, this conceit was confirmed (says Mr. Perkins)
by the council of Toledo, Can. 11. And Augustine was so earnest for this also
that he boldly says in vain do we promise Infants salvation without it. Aug
ep: 23. and ep. 107. and contra ep. pelag. l. 1. c. 22. and contra. (...). l.
7. c. 2. l. 3. c. 12.

5. That diverse in the Greek Church have all along to this day refused Infant
baptism. Gro^ius his words are these (as Mr. T^mbs quotes them) In every age
many of the Greeks unto this day keep the custom of deferring baptism to
little ones till they could themselves make a confession of their Faith. And
the Armenians are confessed by Heylin in his Macrocos. p. 575. To defer baptism
to their Children till they be grown to years of knowledge.

6. Those foolish and sinful adjuncts, which the Authors and promoters of
Infant baptism, were constrained to invent to make it look like baptism (for
example their device of Godfathers, etc.) do sufficiently declare it to be of
an infirm and humane Original.

7. The grounds upon which Paedo-baptism was at first urged, are now in a
manner wholly declined, and new grounds daily invented whereon to built it.
which are no sooner laid, but raized again by some of it is own favorites.

8. That the stoutest assertors of Infant baptism, has ever met with as stout
opposers; Thus Agustine, met with the Donatists and Pelagius whose arguments he
could not avoid but by running into greater absurdity, and though they are
blamed (and perhaps justly) for holding some errors, so also is Augustine and
that not undeservedly.

9. That many of the Learne^ have much abused this age in telling them the
Anabaptists (i. e. the baptized Churches) are of late edition a new sect, etc.
When from their own writings the clean contrary is so evident.

Tenthly and Lastly. Observe how the baptism of repentance for remission of
Sins, which is that one and only baptism commanded in holy Scripture has been
neglected, traduced; and its affertors frequently abused, and that chiefly by
thi^ device of Paedo-baptism which now has so lost it is first form, that it
cannot with any show of truth o^ good sense be called baptism, and ought
therefore to cease with its follow errors, viz. the giving the ^ords Supper to
Infants, etc. That God may be justified in the submissi^n of all sinners to the
baptism of repentance for remission of sins, Luke 7. 39.

The Second Part Of the Promise of the Spirit.
Delivered in a Sermon upon 1. Cor. 12. 1. To which is added A postscript out
of the works (...) Dr. Jer. Tailor, touching the layin^ on of Hands, chiefly
declaring ho^ Religiously it was observed by the Ancient Christians, as it is
now revived by diverse of the baptize^ Christians of this age.
1 Cor. 12. 1. Now concerning spiritual gifts brethren I would not have you
ignorant.
THere was never more need for the Church of God to seek and searc^ for all
those things which God hat^ promised for her strength and encou^agement then
now partly for that her ^pposers are men of exquisite parts by ^eans of all
Arts and Sciences which ^^e not more profitable when used in (...) way of
subserviency to the truth, ^^en pernicious when used in opposi^^on to it (as it
often falls out they ^re) and partly for that ignorance of that God has
promised for his Churches comfortable subsistence, ^roves a great occasion and
temptati^^ to Christians to trust to failing and ^^comfortable helps in the
great bu^^ness of the Ministry of the word and ^rayer, etc.

Now in the words which we have ^^osen the Apostle shows his care for ^^e
Church at Corinthus (and in them (...) all Churches) that they should not (...)
ignorant concerning spiritual gifts ^^d labors in three Chapters toge^^er to
instruct them fully in that point ^^der several considerations, and ^^^st,

1. By giving them a definition of those gifts, or showing what they are, verse
8. 9. 10. viz. A word of Wisdom, a word of knowledge, faith, the gifts of
healing, the working of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse
kinds of Tongues, interpretation of tongues, which definition or enumeration of
gifts he seems to enlarge, Chap, 13. 26. a Psalm, a Doctrine, etc.

2. By showing that the Church has a perpetual right to, and interest in all
these gif^s, Chap. 14. 1. Desire sor be zealous after spiritual gifts, Chap.
12* 31. Covet earnestly the best gifts Chap. 14. 39. Covet to prophecy and
forbid not to speak with tongues.

3. By showing whereto these gifts d^serve, or to what end they were given*
Chap. 14. 12. Forasmuch as ye are zealous of the spiritual gifts, seek tha^ ye
may excel to the edification of the Church, ver. 31. that all may learn, and
all be comforted, Ephesians. 4 12. for the perfecting the Saints for the wor^ of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

4. By distinguishing of gifts as they are more or less necessary and
accordingly gives direction which to prefer in our asking them (yet so as not
to forbid the use of any of them, so it might be done with edification) Chap.
14. 1. Desire spiritual gifts but rather that ye may prophecy. Ver. 5. I would
have ye all speak with tongues but rather that ye prophesied, for greater is he
that prophesies, then he that speaks with tongues. Ver. 5. He that speaks
in an unknown tongue edifyeth himself, but he that prophesies edifyeth the
Church.

5. By showing that all these gifts, how excellently soever any are endowed
with them, yet therein he is not to rest satisfied because there is yet a far
more excellent way of receiving the s^irit, without which all gifts are as
nothing. This more excellent way he refers to the fruit of the Spirit, which he
both distinguishes by its several branches, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. compared
with Gal. 5. 22. 23. and also comprehends the whole in that excelling grace of
Charity follow after Charity, Chap. 4. 1. The greatest of these is Charity.

6. By giving a notable Rule to know who are indeed spiritual Christians from
such as only pretend to be so, Chap. 14. 35. If any man think himself to be a
Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things I write unto you are the
commands of the Lord. Those then are not truly spiritual, or true Prophets who
(as many on the right hand) do not only lay aside the commands of the Lord, but
prescribe to others their own Traditions, neither those on the other hand, who
prefer their poor conceits and Notions, as if the word of God came out from
them, when though (perhaps) it came to them, yet it came not to them only, ver.
36.

Thus much briefly to show what the Apostle means in this place by spiritual
gifts, and in what respects he would not have the Church to be ignorant
concerning them.

Nor shall I insist upon all those particulars now, but only that which may be
most needful to be demonstrated, and that is the second particular. For I find,
it is not only a general conceit among the National Churches, that the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were only Temporary, and now ceased, but also
very many in the baptized Churches are doubtful (at the least) in this matter,
as if that glorious promise of pouring out of the Spirit according to the
prophecy of Joel, and the reception thereof by the primitive Churches, were
taken away long since from the Churches which succeed them, and not to be so
much as looked for in these days!

But that this is a very great mistake, and The point to be proved.
that the contrary, even that, that very promise of the spirit and every part
of it, from the time of its first effusion upon the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.
belongs to the Church throughout all Ages to the end of the World. I hope to
evince to the satisfaction such as desire to see the Truth in this matter.

And First from the scope of the Apostle, 1 From the Apostles scope.
in these three Chapters. Where as it is his designed subject to discourse of
the gifts of the Spirit, so he informs us that God has set them there, namely
in his Church, that is, he has placed, settled or fixed, that one spirit in
that one body, nor for a few days only, and then to leave her as a body without
a spirit for ever after, in respect of spiritual gifts, but to abide there as
in his temple 1 Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
both by gifts and graces, even the same which Christ by virtue of his
assention obtained when he ascended on high, which gifts are given to the
Church for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the body till the
whole be completed. See to this purpose Ephesians. 4. from verse* 4. to 16.

Again, The promise of the holy spirit 2. From the extent of the promise.
is made by our Lord himself to the Church for ever. John 14. 16. I will pray
the Father and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide with you
for ever etc. I say with the Church, for it were a strange exposi^ion to
restrain this for ever to the age of the Apostles (as some do) for since the
Apostles and first Churches could neither pray nor prophysie as they ought, but
as that spirit did help their infirmity, it were strange the subsequent should
be able to do it though destitute of that distance, seeing prophysie is
expressly one of those spiritual gifts, as before we have showed.

That great Apostle Peter, dates the promise of the holy spirit very largely,
Acts, 2. 38. etc. As descending to the very Skirt, or last age of the Church of
God, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call, and he here takes the
promise in that sense where in Jo^l meant it, and the Church had then received
it, which clearly intends both the gifts and graces of the Spirit, for as it is
sure they received then very great gifts, so it is said great grace was upon
them all. Act^. (...) This very p^omise of the Father is by this Apostle
appropriated to all the called of the Lord, even the servants and hand maids in
th^se days.

Now these days must either be a few days at the beginning of the Gospel, or it
must be referred to the whole time of that glorious dispens^^ion if the first,
then how shall all the called of the Lord receive it? Or who will tell us when
these days expired? But we know that These days the latter days last time, and
last days are used with some frequency in Scripture, to point out the time of
the Gospel as it succeeded the time of the Law.

During all which time we are sure that 3. From the Nature of the duties of the
Church.
the duties in general (and perhaps some difficult duties which were not
formerly known) which were imposed upon the first Churches, are laid upon the
Churches to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, etc. Must the Churches now contend
earnestly for the faith (and that both against old and new errors) must she be
the Salt of the Earth, the Light of the World must she strive to preach the
Gospel of the Kingdom to all Nations, must she keep her self in the Love of God
building up her self in her most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost? Surely,
if these duties remain, and the Lord requires that she should glorify him in
the faithful and constant discharge hereof as also in suffering for his sake;
It cannot reasonably be imagined that he should recall his holy spirit, in the
gifts thereof from her who when she had them all, had nothing that was
superfluous, but stood in need of all to furnish her for the work she stood
engaged to do, in these forementioned and other like considerations, since then
our God does require the same service of his Churches now, which he required of
his Churches in the first ages of the Gospel, let us not imagine he will
require the same Brick, and not allow the same Straw.

That the gifts of the spirit here intendby 4. From the nature and perpetuity
of the exhortations to seek for the spirit.
our Apostle are the portion of the Church in every age (as her right)
appears, from the nature of these exhortations she is under to ask them. Luke
11. 13. How much more shall your Heavenly Father give his holy spirit to them
that ask it -- ask and it shall be given unto you. verse, 10. How frequent is
our Apostle in these 3. Chapters in his exhortations to this Church (and in
them to all others) to desire spiritual gifts, to covet earnestly the best
gifts, to covet to prophecy, wishing that they may speak with tongues, and
warning them not to prohibet that gift. Now to what purpose is all this if
these gifts be ceased and that the Church may not now expect them? I hope no
man will say these exhortations are now out of date least in so doing he
deprive us of the exhortation to Charity, for they are so linked together as
the one cannot cease as it is an exhortation) before the other. Follow after
Charity and desire spiritual gifts and rather that ye may prophecy. Thus we
see the Church being under perpetual exhortations, to seek for spiritual gifts
without any restirction, necessarily infers her perpetual right to them and
every of them, which consideration alone is sufficient (as I conceive) to
satisfy any Christian, that the promise of the Spirit (even the same that was
given to the first Churches) in respect of gifts as well as graces belongs to
the Church of Christ throughout all ages.

Let us now consider, whether the 5. From the continuation of spiritual gifts
in the Church to this day.
Church of God do not even now enjoy the promised spirit in the gifts and
graces of it at this day, for the latter, I think there is none does question
it, and yet should the graces or fruits of the spirit which now appear, be
strictly considered by what did formerly shine forth in the Churches, it might
peradventure put us to some pause, yet not thence to conclude that we have not
that spirit of grace, or that the graces thereof are ceased, but it would
surely become a provocation, to cry mightily to God for an enlargement of what
we have received in that behalf.

And as I intend not to boast of the gifts of any, so I may safely presume that
the gifts received in these days are far more then I can set down, or give you
account of because the Church is diffused through many Nations, and her gifts
there unknown to me; I will then restrain my observations to the Churches in
this poor Island, who may not vie with all Churches, but rather in humility
conclude themselves to be short of many concerning spiritual gifts. And yet,
shall we say she has none (or may we not rather say she has many that are
endowed with a word of knowledge and that merely by a gift from God, having
otherwise, no capacity or fa^ulty more then others, but therein far short of
many of their brethren; only the gift of God, and no natural faculty has made
the differance: How have men of knowledge in this world, been found to have no
skill, and the foolish to attain knowledge, and some to excel so far, as to
confound the wisdom of the wise and to bring to naught the understanding of
the prudent, yet out of the mouth of Babes has our God ordained strength, and
thereby has sometimes stilled the enemy.

And as Wisdom is useful to direct, so has God given it to such as fear him;
who if we respect their education etc. could never have acquired it; some by a
word of wisdom here understand, the well ordering of affairs in the Church,
others the right or useful applycation of the word etc. surely according to
these expositions the Church has some, even by the gift of the spirit of God
to go before here in these respects.

Neither is the gift of Healings so abnegated, but that something of it has
appeared, as many living witness by experience have testified, and how far
faith (over and beside the common faith) has therein appeared, as also in some
other memorable undertakings against Satan himself, or against his designs,
with some good success, becomes others to consider more then it does me to
write! as for me I rest satisfied, that miracles are not ceased as a gift to
the Church of God, though perhaps they are but rarely found, as being (in the
wisdom of God) not so necessary now in many places as in times past.

Now for the gift of p^ophesie, which the Apostle here intends, it is certain
the Church enjoys it very graciously in these days since she has them that by
the gift of Gods spirit (and not by acquired Arts) do minister to her the word
of life, by exhortation, to her edification and comfort; which yet she could
not have if the gifts were ceased seeing prophecy is not only one of the
spiritual gifts but the very best of them, and the greatest of them all.

Nor is the spirit of our God removed in the gift of discerning of spirits; for
if it had false spirits had by their subtilty ere this day made havoc of the
Churches, but through the grace of God, notwithstanding all their cunning
craftiness they have been discerned, and their designs prevented; and though
perhaps charity for some time has born with such, in hope of the best, yet
this is no other thing then ought to be, as may be seen by the carriage of our
Lord toward Judas, and his Apostles toward foam others.

The gifts of Doctrine and praising our God with a Psalm is not yet removed,
our Teachers (as taught of God) remaining in every Church; where also are some
that are skillfull in praisiing the Lord to the edification of the Church;

As for Revelations, there might perhaps sometimes be strange or hidden things
made known by some special gift of God and why may not God do such things now?
However it is not unsafe to understand the Revellations here meant, by Chap. 14.
30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by let the first hold his
peace etc. which cannot so well be understood af a new Oracle as of some
further subject or more full explication of the matter treated on by him that
spoke first; according to which interpr^tation we may say the Church has yet
the gift of Revellations. And thus far we seem to be got safe, not any thing so
material intervening, as to conclude against the continuance of these
spiritual gifts in the Church to this day, so that the present repairers of
the House or City of God may comfort themselves by the consideration of the
words of the Prophet, Hagg. 2. 5. According to the word which I covenanted with
you when you came out of Egypt, so my SPIRIT REMAINS among you, fear ye not.

But now the g^ft of Tongues and interpretation of Tongues, these! where shall
we find them. Doubtless these gifts are rarely if at all found in these days,
and in this Nation, so as to suit with those who frequently in some Churches at
first received those gifts; the reasons are many (but none such as conclude the
Church from under the promise of these gifts) as first these gifts differ much
from the rest, chiefly in this that they may be supplied another way, for the
conversion of persons of all Languages, or such as can speak other Languages
and interpret the same to others, does supply the absence of those gifts; 2.
The Church (in this and I suppose other Nations) It is probable that Paul made
use of his education in speaking diverse Languages, as may be perceived by his
discou^ses in the acts of the Apostles, and by the Epistles which he wrote to
several Churches, useing therein (as it is confessed) frequently the Greek
Tongue.
have very little need of these gifts, and therefore considering that they are
not so necessary as the rest, the Apostle leaves these with a forbid them not,
whilst the rest he wills us to c^v^t earnestly. But 3? one great cause (as I
conceive) why these g^fts are so much absent, and the other no more received,
i^ because we either ask them not at all, or else we ask them amiss. For many
have been so ^ar from a king these gifts of the spirit, that in truth they have
been arguing that these gifts are not attainable, and then it is no wonder they
have not been received.

Again where there has been some understanding of the interest we have in
those gifts, there faith in asking has been and is very low, and atended
(perhaps) with great wavering, and then little can be expected at the hand of
the Almighty Jam. 1. And here let me premonish you of one thing which (by my
little reading) I perceive to have been a great provocation to the Lord to
wi^hdraw his gifts in times p^st (and I fear it again) And that was ^and and I
doubt is) an over curious performance, of that which God gave spiritual gifts
for, to wit the ministering of the word, when the Churches grew populous, and
great personages came to her communion, the unwary pastors, let go the
simplicity of the Gospel enclining so much to curiosities that some Counsels
decreed tha^ a Bishop should not read Heathen Authors and Gra^ian is said to
have this passag^ viz. Does not he seem to wa^k in vanit^ and da^kness of mind,
who vexing himself day and night in the studies of Logic in the persuite of
physical specula^ion one while elevates himself above the highest Heavens and
afterward throws himself below the nethermost part of the Earth True, the use
that may be made o^ reading is one thing, and the abuse another; however let
the least gift o^ God be preferred in the ministry o^ the word, above the
greatest of human Arts, otherwise we are in danger to incur the guilt of
despising Prophysyings*

Lastly the truth in hand appears from 6. From the silence of the Scriptures,
as to the privation of the gifts of the Spirit etc,
the silence of Scriptures, touching the privation of any of the gifts of the
spirit till that which is perfect become, 1. ^or. 13. 8. 9. Charity never
fails but whether there be prophesies they shall fail, whether there be
tongues they shall cease, whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away, for
we know in part and we prophe^^e in part. But when that which is perfect is
come THEN that which is in part sha'l be done away.

Hence observe a final determination of the matter in question, If any ask
when the gifts of prophysie, knowledge and tongues etc. Shall cease? The
Apostles answer is, even THEN, when that which is perfect is come, or when we
come to see face to face, or as we are seen. So then seeing the gifts of the
spirit do yet remain to the Church, and every of them (as her need requires)
are attainable, it remains that we humbly consider our wants, and desire
spiritual gifts, you ^ove^ earnestly the best gifts.

From these considerations I conclude, that howsoever it is too true that the
gifts received by the present Churches are but low (and truly so are her
graces) yet thence we may not, we ought not to infer, that the gifts promised
are ceased, or that the Church has now no interest therein. But contrariwise
as the promise of gifts (as well as graces) pertains to us as we are the called
of God, we ought to ^tir one another up, to seek with all 1. Cor. 2. 4.
diligence and full assurance for the spirit of promise, which being received,
will abundantly supply our wants, help our infirmities, convince the contrary
minded by its powerful evidence and demonstration in the ministry of the word
and prayer.

There be two things objected against that which is said, the first.

Ob: If the promise of the spirit do thus belong to the Church, then this will
follow, that the doctrines delivered by such gifted men must pass for Oracles
of God being the effects ^f the spirit of truth whose property it (...) to
lead into all truth. And hence ^ome have conceived the decrees ^f their
Counsels to be infallible, and others have given out of their private ^tters
or books that they were as in^allibly the word of God as the Scripture etc.

Ans. 1. Those gifts do not argue ^he infallibillity of him that has them, ^or
then all the gifted brethren at Co^inth had been infallible which yet they ^ere
not, witness their great want of Wisdom how to use their gifts to edi^ication,
as also the Apostles refer^ing what they delivered to Trial, telling ^s of
gifted person in general (and as ^uch not excluding himself) that they ^ee but
darkly, prophecy but in part, know but in part, so that perfection ^erein is
not to be pretended.

2. That the Apostles did deliver infallible and undoubted verities for all to
submit to, as the very word of God etc. proceeded not hence, viz. because they
were gifted men. But as being the chosen witnesses of God, purposely ordained
to that very end, for which cause they saw that just one, heard the words of
his mouth, and by infallible proves were assured of the Resurrection of our
Lord and of his will concerning his Kingdom, John 15* 16. Ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you and ordained you that you should go and bring forth
fruit, and that your fruit should remain, that whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name he may give it you, see Acts 10. 40. 41. and Acts 22. 14. 15.
The God of o^r Fathers has chosen thee that thou should kn^w his will, and see
that just one, and should hear the voice of his mouth. FOR thou shall be his
witness unto all men of what thou have SEEN AND HEARD.

These are the Fathers of the Churches, the Foundation layers, the
Master Builders in such an elevated consideration, as that the authority of one
is to be valued above the authority of ten thousand subsequent teachers, which
is a greater number then ever yet convened in a general council, 1. Cor. 4.
15. 16. These were such Fathers as laid up such a stock of doctrine for their
Children, as whosoever brings not along with them is not to be received. 2. John.
8. 9, 10. And whosoever corrupts by adding taking away or perverting is to
be held accursed, to be nameless in the City of God and the book of Life, The
conclusion is this, gifted persons, on whom the Holy Ghost fell as it did on
the Apostles, were not thereby empowered, to propose new Oracles, or to be the
Apostles Competitors, and if any presume to these things (as some did in the
Apostles days) they shall fulfill that sentence, 2. Tim. 3. 9. They shall
proceed no further for their folly shall be made manifest to all men as theirs
also was.

Ob. 2. If the gifts of the spirit, 1. Cor. 12. Have continued in the Church as
you teach, it is strange we have no account of them since their days, unless we
regard the papacy who have claimed the gift of Miracles in every age, which
they urge as an undoubted proof that they only are the Church of Christ.

Ans. 1. It is true that people do pretend, as it is said in the objection and
it is now my business to examine the goodness of that pretense, only this I say
they cannot find their Church to have had a being in every age since Christ,
and therefore very unlikely to prove what they say in the case of Miracles. But
put case that since they have had a being in the world, some signs or wonders
have been done among them, yet hence to infer the truth of their Church state
is very unsafe, since before an equal judge others will be found to have as
clear a claim to Miracles as themselves. Which yet shall avail them nothing,
because they wanted truth with their gifts.
Mat. 7. 22. Many w^ll say unto me in that day have we not prophesi^d in thy
Name, and in thy name have we cast out Devils and in thy name have done many
wondrous works. And then will I profess un^o them I never knew you, depart from
me ye workers of iniquity,

And though our Savior says, no man can do a miracle in his Name and lightly
speak evil of him, yet that very speech supposes the thing possible. It does
not follow therefore that wheresoever miraculous gifts are there is the true
Church, but she is only known by her Conformity to the Doctrine of God our
Savior, chiefly in the principles of Religion, Heb. 6. 1. 2. For we are his
House if built upon that foundation of Repentance, faith, etc* and pa^takers of
him, IF we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end otherwise
not. Heb. 3. 6. 14. If any come unto you and bring not this doctrine receive
him not to house, no, though he work miracles, for thus says the Lord. If
there arise among you a Prophet or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee asign
or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee [now note if he do this] saying let us go after other Gods (which thou
have not koown) and let us serve them, thou shall not hearken to the words of
that Prophet -- For the Lord your God proves you to know whether you love the
Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all your Soul. And hence learn
this one thing that Gods Truth is not to give place to any gifts, but all gifts
are to subserve to the furtherance of his Truth.

To conclude as we ought not to be ignorant of the gifts of the spirit, so
neither of the means ordained of God to obtain those gifts. The primitive
Churches are herein our best guide as the word directs. It Is well known (and I
think granted on all hand^) that they used the solemn Ordinance of prayer and
imposition of hands for obtaining the promised Spirit, at least with respect to
these gifts. Now be it so (though I say for the Graces or Fruits also) then
seeing these gifts are promised to us as well as unto them, and are attainable,
and in part (at least) attained by many, what should hinder the Churches, but
that now they should tread in this path, with faith and full assurance that a
blessing is in it? As in holy baptism we are placed (as it were) among those
whose sins are washed away in the blood of the Lamb. So in this Holy Ordinance
of prayer and imposition of hands we are in a solemn manner ushered, into the
promise of the holy spirit, and as the pardon of our sins signified in baptism
does not prevent, but better capaciate us to pray daily forgive us our
^^espasses, so imposition of hands does put us into a better capacity to seek
daily for the gifts and graces of the spirit, because now solemnly intercessed
in the promise, by that very way the primi^ive Saints were intercessed therein,
Acts 8. 15, 17. Acts 19. 2. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Heb. 6. 12. Who when they were down
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, then laid they their
hands on them and they receithe Holy Ghost.

Have they received of the Holy Ghost since the believed? And when Paul had
laid his hand is on them, the Holy Ghost (...) on them.

Wherefore I put th^e in rem^mb^ance that thou stir up the gift of God which is
in thee by the putting o^ of my hands. -- The foundation of Repentance, and of
faith toward God of the Doctrine of bap^ism and of laying on of hands, of the
resurrection of the dead, and of Eternal Judgment.

What shall I (...), the Scriptures are evidence sufficient that this Ordinance
is of divine institution, is from Heaven; the promise which it leads to ^s
perpetual, and Universal, it belong, to the whole body. There is one body and
one Spirit even as ye are called i^ (...) hope of your calling.

A POSTSCRIPT. Taken out of the Works of Dr. Jer. Tailor, in defense of laying
on of Hands, as a never-failing Ministry.
WE have seen the Original [of laying on of hands] from Christ the practice and
exercise of it in the Apostles, and the first converts in Christianity, that
which I shall now remark is, that this is established and passed into a
Christian Doctrine. The Waranty for what I say is the words of St. Paul where
the holy Rite of confirmation, so called from the effect of this Ministration,
and expressed by the Ritual part of it, imposition of hands is reckoned a
Foundamental point (...) not laying again the foundation of Repentance from
Deas works, and of faith toward God, of the Doctrine of baptism, and of laying
on of hands, of Resurrection from the dead and of Eternal Judgment; Here are
six foundamental points of St. Paul's Catechism which he said as the foundation
or beginning of the institution of the Christian Church, and amongst these
imposition of hands is reckoned as a p^rt of the foundation and therefore they
who deny it, dig up foundations. Now that this imposition of hands is that
which the Apostles used in confirming the baptized and invocating the Holy
G^ost upon them rem^ins to be pro^^^. -- Absolution of penitents cannot be
meant here, not only because we never read that the Apostles did use that
Ceremony in their absolutions, but because the Apost^e speaking of the
foundation in which baptism is. -- There need^d no absolution but bap^ismal;
for they and we believi^g gone baptism for the rem^ssion of sins, this is all the absolution that can be at the first and in the foundation. The Me^ning that
laying on of hands used by some at the absolving penetents.
other was secunda post (...) frag^^m tabula. (...) me in after when men had
m^de Shipwreck of their good Conscienscience and were as St. Peter says --
unmindful of the former cleansing.

2. It cannot be meant of Ordination and this is also evident. 1. Because the
Apostle saves he would thence forth leave to speak of the foundation and go on
to perfection, that is to higher mysteries. Now in Ri^uals of which he speaks,
there is none higher then Ordination. 2. The Apostle saying he would speak no
more of laying on of hands goes presentl^ to discourse, of the misteriousness
of the Evangelical Priesthood, and the honor of that vocation, by which it is
evident he spoke nothing of Ordination in the Catechism, or Narrative of
Foundamentals. 3. This also appears from the context, not only because laying
on of hands is Immediately set after baptism but also because in the very next
words of this discourse, he does enumerate and apportion to baptism, and
[imp^sition of hands] their proper and proportioned effects. To b^ptism
il^umira^ion, -- And to Confirma^ion he reckons tasting the Heavenly gift and
being made par^akers of the Holy Ghost* By the thing sig^ified declaring the
sign, and by ^he miste^y the (...)*

Upon these words ^t Chrisostom^ discoursing says, That all these are
foundamental Articles: that it that ^e ought to repent from dead works; to be
baptized ^^to the Faith of Christ, and be made worthy of the gift of the
spirit, who is given by imposition of hands and we are to be taught the
mysteries of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment. This Catechism (says he)
is perfect, so that if any Man have Faith in God, and being baptized is also
confirmed and so tastes the Heavenly gift, and partakes of the Holy Ghost, by
hope of the resurrection tastes of the good things of the World to come, if he
falls away from this state -- digging down and turning up these foundations he
shall never be built again, he can never be baptized again -- Confirmed again.
God will not begin again, etc. He cannot be made a Christian twice. -- This is
the full explication of this excellent place, and any other ways it cannot be
reasonably exp^icated. -- I shall observe one thing more out of this Testimony
of St. Paul He cal^s it the Doctrine of baptism and laying on of hands, by
which it does not only appear to be a lasting Ministry, because no part of the
Christian Doctrine could change or be abolished but hence also it appears to be
divine Institution. For it were not St. Paul had been guilty of that which our
blessed Savior reproves in the Scribes and Pharisees, and should have taught for
doctrines the Commandments of Men. Which because it cannot be supposed, it
must follow that this doctrine of confirmation, or imposition of hands is
Apostolical and divine. The argument is clear, and not easily to be reproved.

Yea but what is this to us? it belonged to the days of wonder and
extraordinary. The Holy Ghost breathed upon the Apostle^ and Apostolical men,
but then he breathed his last; vecendente gratiae recessit disiplina; when the
grace departed we had no further need of the cerimony.

In Answer to this I shall (...) by diverse particulars evince plainly, that
this Ministry -- was not temporary and relative only to the Acts of the
Apostles, but was to descend to the Church for ever. This indeed is done
already in the proceeding Sect in which it is clearly manifested, that Christ
himself made the baptism of the spirit necessary to the Church* He declared the
fruits of this baptism, and did particularly relate it to the descent of the
holy spirit upon the Church at and after that glorious Pe^tie^st. He sanctified
it and commended it b^ hi^ example; just as he sanctified the flood Jordan, and
all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin, viz. by his great
example, and fulfi^ling this righteousness also. This doctrine the Apostles
first found in their own persons, and experience, and practiced to all their
Converts, by a solemn, and external rite; And all this p^ssed into an
Evangelicall, doctrine the whole mystery being signified by the external rite
in the words of the Apostle, as before it was by Christ expressing only the
internal. So that there needs n^ more strength to this argument. But that
there may be wanting no moments to this truth which the holy scripture affords,
I shall add more weight to it; And,

1. The perpetuity of this rite appears, because this great gift of the Holy
Ghost was promised to abide with the Chu^ches for ever. And when the Je^s hea^d
the Apostles speak with tongues at the first and miraculous d^s^ent of the
spirit in Pen^^c^st, to take of the stra^ge^ess of the wond^r, and the envy of
the power. St. Pe^er at that very time tells them plainly. Re^^nt and be
baptiz^d every one of you -- and (...) shall rece^^e the gift of the Holy Ghost
(...) not the meanest person among you all, but shall receive this great thing,
which ye observe us to have received and not only you, but your Children too,
not of this ^eneration only, sed nati natorum et q^i n^centur ab illis, but
your Children for ever. For the promise is to you and to your Children and to
all that are affar off, even to as many as the Lord your God shall call* now
then let it be considered.

1. This gift is by promise, by a promise not made to the Apostles alone, but
to all; to all for ever.

2. Consider here at the very first as there is a verbum, a word of promise, so
there is a sacramentum too I use the word -- -- in a large sense only, and
according to the style of the primitive Church) It is a rite partly moral; and
partly cerimoniall, the first is prayer, the other is laying on of the hands:
and to an effect that is but transient and extraordinary, and of a little
abode, it is not easily to be supposed that such a solemnity should be
appointed. I say such a solemnity; that is, it not imaginable that a solemn
rite, annexed to a perpetual promise should be transient and temporary for by
the nature of relatives they may be of equal abode, the cerimony or rite was
anexed to the promise, and therefore also must be for ever. [I think this will
abide trial, since we may not expect a change of the dispensation we are under;
otherwise the promise might continue under some other rite or elce without it]


3: This is attested by St. Paul who reduces this argument to this mystery
saying, In home after that you believed -- ye were sealed with the holy spirit
of promise. He spoke it to the Ephesians who well understood his meaning, by
remembering what was done to themselves by the Apostle, Act. 19. 6. But a while
before, who after he had baptized them did lay his hands upon them, and so they
received the holy spirit of promise; for here the very matter of fact is the
clearest comentary on St. Paul's words -- -- But fourthly.

What hinders any man from a quick consent at the first representation of these
plain reasonings and authorityes? is it because there were extraordinary
effects accompanying this ministration, and because now there are not, that we
will suppose the whole economy must cease? if this be it, and indeed this is
all that can be pretended in opposition to it, it is infinitely vain.

1. Because these ex^raordinary effect, did continue even after the death of
all the Apostles. St. Frenoeus says they did continue even to his time, even
the greatest instance of miraculous power. et infraternitate, sap^ssimc propter
aliquid necessarium, etc. When God saw it necessary, and the Church prayed and
fasted much, they did miraculous things, even of reducing the Spirit to a dead
Man.

2. In the days of the Ap^stles the spirit did produce miraculous effects, but
neither always, nor at all in all men, are all workers of miracles, etc. No,
the spirit blows where it lists, and as he lists he gives gifts to all,
but to some after this manner, and some after that.

3. These gifts were not necessary at, all times any more then to all persons,
but the promise did belong to all and was made to all, and was performed to
all. -- And therefore if the grace be given to all, there is no reason that the
ritual ministration of that grace should cease upon pretense that the spirit is
not given extraordinarily.

Other arguments he has (many) to the same purpose, and a^ I conceive well
worthy the consideration of all Christians Who know how to read men without
being scandi ized if they meet with phraises, and some nothing which are
doubtful as its the case of most that write.
specially those that are doubtful in this principle of religion but I shall
sh^t up all with a few of his citations out of the works of ancient writers, in
behalf of this point of faith. And first noteing How that originally it came
from the Apostles.

In the second Century he brings Thophilus, Antiochenus and ^ertullian, the
latter says thus, D^ hinc manus imponitur, etc. After baptism the hand is
imposed by blessing, calling, and inviting the holy spirit. -- Being cleansed
by baptismal water, we are disposed for the holy spirit under the hand of the
Angel of the Church, and to this effect the rest, etc. For the third Century he
brings Origin, Cyprian, Dionis, and Eusebius, The first Testimony set down is
out of Cyprian who Writing upon the passage in Acts 8. 14. says, which custom
is also descended to us, that they who are baptized might be brought by the
rulers of the Church and by prayer and imposition of hands receive the Lords
signature, etc.

For the Fourth hundred he brings Melchiades, Optatus, Civil, and others
speaking very highly of the use of this ministration and then brings Urba^ the
first, as more plainly setting down what the rest delivered more siguratively,
in these words Omnes Fideles, etc. All faithful people ought to receive the
holy spirit by imposition of the Bishops hands after baptism. And having added
yet more witnesses of this kind, he alleadges six Counsels, to evince the same
thing, ^ Con. Arles. c. 8.
viz. That this Ordinance of prayer, laying on of hands were received together
with the other principles by Christians generally. The decree of one of these
Counsels (concerning such as had received baptism in a regular form) is in
these words manus ^antum eiis imponatur ut accipiant spiritum sanctum. Let
there be imposition of hands that they may receive the Holy Ghost. Afterward
the Dr. concludes thus.

So many Fathers testifying the practice of the Church and teaching this
Doctrine, and so many more Fathers as it were assembled in six Counsels, all
giving witness to this holy Rite AND THAT IN PURSUANCE OF SCRIPTURE are too
great a blood of witnesses to be despised by any man that calls himself a
Christian.

FINIS.

