A DISCOURSE OF CHRIST'S Coming: And the Influence, which the Expectation
thereof has on al manner of Holy Conversation and Godliness.

By Theophilus Gale.

1 Cor. 16.22. Maranatha, i. e.

Jude 14. The Lord comes.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock Senior and Junior; to be sold at the three
Bibles in Popes head Alley over against the Exchange. 1673.

Preface.
SIns have their fashions as well as Garments: And the great sin in fashion now
adays is Atheism. A sin not openly professed, yea scarce heard of, in the
Infant-state of the World; when the miraculous operations of the Deity, in the
Creation and Gubernation of althings, were so fresh and conspicuous. But in
elder Times, when Philosophy in the Schools, and Human Policy in states began
to prevail, then began Atheism to spring up therewith. Yet could it never
obtain any considerable vogue, or Reputation 'til of late years. But now, alas!
alas! how has it, in a few years, overspread the Christian world? And what
have been the seeds of this prodigious sin, so much repugnant to human Nature,
but Infidelity and carnal security, as to the coming of the Day of God? This
the Apostle Peter, by a Spirit of prophecy, distinctly foretold, 2 Pet. 3.3,
4. knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking
after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming? etc.
What are the Last days, which Peter here refers unto, but this last Period of
the world, in which we live? And who are the Scoffers he makes mention of, but
Atheistic sensual sinners, who put far from them the coming of our Lord to
jugement? Neither have these sins of Atheism, Infidelity, and carnal
security diffused their venomous Influences through the debauched and
superstitious World only, but also through many Reformed Churches. O! What a
world of practic Atheism and Infidelity is to be found among many professors
of Religion? Do not the Lives of too many notional Professors evidently
demonstrate to us, that they really believe not what they profess? What may we
judge of the sensual professor, whose main study and care is to gratify his
brutish Appetite? Can we imagine that he believes what he professes, touching
the coming of the day of God? No Surely. And may we not conclude the same of
the Avaricious covetuous professor, whose main design is to fill his bags, with
Gold and Silver? Did he indeed believe the coming of his Lord, how ambitious
would he be to improve his unrighteous mammon, to the best advantage for his
master's service? But to ascend higher to the form of more refined professors,
has not a spiritual slumber of carnal security seized on the generality of
Professors, both wise and foolish Virgins? Are not the Foolish Virgins or
formal professors, at this day, under a dead sleep of carnal security? Yea, do
not the Wise Virgins also slumber, if not sleep? I know not of any piece of
Scripture more applicable to these days we live in, than that of our Lord, Mat.
25.5. While the Bridegroom tarried they al slumbered and slept. This is the
curse of these last days, That the nearer the Bridegroom is, the more
professors slumber and sleep. This our Lord foresaw and foretold of these last
times. And what is the meaning of al those awakening Jugements, which at
present all the European Churches are fallen under, but to startle slumbering
professors, out of their sweet sleeps of carnal security? And yet, Lo! to this
very day, how do the most of professors, slumber, if not sleep on their beds of
carnal security? Does not the Lord, as it were force open the eyes, and break
in with awakening Jugements on his Churches day by day? Who knows how near that
midnight-crie, Behold the Lord comes, Mat. 25.6. may be? Is it not then matter
of prodigious Astonishment, that Christians, the main of whose profession is,
To wait for the coming of their Lord, should be surprised with spiritual
slumbers, in a day of so great Danger and Duty, when in all likelihood some
eminent Approach of their Lord, and as we have cause to fear in a way of
Jugement, is so near?

The contemplation of the forementioned particulars, with some other
considerations, is that which has given Life and Form, to the following
Discourse; which is intended as a word in season, to awaken secure professors,
and wind up their Spirits unto that, which is their highest concern at al
times, specially in these evil Days, namely, A daily looking for, and hastening
unto the coming of the Day of God, in order to al holy conversation and
Godliness. And would Christians but seriously consider and meditate on the
weight and force of this Argument, it cannot be imagined, what sweet and
efficacious Influences it would derive on their Hearts and Lives. O! Unto what
Eminences, and Raisures in Grace would they arrive? how visible and glorious
would their Graces be? How humble, and yet heavenly-minded would they be? What
real, spiritual, deep, broad, sublime, feeling and affective Notions of God
would they have? What a plenitude and fullness of Grace would possess the Bent
of their Wills? How would their Graces lend to each other their mutual Succur,
and Assistance? Yea, what a combination of Graces seemingly opposite would
there be found in them; did they daily look for and hasten unto the coming of
their Lord?

A Believer, that lives under the power and Influence of this frame, at what a
distance from sin does he keep? How much is his heart Crucified to all the
Glory of this fading world? Does he not daily die unto al self-confidences in
Grace received? Is not Christ placed in the room of self? O! what generous and
sublime thoughts of Christ has he? Who so precious in his Eye, as Christ? and
thence, who so precious in Christ's eye, as he? How much does such a soul thirst
after the most intimate Union and Communion with Christ? Who values Adoption,
pardon of sin, and peace of Conscience more than he? O! what a tender feeling
conscience has he? Does not the least sin burden, and pinch him more, than the
greatest sufferings? What an exact scrutinie and examen does he bring his heart
and life daily under? How much is his heart broken for, and broken off from sin
day by day? Is it not his greatest grief, that he should so much, and so often
grieve the Spirit of God? Does he not daily judge and condemn himself, that so
he may not be judged and condemned of the Lord at the last day? O! What a
profound abasement of spirit, and humble silence before the Divine Majesty
does he lie under? How bitter and loathsome is sin to him, because it unfits
him for his Lords company? How little can he be frowned out of Duty, or
flattered into sin? Its true, he is meek, modest, and patient in his own cause;
but O! how fervent and warm is his zele in the cause of God? What strength and
force does his zele gain by opposition? Who more active and vigorous in the
exercice of Grace, than he? There is no exercice of Grace so difficult, but it
is made facile and easy to such a soul, as daily expects his Lords Approach.
Has not Grace in such a soul its perfect work, so that it serves for all uses;
and performs all the Acts, to which it has a power? What is it that makes
Christians so dead and barren as to gracious exercices, but the putting off the
coming of their Lord? O! what universal spirits, hearts flexible to every
command, have such, as daily look for the coming of their Lord? How unwilling
are such to omit any will of God, or commit any will of the flesh? How much of an
Heavenly conversation have they in their way to Heaven? What an Apology for,
and Vindication of their profession do they give, by a shining exemplarie
conversation? How easy and familiar is Christ's Yoke and Cross unto them? What
a manifestation of the life of Christ do they give in their lives?

These, with many others, are the Influences, which! an awakened believing soul
receives from a serious looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the Day
of God. And O that Christians would put this rare experiment on the trial! What
strange Alterations would they find in their Hearts and Lives? How would they
hereby adorn their conversation? How soon would that Reproach, with which
professors are now laden, be removed? If this following Discourse may any way
conduce to these great ends, all that is further desired is, that the Glory of
al may be returned unto our great Lord, who alone can make every Truth
efficacious and operative.

Table of Contents, of this first Part.
CHAP. I.
THE Explication of the Text. page 1 -- 11 General Observations. page 12 -- 17
CHAP. II.
1. THe several Characters of a sanctified eye, etc. page 18 1. An Evangelic
eye. page 19 2. A single eye. page 20 3. A pure Eye. page 21 4. A Sound Eye.
page 22 5. An humble Eye. page 24 6. A sublime Eye. page 25 7. A Vigilant Eye.
Ibid. 8. An Experimental Eye. page 26 9. An heart-affecting Eye. page 28 10. A
Vigorous Eye. page 30 2. The coming of the day of God considered; 1. In it
self; and that, (1.) In its Grandeur. page 31, 32 (2.) As the mesure of al good
and evil. page 33 2. In its Adjuncts, (1.) As near. page 37 Expectation of
Death. page 39 (2.) As unexpected. page 41 3. In its Consequents. (1.) The last
Jugement. page 42 (2.) Eternity. page 44 3. The Gospel the medium, through
which we look for the coming of Christ. page 46 4. The actual looking for the
coming of Christ, by page 48 1. Faith realising that day. page 49 1. Evident
Views of it. page 51 3. Familiarising that day. page 53 4. Waiting for it. page
55 5. Prepossessing of it. page 56 6. Being transformed into the Image of
Christ. page 57 To hasten unto the coming of Christ, by 1. A strong Bent of will
or Divine Love. page 60 2. Longing Desires page 62 3. Lively Hopes. page 63 4.
Godly Fear. page 65 5. Complacence and delight. page 66 6. Preparation for it.
page 68 7. Exercices of Grace. page 69 8. Prelibations of it. page 71
CHAP. III.
WHat Influence the looking for the day of God has, 1. On sinners; as to (1.)
Conviction of sin. page 74 (2.) Sense of Sin. page 77 (3.) Inquiries about
salvation. page 79 (4.) Evangelic Repentance. page 82 (5.) Conversion. page 83
(6.) Partial Reformation. page 85 2. What Influence it has on Saints, page 88
1. As to Godliness; and that as to (1.) An high estime of God. page 91 (2.)
Love to God. page 93 (3.) Holy fear of God. page 95 (4.) Crucifixion to the
World. page 96 (5.) Mortification of sin. page 100 (6.) Resisting of
Tentations. page 102 (7.) Sincerity. page 105 (8.) Heart-Establishment in
Grace. page 107 1. Establishment of Jugement. page 108 2. Establishment of
heart and ways. page 110 3. Establishment as to suffering. page 112 (9.) Growth
in Grace. page 113 (10.) The ordering our hearts and lives. page 115 (11.)
Christian Vigilance. page 118 (12.) The life of faith. page 121 1. Real Views
of Glory. Ib. 2. Foretastes of Glory. page 122 3. Desires to die. Ib. 4.
Resignation to Gods will. page 123 5. Bearing the Cross. page 124 6. Dependence
on Christ. page 126 7. Patient waiting for the Reward. page 127 (13.)
Assurance. Ib. (14.) Friendship with God in Christ, page 129 As to, 1.
Ressemblance of Christ. page 130 2. Ambition to please Christ. page 131 3.
Service for Christ. page 132 4. Remembrance of Christ. page 133 (15.)
Sanctification of Gods name in Worship. page 134 (16.) Walking with God. page
138 (17.) Perseverance. page 143 2. What Influence the expectation of Christ's
coming has on an holy Conversation, As to Christian Love. page 145 (1.)
Irreprochable life. page 148 (2.) Christian Moderation. page 149 1. As to
Opinions. page 150 2. As to Injuries received. page 151 3. As to censures. page
152 4. As to Animosities. page 153 (3.) Christian Exhortation. page 154 (4.)
Exemplary walking. page 155 (5.) Christian Liberality. page 157
CHAP. IV. WHence it is, that the looking for Christ's coming is so Influential?
Christ comes, 1. As the Judge of al. page 159 2. Unto the Saints, (1.) As a
Savior. page 172 (2.) As an Husband. page 173 (3.) As an Head. page 174 (4.) As
a Soul. Ib. (5.) Under other Relations. page 175 Commun Notions of the last
Jugement. page 177 Commun Illuminations. page 178 Peculiar Dispositions in the
Saints toward Christ's coming. page 179 (1.) A Divine Nature. Ib. (2.) A spirit
of Adoption. Ib. (3.) A Divine Faith. page 180 (4.) A Bent of Will. page 181 The
Effects of Christ's Coming. page 182
CHAP. V.
THe Application of the whole Doctrinal Inferences. page 183 Practic Uses. page
194 1. Of Lamentation and Humiliation. Ib. 2. Of Caution. page 195 3. Of Heart
Examens. page 197 4. Of Conviction and Rebuke. page 198 (1.) To Sinners. Ib.
(2.) To Saints. page 200 5. Of Exhortation, to expect Christ's coming. (1.)
Motives. page 203 (2.) Directions. page 206
TABLE of Scriptures Explicated in this first Part.
Chapter ver. Page Genes. 5.22. 139 Exodus 19.16, 17, 18. 162 Deuteronomy. 4.34, 35. 27
Psalm. 10.4. 25 22.26. 137 98.6 -- 9. 67 131.1, 2. 24 Prove. 2.7. 23 3.21. 23
Eccles. 5.1. 136 11.9. 76 12.13, 14. 163 Cant. 7.4. 22 8.14. 62 Lament. 4.20.
174 Mat. 5.8. 22 6.22, 23. 20 12.36, 37. 171 24.44 -- 46 120 25.5. 118 Luke.
9.13. 132 12.34 -- 36. 68, 91 21.28. 64 Act. 2.37. 80, 81 3.19. 84 5.41. 124
11.23. 60 17.30, 31. 82 24.15, 16. 105, 149 24.25. 77 Romans 2.11. 167 1 Corinthians.
4.5. 164 4.10, 11. 130 7.29 -- 31. 33, 99 9.25, 27. 35 9.26. 111 11.25, 26. 134
16.22. 87, 95 2 Corinthians. 4.5. 153 5.9. 131 5.10, 11. 65, 84, 96, 167 Galat.
3.1. 52 6.7. 167 Ephesians. 6.13. 104 Philip. 1.10. 106 1.9, 10. 28 1.23. 39 3.11,
12, 13, 14. 69 -- 71 3.20. 53, 172 Colos. 3.3, 4, 5. 175 3.4. 101 1 These. 3.12,
13. 146 5.2 -- 6. 119 2 These. 2.1. 109 1 Timoth. 6.12 -- 14. 111 2 Timoth. 1.7.
23 4.8. 60 Titus. 2.12, 13. 149 Hebr. 3.14. 64 5.14. 28 11.1. 50, 51 11.9, 10.
98 11.13. 51 11.26. 92 James. 1.8. 20, 111 2.12. 170 5.9. 153 2 Pet. 1.9. 23
3.10. 3 -- 7 3.11. 7, 8, 89, 97, 114 3.12. 9 -- 11 1 John. 3.2, 3. 101 Jude 14,
15. 75 21. 93

ERRATA.
PAge 77. l. 7. for there read then: p. 82. l. 22. for have r. has: p. 96.
Title, for of r. to: p. 100. l. 6. dele the period af er Godliness: p. 100. l.
20: after same add with: p. 107. l. 27. before stable add more: p. 160. l.
ult. dele to after Judge. p. 185. l. 4. for forcing r. fixing.

A Discourse of Christ's Coming, etc.
CHAP. I. The Explication of 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. with several Observations
deduced thence.
SECT. 1. The Explication of the Text.
OUR Apostle Peter, by a spirit of prophecy, forseeing, what a deluge of
Atheism and Epicurisme would break in, on the professing World, in these last
days; how many scoffers would arise, walking after their own Lusts, and denying
the last Jugement; he does in this 3 Chapter, premonish Believers hereof; and
also confirm them in the expectation of the second coming of their Lord. The
Chapter has two parts: (1.) A confirmation of Christ's second coming to
Jugement: (2.) An elegant description of the same, with the worlds destruction.
In the first part there are these members, (1.) A prediction of Atheistic,
Epicurean scoffers, who should arise in these last days, etc. v. 3. (2.) A
Recitation of their Argument, whereby they should endeavor to subvert the
second coming of Christ and future Judgment, v. 4. (3.) The Refutation of
their Argument, v. 5, 6. (4.) A confirmation of the Worlds dissolution by fire,
v. 7. (5.) A proleptic excuse for the delay thereof, v. 8, 9. In the second
part of the Chapt. you have, (1.) A description of Christ's coming to Jugement;
both from the manner of it, which would be most sudden and unexpected by many;
and from its Adjunct, namely the Worlds last Conflagration: which is explicated
in its parts, v. 10. (2.) An exhortation to al manner of holy Conversation and
Godliness, drawn from the manner of Christ's coming, and the Worlds
dissolution, v. 11, 12. (3.) A promise of New Heavens, and New Earth, v. 13.
(4.) A Repetition of his exhortation to piety, and a confirmation of the same
from Paul's Epistles, v. 14, 15 16, etc. So much for the coherence in general.

The Text is a Description of our Lords second coming to Jugement, both with
the Manner, and Adjuncts thereof; and thence an Exhortation to al manner of
holy Conversation and Godliness. In the verse immediately precedent, the
Apostle makes mention of Gods Longanimitie, or Long-sufferance. But lest any
should abuse this Divine Long-sufferance to carnal security, he subjoins in
our Text, v. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, etc.
The first Article (...) The, is very emphatic and distinctive. The Day, i. e.
that great solemn day of the Lord, which will put an end to all the Days of
time, and usher in Eternity. This Jude, v. 6, calls The Great day. And the
Syriac expresses the emphase, by That Day, i. e. That illustrious renowned
day, which was so often mentioned by our Lord, in the days of his flesh, as Mat.
7.22. and 24.36. and 26.29. as also by Paul, 2 Timothy 1.18, etc. That Day, the
forethoughts of which is so terrible to sinners, and so refreshing to Saints.
That Day, which will be so black, dismal and hideous a Doomsday to the wicked;
but so bright, and glorious a day of Relaxation and Rest to Believers.

Of the Lord.] Why is it called the day of the Lord? (1.) By reason of its
excellence, and magnificence: For things most excellent, and surpassing, are,
by the Hebrews, in a more special manner attributed to God: as the fire of God,
the Ceders of God, etc. (2.) Because this will be the last Day of Time, which
puts a period to Christ's Mediatory Kingdom, and ushers in Eternity. (3.)
Because in this day our great Lord will manifest his Omnipotence, Faithfulness
Justice, Holiness, Wisdom, with his other glorious Attributes, which now seem
veiled, with greater luster, and Majesty. (4.) It seems to be called the Lords
day, in opposition to man's day in this life. The wicked have their Day of Sin;
ay, but the Lord will also have his day of Jugement: The Enemies of Christ have
their day of persecution; ay, but will not the Lord have his day of vengeance
also? Close hypocrites have their day of hypocritic profession; and the Lord
will have his day of manifestation and discovery: Afflicted Saints have their
day of suffering; but the Lord will have also his day of recompense, 2 These.
1.6, 7, etc.

Will come as a thief in the night.] Our Apostle has taken this Ressemblance
from the mouth of our Lord, Mat. 24.43. But know this, that if the good man of
the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched,
etc. So Luke 12.39. The same similitude is used, to the same intent, by Paul, 1
These. 5.2. The Day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night. The like Rev.
3.3. and 16.15. But why is the coming of our Lord thus expressed, under the
similitude of a Thief's coming? Because, (1.) The coming of a thief is
unexpected and uncertain: he usually surpriseth those in the house, when they
least expect him: So the coming of our Lord shall he, when secure sinners least
expect him. (2.) The coming of a thief is usually swift and speedy: The less
he is expected, the more speed he makes: though the whole family be asleep;
yet he sleeps not, but is vigilant, and active in his course and motion: So our
Lord, his coming is not less speedy, than unexpected. Though sinners may sleep
on the bed of carnal ease and security; yet he sleeps not, but is exceeding
quick and swift in his motion. So Mat. 24.27. For as the lightening comes out
of the East, and shines even unto the West; so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be. (3.) A Thief comes to rob and make spoil; yea often to kill: So our
Lords coming is in order to vengeance, on the secure unbelieving World: Thus
Luke 21.34, 35. so that day come on you unawares: for as a snare shall it come
on al them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.

Some of the Ancients referring that clause, in the night, not so much to
Thief, as to Will come, were of an opinion that Christ's second coming would be
in the night. This also they collected from the Parable of the Virgins, Mat.
25.6. which seems to have given the first ground to the Popish Vigils or
watches. But it seems evident, that the word night here must be referred to
(...) referendum est ad (...), non ad (...). Beza.
Thief, and not to will come: and so the word come, must be understood (...),
thus: But the day of the Lord will come, as a thief comes in the night.

In the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise.] Our Apostle here
does more fully explicate what he had laid down v. 7, touching the last
conflagration of the World. The word (...), shall pass away, he borrows from
his masters mouth, Mat. 24.35. Marc. 13.31. Luke 21.33. where he tells us,
Heaven and Earth should pass away. (...), which we render with a great noise,
is rendered by the Syriac, suddenly; by Erasmus, according to the manner of a
tempestuous wind. And so (...) impetum veluti sibila^tis (...) declar^t. Beza.
(...) est sibi ^ar^ cum stridor^, qualis est si^ilus rerum, ouae velo^issime
moventur, ut sagitt^r^m, ventorum. B^daeus (...) a Plutarc^o usurpari dicit de
imp^tu pro^urrentium militum i^ pug^ae initio, qui magnum solext eder^
clamor^m. Gerhard. in loc.
(...) properly signifies the impetus, or violent force of a whistling
tempestuous wind: and (...), signifies, to hiss with a noise. So that (...)
implies, (1.) Celeritie and swiftness: (2.) Force and violence: (3.) A clamor
or noise. Thence the Heavens are said here to pass away with a great noise, to
denote their sudden, violent and horrible destruction, or as some, refinement.

And the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the works
that are therein shall be burned up.] The main thing to be inquired into here
is, What these works are, which shall be burnt up? (1.) Hereby we may
understand al artificial works of men's hands; as al Edifices, houses, Cities,
and all the great Rarities of Art, which men now so much Idolize, and dote on.
(2.) Hereby also we may understand all the works of Nature, which receive their
origin and conservation from Gods Institution and providence; as inamate mixed
bodies, animates, Animals, etc.

As to the whole of this Dissolution it may be inquired, whether it shall be a
total destruction of the very substance of Heaven and Earth; or only a
Transutation and change of its Qualities? Some conjecture, that there shall be a
total and complete dissolution, and destruction of the whole Universe, not only
as to some qualities but substance also. This they conclude from the
particulars here specified: For it is said; See Gerhard in 2 Pet. 3.10.
that the Heavens, Elements, Earth, and al its works shall be burnt up. Yet many
Divines of great note are of a contrary persuasion. We need not contend about
it.

Lastly, This also deserves a remarque, that this Dissolution of the World by
fire, was communly believed among the Jews, (as we may presume from Enochs, or
some other Prophecy) and the very Heathens received some notice thereof from
the Stoici illum mundi exitum (...) v^cabant. Id Zeno a phoenicibus acceperat.
Idem habuit a Pythagoricis H^raclitus: Pythagoras a Judaeis. Grot. in 2 Pet.
3.7.
Judaic Church.

It follows v. 11. Seeing then that al these things shall be dissolved.] The
Greek (...), is a participle of the present tense, and so signifies strictly,
are dissolved, for (...), shall be dissolved. The Apostle seems to use this
manner of speech to show, (1.) The Certainty of Christ's coming to destroy the
World: and (2.) The nearness of it: That so men might ever have it before
their eyes, and keep their hearts in a posture ready to entertain it.

Thence it follows: What manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy
conversation and Godliness?] 1. Here we have a rhetorical Interrogation, which
carries in it much Authority and weight. (...) est aliquid plusquam (...):
dicitur enim de rebus eximiis, Mat. 8.27. Grot.
(...) here implies somewhat more than (...); for it is usually affirmed of
things most excellent; as Mat. 8.27. What manner of man is this? The like Mark.
13.1. Luke 1.29. Luke 7.39. The sense therefore seems this: What excellent
Raisures of Spirit ought ye to aim at? What an admirable life of faith ought ye
to lead? How much should your hearts be alienated from al Idols of time? What a
strong fixed Bent of will ought ye to have? What pure strains of love to Christ
should your souls flame withal? How wisely, how accurately should ye walk in
this World? Shall this World ere long be burnt to a black Cole? Will the Heavens
pass away with an hideous clamor and noise? Shall all the works of Nature and
Art in a short time perish? Oh! then what perishing affections ought ye to have
for such perishing objects? How ambitious should ye be of the most excellent
frames of heart and life, thereby to entertain your Lord at his coming?

2. There lies also a great Emphase in that clause, [in al holy conversation
and Godliness.] The original (...), are in the plural number, and so signify,
al holy conversations and Godlinesses. Which is a Hebraisme, and imports a
perfection of Sanctity and Piety (1.) As to Parts and Kinds: that we should
endeavor after al kind of holy conversation and Godliness; as well interne, as
externe; and that both as to God and men Usurpavit numerum m^ltitu^inis ex
Hebraeorum ^ore ut pi^tas significetur omnibus suis number ris ac pa^tibus
consta^s, quam pro v^r^bus sectari nos oportet. Beza.
(2.) As to degrees: That we should aim at, and endeavor after the highest
mesures and degrees of sanctity and piety. (3.) As to Duration; That we
should persevere in all manner of holy Conversation and Godliness, even to the
end. By (...). Phaver.
(...) Godliness, we may understand al interne principles, and externe duties;
which belong to the first table, and more imdiately refer to God; For so the
Greek word properly signifies, A righteousness, honor and worship performed to
God: and thence, a Godly man, even among the Heathens, was said to be, (...),
Philothcos, and Theophiles, a lover, and friend of God. Whence proportionably,
by holy Conversations, we may understand, al duties of the second table, which
refer more immediately to men. So in Phavorinus, (...), is interpreted by
(...), Life and (...), conversation, and (...), an Institution or peculiar mode
of Life.

Hence it follows v. 12. Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day
of God]. (1.) (...). Looking for. This Peter seems to have taken from the
Parable of our Lord, concerning the Servants waiting for their Lords return,
Luke 12.36. And ye your selves like unto men that wait for the Lord, when he
will return from the Wedding, etc. The like Paul, Tit. 2.13. Looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, etc.

(2.) (...). Erasmus and Schmidius take (...) in a transitive, active sense;
and so render it, hastening the coming of the day of God, namely by your faith,
prayers, and holy affections. But because we never find (...) taken
transitively, but always neutrally, in the New Testament, I rather incline,
with Beza, Gerhard, and our own Version, to take it in the later notion; and so
by understanding the preposition (...), or (...), (which kind of Ellipsis is
usual, not only in the Scripture, but also in profane Authors) keep to our own
Version. And then the sense will be this: We ought, not only patiently to wait
for, but also, by vigorous acts of faith, passionate desires, lively hopes, and
al manner of holy Conversation, to hasten toward the coming of the day of God:
and that according to the Parable of the Wise Virgins, Mat. 25.1. and in
imitation of the Spouse, Apoc. 22.20.

(3.) We are to consider here the connection of these words with the foregoing.
Some take these words, Looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of
God, as a particular explication of the precedent general exhortation to a holy
conversation and Godliness. But we may look on the connection as causal: and so
looking for and hastening to the coming of the day of God, to be not only a
part of, but also that which has a causal influence on a holy conversation and
Godliness.

Wherein.] Some refer (...) here to the Day immediately precedent; and so
suppose it to be put, according the hebraic Idiome, for (...) in which, as v.
10. Thus our Version. Others think it may more properly be referred to (...),
The coming, and so render it, according to its proper construction, by which,
i. e. by virtue of which coming the whole Universe shall be destroyed. Thence it
follows; The Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved. He had said v. 10. The
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise. But now, lest any should imagine,
that the Heavens should be exemted from those commun flames, in which the
Universe should be involved, he here adds, that the Heavens also should come
under the general conflagration.

By Heavens we must understand only the Firmament, together with those
Celestial bodies placed therein: not the supreme Heavens, or Heaven of Heavens,
wherein glorified Angels and Saints shall have their Mansions to al Eternity.

Lastly he adds: And the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.] (...) shall
melt, is a metaphoric notion, borrowed from wax, which being put into the fire
soon melts, so Micah 1.4. and the Mountains shall be molten -- as Wax before
the fire. The like Esa. 34.4. and all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved. LXX.
(...), which place is parallel to this melting in the Text, and includes a
dissolution.

SECT. 2. Observations from the Words.
THe words thus explicated afford several great Observations. But the Day of
the Lord will come, we may Observe, That there is a great Day of the Lord
coming, which will make the stoutest proudest sinner, to stoop and tremble; and
the most afflicted Saints to rejoice. Oh! What a great day will that be, when all the great ones of the Earth shall seek to the Mountains and Rocks to hide them,
from the wrath of the Lamb? So Rev. 6.15. And the Kings of the Earth, and the
great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks
of the mountains. 16. And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide
us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: 17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Its possible this may refer to some coming of Christ, for the exaltation
of his Kingdom in this World; yet we may take it as a lively Image of his last
coming to Judge the World. Will it not be also a great day, when the Lord shall
come to give Relaxation and Rest to his troubled Saints, as 2 These. 1.6, 7?
When al their burdens, either of Persecution, Tentation, or Sin shall be
removed? When al their tears shall end in joy; al their sighs and groans in
Halelujahs; al their natural infirmities of body, in perfect Vigor, Agilitie,
Spiritualitie, Incorruption, and Glory; al their spiritual Ignorances in a
perfect Intuition and Vision of God, as he is, face to face; al their troubles
of Conscience in perfect peace; al their distempers of will, in perfect
subjection to the Divine Will; al their exorbitant Affections, in a most regular
and harmonious motion toward God; al their heart-distractions, and spiritual
deadnesses in duties, in a vigorous active uninterrupted exercice of Grace; al
Church-divisions in perfect union and communion of Saints? Oh! What a great,
glorious, and blessed day will this be?

As a thief in the night, we may note, That the second coming of our Lord will
be most unexpected, sudden, and destructful to the secure World. Oh! What a
surprise will it be to secure sinners, to behold the Lord of Glory coming in
the clouds, to recompense vengeance to them for all their sinful deeds? how soon
then will al their fond presumtions, and self-flatteries determine in dreadful
despair? What terrible awakenings, will then scatter al their present dead
sleeps? How will al their foolish hopes, and groundless confidences vanish into
smoke and vapor? Yea, what sudden, endless, and remediless destruction will
surprise both body and soul? As in the days of Noah, the secure World was
surprised with a sudden and inevitable deluge; and that in the midst of al
their sensuality, and security; so our blessed Lord tells us it shall be at his
second coming, Luke 17.26 -- 30. And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it
be in the days of the Son of man, etc.

In the which the Heavens shall pass away, with a great noise, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein
shall be burned up: Observe, That at the second coming of our Lord, the whole
frame of Nature, and Art shall be dissolved, by general flames. By the Frame of
Nature and Art, I understand al corruptible Bodies both natural and Artificial,
as now constituted. I determine not whether this dissolution shall be total as
to substance, or only partial as to a refinement of Heaven and Earth. Though
some great Divines incline to the later, namely that it shall be only a
Purgation and Refinement, yet most terrible to the sinful World. Oh! what
prodigious universal, devouring flames will these be? Alas! how wistly will the
sensual sinner then look, when al his terrene pleasures shall be snatched away,
by those merciless flames? What will the luxurious voluptuous Glutton do, when
he shall see al his delicious curious dainties, with which he so much gratified
his palate, burnt up? Where will the ambitious man climb for honors, when al
Crowns and Scepters are consumed? Where will the avaricious covetous Worldling
go, to dig for riches, when al his Gold and Silver is burnt up? What will
become of al your fine houses, your rich hangings, your costly ornaments which
you now Idolize?

Seeing then that al these things shall be dissolved. The Original is a
participle of the present tense, and so signifies strictly, are dissolved;
which notes the certainty and nearness of this Dissolution. Whence observe,
That the Dissolution of the World by fire is most certain and near.

1. As for the certainty of this Dissolution we find it avouched not only by
Sacred, but also profane Writers. It was a commun opinion among the Platonists,
that the World should be destroyed by fire, which they called (...): so also
among the Stoics, who called it (...). Seneca speaks much, and fully to this
purpose. Minutius Foelix informs us, that the Epicureans held the same. The
Pythagoreans also, with several of the Poets averred the same. Al these, as we
may presume, borrowed these their Traditions of this last Conflagration, from
the Jewish Church; among whom it was communly believed, as is conceived from
Enoch's prophecy, as Jude v. 14, 15, seems to intimate. But the Sacred
Scripture is positive herein.

2. Neither is this last dissolution only certain, but also very near. It was
looked on as near in the Apostles times; but how much nearer then is it now?
Alas! who knows how soon al your works of Nature and Art may be burnt up? Al
your splendid attire, with all other curious pieces of Art, which you now so
much Admire, and Idolize? O fools! what do we here? Why sleep we so securely in
this old Pesthouse, which ere long will flame about our ears? What folly is it
to build Tabernacles, and take up our rest in this commun prison, which will
soon be burnt? Does not time post away with speed, and Eternity post toward
us? Is not the Judge at the door, yea at our elbow? Do not the Heavens daily
wax old, as a threadbare garment? and does not decrepit and lame Nature
admonish us daily, that its Dissolution is near? Yea, does not the scarcity of
faith upon the Earth assure us, that the second coming of our Lord is not far
off, as Luke 18.8? And should not this engage us al to make sure of that City,
which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10? Oh! what a
sad case shall we be in, if when our Lord comes to pull down the Walls, and burn
up the very foundations of this leper-house, so much overspread with sin, we
have no share in those Heavenly mansions, John 14.2?

What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and Godliness?
Whence observe, That the speedy coming of Christ to Jugement, lays a deep and
essential obligation on al, to aim at, and labor after the highest raisures of
holy Conversation and Godliness. This is a Doctrine of great weight and
Influence; that which carries in it the highest motives, yea the very vital
spirits of faith and Godliness. But the explication of this will fall in under
the following point.

Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, etc. These
words, considered in their causal connection with the precedent, offer to our
view this great Observation, That the fiducial looking for or expectation of,
and hastening unto the second coming of our Lord, has a mighty efficacious
influence on al sorts of persons, to raise them up, to al manner of holy
Conversation and Godliness. This great Truth, though last in order, yet it
seems first in the Apostles Intention; and that indeed which gave the occasion
and rise to this warm discourse, touching the second coming of our Lord, and
ensuing Jugement. This therefore I shall make the subject of our following
discourse. And for the explication hereof, three Questions offer themselves, as
matter of Inquisition.

1 Q. What it is to look for, and hasten to the coming of the day of God?

2 Q. What Influence the looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of
God, has on al sorts of persons, to raise them up to al manner of holy
Conversation and Godliness?

3 Q. Touching the connection of the parts, Whence it is, that the looking for,
and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, has such an efficacious
Influence on al sorts of persons, to raise them up to al manner of holy
conversation and Godliness?

CHAP. II. What it is to look for, and hasten to the Coming of the Day of God?
SECT. 1. The several Qualities of a sanctified eye, whereby we look for
Christ's coming.
1 Q. WHat it is to look for, and hasten to the coming of the day of God?

This Question may be resolved into two parts? (1.) What it is to look for the
coming of the day of God? (2.) What it is to hasten to coming of the day of God?

1. What it is to look for the coming of the day of God? This notion, to look
for, being a metaphor borrowed from natural vision or sight, we may refer the
Resolution of the Question to the several parts of natural vision: Which
implies, (1.) A Visive faculty or eye, whereby we see: (2.) An object visible
or thing seen: (3.) A medium, through which we see. (4.) The actual Reception
of the Object into the eye. Thus in the looking for the coming of our Lord,
There must be a spiritual eye; an object visible; a medium; and the Reception
of the object into the eye.

1. There must be a spiritual eye or sanctified visive faculty, to look for
the coming of the day of God: Without a sanctified mind there can be no looking
for the coming of the day of God; A blind man may as well look on the Sun, as a
carnal mind look for the coming of our Lord. Now this spiritual eye, or
sanctified mind, which is so essential to our looking for the coming of our
Lord, comprehends several Divine Qualities, or dispositions.

(1.) It must be an Evangelic fiducial eye; not merely rational, or legal. To
look for the coming of our Lord, merely with an eye of Reason, is but to put it
farther off from us: The coming of our Lord is an object altogether invisible
to an eye of reason: it is faith alone can make it visible and evident. So Heb.
11.1. Faith is said to be the Evidence of things not seen. i. e, The coming of
our Lord, and al those good things hoped for at his coming, are altogether
inevident and invisible to a carnal eye, yet visible and evident to an eye of
faith. Neither must it be a legal eye; whereby we expect the coming of our
Lord. A legal eye looks only on the black and terrible part of the day of God,
and therefore never hastens the soul toward it. A legal terrified eye flies
from the coming of our Lord, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17; but an Evangelic eye posteth
toward it. A legal eye breeds horrors and affrightments; but an evangelic eye
love to, and delight in this great day.

(2.) It must be a single eye. The coming of our Lord is an object very
glorious and remote; therefore if the eye of the mind, that looks toward it,
be not single, it can never reach that day. Our great Lord informs us, Mat.
6.22. Mat. 6.22, 23.
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body, shall be full of light. 23. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall
be full of darkness, etc. A single eye in nature implies a single object, and a
single medium: if either of these be double, the vision or sight is double, and
so evil. A single eye, as to the coming of Christ, implies a single regard to
that great day, as the supreme mesure of althings, both good and evil. Opposite
hereto is a double eye, here styled an evil eye; which implies an idolising
regard to, and admiration of the poor fading emty goods of this inferior world;
whereby our looking to the coming of our Lord is obstructed. As in nature, the
eyeing of a double object, specially if the objects are opposite, distracts the
sight: so here, he that stands gazing and poring on the heart-alluring Idols of
this lower world, is in no capacity to look for the coming of his Lord. Jam.
1.8.
So Jam. 1.8. A double-minded man is instable in all his ways. (...) here
signifies a man that has a double eye or mind, one for the World, and another
for Christ. Such an eye is always instable; because distracted and torn in
pieces, between two opposite Objects: Now and then he looks toward Christ,
specially when convictions of sin prevail; and then again toward the world,
when lust prevails. He that will look steadfastly toward the coming of his Lord
must have a single eye or regard thereto.

(3.) It must be a pure Eye, i. e. a mind free from prevalent mixtures of sin.
In nature, if the eye be affected with any vicious humor or quality, the sight
is obstructed or corrupted. As for instance in the Yellow Jaundice, the eye
being affected with a bilous yellow humor, althings seem yellow: so here, if
the eye of the mind be affected with any vicious carnal humor or beloved lust,
the coming of our Lord, and al other spiritual objects, will be but carnally
apprehended. For every thing is received according to the quality and
condition of the recipient: A carnal mind receives things spiritual carnally;
as a spiritual mind things carnal spiritually, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. Look as drunken
men, having their optic nerves, and thence their sight distorted and obstructed
by fumes and vapors, ascending from their stomachs, can see nothing distinctly;
just so is it with carnal minds distorted, and obstructed by the vapors of lust
from the heart, they cannot look distinctly to the coming of their Lord. It is
the pure incorrupted mind only that sees distinctly and evidently the coming of
his Lord. Mat. 5.8.
So Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. By the pure
in heart, we must understand the pure mind, which alone can contemplate God and
Christ in his second coming. Hence the eyes of the Church are compared, Cant.
7.4.
Cant. 7.4. To the Fishpools in Heshbon; which denotes the purity of her mind:
For the Fishpools in Heshbon, as the learned observe, were famous for their
purity, being Crystalline, without mixture of mud, or terrene matter: such must
the purity of our minds be, in order to the contemplation of the coming of our
Lord. The more pure the eye is, the more clear and distinct is the sight: A
pure eye sees more things and more of every thing, than a vitiated eye does.
Such must be the purity of the mind, that will look for the coming of our Lord.
Not but that the purest mind on this side Heaven has some mixture of sin in it:
only, if sin do not incorporate with the spirit of the mind; and if it be not
prevalent, the mind may, in evangelic estimation, be accounted pure. As melted
gold is estimed pure, albeit some dross adhere to it, if it incorporate not
with the gold: or boiled liquors are reputed pure, albeit some scum swim on the
top: so the mind may be judged pure, albeit some scum or dross of lust swim
thereon, if it do not, in a prevalent degree, incorporate with the spirit of
the mind, its supreme part.

(4.) It must be a sound, strong, firm eye, not weak and feeble. Bright and
dazzling objects, also such as are very remote, require a sound and strong eye
to behold them: a weak feeble eye is not fit to behold the Sun, or things
greatly distant. Now the coming of our Lord is a mighty glorious dazzling
object; also, very remote and distant from sense and reason: how is it possible
then that any should look toward it, without a strong sound mind, and firm
eye of faith? Prove. 2.7. Prove. 3.21. Prove. 8.14.
Hence Solomon makes frequent mention of sound wisdom: so Prove. 2.7. and 3.21.
and 8.14. whereby he understands solid, substantial saving knowledge, such as
contemplates things not only in notions, but in their proper esences. For so
Esseatia, ratio, sapientia, simper permane^s a (...) ens, res, aliquid.
Schind^. 2 Timothy 1.7.
(...) properly signifies. So Prove. 14.30. a sound heart, (or sound mind) is the
life of the flesh. Again 2 Timothy 1.7. But God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. Where we have a spirit of
power, and of a sound mind joined together, and both opposed to a spirit of
fear; which is very impotent, and feeble: for both legal and carnal fear
dispirit the mind; but divine light and Grace corroborate and fortify the
mind, so that it becomes sound, strong and vigorous, every way fit to look for
the coming of its Lord. But on the contrary an unsanctified mind is weak, yea
blind, and therefore cannot see the coming of the day of God. So 2 Pet. 1.9. 2
Pet. 1.9.
But he that lacks these things [ i. e. graces before specified] is blind and
cannot see afar off. (...) are defined by Aristotle, Those who see things next
them, but not such as are afar off. Thence it is derived (...); because such
always wink with their eyes. Carnal minds wink and shut their eyes against the
coming of the day of God: Their eyes are so enfeebled and weakened by sin, that
they cannot bear the glory of that day: Like Owls or bats, they love darkness
more than the light of that great day, Joh. 3.19.20.

(5.) It must be a meek humble eye. A proud loftly eye, is no way fit to look
for the second coming of our Lord. Yea, there is nothing more hated, and
opposed by a proud mind, than the coming of the day of God. so Psalm. 10.4.
Psalm. 10.4.
The wicked through the pride of his countenance [ i. e. of his mind manifested
in his countenance] will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts: or,
al his thoughts are, that there is no God. Oh! how full of Atheism is the proud
mind? What a world of contradictions and prejudices does in entertain against
the coming of its Lord? You have an excellent character of a mind aptly
disposed to look for the day of our Lord, Psalm. 131.1, 2.
in David, Psalm. 131.1, 2. Lord, mine heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes
loftly, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high
for me. Surely I have behaved my self as a Child that is weaned, etc. An
haughty lofty mind exercises it self in matters too high; and therefore cannot
stoop to Divine revelations, touching the coming of our Lord. It is the weaned,
meek, humble mind that looks for the coming of his Lord. This is well expressed,
Jam. 3.13. by meekness of wisdom, which is opposed to the proud curiosity of
carnal reason.

(6) It must be a sublime raised eye; or a mind some way proportionable to the
glory and excellence of its object. There is a vast distance between a proud,
and a sublime mind: usually none more base and sordid, than proud spirits: and
none more sublime and great, than humble and meek minds. He that lies lowest in
an humble self-abasing sense of his own ignorance, and nothingnesse, has ever
the highest thoughts of God, and the second coming of his Lord. This we find
exemplified in David, Psalm. 139.17, 18. How precious also are thy thoughts unto
me: how great is the sum of them? etc. Oh! what low and mean thoughts had David
of himself; But what sublime, raised, noble, and great thoughts had he of God?
But more of this in what follows.

(7.) It must be a vigilant watchful eye. For the coming of our Lord is, as
that of a thief in the night, and therefore the mind must always be in a
vigilant watchful frame: A slumbering sleepy secure mind scarce ever dreams of
the coming of his Lord. This vigilant watchful frame is the great thing that
our Lord commends to us, as a main disposition for the expectation of his
coming. So Luke 12.39. And this know, that if the good man of the house had
known, what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, etc. 40. Be ye
therefore ready also: for the son of man comes at an hour, when ye think not.
The like Luke 21.36. Watch ye, etc. And this is the great blame of the wise, as
well as the foolish Virgins, that their Lord surpriseth them in a slumbering
fit, Mat. 25.5. While the Bridegroom tarried they al slumbered and slept. This
I take to refer to the professors of these last times. Whence Paul also, in
imitation of his Lord, tells us 1 These. 5.2. That the day of the Lord so comes
as a thief in the night. Whence he exhorts al, v. 6. Therefore let us not
sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober. By which it is apparent,
that a vigilant watchful mind is an essential, requisite for such, as will
expect the coming of their Lord.

(8.) It must be an experimental feeling eye. The eye is the most sensible
part, because most full of animal spirits: The least dust in the eye, what a
dolorous sense does it often work? so it is with the eye of the mind, if it be
rightly disposed, it has the most acute lively sense. This eye of the soul, as
it regards morals, Divines usually style Conscience; which has the most
intimate tender feeling sense, if rightly qualified. There is nothing more
sensible than life: now saving knowledge, when it informs Conscience, gives a
light of life, Joh. 8.12. i. e. a quick feeling Light, which can penetrate, and
discern things most spiritual and remote. In Naturals, our best knowledge is
that which follows sense and experience: so in spirituals, the most familiar,
pleasant, deep, affectionate working knowledge is that which arises from an
experimental feeling Conscience. This is well expressed by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.35.
Deuteronomy. 4.34, 35.
Thou have been made see to know, that the Lord he is God, there is none else
besides him. See to know, i. e. as v. 34. by tentations, by signs, by wonders,
etc. God has given thee an experimental sense and knowledge, that the Lord alone
is God. Tentations and trials are the Schole of Christ; where Christians gain a
feeling knowledge of Christ: yea more in a day, than by Books in many years.
Thus Rivet, under dying torments: I have, says he, learned more Divinity in
ten days, that thou have visited me, than in fivety years before. Thou have
made me to go home into my self: I was not before but in the World. I am now in
the Schole of my God, and he instructs in another manner, than al those
Doctors. Thus also Mr. John Row Senior, said: He never had any chastisement,
but the Lord had shown him some miscarriage by it. Afflicted Christians have
the most experimental knowledge of God, and their own hearts: and a little
knowledge gained by an experimental feeling Conscience, O! What wonders will it
do? None have more clear and raised expectations of Christ's coming than such,
whose Consciences have any feeling experimental sense of that day, and what
relates to it. For Conscience has Ressentiments or jugements of things,
according to the sense it is impressed withal. Hence the Apostle prays for the
Philippians, Chapter 1. v. 9. Phil. 1.9, 10.
That they might abound in all jugement, (...), sense, i. e. inward feeling
experience: and he gives the reason, v. 10. That ye may approve things that are
excellent, i. e. that ye may have so much Divine subtilitie and sagacitie, as
to discern the coming of your Lord; and thence to approve those most excellent
things, which shall be then reveled. Heb. 5.14.
The like Heb. 5.14. Senses exercised to discern both good and evil. An
illightened sanctified Conscience is made up of spiritual senses, which being
exercised, clearly discern the evil of sin, and sensual good; as also the good
of sanctified evils, and those good things hoped for, at the coming of our
Lord. Spiritual sense and experience, of those objects we think on, does much
sweeten our thoughts, and make them delightsome. Certain it is, that nothing
more conduces to our looking for the coming of our Lord, than such a
sanctified Conscience, invested with spiritual senses, to diseerne between good
and evil. But, alas! how far short are many professors, of such a tender,
quick, feeling Conscience? and is not this the main cause, that they so seldom
look for the coming of their Lord? oh! what an Heaven upon Earth, is an
experimental feeling Conscience?

(9.) It must be a warm heart-affecting eye. We al know, that the eye, if
deeply impressed with any object, affects the heart. So Lam. 3.5. Mine eye
affects mine heart. Sight is the most affective sense: no sense ru^ with more
vigor, force and speed into the Affections, than sight does, whether it be of
good or evil. Moses speaks of some, Deuteronomy. 28.34. who should be mad for the
sight of their eyes. As evil, so good things, that strike on the eye sink very
deep into the Affections. Such must the sanctified eye be, that looks for the
coming of our Lord. Indeed al Sacred Science is affective: if our notions and
contemplations of things spiritual affect not our hearts; they are nothing
worth. As corporal vision is the door to natural love; so spiritual vision to
supernatural. If our looking for the coming of our Lord affect not our hearts,
it does nothing. A Christians sanctified knowledge is warm: every notion sends
forth a ^ivine spark into the Affections: look what he spiritually knows he
affects, if good. If we will contemplate the coming of our Lord, ^he eye of our
mind must be amorous and affectionate: Such as may inflame love, quicken
desires, strengthen hopes, highten Joys, fire ^ele and Indignation against sin:
A barren contemplation in things spiritual implies a contradiction. The
spiritual sight of Christ (...) ever affective: If our speculation pass not
unto affection it is not right. Look as those ^isciples, Luke 24.32. by
conversing with ^^eir Lord felt a Divine fire burning in their ^earts; so in
like manner the eye, that looks or the coming of his Lord, is ever attended
with a burning heat, or affectionate regard to ^^at great day.

(10.) Lastly, It must be a vigorous Active Eye. The eye is the most spriteful
vigorous part in man's body; because most full of animal spirits: So in the new
Creature, nothing is more spriteful and active than the spiritual eye of
Conscience. The best mesure of our knowledge is not so much the Quantity, as
the Quality, and Activitie of it. As in nature, the lesser the eye, if
spriteful and vigorous, the farther, and more clearly it sees: Thence the eye
of a Sparrow, or Hawk sees farther, and more distinctly, than the eye of an
Ox: because the later, though greater, yet it is more dull, by reason of the
diffusion of the animal spirits: whereas in the eye of a Sparrow, the spirits
being more contracted, the sight is more spriteful, and active. This holds true
in a great proportion here: Many sincere Believers, who have less knowledge for
quantity, often have more distinct and clean sights of the coming of their Lord,
and things spiritual, than other professors, who have a more bulky knowledge:
and why? because the former have a more spriteful vigorous eye (...) faith;
which is full of Divine spirits; whereas the later, albeit they may have a
bigger eye, yet it is more dull and unactive. Abraham had but a little eye, if
we regard the quantity of his knowledge; yet he saw farther, and more
distinctly, than the highest notional professors now adays, which have only
commun knowledge: and why? because he had a spriteful vigorous eye of faith. So
John 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoice^ to see my day, etc. It is the active
working eye of faith, that alone can look for the coming of our Lord. The eye
that sincerely looks for the coming of Christ, will work the heart toward that
day. In Christianity we know no more than we do: Working effectual thoughts
are ever best: An idle, lazy, faint-hearted expectation of the coming of our
Lord is the fruit of cursed formalitie; and has undone millions of souls. So
much for the spiritual eye, whereby the soul looks for the coming of the day of
God.

SECT. 2. The coming of the Day of God considered in it self, its Adjuncts, and
Consequents.
2. WE proceed to the Object, The coming of the day of God. Which we may
consider, (1.) In it self. (2.) In its Adjuncts; (3.) In its Consequents.

1. If we consider the coming of the day of God in it self, then our looking
for it implies two respects.

(1.) A spiritual, particular, fixed Regard to this day, in all its Grandeur and
Glory. No man looks for the coming of the day of God, as he ought, but he that
has a spiritual eye intent on the Splendour and Glory of that great day. The
first coming of our Lord was in the form of a Servant, in a mean abased
manner, without that pomp and state, which was due to his glorious person: Ay,
but his second coming shall be in another-gets manner, such as becomes the Lord
of Glory. So Mat. 16.27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his
father, with his Angels. The like Mat. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in
his Glory, and all the Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne, of
his Glory. So Paul 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpe of God. O
What a glorious Appearance will this be? how will the whole World in a moment ring
with this shout? What a dazzling ravishing luster will shine from Christ, and al
his retinue? Hence to look for the coming of the day of God, is to have a
constant, great regard to that Glory and Majesty, which will attend this
appearance of Christ. Thus Paul, Tit. 2.13. Looking for that blessed hope, and
the Glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. If we
look not for the coming of the day of God, as the glorious appearing of the
great God, we look not for it as we ought. The several particulars of this
glorious appearance will come under consideration in our last Question. In the
general, The second coming of Christ will be the most glorious object that ever
eye beheld; and a spiritual believing eye, fixed on the coming of the day of
God as most glorious, sees a glory in all things that refer to that day: a
glory in Grace; a glory in Ordinances; a glory in duties; a glory in
sufferings; a glory in promises; a glory in Saints, etc. Oh! What a glory
does that great day, and the forethoughts of it, infuse into althings that
belong to Christ? And, on the contrary, how does the spiritual sight of this
glorious day darken all the Glory and beauty of this lower world? What a
fading Sunburned flour are althings below, to a believing soul, that has his
eye of faith fixed on this great and glorious day?

(2.) To look for the coming of the day of God implies, a spiritual constant
regard to it, as the mesure of al Good and Evil; to look on nothing as real
happiness or misery, but what will be such at the coming of our Lord. He that
looks for that great day, will look on nothing here below as great. He that
looks up for the coming of the day of God, will look down on althings of time,
as emtie, poor, and fading. None looks for the coming of the day of God as he
ought, but he that mesures althings by it; he who desires creature comforts,
not for enjoyment, but for use; and when he has them does use them aright, not
as fuel for his lust; but as preparatives, to fit him for the day of God. This
is the substance of Paul's exhortation, 1 Cor. 7.29, 31.
1 Cor. 7.29. But this I say, brethren, the time is short, i. e. The coming of
the day of God is very near: our Lord stands at the door: what does he collect
thence? It remains, that both they that have Wives, be as though they had
none, i. e. They must study, and endeavor moderation in the use of them, and
contentation in the loss of them: whiles they have them they must use them as
it becomes Christians, and keep their hearts in an habitual readiness to part
with them, when God calls them to it. This he inculcates; and adds the reason,
(...) idem est quod (...), nisi quod videtur before quiddam significare scil.
v. 31. And they that use this world, as not abusing it: The Original (...),
abusing, is of the same origination with (...), that use; only the former
signifies somewhat more, and therefore may be properly rendered overusing. Most
men, in using the World, do overuse, and so abuse it. Now the World is
overused, (1.) When men are anxiously careful in the getting or keeping of it.
Thence he adds, v. 32. But I would have you without carfulness, i. e.
anxious distracting care. (2.) Men overuse the World, when they consume and
lavish it on their Lusts. So the Original to abuse, sometimes signifies to
consume in using. (3.) When men do not exercise some grace in the use of what
they have, they overuse it. But (4.) Men chiefly overuse or abuse the World,
when they do not use it in subservience and subordination to the other World,
i. e. When men do not make the coming of the day of God the mesure of their
use. Al men overuse the world, when they do not mesure their use of it, by the
coming of their Lord. This seems included in the following reason, v. 31. For
the fashion of this world passes away. Locutio desumta est a Theatro. Dicitur
(...) ubi scena invertitur aliamque plane ostendit faciem. Grot.
The fashion (...) The Scheme, Scene, Figure, Apparition, Pageant, or Show of
this world. The notion is borrowed from the Theater or Stage; whereon men acted
their parts, and then the Scene was changed, another face appeared. So much
also, (...), passes away, imports, namely the change of a Scene. As if the
Apostle had said: Alas! what is this world, but a Theater or Pageant? men here
act their parts awhile; but how soon are they gone off this Stage? yea, will not
our Lord ere long come and involve this great Theater in flames? what will then
become of this Pageant which men now so much gaze on, and idolize? Should not
this engage us as to be very careful, that we do not overuse, or abuse the
things of this World? Ought we not al to use them so, as we may find comfort
therein at the coming of the day of God? Should not this approach of our Lord
be the mesure of al our thoughts, Inclinations, Affections, care, and use of
this world? Certainly, he that looks for the coming of his Lord, will not
overuse this world, but use it in subservience, to that great day. Thus Paul, 1
Cor. 9.25, 27.
in what follows, 1 Cor. 9.25. And every man that striveth for masterie, is
temperate in althings. This discourse is borrowed from their Olympic games;
wherein those who combated, or wrestled were very temperate in their diet;
using al in subservience to their game: so the word Temperate, signifies, (...)
to have althings in our power. He that will combat or run the race for Heaven
must have power over althings beneath: He must first get victory over himself,
and then he will, with ease, get victory over al his adversaries. He that is
under the power of his own lusts, will never get power over tentations, or
difficulties. But what was it that made Paul thus temperate in althings? That
he adds: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown; but we an
incorruptible. As if he had said: Alas! in all those famous Olympic games, what
was the reward of al their temperance, and Agonies, but (...), a leafy fading
crown? But we have a substantial, incorruptible crown in our eye; which we
expect at the coming of our Lord. Thence he adds: v. 27. But I keep under my
body, and bring in into subjection. These words seem borrowed from the Grecian
(...), or Wrestlers, who having vanquished their Adversary, led him captive in
triumph: so the first word (...) signifies to beat black and blew; and then
(...) to lead captive, with triumph. The sense is: I combat daily with my
body, to bring it into subjection, that so I might meet my Lord with triumph,
and comfort. Such was Paul's regard to the coming of the day of God: He
prepared his body, and mind, by all manner of Christian exercices: he made the
coming of his Lord the mesure of al inferior goods: he looked on al he had as
given by Christ, and so was ready to give back al to Christ, when he called for
it: what he had he improved for Christ, and what he had not he contentedly
wanted: He knew how to abound in his wants, and how to want in his abundance,
Phil. 4.12. He could be diligent in the use of earthly comforts, and yet dead
to them: He was better pleased in his mean condition, than worldlings are in
the highest: He pursued after a world to come, and that made him contemn the
present: His eye was fixed on the coming of his Lord, and that took him off
from admiring any good things of time. Thus Paul; and so must we make the
coming of the day of God, the mesure of althings. So much for the coming of the
day of God considered in itself.

2. If we consider the coming of the day of God in its Adjuncts, then to look
for it implies, (1.) To look on it as near. Things remote affect but little:
the nearer an object, is, if it greatly concerns us, the more it affects. Now
there is a twofold nearness, under which we are to look for the coming of the
day of God: First the nearness of its approach to us: and Secondly, the
nearness of our approach to it. (1.) We are to look for the coming of the day
of God in the nearness of its Approach to us. This has ever been the great sin
of the secure world, that men look on the coming of the day of God as a thing
remote. Yea, our Apostle Peter foretold, that this would be the great sin of
these last days: so in some few verses before our Text, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. knowing
this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts; and saying, where is the promise of his coming? etc. And this
prodigious piece of Atheism, which Peter presageth would befall these last
days, seems to have given the original occasion of the following discourse,
touching the second coming of our Lord: Yea, and that which is yet more
remarquable is this, that the nearer the day approaches, the more remote secure
sinners, by their unbelief, make it to be. Thence Peter dwells much on this
argument, that the day of Christ's coming is near. So v. 9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise. Again v. 11. Seeing al these things shall be
[Greek. are] dissolved, etc. He speaks in the present tense, to show the
nearness of this day. So that to look for the coming of the day of God, is to
look on it as near to us. Thus Paul, Phil. 4.5. The Lord is at hand. And Hebr.
10.37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. The like Jam. 5.9. Behold the Judge stands at the door. And if those
primitive Saints looked on the coming of the day of God as near, how much
nearer then ought we to look on it? Oh! with what swift wings does it post
toward us? How soon will winged time rush hinto Eternity? The last words that
ever Christ spoke, or will speak to the end of the world, in a way of Gospel
Administration, were to assure us that he would come quickly, Rev. 22.20. He
which testifies these things, says, surely, I come quickly, Amen. This Amen
is a seal for ratification, and confirmation, to assure us, that our Lord will
quickly come. Lo! do not the Heavens begin to open, and make way for the coming
of the Lord of Glory? May we not, by a spiritual eye of faith, see him coming
in the clouds? May not a gracious heart hear the last Trumpe ringing in its
ears? Is not that fire already kindled, which ere long will turn the whole
globe of Heaven and Earth into flames? Is not the Judge of quick and dead at
the door? And ought we not then to look on the coming of the day of God as near?

(2) We are to look on the coming of the day of God as near, in regard of our
approach to it, by Death. Though the coming of this day should be never so
remote, in regard of the last jugement, yet it is most certain, that our
approach to it by death is most near. Alas! who knows how soon any of us may
behold our particular day of jugement staring us in the face? Do we not al
begin to die, as soon as we begin to live? Is not death as essential to us as
life? What is our present life but a coming into, and going out of this world?
What is this present earthly Tabernacle we live in, but our Inn, our Hospital,
our Leper-house? How soon will a little time eat us out of our possession? Does
it not then nearly concern us to look daily for death? And is not this a main
part of our looking for the coming of the day of God? This was Paul's frame,
Phil. 1.23. Phil. 1.23.
For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. To depart, (...) contains various emphatic notions
proper to the sense. It signifies (1.) To loosen or relinquish our chains, as
prisoners. (2.) To depart from our Inn, to our home. (3.) To weigh anchor, and
set sail. (4.) To loosen the cords of our Tents as Soldiers. (5.) To be
resolved into our first elements, as bodies corrupted. So that Paul's longing
desire was to depart from his body, as his prison, his Inn, his Tent, etc.
And why? That he might be with Christ. This made him so willing to be
dissolved, that so he might be taken into a more intimate union with his Lord,
for whose coming he so much looked. He looked on the dissolution of his body
to be but the conjunction of his soul with Christ: Death was in his eye but a
door to life: He knew death would take nothing from him but his prison, his
chain, his clog, his shame, his sting, his poison, his burden, his misery.
This made him to look for the day of death, as the day of his espousals and
coronation. So that it is evident, to look for the coming of the day of God
implies our looking for death, which is a great approach thereto. And may we
not take up this as a general observation, that none have more lively
expectations of the coming of their Lord, than those who have most fresh and
affectionate expectations of death? And on the contrary, do not they always
put far from them the coming of the day of God, who put far from them thoughts
of death? such an essential and intimate connection is there between these two.
Ah! think how soon your breath will grow cold, your eye strings break, your soul
stand trembling at the doors of your lips, and take flight at the windows of
your eyes; and then you cannot but look for the coming of your Lord. Does not
the frailty of life, specially in these days, engage us to look for death? And
are any more fit to live, than those who think most of and prepare for dying?
Should we not whiles on earth so live, as always dying; that so we may, when
death comes, live always with our Lord? Is not life and death the same thing
to him, that daily lives in the expectation of, and preparation for death? Oh!
then why should we not ever live in the expectation of death, which will join
our soul, and Christ together?

(2.) Another Adjunct of the coming of the day of God is its Unexpectedness.
This is fully expressed, 2 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night. We al know the coming of a thief is unexpected: yea the
nearer he is, the less usually he is expected. Such will be the coming of our
Lord, as he himself informs us, Luke 12.39, 40. If the good man of the house
had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched. Be ye
therefore ready also: For the Son of man comes at an hour, when ye think not.
We find this exemplified in the parable of the Virgins, Mat. 25.6. And at
midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes. The Bridegrooms
coming at midnight, argues that our Lords coming shall be when least expected:
For men at midnight are usually in their deepest sleep. So then, to look for
the coming of the day of God, is to look on it as that, which will come when
least expected. Oh! what a surprise will it be to slumbering virgins, to hear
that midnight cry, behold the bridegroom comes? Yea, how many wise Virgins
will be found slumbering, and so not expecting this great day? Is it not
therefore the duty of al, to look for the coming of the day of God, as that of
a chief in the night, who comes when least expected.

3. We may consider the coming of the day of God in its Consequents; which are
various: but, at present, we shall mention only two, namely the final Jugement,
and Eternity: and in this regard;

(1.) To look for the coming of the day of God, implies a looking for the last
Jugement. Oh! what a great day will that be, when sin shall no longer go masqued,
nor Godliness disgraced: How will Grace then shine forth in its own native
glory, and beauty? How will all the fuel, with which men now feed their lusts,
be then turned into fuel for Hel-fire, and stings of Conscience? With what an
insatiable hunger and thirst, will the sensual glutton and drunkard be then
tormented? What a vexatious fire will burn both body and soul of the
lascivious unclean wretch? Will not every lust then have its proper torment?
shall not the secure Conscience then be filled with ^morses and stings? How will
the avarici^s greedy worldling then perish with want? What confusion and shame
will surprise the ^^oud ambi^ious man? Will not then the foolish Christian appear
to be wiser, than the most ^afty politician? Shall not the poor believers ^^le
habit shine more, than the rich man's scar^^t and glittering robes? Will not the
contemt ^f this World be of more value, than all the ^reasures of it? Shall not
the tears of the pe^itent soul then bring more comfort, than al ^he mirth and
joy of this world? Will not an ^^oly life then give more satisfaction, than al
^he licentious humors of this life? O! what (...) glorious day will the day of
Jugement be? How will althings be set at Rights then? Shall ^ot every man's work
then be made manifest, ^^s 1 Cor. 3.13? Oh! what a glorious manifestation will
there then be made of all the hidden things of darkness, whether good or bad?
So 1 Cor. 4, 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of
God. Here the Apostle calls us off from our present uncharitable censures of
things secret, to a looking for the coming of the day of God, and that
righteous jugement which shall then be made, of the most hidden things. Hence it
is evident, that a great part of our looking for the coming of the day of God
consists in our looking for the day of Jugement, which will follow thereon.

(2.) To look for the coming of the day (...) God, implies a deep fixed regard
to Eterniti^^ as an essential consequent thereof. Eternit^^ indeed is a great
word; But, O! how mu^^ greater is the thing it self? How far sho^^ are al our
Expressions and Affections of Eternity? Had we right notions of that eterna^^
state, we should not think of it without a^^ ecstasy or rapture. But alas!
alas! Eterniti^^ is too big for our poor shallow apprehensions^ How soon are
our short capacities swallowe^ up, when we dive into this infinite Abyss an^
Ocean of Eternity? And yet without a regard to it, we neither think, nor
affect, no^ act any thing as we ought. Eternity gives form and spirit, both
to the life of Grace and Glory. We had better never be happy, than be happy
only for a time. If those glorified Saints in Heaven were not assured o^ an
Eternity to be happy in, their happiness for a time would render them the
more miserable in the end. Time renders althings little or nothing; but
Eternity althings great. Eternity sums up al time in formal Being, without
succession: If thou art one moment happy in Eternity, thou art for ever so.
Take away ten millions of years from Eternity, and you take away nothing:
Millions of years make not the least moment of Eternity. Cast but an eye on
Eternity, and all the goods and ils of time will appear to be pure nothings.
Alas! how little difference is there between the ils and goods of this life, if
we regard Eternity? Yea, will not the crosses and sorrows of this life, if
sanctified, appear to be great blessings; and unsanctified blessings great
curses, to one that has an eye of faith fixed on Eternity? He that looks with
a steady ^eye to Eternity, will count his losses in this life for Christ great
gains; his sorrows matter of ^oy; his reproaches, his glory; his miseries, his
blessings; yea, death it self his door to life. Surely they who have Eternity
in their eye, can see nothing in this world agreeable, or great. There is no
real happiness or misery, but what is Eternal. Hence all that look for the
coming of the day of God, must also look for Eternity. For, without regard
hereto, the coming of the day of God will signify but little. Al our thoughts,
Intentions, Inclinations, designs, Affections, and Actions run into Eternity,
and subsist there, as soon as they have a being: wherefore our main work is to
cast an eye of faith after them; and often to consider, what account we shall be
able to give of them at the coming of our Lord. Faith is great with Child of
Eternity: and the more we live by faith, in the expectation of Christ's coming,
the more we will live in the believing views of Eternity. Oh! how little will
althings of time seem to him, who has his eye fixed on things eternal. So 2
Cor. 4.18. while we look not at things that are seen; but at things that are
not seen: for the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are
not seen are eternal. A sight of things Eternal darkens all the glory of things
temporal. So much for the Object.

SECT. 3. The Gospel the Medium, through which we by faith, look for the coming
of the day of God. Also the several Acts of faith in looking for Christ's coming.
3. ANother requisite in natural Vision o^ Sight, is the medium, through which
we look. Now the Medium through which we look for the coming of the day of God
is the Gospel, and the Promises thereof. Such is the imperfection of our
present state, as that we cannot see things Divine but in a glass, and that
darkely, if compared with the intuitive Vision of Saints glorified. So 1 Cor.
13.12. But now we see through a glass darkely; but then face to face. The
Gospel is this Glass, which implies both imperfection and perfection. (1.)
Imperfection, if compared with the state of Heaven; Yet (2.) Perfection, if
compared with the knowledge of sense and reason. For the Gospel is a clear
Crystal Glass, which discovers to us Divine things more distinctly than Nature
or the Law can do. Evangelic promises, touching the coming of the day of God,
are spiritual prospective Glasses, through which a Believer, by faith, clearly
and distinctly beholds the coming of our Lord. Thus Abraham beheld the first
coming of the day of God, John 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day: and ^^e saw it, and was glad. How did Abra^am see the day of Christ?
Surely in and by ^he promise. Thus Gal. 3.8. Its said: The Gospel was Preached
unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall al Nations be blessed, i. e. in thy seed,
which is Christ, as it is interpreted, ^. 16. Oh! what a clear, distinct, real,
glorious sight had Abraham, through the glass of the promise, of the first
coming of our Lord? Just so, yea, much more, may believers, in these Evangelic
times, behold, by says, through the glass of the promise, the second coming
of the day of God. There are some prospective glasses, so artificially made, as
that you may see through them distinctly things very remote and obscure; as the
Spots in the Moon, etc. Such a prospective glass is the Gospel, and the
promises thereof: The coming of the day of God is very remote, as to sense and
reason, which are apt always to clamor, in the language of those Atheistic
scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.4. where is the promise of his coming? etc. ^ay, but now an
eye of faith, looking through the prospective glass of the promise, beholds
our Lord coming in the clouds, as really, evidently, and distinctly, as the
natural eye sees the Sun in the firmament. O! What ^ively glorious views might
we have of the coming of the Son of God, had we a lively active faith fixed on
those Evangelic promises, which represent the same? But, alas! here lies the
misery of many knowing professors, they contemplate the coming of the day of
God, only in the deceitful glass of their own false Imagination, and carnal
reason; and then, no wonder if they are strangers to it. Ah! how few, yea very
few, look for the coming of the day of God, as represented, and offered to an
eye of faith, in and by the promises? Certainly, if the promise be not the
mesure and medium of our sight, al our seeming faith is but real unbelief.
Nothing may fall within the compass of your expectations, but what falls within
the compass of the promise: If there be the least cast of your eye toward
the coming of the day of God, beside, or without the promise, it is but carnal
reason, and therefore attended with much confusion and darkness; yea, it will
end in greater unbelief and security. Be sure then, in all your lookings for
that great day, you keep your contemplations and expectations within the
compass of the promise.

4. The last thing required to make up natural Vision or sight, is the actual
reception of the Object into the eye. And herein the excellence of the sight,
above al other senses, discovers it self. For the eye can, with the least turn
or motion, in an instant fetch in the most remote objects, even the celestial
bodies. So quick and comprehensive is its reception. Now this, as spiritually
applied to our looking for the coming of the day of God, implies several acts
of the believing soul.

(1.) One great act of faith, in the actual reception of, or looking for the
coming of the day of God, is, to realise that great Day. The more real our
notions are, the more affective and effective they are. There is a vast
difference between the sight of the Sun in the Firmament; and the sight of it
in a picture: the former is real, the later not: So in like manner, the
difference is not less, between the beholding of Christ's second coming, as
held forth by notions only, and the real view of it by faith. It is the proper
work of faith, to give the soul real views of things; Faith is the greatest
realiser in the World: It can realise things most remote, as to sense and
reason: Things infinitely out of sight, in regard of time, and natural
existence, faith makes them present, and so gives a real view of them. Al real
sight implies an existence of the object in the eye, agreeable to the existence
it has in it self: So real knowledge denotes a real being of the object known,
in the mind of him that knows it. For nothing is really apprehended, unless
the real Idea or image of the thing it self be in the mind of him that
apprehends it. This is most true here, unless the coming of the day of God be
really existent in the eye of faith, we do not look for it. This indeed is one
of the greatest mysteries of faith, that it can realise things most remote,
even the coming of the day of God. Al reading, hearing, studying, meditation,
and discoursing will not discover to us the coming of our Lord, without faith
realise that day. The Schools give us a good distinction, between Abstract, and
Intuitive knowledge: Abstract knowledge is the contemplation of things in their
notions, pictures, or propositions only: but Intuitive knowledge is the
contemplation of things as they exist in themselves. Such an Intuitive, though
reflexe, sight does faith give us of the day of God, by realising of it to the
soul. Heb. 11.1.
So Heb. 11.1. Faith, is the substance of things hoped for. (...), The solid
basis, subsistence, essence, or realitie of things hoped for; which have no
actual existence or being of their own. Such is the realising power of faith;
and so efficacious is it, to make the coming of the day of God, which is the
main of those good things hoped for, really existent, and actually present in
the believing soul. O! What a miraculous efficace has faith, to make things
absent present; things hoped for actually existent? And does not a main part of
our looking for the coming of our Lord consist herein? could we but by faith
realise that great day, what lively, intuitive, heart-affecting views should we
have of it? how would our hearts be ravished in the prevision, or foresight of
it? What wonders of Grace and Godliness would it work in our hearts and
lives? But, ah! here lies the bane of our profession, we content our selves
with some notional speculations, and contemplations of that glorious day,
without that real intuitive view thereof; which faith gives. Read but Heb. 11.
and you will see how those great worthies by faith did realise things hoped for.
So v. 13. Heb. 11.13.
These al died in faith, not having received the promises; but having seen
them afar off: i. e. as Mariners, in a tempest at Sea, if they can, by a
prospective glass, discern their harbor afar off, how do they rejoice, and
make toward it? so faith, beholding through the optic glass of some promise,
good things promissed, it does realise the same, and rejoice therein. Thence it
follows: and were persuaded of them, i. e. they looked upon them as really
existent in the promise as if they had been in possession. Yea, he adds; and
embraced them: i. e. they, as it were, hugged them in their arms, and solaced
themselves in the embraces of them, just as a man does his intimate friend, who
has been long absent, in a remote Gountrie. Such a real view did faith give
them of those good things promissed, and hoped for. And O that we could by
faith thus realise the coming of our Lord! What lively glorious Ideas; what
ravishing views should we then have of that day?

(2.) The actual looking for the coming of the day of God implies an evident,
distinct, particular view of that day. This also is the work of faith, which
is not only the substance of things hoped for, but also the evidence of things
not seen, Heb. 11.1.
Heb. 11.1. (...), the meridian noonday light, which gives the most distinct,
evident, particular view of things: The Argument, or demonstration, which makes
the conclusion most distinctly evident. O! what a distinct evident view does
faith give of the day of God? Faith pierces through the objects it looks upon,
and so gives a distinct view of them. We find a great promise, Oculo ad oculum
videre, est cominus evidentissime videre.
Esa. 52.8. For they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Sion.
What is it, to see eye to eye? To see eye to eye, is to see most evidently and
distinctly. Such must be our looking for the coming of the day of God. Such an
evident distinct view had the believing Galatians of Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1.
Gal. 3.1. before whose eyes Christ has been evidently set forth, (...). (...)
prius depictus fucrat. Beza.
They had such evident, distinct, particular views of Christ crucified, as if
his passion had been acted, to the life, before their eyes. Whence it follows;
crucified among you. How was Christ crucified among them? Was he not crucifed
at Jerusalem, which was many hundred miles from Galatia? Yes; but yet Christ
crucified was so lively represented by Paul's Ministry, to their eye of faith,
as if he had been crucified among them. (...) pro (...), Hesych. (...): nam qui
est (...) ad summun usque pervadit. Stephanus.
Such distinct, evident, particular, believing views should we have of the
coming of our Lord. Such, Paul tells us, the Thessalonians had, 1 These. 5.2. For
you your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes, as a thief
in the night: perfectly, (...), exactly, accurately; as if the day of the Lord
had been drawn to the life in their hearts. The more distinct, accurate,
particular notice we have of Christ's second coming, the more we shall hasten
toward it, and the more efficacious Influence it will have on our hearts and
lives.

(3.) Actually to look for the coming of the day of God implies also, daily to
familiarise that day; to have familiar acquaintance, constant converse with it,
in our thoughts. None look for this great day, as they ought, but such as often
visit, and familiarly acquaint themselves with it, in their Meditations. This
was Paul's manner of conversation, as he himself assures us, Phil. 3.20.
Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven, From whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle, in the words precedent, speaks
of some, who minded nothing but earthly things: But, says he, for our part,
our conversation is in Heaven. (...), our manner of life, our commerce, our
state. The word in its primary notion signifies a State, or Republic, or City,
or Society of people, united together as one body; governed by the same Laws;
enjoying the same privileges; subject to the same Prince, or governors; and
having among them one and the same form of Government. But this word being
taken from (...), which answers to the Hebr. (...), and signifies to walk or
converse as Citizens, hence also it is used to signify a conversation, or
manner of life. We may take in both regards. (1.) Says Paul, our conversation
is in Heaven: i. e. Heaven is our City, our State: we are governed by its
laws; subject to its Prince, and under the enjoyment of its privileges. (2.)
Our Conversation is in Heaven, i. e. the current of our thoughts, Inclinations,
Affections, Actions, and Manner of life is in Heaven. And why so? that he
adds: from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: (...)
from whence, is referred by some to the whole matter; by others to conversation;
by others to Heaven: The difference is not material: The sense seems this: And
truly its no wonder that our conversation is in Heaven, seeing we thence expect
the coming of our Lord. Is he not our Savior, our life? and ought we not to
live where our life is? where should the member be, but where the Head is? Will
he not ere long come from Heaven? and should we not, by all manner of Heavenly
thoughts and Aspirations, go forth to meet him day by day? ought we not every
hour to send forth holy ejacultions to meet our Lord? Whatever you are about,
you ought to have the coming of your Lord before your eyes. Are you plodding,
and contriving about your worldly affairs? Why be sure you lose not the
thoughts of your Lords coming. Are you in a journey? let the thoughts of your
Lords coming be your companion. Let your first and last thoughts every day
converse with your coming Lord. Entertain your hearts frequently with such
sacred Soliloquies as these: Methinks, I hear the last trumpe ever sounding in
mine ears: Methinkes, I see my Lord Jesus coming in the clouds, with ten
thousands of his Angels. Thus we ought to familiarise the coming of the day of
God. And that more particularly, (1) By holy ejaculations? O! what frequent
ejaculations ought we to send forth, toward the coming of our Lord? One saving
glance toward this day brings life to the soul. But oh! what familiar converse
have they with this great day, who daily send forth multitudes of ejaculations
toward it? what an Heavenly conversation is this? (2.) We must familiarise the
coming of the day of God by fixed contemplation on it. There must be a dwelling
of the thoughts on that day, by stated and fixed meditation every day. The more
our thoughts dwell on this day at stated seasons, the more familiar it will be to
us.

(4.) Actually to look for the coming of the day of God implies further, daily
to wait for it, to stand on our watch tower, and thence always to expect it.
This we find often inculcated by our Lord, and his Apostles. Thus Luke 12.35. Let
your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. 36. And ye your selves
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding,
that when he comes and knocks they may open unto him immediately, etc. So
Luke 21.28. having mentioned in the precedent verses, the forerunners and
signs of his coming, he adds: and when these things begin to come to pass,
then look, and lift up your heads, for your Redemtion draws nigh. Albeit this
seems limited to some time immediately foregoing the coming of Christ, yet it
may, by a paritie of reason, be extended more generally, to our waiting for
Christ's coming at al times. So Romans 8.23. Paul makes it a propriety of Saints
to wait for their Adoption, namely at the coming of Christ. Yea, 1 These. 1.10.
Paul makes this one of the first frames they arrived unto, after conversion, To
wait for his Son from Heaven. Now this waiting for the coming of the day of God
implies, daily to revive and refresh our thoughts and expectations of that day:
not to give way to any short slumbers, much less to deep sleeps; but to be
always in exspectation of that great day. This is the great faut of the wise
Virgins, as well as the foolish, they are surprised with fits of slumber; which
are opposite to waiting for the coming of our Lord. Mat. 25.5. O! what a world
of such slumbering Virgins are there?

(5.) Actually to look for the coming of the day of God imports farther, to get
a Prepossession of that day, and those good things hoped for, therein to be
enjoyed. The eye, by looking on the Sun, gets a possession of it: yea, there
are certain Optic Glasses, which give the eye the real Image and possession of
Objects very remote. So, by looking on the second coming of Christ, and those
good things hoped ^or, in that day, by an eye of faith, through ^he Optic
glass of the promise, we come ^o possess the same. So Mat. 5.8. Blessed are
the pure in heart; for they shall see God, ^. e. possess and enjoy God. Thus,
by looking on the coming of Christ, you possess him. This spiritual vision of
faith gives possession and Fruition. Yea, in natural contemplation, the mind,
by gazing on its object, gets the possession of it: and so the mind by
understanding becomes althings. This holds much more true in spirituals; such,
as by faith gaze much on the second coming of the day of God, thereby really
possess the same. Look on Christ by faith and you possess him.

(6.) Actually to look for the second coming of our Lord, implies thus much
also, to get the soul transformed into the image of Christ: Al saving views of
Christ, whether as past or to come, do transform the heart into the image of
Christ. Whiles, by the eye of faith, we look on Christ, in his second glorious
coming, a little image of Christ is stamped on faiths eye. So 2 Cor. 3.18. As
take a looking-glass, and expose it opposite to the Sun, and it will have an
Image of the Sun stamped on it; yea, it will shine, in imitation of the Sun: So,
such as contemplate the face of Christ, in his glorious appearance, will have a
little image of Christ stamped on the face of their souls. This was typified by
the transformation of Moses's face, when he had seen God. Look on Christ by
faith, and live in, and to Christ: look on Christ, and love Christ: look on
Christ and be humble, as Christ was: look on Christ, and be crucified to the
World, as Christ was: Look on Christ, and be patient as he was: Look on Christ,
and thou will, in thy mesure, shine with Grace, as Christ shined Such a
miraculous influence has our looking on Christ's second coming by faith, to
transform the heart and life into the image of Christ. So much for the first
branch of the Question? What it is to look for the coming of the day of God?

SECT. 4. What it is to hasten to the coming of the day of God?
IN the next place, we are to examine, What it is to hasten to the coming of
the day of God? The Object here is the same as in the former Inquiry, and
therefore needs not any further consideration. the only thing we are to
consider here is the various Acts of the soul, in hastening unto the coming of
the day of God: In the general, there seems to be this difference between our
Looking for, and Hastening unto the coming of the day of God: In the former,
the soul, by apprehending or contemplating the coming of Christ, receives in a
lively Idea, or Image thereof: In this later, the soul, by Will and Affections,
goes forth to meet its approaching Lord. This arises from the natural
difference between the souls seeing, or knowing, and willing things: for in
seeing or knowing the object is by its Idea, or Image received into the soul:
but in willing and affecting things the souls goes forth to meet, and adhere to
its object. So that this hastening to the coming of the day of God consists in
the Egresse, or going forth of the soul, by Will, Affections, and al spiritual
exercices of Grace, to meet our approaching Lord.

1. To hasten to the coming of the day of God implies a firm, inviolable,
vehement Bent of Will toward that Day. So much as there is of a bended will
toward the coming of our Lord, so much does the soul hasten thereto. O! how
tenacious and invincible should the will be, in adhering to the coming of the
day of God? This seems included in that exhortation of Barnabas, Act. 11.23.
Act. 11.23. where he exhorts them, with purpose of heart, to cleave unto the
Lord. (...), with a fixed, determined, resolute Bent of will, to adhere to the
Lord, both in his present dispensations, and approaching glorious appearance. The
force and efficace of this bended will consists in the deliberate Intention, or
Inclination thereof, toward that great day: when the soul does, with a
plenitude, or fullness of Will, adhere to our approaching Lord. Now this strong
bent of will procedes from the spirit of Sanctification, and Adopption, who
inspires and infuseth into the will a Divine Love; which is as a pondus, or
weight to incline it toward the coming of the day of God. Hence we find this
hastening to the day of God expressed by Paul, by love thereto, 2 Timothy 4.8.
where he says, 2 Timothy 4.8.
There is laid u^ a Crown of Righteousness for all them that love his
appearing. The soul lives where it Loves. Love has a violent Impetus, or sweet
violence, whereby it binds the will to the object beloved. Love the day of
God, and you hasten to it, yea live in it. So Can. 8.6. Set me as a seal on
thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm; for love is strong as death -- it has
a most vehement flame, etc. By love the heart ascends up, as in a flame, to
meet our Lord. Love is a swift post, that carries the heart to its beloved: It
is never satisfied, 'til it arrives to union, and fruition of what it loves.
Absence fires love, and makes it burn with a vehement flame toward its
approaching Lord. Yea, it gathers force from obstructions, and difficulties.
Love burning in the Intention of the will gives swift feet, yea wings to the
soul, to fly toward the coming of the day of God. A soul inspired with love
to our approaching Lord, is not its own, but loses it self in the bosom of its
Lord; There it lives, and breathes, and moves day by day. Love is most
artificial, and puissant to hasten the soul toward the day of God: it commands
all the Passions and Actions of the soul to tend, and move this way: Yea, it
makes the most difficult unpleasant way easy and pleasant. Alas! do but think
what love will do, to meet and enjoy an absent friend: and will it not do much
more to meet and enjoy its absent Lord? Love grows not faint or weary in its
motion, toward our coming Lord. Yea, it multiplies by acting, and that from
the similitude there is between the lover, and beloved. Hence there is no
Grace, that has such a strong inclination to its act and object as this Divine
Love. Indeed, its never well pleased longer than it is hastening to its beloved:
It immediately delivers up the heart to its approaching Lord, and so adheres to
him by an unio^ of spirit: It is impatient til it come to take hold of its
Lord: it melts and dissolves the heart into him. Such is the force of Love, in
hastening to the coming of the day o^ God.

2. The soul hastens to the coming of the day of God, by longing desires after
it. Desires are the firstborne of Love, and the feet of the soul, whereby it
moves toward its beloved. He that is possessed with desires after the coming of
Christ, cannot but hasten toward that great day: For desire is an hungry
greedy Affection, which thinks it has never enough of what it desires. In
every lover there is a desire of union with its beloved: and therefore the
absence of Christ causes the soul to breath forth love-sighs after his second
coming. Thus the Spouse Cant. 8.14. Cant. 8.14.
Make haste [or flee away] my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young
heart, upon the mountains of Spices. Fly my beloved: As the Spouse began with
desires of Christ's first coming, Cant. 1.2. to kiss her by the Preaching of
his Gospel; so she ends this her Song, with earnest desires of his second
coming, to put an end to al her miseries. Thence it follows: And be thou like
to a Roe: or, liken thy self to a Roe, [i. e. be swift and make haste to fly
away] or, to a young heart on the mountains of Spices. Some conceive, that the
Hearts, which sed on those mountains of Spices, had a very aromatic, fragrant
smell; and thence the Spouse here ressembles her beloved to these, thereby to
show, how much her heart was ravished with the sweet odors of his Grace; and
how much she longed for his second coming. Thus the same Spouse or Church, Rev.
22.17. And the spirit and the bride say come, and let him that hears say
come: and v. 20. even so come, Lord Jesus. As if she had said: O time post
away, and hasten the coming of my Lord: come Lord, come; for Love is tormented
with delays. Thus ardent desires after the coming of our Lord do much hasten
the soul toward that day. A believers continual cry should be: Lord come down
to me or take me up to thee: His desires after the coming of his Lord should
never cease, 'til he be master of what he desires. This was the language of
Paul's groans, 2 Cor. 5.2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven. Paul's groans after his
dissolution were in order to the conjunction of his soul with Christ: and
hereby he hastened to the coming of his Lord.

3. The soul hastens to the coming of the day of God, by lively Hopes of that
day. Hope is the neck stretched forth, or head lifted up, whereby the soul
expects, with confidence, its approaching Lord. Hope, as the good Spies Caleb
and Joshua, prophesies good things, in the greatest difficulties. A fiducial
hope stands on sure ground, even the word and fidelity of God, and therefore
it will not be soon shaken, though the pillars of Heaven and Earth are shaken.
Yea, when the times are worst hope often expects the best, even the coming of our
Lord. Luke 21.28.
Thus Luke 21.28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up,
and lift up your heads; for your Redemtion draws nigh. These things, i. e.
distress of Nations, and the powers of Heaven being shaken, with other
terrible forerunners of the Son of God, v. 25, 26, 27. Then look up, Ut solent
qui de loco superiori libertatem expectant. Grot.
and lift up your heads; These are expressions of hope. (...), look up, as
they, who from some eminent place confidently expect liberty and deliverance.
The more we hope for Redemtion, at the coming of our Lord, the more our souls
will hasten toward that day: If our hopes flagge our pace will flagge. The
longer the thread of our hope is, the swifter will our motion be, toward the
coming of the day of God. Yea, strong and lively hopes make us partakers of
Christ, and all the good things that attend his second coming: Heb. 3.14.
So Heb. 3.14. For we are partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence steadfast, unto the end. Principium quo s^stentamur.
(...), The principle, or foundation, by which we are supported. Wel-grounded
hopes give a subsistence to the good things hoped for: and thence we find the
same word used to express faith by, Heb. 11.1. as it is the subsistence of
things hoped for. Now the good things hoped for being made subsistent and
present in and by hope, no wonder if the soul hasten toward the coming of
Christ hereby.

4. The soul hastens to the coming of the day of God, by an holy dread, awe,
and fear of that day. That great day, although it be most joyous to Saints, yet
it will be also most terrible to sinners: And the terrors of this day,
apprehended by faith leave an holy awe, and dread on believers themselves. Oh!
what holy Tremblements of heart have many awakened serious souls, at the
apprehension of that terrible day? This seems to be the import of Paul's
Exhortation, 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.
For we must al appear before the Jugement seat of Christ, etc. What follows?
11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men. As if he had
said: Oh, friends! Will not that be a terrible day, when the Lord of Glory will
come, and call us to an account, for every thought, word, and Action? What a
dreadful Jugement, or doomsday will that be? Have we not al cause to tremble,
and stand in awe of this terrible day? For our part, knowing the terror of the
Lord, we persuade men, to maintain an holy dread and fear of that tremendous
day. This holy awe and fear of that great day is no way inconsistent with
lively hopes, and affectionate desires thereof: neither does it at al impede or
hinder our hastening thereto. For this Godly fear procedes from a Spirit of
Adoption, faith, and love, and so keeps the soul in an holy awe, lest it should
do any thing unworthy of that great day. Its true, servile carnal fear procedes
from Unbelief, and self-love; and therefore drives men from the day of God,
whiles it seems to hasten them toward it: But this holy filial fear proceeding
from faith and love, always prepares for, and hastens the soul toward the
coming of the day of God. Slavish fear is of a dull and lazy humor: it freezeth
and binds up the powers of the soul: but filial fear is warm and active; it
greatly enlarges the heart in its motion toward the coming of our Lord. Yea,
holy fear, as well as faith and hope, makes our absent Lord present, and so his
second coming present to the soul.

5. We hasten to the coming of the day of God, by satisfaction, complacence,
and delight in that glorious day. This is not at al inconsistent with the
former: For the Child may dread and fear the coming of his Father, as a Judge;
and yet delight and joy therein as his Father: so here, a Child of God, dreads
the coming of Christ as a Judge, and yet rejoices therein, as Christ is a
Father and Husband. Yea, how often has the believing soul, at the same time, the
greatest holy fear and awe, and yet the greatest delight, and solace in the
expectation of his approaching Lord? Complacence and delight arise from the
presence of the object delighted in: Faith makes the coming of our Lord
present, and then the believing soul find joy and satisfaction therein. Thus
Abraham delighted in the first coming of our Lord: John 8.56. Your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it and was glad. By faith he made
the day present, and then rejoiced therein: (...), he danced and skipped for
joy: he was as it were in a transport. Such should the believers joy be in the
prevision and prelibation of our Lords second coming. O! what raptures of joy
might we have herein? What an Heaven upon Earth might a Believer fetch hence?
As Christ's absence is most bitter, so ought not the foresight of his return be
most sweet and joyous to his spouse and friends? Oh! how sweet is it, even to
dream of Christ? The heart and the treasure are ever together: Luke 12.34. If
Christ be your treasure, your heart will be with him, and delight in him. We
find this delight in the prevision of our Lords second coming described to the
life by the Psalmist, Psalm. 98.6 -- 9.
Psalm. 98.6 -- 9. With trumpets, and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before
the Lord, the King, etc. 8. Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be
joyful together. Have the floods hands to clap? or, the hills a tongue to sing
joyfully? no: but these human actions, are, by a figure called prosopopoeia,
attributed to these inanimate creatures, to excite us to rejoice in the coming
of the day of God. So it follows, v. 9. Before the Lord for he comes to judge
the earth, etc. The like we find, Psalm. 96.10, 11, 12, 13. Thus by complacence,
and satisfaction in the approach of our Lord, we daily hasten toward that
great day. For all joy is active and diffusive: it is as oil to the wheels of
the soul; specially if our joy be spiritual.

6. We hasten to the coming of the day of God, by putting our hearts into a
prepared posture, and disposition to meet, and welcome him, when ever he comes.
Thus the Latin Gloss on our text: Hastening, i. e. say they, by acting well,
that you may be such, whom the Lord may come to save. And certain it is, the
more prepared we are to entertain our Lord, when he comes, the more we hasten
toward that great day. Luke 12.34 -- 36.
Thus Luke 12.34, 35, 36. v. 34. He tells them: where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also, i. e. if the treasure be in him, the heart will be with
him, and always waiting for his coming. Thence it follows: 35. Let your loins
be girded about, and your lights burning: Its an allusion to persons waiting
for the Bridegroom, or their Masters coming, in the night: and thence they
stood with their loins girded, and lights burning, ready to meet him. So it
follows: 36. And ye your selves like unto men, that wait for their Lord, when
he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may
open unto him immediately. Now this preparation for the coming of our Lord
consists in getting a stock of habitual grace, and keeping the soul in a
vigilant posture. Christians should aim at the highest raisures of Grace, that
so they may meet their Lord with triumph. Grace in vigor and power is the best
preparative for the coming of our Lord. Much Grace will give much acceptance and
boldness in that day. Every new degree of Grace is a step toward the day of
God. He that attains to a great mesure of Grace, gets up into the spirit and
life of that great day.

7. We hasten to the coming of the day of God, by running our Christian race,
with all manner of holy activitie and exercice of Grace. Habitual Grace prepares
us for the coming of our Lord; but gracious exercices, in our Christian race,
is a pressing on toward that day. A spirit of sloth puts us greatly back, but
exercices of Grace do much hasten us on toward the day of God. Every
repetition of a gracious act gives us a lift forward toward that day. By how
much the more active Grace is, by so much the more we press on toward the
coming of our Lord. The exercice of Grace gives light, and life to the soul, in
its Christian race. One exercice of Grace disposes the soul for another: and
this for another, etc. Thus, exercices of Grace are multiplied into thousands,
without pain; whereby the soul greatly hastens toward the coming of the day of
God. The blessed God rewards exercices of Grace, with farther Assistances of
Grace; yet of mere Grace. The highest assimilation of the soul to God is by
divine operations. Whatever condition we are in, there is some suitable Grace,
which being suitably exercised does hasten the soul toward the coming of our
Lord. Thus Paul hastened toward the coming of the day of God, Phil. 3.11, 12,
13, 14.
Phil. 3.11. If by any menas I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.
D^bita^di adverbia non semper incertitudinem direct important, sed velr. i^
difficultatem exprimant, vel propter allam rationem emphatice adhibentur.
Glass. Gram.
This (...) If here is not an if of douting, as the Papists would persuade us;
but it is here used by Paul, not without an Emphasis, to show the difficulty
of the work; as also his ardent desires, lively hopes, and important endeavors
in running his Christian race. By any means: Paul tried al manner of Gracious
experiments, and Christian exercices: and why? That he might attain to the
resurrection of the dead, i. e. that he might hasten to the coming of his Lord.
Thence it follows, v. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were
alreaay perfect: but I follow after, if I may apprehend that, for which also I
am apprchended of Christ Jesus. These words, with what follow, are for the most
part agonistic, referring to the customs of the Grecian exercices, in their
games. The words (...), and (...), apprehended, signify to catch, or apprehend
the Crown, that hung over the Goal: so also (...), perfect, is an Agonistic
word that signifies the being crowned, or receiving the reward: and (...), I
follow after, denotes the contention of such as ran in the race, who endeavored
with all their might to outrun those before them. Thence he adds, v. 13.
Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind. (...), forgetting those things which
are behind. This in like manner refers to the custom of Racers; who were wont,
not to look behind them, to see, either, how much of their race they had run,
or, how far their Antagonists were behind; but, as it were, forgetting what was
passed, they pressed on, with might and main, toward the end of their Race.
Whence it follows: and reaching forth unto those things which are before. (...)
properly signifies, to stretch forth to the utmost. Paul here continues the
metaphor of a Racer, who when he came nigh the Goal, gave a spring forward,
with all his might to catch at the Crown that hung over the Goal. Thence also he
adds, v. 14. I press toward the marque, for the price of the high calling of
God, in Christ Jesus. (...), the marque properly signifies the Goal; over which
hung (...), the price, or Crown, which they ran for. We find frequent
allusions, specially in Paul's Epistles, to this famous game of Racing, as 1
Cor. 9.24. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Heb. 12.1. whereby he does in a lively manner set
forth the holy contention, which a Believer ought to exercise, in hastening to
the coming of his Lord. Thus Paul, by all manner of gracious exercices,
contended in his Christian race, toward the coming of the day of God.

8. By entering into the enjoyments of the Day of God, we hasten toward that
day. Believers have, or at least may have, a prelibation, or foretaste of
approaching glories: There is a kind of entering into celestial Canaan even in
this life. So Heb. 4.11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest. A
Believer, by says, may get on foot in the Celestial Canaan, ere he get
thither: he may attain unto some fiducial possession, and fruition of those
good things hoped for, ere he get the actual possession of them. Now a great
part of our hastening to the coming of the day of God consists in the
prepossession, and preenjoyment of those good things then to be reveled. As the
Israelites in the Wilderness, having had some prelibation of the first fruits
of Canaan, could not but long for, and hasten to the full enjoyment of that
promissed Land; so a believer, by foretastes of the celestial Canaan, longs
for, and hastens to the coming of the day of God, when he shall have the full
fruition of al.

CHAP. III. When Influence, The Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of
the day of God, has on al sorts of persons to raise them up unto al manner of
holy conversation and Godliness?
SECT. 1. What Influence the looking for the coming of the Day of God has on
sinners Unconverted?
HAving dispatched the first Question, we proceed to the second: What Influence
the Looking for, and Hastening to the coming of the day of God, has on al sorts
of persons, to raise them up, to al manner of holy conversation, and
Godliness? We may range al sorts of persons, under these two commun Heads of
Sinners and Saints, which divide the whole World. By sinners, I understand
persons unconverted and irregenerate: by Saints, persons converted to God. Now
a serious looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God has an
efficacious influence on both these, though primarily on the later.

1. Serious looking for the coming of our Lod has no small Influence on Sinners,
or persons unconverted. I know not a more powerful principle, or consideration,
to make secure sinners serious, about soul-concernes, than lively thoughts, and
expectations of the second coming of our Lord, to Jugement. Alas! can we
imagine that sensual sinners would wallow, head and ears in Sensuality as they
do, had they, but now and then, some serious deep Apprehensions of their Lords
approach to Judge the world? Would the base-minded worldling be so costive and
tenacious of his Gold and Silver, did he consider, that ere long it must al be
burnt up? No verily: men's Consciences would fly in their faces, and be a
continual torment to them, til they had parted with their beloved Idols, were
they but under the power of such serious thoughts, touching the coming of their
Lord.

1. Serious thoughts of Christ's second coming to Jugement, hasa very prevalent
Influence on secure sinners, in order to the conviction of sin. This is indeed
the fundamental principle, and grand Instrument of al conviction of Sin, That
our great Lord will, ere long, come to judge the world: and the clearer
apprehensions men have of that great day, the clearer convictions will they have
of sin. If sin be little i^ thine eye, it is, because thou have but little
expectation of thine approaching Lord. This therefore has been the course, which
the Ministers of God in all ages have taken, to convince the secure World of
sin, namely, to set before them the coming of Christ to jugement. Thus Enoch;
what was the substance of his prophecy, or preaching to that sinful
generation, but a lively description of our Lords coming to judge the world?
This is evident from Jude 14.15. And Enoch also, Jude 14, 15.
the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying: Behold, the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints: To execute jugement upon al; and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of al their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodly committed; and of al their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him. O! what powerful Sermons did Enoch preach, to that
debauched sinful age, touching the coming of our Lord to jugement? But alas!
how few believed his report? Yea, what blasphemous or hard speeches did they
utter against the Lord? But, adds Enoch, The Lord comes to convince all that
are ungodly, etc. As if he had said: Alas! you will not now be convinced of your
sin, by my Preaching: but know, that the Lord, when he comes, will convince you
to purpose. This also, without dout, was a part of Noah's Sermons; who is said
to be 2 Pet. 2.5. a Preacher of Righteousness, i. e. one that endeavored to
convince them of their sin, and righteousness by Christ. This course also
Solomon takes to convince the young gallant, of his sinful courses, Eccles.
11.9. Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth; and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into jugement.
(1.) Here we have an Ironic concession to a young man, going on in the heat of
his lusts, and solacing himself in his youthful pleasures. As if he had said:
Take thy fill of youthful delights; go on in thy pursuit after sensual
enjoyments: and much good may they do thee. But then, (2.) Follows a stinging
correction: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
jugement. Here is a dreadful and sad But, enough to make the stoutest proudest
sensualist to tremble. Ah! would the young gallants of this sensual age, but
now and then seriously think on this Solomon's But, what a dampe would it cast
on al their youthful dalliances, and solaces? Would secure sinners but
consider, that ere long our Lord will come, and bring them into Jugement, for all
their evil deeds, what awakenings of Conscience; what dreadful convictions of
sin would they soon fall under? But, Oh! here lies the hell of this secure world,
men put far from them this evil day; and saym, at leasty in their hearts, where
is the promise of his coming? He that has spiritual, and strong apprehensions
of the coming of his Lord, what distinct and evident convictions of sin will he
have? How soon will al his sins, one by one, be set before him, as Psalm. 50.21?
How great will small sins, even vain thoughts, then appear to be? what an ungodly
face will his most beloved delicious sins than appear to have? How cheerfully
will he then open his eyes to the convictions of sin, but shut them against the
Allurements thereof? Will not the least sin there seem greater, than the
greatest sin before?

2. Serious thoughts of the second coming of Christ to jugement have a very
efficacious influence on sinners, in order to a deep feeling sense of sin, and
misery that attends it. Take the securest stoutest sinner in the World, and
let him but have clear apprehensions of the coming of the day of God, and oh!
what a load and burden will sin be to him? What remorses, and stings will small
sins breed in his Conscience? Will not every act of sin be, as a scalding drop
of burning lead on his soul? What a spirit of bondage and heaviness will he be
possessed withal? How soon will the root of al his delights wither? Yea, an
awakened Conscience, that lies under a a deep lively sense of Christ's coming to
Jugement, feels no sin so heavy and tormenting as his darling sin: That sin,
which heretofore was most delicious to him, will now be most vexatious and
bitter: and why? because he knows That sin will cost him most dear, at the
coming of his Lord, if not repented of. We find this exemplified in debauched
Felix, Act. 24.25. Act. 24.25.
And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and jugement to come, Felix
trembled. What made Felix to tremble? Is it not strange, that a Judge should
tremble at a few words, of a poor prisoner, at the bar? Must there not be a
strange efficace in this discourse of Paul? Yes, there was: Paul indeed hit him
in the right vein: Felix was as Tacitus, Hist. l. 5. assures us, a man given up
to al manner of injustice, and incontinence. His injustice in part appears from
his expectation of a bribe, v. 26. His incontinence also is manifest, by taking
Drusilla another man's wife as his own. Now Paul having reasoned of
righteousness and temperance virtues opposite to Felix's darling lusts; and
withal described to the life Jugement to come, which would take vengeance on
him for these sins, oh! What a pannic fear, and fit of trembling does Felix sal
into? How does his Conscience smite him for these his beloved lusts? WHat?
Says Felix, is there a Judge coming, that will call me to an account for mine
Injustice and Intemperance? Oh! what shall I do then, when that day comes? What
a miserable wretch am I, to prefer these base lusts, before mine immortal soul?
Thus the vbery apprehension of a Jugement to come, or a coming Judge, who would
reckon with him for his Idol-lusts, cast him, though an ignorant debauched
sinner, into a tremblement of Conscience. O! how many carnal secure sinners,
are often, amidst al their sensual pleasures and delights, startled and
affrightened, at the apprehensions of our Lords coming to judge the World? Do
not such thoughts as these, like Belshazars handwriting on the wall, fill their
Consciences with horror? What an Hell is it to them, amidst their sensual
Heaven, to think that the Judge stands at the door? Believe it, sirs, a
serious looking for the coming of the day of God, will rend and pluck the
stoutest heart to pieces: 'twil lie the proudest sinner in the dust. Ah! would
secure sinners but entertain themselves now and then with such serious thoughts
as these: Will this sensual life last for ever? Will not the judge ere long come,
and call me to an account, for all mine evil deeds? And will not then my
flesh-pleasing delights end in soul-tormenting dolors? Can I make my party good
against the Almighty, or bear the wrath of the Lamb? I say, such thoughts as
these, would make the securest heart ache and tremble.

3. Serious thoughts of the second coming of Christ to jugement, have a great
Influence on irregenerate men, in order to a serious inquiry into the means
and ways, how they may escape out of their miserable condition. Alas! were
secure sinners but thoroughly convinced, and persuaded of Christ's second coming
to jugement, how inquisitive would they be into al means, by which they might
be enabled, to appear with boldness before him, at that great day? Were it
possible, that sinners could leave their eternal salvation under such great
hazards, had they but lively views of the coming of the Lord, to judge them for all their wicked works? No surely. But oh! this is the bloody soul-destroying
principle, which ruins so many millions of souls, walking securely in their
own lusts, they say, with those profane scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.4. where is the
promise of his coming? Ah! had the sensual sinner but a real, and full
expectation of his approaching Judge, how serious and affectionate would he be,
in his inquiries after, and into the means of salvation? Was not this Doctrine
of Christ's second coming to jugement, one main fundamental principle, in
Peter's first Sermon, that made those 3000 Converts so inquisitive about the
means of salvation? Act. 2.37.
so Act. 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, and unto the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren what shall
we do? What Is the matter? why do they cry out thus, what shall we do? why, they
were pricked in their heart: Their Consciences were pricked and enflamed with a
sense of divine wrath. But how comes this to pass? What is it that stings and
gals their consciences? 'Twas, when they heard this: i. e. Peter's precedent
Sermon, touching Christ's Crucifixion, Resurrection, Exaltation, and second
coming to Jugement. Peter gives them some Intimation, v. 20. Of the great and
notable day of the Lord, and v. 21. That those who called on the name of the
Lord should be saved. Then, to make this position good, he goes on to prove the
Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ as King and Judge of the World. Whence v.
36. he concludes: Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made the same Jesus, whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ. As if he
had said: Assure your selves, ye are those foes, v. 35. whom, if you continue
such, the Lord will make his footstool. There is a black day coming when this
Son of God, whom ye have Crucified, shall call you to an account for all your
bloody designs, and Actions, against his Royal person, crown, and dignity:
For, believe it, God has made him both Lord and judge, of quick and dead.
Hence it follows, v. 37. Now when they heard this, [ i. e. that he, whom they
had crucified, was made, by God the Father, both Lord and Judge of al] they
were pricked in their heart, and said -- what shall we do? As if they had said:
Is it so indeed? Is he whom we crucified, now exalted by God, to be both Lord
and Christ? And will he ere long come to judge us, for all our desloyaltie and
treason against him? Shall al his foes then become his footstool? Oh! then, for
the Lords sake, tell us, sirs, what we shall do, to be saved in that great day?
We will stick at no means, under Heaven, for the saving of our souls. Thus,
being deeply convinced of Christ's Exaltation, and second coming to judge the
World, the first inquiry they make is, what shall we do to be saved? And without
al peradventure, the expectation of Christ's coming to judge the world was a
main foundation, and principle of the Jaylors inquiry, Act. 16.30. SIrs, what
must I do to be saved? The coming or the day of God will be most terrible to
secure sinners, and therefore no wonder, if the serious expectations thereof
make awakened consciences inquisitive about salvation. When the Lion roars the
beasts of the forest tremble, and seek refuge: So when Christ, the Lion of
Judah, roars in men's Consciences, by lively convictions of his approaching
jugement, how soon does the stoutest sinner tremble, and seek out for refuge.
Thus when Christ pleads his Controversy with Israel, and threatens impendent
Jugement, Mic. 6.1 -- 5. presently they fall upon their Inquiries, though but
legal, v. 6. wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before the
high God, etc? What more natural to an awakened conscience, apprehensive of
present or approaching Jugements, than serious Inquisition how to escape such
Jugements?

4. Serious and fiducial looking for the coming of Christ have a mighty
forcible Influence on sinners, in order to a deep humiliation for, and turning
from sin. If we consult the Scripture, we shall find, that the great Argument,
and Instrument, which the Apostles used to turn men from sin, was the powerful
preaching of the second coming of Christ to Jugement. Thus Paul in his Sermon
to the Athenians, what subject does he choose to Preach on among those great
wits? Why 'twas the plain doctrine of Repentance, or Humiliation for, and
Aversion from sin, Act. 17.30. Act. 17.30, 31.
And the times of this ignorance God ninked at; but now commands al men every
where to repent. Ay, but what argument or reason does he bring to prove this
Doctrine, unto these curious wits? That follows: v. 31. Because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that
man, whom he has ordained, etc. So that here lay the force and strength of his
exhortation, even in the coming of our Lord to Judge the World. Its true, many
of these proud Athenian wits were not at al moved by this Argument, but rather
scoffed, and mocqued at it, v. 32. But what course does Paul take then? Why, v.
33. So Paul departed from among them: As having never a word more to say unto
them. Implying, that if the Doctrine of Christ's second coming to Jugement would
not prevail with them, to humble, and turn them from sin, nothing would, in an
ordinary way. What more estectual for the killing of sin than fiducial sights
of our coming Lord? when the eye of the mind is fixed on the approach of the
great Judge, how is the Bent of the will turned against sin? How easily can they
part with beloved lusts, whose eyes are intent on the coming of the day of God?
What spiritual combats and conflicts against sin will they maintain, who live in
the daily expectation of their approaching Lord?

5. Serious expectations of the coming of our Lord have, when sanctified by the
Spirit of Grace, no small Influence, not only for the aversion of the heart from
sin, but also for the Conversion of it to God. Heart-affecting views of our
approaching Lord, are, when animated by the spirit of God, a soverain Instrument
for the turning of the heart to God. Thus Peter, in his second Sermon to the
Jews, Act. 3.19. Act. 3.19.
Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord. The force of
Peter's exhortation, whereby he presses them to turn from sin unto God, lies
in this, That their sins might be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come, from the presence of the Lord. Afacie Domini] h. c. coram Domino,
jam in majestate sua apparente, and credentes Glorificant^. Glass. Gram.
(...), is rendered by some, before the Lord, i. e. at his second coming, when
he shall, in all his glory and Majesty, sit on his Throne of Jugement, and
absolve al Believers. Oh! what a refreshment will it be then to poor believers,
to receive a general pardon, and absolution, whiles they stand before this
their Judge? And the fiducial expectation hereof, is that which Peter here
urges, as a main argument for their conversion. So Paul, Romans 2. from v. 1. to
12. The main argument he uses to turn sinners from sin to God, is a
premonition touching Christ's second coming to Jugement. Thus also to the
Corinthians, he tells them, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. (...) Homines ad fidem adduci^us.
Beza.
2 Cor. 5.10. That we must al appear before the jugement seat of Christ, etc.
and thence concludes, v. 11. knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we
persuade men. (...), we draw men to faith in God. As if he had said: Oh! what a
dreadful terrible day will that be? How will the stoutest hearts then tremble?
Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, in that day, we persuade men, by
faith to embrace him in this day of Grace. Thus also he informs us, that the
Conversion of the Thessalonians was in this manner, 1 These. 1.9, 10. How ye
turned to God from Idols, and to wait for his Son from Heaven. So that it
seems, this was the Apostles ordinary method, in converting sinners, to fix on
their souls a deep conviction, and impression of Christ's second coming to
jugement. And verily Sirs, were this great fundamental principle more
powerfully preached, and deeply impressed on men's Consciences, we might expect
many more Converts, than now we find: Of such soverain influence is it to turn
men to God.

6. Serious lively thoughts of Christ's second coming has often a powerful
Influence, for the restraining the lusts and reforming the lives, even of such
as are not thoroughly converted, or turned to God. Alas! how many awakened
sinners, are hereby brought to a great degree of partial Reformation? What made
politic Herod hear John Baprist gladly, and do many things he prescribed, but
fears of this great day? Was not this also that, which made Agrippa an
Almost-Christian, Act. 26.28? Its a wonder to think, what a change this has
made on many Awakened Consciences. What a form of Godliness have many
hypocrites attained unto? What a seeming exact conformity to the letter of the
Law, have they given? How many, not only outward acts of sin, but also inward
Lusts have been for a time, not only suspended, but in part quenched. What
pretentions of obedience to, and dependence on Christ? What seeming Adherence
to, and Application of Christ, by faith? What legal desires of Grace? In short,
what a seeming Reformation of heart and life have many hypocrites arrived unto,
by a serious, though but legal looking for, and hastening to the coming of the
day of God? Yea, do not the thoughts of this great day, leave an awe on the
consciences not only of mor l, but also of many debauched persons? And are they
not hereby restrained from many sins and outrageous violences, which otherwise
they would commit? Alas! were it not that this principle of Christ's coming to
Jugement were, more or less, impressed on men's Consciences, how soon would the
wicked world be al in flames and bloody tumults? How impossible would it be for
a Saint to live without great hazards in any human society, where wicked men
prevail? At what an inconceivable degree of rage and malice would the spirits
of unreasonable men swel, and vent themselves against the people of God, had
they not some commun notions, and Impressions of this great day of Jugement? So
that its evident much of the power and force of restraining Grace, on the
wicked world, procedes from this principle deeply fixed on men's Consciences.
And therefore the last refuge the Church has to curb and restrain licentious
professors is a Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.
1 Cor. 16.22. which is a Syriac word, and signify, our Lord comes. This,
they say, was the form of the extreme and highest excommunication, as we find
it expressed Jude 14. the Lord comes, etc. The Jews were wont to begin their
grand and highest excommunication, with these first words of Enochs Prophecy,
The Lord comes; whereby they did bind over the person excommunicated to this
Grand Assize. In allusion whereto the Apostle here pronounces al Christian
professors, who love not our Lord, accursed til he come. Thus the Church,
despairing of such a man's salvation, delivers him up, to the coming of the day
of God. So that if any means under Heaven will restrain professors from
Apostasy, a maranatha will: If this will not lie a restraint on men's lusts, what
will, or may? What an hell of sin and wickedness should we have above ground,
could men but stifle and smoother al thoughts of Christ's second coming to
Jugement?

SECT. 2. What Influence the serious looking for, and hastening to the coming
of the Day of God has on Saints, as to the promoting of Godliness?
2. HAving explicated, what powerful Influence the serious expectation of the
day of God has on sinners, we now proceed to show how efficacious its Influence
on Saints is. And this indeed seems mainly intended in our text: For, albeit
the serious thoughts of this great day may, when set home by the Spirit of
Grace, be of great use to convince, and convert some, as also to restrain
others, from many exorbitent courses; yet its evident, that secure sinners do
what they can to banish al such serious thoughts from their hearts. Oh! what a
torment, yea hell is it to wicked men to lie under serious thoughts of this
great day? It is the Saint only that has either capacity, or will to draw
forth the efficace, of such a serious looking for, and hastening unto the
coming of the day of God. And thence our Apostle here directs his exhortation
mainly to Saints: What manner of persons ought YE to be, in all holy
Conversation and Godliness? Oh! what miserable creatures were the Saints,
should not Christ come again to judge the world? How much then does it concern
them to eye this great day? And what a forcible influence has such thoughts on
their hearts and lives? O! how many, and rich promises has our Lord made to
this looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God? And, what
eminent raisures of spirit have such arrived unto, who live under the power and
Influence of this frame? Is there any principle in Christianity, that has a
more sovereign influence on the Divine life, than this? What made Paul so
heavenly-minded, but daily looking for the coming of his Lord? Whence was it
that Peter had his heart so much filled with love to Christ, and his Lambs, but
from his continual expectation of his Lords return? How comes it to pass that
some Christians are so eminent in faith, so diligent in duty, so vigilant
against Tentation, so warm and affectionate under ordinances, so faithful in
service, so meek and patient in sufferings, so fixed and constant in communion
with God, and so shining in all manner of holy conversation and Godliness,
beyond other professors, but from serious looking for, and hastening to the
coming of the day of God? That this frame has an efficacious influence on al
manner of holy conversation, and Godliness is evident from our Text, 2 Pet.
3.11.
2 Pet. 3.11. what manner of persons ought Ye to be? (...); which imports
more than (...), namely somewhat admirable and excellent. As if he had said: O!
how should the thoughts of this day elevate and raise your hearts and lives to
the highest pitches of Godliness? What singular frames of Godliness should ye
be ambitious of? at what a strange rate of holy conversation ought ye to live?
Thence it follows, in all holy conversation, and Godliness: or according to the
original, in all holy conversations, and Godlinesses: which is an Hebraisme, and
imports al manner of perfection, both extensive, or of kinds and parts;
Intensive, or of degrees; and protensive, or of duration. Oh! what a powerful
Influence has the expectation of this great day on al kinds and degrees of holy
conversation, and Godliness?

But to discourse more distinctly, and fully on this head, I shall resolve the
whole into these two Questions. 1 Q. What Influence the serious looking for,
and hastening to the coming of the day of God, has on al manner of Godlinesses?
2 Q. What Influence it has on al manner of holy conversations?

1 Q. What Influence the serious looking for, and hastening to the coming of
the day of God, has on al manner of Godlinesses? By Godliness here, as was
intimated in the explication of this text, we understand the duties of the
first table, which refer immediately unto God: (...), etc. Phavorin.
For so (...) signifies as we proved. So among the Platonists, (...),
Godliness is defined, (...), a Righteousness toward the Gods. Thus also
(...) a Godly man is, among the Grecians, one that estimeth, loves, honors,
serves, worships, obeys, and is a friend of God, etc.

1. One great and fundamental part of Godliness consists in an high estime of
God, and the things of God. Thus in the Platonic definitions, (...), Godliness
is defined, (...), a voluntary and honorable estimation of the Gods. So (...) a
Godly man is said to be, (...), One that highly estimes the Gods. Oh! how much
of the spirit and power of Godliness consists in the high estimation of God?
What is Religion and worship, but to acknowledge, adore, and imitate the
transcendent eminences and perfections of God? And what is there more
efficacious for the production hereof, than serious looking for, and hastening
to the coming of the day of God? who more Godly, than they, who estime most of
God? And what makes men most highly to estime of God, but lively expectations
of Christ's second coming? Thus our blessed Lord, Calling off the Estime, and
Affections of his disciples, from things temporal to God, and things eternal,
he backs his commands with this Argument, Luke 12.34. Luke 12.34, 35, 36.
For where your treasure is there will your heart be also, i. e. the heart and
the treasure are always together: If God, and the things of God be our
treasure, they will loge in our highest estime. Ay, but might the Disciples
reply, what course may we take to gain such an high estime of God? That
follows, v. 35, 36. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning;
and ye your selves like unto men, that wait for their Lord, etc. As if he had
said: Would ye indeed make God your treasure? are you desirous to loge him in
your choicest estime? O! then let your eye be fixed on my return to jugement:
be much in looking for, and hastening unto that great day; and then have a low
estime of God if you can, if you dare. The great sin of this secure sensual
world is, that men have a low cheap estime of God, and the things of God. And
whence procedes this, but form putting far from them the coming of the day of
God? Ah! how few set an high price on God? how few value God for God himself?
Is not the formal reason of most men's estime of God, something below God? do
not the most of men estime the poor nothings of time, more highly than the rich
althings of God? and why, but because they look not for the coming of their
Lord? whereas, he that daily looks up and waits for the coming of his Lord,
has such great thoughts of God, that althings below God seem but shadows to
him: Yea, he will estime and honor the reproaches of Christ, mor than all the
glories of this world. Thus it was with Moses, Heb. 11.26.
Heb. 11.26. Estiming the reproach of Christ greater riches, than the treasures
in Egypt. Here is a Godly man indeed; one that had so noble and generous estime
of Christ, that he counts the worst things of Christ, better than the best
things of the world: How much then did he admire the infinite grandeurs and
Glories of Christ? But what was it that made Moses thus to estime the Reproaches
of Christ, more honorable than the Honors of Pharaohs Court? That follows: For
he had respect to the recompense of reward, i. e. he had a particular fixed eye
of faith on, or regard to the coming of the day of God, and the recompense he
should then receive, and this wrought up his heart to this high estime of the
reproach of Christ. As the Glory of the Sun, when it breaks forth in its
meridian light, swallows up, not only darkness, but lesser lights also; so the
glory of Christ's second coming, darted on an eye of faith, swallows up all the
dark reproaches of Christ's Cross, with all the lesser glories of this world; and
so works up the soul to high admiration, and estime of God, and the things of
God.

2. Another fundamental part of Godliness consists in love to God, and things
Divine. Thence (...), a Godly man is styled by the Grecians (...), a lover of
God. And what more soverain a motive, or Instrument is there to inflame the
heart with divine love to God, than serious expectations of the coming of our
Lord? As the natural eye affects the heart; so what more affects, yea inflames
a gracious heart, than lively views of his approaching Lord? Thus Jude 21. Jude
21.
Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to eternal life. The Love of God may be here understood, not only
objectively, of Gods love to us; but also subjectively, of our love to God. Now
what course must they take to keep themselves in the love of God? That
immediately follows: looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life. A spiritual look on the love and mercy of our Lord, which shall
be reveled at his second coming, is most efficacious to keep the soul in love
to God. What is al our love to God, but the Reflection of his love to us? And
hence, the more the love of God to us is apprehended, is not our Love to God
the more increased? And when do we apprehend more of the love of God, than when
we most intently look on the mercy of our Lord, at his second coming? What
more naturally breeds love, than the contemplation of the thing beloved? And do
not al our beloved objects lie wrapped up in the mercy of our Lord, (...).
Platonic.
at his second coming? what better preservative can there be of our first love,
the love of our espousals, than to have the second coming of Christ always in
our eye? Did not our wanton hearts forget Christ, our absent husband, and his
return, were it possible that they could gad abroad so much after other
lovers, as now they do? No, No: Expectation of Christ's second coming would dash
out of countenance al adulterous thoughts, and wanton dalliances with the Idols
of time: It would maintain in us pure, virgin, chaste love toward Christ; and
that upon this ground, because it knows, that al those that love not our Lord
Jesus, lie under the most dreadful curse that ever was. Thus 1 Cor. 16.22. 1
Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha, i. e.
let him be accursed til the Lord come, to pronounce his last doom. This curse,
as we before hinted, alludes to the great and terrible excommunication of the
Jewish Church, which began with the first words of Enochs prophesic, so famous
among them, and mentioned Jude 14, 15. The Lord comes. And the Apostles sense
seems this; That whosoever loves not our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be obnoxious
to all the Plagues and Misery denounced by Enoch, against ungodly sinners. The
very apprehensions of this dreadful curse has kept many a poor believer in the
Love of Christ. What! says the believing soul, are all that love not our Lord
under a Maranatha? must they indeed remain accursed, til our Lord come, and
thence for ever? O! then, farewell al other lovers: what do thou mean, O my
soul, by entertaining beloved Idols: is not the judge at the door? Must I not
give an account for all adulterous glances on this alluring world? The soul that
always eyes the coming of his Lord carries his picture in its bosom, and
thence is daily inflamed with love to him, as lovers are wont.

3. Believing views of Christ's second coming work in the soul an holy fear of
God, which is another main branch of Godliness. So in the old Testament, the
whole of Godliness and divine worship is often expressed by fear. And its certain,
nothing breeds a more reverential fear and awe of God, than deep lively
expectations of the second coming of our Lord. This seems contained in our
Lords exhortation, Mat. 10.28. And fear not them, which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, who is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell. As if he had said: Alas! what mean you by being so
solicitous and fearful about your present life? ought you not rather to fear
your Lord, who, at his second coming, will destroy both body and soul of wicked
men? This also seems to be the import of Paul's Admonition, 2 Cor. 5.11.
2 Cor. 5.11. knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men. The
terror of the Lord, i. e. when we must appear before his jugement fear. We
persuade men: To what? why, to an holy fear and awe of God. The proper
affection suited to things terrible, is fear: and oh! what an holy fear of God,
does the expectation of that terrible day work in Believers? Were it possible
that men could be so regardlesse and fearlesse of God as they are, had they but
the coming of the day of God more frequent and lively in their eye?

4. Spiritual sights of the coming of our Lord have a Soverain influence for
the calling off our hearts, from al inordinate regard to, and love of this
present world. And oh! how much of the power of Godliness consists herein?
Does not a principal part of the divine life consist in our spiritual death
unto, and alienation from this dirty world? may we count him a Godly man, who
is drowned head and ears in the cares and concerns of this life? Surely, true
piety brings a man to a general privation of the goods he does possess, that
so Christ may be al in all. He is the true Godly man, who, amidst all the
comforts of this life, admires, loves, and enjoys nothing greatly but God. And,
oh! how much does a real sight of the coming of our Lord, in all his glory,
darken the glory of this fading world, and deaden the heart unto it? What more
effectual to draw off the heart from this lower world, than our daily drawing
nigh, in thoughts and affections, to the coming of the day of God? He that
looks for a crown at the coming of our Lord, will contemn all the shadows of
this lower world: Such as are much taken up in the contemplation of that coming
world, will not think themselves obliged, to give this present temting world one
good look, or act of love, hope, and friendship. Thus 2 Pet. 3.11. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing then that al these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be, etc. As if he had said: will our Lord indeed ere long come to
judge the world? and shall all the beauty, Glory, and excellence of this
sensible world be involved in that universal conflagration? ought we not then
to have our hearts crucified to al these inferior goods? suppose a Citizen of
London should be assured, that within a few days his house should be involved
in flames, would he, think ye, be at any great charge to adorn or beautify
his house; or lay up his choicest treasures and goods therein? Would he not
rather entertain himself daily with thoughts of removing elsewhere? Just such
is our case: are we not assured, that ere long this visible world will be in
flames about our ears? ought we not then to call off our Affections from it, and
look out for a City which has foundations? Surely this was Abraham's
practice, Heb. 11.9, 10.
as we are told, Heb. 11.9. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as
in a strange Country, dwelling in tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs
with him of the same promise. (...) ut illi quorun vite vagas plaustra trabuat
donos. Grot.
In tabernacles, or moveable houses; such as had no firm foundation, but were
drawn on wheels, here or there, as the owners pleased. But why did Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob dwell in tabernacles? had they not a promise of, and thence a
right unto Canaan where they dwelt? And might they not, by virtue of this
promise, and right granted, have built houses, and remained there, as those
whose posterity were to possess the same? Yes: but yet they chose rather to
dwell in tabernacles, as those that looked for a better habitation, and
possession, than Canaan could afford them. So it follows, v. 10. For he looked
for a City, which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. He dwelt
in Tabernacles that had no foundation, because he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose maker and builder is God. (...) properly signifies an
Architect, and (...) the Builder. No City would please Abraham, but such as
was both invented, and builded by God. He had a promise of Canaan, but that
would not satisfy his Spirit; he still dwells in tabernacles: nothing would
content him, but a City of Gods founding and finishing. In short, Abraham had
an eye on the coming of the day of God, and the Celestial Canaan, then to be
possessed, and this made him sojourne in the terrestrial Canaan, promissed to
him and his seed, as in a strange Country: He looked for a City that has
foundations, and that made him dwell in tabernacles, without foundation, even in
the promissed land, where he had right to build. For they that possess land,
have right to build, Qui solum possident ibi aedificant, ibi ^an^^t. Grot. 1
Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
and live there. But Abraham was not so fond of Canaan, because he had a better
Country in his Eye. Thus also Paul, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. He lays down this
for a principle: The time is short, i. e. ere our Lord come, and dissolve the
world into universal flames. And what does he conclude hence? It remains,
that both they that have wives be as though they had none, etc. i.e. that
amidst al our temporal comforts the heart be crucified to them. Whiles our
persons are in the World, and our hands make use of it, our hearts must be dead
to it. Suppose God should give us a promise and grant of this whole world, as
he did of Canaan to Abraham, we ought still to use it as he did Canaan, looking
upon our selves as strangers, and pilgrims, because we look for a City that
has foundations, whose builder, and maker is God. Alas! to expect happiness
in the creature, what is it but to search for the fountain in the stream?
Surely, he that daily expects the coming of his Lord, will not expect much from,
or delight much in lower goods. Such thoughts ungod this world, and unmasque al
its Idols.

5. Another essential part of Godliness. consists in the mortification of
sin. The life of Godliness lies much in the death of sin: When Lust is in its
vigor and force, Godliness is in its consumtion and decay: The power of lust
may consist with the form of Godliness, but not with the power thereof. He is
a Godly man indeed, who takes more delight in subduing his lusts, than sinners
do in gratifying and fulfilling of them. If the life of any sin be dear unto
thee, the life of Godliness will soon wither and languish: starve lust and you
nourish piety. Hence among the Grecians (...), I havor.
a Godly man is the same (...), a Saint: Now what more efficacious for the
mortification of sin, than a lively expectation of the coming of our Lord? Thus
in our Text: What manner of persons ought ye to be? O! what mortified spirits
ought ye to have? What a deadly feud and Antipathie should ye have against sin?
How ought ye to keep your hearts at the greatest distance that may be from sin?
What a violent Bent against sin should your hearts be principled with? And why?
because you look for the coming of the day of God. Oh! what a Soverain
Influence has the serious expectation of that great day, for the carrying on
the work of mortification? And how so? because the Saints are then to appear
with Christ, and therefore ought to be holy, as he is holy. Thus Paul argues,
Col. 3.4.
Colos. 3.4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory. What consequence does he draw thence? v. 5. Mortify
therefore your members, which are upon the Earth, Fornication, etc. As if he
had said: Will not Christ, who is your life, ere long appear? and must you not
then appear with him in glory? and how is it possible you should appear with
him in glory, unless you be like him? Can there be any Communion betwixt
light and darkness, God and Belial? ought ye not then to bid farewell to al
your earthly members? Fie for shame! what mean you to lie wallowing in sensual
lusts, when as your Lord is so near? The like we find, 1 John 3.2. we know, 1 John 3.2, 3.
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him, as he is.
This is an infallible argument that we shall be like him, because we shall see
him as he is: For none but the pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.8. And what
does the Apostle collect hence? v. 3. and every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself as he is pure. As if he had said: Must we indeed be like our
Lord, when he appears? Is there no vision or fruition of him unless we be like
unto him? Oh! what a binding argument is this to every man, that has this hope
in him, to purify himself, as he is pure? why, says such a soul, must I
indeed appear with my Lord, and be like unto him, if ever I hope to enjoy him?
O! what mean I then to let mine heart swarm with such noisome lusts? What
do thou mean, O my soul, by giving entertainment to such vain filthy
thoughts? Is this suitable to thy principles, to harbor, and nourish corrupt
Affections, which thirst after the heart-bloud of thy Lord? Fie upon it! how
comes it to pass, that such venomous Snakes, and Serpents loge in thee? Is not
my Lord at the door? And must thou not be like him, if ever thou hope to enjoy
him? How much then is it unbecoming thy state, profession, relation, condition,
and engagements, to entertain any Idollust in thine heart? So forcible are the
serious expectations of our coming Lord, to stab and let out the heart-blood of
sin.

6. Another part of Godliness consists in the resisting of Tentations, whether
from Satan, the World, or our own hearts. There is scarce any thing in this
lower world, but Satan knows how to make use thereof, as an instrument to temt
us thereby. Satan is not the creator of his tentations, but takes his matter
from those whom he temts, or some circumstance which environs them. Yea, how
often does Satan's tentation take its rise and occasion from that, which is
materially agreeable to the will of God? As winds that enter in by little
cranies, are usually most dangerous; so Satan's tentations, that enter in by
small occasions. Oh! how many great Acts of sin have followed on small
tentations? what a secret Intelligence has Satan with the soul by tentations?
But now serious thoughts of the coming of our Lord have a forcible efficace, to
dash out of countenance al tentations. For every tentation has its force and
taking power from the seeming goodness thereof: take off its masque, and it
soon loses its force. And what more effectual to take off the seeming
goodness of any tentation, than lively expectations of our Lords approach? The
wise man tells us, Prove. 14.27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to
depart from the snares of death, i. e. an holy fear and awe of God upon the
soul is most efficacious, to keep the soul from al tentations. And what more
powerful to keep the soul under such an awe and dread of the holy God, than
serious expectations of the coming of our Lord? The like Prove. 16.6. By the
fear of the Lord men depart from evil. A soul, that lives under an awful dread
of that great day, dares not entertain secret dalliances and correspondences
with Tentations. These or such like are the Soliloquies of such an awakened
soul: Is the coming of the day of God near? must I ere long appear before his
jugement seat? O, then, away tentation, away! farewell al eye-pleasing delights,
farewell! Adieu al ye Bastard Gods, adieu! al your sweet odors are but
soul-ensnaring deceits: al your flesh-pleasing delices are salted with the
curse of Heaven: your seeming felicities are but real miseries: I owe no suit
or service to you: no love, no confidence, no friendship: I must not; I dare
not, I cannot entertain longer correspondence with you. Lo, my Lord! he
stands at the door: I wait for him every moment. Behold! he comes; he comes;
he will not tarry: how may I then yield to your ensnaring allurements? Oh! what
a prevalent influence have such thoughts as these, to put a bar to the most
heart-bewitching tentation? Thence Paul, Ephesians. 6.13. Ephesians. 6.13.
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day: and having done al to stand. There is no part of
this spiritual Armor after mentioned, v. 14, 15, 16. but receives force from
the coming of the day of God: what means, having your loins girt about with
truth, but a prepared posture to meet your Lord? Why must you have your feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; but in order to your
hastening to the coming of the day of God? And whence has the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, its
strength, but from our approaching Lord? So that if you would be able to
withstand in the evil day of tentation, and after al assaults to stand, as
conquerors, you must ever keep in your eye the coming of the day of God. This
shield of faith will quench all the ficry, or poisoned darts of Satan. O! how
triumphant is the cross of Christ, in the hearts of believers, over Satan and
al his flesh-pleasing tentations, so long as they have their eyes fixed on the
approches of their Lord? What more efficacious to blunt the edge and point of
tentation, than such contemplations of that glorious day?

7. Fiducial expectation of the coming of our Lord, has a soverain influence on
Sincerity, which is a vital part of Godliness. Indeed the life of Godliness
springs from the spirit of sincerity: and thence, according to the mesure of
our sincerity, such will be the mesure of our Godliness. Sincerity makes the
lowest actions of a Godly man higher, in Gods estime, than the highest and most
glorious actions of rotten-hearted professors. He is indeed the Godly man, that
really, and prevalently intendes, what he pretendes to be; that is loyal to God
in Affection, as well as in expression; that not only assentes to Christ in
jugement, but also consentes to him in heart; that makes use of the blood of
Christ, not only to heal a wounded Conscience, but also to kill lust in the
heart; finally who is never satisfied 'til he arrive to such a plenitude, or
Bent of will toward God, as al hypocrites come short of. This is the Godly man
the Scripture describes. And, oh! What a prevalent Influence has the serious
expectation of Christ's second coming on this piece of Godliness? We find this
exemplified in Paul, who gives us a confession of his faith, Act. 24.15, 16.
Act. 24.15. and have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow; that
there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. As if
he had said: For my part, if you will have the sum of my faith and hope it is
this: I believe, and wait for the coming of the Son of God to jugement. And
what does he collect hence? v. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God, Propter hoc, i. e. Propter
ban^ fiducian. Grot.
and toward men. (...), for this, i. e. by reason of this confidence. Oh!
says Paul, how does the real belief, and hope of this great day strongly
oblige and bind my Conscience, to al manner of gracious exercices, that hereby
I may keep always a Conscience void of Offense toward God and men. Now wherein
does a Conscience void of offense toward God chiefly consist? Surely in that
character of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. And they were both righteous
before God, walking in all the commandments, and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. There is a vast difference between being righteous before God, and
being such before men: often such as seem most righteous in the eyes of men, are
most unrighteous in the eye of God. But now Paul's main work was to have a
conscience void of offense, or to appear righteous before God: i. e. to be
found sincere, and blameless at the last great day. And Oh! what a forcible
Influence had the lively thoughts of the coming of his Lord hereon? Phil. 1.10.
Thus Philip. 1.10. That ye may be sincere and without offense 'til the day of
Christ. The day of Christ is here brought in, not only as the term, but also
as a motive, and inducement, to provoke men unto sincerity. To think, that we
must al ere long appear before the Jugement seat of Christ, in our own colors,
nakedly, as we are; that there will be no varnishing or guilding over of a
rotten heart, in that great day; what a mortal wound would such thoughts as
these give to our hypocrisy? Oh! how will al men's borrowed colors and paint be
then melted away? What a number of painted vizards, and desguised masks of
false hearts will then be cast into the fire? Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 3.13. The
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. And surely the lively
forethoughts of that fiery trial would be of mighty use to make us sincere.

8. Spiritual raised expectations of the coming of our Lord has an efficacious
influence on heart-establishment in Grace. The more established our hearts are
in Grace, the more Godly we are. Plato. Protag fol. 339. and Arist. Eth. l. 1.
c. 11.
The blind Philosophers could tell us, that a man truly Godly is (...), a
quadrate or foursquare man: cast him which way you will, he still finds a
bottom. And it is most certain, that so far as we are Godly, so far we are
stable. God is the most stable and immovable Being: and by how much the more
any creature draws near to God, either by ressemblance, or actual communion, by
so much the stable and immovable it will be. True Godliness implies a
consistence of soul: Grace is ballast or weight to the soul; it poiseth and
fixes the heart: a fickle wavering instable spirit never excels in Godliness.
This was Reubens case, Genesis 49.4. Unstable as water, thou shall not excel.
Inconstant instable spirits, that fluctuate, as the waves of the Sea, have much
filth and mud in them. So Esa. 57.20. But the wicked are like the troubled Sea,
when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Restless fluctuating
spirits always cast up mire and dirt. Firmitude and stabilitie in a Christian
course, is the beauty and glory of Godliness: whereas Ambulatorie moveable
dispositions are usually a reproach thereto. None so fit to receive Grace from
God, to act for God, and to walk with God, as hearts established in Grace: and
thence, none so Godly as these. Now daily waiting for the coming of the day of
God, has a powerful influence on this heart-establishment in Grace. There is a
threefold establishment of heart, which is much influenced by serious thoughts
of our Lords second coming.

(1.) Establishment of Jugement; when the mind is united and fixed as to the
Doctrine and truths of the Gospel. What more inconstant and instable than the
vain mind of of man? What risings and fallings of Opinions are many instable
minds subject unto? Some minds are so inconstant, as that nothing will please
them long: they are stable and constant in nothing but Instabilitie and
Inconstance: They are indeed a mere Bethaven, an house of vanity, Hos. 4.15.
Of such the Apostle speaks Heb. 13.9. Be not carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines: For it is a good thing the heart be established with Grace,
and not with meats. By Grace here we may understand the doctrine of the Gospel,
as opposed to the legal ceremonies; which many Judaising Christians too much
doted on. Ay, but now how might they get their minds established in the Grace
of the Gospel? that he lays down, v. 13, 14. Let us go forth to him without the
camp, bearing his reproach. For we have no continuing City, but seek one to
come. Oh! says Paul, would men but go forth and meet their approaching Lord,
what an influence would it have to fix their minds, in the Grace of the
Gospel? Thus Paul to the Colossians, Col. 1.23. If ye continune in the faith
grounded, and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel. This
later has a causal influence on the former: The hope of the Gospel, which
refers to the coming of our Lord, is a soverain means to keep the heart
grounded and settled in the faith. Thus also, 2 These. 2.1. 2 These. 2.1.
Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the gathering together to him. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. (...), may have a double version, (1.) If we
interpret it, according to our translation, by the coming, etc. then it is
evidently brought in as an argument or motive strongly inducing them, not to be
soon shaken in mind. (2.) But yet others, Fla^ius Illyr'cus and Glassius.
and that not without good probability, render it, concerning the coming, etc.
and so indeed (...) signifies sometimes, denoting the object matter. If we take
it in this last sense, then we may give the words this paraphrase: Concerning
the coming of our Lord, I beseech you, brethren, be not soon shaken in mind, or
troubled, as if it were at hand: for grant it were so, as it is not, yet it
should be so far from shaking your minds, as that it ought to fix and compose
them. So that take the words in either sense, we may look upon the coming of
Christ to be urged, by Paul, as a means to compose their minds, though in the
first sense the argument is more strong and binding.

(2.) Serious expectations of Christ's coming have a soverain Influence on the
establishment of our heart and ways, in our Christian race. The more stable and
fixed our hearts are, in our Christian obedience, the more Godly we are: As a
square figure is immovable in every posture; so ought a Godly man to be, in
the whole of his Christian race. Our hearts and works are so far Godly, as
they answer to Gods stabilitie and equality. For Grace infuseth a Strength and
Vigor into the soul; whereby our ways are rendered stable and uniforme. And, oh!
what an efficacious Influence has the lively view of our Lords coming hereon?
There are two main springs of heart-establishment in our Christian race, and
both are greatly influenced by serious thoughts of the coming of our Lord. The
first great spring of heartestablishment is, the constant keeping a single end
in our eye. For he that has a double end in his eye, will also have a double
instable motion: Jam. 1.8.
So Jam. 1.8. A double minded man is instable in all his ways. Now serious
thoughts of our Lords coming keep a single end always in our eye. Thus Paul, 1
Cor. 9.26. I therefore so run, 1 Cor. 9.26.
not as uncertainly. (...), i. e. not unadvisedly with a blind impetus, without
regard to our end. So Chrysostom: What means not uncertainly? (...). Chrysostom.
They say, looking to a certain end, not in vain, etc. The metaphor is taken
from men that run in a race, who have the Goal, and Crown ever in their eye;
which keeps them stable and active in their race. Paul had his Lords coming,
and the Crown of Glory then to be reveled, ever in his eye, and that made him
stable in his race. Again, another cause of stabilitie in our race is a strait
way: This follows on the former: for a strait single end brings a strait single
way: and as both greatly conduce to stabilitie; So are they promoted by serious
expectations of our Lords coming. Thus Paul in his exhortation to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12 -- 14.
1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of faith. (...), contend in the Agony of
faith. Its a metaphor from such as contended in running the race, and it
implies a continued uninterrupted motion in our Christian race. Thence he
adds: lay hold on eternal life. (...), apprehend, catch at. This alludes to
the posture of racers, who, when they came near the Goal, gave a spring
forward, and caught at the Crown, which lay on the top of the Goal, which is
expressed Phil. 3.13. by reaching forth unto those things which are before.
Thus Paul exhorts Timothy unto a strait stable course and motion in his
Christian race. Ay, but what argument does he urge to enforce this exhortation?
Surely, his main argument is drawn from the coming of our Lord. So v. 13. I
give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickens althings, i. e. at the
second coming of our Lord, by the resurrection, etc. Again v. 14. That thou
keep this commandment, without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ is here brought in,
not only as a period or term, but also as a motive of Timothies keeping this
great commandment. Oh! what a powerful influence would this have to keep
professors strait and stable in their Christian race, would they but always
eye the coming of our Lord, and that Crown of Glory laid up for such as
overcome. This Paul assures us, was that which influenced his heart, in his
Christian race, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course I have kept the faith, i. e. I have walked in an equal, stable, fixed
course of faith and Godliness. And what was it that engaged him hereto, but
the expectation of Christ's appearing, v. 8?

(3.) Lively expectations of Christ's coming is very influential on
heart-establishment as to suffering: it establishes the heart not only in
active obedience to Gods Will of precept; but also in passive, as to his will of
providence. And herein, indeed, much of Godliness does consist: For who more
Godly than he, whose heart is established in suffering, as well as doing the will
of God? and what has more powerful influence hereon, than fiducial
expectations of Christ's second coming? Thus Jam. 5.8. Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of your Lord draws nigh. The length of
sufferings usually breeds impatience under them: But then a consideration, that
the coming of our Lord draws nigh, is a most prevalent means to establish the
heart under them.

9. Raised expectations of our Lords coming have a very soverain influence on a
Christian's growth in Grace. He is a Godly man in truth, who sets no bounds, or
mesures to his Grace, but aims at a kind of Infinity therein. Its a black
marque, that men's Grace is not sincere, if they stint or limit themselves as to
the mesure thereof. Christians should, specially in these evangelic days, aim
at the highest raisures and procedures in Grace. Much Grace brings much
strength, much peace, much communion with, and much service for God: The more
extensive, and intensive your Grace is, the more Godly you are. What Is the
reason why so many professors can do, or suffer so little for God, have so
little beauty and glory on their lives, but because they have so little of
Grace in their hearts? Now what more prevalent and efficacious to make
Christians thrive in Grace, than spiritual and affectionate expectations of our
coming Lord? Thus in our text, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12.
v. 11. What manner of persons ought ye to be? (...). Oh! What an eminence in
Grace ought ye to aim at? what transcendent excellent frames should ye endeavor
after? how heavenly-minded and affectionate toward God; how spiritual, and
serious ought ye to be in all your conversation? why so? why; because al these
things here below must be dissolved. Ay, but might they object, how may we get
to such excellent raisures in Grace? That he adds, in what follows, v. 12.
looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God. This seems to be
brought in, as that which would have a very great causal influence on growth in
Godliness. Alas! how comes it to pass, that professors in this day are so
low, and poor in Grace? Whence is it that we come so far short of former
Christians, as to growth in Grace and Godliness? Is not this the true reason,
because we come short in our expectations of our Lords second coming? Its true,
we seem much higher than the professors of former ages, as to purity of
Worship, Doctrine, and Discipline: ay, but are we not much lower than they, as
to purity of heart and life? And why; but because we have not those lively
expectations of that great day, which their hearts were possessed withal? How
comes it to pass, that our spiritual Fervors and heats are not more
proportionable to our Lights; but because o^r lights are not more
proportionable to the coming of the day of God? Oh! what an high value would
men put on Grace, with a low value on althings else, did they but daily expect
the coming of their Lord? Surely nothing does more raise the price of Grace,
than raised expectations of that glorious day: and there is good reason why;
because nothing will stand us in stead at that great day, but Grace. What would
the foolish Virgins give for the oil of Grace, when they hear the rumor of the
Bridegrooms approach; Mat. 25.8? And what would the man invited to the marriage
feast give for a wedding garment of Grace, when he stands at the door and
receives a repulse? How would the market of Grace rise; and with what industry
would Saints seek after the highest raisures thereof, did they but seriously
wait for the coming of their Lord? For a Saint has this principle fixed in his
heart, that he can never look Christ in the face with comfort, without Grace in
his heart: and the more Grace, the more boldness in that day.

10. Lively expectations of our Lords second coming have an efficacious
Influence on the right ordering of our hearts and lives; wherein much of the
life and power of Godliness does consist. For, what is Godliness, (...).
Piato Protag. 3. sol. 326.
but an Harmony or right Order of heart and life? The poor Philosopher could
inform us, that The whole life of man should consist of Harmony and
Uniformity: and that al virtue and liberty consists in this harmony of soul
and life. Virtue implies a decorum, and good order: and that is ever best,
which is most harmonious. Al sin is attended with confusion, and disorder; but
al Graces have an Amity, (...). Stob. ex Polo, Pythag.
and harmony among themselves. Righteousness, says the Pythagorean, is the
Harmony and Peace of the whole soul, like unto the concent of music. And the
more harmonious the soul is, the more peace and less trouble it has. For God,
who is the Author of peace, dwells not in Babylon, i. e. Confusion, but in
Salcm, i. e. peace, or the soul which is kept in order and peace. Hence, he is
a Godly man indeed, who has got the Art and Skill of ordering his heart and
conversation aright. With such a soul God dwells, and to him he shows his
salvation. So Psalm. 50.23. And to him that orders his conversation aright,
will I show the salvation of God. Now nothing has a more soverain efficace for
the ordering our hearts and lives aright, than deep constant expectations of
our Lords approach. O! what an exact order are such men's souls and
conversations in, who daily expect the coming of their Lord? how harmonious are
their thoughts? how uniforme and equal are their Affections? What a sweet
concent and exact mesure is there in all their ways? This seems implied in that
great Admonition of our Lord, Luke 12.35, 36. Let your loins be girded about,
and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their
Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks
they may open unto him immediately. The girding of the loins, and burning of
their lights, with their waiting for the return of their Lord, do al implie a
good order of heart and life: and whence springs all this, but from serious
thoughts and expectations of our Lords coming? The Allusion seems to be unto
the custom of Servants, who, when they were under expectation of their Lords
return, were mighty careful to set althings in order, and preparation for him.
Lively thoughts of Christ's coming preserve the soul in its due order, by making
Eternity near. If we have tidings, that a person of great quality is coming
to visit us, how are althings immediately set at rights? what care is there to
put every thing in its place? So here, when the soul lies under deep
impressions of the near approach of the Lord of Glory, how studious and exact
is it in setting al its thoughts, Affections, motions, and ways in order? what
a sweet Uniformitie and agreement will there be in its thoughts? how regular, and
consonant will its affections be? what a beautiful Decorum will there be in its
Actions and motions? This is evident in persons on their deathbed, who having
lively views of Eternity, and their near approach thereto, are most careful to
set althings in order. Thence 2 Kings 20.1. When Hezekiah was sick unto death,
Esaias, by Gods appointment, bids him set his house in order, for he should
die. Indeed, it is natural and most commun for Christians, at the approach of
death, to set althings, both of soul and estate in order: and why? because then
they have deep apprehensions of the near approach of their Lord. So that had
we, as we ought to have, such lively views of our Lords coming at al times,
what an admirable order, harmony, and concent would there be in our hearts,
and conversations?

11. Heart-affecting views of our Lords coming have a prevalent Influence on
Christian Vigilance or Watchfulness, which is another great piece of
Godliness. The Life and power of Godliness is much maintained by a spiritual
watching over our hearts and ways. Usually the more or less vigilant we are,
the more or less Godly we are. None thrive more in Godliness, than such as
are the most curious observers of their own spirits, Inclinations, affections,
and conversations, on al occasions, as to tentations, and duties. But, Oh! how
dangerous is a sleepy profession? What a world of evils attend a slumbering
professor? how soon do short sleeps harden? And what more commun in these last
days, than spiritual slumbers even among Virgin prosessors? Yea; how apt are
Christians to be over-taken with slumbering fits, even under the greatest
dangers, and duties? And whence comes this to pass, but from putting far off
the coming of their Lord: Thus it is with the ten Virgins, as well wise as
foolish, Mat. 25.5.
Mat. 25.5. while the bridegroom tarried, they al slumbred and slept. This
refers to these last days of the world, in which our Lord premonisheth us, that
the great sin of professors would be spiritual slumber, and security, arising
from the bridegrooms tarrying, i. e. their not apprehending the nearness of
his approach. Whence it follows, by natural consequence, that the more clearly
and fully we apprehend the Bridegrooms approach, and the nearness thereof, the
more vigilant and watchful we shall be. There are two main parts of Christian
vigilance: (1.) To watch against sin and Tentation. (2.) To watch unto duty.
Now both of these are greatly promoted by lively expectations of our Lords
approach. (1.) Fixed contemplation of our Lords coming, is a prevalent means to
keep the soul vigilant and watchful against sin and tentations thereto. Thus
Mat. 24.42, 43. Watch therefore; for ye know not what hour, your Lord does
come, But know this, that if the good man of the house had known, in what watch
the thief would come, be would have watched, and would not have suffered his
house to be broken up. This Paul applies to our Christian vigilance against
Tentation, 1 These. 5.2 -- 6.
1 These. 5.2 -- 6. v. 2. For your selves know perfectly, that the day of the
Lord so comes as a thief in the night. He refers to the foregoing Admonition
of our Lord, which was communly received in all the Churches. And what does he
infer hence? v. 6. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch
and be sober. He brings in the unexpected coming of our Lord, as a forcible
motive, to provoke al Christians unto Christian vigilance against Tentation.
What is the reason that many professors are so soon overcome by small
tentations, and hardened in sin, but because they watch not against them? And
why is it that that they watch not against sin and tentation, but because they
expect not the coming of Christ? (2.) Frequent and affectionate expectations of
our Lords coming are exceeding powerful, to keep the soul vigilant and watchful
as to duty. Continual vigilance over the work God calls us to, is a great
marque of Godliness. He is a Godly man indeed, who watches al occasions of
doing good, and of being faithful in every relation, and service God calls him
unto. And what greater incentive or argument have we to excite us hereto, than
daily expectations of our Lords approach. Mat. 24.44 -- 46.
Having exhorted them, and us to watch v. 42, 43. he adds v. 44. Therefore be
ye also ready: for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of man comes.
(...). For this cause, i. e. because your Lord comes as a thief in the night,
therefore watch al opportunities of being found in ways of duty. Whence it
follows, v. 45. who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has
made ruler over his household, C^istus hac inte^rogatio^is orma (...), (...).
to give them meat in due season. Here is quis, for qualis or quantus: Who, i.
e. What a faithful and prudent servant is he? or O! how happy is he? What a
rare servant is he? Our blessed Lord uses this form of speech, to show how
rare, and excellent such faithful and prudent servants were. Thence he
concludes, v. 46. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall
find so doing. As if he had said: He is a faithful and blessed servant indeed,
who thus watches al opportunities of service: Now all this is but the effect of
serious expectations of Christ's second coming.

12. Daily and fiducial expectations of Christ's second coming are greatly
prevalent, to wind up the Soul to a Life of faith; which is a main spring, and
essential part of Godliness. For what is Godliness, but a dissolving or
melting the will of man into the will of God? And how is this brought about, but
by faith, which bends the human will to a correspondence with, and conformity
to the divine will? He is the Godly man indeed, to whom God is althings, and the
creature nothing: who admires nothing but God: who makes God the first principe
of his Dependence, and the last end in point of fruition. And are not these the
proper issues of faith? And what more effectual to work the heart to such an
active faith, than fixed and raised expectations of the coming of our Lord? The
Life of faith has seven main venes or branches, which are al animated or
spirited by believing views of our Lords approach.

(1.) A main part of the life of faith consists in the realising of those good
things hoped for. So Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance, [or subsistence] of
things hoped for and evidence of things not seen, i. e. Faith makes things
future present; things invisible visible. And how is it that faith works such
wonders, but by real views of the coming of our Lord? Faith, by fixing its eye
on that glorious day, gives the soul a spiritual real view of al those coming
glories, which attend and follow that day.

(2.) Another branch of the life of faith consists in those prelibations, and
foretastes of approaching Glories, which believers, at times, are made partakers
of. And what more efficacious to animate this part of the life of faith, than
lively views of our Lords near approach? Thus Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ^lso after
that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. 14. Which is
the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemtion of the purchased
possession. (...), Dum in libertatem vindicemur. Bez.
'til we are brought into a state of complete liberty. The believing views of
our Lords approach give us some earnest, and first fruits of this purchased
possession, as Romans 8.23. which have the first fruits of the spirit.

(3.) Much of the life of faith consists in spiritual groans after the
dissolution of this sinful frail Tabernacle, in order to a more complete union
with our Lord. This follows on the former; For they who have received some
prelibations of approaching glories, cannot but long after a dissolution of this
sinful state, in order to a more intimate conjunction with their Lord. And
whence springs this, but from serious expectations of our Lords approach? So
Romans 8.23. Romans 8.23.
And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of
the-Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemtion of our body. Look as the Israelites in the
Wilderness, having tasted off the clusters of Canaan, longed after the full
possession of that goodly land: O! say they, when shall we set foot in Canaan?
So Paul, having tasted of the first fruits of Heavenly Canaan, groans, and
longs after a dissolution, in order to his more intimate conjunction with his
Lord. And that which made him groan more earnestly, was his waiting for the
Adoption, namely at the coming of our Lord. The like 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know,
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens. Paul takes this
for grant, that if his body were once dissolved his soul should be housed with
God: he should meet his Lord. What follows hence? v. 2. For in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven.
(...) In, or for this we groan. That which made him groan after a dissolution
of his body, was the union of his soul with his absent Lord, as ver. 5, 6.

(4.) Another part of the lise of faith consists in an holy resignation to the
will of God in althings. Herein also much of the life and power of Godliness
does consist. And what more powerful to breed such a resignation to the will of
God, than lively expectations of our coming Lord? O! how gladly would such have
Christ to dispose of al their affairs? What content can they take in every
condition God calls them unto? If they meet with a dark providence, how much do
they persuade their hearts quietly to submit to the Divine will therein? Whence
proceed al our clamors, and murmurs against the Divine will, but from some
defect or neglect in waiting for Christ's coming? O! how patient and meek will
such be, who continually expect their Lords approach? So Jam. 5.7. Be patient
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: Behold, the husbandman
waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it,
until he receive the early and the later rain. The coming of the Lord is here
brought in as the ground of Christian patience, or submission to the will of
God. v. 8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh.

(5.) Again, the life of faith consists much in the Art and Mystery of bearing
the Cross; which is much improved by serious thoughts of our Lords near
Approach. Lively expectations of Christ's second coming take out the sting and
poison of every Cross, and infuse a medicinal virtue into it. O! how is the
black cross made beautiful; the heavy cross made easy and leight; the sour
bitter cross made sweet by spiritual sights of our Lords approach? Thus Act.
5.41. Act. 5.41.
And they departed from the presence of the council rejoicing, that they were
coun^^^ worthy to suffer shame for his name. (...), that they were honored with
dishonor, or reproaches for his name. Here is a figure, which they call (...),
acute solie, whereby things contrary are acutely and wisely conjoined. They
count their dishonors and Disgraces for the name of Christ great marquis of
honor and grace: and why? because they mesured al by the coming of the day of
God. What more soverain cordial can there be, to revive the drooping despondent
spirits of troubled Saints, than saving heart-affecting views of their Lords
approach? And there is good reason for it; because then the troubled Saint shall
be freed from al his pressing fears, burdens, tentations, and sins. This was
the ground of the Apostles consolation to the afflicted Thessalonians, who
lived under the cross al their days: 1 These. 4.16, 17, 18. v. 16, 17. he gives
them a lively Image, or description of the coming of our Lord: and then
concludes, v. 18. wherefore comfort one another with these words. O! what a
spring of consolation is here? If thou art much acquainted with such thoughts,
I dare say thou can be no stranger to true comfort. Oh! how much comfort
might Saints enjoy, amidst al their crosses, would they but feed and refresh
their hearts with frequent expectations of their Lords second coming? Do not
the purest and best consolations come in this way? Thus Paul comforts the same
Thessalonians, 2 These. 1.7. And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the
Lord Jesus shall be reveled from Heaven, with his mighty Angels. He still makes
this the ground of his consolation to those afflicted Saints, namely the
Revelation of our Lord from Heaven.

(6.) Another vital branch of the life of faith consists in dependence on
Christ, for actual Grace, in all conditions and duties, either of active or
passive obedience; wherein also much of the life and power of Godliness does
consist. A Godly man is the most passive dependent creature in the World; He
can neither do nor suffer any thing as a Godly man, without absolute,
immediate, and total dependence on Christ by faith. And what more effectually
promotes such an absolute dependence on Christ, than serious expectation of our
Lords approach? How powerfully is the soul drawn to depend on Christ for all
Grace, by a spiritual view of his glorious appearence? who more dependent on
Christ, than such, who live daily in the expectation of his return? A
believing soul, that has a spiritual constant regard to the coming of his Lord,
sees al fullness of Grace in him, and al emtinesse in himself. What makes men
more negligent in taking hold of Grace when offered, than putting far from them
the coming of their Lord? How comes it to pass, that proud man affects to be
self-sufficient, as God, but because he considers not the exact jugement, which
will follow on the coming of our Lord? He that eyeth that great day, sees a
necessity of putting al his stock and treasure in Christ's hands. The same
faith, that draws forth the soul to regard the coming of his Lord, draws
divine Influences from him, in order to a provision for that day, as Joh. 15.5.
He that abides in me, etc.

(7.) The last part of the life of faith is patiently to wait for the reward of
al our services, and sufferings. And is not this also greatly promoted by
spiritual expectations of our Lords approach? (1.) This as to service is
evident from Heb. 10.35. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has
great recompense of reward. 36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise, i. e. the thing
promissed. Now what argument does the Author use to excite them unto a fiducial
waiting for the recompense of reward? That follows v. 37. For yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Here lies the force
of his exhortation, even in the speedy return of our Lord. (2.) So also as to
sufferings, what made Moses so patiently to wait for the recompense of reward;
but his seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11.26, 27? i. e. Our Lord, who will
come to judge both the quick and dead.

13. Raised expectations of our Lords coming have also a prevalent Influence on
Assurance; which is a great spring of Godliness. The more Assurance Saints
have, the more Godly usually they are: For the sense of Gods love to them is
mostessicacious, to draw forth their love and obedience unto God: To be sure
that Christ is ours, makes us to do and suffer the most for Christ. Apprehended
love is more powerful, than apprehended wrath to keep the soul in ways of
duty: The more the heart is assured of an Interest in Christ, the more the
Interest of Christ prevails in the heart and life: Assurance of being in a
state of Grace enlarges the heart to receive much Grace from Christ. Such a
powerful Influence has Assurance on Godliness. And O! what a soverain
Influence has raised expectations of our Lords approach on Assurance? Such
thoughts have a twofold Influence on Assurance.

(1.) By way of motive, as they press, and provoke the heart to labor after
assurance. I no way dout, sirs, but were our hearts possessed with daily and
fresh apprehensions of Christ's second coming to jugement, we could not content
our selves in such doutful peradventures about our state, as now we take up
with. A soul that lies under deep expectations of Christ's second coming, will
thus reason in himself: What! will my Lord ere long come to jugement? and must I
then appear before him in my native colors? Oh! what may I do then, to be
assured of an interest in his favor? what more effectual to put men upon
heart-examination, than such a constant minding of our Lords approach to
Jugement? Thus Paul, 1 Cor. 3.13. tells us, that every man's work, shall be tried
by fire, in that day, which is a strong argument to put us on the examination
of our heart and works, in order to assurance.

(2.) Actual fixed thoughts of Christ's coming have a great Influence on
Assurance by way of real evidence: They are not only a motive, but substantial
ground to bottom assurance on: what better note or sign of the sincerity of
thy Grace can there be, than a fiducial cheerful looking for, and hastening to
the coming of the day of God? Be sure, an hypocrite fears nothing more: nothing
strikes a greater dampe on his spirit, than the apprehensions of Christ's second
coming, because then al his rottenness, and hypocrisy shall be discovered. I
dare pronounce that person a Saint, who can in good earnest desire, and with a
wel-grounded confidence expect the second coming of Christ to jugement. Yea,
this is a sign not only of sincerity, but also of an eminence in Grace, and
therefore a substantial evidence, and bottom for Assurance.

14. Serious thoughts of the coming of Christ have a forcible influence on the
carrying on and improvement of friendship with God in Christ. The ancient
Glossarie interprets (...) a Godly man, by (...), Theophiles, a friend of God.
And indeed the Scripture seems to place much of the spirit, and power of
Godliness in friendship with God. For look as friendship bends it self to
serve, please, and conform unto its friend; so Godliness to serve, please,
and conform unto God. Now what more effectual to maintain and improve
friendship with God in Christ, than lively expectations of our Lords approach?
(1.) One part of friendship consists in Ressemblance of, and conformity unto
our friend: when men's principles, dispositions, ends, humors, conversation, and
manner of life is one and the same. And what is there more efficacious to
improve such an holy friendship with God, than serious expectations of the
coming of our Lord? Oh! how ambitious will such be to have one and the same
Mind, Will, Affection, and Conversation with Christ? Paul was one of the best
friends Christ ever had on earth: and wherein lay his friendship chiefly, but
in conformity to the death and life of Christ? 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
2 Cor. 4.10, 11. Always bearing about in the body, the dying of the Lord
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be manifest in our body, etc. Paul
was couformable as well to the death, as to the life of Christ: As Christ died
for sin, so he died to sin: And as Christ lived to God, so Paul in his mesure.
Christ was his great exemplar, both in regard of active and passive obedience:
Christ's exemple was not only the Rule, but also Reason of his obedience: The
love of Christ to him, and his love to Christ prevailed on him to live the life
of Jesus: The end of his suffering for and obedience to Christ was to manifest
the life of Christ. And what did wind up his Spirit to such a divine
friendship, and conformity unto Christ, but serious thoughts of his second
coming? So John tells us, 1 John 3.2, 3. that every one, who has hopes of being
found at last day a friend of Christ, purifieth himself as he is pure. And Paul
informs us, Tit. 2.11, 12. That the Grace of God teaches us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and Godly
in this present World, i. e. in short, that we should demonstrate our
friendship to Christ by manifesting the life of Christ. And then he adds the
ground of al, v. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

(2.) Another part of friendship with Christ consistes in an holy Ambition to
please him. A true friend makes it his business to please and content his
friend: so Believers to please Christ. And herein much of the Spirit of
Godliness does consist. What is al piety but a studious emulation, and
endeavor to please God? Hence among the Grecians, (...), a Godly man was one
that had a care to please the Gods. Such also they styled (...), Theophiles, a
friend of God. Thus Enoch is said, Heb. 11.5. to please God: and what made him
thus ambitious to please God, but fiducial expectations of the coming of our
Lord? of which we find mention, Jude 14. Such a Court-like ambition had Paul to
please Christ, 2 Cor. 5.9.
2 Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of him. (...), Wherefore, i. e. because we have this Confidence and
desire of being present with our Lord, who is our best friend, therefore we
labor; Si nificanter ^ surpavit hoc votabulan, quo soreasis quaedam ambitio
h^norum proprie sig ^ificatur. B^za.
(...), we have a certain courtlike ambition, and holy emulation of pleasing
Christ. Thence he adds, v. 10. For we must al appear before the jugement seat
of Christ. Oh! what a prevalent argument was this, to work up Paul's spirit to
an holy emulation of pleasing Christ? Thus also Peter, in the words following
our text, 2 Pet. 3.14. wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things,
be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.
Here he brings in the looking for the coming of the day of God, as a strong
argument, inducing them to an holy emulation, and contention after al manner of
gracious qualities, for the pleasing of Christ their friend.

(3.) Another part of Godly friendship with Christ consists in importunate
desires, and endeavors to serve him. Its a great saying of a serious Jansenist,
S. Cyran: One of the most principal rules for solid devotion is, that we let
not pass the least occasion for serving God. If there be any vacuum, or emty
space in our lives, the Devil will be sure to fill it up, and so obstruct our
friendship with Christ. What more obsequious and officious than friendship? and
who are more industrious, and unwearied in the service of Christ, than such
friends of his, who daily expect his second coming? Thence that parabolic
exhortation of our Lord, Luke 19.13.
Luke 19.13. And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and
said unto them, occupy 'til I come. (...), employ al your thoughts, vigor, and
activitie in my service: and why? til I come: This is brought in as an argument
or motive, to engage them more effectually in his service. A soul that lives
much in the expectation of Christ's coming, will spend as much time and strength
as he can in the service of Christ, but as little as he can in the service of
sin. Thus also it was with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.7. So that ye come behind
in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Their waiting for
the coming of our Lord is brought in by Paul, as that which has a very
efficacious causal Influence on the improvement of their gifts, in order to the
service of Christ. And what made Paul so vigorous and laborious in the service
of Christ, but daily expectations of his return? So 1 These. 2.19. For what is
our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? That which made Paul so unwearied in his
service for Christ, among the Thessalonians, was an eye fixed on the coming of
Christ, and the Crown he should then receive, for all his labors. Such thoughts
make us do much in a little time for Christ.

(4.) Lastly a main part of our friendship with Christ consists in an
affectionate complacential remembrance of him in his absence: and does not the
formal spirit hereof consist in looking for, and hastening to the coming of the
day of God? Are not they most mindful of him, who daily expect his second
coming? Was not this one main intent of our Lord, in the Institution of his
last supper, that we might thereby keep alive the memorial of him? 1 Cor.
11.25, 26.
Thus 1 Cor. 11.25. This do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.
Friends at parting are wont to leave remembrances each of other: so Christ left
his last Supper, as a love-remembrance with his friends. Thence it follows; 26.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death 'til he come. The coming of Christ, and the expectation thereof is that
which gives life to our remembrance of him. The thoughts of Christ's return
give a fresh luster, and sweetness to al lovetokens.

15. Solid and deep expectations of our Lords coming have a particular and
powerful Influence, (...). D^f. Plat. Dixerunt Stoici, (...). Laert. (...).
P^avor.
on our sanctifying Gods name in Worship; wherein much of the power of
Godliness does consist. So (...), in its primary notion, signifies one that
Worships God aright, and so it is the same with (...). Thus, according to the
Platonist, Godliness is a faculty of worshipping God: and so the Stoics said,
That Godliness was a Science of Worship due to the Gods. Whence a Godly man
was, among the Grecians, one that ministered unto, or worshipped God. And
indeed, that a main fundamental part of Godliness consists in the
sanctifying Gods name in Worship is most evident; because al pretenders to
Godliness do mostly concern themselves about matters of worship. And the
serious Jansenist, S. Cyran, assures us, That the least points in worship are
of greatest consequence. Whence, there is nothing more opposed by Satan, than
Divine Worship; which sufficiently evinceth, that the chief of Godliness
consists therein. Now nothing has a greater influence on the sanctifying
Gods name in worship, than serious expectations of our Lords second coming.

(1.) We sanctify Gods name in Worship, when we abase our selves, and advance
his name therein. Al eminence is worshipped by an humble reverence and
submission. Hence humble spirits are ever the fitest subjects for devotion. Now
none raise God higher in their hearts, and depresse themselves lower, than such
as daily expect the coming of their Lord. Oh! with what an humble reverence,
and tremblement of heart do such worship God? (2.) Again, we sanctify Gods
name in worship, when we worship him in spirit and in truth. A worship that
has not an inward root and spring in the heart deserves no better name than
superstition. Our Lord tells us John 4.23. The true worshippers are those that
worship the father in Spirit, and in truth. Formal devotion is but a kind of
irreligion: Such duties are the devils galleries, not Christ's: none worship God
in truth, but such as worship him in Spirit. And who worship God in spirit and
truth more than such, as daily expect the coming of their Lord? Oh! what a
reverent and high estime have such of God, when they draw nigh to him? How do
they adore the Grandeurs of God? (3.) Moreover they sanctify the name of God,
who watch their hearts, and keep out vain thoughts, and terrene Affections,
whiles they are in the worship of God. This is termed, Eccles. 5.1.
Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God. This seems to
allude to the custom of discalceation or putting off their Shoes, used both by
the Jews and Gentiles, in going to the place of worship; which I presume had
its rise from that command of God to Moses, Exodus 3.5. Put off thy Shoes from
off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground. Hence that
Symbol of Pythagoras; worship and Sacrifice with thy Shoes off. (...) keep,
look to, observe, watch narrowly. Thy foot, i. e. thy Thoughts, thine
Affections, thy whole soul, and man. Its the manner of the Scripture, under one
single Gesture or Act, to signify the whole worship represented thereby. So
that the sense is: keep an accurate and curious observation of thy soul, when
thou engagest in the worship of God. And, oh! how exact and accurate in keeping
their hearts are such, as daily expect their Lords approach? (4.) Lastly they
sanctify the name of God in Ordinances and Worship, who are unsatisfied til
they have acquired the gain and benefit of Ordinances. In all worship, one that
sanctifies the name of God, is carried above the act of worship unto Christ.
And surely none mind and taste more of Christ in ordinances, than such as daily
look for and hasten to his second coming. Oh! what a full draught do such drink
of the satisfying sweetnesses of Christ in duties? Thus Psalm. 22.26. Psalm. 22
26.
The meek shall eat and be satisfied. By eating here is chiefly to be understood
a feeding on a Crucified Christ. This is evident both from the title, and main
subject of the Psalm. The Title Aijeleth Shaar signifies the Hind, or Heart of
the morning, i. e. the Hind which is hunted and killed in the morning. So v.
16. That Christ is this hunted Hind, is evident from v. 1, 8, 18. which are
applied to Christ, Mat. 27.46, 35, 43. Christ's Crucifixion extends to v. 22.
where begins a prophetic triumph over al his sufferings. v. 26. is a solemn
invitation, made by Christ, to believers, to come and feast with him on the
benefits of his death and passion: and the manner of speech is taken from the
custom of those times, in which, those who had been delivered out of great
dangers, were wont to celebrate the same by Sacrifices and public feasts. The
meck, i. e. the humble, brokenhearted believer. Shall eat, i. e. feed on my
death and passion, my body and blood; with all the benefits thereof. And be
satisfied, i. e. find a satisfying sweetness therein: So far as the thirst of
total indigence shall be quenched, albeit not their thirst of fruition. Ay, but
what must the meek do, that so they may feed on and be satisfied in a crucified
Christ? why they must seek him: so it follows, They shall praise the Lord that
seek him, i. e. seek him in every Ordinance, specially in the Lords Supper. Ay,
but how must they seek him? They must seek him, not only in his present
influences, but also by waiting for, and hastening to his second coming. Again,
with what a spiritual fervor, and holy violence do such prevail with God, in
Prayer? What a rich trade do they drive for heaven? How diligent, attentive,
and affectionate are they in hearing the Word? How are their minds illuminated,
their hearts quickened, their affections warmed, their Resolutions
strengthened, and their whole souls enlarged, fixed, and elevated in
Meditation? So great is the influence, which the lively expectation of Christ's
second coming has on the sanctifying Gods name in Worship, and all the parts
thereof.

16. Serious expectations of our Lords approach have a prevalent Influence on
walking with God; which is another great and essential part of Godliness. By
walking with God I understand communion with God, not only in Acts of Worship,
(...). Phavor.
but also in the whole of our conversation. And such is a Godly man indeed.
Thus among the Grecians, a Godly man was one that conversed much, or had
communion with the Gods. Whence the more devote among the Heathens had their
Lectisternia, or Beds, Of these Lectisternia see Court Gent. part 1. B. 2. c.
9. sect. 10.
exhibited in their Temples, on which they pretended to feast, and hold
communion with their Gods. O! what a rare instance of Godliness is he, that
has communion with God, not only in acts of immediate Worship, but also in the
whole of his conversation? Many Christians enjoy, at times, somewhat of God in
duties; but then how soon do they lose it again, after duties, by neglects, or
not walking with God in their callings? But now a Soul that eyes, admires,
adores, loves, and follows God, not only in Religious Ordinances, but also in
commun providence, employments, and enjoyments, such a man may be said to
walk with God, and to have attained more than ordinary strains of Godliness.
And what has a greater influence and force to raise up the heart, to such a
strain of heavenly conversation, or walking with God, than lively views of our
approaching Lord? Oh! how does the glory of Christ's second appearance, beheld
by faith, wind up the soul to high raisures of communion with him in this
life? A Soul that ever lives in the believing views of Christ's glorious
appearing, sees, hears, smells, tastes, touches, and enjoys nothing so much as
Christ. How does such a soul, not only pray, and meditate; but also eat and
drink, walk, discourse, live and die in Christ? Is it not his whole business
to enjoy Christ? Does he not make Christ his companion out of duty, as well as
in duty? Thus Enoch walked with God. Genesis 5.22. Genesis 5.22.
And Enoch walked with God. Which is rendered, Heb. 11.5. By faith he pleased
God. How did Enoch walk with, and please God? why surely thus: Enoch, by faith
had a clear sight of the coming of our Lord, as it is evident from Jud. 14. And
this made him studious, and ambitious to walk with and please God, by all
manner of heavenly conversation: he obeyed and followed the various calls and
Impressions of God: he retired from that sensual corrupt generation, and lived
much alone with God: he enjoyed a true monastic life: the whole world was to
him a Monastery, wherein he found solitude and retirement with God. Fiducial
expectations of his approaching Lord, gave him many sublime and sweet
meditations, much pure light, and fervent love, many strong desires, and
unwearied endeavors in walking with God. Oh! how were his Thoughts,
Inclinations, and Affections hereby molded into a fit frame for walking with
God? Believing, and lively expectations of our Lords approach have a soverain
Influence on communion or walking with God, three ways.

(1.) By enlarging the heart, and raising it above it self. None are more
filled with God, than those who have their hearts most enlarged toward God.
And O! how much is the heart enlarged toward God, by lively views of the
coming of our Lord? To have raised expectations of our Lords approach, how does
it amplify, and raise the soul above it self? Is not this one of the noblest
dispositions in the new creature? As a Christian in his lowest condition far
excels al other men; so when he lies under such believing views of his Lords
approach, how much does he excel himself? Is he not, as it were, in another
world? how enlarged are his desires? what elevated hopes has he? how wide and
capacious is his whole soul for walking with God? Thus it was with the Spouse,
in the Canticles; She was no sooner espoused to Christ, but he goes away, and
resides in heaven; and leave, her no other way for the enjoyment of him, but
continued expectations, and strong breathings after his return: and oh! how is
her soul enlarged hereby in walking with God? So Cant. 8.14. Make have, or fly
away, etc. She had an holy impatience, with Christian submission, under his
long absence: So much was her heart enlarged in the expectation of his return.
Such enlargement of heart, and communion with God had Paul, from the
expectation of Christ's return, Romans 8.23, 24. We our selves groan within our
selves, waiting for the Adoption, etc. Yea, this is the last word that the
Church or Spirit in the Church breathes forth in Scripture, Rev. 22.17. And the
Spirit and the Bride say come, etc. So John, v. 20. Even so come Lord Jesus.
Thus the Primitive Churches had their hearts enlarged in longings for the
coming of our Lord: and thus they walked with God: seeing they could not enjoy
their Lord in person, they would in lively hopes and expectations of his
return.

(2.) Lively expectations of our Lords second coming have a prevalent influence
on communion and walking with God, in that they keep God, and the soul
together. Estrangements from God make a Schism in our walking with him: If you
would keep God close to you, you must keep your hearts close to God. A variable
professor, who starteth away from God with every company, is not fit to walk
with God. And surely, nothing has a greater force to keep the heart close to
God, than lively views of our Lords return. What is it to have the heart kept
close to God, but to have it raised up to the Spirit and life of heaven? When
the body is in the world, conversing with variety of objects, even then to
have the heart in heaven, this is that which I mean by having the heart kept
close to God, in all our ways. And what more effectual to keep the heart and
conversation in heaven, than daily expectations of our Lords approach? Thus
Paul walked with God, Phil. 3 20.
as he assures us, Phil. 3.20. Having spoken before of some, who made their
belly their God, and were immersed in earthly things, he subjoins: For our
conversation is in heaven: (...), our State, City, Trade, manner of life and
conversation: The current of our thoughts, Inclinations, affections, and lives
is in heaven, i. e. in short: he walked with God. Ay, but what was it that
engaged him hereto? That he adds: Whence also we look for the Savior, our
Lord Jesus Christ. Here lies the Spring, the root of his heavenly conversation,
namely his looking for the coming of our Lord.

(3.) To walk with God is to follow God in all ways of Service, Suffering, and
Providence: To observe what work of service, or suffering God calls us to, and
to fall in with God in that work. And what does more effectually engage the
heart hereto, than lively expectations of our Lords approach? Oh! how exact is
such a soul in observing every motion of Gods Spirit and Providence? What
workings toward God has it, agreeable to the workings of God toward the soul?
how flexible is it to turn this or that way, accordingly as God turns toward
it? Thus Enoch, Noah, and Paul walked with God.

17. Deep and affectionate expectations of the coming of our Lord have a
Soverain influence on Perseverance in Grace; which is another fundamental part
of Godliness. A Godly man, being rooted in the covenant and in Christ, can
never fall away finally, and totally. He may fall into sin, but does not, cannot
continue in his false: He may fall into a fit of slumber, as the Spouse, but his
heart waketh. The weakest believer at his lowest ebb keeps a radical union
with Christ. False hearts forsake Christ, when the comforts of Christ, or of
the world forsake them: But Godly persons cannot forsake Christ, albeit he may
seem to forsake them. A man that is once truly Godly is ever so. God has put
this divine quality into the nature of Evangelic Grace, beyond that of Adam,
that it keeps man's mutable will, in an immutable state of Grace. In other states
men come to security by degrees, but in the state of Grace a Godly man has it
at first dash, and that from the Spirits indwelling. Now a main Instrument,
which the Spirit uses to keep the Saints in perseverance, is daily expectation
of our Lords return. O! what more effectual to keep the heart from secret, as
well as open backslidings, than fresh views of our Lords approach? Thus Jud. 21.
Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, unto Eternal life. This also kept Paul tite and constant, in his
Christian race, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Alas! what is it that makes many carnal
professors turn their back on Christ, and plunge their souls in all manner of
sensualities, but putting far off the coming of their Lord? This seems to have
given occasion unto Peter, of this warm discourse, touching the coming of our
Lord, his foreseeing there would arise many loose professors, in these days,
who putting far from them the coming of the day of God, would fall into al
manner of sensuality and profanesse, as 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. What think you? Would
Judas have been so base-minded, as to sell his master for thirty pieces of
Silver, had he expected his second coming? Can we imagine that Demas would have
been so sordid, as to leave the service of Christ, and turn again to this
present world, had he kept the coming of his Lord in his eye? No surely. Ah! is
not this the bitter root of al Apostasy, in these last days, secure professors
dream not of their Lords approach?

SECT. 3. What Influence the Expectation of Christ's coming has on an holy
Conversation.
HAving demonstrated, what Influence the daily expectation of our Lords second
coming has on Godliness, we now proceed to show, what an efficacious Influence
it has on an holy conversation. By (...) we understand, as was intimated in the
explication of the text, al duties of the second table; which have a more
particular regard to men, and our manner of Life, or conversation among them. I
intend not to discourse on al those particular duties, which necessarily
conduce to constitute, or make up an holy conversation toward men, but to
speak somewhat of the root of an holy conversation, and then of such particular
branches, as in a more peculiar manner receive Influence from the serious
expectation of our Lords approach.

As for the Root of al second-table duties, or holy conversation toward men,
it is placed, by our Lord, in Love to our neighbor, Mat. 22.39. And Paul tells
us, Romans 13.10. that Love is the fulfilling of the Law, i. e. so far as it
prevails, it fills up every duty, with its proper Form, Spirit, or moral
perfection. O! what a seminal, universal root of holy conversation is Love? How
much are al inferior duties influenced hereby? and what more efficacious to
breed love to men as men, and to Saints as Saints, than daily looking for, and
hastening to the coming of the day of God? Thus, 1 These. 3.12, 13.
1 These. 3.12. And the Lord make you to increase, and abound in love one
toward another, and toward al men, even as we do toward you. Here is
required in Saints a twofold love, (1.) One toward another: and (2.) Toward
al men. We have a relation to, and therefore ought to have a love for men as
men; but much more for Saints as Saints: Our relations by nature ought to be
near and dear to us; but our relations by Grace much more dear and near. Saints
must communicate in commun love and benefits with all; but in peculiar love and
benefits with Saints. Recte in malu odimus malitiam and diligimus creaturam: ut
nec propter vitium natura damnetur, nec propt^r naturam vi^ium diligatur. Arg.
We ought to hate the evil in evil men, but to love the nature: that so the
Nature may not be condemned for the evil; nor the Evil loved for the Nature.
Ay, but what argument does Paul here urge, to induce these Thessalonians, thus
to abound in love one toward another, and toward al men? Surely no other than
the expectation of our Lords approach, as v. 13. To the end he may stablish
your hearts unblameable in holiness, before God, even our father, at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints. The coming of our Lord is
here brought in by Paul as a motive and means of their abounding in Love, one
toward another, and toward al men. O! how will their hearts flame with love
each toward other, whose eyes are intent in looking for the coming of our
Lord? And there is good reason for it; because then their hearts will be
perfectly knit together in love. Alas! were it possible, that Saints, who lie
under so many essential, and deep obligations to love each other, could keep at
such a distance as they do, had they the coming of their Lord much in their
eye? It was the saying of a great Divine now with God, That the Divisions in
the Church, are a greater plague, than the raging sword. And whence spring al
these divisions, but from our division from God? And how comes it to pass,
that we are so divided from God, but because we wait not for the coming of our
Lord? How soon would a deep expectation of our Lords approach dash out of
countenance al our dividing principles and practices? That should never be got
by strife, which may be had by love and peace: Yea, such thoughts would make us
not only Patients, but Agents in seeking after peace. The more spiritual we
are, the more uniting and healing will our spirits be: and what makes us more
spiritual, than lively expectations of our Lords second coming? In a circle,
the nearer the lines come to the center, the nearer they come each to other: so
here, the more we look for, and the nearer we approach to the coming of the day
of God, the nearer we shall approach each to other, by brotherly love, union,
and communion. There is no such way to keep up an holy conversation, as union
and communion of Saints: and what more efficacious to preserve union and
communion of Saints, than union and communion with our approaching Lord? Neither
does this expectation of our Lords approach work in the Saints love to each
other only, but also love to al mankind. Oh! what a diffusive and generous love
to the worst of men have such as lie under distinct, and spiritual views of our
approaching Lord? So much for the principe and root of al holy conversation,
namely Christian love, which is the bond of perfection. I now proceed to some
particular branches or parts of this holy conversation, with endeavors to
demonstrate, what Influence they receive from a fiducial looking for, and
hastening to the coming of the day of God.

1. One main part of an holy conversation, as to men, consists in an
irreprochable and blameless course of righteousness: when Christians fill up
every Relation, Capacity, Condition, Opportunity, and duty God entrusts them
with: when men perform the duties of their place, in their proper place. Such
Christians do by their Actions demonstrate the truth of their principles and
profession. Their deeds, as well as their words, are a good Apology for what
they profess: and when men cannot judge concerning their principles, yet they
may, and do judge of their holy practice and conversation. Now what more
efficacious to produce such an irreprochable and righteous conversation, than
serious expectations of our Lords approach? This made Paul so conscientious and
exact in his conversation toward al men, Act. 24.15. Act. 24.15, 16.
And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. Paul here makes an
Apology for himself, against the false imputations of the Pharisees; and he
bottomes al upon a principle allowed by them; namely, that there should be a
resurrection of the just and unjust. And what does h^ collect hence? v. 16. And
herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense,
toward God, and toward men. Herein, (...), propter hoc, i.e. by reason of
this Confidence, touching the Resurrection, at the coming of our Lord, Paul did
exercise himself in all conscientious regard toward God and men. This is the
life of al piety toward God, the nerves of al commun justice toward men, and
sobrictie toward our selves. Thus Tit. 2.12. Tit. 2.12, 13.
That we should live soberly, [i.e. in reference to our selves] righteously,
[which refers to others] and godly, [which respects God.] And all this is
grounded on, v. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

2. Another part of an holy conversation consists in Christian moderation
toward al men; which is the proper effect of Love. A Christian should be most
severe toward himself, but exceeding moderate as to others. Our blessed Lord
instructs us, both by his exemple and precept, that there is not a more
evident marque of a generous heroic spirit, than, in all humility and
submission, to condescend to the Infirmities of others, by Christian
moderation. This moderation, which is so essential to an holy conversation,
contains in it several Ingredients. I shall only mention such as receive a
peculiar Influence from a serious looking for, and hastening to the coming of
the day of God. That daily expectation of our Lords approach has a very
soverain influence on Christian moderation, is evident from that exhortation of
Paul, Phil. 4.5.
Philip. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto al men; the Lord is at hand.
Some among the Philippians were, as it seems, from Phil. 3.15. too tenacious,
and stiff, as to their own sentiments and opinions: The Philippians were very
affectionate Christians, but wanted knowledge and jugement, as it appears from,
Phil. 1.9. Their love was ardent, but not so judicious as it ought to be: and
such affectionate Christians are most prone to excede in intemperate,
immoderate zele. Hence Paul here exhorts them to Moderation, not only toward
Christians, but to al men: and what argument does he urge, to induce them
hereto? That follows: The Lord is at hand. The grand motive, from which he
enforces his exhortation, is the coming of our Lord. But I descend to
particulars.

(1.) Serious expectation of the coming of our Lord has a special efficace on
moderation in Jugement, and opinions. Its no small piece of Immoderation, and
Intemperance, too commun among many professors, to impose our own private
Dogmes and opinions, no way essential, or fundamental to saving faith, as a
rule of faith on others. This seems to have been the case of some among the
Philippians; whom Paul exhorts to moderation herein, and that from this ground,
Phil. 3.15. if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall revele even this
unto you. And, oh! what a prevalence has a serious expectation of our Lords
second coming, to keep professors from the Imposition of their own persuasions,
as a rule of faith on others? Such as daily look for this great day, though
they cannot follow, yet they durst not by force lead, or rule others: perhaps
they cannot embrace the sentiments of others, yet they dare not impose their
own, as a rule of faith.

(2.) Another piece of Christian moderation consists in Toleration, or
forbearance of others, as to injuries done unto us. Christian love is exceeding
meek and passive: It can suffer much injury, without the least Reaction,
specially when it has the coming of the day of God in its eye. What makes men
so vindictive and impatient under injuries received, but putting far from them
the approach of their Lord? So Mat. 24.48, 49. But and if that evil servant
shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his
fellow servants, etc. Here you see the cause why the evil servant smites his
fellow servants, is because he says in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming.
What made the rigorous servant so severe in exacting the hundred pence, due
from his fellow servant, but a groundless persuasion, that his Lord would not
call him to an account for the ten thousand Talents, Mat. 18.32, etc?

(3.) Serious thoughts of our Lords approach are exceeding efficacious to keep
men from uncharitable censures, which is another part of Christian moderation,
wherein much of an holy conversation does consist. Oh! what a severe censorious
spirit have many professors? whiles they blame and censure others, how justly
do they fall under the blame, and censure of uncharitable severitie? Yea, how
rigid are some in their censures of other men's rigidnesses? Yea, are not many,
who are most indulgent as to their own fauts, most severe in censuring the
fauts of others? And if their actions are good, yet how prone are they to
censure their Intentions? And whence springs this unchristian severitie, but
from a want of regard to the coming of our Lord? This seems to have been the
sin of the Corinthians, which Paul cautions them against, 1 Cor. 4.5. 1 Cor.
4.5.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts. The Corinthians were broken into many parties, and each
party was prone to judge, and censure the different party. Paul here gives
check to these censorious humors: and what argument does he use? surely, no
other than the coming of our Lord, and that universal Jugement which would
ensue thereon.

(4.) Another piece of Christian moderation consists in freedom from secret
Animosities, grudges, and envies against others. Some professors are so
intemperate and immoderate in their pretended zele, or rather self-love, that
albeit they have nothing they can or durst censure others for, yet what secret
grudges, animosities, and envyings do they loge in their breasts against them?
And what better remedy can there be against such distempered, immoderate
passion, than lively expectation of our Lords approach? Thus Jam. 5.9. Grudge
not one against another, Jam. 5.
brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold the judge stands at the door. He had
mentioned in the foregoing verse, the drawing nigh of the Lord, and then adds
this as an appendix thereto, (...), send not forth secret groans each against
other. By grudging or groaning, he understands a certain intestine complaint,
or invidious clamor of spirit; which argues much impatience, albeit it
breaks not forth, by reason of somewhat that may hinder. Some interpret it,
Envy not each other; because envy is wont to grudge, or groan at the good of
others. It is thought to refer to the story of Cain; to whom God said, when he
envied his Brother, Genesis 4.6. Why art thou wroth? i. e. why do thou grudge,
or groan against thy brother? Ay, but what argument does James bring to kill
this viper of invidious groaning, or grudging each against other? that follows:
Behold the judge stands at the door. Oh! what a soverain Antidote is this,
against the venomous root of invidious grudging against others, to think, that
the judge stands at the door? Alas! whence springs al envy, and grudging,
but from this narrow selfish conceit, that another man enjoys the good, that I
want, and ought to have? Now a serious saving lively view of the coming of our
Lord, makes us look upon what good others enjoy, as if it were our own: and
does not this take away the root, and ground of al envy? A Saint that daily
waits for the coming of his Lord, looks on the Gifts and Graces of another, as
that which does as effectually promote his chiefest good, namely the service of
his Lord, as if they were his own; and therefore, so far as he is spiritual, he
does rejoice in them, as if they were really inherent in himself: so far is he
from envying or grudging at the gifts and Graces of others.

3. Fiducial views of our Lords approach have an efficacious Influence on
Christian Exhortation, and Admonition; which is another main part of an holy
Conversation. The love we owe to our brethren obliges us to admonish them of
sin, and exhort them to duty. Yea, love to our selves engages us to admonish
others of their sin. To be either afraid or ashamed of reproving sin is an
heinous sin: Not to reprove our brother for sin, is a great piece of cruelty
both to him and our selves, Lev. 19.17. Now daily waiting for the coming of our
Lord, is a very forcible motive to provoke men unto the faithful discharge of
this duty. Thus Heb. 10.25. ^^ut exhorting one another, and so much the ^^ore
as ye see the day approaching. Our Au^^or here brings in the spiritual view of
our ^^ords approach, as a strong motive to bind ^^eir hearts unto this so
necessary a duty of Christian Exhortation.

4. Daily expectations of the coming of our ^^ord greatly engage Christians, to
be exam^^les and patterns of piety unto others; which (...) a great part of
an holy conversation. He ^^at gives a good exemple unto his brother, ^^ives him
much, albeit he give nothing else. Oh! what a convictive testimony do they
^^ive to the Religion they profess, who de^^onstrate the same by a lively
exemple? How are the prejudices of invincible diffi^^ulties and
impossibilities, which carnal hearts ^ake up against the ways of God, taken off
^y an exemplary holy conversation? Yea, ^uch as give holy exemples, do not only
instruct, but sweetly draw others into a love, and liking of an holy
conversation. What (...) Divine emulation does such an exemplary Christian work
in others? what a secret shame and blush does he leave on those, who come short
herein? Do not holy exemples often compel men to be holy, much more than the
strongest Reasons, or Arguments? Holy exemples carry in them not only a Rule,
but also an Instance, how practicable the ways of Godliness are. Yea, how do
Christian exemples excite and stir up all the powers in the soul, to imitate the
same! what holy emulation and desires do they beget in us, to that which
perhaps we little minded before? How willing are men to venture on the ways of
God, when they see others going before them? An holy exemple is a visible,
particular precept, which often prevail; more than doctrinal instructions. For
men naturally are more apt to believe their eye, than their ear: when they see
grace exemplified in an holy life, it is more taking and prevalent, than when
they hear never so affectionate discourses thereon, or exhortations thereto,
without an agreeable conversation. General precepts are a great way about, in
comparison of holy exemples; which have a more curt, and efficacious way of
insinuating into men's hearts, and lives. Men's particular good actions often
prevail more, than general precepts, to win others unto a good estime of their
holy conversation. And oh! what a prevalent influence has the serious
expectation of our Lords approach on an exemplary holy conversation? Who more
lively exemples of holy conversation, when such as continually expect their
coming Lord? We find this greatly exemplified in the Thessalonians, who were a
poor afflicted people, but very eminent for exemplary holiness. 1 These. 1 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
So 1 These. 1.6, 7, 8. v. 7. he says, they were exemples to all that believed
in Macedonia, and Achaia. (...), Types, Images, Ideas, or grand exemplars. Ay,
but what made them such rare exemplars of piety? Surely nothing so much, as
their daily waiting for the coming of our Lord; which they had been trained up
unto even from their first Conversion, as Paul tells you v. 10. and to wait for
his Son from Heaven. This poor people lived under affliction, even from their
first reception of the Gospel, as v. 6. and they found no relief, but in
waiting for the return of their Lord. And, oh! what a powerful influence had
this on their holy conversation? What shining and lively patterns were they,
unto all the believers in Macedonia, and Achaia; yea, in more remote parts as v.
8? who more visible and bright exemples of holy conversation, than such as
daily expect their coming Lord?

5. Lively views of our Lords approach are of great force to make Christians
compassionate and bountiful toward others in want and misery; wherein also
much of an holy conversation does consist. God is the chief-est good; therefore
most diffusive, and compassionate: and the more good we do to others, the more
like we are to him, the chief-est good. A compassionate heart, and liberal
hand, toward your poor brother, places you in the room of God to him. It was
the great Aphorism of our Lord; Its better to give than to receive: Active
good is better than passive. Yea, ordinarily, they receive most good from God,
who do most good to others. That which we communly call Charity, or Alms, is
termed by the Hebrews (...) Justice; to teach us, that relieving others in
need, is not a thing arbitrary, but (...) debt or piece of justice: and hence
the faithful discharge of this so necessary a duty make^ Christians to shine
excedingly, in all holy conversation. And what more effectual t^ make Christians
compassionate, and largehearted toward others, than deep expectations of our
Lords second coming? This lie^ couched in the parable of the unjust steward
(...) whence our Lord concludes, Luke 16.9, 10, etc. And I say unto you, make
to your selve^ friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, etc. A soul that
waits for the coming of hi^ Lord, will not let Christ, his Interest, or people
want, what he has to give. If Christian^ lived under daily, and fresh views of
their Lords approach, what effusions of mutu^^ Charity and Liberality would
there be i^ Churches? how large-hearted, and open-harded would Christians be in
giving? What (...) sympathising would there be with others in misery? But so
much for the second Question.

CHAP. IV. Whence it is, that the looking for, and hastening unto the coming of
the Day of God, has such an efficacious Influence on al sorts of persons, to
raise them up, to al manner of holy Conversation and Godliness?
SECT. 1. What there is in Christ the Object, which renders the looking for his
second coming so Influential.
WE now proceed to the Connection of the parts of our proposition, contained in
3 Q. Whence it is, that the looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the
day of God, has such an efficacious Influence, on al sorts of persons, to
raise them up, to al manner of holy conversation and Godliness? This Question
takes in the Demonstration of our proposition, from its causes and effects: We
may resolve it into these three parts; (1.) What there is in Christ the supreme
object? (2.) What there is in sinners and Saints, who are the subject? (3.)
What there is in the effects of Christ's coming, which renders our looking for,
and hastening to the coming of the day of God so influential on al sorts of
persons, to raise them up to al manner of holy conversation, and Godliness?

1 Q. What there is in Christ, the supreme object, that renders our looking
for, and hascening to his second coming, so influential on al sorts of persons,
to raise them up to al manner of holy Conversation and Godliness? We shall not
here consider Christ in his Absolute Perfections and Excellences, which are
indeed infinite and transcendent; but only in his Relative, as he is Mediator.
Now the Relations of Christ as Mediator, are either General, such as refer both
to Sinners, and Saints: or Special, and peculiar to Saints only. In both these
regards our looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God is very
Influential, etc.

1. If we consider Christ under his general Mediatorie relation, as to Saints
and Sinners, the looking for, and hastening to his second coming must needs be
very influential, etc. We shall here only consider Christ's general Mediatorie
Relation to Saints and Sinners, as he is the Supreme Judge of both; the
consideration whereof renders our looking for, and hastening unto the coming of
the day of God very Influential, on al sorts of persons, to raise them up to al
manner of holy Conversation and Godliness. That al Jugement is committed to
Christ, by the Father, is evident, from several prophetic Characters of Christ's
coming to judge to the world in the old Testament. So Psalm. 96.10. he shall
judge the people righteously. The like Psalm. 98.9. For he comes to judge the
earth, etc. with variety of other Scriptures, which mention the last jugement.
For the understanding of which we have this general rule given by Jackson, and
other learned men; That al those places of Scripture in the Old Testament,
which intimate either a new manner of Gods governing the World; or a beginning
of his reign over al Nations; or of being made Lord and King; or of coming to
judge the earth, must be understood of Christ, as God-man: who by virtue of his
death and Resurrection, became Lord of althings, and so judge of quick and
dead, by a peculiar Title and personal right. This is more fully expressed by
our Lord himself; who in his Sermons and discourses with the Jews, did but
expound and comment on thoses text of Scriptures, which he had before uttered
by the mouths of his Prophets. Thus, John 5.22. For the Father judges no man;
but has committed al jugement to the Son. So Act. 10.42. And he commanded us
to Preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he who was ordained of
God, to be judge of the quick, and dead. Thus 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing. The like 1 Pet. 4.5. Now al mankind standing in this
relation to Christ, as their supreme Judge, it cannot be, but that the serious
looking for, and hastening to the second coming of Christ must needs have a
soverain Influence on men's hearts and lives. At present, Christ's Mediatorie
Kingdom and Glory lies veiled and darkened; but at Christ's second coming
there will a visible glory, and Majesty attend his Throne of Jugement; the
consideration whereof cannot but startle, and overawe the stoutest sinners,
when under the apprehensions thereof. Oh! what tremblements of spirit; what
violent rendings and horrors of Conscience have many awakened sinners, whiles
under lively apprehensions of Christ's second coming to judge the world? What
made Cain, Judas, Felix, with other debauched sinners, so much to tremble under
the sense of their sin, but the consideration of Christ's coming to judge the
world? There are two particulars in Christ's final Jugement, the consideration
of which render our looking for, and hastening to that great day very
influential.

(1.) The day of Jugement will be a day of manifestation: all the secret hidden
things of darkness will then be brought to light. And Oh! what a powerful
consideration is this, to influence the hearts and lives of such, as daily
expect the coming of our Lord? What made the promulgation of the Law on Mount
Sinai so terrible, Exodus 19 16, 17, 18.
Exodus 19.16, 17, 18. but that it was a day of manifestation? Yea, we are told,
Heb. 12.21. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I excedingly fear
and quake. And whence sprang this great pannic fear, which surprised Moses and
the rest of the Jews, at the delivery of the Law, but from the sense they had
of their own sinful and miserable state, upon the manifestation the Law gave
them? Hence Jackson makes the Terrors on Mount Sinai, types of those terrors,
which shall surprise sinners at the last jugement. O! then, what a great and
terrible day of manifestation will that be? and how does the forethoughts hereof
affect awakened souls? What! say such, will my Lord ere long come to judge the
World? And must al my, secret lusts, thoughts, and actions be then reveled? Oh!
what mean I then thus to indulge my self in sin? What a fool am I thus to
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath? This was the sum and conclusion of
Solomon's Sermon, Eccles. 12.13. Eccles. 12.13, 14.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: fear God, and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. Solomon here closes up his
experimental discourse, touching the vanity of the creature, with this great
conclusion; which, says he, is the whole duty of man, (...), the whole man,
i. e. that which concerns the whole man. Ay, but what does he ground his
exhortation on? That follows, v. 14. For God shall bring every work into
jugement, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
O! says Solomon, remember, that al your secret vanity, pride, wantonnesses,
with other lusts, shall be brought into Jugement, at the coming of our Lord, and
this consideration will strongly oblige you to fear God, and keep his
commandments. Upon the like account the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
4.5. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God. As if he
had said: Alas! how comes it to pass, that ye are so censorious, in judging me
at present? Are not things now much in the dark? cannot you tarry awhile, 'til
our supreme Judge come, who will then bring to light all the hidden things of
darkness? Hence the Apostle 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13. bids them take heed what
materials they built on Christ the foundation, because every man's work shall be
made manifest: for the day shall declare it, etc. By day, we may understand the
day of Christ's coming to judge the world, which will be a great day of
Revelation, and Manifestation. You know a clear discovery of the fact, is a
necessary antecedent to a righteous jugement: And, oh! what a discovery will
there be of the hidden things of darkness? Will not then al Gods books and
records be brought forth and manifested? How clearly will the book of the Law be
understood? How manifest will all the records of Conscience be in that day? What
a World of secret sins will the book of Gods omniscience then produce? How
impossible will it be for any secret hypocrite to concele his sin in that day?
At present, many refined hypocrites have got the Skill and Art of conceling
their secret lusts, not only from the world, but their own Consciences also.
There are mysteries of Iniquity, and deeds of darkness, which never yet saw
the Sun; yea, which the sinner himself peradventure is not conscious of: Ay,
but sinner; how will thou be able to concele thy sin, at the revelation of our
supreme Judge; when he shall come, and rip open thine heart, and bring to
jugement al thy secret sins? How will thine heart be able to bear the
brightness, and heat of that fiery trial, at our Lords appearing? So also in
regard of the Saints, that day will manifest al their secret and hidden things
of darkness, both good and evil: and oh! how much does the consideration
hereof influence their hearts and lives in this day of Grace?

(2.) The consideration of Christ's coming to judge the world makes our
expectation of his second coming very Influential, in as much as that day shall
be a day of Recompenses, and Retributions to every man according to his works.
In this world we al have our day of labor and work: every man living has some
work which he designs to finish. The righteous, they work in the fire of
much tribulation, that at last they may find refreshment from the presence of
the Lord. The wicked they also work, and toil hard in this their day of time.
Oh! what drudges are they of Satan, and every base lust? And as both have their
working day, so also their day of Recompenses, at the second coming of our
Lord. So Luke 14.14. For thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the
just, i. e. at the coming of the day of God. When men's labors end, their
recompenses begin: 2 These. 1.6, 7.
so here; as 2 These. 1.6. seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you. 7. And to you that are troubled rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be reveled from Heaven, with his mighty Angels.
The Revelation of our Lord from Heaven is the day of recompenses; because then
al men cease from their works of time. Neither is it only a day of recompenses
in general, but also of retribution unto every man, according to his works.
Thus much is implied in that first notion: seeing it is a righteous thing with
God. What is the formal notion of a righteous thing, but to render unto every
one according to his deserts, or what is his own? Thence also it follows:
(...), to recompense. The word properly signifies, to give unto every one
according to what he has done. So that should not God recompense unto every
one according to his works, he would not be righteous; which to conceive of
the holy God is no less than blasphemy. God, who is righteous, cannot but
recompense to al according to their works: else he would not be God. So Esa.
3.10. Say ye unto the righteous, that it shall be well with him: For they shall
eat the fruit of their doings. 11. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be il with him:
For the reward of his hands shall be given him. Romans 2 5, 6, 11.
Thus Romans 2.5. and revelation of the righteous jugement of God. v. 6. Who will
render unto every man according to his deeds: and he gives the reason of al, v.
11. For there is no respect of persons with God. He respects the person, who in
jugement respects somewhat, which comes not into Jugement: When the external
qualities or relations of the person are respected, which have not relation to
the thing. This is here styled by Paul (...), respect of persons, which the
Hebrews call (...) accepting the face: this may be no way imputed to the
righteous God. Thus also 1 Pet. 1.17. And if ye call one the father, who without
respect of persons, judges according unto every man's work. Personom ^espicere
dici^ur, ^ui in judicio aliud r spicit, quam ^uod in Jadi^ium venit. Grot. 2
Cor. 5.10.
This Christ will do. The like Jer. 32.19. Thine eyes are upon all the ways of
the Sons of men, to give every one, according to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his doing. So 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must al appear before the Jugement
seat of Christ, [as they who pleaded their own, or other men's cause, were wont
to stand, in an open place, before the Judge] that every one may receive the
things done in his body. [(...), i. e. the things due to his body, or person]
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, i. e. proportionably
to his actions, and manner of life, according to the formal nature of justice,
which consists in giving every one his own. Thus also, Gal. 6.7. Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived God is not mocqued: For whatsoever a man sowes, that shall he
also reap. Be not deceived, i. e. deceive not your selves: delude not your own
souls by fallacious fond presumtions, and conceits. God is not mocqued, etc.
Should carnal secure sinners, who sow to the flesh, reap life everlasting, how
would God be derided and mocqued by them? But the holy God will not be mocqued.
They that sow tares must not expect to reap wheat: Such as sow to the flesh
shall reap wrath and damnation. Again, should not God recompense to his people
according to their works and sufferings, God would be also mocqued by wicked
men, in that all the works of his troubled Saints were in vain. But Paul tells
us, 1 Cor. 15.58. that their labor is not in vain, which he expounds, 1 Cor.
3.8. every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor. By which
it is most evident, that Christ will, at last day, recompense to every man
according to his works.

Neither does this at al make for merit, or Justification by works, as the
Papists would needs persuade us. For (1.) The Reward which God confers on
believers is not For, but According to their good works. It is Romans 2.6.
(...), according to, not for his deeds. Good works are not the meritorious
cause, but the evidence, by which God mesures their evangelic sincerity and
perfection. It is impossible for a creature to merit any thing in a proper
sense; because there can be no mutual obligation betwixt the creature, and the
Creator; or any thing given to God, which bears proportion with the good things
of eternal life, which he confers on us. Indeed were our good works perfect,
yet they could purchase nothing from God by way of merit; because they are but
the fruit of his own Grace; neither do we give unto God but what is his due.
But alas! the best works under Heaven are so far from meriting any good from
God, as that, by reason of their sinfulness, they demerit wrath and damnation.
Hence,

(2.) The Recompense which God gives unto believers, according to their good
works, is properly a Gift, and metaphoricly only a Reward. All the proportion
or regard which our good works have to the reward, given according thereunto,
flows merely from the evangelic constitution, and promise, not from any
inherent worth in the works themselves. So that although it be a day of
Jugement, yet it is also a day of Grace, as to the rewards given to believers:
There is not more of justice, than of free grace in the rewards distributed. So
Romans 6.23. But the gift of God is eternal life.

(3.) Albeit Christ allows a place to works in the last Jugement, yet he will
not allow them the least place, or mention in our present justification,
thereby to exclude al boasting, as Romans 3.27. There will be no danger of
boasting in the believers being judged according to his works, because his
good works are produced, not as the principal ground of his acceptance, but
only as an evidence of his sincerity, and evangelic perfection. As faith is
the federal Instrument, that justifies his person, so good works are produced
in the last jugement, as that which will justify his faith, and Gods former
justification of him before the world. Jam. 2.12.
So Jam. 2.12. so speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty. The law of liberty, by which men shall be judged at last day, is
the Moral Law Evangelised; which shall judge, not according to the rigor of the
first Covenant, but according to the Evangelic constitution of the New
Covenant, which accepts faith and sincerity in lieu of perfect obedience.

(4.) In the last jugement Christ will proceed, even with believers, according
to their works; because then they are to be compared with wicked men. For to
vindicate the equity of Gods procedings with the wicked, it is necessary, that
the Evangelic obedience of believers be brought forth in jugement; which will
stop the mouths of al ungodly men, and vindicate Christ from that false
Imputation of having respect to men's persons, as Romans 2.11. But now in the
present justification of believers, the comparison is not with unbelievers; but
they are compared with themselves, and the law of God; that so seeing the
Imperfection and pollution of their best works, they may abandon themselves,
their own righteousnesses and sufficiences, and fly to Christ for refuge. So
that should good works have the least room here, the whole design of
Justification by Christ's righteousness would be frustated and made void.

Now this being made evident, that Christ, at his second coming, will judge al
men according to their works, the consideration hereof cannot but have a
prevalent influence on al such, as by faith look for, and hasten to the coming
of the Day of God. I shall only add one text, which indeed should work a dread
and terror in us al, namely, Mat. 12.36, 37. Mat. 12.36, 27.
But I say unto you, That every idle word, that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof, in the day of Jugement. For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. By (...), Idle word, we
must understand, (1.) Every emty vain word, that has not its due soliditie,
mesure, and weight. (2.) Every unprofitable word, which has not some
conducence, and tendence to the honor and glory of God. (3.) The whole
conversation. For if we are to give an account of every idle word, then surely,
by a paritie of reason, of al other parts of our conversation. And oh! what a
weighty consideration is this, to al those, who wait for the coming of their
Lord, to labor after al manner of holy conversation, and Godliness? What!
says such an expectant soul, does my judge stand at the door? as Jam. 5.9. and
must I shortly render an account to him, of every idle word? O! then hat an
essential obligation do I lie under, to labor after al manner of
righteousness, and holiness? So much for Christ's general relation to al as
Judge.

2. If we consider Christ's special mediatorie Relations to Saints, these cannot
but be exceeding influential on such, as by faith daily look for and hasten to
the coming of the day of God. Christ, out of his rich, free, and condescendent
love, has brought himself under many affectionate and efficacious relations,
the consideration of which is exceeding obligatorie, and influential on such as
wait for his second coming, in order to al manner of holy Conversation and
Godliness.

(1.) Christ is the Believers Savior; and therefore the looking for, and
hastening to his second coming cannot but leave a prevalent influence and
engagement on their hearts, to labor after the highest pitches of Godliness.
Thus Phil. 3.20. Phil. 3.20.
For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior,
the Lord Jesus Christ. What made Paul so studious and ambitious of an Heavenly
conversation, but his daily expectation of his Savior from heaven? Oh! says
Paul, my Savior is coming: lo! yonder he comes: What meanest thou, O my soul,
by conversing with things of time? farewell al ye worme-eaten Idols of Clay!
Farewell! I have no thoughts, no Inclinations, no Affections, no Embraces, no
converses for you. Adieu al flesh-pleasiing delights! adieu! Away, away my
soul, to meet thy Savior! where should thy heart, and conversation be but where
thy treasure, thy Savior is? No wonder indeed, that Paul had his conversation
in Heaven, seeing thence he looked for his Savior. So Heb. 9.28. And to them
that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin, unto salvation.
The consideration of Christ's second appearance unto salvation, is of great
force, to such as look for the same, in order to an holy conversation, and
Godliness. The like Jude 21.

(2.) The Relation which believers bear to Christ as their Husband, has a
soverain efficace on those that look for his second coming, to wind up their
Spirits to al manner of holy conversation and Godliness. One main essential
part of conjugal friendship consists in the daily expectation of our absent
relation: and the more lively thoughts the Wife has of her approaching Husband,
the more will she prepare herself to entertain him, when he comes. Oh! what a
prevalent motive and argument is Christ's conjugal relation, to draw forth the
hearts of his Spouse daily to look for, and hasten to his second coming? These
are the last breathings of the Church in Scripture, Rev. 22.17. and the Spirit
and the Bride say come, i. e. the Spirit in the Bride. And what more effectual
to work up the believers heart and life to the highest raisures of Godliness,
and holy conversation, than the lively expectation of Christ as their husband?
How soon would such thoughts dispel al adulterous thoughts and Affections
toward the Idols of this World?

(3.) Christ is related to believers as their Head, which adds much to the
Influence, their looking for his second coming has on an holy conversation and
Godliness. As a body is either natural or politic; so an Head: and Christ is
held forth in Scripture under both these capacities. He is as the natural head,
in regard of Influence; and as a politic Head, in regard of government, to his
Church. Believers receive al gracious Influences from Christ, as the natural
body al animal Spirits from the Head; as also al Laws and discipline, as
politic bodies do from their Rulers. So Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Which is the head even
Christ, etc. So Ephesians. 4.23. Col. 2.10. Now Christ being thus the Head, both as
to Influence and Government, of his Church, how much does this oblige
believers, who expect his second coming, to press after al manner of holy
Conversation and Godliness? Alas! whence has the member sense, motion, and
conduct but from its Head? And does not this oblige it to converse with, and
submit unto its head in althings? And does not the believers relation to
Christ, as his Head, much more oblige him to look for, and thence to conform
unto Christ in althings?

(4.) Christ is held forth in Scripture as the very soul and life of Believers,
he being the same to them that the soul is to the body. So Lament. 4.20. Lam.
4.20.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits,
etc. Though this may have some regard to Zedekiah as the type, yet it chiefly
refers to Christ, who is the breath of our nostrils, i. e. our life. So Gal.
2.20. Not I, but Christ lives in me. Christ is to the believing soul the same,
that the soul is to the body. Now this consideration, that Christ is the soul
and life of the New creature, must needs have a very powerful and Soverain
influence on al such as wait for his second coming. Thus, Colos. 3.3, 4, 5. For
ye are dead, Col. 3.3, 4, 5.
and your life is hid with God in Christ. Our life is hid with God in Christ,
as in the Root, Spring, and Fountain; but it shall be manifest at the appearance
of our Lord. So it follows: When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. When Christ, who is our life: i. e. as
the soul is the life of the body, so is Christ of the soul. The soul gives to
the body life and all the issues thereof, as health, vigor, sense, growth,
perfection, operation, etc. So does Christ to the soul. And what conclusion
does Paul draw from this, that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we
shall appear with him in glory? That follows: v. 5. Mortify therefore your
earthly members, etc. So that this consideration, that Christ who is our life
shall ere long appear is mighty influential on such as look for him.

(5.) There are several other relations between Christ and believers, the
consideration of which is mighty efficacious on such as daily expect his second
coming. Is not Christ the Vine, and are not they the branches? Is not Christ
the advocate, and are not they guilty malefactors? What are they but sick
patients; and what is Christ but the great Soul-Physician? O! what a
tenderhearted Sheepherd is Christ; and what poor infirm Sheep are believers?
What a wise compassionate Father is Christ, to such disobedient and froward
Children as believers are? Was there ever found such an indulgent Lord and
Master as Christ is, to such unfaithful servants as we are? Now the
consideration of these intimate relations, which Christ has to believers, are
of great influence on such as expect his second coming: What! say such, is my
Soul-Physician, my great Sheepherd, my Father, my Lord so near in coming, and
shall I be so far behind in my preparation for him? Must I hereafter live
forever with him, and shall I now live no more unto him? Oh! What means this
difformitie and distance from my great Lord and Father who is so near to me?

SECT. 2. What there is in Sinners and Saints, which renders the looking for
Christ's second coming so influential, etc.
WE now proceed to the second branch of our third Question, namely, What there
is in Sinners, and Saints, which renders their looking for the second coming of
Christ so Influential, etc.

1. There are some commun principles, notions, and Inclinations in sinners,
which render their looking for the coming of our Lord very efficacious. (1.) Al
sinners have more or less some commun notions of a future state. There are
some notions of good and evil, naturally implanted in men's Consciences: as the
notions of truth and falsehood. So Romans 2.14, 15, 16. The Gentiles are said to
be a Law unto themselves, etc. The Apostles proposition is universally true;
which argues they were not without some apprehensions of a future state, which
rewards the good, and punishes the evil. (2.) They have also a natural
inbred remote Inclination toward future happiness, with an aversation as to
approaching misery. (3.) These commun notions and inbred Inclinations are often
much heightened by the access of Evangelic Illuminations. (4.) The Spirit of
Bondage frequently comes, and adds much more light and heat, unto natural and
awakened Consciences. (5.) Yea, sometimes unconverted sinners obtain a taste of
the Heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come, as Heb. 6.4, 5. Now
these commun notions, Inclinations, and dispositions, specially when they are
al in conjunction, cannot but have a powerful Influence on awakened sinners,
such as look for the coming of our Lord. Oh! what strange convulsions and
horrors of Conscience have some fallen under? what a seeming Crucifixion to the
World, and Mortification of lust have they attained unto? How far have they
gone in partial Reformation, and Conformity to the Laws of Christ? Yea, what
commun tastes have they had of approaching glories, by virtue of these commun
notions, and Illuminations of the Spirit, seconded with a serious expectation
of their coming Lord? This seems to have been the case of some illuminated
Jews, of whom we find mention, Heb. 6.4. They had not only some natural
notions, but moreover commun illuminations, and tastes of the Heavenly gift:
Yea, they were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, i. e. had some transient and
commun touches, some imperfect work of sanctification. Ay, but whence sprang
all this? That follows, v. 5. And have tasted the good word of God, [ i.e.
Evangelic tidings of salvation by Christ] and the powers of the World to come,
i. e. the suavities of those good things, that shall be reveled at the coming of
our Lord. The sum of al seems this: The Spirit of God wrought in them some
great illuminations and discoveries of the coming of the day of God, which gave
them labial tastes of the Heavenly Gift, and brought them under a great mesure
of partial Reformation, and Renovation of heart and life.

2. The Saints have some peculiar principles and dispositions in them, which
render their looking for the coming of our Lord exceeding influential.

(1.) Believers have a Divine Nature, which is suited unto the coming of the
day of God, and al those good things then to be enjoyed, as 2 Pet. 1.4. And
this makes the expectation of our Lords coming exceeding efficacious. There is
no disposition so spiritually natural to the new creature, as the continual
looking for the coming of our Lord. Hence the daily exercice hereof cannot but
be of great force, for the improvement of al holy Conversation and Godliness.
Believers neither think, nor speak, nor act, nor live as they ought, longer
then they mind the coming of their Lord.

(2.) Saints have a Spirit of Adoption dwelling in them, which adds a
prevalent Influence to the looking for the coming of their Lord. The Spirit of
Adoption residing in Believers, is an earnest of al those glorious enjoyments,
which shall be reveled at the coming of our Lord: and oh! what a soverain force
does their looking for the coming of the day of God receive hence, for the
improvement of al manner of Godliness and holy Conversation? Thus Romans 8.23.
Our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption. The Spirit residing in
believers, as the principle of their life and Grace, is, not only the first
fruits of approaching Glory, but also a powerful spring, which inclines the
heart, by ineffable groans, to move toward our approaching Lord; whereby the
heart is fortified, and drawn forth in all manner of holy conversation and
Godliness. This Spirit of Adoption thus dwelling and acting in believers,
does, by lively views of our Lords coming, work up the heart to great
elevations of Grace and holiness.

(3.) Saints have in them a principle of Divine says, which has a great
correspondence with, and Influence on their looking for the coming of the day
of God, in order to an holy conversation and Godliness. O! what an intimate
cognation has faith, with the coming of our Lord? and how much is Godliness
improved by believing sights of that great day? where ever we find any peculiar
promises made to a particular condition, or frame of Spirit, there faith, when
exercised on such promises, receives a peculiar Influence: Now looking for the
coming of the day of God, has many special promises made to it, which faith
improves and draws influence from, in order to a holy conversation and
Godliness. Thus, 2 Timothy 4.8. Paul brings in the love of Christ's appearing, as
the main condition of the Crown of Righteousness. So Heb. 9.28. The looking
for Christ's coming, is made the condition of his appearing the second time,
without sin, unto salvation. And in the general, I do not find any one frame of
spirit, which has more peculiar promises made to it, than this of looking for,
and hastening to the coming of our Lord. Now then faith finding on record such
special promises, made to this looking for our Lords approach, hence it
derives special Motives and Influences; whereby it is much raised, quickened,
and fortified in the prosecution of al manner of holy conversation and
Godliness. Special promises entitle us unto special privileges, blessings,
and Influences, upon the performance of the condition annexed to them. And the
main work of faith is, to suck and draw forth the juice and marrow of these
promises in order to the Divine life.

(4.) A Saint has a strong Bent of heart, with a great quantity of spiritual
Affections, which are al suited to the coming of the day of God; and being
exercised thereon draw thence soverain Influences, for the promoting of an holy
Conversation and Godliness. What more agreeable to the Saints desires, than the
coming of their absent Lord? how are their hopes solaced herein? what a
vehement Indignation and Antipathie have they against all that may hinder their
Lords approach? How much is their spiritual joy satisfied herein? What an holy
fear have they of themselves, lest they should be found short in that day? Now
these Affections thus exercised on our Lords second coming, draw down powerful
Influences, for the promoting of al manner of Godliness. When Divine
Affections are in conjunction with the coming of the day of God, what strange
and efficacious Influences proceed thence, for the begetting and increasing al
manner of holy Coversation and Godliness? How holy, how Heavenly minded are
such Christians?

I should now proceed to the third Question, What there is in the Effects of
Christ's coming, which renders our looking for, and hastening to the same so
Influential? etc. The Effects of Christ's coming are various and great. Will he
not then bring to Light all the Hidden things of Darkness? 1 Cor. 4.5. Shall
not al men be then recompensed according to their works? How soon will the
wicked be then separated, and cast into Hell, Mat. 25.32, 33, etc? And as for
the Righteous, will it not be a Day of Redemtion for them, as Luke 21.28. Romans
8.21? Shall not Christ receive them to himself, John 14.3. and they be ever with
their Lord, 1 These. 4.13 -- 17. Col. 3.4? And O! what a Recompense of Reward
will Christ then give unto them, Luke 14.14. 1 Pet. 5.4. Heb. 11.26, 27. 2 Timothy
4.8? In short; the Effects of Christ's Coming may al be reduced to these two
commun heads: (1.) The Torments of the Damned; (2.) The Saints Rest. The
consideration of these has efficacious Influence on such as wait for the
coming of their Lord. But in as much as my contemplations on these two great
effects, have exceded the proportion I allowed them in this short Discourse, I
rather choose to publish them apart, if the Lord favor my desires with an
Opportunity, and his Assistance.

CHAP. V. The Application of the whole.
SECT. 1. Doctrinal Inferences.
HAving dispatched the explication of our subject, we now proceed to the
Application thereof; and that first by Doctrinal Inferences.

1. From the Doctrine of Christ's coming as before explicated, we may infer,
That looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God comprehends the
most noble and active part off the Divine life, both as to faith, and
Godliness. There are two main springs of the Divine life, contemplation of God
in Christ, and Action, or motion toward him: and does not looking for, and
hastening unto the coming of our Lord take in both of these? As for
Contemplation of God in Christ, what pure, immixed, raised thoughts of God have
such, as daily expect the coming of Christ? How familiar, affectionate, and
warm are their meditations of things spiritual? with what a fervor and
vehemence do such apply their minds to Divine objects? who more enured to
Divine contemplation, than such? What more effectual to bind the thoughts to
spiritual objects, than this looking for our coming Lord? Does not this make
you masters of your thoughts, by forcing of them on Invisible Glories? Who have
more clear, real, and lively notions of the things of God than such? What more
efficacious to improve al objects your thoughts converse with, to spiritualise
al providence and enjoyments, than such lively expectations of our Lords
approach? In short, may not this be estimed as Jacobs Ladder, whereby the soul
ascends up to God, and God descends down unto the soul?

So also for spiritual Action, which is another main part of the Divine life,
what more powerful to fortify, familiarise, and sweeten gracious exercices,
than daily waiting for the coming of our Lord? Does not this quicken, enlarge,
refresh, strengthen, and establish the soul in all holy duties? What more
effectual to fill up al your time with proper duties? Does not this bring the
soul into the nearest access to God? Is it not the wing, by which the soul
retires into God? Does it not subdue the heart to God, and cause it firmly to
adhere to him? In sum: Is not this looking for the coming of our Lord, the
richest, safest, sweetest, freest; most satisfying, most thriving, most
harmonious life? Yea, does it not come nearest to the life of God? wherein
consists the life of God, but in the blessed Vision, and Fruition of his own
most perfect Being? And who have a more clear and real vision and fruition of
God, than such as daily look for, and hasten to the coming of our Lord? And
does it not hence follow, that this contains the most noble and active part of
the Divine life? Oh! what a progress has he made in the Divine Life, whose
heart is raised to a daily contemplation of and meditation, on the coming of
the day of God?

2. Hence also we see the true reason, why so many professors, and some truly
Godly, are so far behind in their Christian Race, and have so much of their
work before them. It is strange to consider how long many have been in the
Schole of Christ, and yet how far short they are of others, who entered on the
profession of Christ long after them, Oh! how carnal, and dark are their
notions of God in Christ? What cold and frozen Affections have they for God,
and the things of God? How soon are they overpowered by a small Tentation? What
a burden is it to them to part with their burdens, that hinder them in their
Christian race? How much and how soon are they defiled with the pollutions of
this world? And whence comes all this, but from want of serious, lively
expectations of their Lords Approach? Believe it, there is a deep mystery, a
Spiritual Art and Skill in Godliness, which none arrive unto so soon as they,
who wait for the coming of their Lord. What made the Thessalonians, in a short
time to arrive unto such high pitches of Christianity, but that they imbibed,
or sucked in, at their first Conversion, this principle, of waiting for the
coming of their Lord, 1 These. 1.10? and O that professors would try this
experiment! Verily, we should not have such complaints, decays, folies, and
scandals among professors, as now we every where find. It is a sure and fixed
Rule, That no one has made a further proficience, in the schole of Christ,
than he can with hope and Joy expect the second coming of Christ.

3. Hence likewise we may infer, That among the crowd of professors, few, yea
very few, are acquainted with this great frame of looking for, and hastening to
the coming of the day of God. (1.) Do not many, who profess love to Christ,
hate the thoughts of his coming, as 2 Pet. 3.4? (2.) How many are there, who
forsake their first love, and backslide from Christ, as Hos. 11.7. Rev. 2.4?
(3.) Can we suppose, that they look for the coming of their Lord, whose eyes
are dazzled with the fading beauty of this world? (4.) Do they look for the
coming of their Lord, who sleep securely in the bosom of the times, and never
mind their later end? (5.) Is it possible that they should expect the coming of
their Lord, who are drowned head and ears in the cares of this world; who
violently pursue after the shadows of time, but are prodigiously sluggish about
the concerns of eternity? (6.) May we imagine, that they look for the coming
of their Lord, who cannot deny themselves a toy, or sensual lust for him, who
indulge themselves in the commission of known sins, and the omission of known
duties? Oh! how defective are al these, with many more commun professors, in
their looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God? Do not most
men's lives speak, what contradictions they are to their profession?

4. This also teaches us, How much it is below the spirit, and profession of a
Christian, to terminate and bound his Thoughts, Desires, and Hopes by things of
Time. Alas! how soon will time eat us out of this poor Cottage we now inhabit
in? What folly is it to make our Inn our home, our Hospital our Paradise? What
shall we be the poorer, at the coming of our Lord, for the want of those
worme-eaten Gods, those masqued Idols, those glittering nothings, which the
degenerate Sons of Adam do now so much Idolize? Does not our great Lord
instruct us, that the way to Heaven is narrow, and the gate strait; yea, That
it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God? Mat. 19.24. The Camel has a bunched back,
and therefore cannot easily enter into a strait gate: O! how impossible is it
for Professors to enter into the strait gate of Heaven, with any bunch of times
Idols? Believe it, beloved Idols and we can never go to Heaven together: there
is no room for such false Gods. How comes it to pass then, that we are so
unwilling to part with our burdens? why should we dote on the Gods of time?
what a shame is it for us to take up with any thing short of our Lord? O! what
a great kindness, and rich favor is it, for our Lord to snatch from us any
eye-pleasing Idols, which hinder our looking for, and hastening to his second
coming?

5. Infer likewise hence, That the grand difference between sincere Christians,
and secret Hypocrites consists, in the regard they both have to the coming of
the Day of God. How far have many close Hypocrites gone in the knowledge,
profession, and practice of Christianity? What a broad and dazzling light has
there shone on their minds? what deep convictions of sin, yea, and wounds of
Conscience for sin have they layen under? Have not some also had many
affectionate workings of heart toward Christ, his Ordinances, ways, people;
yea, and his cross also? And O! what a seeming conformity have they given to
the Laws of Christ? And yet after all this, ^o! how soon have al their
Convictions, Affections, and seeming Godliness sunk down into an earthly
worldly Spirit; or, at best into a mere emty, secure, formal profession? And
whence springs the bitter root of such a prodigious Apostasy, but from this,
that they never had a real, spiritual, single, pure, fixed eye of faith, to
look for the coming of the day of God? Is not this fully exemplified in the
foolish Virgins, who are generally thought to refer to these last days? So Mat.
25.3. They that were foolish took their ^ampes, and took no oil with them. May
we ^ot well understand by oil, an eye of faith, which enlightens the soul, and
enables it to look for, and hasten to the coming of its Lord? Its true, the
Wise Virgins, as well as the Foolish, had their slumbering fits, while the
Bridegroom tarried, as v. 5. but yet they had eyes in their heads, they had the
Oil of a Divine habitual faith, which kept them under an habitual Vigilance,
albeit they wanted actual for some time. And herein the meanest believer excels
the most shining hypocrite, that, notwithstanding some short slumbers he may be
overtaken with, yet he still has an habitual radical eye of faith, which more or
less has regard to the coming of the day of God. Whereas the most glorious
hypocrite has no Oil in his Vessel, no saving habitual light, and therefore he
lies in a dead sleep, without any fiducial regard to the coming of the day of
God.

6. This instructs us also, That then, and only then the Cross of Christ
triumphs in the hearts of Believers, over sin, Satan, and the World, when the
soul is brought unto this Divine Life of faith, always to look for and hasten
to the coming of the day of God. What was it that made our great Lord, even on
the Cross, to triumph over the Cross, but the prevision of his Victory over
Death, by Death itself? So in like manner, what makes the Cross of Christ
triumphant in the hearts of Believers, but their faith looking through al their
sufferings to the coming of the Day of God, and the complete Victory they shall
then obtain over al enemies and crosses? O! how much pleasure, and how little
pain have they in fighting against Sin and Tentation, who daily expect and hope
for the coming of their Lord? what makes the Lambs followers overcome by
dying, but the fiducial hopes they have of their Lords Approach? How comes it
to pass, that the Saints rejoice in their poverty, and are poor in their
Riches, but that they by faith do behold their coming Lord? Does not the
Believer, who looks for the Approach of his Lord, look on al his evils as
passing, and on al his good things hoped for as coming toward him? And O! what
a triumph does the Cross of Christ gain hereby in his heart? What an
happiness is it to him, to be unhappy for a little time, that so he may be
happy for ever with his Lord? What Riches is it to him to be poor for a little
time? How much Liberty does he find in the slaverie of Time? What a little
Heaven does he find stamped on his temporary Hell? How many blessings on the
curses of men? and why, but because he expects the coming of his Lord?

7. Lastly, Hence learn, how greatly it does concern us al, to entertain our
hearts continually, with such serious thoughts, and lively expectations of
Christ's second coming. It has been in part discovered, what influence such
thoughts have upon our present and everlasting condition. O! then how should
this provoke us al to keep up such serious fresh and lively thoughts of Christ's
second coming? Alas! what is it that makes the most of men so sotishly ignorant
of God; so sensual and brutish in their enjoyments; so careless and
regardlesse of Heaven and Glory; so secure and supine under all the threatenings
of the Law, Hell, and everlasting displeasure? Is it not this, that men put far
from them the evil day; they never have a serious thought of the second coming
of Christ to jugement. Surely, sirs, would we but be serious in the
consideration of this great day, what a strange alteration should we find in
men's lives? would the voluptuous glutton, in the midst of al his dainties, but
take up a serious thought of Christ's second coming, how soon would he turn his
feasting into fasting and prayer? would the swinish drunkard, in the midst of
al his caresses, seriously consider, that the Lord is coming, and will ere long
call him to jugement for all his brutish wickedness; surely every draught he
drinks would be but as gal and wormwood to his taste. So for the profane
Swearer and Blasphemer of the name of God, would he but seriously consider,
that ere long he must answer, at the bar of divine Justice, for every idle
word, how would he bridle his tongue, and watch over his lips? Likewise the
covetous worldling, whose heart is in his bags and barnes, would he but now
and then consider, that his Lord is coming, and will require an account of his
stewardship, how would he endeavor to make friends of the unrighteous Mammon?
Lastly, for the close secret hypocrite, who makes it his work to varnish his
profession with seeming Graces, alas! did he but consider, that when the Lord
Jesus shall be reveled from Heaven, al his hypocrisy will be laid open, al his
hay and stubble, his rotten, hollow-hearted profession will be burnt up, in that
flaming fire, I say, would your close hypocrites consider this; how would they
prize a little sincerity? how would they work out their salvation with fear
and trembling, endeavoring to approve themselves not so much to men, as to
their Lord and master at his second coming? My friends, you cannot imagine,
what powerful influence such serious thoughts of Christ's second coming would
have upon men's hearts. Methinkes, the very thought, that our Lord Jesus is
coming to judge both quick and dead; that it cannot be long ere that every
soul here present must appear before his jugement Throne, and give an account
of every thing done in the flesh, and such as are not found in Christ, shall
then be turned into Hell, to lie under the scorching wrath of a sin-revenging
God, and that for ever, I say, such thoughts as these, methinkes, should
startle and affrighten every secure sinner in this Congregation. Is not this,
sirs, a sad contemplation, and yet most true, that of so many hundreds that do
meet together for the Worship of God; the greatest part, yea all, that remain
unbelievers, shall ere long meet in Hell, and there bewail their cursed
security, in not minding the coming of their Lord?

SECT. 2. Practic Uses.
THE practic Uses, which this subject as before explicated, are of great
moment, and therefore deserve ferious Attention.

1. Here is matter of doleful Lamentation, and Humiliation, to consider, what
strangers the most of Professors are to the coming of our Lord. It is the
observation of a la^t great Divine, now with God: At this day the world is
coming to the last fit of madness against Christ. And wherein lies this last
fit of the worlds madness against Christ, but in men's endeavors to banish out
of the World, al thoughts of the coming of the Day of God, as 2 Pet. 3.3.4? And
oh! what sad matter of Lamentation is it to think, how far many Professors sal
under this condemnation? Alas! how few understand what this means, to look for
and hasten to the coming of the day of God? Where is the awakened soul, that
stands on his watch tower, looking forth toward the coming of his Lord? when
was it, that you had any lively heart-affecting views of that great day? Does
it not give us a dreadful prognostic, that some astonishing Jugement is at the
door, because men so little expect the great day of Jugement, at the coming of
our Lord? Has it not ever been a sad presage of some impendent Jugements, if
not ruin to a professing people, when they have banished from their hearts al
serious thoughts of future Jugement, as Lam. 1.9? O that professors would daily
be humbled for, and lament over this sin, their not daily looking for, and
hastening to the coming of the day of God!

2. Our subject affords us also matter of Caution, Advice, and Counsel to
professors, and that chiefly in four particulars. (1.) That they beware of a
carnally secure, sleepy, and loitering spirit in their Christian Race. O! what
a contradiction is a sleepy Christian to the Religion he professes? How near
akin is a sleepy Christian to a dead hypocrite? Its true, the Hypocrites
spiritual death is a total privation of al principles of life: but does not
carnal security bring a suspension of the Acts of life, even in a real
Christian? O! beware of carnal security after great peace and comforts,
whether inward or outward. How does carnal security creep insensibly on most
professors, first or last? And what a danger are such in of dosing their peace,
exercices of Grace, and Communion with Christ? Remember, carnal security comes
not alone: and when it comes, it exposes you to the violent incursion of every
Tentation: and, that which is worst of al, it binds up al your spiritual senses
and Faculties; so that you can neither look for, nor hasten unto the coming of
the day of God. O! fear the terrors of the Lord at that great day. How are the
Consciences of most men bound up with chains of security; so that they cannot
see or fear their misery, before they feel it?

(2.) Be advised also not to expect or desire much Rest in this Life. Remember
it is inconsistent with your present state, to have your Rest here; because you
are now in your Motion and Race toward your approaching Lord. The Saints
triumph here lies in conflicts against sin and tentation; his Rest, in a life
of faith under troubles. He that expects other Rest here, will find the greater
troubles and disappointment. And this also know, that the Hopes which a
believer has, under al his troubles, of a Rest, at the coming of his Lord, are
much better, than all the present enjoyments of others. Expectation of Rest here
is a great bar to our looking for the coming of our Lord.

(3.) Beware of secret heart-back slidings from Christ: For these are most
opposite to our looking for, and hastening to the coming of the Day of God. It
was the saying of an holy eminent Divine now in Glory: Think on this speech,
when you see me dead, that of al Churches in the World, the Lord Jesus carries
a most Jealous eye, over these for whom he has done such great things: and I
know it, he takes exceeding il your secret wantonnesses, and whoredoms of
heart.

4. Take heed of a formal, remiss, slight spirit in private duties, or public
Ordinances: For hereby you lose your communion with Christ; and so, by
consequence, your looking for, and hastening to the coming of the Day of God.

3. Here is also matter of Heart-examination,

(1.) Whether we look for the coming of our Lord. Are our hearts taken off from
gazing on the fading Glory of this lower world? Do we value althings as they
refer unto the coming of the Day of God? Are our souls drawn by the Glory of
that day, as the Iron is by the Lodestone? Do we by faith feed on the good
things of that day? What influence has the expectation of this day on our
Hearts and lives? Are we made more holy and heavenly-minded hereby? If it be
thus with us, then al is well. But if, after al our awakened thoughts, we are
again grown secure, carnal, earthly-minded, formal in duties, proud, and
confident in our selves, it is a black marque we look not for the coming of our
Lord.

(2.) Examine whether you are prepared to meet the Lord, when he comes. Suppose
you should this night hear the cry, Behold, the Bridegroom comes! are you
ready to enter into the wedding chamber? Have you the Wedding garment of Faith
and Holiness? Do you stand with your loins girt, and your lamps burning, ever
ready to entertain your Lord? How stands it with you in point of Assurance, and
wel-grounded evidences, as to your eternal state? Can you look Christ in the
face with confidence, when he comes? Are you sure your sins are pardoned, and
your persons accepted? Dare you look death in the face without change of
countenance, when ever it comes? Remember, the Lord has taken al other cares
on himself, that so we might care for nothing, but to prepare for our Lords
approach. Examine whether this be your care.

(3.) Examine well both your Notions and Practice of Godliness. Count nothing
Godliness, but what will bear the fiery trial, at the coming of our Lord: let
there not be a loose pin in the main parts of your Christianity. Think often,
whither you are going, and where you shall loge at night: and this will make you
exceeding accurate and curious, both in your notions, and practice of Godliness.

4. Here is matter of conviction, rebuke, and shame, both to secure sinners, and
Saints, who mind not the coming of the day of God.

(1.) Here is matter of conviction and confusion to carnal secure sinners, such
as Peter prophesies of, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Who walk after their own lusts: saying,
where is the promise of his coming. I fear there are too many, who pretend
much friendship to Christ, and yet seldom or never think of his return. I
shall therefore take liberty, to reason the case with such. Thou think,
peradventure, it may be long enough ere Christ come, if he come at al: Mean
while thou art resolved to take thy fill of thy lusts. Very good: Ay, but what
grounds have thou to think, it will be long ere Christ come? Does not the
Scripture tell thee in express terms, the Judge stands at the door, Jam.
5.9? and dare thou contemn plain Scripture? do thou consider whose word
it is thou do contemn? whose threats thou think scorn of? Can thou
not believe he is so near at hand? Why, yet believe that he will surely come,
first or last, and then call thee to an account for all thine evil deeds? I say,
do but believe this, and I question not but it will make thine heart to ache. Ay,
but possibly thou may presume to find favor with him in that day: Why not?
What sinner! can thou expect to find favor in his eyes at last day, and yet
despise, and reject al proffers of his Grace in this day of salvation; spit in
his face; and prefer a few sensual delights before him? Oh! what a foolish
soul-deluding presumtion is this? Its true, our great Lord is exceeding
merciful, pure Grace, al love: But is he not also as just and righteous? Is it
not a righteous thing with him to recompense tribulation to carnal secure
sinners? and, what! would thou have him unrighteous that he may show mercy
to thee? Ah! what a sad contemplation is this for awakened sinners, to think,
that God must either be unrighteous, or al their foolish hopes of mercy must
perish? And let me tell thee, sinner, the mercy and Free Grace of God will be so
far from favorising of thee, in that great day, if thou continuest in thy sin,
as that it will prove a stinging aggravation of thy misery. Oh! what a dreadful
worm will this breed in thy Conscience, to be spurned into hell by a foot of
Mercy and Grace? Do not thy hopes yet fail thee? Is not thine heart yet
pained, and rent at the thoughts of thy Lords coming to Jugement? Do thou
not, as it were, see the Lord of Glory coming in Chariots of flaming fire, to
take vengeance on carnal secure sinners? Methinkes, that voice should be ever
ringing in thine ears, Lo! Yonder, yonder comes the Judge of the whole Earth!
What meanest thou, sinner, by plodding, how thou may keep thy lusts, and yet
escape future wrath? How long will thou proceed to harden thy wicked heart to
thine own destruction, by putting far off the evil day? Assure thy self the day
of the Lord is never the farther off, for thy thinking it is so: but this
advantage it will have by the putting of it far off, it will surprise thee
unawares. And what will become of al thy fond hopes and groundless presumtions?
how will al thy cruel self-flatteries end in everlasting horror, confusion,
disappointment and despair?

(2.) Here is matter of conviction and shame even to Believers, to think how
little the most of them have their thoughts fixed on the second coming of their
Lord. Alas! how little are your expectations of that great day raised? How
coldly and faintly do your Affections work toward that good time? Ah Sirs!
are there such glorious things to be reveled then? and has the forethoughts
hereof so much influence, upon al manner of holy Conversation and Godliness?
How comes it to pass then, that Believers have their hearts no more bent
toward this great day? How comes it to pass, that their Affections are not
carried out more to meet their approaching Lord? Is it not strange, that
Christians should be so seldom, and so low in the thoughts of this glorious
day? Alas! where can we spend our meditations better than to meet our Lord?
where can the Spouse better employ her thoughts and affections, than with her
absent Husband? Who should look toward the coming of their friend, their
Savior, if not Believers? As for the secure world no wonder, if they endeavor
to stifle al thoughts of their Lords approach, sithat it will be a black day to
them: But as for believers, O! what a joyful time will it be to them? Will it not
be the time of their complete redemtion, their mariage-day? Should not their
thoughts therefore be always musing on this day? How should their hearts leap
for joy, at the very reports of it? But is it thus with them? Are not al too
much strangers to this day? And oh! what an heinous sin is it for believers,
not to look for this great day?

(1.) How much do such sin against the many intimate relations they bear to
Christ? Is it possible that the member should forget its Head? Was it ever
known, that the affectionate faithful Spouse forgot her absent husband? Is it
not then strange unkindnesse, that the members of Christ should put far from
them the coming of their Head, and Lord?

(2.) What a strange violence do such offer to all the principles of the New
Creature? Is there any thing more injurious to the divine nature, than not to
mind the approach of Christ? Does not this greatly provoke and grieve the
Spirit of Adoption? How is faith oppressed, and kept under hereby? What a check
and contradiction is this to al Divine Affections?

(3.) For Believers not to mind the coming of their Lord, is a sin against the
strongest and deepest obligations. Does not this oppose al our Covenants,
Resolutions, Experiences, Ordinances; yea, the blood and heart of our dying and
exalted Savior? Was not this one main end of the death and exaltation of
Christ, that believers might live always in the expectation of him?

(4.) What a World of other sins are maintained by our not looking for our
Lords approach? What more prevalent to feed Idollusts? How is Conscience cast
into fits of spiritual slumber hereby, as Mat. 25.5? What a world of sloth,
deadness, and formalitie is nourished hereby? How much Instabilitie,
confusion, and distraction of spirit is caused hereby?

(5.) Yea, how cruel and injurious are such to their own souls? What a sting
and poison does this put into every affliction? How does it embitter the
sweetest mercies? Yea, does it not open a door to al tentations, and leave men
shiftlesse under the greatest difficulties?

5. Let us then al be exhorted henceforth daily to look for, and hasten unto
the coming of our Lord. And to provoke our hearts hereto, let these following
motives be duly considered by us.

(1.) Is not that great day our time of Rest? and do not al mind their Rest,
specially after hard labor, and a tiresome journey? would not al fain be at
home, when night comes? What is this world, but our Wilderness?

(2.) Consider the nearness of your Relation, and the manifold engagements you
stand in unto Christ. Are you not married unto Christ? and does not the law of
marriage require, that you daily expect the coming of your absent husband?
Remember you are not married to the clay-Gods of time, but to Christ, who has
laid infinite obligations on you, daily to expect his return.

(3.) Consider also Christ's Regard, and Affection toward you. Though his Body
be in the supreme Heaven, yet is not his eye of pity and care; yea, and his
heart with you? Does he not long for you? and will you not also long for him?

(4.) Remember also what Influence this looking for your approaching Lord has
on your heart and ways. O! What Vigor and Strength does it infuse into all that
you do or suffer? How much is the heart hereby fortified against al tentations
and difficulties? This will be wings and spurs to the soul in every duty: The
more you eye your home, the more active will you be in your way.

(5.) Is not this likewise your Glory and triumph, to turn your back on
althings of time, and daily to look for, and hasten to the coming of your Lord?
Are you not hereby advanced into the highest form of Christians; yea, taken up
into the very spirit and life of Heaven? Have you not hereby a beginning of
Heaven, a stamp of Glory on your hearts and lives?

(6.) Remember, that al you do for your souls, without a regard to the coming
of the day of God, is nothing. You neither mind, nor affect, nor act any thing
to purpose, longer than you mind your Lords approach. What is al your Religion
without this, but a dreaming, sleepy, loitering formalitie? Al your Actions and
passions for God, which refer not to this day, are lost.

(7.) To look for and hasten unto the coming of your Lord, puts you into a
state of Liberty and freedom: it makes you freeborne Citizens of Heaven, as
Phil. 3.20. Whereas al others are chained to the Idols of time, prisoners to
their lusts, of servile ignoble spirits. Nothing brings so much Amplitude and
Liberty of heart and ways, as daily looking for that great Day.

(8.) Remember the judge stands at the door; you are on the brink of
Eternity; and dare you sleep or loiter, when the judge is so near? Is it not
prodigious folly, to lie dreaming on the precipice of Eternity? If you look
not for the coming of your Lord, is it not a black marque, that wrath and
jugement look for you? Have you not sufficient cause to question your Interest
in Christ, if you altogether neglect and disregard his second coming?

(9.) Know that your choicest comforts, peace, hopes, Graces, with the whole of
the Divine Life depend greatly on your looking for, and hastening unto the
coming of your Lord. Christ will never honor you with much peace, joy, and
Grace, if you will not honor him with looking for and hastening unto his second
coming.

(10.) Future Blessedness is entailed on our present looking for and hastening
unto the coming of our Lord. Thus Heb. 9.28. And to them that look for him,
shall he appear the second time without sin, unto salvation. So that you see
Christ will appear to none in a way of salvation but such as look for him.

(11.) Does not the whole Creation, excepting the secure sleepy world, look for
the coming of our Lord, as Romans 8.19, 20, 21. and will you not do the same?

(12.) Lastly, To be altogether unmindful of your Lords approach, argues a
lifelesse, senseless heart. Is not the expectation of your Lords approach,
your safest, sweetest, richest, noblest life? Oh! then what a sad death is it,
to be deprived, either in part or in whole, of that which is your highest life?
To be dead to Christ and his second coming, which brings eternal life, what a
miserable death is this? Is not al life dead and gone, if your looking for your
Lords return be dead and gone?

To give a few Directions for our better looking for, and hastening unto the
coming of our Lord.

1. Make the promise the mesure of thine expectations; and let thy spirit be
unsatisfied, til thou have got some assurance of an interest in the good things
promissed, at the coming of thy Lord. As the promise alone can give being to
thy faith and hopes; so the Assurance of an interest in the things promissed,
gives life and vigor to thy looking for, and hastening unto the coming of thy
Lord. Thou can not hope for the coming of thy Lord, without a promise;
neither will thou hasten toward it, without some persuasion of an Interest in
the things promissed. Leave not soul-concernes under any hazards, or
peradventures: Rest not satisfied in any condition, 'til you are sure, you can
look Christ in the face, when he comes, without fear or shame. In order hereto
cast up your accounts daily; and never be satisfied without some assurance your
sins are pardoned.

(2.) Be ever parting with the Idols of time: Let no false God, or Image of
Jealousy loge in your heart. Remember the Lord usually conveigheth his most
deadly poison, through the sweet wine of prosperity. O! how many, by having
their eyes dazzled with the glory of this world, have lost the sight of their
Lords approach? How soon are our eyes misted, and hearts bewitched with the
golden pleasures of that heart-inveigling Idol, the World? Oh! at what a
distance ought we to keep from the walls of this Pesthouse? what have we to do
with this dirty Idol, which the degenerate Sons of Adam Worship and adore?

(3.) Let your Thoughts and Affections ever work according to the Dignity of
those objects you expect, at the coming of your Lord, and your Relation to
them. Have thou a clear apprehension of thy Lords approach, and some Assurance
of an Interest in him? O! then how should thy Love, by all manner of vehement
exercices both of desire, hope, Joy and satisfaction, move toward thy Lord?
Or, do thou behold the coming of thy Lord, but want a prevalent assurance of
an Interest in him? what an holy awe and filial fear of thy Lord; what hatred
and Indignation against sin ought thou to have?

(4.) Make frequent suppositions of thy Lords Approach; and think what
thoughts thou will then have of things. Remember, with what swift wings time
posteth away, and Eternity hastens toward thee. Make such suppositions as
these: What if this night I should hear the midnight-crie, Behold, the
bridegroom comes? how am I prepared to meet my Lord? Can I look him with
confidence in the face? Will my soul then be able to pass the fiery trial,
without being consumed?

(5.) Do nothing, but what thou would do, if the Lord were come. This will
give thee much confidence in looking for the coming of thy Lord. They, who
mesure al their Actions by that day, will not care how soon it come. Such as
keep their spirits in an absolute submission to the Divine will, both as to
doing and suffering, are in the fittest posture to entertain their Lord. The
reason why the most of men are so averse from looking for, and hastening unto
the coming of the day of God, is the Irregularitie of their Actions, which they
know will not bear the trial, of that day.

(6.) Contend daily with invincible Resolution, and violent efforts toward the
coming of the Day of God. Go forward, in the strength of the Lord, with
invincible courage and vigorous activitie to meet your Lord: and remember, what
difficulties you meet with in your way, will be made up in the enjoyments that
follow. Alas! what is it that keeps our souls at such a distance from the
coming of the Day of God, but the Formalitie and D^^dnesse of our Spirits in
our race? Is the^e much deadness in thine heart, whereby thou art hindered in
thy race? And is there not much life in Christ to quicken thee? then adhere to
him, draw from him of his fullness Grace for Grace, that thou may run with
speed, the race set before thee. Dread a loitering formal spirit as much as Hell.

(7.) Muse and consider much on the glorious effects, which follow the coming
of the day of God. Remember that thy present thirsty desires, will then be
turned into a love of Fruition and complacence. How soon will the Saints present
tears be changed into eternal joys? O! what an excellent thing is Heaven? Does
it not as much (or much more) excede our present apprehensions, as our present
apprehensions excede our present enjoyments? What are al present enjoyments,
whether spiritual or temporal, but shadows, in comparison of those celestial
enjoyments? Yea, al we here enjoy is scarce a picture of that glorious state.
O! what a blessed day will that be, when the Saints shall leave, though not their
Natures, yet al their imperfections both natural and sinful? When al their
Spiritual Darknesses, Errors, and Douts, shall end in the beatific Vision of
God, as he is, face to face: When al their Rebellions of heart, shall end in a
perfect conformity and subjection to the Divine Will: When al their unlawful
passions and exorbitant Affections shall end in a regular harmony and motion:
when al their Deadnesses in Duties, shall end in the most vigorous and lively
exercices of al manner of Graces: When al their convulsions and terrors of
Conscience shall end in complete assurance of Gods Love: when al their Distances
and Estrangements from God shall end in perfect Union and communion with God:
When al their troubles, disgusts, and dissatisfactions in this world shall end
in perfect Rest and Satisfaction: O! what a glorious blessed Day will this be?
How would the serious and lively views hereof by faith fix the heart, in
looking for and hastening to the coming of the Day of God?

(8.) Familiarise thoughts of death unto thy soul; and never rest satisfied,
'til thou have brought thine heart to a wel-grounded, cheerful willingness to
be dissolved. None look for and hasten to the coming of their Lord, so much as
they who daily wait for their change. O! how welcome is death, when it comes,
to those, who daily look for it? Who live better lives, than they, who
continually think of death? What more effectually engages men to die unto
althings of time, than daily expectations of Death? They who look for the
dreadful hour of Death and Jugement, how much do they despise all the dreadful
things of this life? Remember, that death comes not the sooner for your
expectation of it: But the more you look for it, the better prepared you will be
to entertain it, when it comes: You will die out of choice, not merely from
necessity. I shall conclude with a great saying, of that holy man, Mr. John
Row, (p. 124. of his life), when he drew near to death; why, said he, should
we not be willing to die: Christ came from Heaven to Earth, to free us from sin
and misery, and why should not we be willing, to go from Earth to Heaven, to
be freed from sin and misery?

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock, Senior and Junior, at the
first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley, at the three Bibles; Who sells all sorts of
Divinity-Books, etc. to Chapmen, or others.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the
Gospel at Magarets New Fish-street.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's devices; Or, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores; being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; that are growing in Spirituals, or decaving; that are tempted, or
deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want it; on 2 Cor.
2.11.

2. Heaven on Earth; Or a serious Discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance
of man's everlasting happiness and blessedness; discovering the nature of
assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and degrees of
it, with the resolution of several weighty Questions on the 8. of the Romans,
32, 33, 34, verses.

3. The unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or Meat for strong Men, and Milk for
Babes, (...) two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians.


