The FORERUNNER to a further Answer (if need be) to two Books lately published
against Tho. Grantham of Norwich: Wherein the Spirit and Temper of the
Calvinists is discovered; particularly Mr. Calvin, Mr. Finch, and his little
Praecursor.
To which is prefixed, The solid Testimony of Mr. George Wither against
Calvinism, the worst of Doctrines.
By THO. GRANTHAM, Preacher of glad Tidings to all Men in the City of Norwich.
MR. George Wither, a Man of great Judgment in many things, and a faithful
Monitor of the English Nation for many Years; did, in the Year 1666, publish
his Parallellogrammaton; wherein he does much persuade to Repentance and
Brotherly-Love. And observing some great Impediments to both, in p. 61, etc. he
considers the Doctrine of the Calvinists, in denying universal Redemption, to
be a very great Obstruction thereunto. And thus he declares himself.

I will be bold to aver -- that the brotherly Love and true Repentance, whereto
I would persuade, will never be effectually attained unto by them, which
knowingly, premeditately, and wilfully persevere in denying the universal
Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ; seeing thereon depends God's most
glorious Attribute; and in regard it is that for which we are much more obliged
to him than all the rest of his Creatures, he cannot but be highly displeased
with all those who confine the extent of that Mercy. I know many in these Times
(some of them in other respects very good and learned Men) who think universal
Redemption to be a New Doctrine, terming it Arminianism and Popery: but it is
neither new, nor repugnant (as is pretended) to the Orthodox Doctrine of
Election and Reprobation, and the free Grace of God; nor ascribes ought more to
Nature by the Consequences thereof, than tends to our justifying of God, and to
our self-condemnation, if that which he has given us be not husbanded
according as he has and does enable. The holy Scriptures evidence it to all
who rightly understand them.

So far is it from being a Novelty, (as ignorant Hearers are made to believe)
that it was received and professed for a necessary Truth by the Churches of God
in all Ages since Christ's Birth, and contradicted by very few in the first
Times of Christianity: Yea, it was believed many hundreds of Years before
Arminius was born, or Popery had any being in the World; and will be professed,
when the Opposers and Traducers of that Verity shall be quite rooted out of the
Evangelical Kingdom -- It is the well-counterfeiting of Truth and Holiness
which must complete the Designs of Antichrist; and there is not any one single
Heresy or Wickedness, which does so secretly, and so mischievously supplant
Christ; it undermines the Foundation of that Structure which open Blasphemies
above-ground cannot endanger, and has already sprung a Mine to the dividing of
Lutherans and Calvinists, that they will hardly be reconciled until all
Controversies are at an end.

Let us therefore consider well what depends upon it; how much it concerns the
Glory of God; how much he is dishonored by a contrary Belief, and how much it
detracts from our own Privileges and Consolations. God's Mercy is above all his
Works. It is the Crown and Dignity of the King of Kings, and the highest of all
Treasons to clip it.

A professed denial of the universality of humane Redemption, seems to me a
cursed Counter-Callol, made and sung by Devils, in opposition to that blessed
Nativity-Song which was sung by Angels at the birth of Christ, Glory to God on
High, on Earth Peace, and good Will to Men. For how was God likely to be
glorified, Peace to be upon Earth, and good Will to Men, manifested by the
Incarnation of his Son, if Man's Redemption had not been Universal? But so
narrowed, that it extended to a very few, and those few also left without
assurance they were of that small number, whatsoever they should endeavor, if
there should be an Exception from the Act of Grace, as many fancy?

Doubtless if it had been so, it would have given occasion rather of howling
than of singing, and been rather sad than glad Tidings, in regard of that great
Terror which might have seized upon all Mankind, and caused an universal
Lamentation, when they considered how many millions of millions were certainly
exposed to everlasting Damnation; how small a number in possibility to be
saved, and how few of their dearly beloved Parents, Children, and Friends might
be of these few, for whom Christ took upon him humane Nature. O horrible and
unparalled Blasphemy! But, blessed be God's Name, it is not so. When the
Children of Israel were redeemed out of their Egyptian Bondage, which was a
Type of our ^^^versal Redemption, there was not one Soul, no not a Hoof left
behind them; nor was one soul absolutely excluded from the benefit of Christ's
Incarnation and Passion, but they only who by their own Defaults, and
unrepented Sin, should fall away, as they did who perished in the Wilderness.
For God has many a time, upon several Occasions, pa^sed his Word to ascertain
the Universality of his Love to Man without personal Respects, where personal
Sins without Repentance, have not first made the Person incapable. Nay* our
Incredulity has put him to his Oath to assure every Sinner. And if
nevertheless we still distrust him, continue in our misbelief of his Word and
Oath, and labor to draw others into the same Crime; it cannot be an ordinary
Punishment which God will at last inflict for so extraordinary and so high an
Affront; it being a Sin more heinous than Murder, Adultery, and all other mere
carnal Sins put together; yea, more heinous than those the Jews committed by
their Idolatries, killing the Prophets, and crucifying Christ in the Flesh; for
the last was but a Sin against his Humanity, and their Idolatries but the
ascribing some part of that Honor to the Creatures, which was due to God only:
Whereas the limiting God's universal Grace in Christ with the concomitant
Doctrines, and the Consequences thence raised, and the imputing to God an
eternal Reprobation of the greatest part of Mankind, before they had done Good
or Evil; for those Sins also which they blasphemously say he necessitated them
to commit, to show his Justice, and manifest his hatred to Sin, is a despoiling
God of his Divine Nature, of his Goodness, and an ascribing unto him that which
belongs only to the Devil.

O the Patience of God! what can be so abominable? They do not only make
Reprobation older than the Father of it the Devil, but make God also the Author
of his Wickedness, in necessitating him to be a Devil, and consequently Author
of all the Wickedness committed by all the Devils in Hell, and all the wicked
Men upon the Earth: which appears to me so horrible an Impiety, that I wonder
not to see the World so full of Plagues and Sins, and Sins and Sinners become
such Plagues to each other as they are. Nor can I believe there will ever be
less Plagues, where that Blasphemy is professed and indulged as Orthodox
Doctrine, until it be repented of. Nor shall I marvel if my Words be
misunderstood, and my good Meaning misinterpreted; if God's Word be so
mistaken, and his Love so ill-rewarded. I know the bitterness and
uncharitableness of their Spirits, who shall be obstinate in this Judgment, yet
am neither afraid nor ashamed to declare my Conscience therein; or in
whatsoever else I think may concern God's Glory, and the Peace of my Country.
Thus far Mr. Geo. Wither.

The Forerunner to a further Answer (if occasion serve) to two Books lately
Published against Tho. Grantham of Norwich.
Briefly showing the Spirit and Temper of the Calvinists, and particularly of
Mr. Finch and his Praecursor, etc.
Wickedness proceeds and comes forth from the Wicked, as says the Proverb
of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24. 13.
IN Psalm. 94. 20* this Question is put, Shall the Throne of Iniquity have The
Calvinists make God to establish all the mischievous Actions of Men and Devils
by an unalterable Decree, so as that they must be done of necessity. O horrible!
fellowship with thee, which frames Mischief by a Law? The Sense of the place
is, No such thing can please God, etc.

Now of all Mischief, Sin is the worst, and indeed the Cause of all the rest.
It must therefore be exceeding Evil, for any to make the Holy God the Ordainer
and Commander of all the Sins of Angels and Men, and that freely, without any
Provocation, and infallibly and unchangeably also, that they must even so come
to pass as he has (not only) foreseen them, but ordained and commanded them.
This is the Doctrine which I chiefly opposed in my Dialogue. And though I have
made this very manifestly appear to be the Doctrine of the principal Men of the
Presbyterian and Calvinistical Persuasion, yet I will here add one Passage more
out of Mr. Calvin, Inst. L. 3. c. 24. Sect. 6. where he boldly tells us, That
God does none otherwise foresee the things that shall come to pass, than
because he has ordained they shall so come to pass. It is vain to move
Controversy about Foreknowledge, where it is certain rather by Ordinance and
Commandment. So then, let the Action be never so wicked, he makes it infallibly
necessary, by virtue of God's Ordinance and Commandment. Than which I do aver*
nothing can be spoken more dishonorable to God, nor more mischievous to Men.
Yea, Zanchius is as bold as Calvin, for he says, Damus Reprobos necessitate
p^^candi, eoque and pereundi, ex hac Dei ordinatione constringi, atque ita
constringi ut nequeant non peccare atque periere: That is, We grant that
Reprobates are held so fast under God's Almighty Decree, that they cannot but
sin and perish. These I call the worst Doctrines in the World.

And finding this worst of Doctrines to have much prevailed in the City of
Norwich, I have endeavored to make the Citizens sensible of the danger of it,
both by Preaching and Writing. For which Work and Labor of Love (and to their
Souls especially who are most deceived by it) I have been ill requited by many
Slanders and Reproaches; and particularly by a very foolish Pamphlet, as a
Forerunner to that Book of Mr. Finch, which he calls, An Answer to my Dialogue,
[which scurrilous Pamphlet was published with his Privity and Allowance, as I
suppose] in both which, one great Design is, to disgrace my Person by unseemly
Epithets, and very false Stories; and particularly for that which I writ
against Calvin for his Rage and Cruelty, in procuring one Michael Servetus to
be burnt to death at Geneva, Anno 1553. Concerning which the Pamphleteer calls
Calvin, a renowned Man a Star of the first Magnitude; and Servetus, an infamous
Wretch; and my self, a paultry grovelling Fellow. And Mr. Finch calls me, a
boisterous quarrelsom Man, one that has the Spirit of Slumber, as a check and
punishment to defame such a Man as Calvin; and to extol Servetus, an
Antitrinitarian; and says, I have lost all Credit and Esteem with all wise and
knowing Christians. But yet I hope all wise and knowing Christians will hear me
speak for what is Truth, and so for my self also before they condemn me. And,

1. Wherein do I defame Calvin? That he did certainly procure the death of
Servetus, a very learned Man, and of that exact Life, that nothing is objected
against him, though I doubt he did err in some things; I sa(...)at Calvin did
procure his Death* is p(...) he says, I freely confess the Accuser came out
from me, I hope at the least he shall be put to death Libenter fateor ( inquit
Calvinus de se) ac prae me fero prodisse accusatore^, spero capitale saltem
feret judicium. Calv. Ep. ad Farret.
. I have not then defamed Calvin, unless Mr. Finch and his little Lawyer can
justify that cruel Action; as indeed they seem willing so to do, by approving
Dr. Owen his Sentence, who tells us, as Mr. Finch quotes him, p. 115. That
Servetus is the only Person in the World that he ever heard of, that ever died
upon the account of Religion, in reference to whom the Zeal of them that put
him to death may be acquitted. And thus Mr. Finch, Dr. Owen, etc. have bathed
their Hands in the Blood of poor Michael Servetus. Behold, and wonder! and
wonder the more, because neither of them ever saw the Book which Servetus died
for, but take their Grounds from the Pens of his Murderers, who would not speak
the best of him you may be sure. But,

2. Wherein do I extol Servetus? I said he was a Learned and worthy Man, and
pious, tho mistaken in some things perhaps. And do I not call him Pious in
conjunction with Calvin? Now I conceive that in Charity, I may hope many were
pious Men, who did not rightly understand the Mystery of the Trinity. Yea, I
have the charity to think, that Calvin was a pious Man, and yet I believe and
know that he was very Erroneous in many things, and that he was acted by Cain's
Spirit, when he procured the Death of Servetus, who could not deny either the
Father, Son, nor Holy Spirit, because he held true Baptism in the Name of all
the Three; though I fear his Sentiments were not so clear as they ought to have
been concerning the Unity of these Three. And who can say that he so fully
knows this great and glorious Mystery as he ought to do? I am far from
justifying Servetus in his Error, yet I think they ought to have spared his
Life, though they had laid some Restraint upon him.

3. Let us hear what Learned Protestants have said before me, in the Case of
Servetus.

1. Grotius, a Man that had but few Equals for Wisdom and Moderation, tells us;
Servetus Libri non Genevae tantum, sed in aliis Locis, per Calvini diligentiam
exusti sunt; fateor tamen unum me exemplum vidisse Libri Servetiani, in quo
certe ea non reperi quae ei objicit Calvinus, Vot. pro p^ce, p. 16. That is, By
the Diligence of Calvin, all the Books of Servetus were not only burnt at
Geneva, but in other Places. Yet I have seen one Copy of Servetus' s Books, in
which truly I do not find the Things which Calvin does object against him.

And says Dr. Pierce, (a Learned and Able Minister of the Church of England)
Servetus was burnt at Geneva for less than being a Socinian, and who was not so
bad as Mr. B. (a Presbyterian) has labored to fancy me.

And he tells us also, That Oecolampadius (a Learned Protestant) was offended
at the barbarity of the Sentence. Nor find I any thing ( says he) pretended
against Servetus, which was so highly blasphemous, as to make God the Author or
Cause of Sin. And how well Calvin could tell his own Tale, and how diligent he
was in being the first Informer of his Affairs, we may guess by his Epistles,
164, 165, which he writ to the Four Helvetian Cities for gaining Authority to
his new Device -- for, let them say what they please to lessen the Guilt of
that Cruelty, yet they are Parties, and must not so easily be heeded as other
Men who are none. If Servetus his Books were so blasphemous, why was Calvin so
diligent in burning up the Impression which he should rather have preserved,
that Posterity might see some competent Cause for such a terrible Execution?
Yet, by the Providence of God, one or two of the Copies escaped the Flames; and
we are assured, by peerless Grotius, that in the Copy which he saw, he could
not find those things which were objected by Mr. Calvin; what Melancton wrote,
it was merely on supposition that Calvin's Narrative was true. Thus far the
Learned Pierce, in dislike Calvin' s Cruelty against Servetus.

And by this we may perceive, how little Credit there is to be given to Dr.
Owen and Mr. Finch, or his Little Praecursor, not one of them having seen the
Book which they condemn, but receive their Information from them that were his
Murderers.

And grant that Servetus did err in that great Mystery of the Trinity, yet must
he for this be burnt to death? Why then, Dr. Owen, Mr. Finch, and his Little
Lawyer, would make bloody Work, even in England, where there are too many who
are as erroneous concerning that glorious Mystery, as Servetus was, (the more
is the pity); for seeing they justify Calvin in that bloody Act, how can they
refuse doing the like, were it in their Power, unless they will come short of
that Zeal which they commend in Mr. Calvin? By this print of the Foot, we may
know the stature of that Monster of Persecution, which did not the Law
restrain, would appear in too many Professors at this Day. I speak what I know
by the Usage I have met with in this City, both from Professors and Profane.

4. Now let us hear how famous Mr. Calvin was in the Judgment of some Learned
and Sober Protestants.

(1.) He is thought to err in the Mystery of the Trinity as well as Servetus,
though perhaps not so much. These are his words, (speaking of the Three
Persons, etc.) If the Names have not without cause been invented, we ought to
take heed, that in rejecting them, we be not justly blamed of proud
Presumptuousness. I would to God (says he) they were buried indeed, so that
this Faith were agreed of all Men, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are
one God; and yet the Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost the Son, but
distinct by certain Properties. Institut. L. 1. c. 13. Sect. 3. And this his
Tres Proprietates, is objected against him by some of the Learned Protestants.
And I am of Opinion, should I write of the Blessed Trinity as Mr. Calvin has
done, Mr. Finch and his Forerunner would cry out Blasphemy.

(2.) He condemns the Ancient Fathers, because they were not of his Mind in the
Case of Irrespective Reprobation, but hold, That there was Salvation for all
Men through God's Mercy in the Gift of his Son. He brands them (says a Learned
Protestant) as Pelagianising in their Opinions.

But (3.) his rudeness of Speech was intolerable: He called great and good Men
by Titles unseemly; as Serpent, Pest, Lossel, Fool, Knave, Devil, filthy Dog,
impudent Hangman, etc. And Bucer (a Learned Protestant) calls him, Fratricide,
a Murderer of his Brethren. And Grotius says, He grew worse and worse; and that
Calvin' s Disciples are such themselves in Disposition, as they make God to be
in their Imaginations toward the greater part of Mankind.

And truly this is too apparent in two of his Followers, I mean, the Little
Praecursor and Mr. Finch, whose study has been to render me very odious, though
I am sure they know no Evil by me, more (no nor so much) as they know by
themselves. And yet thus I am represented by them, viz. audacious, impudent,
turbulent, impetuous, impertinent, scurrilous, prejudiced Mechanic; a Fool,
despicable, wise Mr. Grantham, a despised Man, Coxcomb, addleBrain, dull
Kitching-pate, Clown, Blunderbuss, dissembling Prater, Brawler, bellowing,
hideous, bleat, thick-skull Momus, one decreed to steal, wrangling Fellow,
Dolt, poor Fop, soft-pated Clod, Caviller, Brazen-^orehead, inconsiderate
Fellow, gagling Goose, a quarrelsome boisterous Man, one that has lost all
Credit and Esteem with all wise and knowing Christians that worship the Holy
Trinity; one, like a Woman scolding and quarrelling in the Streets, one like an
impertinent Woman, etc. So that I think these two Calvinists have come near the
pitch of their Master. And such as will not spare Men's Reputation, are not to
be trusted with their Lives, any more than Mr. Calvin.

5. There is one thing which runs through Mr. F's Epistle and Book, and that is
a talk of special discriminating Grace. As if God's Grace, which he gives to
most Men, were of little use for them that have it; yea, of no use at all, in
respect of Eternal Life. All that Mr. F. allows that Grace to effect for them
in the other World, is only to make their Punishment less in Hell, as you may
see in p. 15. of his Answer; which is a piece of as woeful Divinity as ever was
heard surely.

Reader, I humbly advise thee to take heed how thou receivest these Dictates,
and esteem all (even the least Measure of Grace from God) to be a special
favor, and such as in its Nature and Effect ( if it be all that ^e designed
for thee, be it never so little) will certainly lead thee to Heaven, thou being
a faithful improver of it, sincerely, though under many Infirmities; and this
through his own Goodness, in Christ Jesus our Lord, who gave himself a Ransom
for all to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

(2.) Again observe, that these terms, discriminating Grace, etc. are not found
in the Scripture; nor wisely made use of to render some of God's Grace not to
be discriminating, (as they please to phrase it). We know God gives more
Talents to some than he does to others, yet Grace is the same in Nature and
Efficacy, if improved, and to leave the Receiver under unpardonable Guilt if
not improved, Mat. 25. and we shall only be accountable for what God gives to
each one, and for no more; nor will he deal in severity, but where his Grace
has been contemned.

(3.) Consider that very many of those who most talk of discriminating Grace,
are greatly destitute of that tender Love which Paul had for them that rejected
Christ, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3. and 10. 1, 2, 3. but are filled with hatred against
all that oppose their Conceit of irrespective Reprobation; being indeed fierce
and of a cruel Disposition, full of Passion, quickly angry, etc. These things I
have found to be true (God knows it) among such as pretend very high to
discriminating Grace more than amongst others: but I fear it will prove but a
special discriminating Conceit in the end to very many of them.

6. There is a great talk also, both in his Epistle and Book, about God's
absolute Sovereignty. As if because he is so, he might make Angels and Men on
purpose to damn them to Everlasting Fire, without giving them (at any time) any
Means sufficient to prevent their Destruction. To avoid this Rock upon which
they often split themselves, let us consider, That though God's Sovereignty is
incomprehensible, yet it is every way better both in its Mercy and Justice, and
in the exercise of both, than any Sovereignty that Men do receive or exercise
under him. Now we know, that what Prince soever exerts his Sovereign Power, to
impose absolute Impossibilities upon his Subjects, and Death for
nonperformance, is a very cruel and unrighteous Prince in the exercise of that
Sovereignty. Such was Pharaoh, Exodus 5. condemned by God and Man.

O how ill would it become a Prince to cut off the Feet of many of his
Subjects, and then Gibbet them alive, because they do not run as well as those
whose Feet he spared? And yet even thus do these Calvinists represent the most
merciful Sovereign that ever was: For they hold and teach, that God did freely
and unchangeably decree, precisely such a number of Angels and Men, Women and
Infants, to be damned, and that unspeakable Time, before there was either Angel
or Man created; and this, not because God foresaw they would sin, and despise
the Riches of his Goodness; but he also ordained them that they should commit
so many Sins, yea, all the Sins that they ever shall or can commit, that so he
might glorify the Sovereignty of his Justice (as they speak) in such a
voluntary and dismal destruction of his Creatures.

7. These things I made evident from the Learned Calvinists own Pens, as
alleged against them by their fellow Protestants; and Mr. Finch is so far from
answering them, that he plainly tells you, he will not meddle with any of my
Quotations, and yet he calls his Book an Answer to mine. He says also, he will
not justify all the Phrases of Learned and Godly Men; and thus he will hold to
their Opinion, but not to their Phrases. Hence he likes not Dr. Collings's
using the Phrase, as if God did not seriously act, etc. when indeed he makes
the Case far worse: for tho Peter told the Jews, God sent Christ to them to
bless them, in turning every one of them from their Iniquities, Mr. F. tells
you, it was far from Peter' s meaning, p. 21. And when our Savior bewails
Israel, for not knowing the things that belonged to their Peace; Mr. F. tells
us, Christ did not weep for their Spiritual Peace, but to prevent their Ruin by
the Romans; as if Christ did more tender their Bodies than their Souls: It
seems he had ordained the Devil should lead them to Hell, but for this Christ
would not weep as a Mediator, but he wept as Man only for that they should be
destroyed by the Romans; and yet, if you sound him to the bottom, it was
infallibly and unchangeably decreed by Christ as God, that they should be
destroyed by the Romans, for he holds that God did unchangeably decree
whatsoever comes to pass. O unwise Expositor! and thus does he abuse most of
the Texts which he meddles with, which speak of God's Love to Mankind
universally, as every careful Reader may perceive: And very unworthily
declares, That God has many holy Ends in affording the preaching of the Word
to many, upon whom he never purposed nor intended to bestow special and saving
Grace, p. 15. And what is this, but to tell the World, that God merely mocks
the greatest part of Men to whom the Gospel is preached? for whatever he speaks
by the Gospel to them, he never intended them any Salvation by it. And thus Mr.
Finch, and all such Preachers as he is, are mere Hypocrites, for they cannot
intend any Salvation to all they preach unto, but only to a very few* and they
know not so much as one of them.

Nay, so greedily does he fancy that God will absolutely damn the greatest part
of Mankind; that he will not spare the poor dying Infants, but cast them into
Hell also; and his Reason is, That as Men do kill the young Cubs of Foxes and
Wolves, though they never yet did any Mischief, so God may, if he please,
glorify his Justice upon Infants, though they die in their Infancy* p. 88, 89.
And thus our gracious God is made more cruel to his Offspring, (for such is
all Mankind, Acts 17. 28.) than the very Wolves and Foxes are to their young
Ones. An^ what is now become of that gracious Speech of Almighty God, Psalm.
145. His tender Mercies are over all his Works? Sure, damned Infants have no
share at all in his Mercy, no not so much as a Toad by a thoasand degrees. O ye
Fools, when will ye be wise? Psalm. 94. 8.

Mr. Finch quarrels with the Title of my Book, and says, We read of John the
Baptist, not of Thomas the Baptist. But this only shows his weakness; I speak
not of Thomas the Baptist. I intend by the Baptist, all that own the Doctrine
and Baptism of Repentance for remission of Sins, including John the Baptist as
the first Teacher of that Baptism, for the manifestation of Christ to Israel,
and that all Men through him might believe, John 1. 7, 31. This Doctrine Mr.
Finch and the Presbyterians do oppose, both in the extent of this blessed
Object of Faith for all Men, by narrowing it up to they know not who, and
therefore preach they know not what. And also by Sprinkling poor Infants (many
times fast asleep) in opposition to John the Baptist, who baptized Repentant
Believers in the River, or where there was much Water, Mark 1. 17. John 3. 23.
Mr. Finch also quarrels my Office as a Messenger of the Baptized Churches, etc.
But of this I have given an account, in my Book entitled, Christianismus
Primitivus, to which I refer the inquisitive Reader, and remain,

Norwich, Aug. 14. 1691. A Friend and Servant to all Men, for Jesus's sake,
THO. GRANTHAM.


