THE Grand Concern Of ENGLAND EXPLAINED; IN SEVERAL PROPOSALS Offered to the
Consideration of the PARLIAMENT.

1. For Payment of Public Debts. 2. For Advancement and Encouragement of
Trade. 3. For Raising the Rents of Lands.
In Order whereunto, It is proved Necessary, I. That a Stop be put to further
Buildings in and about London. II. That the Gentry be obliged to live some part
of the Year in the Country. III. That Registers be settled in every County. IV.
That an Act for Naturalizing all Foreign Protestants; and Indulging them; and
His Majesty's Subjects at home, in Matters of Conscience, may be passed. V.
That the Act Prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle, may be Repealed. VI.
That Brandy, Coffee. Mum; Tea, and Chocolata, may be prohibited. VII. That the
Multitude of Stage-Coaches and Caravans may be suppressed. VIII. That no
Leather may be Exported Vn-manufactured. IX. That a Court of Conscience be
settled for Westminster, and all the Suburbs of London, and in every City and
Corporation in England. X. That the Extravagant Habits and Expense of all
Persons may be curbed; the Excessive Wages of Servants and Handicrafts-men may
be Reduced, and all Foreign Manufactures may be prohibited. XI. That it may be
made lawful to Assign Bills, Bonds, and other Securities; and that a Course be
taken to prevent the Knavery of Bankrupts. XII. That the Newcastle-Trade for
Coals may be managed by Commissioners, to the Ease of the Subjects, and great
Advantage of the Public. XIII. That the Fishing-Trade may be vigorously
prosecuted, all poor People set at work to make Fishing-Tackle, and be paid out
of the Money Collected every Year for the Poor, in the several Parishes in
England.


By a Lover of his Country, and Well-wisher to the Prosperity both of the King
and Kingdoms.

London, Printed in the Year, 1673.

PROPOSALS humbly offered to consideration of the Parliament, etc.
1. For discharging the Public Debts of the Kingdom. 2. For Encouraging and
Advancement of Tradc. 3. The Increase of the Rents of Lands.
THE Honor, Interest and Safety of a Kingdom lies in maintaining the Grandeur
and Dignity of their KING, and the Prerogative of his Crown; The which can no
way be better secured, than by providing him a plentiful Revenue wherewith to
defray the Public Expenses of the Kingdom, encourage and help all his Friends
and Allies, maintain Forces for his Own, his Subjects, and the Kingdoms
Safeguard at home, and a sufficient Fleet at Sea for the Security of Trade
abroad, and Defense of his Kingdom against all Foreign Princes and Potentates;
and wherewith also to discharge such Public Debts as are justly owing to any
person upon valuable Consideration.

If the payment of Public Debts were provided for, the rest would be easily
secured, without any great Charge to the People, and the King be freed from the
necessity of calling for fresh Supply every year from his Subjects, which now
comes very hard, and makes Parliaments uneasy to themselves as well as to
those whose Representatives they are.

The vast Debt contracted by his Majesty when beyond the Seas, the great Sums
he has since his happy Restoration given to relieve some of the many poor
(yet Loyal) Subjects, that served him and his Royal Father faithfully, and lost
their Limbs and Estates in their Service; The great Debts he found the Kingdom
in to the Army and Navy when he came first home, which are all paid off,
excepting about 150000 l. that has been under consideration of the Parliament,
which if not paid, will be the ruin of many thousands of poor Families, who
advanced the same for his Majesty's Service, and it was all employed for the
bringing him home.

The great charge of the last and this present Dutch War, both which his
Majesty has been necessitated unto, for the preservation of the dignity of
his Person, (which they so basely scorned and contemned) the Honor of his
Kingdom, and the interest and security of Trade: these, together with the
Money's expended in the reparations of his Ruined Houses, repurchasing his own
Goods, and others for furnishing his Royal Palaces, and many other public
affairs, have called for frequent and great Supplies.

Which howbeit the Parliament have thought fit freely to grant when the King
has desired the same, and passed several Acts for Pole Money,
Benevolence-money, Subsidies, Hearth-money, additional Excise, Taxes upon the
Law, poundage upon Rents, and Land-Taxes, yet the public Debts are very great,
and the reason of it is plainly because whatever has been given (excepting
Land-Taxes) was so overvalued in the granting thereof, the Grants so uncertain,
the Collecting so troublesome and chargeable, the Payment so vexatious to the
People, that the end of the Parliament has not been answered, the King has
not had the Supply intended, nor the Subjects the benefit or ease designed; but
the quite contrary events have happened.

So that it is humbly conceived there is nothing can be more for the Interest and
advantage of the King and Kingdom, than for the Parliament to examine what the
public Debts really are, how contracted, and when; and to see where the King
has been well or ill used, where Persons have made usurious or advantageous
Contracts, and taken advantage of the King's necessities, to impose ill
Commodities and at unreasonable rates upon him, and there to reduce the Debt to
such a preportion, as the Commodity sold was (at the time of such Sale) really
worth; and to see where the King has been justly dealt with; which done, and
the Accounts being brought to Balance, and the Debt stated and known; then at
once to raise so much Money as may discharge the whole, and appoint Persons to
see the money so to be raised, disposed to that and no other use; allowing them
indifferent Salaries for their pains, that so they may mind the work, and
recieve no manner of Fees or advantage from the Creditor, whereby the public
Debts may be lessened: for whoever has trusted the King, had a respect (in
setting his price on the Commodities fold) to the time he thought he should
stay for his Money, the uncertainty of ever receiving it, the vast Charge he
must be at in Exchequer Fees, Gratuities, etc. when ever he should have
obtained the same, insomuch that publiek Debts were and are frequently sold at
sixty or seventy pounds per cent. And so, what hinders but that if this
Business be prudently managed by Persons to be entrusted for that purpose, the
public Debts may be lessened, and the more easily paid? which done, the
Subjects may reasonably expect, and hope for the future to be at quiet and
freed from the fears they are now under of a Parliaments meeting, lest still
there should be fresh supplies for the purposes aforesaid demanded, and given,
and no end be known of such Gifts; and yet to his Majesty and the Kingdoms
great dishonor both at home and abroad, the public Debts still remain
undischarged. And if Money for this purpose shall be by the Parliament thought
fit to be given, It is humbly offered and submitted to their considerations,
whether there can be any way in the World found, more certain, equal, and
easy, to raise the same, than by a Land Tax: for then they will know what it
is they give, when and how certainly it will come in, and the time when the
same will end, and may proportion their Contracts and Payments accordingly.
Besides, a Land Tax will be a certain Fond for to advance Money upon in a short
time, at easy Interest, wherewith speedily to discharge and pay off those
Debts, for which now great interest is to be paid.

I know it will be Objected, that Land is a Drug, bears little or no Price to
be let, or be sold; what Rent it is let for, Tenants are not able to pay; for
to lay Taxes upon that, would utterly undo the Gentry, who have nothing to live
upon but their Rents.

To this I answer, that it is very true, Lands let poorly, Rents are ill paid,
and yield very little, if sold. But let us examine the Reasons hereof, and see
if some things may not be proposed to remedy those Mischiefs, and bring Land to
its former value: which if we do, then every Man will certainly be of Opinion
that a Land Tax is the best way to raise Money, and be glad on that Condition
to have it imposed.

I am of Opinion, that Gentlemen's being wanting to themselves, is the greatest
occasion of the decay of their Estates, and lowering of their Rents. Now in
Order to the bringing them to the same Rate and Value, if not to a better than
they formerly bore, I humbly propose that these several Particulars following
(which can only be done by Act of Parliament) may be enacted as Laws. And I
shall endeavor to Demonstrate the Mischeifs we suffer for want of them, and
the great Advantages we may rationally expect to receive by their being
Enacted. 1. I propose that a stop be put to any farther Buildings in or about
the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, or in any place
within the Weekly-Bills of Mortality, the Head being already too big for the
Body. And that a years Value of all Houses Built upon New Foundations may by
the Owners of such Houses be paid to the King toward payment of Public Debts,
which would advance above 300000 l. 2. That all the Nobility and Gentry of
England who have Estates in the Country, and are not obliged to atterd on His
Majesty by reason of their Offices, be enjoined with their Families to live
where their Estates do lie, so many Months in each year as to the Wisdom of
Parliament shall seem meet. 3. That a Bill be passed for setting up of
Registers in every County for Registring Sales, Mortgages, Leases for term of
Years or Lives, and all other real Securities, and if possible all Bonds, etc.
which Work may be done with little charge to the Subject, and yet a profit of
above 50000 l. per annum arise to the Public. 4. That an Act for a General
Naturalizing of all Foreign Protestants be passed, and an assurance of Liberty
of Conscience given to all that shall come over into England, and place
themselves and Families amongst us. And that the same privilege be given to
his Majesty's Subjects at home. 5. That the Act for prohibition of the
Importation of Irish Cattle be repealed, and a Trade between the two Kingdoms
Established, whereby his Mejesties Revenue of Customs would be advanced above
80000 l. per annum. 6. That Brandy and Mum, Coffee and Tea be prohibited, and
Coffee-houses suppressed, which may be done without any dimunution of his
Majesty's Revenue of Excise. 7. That the multitude of Stage-Coaches and
Caravans now traveling upon the Roads be all or most of them suppressed;
especially those within forty or fifty Miles of London where they are ino way
necessary, and yet most numerous and mischievous; and that a due regulation be
made of such as shall be thought fit to be continued. Which done, his Majesty's
Excise would be worth above 30000 l. per annum more than it now is, and the
Post Office by 6000 l. per annum. 8. That the Act for Transportation of Leather
Unmanufactured be repealed, or so far discountenanced at least, that it be not
renewed when the seven years is expired. 9. That a Court in the nature of the
Court of Request in London be established for Westminster, Southwark, and all
parts within the Weekly-Bills of Mortality if possible, and in every City and
Town Corporate in England, to determine differences between poor People, for
small Debts, Words, or Trespasses, that so they may not be undone by Law Suits.
10. That a Bound be put to the Extravagant Habits, and Expenses of all sorts of
Persons, that Servants and Handicraft Tradesmens excessive Wages may be
reduced, and that no foreign Manufactures, except from Ireland, be suffered to
be worn in England, but that the importation and exposing of them knowingly to
Sale be both made Felony. 11. That it be made Lawful to assign Bills, Bonds and
other Securities, And the Frauds of Men Breaking, with design to Enrich
themselves out of their Creditors Estates may be prevented. 12. That the
New Castle Trade for Coals may be managed by Commissioners for his Majesty,
which would be a great advantage to the Subjects, and raise his Majesty above
300000 l. per annum. 13. That the Fishing Trade be encouraged, all Poor set at
Work to provide Tackle for that use, and be paid out of the Money Collected
yearly in every Parish throughout England for relief of the Poor, which would
be of vast advantage to the Public.


In Order to the evincing of the necessity of Prohibiting any of further
Building in and about London, and Westminster, and of the Gentries being
confined to live some part of the year upon their Estates in the Country, I
desire every serious considerate Person, that knew London and Westminster, and
the Suburbs thereof, forty or fifty years ago, (when England was far richer
and more populous than now it is) to tell me whether by Additional Buildings
upon new Foundations, the said Cities and Suburbs, since that time, are not
become at least a third part bigger than they were; and whether in those days
they were not thought and found large enough, to give a due reception to all
persons that were fit, or had occasion to resort thither (whereupon all further
Buildings on new Foundations (even in those days) were prohibited?
Nevertheless, above thirty thousand Houses great and small have been since
built, the consequences whereof may be worthy of our consideration. These
Houses are all inhabited, considering then what multitudes of whole Families,
formerly dwelling in and about the said Cities, were cut off by the two last
dreadful Plagues, as also by the War abroad and at home, by Land and by Sea;
and how many have transported themselves, (or been transported) into our
foreign Plantations; and it must naturally follow, that those who inhabit these
new Houses and many of the old ones, must be persons coming out of the Country;
which makes so many Inhabitants the less there, where they are most needful and
wanting. For, the occasion of the Rents of Lands falling every year, arises not
so much from Lands growing worse, as because of the want of Tenants with good
Stocks to manage the Farms they take. And this mischief has been, and is in
great measure occasioned by these additional Buildings; for, had they not been
erected, those who inhabit them, would have been in the Country, living an
Industrious and Laborious Life, improving their Stocks, and thereby advantaging
Gentlemen's Lands, and the Trade of the Nation. But now, if a Man get two or
three Hundred pounds in his Pocket, up he comes to London, takes a House, pays
a Fine, lays out the rest of his Money in furnishing it for Lodgers, thereby
promising himself a lazy Life, free from care; or else he sets up an Alehouse,
or Brandy House, (both tending to the debauching and destroying of Youth;) when
as had there not been these Buildings to draw them hither, and give shelter,
then those Men with their three or four hundred pounds a piece Stocks employed
in the Country, might have made each of them a good Tenant, for a Farm of 100
or 200 l. per annum; which Farms by their removing to London, are thrown into
the Landlords hands so that by a moderate Calculation, it is judged, that there
are 60000 Families at least now in and about London, more than would or could
conveniently have been, if these Houses had not been Built; which Families if
they had continued in the Country, would have kept up the value of Lands which
fall only for want of Tenants: If therefore more Buildings should be hereafter
erected; more Mischiefs in all probability will be done of this kind to the
Country; And really, Gentlemen may thank themselves for the prejudice they
receive by these means, they having given the example, and been the occasion
thereof. For, they never thinking their Estates would have an end, weary of an
honest and commendable Country-life, come up to London to see fashions, fall
into ill company, learn how to run out of all their Estates in a short time, by
extravagant Habits, gaming, drinking, and other debaucheries, destructive to
their Healths as much as Estates; As if to have lived in the Country upon their
own Estates and to have taken care of and managed them, and kept a handsome
retinue of Servants, and a good House of Hospitality, and to have taken off
their Tenants Provisions for their Family expenses, in part of their Rents,
relieving and setting the Poor at work, and encouragement of Art, Industry and
Labor, were not so commendable in them, or so much for their Advantage, and
Honor, as to live idly in London, pursuing their lustful pleasures, paying,
whilst their own houses stand empty, and go to ruin for want of being
inhabited, more for their Lodgings than would maintain their Families
handsomely in the Country, and increase the Consumption of the Provisions, and
Manufactures of the Kingdom, than which nothing can conduce more to the
Improvement of Land. I would desire to know of any sober Person, how far the
many Gentlemen who have thus foolishly and idly run themselves out of their
Estates, have done good with the same? who is the better for it? Is the
Country, where their Estates lie, or their Tenants that rent them? or the poor
Inhabitants about them? No, not at all, but all are the worse, and undone
thereby, for when these Persons come first to London, they bring up all the
Money they can get in specie, and no sooner do their Rents grow due in the
Country, but they or their Bailiffs or Stewards rack the poor Tenants for the
same, gather in all that they can get, and sue, or distrain where Money is not
presently to be had, taking away Tenants Cattle, selling them for half their
worth, and thereby ruin not only idle Persons or ill Husbands that have run
out of their Stocks, but also many Industrious men and great husbands, who have
Stock and Goods enough (if sold) wherewith to answer the Rent; and the want of
a vent for the product of their Farms is the only reason why they could not
raise present Money for their Landlords. How many persons by these means have
been undone! forced to leave their Farms! which thereby have been thrown into
their Owners hands; who have been forced both to abate Rents, and keep their
Farms a year or two without making any thing of them, before they could dispose
of them again. And I know none the better for these things but the Gentries and
Nobilities Bailifs and Stewards, who being entrusted to Let and Set, Receive
Rents and manage their Masters Estates, do by their neglecting to call them to
account, or looking after and disposing their own Affairs, grow vastly Rich,
and frequently in Trustees names become Purchasers of their Masters Estates;
whilst they in the mean time, by means as aforesaid, become greatly
impoverished. The rather, for that frequently, when they receive their Masters
Rents, they pretend the Tenants have them in their hands, and put their Masters
thereby under necessity of borrowing Money for their present Supplies; which
when they have done, they being employed to procure the same, do frequently
furnish them with their own Money, making them pay Brocage, Procuration and
Continuation-Money, and Interest for the same, which helps forward their Ruin.

In short, these New Buildings are advantageous to none but to the Owners of
the Ground on which they are built, who have raised their wonted Rents from a
hundred pound to five or six hundred pound per annum, besides the Improvements
in Reversion; or to the Builders, who by slight building on long Leases, make
ten or twelve pound per cent. of their moneys. But the advantage of these
persons being the Countries great prejudice, Therefore in my poor Opinion, it
seems agreeable to Reason that they ought to help to pay the public Debts of
the Kingdom; and the Country (who are hurt by them) should be eased: And for
them to pay one year, or a year and halfs Improved Rent to the King, would not
be much, considering the greatness of the Improvement they have and are like to
make. So that admitting that there are 30000 Houses Built upon New Foundations
as aforesaid, and that each of those Houses (one with another) should pay but
10 l. per annum Rent, and the King should have but one years Rent from each
House, the same would amount unto above 300000 l. which would go a great way in
the discharging the public Debts; But one years Rent from each of these Houses
(it is conceived) would come to above 500000 l. and the enforcing them that
have Built contrary to the Statute to pay such a Fine, would deter others from
Building for the future; of which there can be no need; considering that there
are above 3000 brave Houses which, for the Honor of the Nation, are at great
charge, to the ruin of the Builders, rebuilt, stand empty within London Walls,
and are like so to do, by reason that the Trade is drawn out of the City to the
new Erected Buildings in the Suburbs, where the Inhabitants have these
advantages following. 1. They have Houses at easier rates, because built at
lesser charge than those in the City, which were Built when all Materials were
very scarce and dear, and Workmens Wages extreme high. 2. They are certain in
most places to raise their Rents by letting Lodgings, especially near the Inns
of Court, Whitehal and Westminster; the Gentry coveting to Lodge thereabouts,
and they have not only Lodgings, but the advantage of their Customer also for
such Commodities as they sell, and their Lodgers want. Which hinders the Trade
of the City, where little or no benefit at all is made by Lodgings. 3. They are
not liable to a third penny of charges for Taxes and public Duties that they
are who live within the City; whereby they can aford to sell at a lower rate
than in London they can do. All which inevitably tends to destruction of the
Trade within the Walls.


III.
THe Third thing proposed is, A Bill of REGISTERS; That in every County a
Register may be settled, to Register all Bills of Sale, Judgments, Statutes,
Recognizances, Bonds, Mortgages, Leases, and Conveyances of Land, than which
nothing can be of greater advantage to Gentlemen, Security to Purchasers, or
benefit to the public, without hurt to any, unless the professors of the Law,
or such who intend and design to defraud Purchasers.

Those therefore that shall oppose so excellent and beneficial an Act as this,
must be either, first, such who live by the practice of the Law; or secondly,
such as understand not their own Interest: or thirdly, such as design to live
by defrauding others. The opposition arising from the practisers of the Law is
not so much from their conviction that the thing in it self is not good, and
beneficial to the public, as from self-Interest, which too much governs all
sorts of Men in this Age, Men being apt to prefer private advantage before a
general good. I confess, a Register may prove a great hinderance to those of
that profession: For, in short time it would prevent the multitudes of Suites
that yearly arise between his Majesty's Subjects occasioned by the Cheats that
are committed for want of such a Registry as is proposed; and perhaps would
save the Subjects at least two or three hundred thousand pounds per annum which
now is spent in those Suites; which if prevented, and the Money saved to the
People, would be employed in Trade, or spent upon the Manufactures and
Provisions of the Kingdom; and so the number of Attourneys would not increase
as of late they have done, there being at present about 6000 of them, besides
Sollicitors, who live scattered about the Country: most of whom could not
subsist but by making it their whole study and business, to promote Suites and
Controversies, and encourage quarrelsom persons to being Actions against their
Neighbors, for small petty Trespasses, or a frivolous hasty passionate Word or
two; those persons of that employment taking advantage thereby, of enriching
themselves, by impoverishing the Subjects: whereas w^^ it not for them, such
differences might happily be composed in a friendly and amicable way.

The second sort that I presume may oppose this Act are, Men not sensible of
their own Interest and advantage, nor of that of the Public; for, if a
Register were kept of all Sales, Leases for Years, or Lives, Mortgages,
Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, and of all other real Securities, that will
or can lay hold on Lands, so that in every County where any Gentleman's Estate
lies, a Man may know by the Register, what Estate he has in that County, and
what encumbrances are upon it: therefore if it were declared by Law, that no
Encumbrance shall be good, but such as if made or entered into before the Act
for settling Registers be passed, shall be registered within one year after the
passing thereof; or if made or entered into after the passing the said Act,
shall be registered within one month or two after such Conveyances, or
Securities, are entered into or made, or otherwise be void, it would highly be
for the advantage of all Gentlemen, that either have or may have Land to sell,
or would borrow Money upon Mortgages. For, then they shall not need to be
beholden unto those Men, that make it their Trades to dispose of Gentlemen's
Money, to help Gentlemen to Purchasers for their Lands, or to take up money
upon Securities; whom now they are forced to make use of, and pay great sums
for Brokerage, Procuration, and Continuation-Money. Whereupon I desire every
Gentleman to consider, when he comes to London, and wants Money, how difficult
a thing he finds it to supply himself therewith, (though he offer good
Land-Security.) What begging, entreating, running from place to place? What
expenses is he put unto? And when all is done, let him consider whether he can
be accommodated without City-Security, (which runs him into further obligations
and expenses to procure;) and if he does get such, whether he be evertheless
constrained to pay 3, 4, or 5 l. per cent. for procuring and sometimes viis and
modis 10 l. per cent. for what he borrows; And then, it being lent but for a
year, the Procurers thereof and their Emissaries being wont to contrive which
way to make their further advantage of the Borrowers, do commonly at the nine
months end send them word, that the Persons whose Money they borrowed, have
great occasions for the same and are forced to call it in, and must have it
when due; but withal they usually advise them not to be troubled, or take any
care; for if they cannot raise the Money themselves, they will furnish them
elsewhere, having the like consideration for their pains as before; the which
these Gentlemen are forced to agree unto, because perhaps they know not
elsewhere to have it: And when they have thu^ done, then they go to the
Persons, whose Money they had lent to these Gentlemen the year before, and tell
them, that the Gentlemen that borrowed the same, desire to pay it in when it
shall be due; who finding and believing their security good, are loath to
receive it, never having given any direction to call it in, nor knowing how
better to dispose thereof when they receive the same; whereupon to please them
also, they inform them that other good security is ready for them, so that the
Money shall not lie dead; and so they get the advantage of the Gentlemen that
had the Money, by procuring other sums for them, in lieu thereof, and of the
persons to whom they lend the Money so called in; Insomuch that by frequent
shifting the Loan-money from one hand to another, they sometimes receive to
themselves from the persons borrowing, as much as the principal Sum lent
amounted unto, for Procuration, Brokage and Continuation: whereby the Borrowers
at last are brought to sell their Estates; and being reduced to such
necessities by the Subtilties of these persons, are forced to be beholden to
them to procure purchasers: which when they perceive, they usually play their
game as follows: the seller is by them persuaded that they can get no
purchaser, but such as does object against their Title; or their persons, using
many frivolous delays, till they drive them to such distress, that they must
sell at any rate: And then their living remote in the Country, or being under
protections as Parliament Men or Courtiers; or their Estates lying far from
London, or the uncertainty of what Encumbrances may be thereupon, are
Objections which they raise, pretending that all Men they propose their Estates
unto (upon these or suchlike accounts) are afraid to deal with them, unless
such as wait for good bargains, and will not purchase except they can buy below
the Market-price. By which means they so contrive the matter with the Venders,
that they enforce them to sell that for thirteen, fourteen or fifteen years
purchase, which really is worth twenty; And out of that Contract, their manner
is to bargain for a good Gratuity for themselves; although they at the same
time have agreed with the Purchaser that is to have the Land, for one or two
years purchase more than they are to pay to the Sellers. And the better to
manage their Designs, the Buyers are concealed, and the Land-Brokers and
Jobbers of Land find other persons to personate the Purchaser, so that the
Vender is never suffered to know or see them till the Writings be drawn;
wherein the Considerations are frequently expressed to be a year or two's
Purchase more than the Vender is to receive for the same. Which when they
question the Reason of, they are informed that it is done, only to enable the
Purchasers to demand better prices when they sell the same, and to keep up the
reputed value thereof. Thus do they enrich themselves by imposing upon
Gentlemen in extremity, through an artificial debasing the value of their
Estates, exacting great Gratuities from the Purchasers also. This is the common
Practice of your Land-Brokers and Jobbers and their Confederates: But if
Registers were settled, and all Encumbrances registered, so that men might be
secure, no dormant Securities, after they have lent their Money upon Mortgages,
or purchased for valuable Considerations, could be started up to defeat them of
their Interests; and then Gentlemen that have Money lying dead by them, would
be as glad to lend it; at easy rates, to honest Gentlemen upon good Security,
as those that want it would be to be supplied therewith; And Lands undoubtedly
would come to be worth, as formerly, twenty years purchase, if Men could but be
secured in their Titles. So that all persons that either have, or suppose they
ever may have any Estate to sell, or Money to borrow, understand not their own
Interest, if they oppose the settling of the Registers proposed.

The last sort of people that I presume may be agriev'd at this Registry, are
such who having lived high, and spent their Estates extravagantly, and perhaps
entered into Judgments, Statutes, and Recognizances, to double the value
thereof, and have mortgaged their Lands over and over, and then get Protections
whereby they keep off Suits, or abscond themselves so that they cannot be found
by their Creditors, and are wont thereby to keep their Estates in possession,
and can no way for the future live but by doing further acts of dishonesty;
which whilst their Estates remain in their possession, they have opportunity to
do. Such unrighteous Actions will for the future be prevented, and the present
Designs of this nature be defeated, if Registers be settled. So that such
persons are concerned to oppose the same. But I hope such Creatures as these
are, and their Designs, will easily be seen through, and have little respect
given them by Parliament.

In short, Were the Registry as desired, settled, and the Profit arising thereby
brought into the Exchequer, the Work may be done, good Allowances appointed for
those that shall be employed therein, and but a small sum would be imposed upon
the Subjects for Registring their Claim, and yet by computation at least 50000
l. per annum be brought into the Treasury: which would be an additional help
toward payment of the Public Debts.

IV.
THe Fourth Thing Proposed is, That an Act be passed for a general
Naturalization of all Foreign Protestants, and for granting Liberty of
Conscience to such of them as shall come over and Inhabit amongst us, and that
the like Liberty be given to his Majesty's Subjects at home. There is nothing
so much wanting in England as People; and of all sorts of People, the
Industrious and Laborious sort, and Handycraft-men, are wanted to Till and
Improve our Land; and help to Manufacture the Staple-Commodities of the
Kingdom; which would add greatly to the Riches thereof.

The two last great Plagues, the Civil Wars at Home, and the several Wars with
Holland, Spain, and France, have destroyed several hundred thousands of Men,
which lived amongst us; besides, vast numbers have Transported themselves, or
been Transported into Ireland, and other our Foreign Plantations; who, when
they were living amongst us, did Eat our Provisions, Wore off our
Manufacturies; employed themselves in some Calling or other beneficial to the
Nation; the want of which calls for a supply of People from some place or
other; and it is, in my judgment, worthy our Observation, That the Men thus
lost from amongst us, are of greater consideration, and the loss more
mischievous to the Kingdom, than merely the death or removal of so many
Persons, considering that they were Men in the prime of their years, in perfect
strength, such, who had they not dyed, or been killed, or removed, might every
year have begotten Children, and thereby increased the World; So that three
times the number of Children might have been better spared than they. For
instance, Say there be but 100000 Men, by these means, gone from amongst us;
and instead of them 300000 Children had been taken away, and the Men left, it
would have been much better; for they in two years and a half, or three years
time, might have gotten so many Children again; but the Men dying, or being
gone, and the Children living, it may be ten or twenty years before they come
to Marry and beget Children: And notwithstanding the great mischief this Nation
has sustained by the loss of these Men, yet so inconsiderate are the
Inhabitants thereof, concerning their own Interest, (which, if possible, is to
have the Kingdom full of People) that they are taking up another way to prevent
the peopling thereof for the future, there being almost all over England a
Spirit of Madness running abroad, and possessing Men against Marrying, rather
choosing to have Mistresses, by whom very few ever have any Children: And many
Married Women, by their lewd Conversations, prevent the bringing forth many
Children, which otherwise they might have had. These Humors and Practices, if
continued, will prove so mischievous, that unless Foreigners come in amongst
us, in few years there will not be People to Manure our Lands, Eat our
Provisions, Wear our Manufactures, or Manufacture the Staple-Commodities that
are of the growth of the Kingdom; without which, it is no wonder if Lands yield
little Rent, or Sell not for above 14 or 15 years Purchase.

And if Foreigners must come over, or our Estates here grow worse, there must
then Encouragement be given them so to do; else they will think themselves
Well-Seated where they are, following their Trades, increasing their Estates,
Enjoying all the Liberties and Privileges of Freeborn Subjects, know how (and
have Liberty and Encouragement) to improve their Estates; and when they have
got them can keep them; therefore will never come themselves, nor bring over
their Families or Estates amongst us here to be accounted of as Aliens and
Strangers, such as may not purchase Estates amongst us; and if they do, shall
not enjoy the same, nor their Children after them. That sort of people which we
most want are such, who though they would come over, and dwell amongst us, yet
cannot spare 50 or 60 l. out of their Stock to procure themselves naturalized
by Act of Parliament; especially if they bring over Wife and Children with them
(which would be more advantageous for us than for them to come over alone) Or
if they should spare Money to Naturalize themselves; yet perhaps they may not
have so much as to pay for the naturalizing of their Wives and Children; who,
as our laws are, cannot be permitted to Inherit, what their Fathers purchase,
unless they be naturalized also. So that an Act for a General Naturalization is
absolutely necessary, if we will be supplied with People from Foreign parts;
But the passing such Act alone, will not be sufficient to encourage Foreigners
to come and dwell amongst us; there must be Liberty of Conscience also granted
unto them; and they must be assured that they shall not be Imprisoned,
Banished, or have their Estates seized, and taken from them, and sold, only for
differing from the Church of England, in the way of their Discipline, whilst
they agree in the Fundamentals of Religion, live peaceably under the Civil
Government, and disturb not the Government of the Church established: for they
having such liberty abroad where they are, will not without assureance of the
same here, be induced to come amongst us; How many thousands have left England,
and gone to seek shelter in Foreign parts, for the persecution they were under
for their Consciences, who otherwise, with their Families, would have Continued
amongst us? How many have been forced to leave their Trades, by being kept in
Prison, and having their Goods and Estates taken from them? How many, for fear
of being undone, not knowing but that so soon as their Goods come into their
Shops, they may be seized for their having been at Conventicles, have left
their Trades, drawn off their Stocks, and keep up their Money (not knowing how
soon they may have occasion to make use of it in the time of their distresses)
which otherwise would have been employed in Trade to the benefit of the
Kingdom; How many thousands of Farmers have been necessitated to leave their
Farms, and come to dwell in London? or to live obscurely in the Country, for
fear lest when they should have employed their Stocks, Plowed and Sowed their
Land, Reaped their Corn, and Stocked their Pasture-Land, all should be taken
from them, and they imprisoned, and forced from their Families, for their
Religion? Are not these great mischiefs to the Kingdom, and great reasons of
the decay of Trade, and of Gentlemen their wanting Tenants for their Lands, (a
thing so generally complained of all over England) that men are not suffered to
live as they would do quietly, and employ and improve their Stocks, as they
might do, to the advantage of Trade, and the Kingdom in General; which if they
were permitted, would occasion the Consumption of more of the provisions, and
Manufactures of the Kingdom, Employ more poor people at Work, and thereby
Improve the Rent of Lands, and would send many of the Gentry, and Farmers who
left the Country for the Reasons aforesaid and now live obscure in London and
some other places, back to their Country-houses or to their Farms again; it
would remove their Fears, quiet their Minds, and cause their Purses again to be
opened, and every one would be putting himself upon some way of Improving his
Estate, and not live upon the main Stock, as now they are forced to do. It were
greatly to be wished, that there were more love and Charity amongst us; And
that all men would Consider seriously what they do, when they take upon
themselves thus to impose their own Principles upon all others, as such that
are only right, and Condemn all others as Erroneous; this is to magnify
themselves as Infallible, and despise all others.

Upon all these Reasons I humbly submit to Judgment, whether an Act for a
general Naturalization, and Liberty of Conscience, be not absolutely necessary
at this time? And whether the Passing thereof may not be of great advantage to
the Kingdom, since it would increase Trade, Promote a vast Consumption of the
Manufactures and Provisions of the Kingdom; make us more Industrious, Employ
more of our Poor, Increase his Majesty's Revenue of Customs, and bring our
Lands to let for greater Rents, and to sell for more years Purchase than ever
heretofore they would have done.

V.
THe Fifth Thing Proposed is, That the Act for Prohibition of the Importation
of Foreign Cattle, so far as it relates to Ireland, and Westphalia-Hams, may be
Repealed.

This Act has no way answered the end designed by the passing thereof, but on
the contrary proved,

First, Very prejudicial to his Majesty in his Revenue of Customs. Secondly, To
all or most of the Land-Owners in England. Thirdly, To the Navigation and Trade
of the Kingdoms.
1. To his Majesty: for, before this Act passed, there were so many great
Cattle and Sheep, Imported from Ireland, as (Computing the Custom paid for them
and for the other Commodities exported out of England into Ireland in lieu of
them) amounted yearly to 80000 l. besides the Customs of all Norway, Spanish,
and Westphalia Hams; which sum the King loses every year, and the Kingdom, to
their Vast prejudice, have lost that Trade.

2. To Land-Owners this prohibition must necessarily be a great prejudice, If
it be considered, 1. That the Breeding-Lands of England are not able to raise a
sufficient Stock for the feeding, six months feeding being as much as four
years Breeding. 2. That by reason of the scarcity of such Stock, the Breeders
Impose a greater price on Lean Cattle then they will yield when fatted, whereby
Feeding-Land becomes worth little or nothing. 3. That for want of Irish Cattle,
the Victualling both for Home-Consumption, and Foreign Trade, and Naval
Provisions, (most of it) is transferred from England into Ireland: which is a
great prejudice to the Consumption in England; So that Lean Cattle, though they
be dearer, because of the scarcity of them, yet fatted Cattle are cheaper for
want of the Consumption we formerly had. The Consequence whereof is, That the
Ends of the prohibition are not answered, Rents of Lands are not Raised; but on
the Contrary, Feeding-Lands must and do fall for want of a Cheap Stock; and our
former Consumption, and Breeding-Lands, through the decay of Trade, which this
prohibition has occasioned.


3ly, This Prohibition is prejudicial to Trade and Navigation.

1. Because those Foreigners, who formerly Victualled here, do Victual
themselves in Ireland. 2. And they have their Provisions for the fourth part of
what we pay for ours; whereby they have a great advantage in point of Trade,
and can Sail Cheaper than we: which forces the English to Victual there also.
3. All Irish Cattle which formerly came unto England, and for which they
carried out no Money, but took of our Manufactures in return, are carried to
other places beyond Seas, and from thence fetch the Commodities wherewith we
before the prohibition supplied them. So that the Traders in Lancashire,
Cheshire, and other Northen parts, where the Breeding-Lands lie, their Loss is
greater for want of a Consumption of the Manufactures of those Countries which
formerly were sent into Ireland, than the Advantage they receive by advanceing
the price of Lean-cattel does amount unto. 4. It has enforced the Irish for to
lessen their Herds of Cattle, and increase their breed of Sheep, having gotten
of our largest and best Breeders: So that they have now Vast Flocks, and
prodigious quantities of Wool, besides Hides and Tallow: which proves
mischeivous to England three ways. 1. By their sending Wool beyond Seas
unmanufactured; which notwithstanding the Prohibition, every day they do, which
being manufactured by Foreigners, they grow rich thereby, whilst our poor in
England starve for want of the work they had when they were Employed in
manufacturing for a Foreign Consumption. 2. By sending their Hides, Tallow, and
Wool in great quantities into England: which, for want of a Consumption here,
bring down the price of our own growth. 3. By setting up the Woollen
Manufacturies in Ireland, where having the Wool, Land, and all Provisions
cheaper than in England, they must necessarily have their Workmen cheaper; and
if so, they will be able to make enough, not only for their own use, but, to
supply Foreigners also with that which England used to supply them with
heretofore; which, in a short time, if not prevented, will undermine the Staple
and most Advantageous Trade of this Kingdom. It is the Interest of England,
being the Seat of Government, to maintain a preeminence in the Trade, and to
see that the Manufacturies thereof be preserved entire within it self:
Otherwise by how much the more Ireland is Improved, by so much the more England
will be Impaired therein. For they, working cheaper, lying nearer Foreign
Markets, and their freight being less, do what we can, will underfell us, where
ever they come; whereby our Manufacturies will be destroyed, and Manufacturers,
with their Families, be Ruined.

It is observable, 1. That the Trade with Ireland kept three or four hundred
ships in full employ; which were paid by the Irish Freighters there and
occasioned the breeding many Seamen yearly; but now all those ships are laid
aside, the breed of Scamen neglected, and that Trade managed in Foreign
Bottomes.

2. That the Cattle and Sheep formerly imported, by Computation amounted unto a
Million of Money per Annum.

3. That they carried no Money out of England; but the effect of their Cattle
was all laid out in our Manufacturies, or other Commodities Imported into
England, and from thence sent to Ireland: and the King had a Custom paid both
upon the Importation and Exportation, and also for every head of Cattle brought
over.

The Irish being now Prohibited this Trade, are necessitated to send all their
Victuals to Foreign parts, where they sell them for more than we paid for
them, and buy what ever they want Cheaper than they had them from us; by which
means they will be concerned to take no Commodities from England.

Nor can they Trade with us, if they would, because they have no way to pay for
what they buy, unless they bring over Money in Specie, to the mischeife of that
Kingdom; or by Bills of Fxchange, which cannot be had under 15 or 16 per Cens.
which is double the profit gotten by those that Trade with them. That Exchange
of moneys thence is very high, Gentlemen whose Estates are Returned over, do
find, and by reason thereof are forced to retrench a fixth part of their
Expenses here: which is a further lessening to the Consumption of the
Manufacturies and Provisions of this Kingdom, and of Trade with them: which is
further dangerous; for, if we send Goods, they having a new Trade to Foreign
parts, we must send our Stocks thither; So that if any loss happen, it is the
English that undergo it.

Irelands being peopled from England was at first a hurt to us, because it
lessened the Consumption of our Provisions here. But to prohibit them Trade
with us is ten times worse: for, that not only takes off the Consumption they
used to make of our Manufactures, but destroys all those Families in England
that used to be Employed for their supply: So that they can neither spend of
the Provisions nor Manufacturies of this Kingdom as formerly they did.

And besides these Handicraft-men, there are many Eminent Trades in London, as
Mercers, Milliners, Haberdashers, etc, suffer greatly: for, when Fashions were
out here, they used to send them into Ireland in return for their Cattle, and
they went off as new there: for want of which utterance, many of those
Tradesmen, by reason of the often changing of Fashions amongst us, have been,
and are daily undone.

There is one other high Inconveniency like to fall upon England by this
Prohibition, which has put Ireland upon Industry: For some part of Ireland
lying nearer to France, Italy, and Spain than England does; and so the Irish
having Salt from France, and Cask, and Men's Labor, and all Tackle for Fishing
being cheaper there than we have here, do set up the Fishing Trade there, from
whence they need but one Wind to carry them to their Markets; and they catch
the Fish six weeks before they come into England. If so, then what hinders but
that they may cure them, and supply Foreign Markets sooner and cheaper than we
can? which in time will destroy the Fisheries of this Kingdom.

Not but that Ireland should have its proper Advantages, and may, if they
please; there being many additional Manufactures that both they and we want, to
which the nature of that Soil, and the inclination of the People, gives
encouragement; particularly that of Linen, the greatest part of the Country
being Turf-Land, and naturally proper for Hemp and Flax; and being employed to
that use, (with due regulations) those Commodities may be had cheaper there,
and from thence, than from any other part of the World; which would be a great
encouragement to the setting up of the Manufactures thereof. It must
necessarily be cheaper, because Land is far cheaper there, than in those Parts
from whence we have our Hemp and Flax: and what we fetch, comes charged with
great Freight and Customs: Which might be saved if the Commodity were fetched
from Ireland. What then would there be wanting, but a method to manufacture
this Commodity cheaper? Which done, that place may supply, not only England,
but all Europe with Linen Cloth, at easier rates than now they pay for the
same. And if so, what hinders but that they may ingross the whole Linnen-Trade,
and quickly grow rich? And that they may manufacture cheaper there, consider,
that in this part of the World there cannot be found a place where people may
live cheaper, have Lands at easier Rates than in Ireland; so then consequently,
no place in the World where people work for less than there. If then the
Commodity to be wrought, and the working of that Commodity be cheaper in
Ireland than in any other Part, the Manufacturies, when wrought, may be sold
from thence cheaper than from any other part; and this would bring Trade
thither, take away no more of the Stock of this Nation, than is absolutely
necessary for the supply of our Necessities. And it would be a great advantage
to the Kingdom to be furnished with that within our selves which we necessarily
want, and are enforced to depend upon Foreigners for.

In short, the Prohibition of Irish Cattle, puts them on a necessity, (for
something they must do with their Cattle, and the product of their Lands, or be
utterly destroyed) that necessity forces them to Industry; which Industry, if
not determined with us, but continued or encouraged with Foreigners, the more
industrious they are, the more pernicious it will be to England in all its
concerns. For, if the Irish, by reason of their Religion, and the sense of our
conquering them, have (as some affirm, and I and all Englishmen have good
reason to believe) a natural antipathy against us Englishmen, and as natural
an Affection and Sympathy to and with Foreigners, who are of their own
Persuasion and Religion; And if Nations grow Intimate, espouse Interest, and
mix by Trade and Commerce, it is humbly submitted, whether for the security of
England, both in its Government and Trade, it be not advisable to annex
Ireland as a Province to England, as our Islands abroad are annexed, whereby
his Majesty's Revenue of Customs would be advanced at least 80000 l. per annum,
which would help to pay the Public Debts, and do a public good to the Nation?

Concerning the Importation of Westphalia-Hams, I have only this to say, That
though Prohibited, yet they are Imported, the King loses the Custom of them
which formerly he had, the Merchants buy them far cheaper beyond Seas than ever
they did; in England the Subjects pay twice as much as they might have bought
them for before the Prohibition; and not any good is done to the Kingdom
thereby.

VI.
THe Sixth thing proposed, is, the Prohibition of Brandy, Mum, Coffee,
Chocoletta and Tea, and the suppressing Coffe-Houses.

These greatly hinder the Consumption of Barley, Malt and Wheat, the Product of
our Land, and thereby bring down the prices of these Grains, consequently the
Rents of Land; to the ruin of Tenants, who cannot sell their Corn, when they
have it; and of Landlords, whose Rents Tenants are not able to pay, because
they have no vent for the Product of their Farms.

There is (as I am (upon strict Enquiry of the most knowing persons) informed)
so vast a quantity of Brandy, Mum, Coffee, Tea and Spanish Chocoletta, every
year imported into England, and consumed here, that reckoning the Brandy to be
sold at two pence the Quartern, and no more (whereas most of it by retail is
sold for three pence) the Mum at six pence a Quart, and the Coffee, Tea,
Chocoletta, at the rates they are usually sold for, yet is there expended by
the Subjects yearly in these drinks above 400000 l.

If these Liquors were prohibited, then would there be made in England, with
our Wheat, or Malt, such quantities of Brandy, or a Spirit equal to it, and of
Mum also, as would, in all probability, occasion the Consumption of at least
two or three hundred thousand Quarters of Wheat and Malt every year more than
now is consumed; and that would raise the price of the Commodity, and thereby
keep up the Rent of Lands, which every year falls for want of a Consumption of
the Product thereof: And the Prohibition of Brandy would be otherwise
advantageous to the Kingdom, and prevent the destruction of His Majesty's
Subjects; many of whom have been killed by drinking thereof, it not agreeing
with their Constitutions. How many instances have we had yearly of men's dying
suddenly, after drinking of Brandy! How many after over-drinking themselves
with this Liquour, have lain languishing till they have dyed thereof! Before
Brandy (which is now become common, and sold in every little Alehouse) came
over into England in such quanties as now it does, we drank good Strong Beer
and Ale; and all laborious people (which are the far greatest part of the
Kingdom) their bodies requiring, after hard labor, some strong drink to
refresh them, did therefore every morning and evening use to drink a pot of
Ale, or a flagon of strong Beer: which greatly promoted the Consumption of our
own Grain, and did them no great prejudice; it hindered not their work, neither
did it take away their senses, nor cost them much money. But now this sort of
people, since Brandy is become so common, and fold in every little house (a
small quantity costing them three pence) do sometimes spend their days wages in
this sort of Liquor, before they get home in an evening, and thereby impoverish
their Families; and not only so, but frequently by their drinking to excess,
they are bereft of their senses for two or three days together, so that they
cannot work.

In short, Brandy burns the hearts of His Majesty's Subjects out; in few years
it has been the destruction and death of some thousands, who if they had kept
to Beer and Ale might have received better refreshment therefrom, and now been
living to have served the King and their Country, and might have helped to
consume the Manufactures and Provisions of the Kingdom. And if so, then what
reason can any man give for the Importation thereof? For my own part I declare,
I know of none, unless it he, because it pays a great Custom or Excise to the
King And as to that, I answer and affirm. That if Brandy be prohibited, the
Excise of the Beer and Ale that would be then consumed, more than is now, will
more than answer the duty of Brandy that the King shall lose by such
Prohibition as is desired (admitting that all the Brandy imported paid the duty
imposed, when as not one half thereof is paid for, the same being stolm;
insomuch, that when the duty to the King was four shillings per Gallon, Brandy
was sold for three shillings, which was twelve pence less than the Kings Duty:)
But admitting that if Brandy should be prohibited, the additional Excise of Ale
and Beer would not answer the Kings lose he shall sustain thereby; and taking
it for granted, that our English Constitutions are now so accustomed to Brandy,
that it is become absolutely necessary for them to use the same, or some Liquor
like it: If it be so, then from our Malt and Wheat may be extracted a Spirit
equally as good, if not for our Constitutions much better than Brandy: And then
laying a small duty (as a penny a Gallon) upon low Wines, will more than answer
what the additional Excise shall fall short of to the King, yea, and very much
exceed what he shall lose by the Prohibition desired. And in as much as nothing
is so much wanting in England as people; Therefore all means possible, in point
of Prudence and Policy, ought to be used to preserve the lives and healths of
those we have: But the Importing of Brandy has destroyed many, is like to
destroy more; ergo, it ought to be prohibited. And the rather, in regard that
Brandy comes from France; and whatever we import from France, ready money is
paid for the same, or for the greatest part thereof: For although we impose but
between Four and Ten pound per cent. upon any of the Manufacturies or
Commodities of the growth of France, except the duty upon Wine and Brandy; yet
the French King either prohibites the Importation of the Manufactures of
England into his Dominions, or the selling them there, unless they be sealed,
for which Seal, a great duty is paid, or else he burns them if they are
imported, and sold without such Seal (as he did the Silk Stockings) or imposes
upon the Importation thereof, a duty of 30, 40, or 50 l. per cent. which is
double as muchas was imposed, till within these few years last past; and is in
effect a Prohibition: For, when we do Transport any thing thither of our Growth
or Manufacturies, the French, by reason of the high duty imposed upon them,
undersel us; whereby we are necessitated to keep our goods till spoiled, or
bring them back. And if so, them plain it is, that whatsoever we have from
France, ready money goes for the same: So that by a moderate computation, they
have at least 400000 l. per annum in money from us* which is a vast prejudice
to England, and a great enriching to France who impose upon us, not only vast
proportions of their Brandy and Wines, but also of their Silks, Stuffs,
Ribbons, Laces, Points, and diverse other things, whereby our Manufacturers in
England are ruined, and the Treasure of the Nation exhausted. I know it will be
said, that we lay far greater Impositions upon their Wines and Brandy, than
they do upon any of our Manufactures, and it is true, that we do so. But
consider, that whatever duty we lay upon Wines, is laid upon the King of
Englands own Subjects, they pay it, and such duty does not hinder the
Importation thereof; for more comes in now then ever there did when the duty
was not half so high, and the French force the English to pay more for their
Wines than ever they paid before. But the Impositions laid by the King of
France upon our Manufactures, have stopped us from sending any thing considerable
thither, whereas before such duties imposed, we sent great quantities: So that
in a few years, if not prevented, the very Commerce with France is like to
destroy England. As for Brunswick Mum, I am sure we brew as strong in England
as they do there, and yet afford to sell it for half the price they sell theirs
for; therefore there is no necessity of the Importation thereof, to supply any
defect we have here, consequently, it is not fit to be encouraged, because it
hinders the Consumption of the Grain of this Kingdom.

And for Coffee, Tea and Chocoletta, I know no good they do; only the places
where they are sold are convenient for persons to meet in, sit half a day, and
discourse with all Companies that come in, of State-matters, talking of news,
and broaching of lies, arraigning the judgments and discretions of their
Governors, censuring all their Councels, and insinuating into the people a
prejudice against them; extolling and magnifying their own parts, knowledge and
wisdom, and decrying that of their* Rulers; which, if suffered too long, may
prove pernicious and destructive. But say there were nothing of this in the
case, yet have these Coffee Houses done great mischiefs to the Nation, undone
many of the Kings Subjects; for they being very great Enemies to Diligence and
Industry, have been the ruin of many serious and hopeful young Gentlemen and
Tradesmen, who before they frequented these places, were diligent Students or
Shopkeepers, extraordinary husbands of their time, as well as money: but since
these Houses have been set up, under pretense of good husbandry, to avoid
spending above one penny or two pence at a time, have got to these Coffee
Houses; where meeting Friends, they have sat talking three or four hours,
after which a fresh acquaintance appearing (and so one after another all day
long) has begotten fresh discourse; So that frequently they have staid five or
six hours together in one of them: All which time their Studies or Shops have
been neglected, their Business left undone, their Servants been trusted, and an
opportunity given them thereby to be idle and deceitful; the taking of money in
many of these men's shops has been hindered, and their Customers gone away
displeased: How many by these means have received great losses and
disadvantages in their Trade! and by accustoming themselves to these houses,
have made it so habitual to them, that they cannot forbear them, though,
together with their Familes, they are ruined thereby. These Houses being very
many of them professed Bawdy Houses, more expensive than other houses, are
become scandalous for a man to be seen in them; which Gentlemen not knowing, do
frequently fall into them by chance, and so their Reputation is drawn into
question thereby.

VII.
THe Seventh Proposal, That the multitude of Stage-Coaches and Caravans, now
traveling upon the Roads, may all, or most of them, be suppressed; especially
these within 40, 50, or 60 Miles of London, where they are no way necessary.
And that a due Regulation be made of such as shall be thought fit to be
continued.

These Coaches and Caravans are one of the greatest mischiefs that has happened
of late years to the Kingdom, mischievous to the Public, destructive to Trade,
and prejudicial to Lands.

First; By destroying the Breed of good Horses, the Strength of the Nation, and
making Men careless of attaining to good Horsemanship, a thing so useful and
commendable in a Gentleman. Secondly; By hindering the Breed of Watermen, who
are the Nursery for Seamen, and they the Bulwark of the Kingdom. Thirdly; By
lessening of his Majesty's Revenues.
For the first of these; Stage-Coaches prevent the breed of good Horses,
destroy those that are bred, and effeminate his Majesty's Subjects, who having
used themselves to travel in them, have neither attained skill themselves, nor
bred up their Children to good Horsemanship, whereby they are rendered incapable
of serving their Country on Horseback, if occasion should require and call for
the same; for, hereby the become weary and listless when they ride a few miles,
and unwilling to get on Horseback; not able to endure Frost, Snow, or Rain, or
to lodge in the Fields; and what reason, save only their using themselves so
tenderly, and their riding in these Stage-Coaches, can be given for this their
inability?

What encouragement has any Man to breed Horses whilst these Coaches are
continued? There is such a lazy habit of body upon Men, that they, to indulge
themselves, save their fine Clothes, and keep themselves clean and dry, will
ride lolling in one of them, and endure all the Inconveniences of that manner
of traveling rather than ride on Horseback: So that if any Man should continue
his Breed, he must be one that is a great lover of them, and resolve to keep
and please his own fancy with them; otherwise most certainly he (as most
Breeders already have done) will give over his breeding.

There is not the fourth part of Saddle-Horses, either bred or kept now in
England, that was before these Coaches were set up, and would be again if they
were suppressed. Nor is there any occasion for breeding or keeping such Horses,
whilst the Coaches are continued.

For, will any Man keep a Horse for himself, and another for his Man, all the
year, for to ride one or two Journeys, that at pleasure, when he has occasion,
can slip to any place where his business lies, for two, three, or four
shillings, if within twenty miles of London, and so proportionably into any
part of England. No, there is no Man, unless some Noble Soul, that scorns and
abhors being confined to so ignoble, base, and a sordid way of traveling, as
these Coaches oblige him unto, and who prefers a public Good before his own
ease and advantage, that will breed or keep such Horses. Neither are there near
so many Coach-Horses either bred or kept in England now, as there were
Saddle-Horses formerly, there being no occasion for them, the Kingdom being
supplied with a far less number. For, formerly, every Man that had occasion to
travel many Journeys yearly, or to ride up and down, kept Horses for himself
and Servants, and seldom rid without one or two Men; But now since every Man
can have a passage into every place he is to travel unto, or to some place
within a few miles of that part he designs to go unto, They have left keeping
of Horses, and travel without Servants; And York, Chester, and Exeter
Stage-Coaches, each of them with forty Horses a piece, carry eighteen
Passengers a week from London to either of these places; and in like manner as
many in return from these places to London; which comes in the whole to 1872 in
the year. Now take it for granted, That all that are carried from London to
those places, are the same that are brought back, yet are there 936 Passengers
carried by forty Horses; whereas were it not for these Coaches, at least 500
Horses would be required to perform this Work. Take the sort Stages within
twenty or thirty miles of London, each Coach with four Horses carries six
Passengers a day, which are 36 in a week, 1872 a year; If these Coaches were
suppressed, can any Man imagine these 1872 Passengers and their Servants could be
carried by four Horses? Then reckon your Coaches within ten miles of London,
that go backward and forward every day, and they carry double the number every
year; and so proportionably your shorter Stages within three, four, or five
miles of London.

There are Stage-Coaches that go to almost every Town within 20 or 25 miles of
London, wherein Passengers are carried at so low Rates, that most persons in
and about London, and in Middlesex, Essex, Kent, and Surry, Gentlemen,
Merchants, and other Traders that have occasion to ride do make use of; some to
keep Fairs and Markets; others to visit Friends, and to, and from their
Countrey-houses, or about other business, who before these Coaches did set up,
kept a Horse or two of their own, but now have given over keeping the same; so
that by computation there are not so many by ten thousand Horses kept now in
these Parts, as there were before Stage-Coaches set up: By which means breeding
of good Pad-Nags is discouraged, and Coach-Horses that are bred, by cruelty and
ill usage of Stagers are destroyed.

2ly, Those Coaches hinder the breeding of Watermen, and much discourage those
that are bred; for there being Stage-Coaches set up unto every little Town upon
the River of Thames, on both sides the Water, from London as high as Windsor
and Maidenhead, etc. And so from London-Bridg to and below Graves-end, and also
to every little Town within a mile or two of the Waterside. These are they who
carry all the Letters, little Bundles, and Passengers, which before they set
up, were carried by Water, and kept Watermen in a full Employ, and occasioned
their increase, (whereof there never was more need than now); And yet by these
Coaches, they of all others are most discouraged and dejected, especally our
Western and below-Bridg Watermen; they having little or nothing to do,
sometimes not a Fare in a week; so that they dare not take Apprentices, the
Work they have not answering the charge they are at in keeping themselves and
Families. The consequence whereof is like to prove sad in a short time, unless
speedily prevented, especially if these Wars continue, and we happen to lose so
many yearly of those that are bred, as of late years we have done. But if these
Coaches were down, Watermen as formerly would have Work, and be encouraged to
take Apprentices, whereby their number would every year greatly increase.

3ly, It prejudiceth his Majesty in his Revenue of Excise: For now four or five
travel in a Coach together, and twenty or thirty in a Caravan, Gentlemen and
Ladies, without any Servants, consume little Drink on the Road, yet pay as much
at every Inn, as if their Servants were with them, which is the Tapsters gain,
and his Majesty's loss: But if Travelers would, as formerly they did, Travel
on Horseback, then no Persons of Quality would ride without their Servants: And
it is they that occasion the Consumption of Beer and Ale on the Roads, and so
would advance his Majesty's Revenue. I know it will be Objected, There are as
many People now as will be when Coaches are down, and they drink where every
they are; Therefore no matter whether they drink at Home or on the Road, since
the Consumption will be the same; how can the Kings Revenue then be advanced by
Servants traveling with their Masters or Mistresses, more than it is already?
The answer is plain; at home they drink small or strong drink brewed by their
Masters that pay no Excise, but whatever they drink at Inns pays the Kings
duties: And all Innkeepers do declare, that they sell not half the drink, nor
pay the King the Excise they did before these coaches set up.

2ly. These Coaches and Caravaus are destructive to the Trade and Manufactories
of the Kingdom, have impoverished and ruined many thousands of Families, whose
subsistence depended upon the Manufacturing of Wool and Leather, two of the
Staple-Commodities of the Kingdom: For, before these Coaches were set up,
Travelers rode on Horseback, and men had Boots, Spurs, Saddles, Bridles,
Sadle-clothes, and good riding Suits, Coats and Cloaks, Stockings and Hats;
whereby the Wool and Leather of the Kingdom was consumed, and the poor people
set at work by Carding, Combing, Spinning, Knitting, Weaving, Fulling: And your
Cloth Workers, Drapers, Tailors, Saddlers, Tanners, Curriers, Shoemakers,
Spurriers, Lorayners, Felt-makers, had a good employ, were full of work, got
money, lived handsomely, and helped with their Families to Consume the
Provisions and Manufactures of the Kingdoms: But by means of these Coaches,
these Trades, besides many others depending upon them, are become almost
useless* and they, with their Families, reduced to great necessity; insomuch,
that many thousands of them are cast upon the Parishes wherein they dwell, for
a Maintenance. Besides, it is a great hurt to the Girdlers, Sword-Cutlers,
Gunsmiths and Trunk-makers; most Gentlemen, before they traveled in their
Coaches, using to ride with Swords, Belts, Pistols, Holsters, Portmantues and
Hat-cases, which in these Coaches they have little or no occasion for: For,
when they rode on Horseback, they rode in one Suit, carried another to wear
when they came to their journeys end, or lay by the way: But in Coaches, a
Silk-Suit, and an Indian Gown, with a Sash, Silk-Stockings, Beaver-Hats men
ride in, and carry no other with them, because they escape the wet and dirt,
which on Horseback they cannot avoid; whereas in two or three journeys on
Horseback, these clothes and hats were wont to be spoiled: Which done, they
were forced to have new very often; and that increased the Consumption of the
Manufactures, and the employment of the Manufacturers, which traveling in
Coaches does no way do. And if they were women, that traveled, they used to
have Safeguards, and Hoods, Side-saddles and Pillions, with Strappins, Saddle
or Pillion-cloths, which (for the most part) were either laced or imbroydered;
to the making of which there went many several Trades, seeing there is not one
Side-Saddle with the furniture made, but before it be furnished, there are at
least thirty several Trades have a share in the making thereof, most of which
are either destroyed, or greatly prejudiced by the Abatement of their Trade:
Which being bred unto, and having served seven years Apprentiship to learn,
they know not what other course to take for a Livelihood. And besides all these
Inferior Handy-Craftsmen, there are the Mercers, Silkmen, Lace-Men, Milliners,
Linen and Woollen Drapers, Haberdashers, and diverse other Eminent Trades, that
receive great prejudice by this way of Traveling: For the Mercers sold Silk
and Stuff in great quantities for Safeguards, Hoods, and Riding Clothes for
women; by which means the Silk-Twisters, Winders, Throseters, Weavers and
Dyers, had a fuller Employment, the Silk-men sold-more Lace and Imbroidery,
which kept the Silver-Wyre-Drawers, Lace-makers and Imbroyderers. And at least
ten Trades more were employed: The Linnen-Draper sold more Linen, not only to
Sadlers to make up Sadles, but to Travelers for their own use, nothing wearing
out Linen more than riding. Woollen-Drapers sold more Cloth than now; Sadlers
used before these Coaches were set up, to buy 3 or 400 l. worth of Cloth apiece
in a year, nay some Five hundred and a Thousand pounds worth, which they cut
out into Saddles and Pillion-Cloths; though now there is no Sadler can dispose
of One hundred pounds worth of Cloth in a year in his Trade. The Milliners and
Haberdashers, they also sold more Ribbons, Gloves, Hoods, Scarfs, and other
things belonging to their Trade; the dust, dirt and rain, and riding on
Horseback, spoiling and wearing them out, much more than traveling in a
Coach: And on Horseback these things were apter to be lost than in a Coach.

Trade is a great Mystery, and one Trade depends upon another: Were it not too
tedious, I could show you how many several Trades there are that go to the
making of every one of the things aforementioned, and demonstrate, that there
is scarcely a Trade in England, but what is one way or other concerned and
prejudiced by these Stage-Coaches, especially the Countrey-Trade all over
England: For, passage to London being so easy, Gentlemen come to London oftener
than they need, and their Ladies either with them, or having the conveniences
of these Coaches, quickly follow them. And when they are there, they must be in
the Mode, have all the new Fashions, buy all their Clothes there, and go to
Plays, Balls and Treats, where they get such a habit of Jollity, and a love to
Gayety and Pleasure, that nothing afterward. in the Country will serve them,
if ever they should fix their minds to live there again: But they must have all
from London, whatever it costs.

And there is one grand mischief happens to the Country thereby; for Gentlemen
drain the Country of all the money they can get, bring it to London, and spend
it there: Whereas if they stayed at home, bought their Clothes and other
Commodities, of their Neighbors, money would be kept circulating amongst them;
and Chapmen that have served Apprenticeships, and set up near them, would have
a good Trade, pay their Rents, and live handsomely, the Trade betwixt them and
the City of London would be renewed, Country Ladies would be as well pleased
(provided they be kept from London) as if they had all the rich Clothes, Modes
and Fashions, vainly and extravagantly invented and worn in the City, as soon as
they have them there; and Gentlemen would not only save the money they spend in
Journeys to buy Clothes, but have as good as need to be worn in the Country,
at easier rates than they must pay at London, if they buy when the Fashion
comes first up.

3ly. These Coaches and Caravans, hinders the Consumption of all sort of
Provisions for Man and Beast, thereby bringing down the Rents of Lands. For
instance, a Coach with four Horses carries six Passengers, a Caravan with four
or five Horses, carries twenty or five and twenty: These, when they come to
their Inn, club together for a Dish or two of Meat, and having no Servants with
them, spend not above twelve pence, or sixteen pence apiece at a place; yet
perhaps foul four, five or six pair of sheets. Horses they have none, but what
draw them; and for those, the Coach-men agree with the Innkeeper before hand,
to have their Hay and Oats at so low a rate, that he loses by them, and is
forced to beat down the price of them in the Market, yet must let the Coachman
have them for what he pleases; otherwise he carries his Passengers to other
Inns: by which means the Inholders get little or nothing, cannot pay their
Rent, nor hold their Inns, without great Abatements; Two third parts of what
they formerly paid, is in some places abated. Upon such accounts as these,
Innholders where these Coaches do come, are undone: And if so, since most
Travelers travel in Coaches, what must become of all the rest of the Inns on
the Roads where these Coaches stay not? Believe it, they are a considerable
number, take all the grand Roads in England, as, York, Exeter, Chester, etc.
There are about 500 Inns on each Road, and these Coaches do not call at fifteen
or sixteen of them; then what can follow, but that the rest be undone, and
their Landlords lose their Rents?

But were these Coaches and Caravans down, and traveling on Horseback again
come into fashion, first, every Passenger that now travels in Coach, would have
one Horse at least; many of them, one, two or three Servants with them, who now
ride sneaking without any Attendants at all; whereby, in all probability,
according to moderate Computation, there would be at least forty or fifty
horses upon the Road, instead of nine or ten that draw the Coach and Caravan.

2ly. These Travelers would disperse themselves into the several Inns upon the
Road, each man where he could find the best Entertainment; whereby Trade would
be diffused, Innholders be enabled to pay their Rents, and encouraged to
provide accommodations fit for the reception of Gentlemen.

3. Most Horses go to grass in the Summer time, which would raise the Rents of
Pasture-Lands about Cities and Corporations, and other Towns upon the Roads,
above what formerly they were; which of late years, by means of those Coaches,
have fallen half in half, even in Middlesex, and other places adjoining to
London it self: And n^ other reason for it can be given but this, That Citizens
and Gentlemen about the City, do not keep Horses as formerly they did: Neither
does there now come a fixth part of the Horses to London that used to do; but
if Stage Coaches be suppressed, there will be a necessity for men to apply
themselves to the breeding, keeping and using Horses as formerly they did; and
it will necessarily occasion the Consumption of five times the quantity of Hay,
Straw and Horse-Corn that now is consumed; whereby Farmers will have a vent for
their Commodities, and be enabled to pay their Rents; for, not only will there
then be four times the number of Horses traveling upon the Roads as there are
now, but in the City of London, and all the great Towns in England, there would
be great numbers of good Horses kept by Gentlemen, Merchants and Tradesmen for
their own uses; and by others also, to let out to hire to such as shall have
occasion to ride, and keep not Horses of their own.

It is very observeable, that before these Coaches were set up, what with the
Horses kept by Merchants, and other Tradesmen, and Gentlemen in or near London,
and the Travelers Horses that came to London, That City spent all the Hay,
Straw, Beans, Pease, and Oats, that could be spared within twenty or thirty
miles thereof; And for a further supply, had vast quantities from Henly, and
other Western parts, and from below Graves-end by Water; besides many Ships
Lading of Beans from Hull, and of Oats from Lynn and Boston; and then Oats, and
Hay, and other Horse-Meat, would bear a good price in that Market, which was
the Standard for all the Markets in England; But now, since these Coaches set
up, especially in such multitudes, and those so nigh London, London cannot
consume what grows within twenty miles of it. But if they were down, the
Consumption in London would quickly be as great as ever, and that would raise
the price of the Commodities, advance the price of Lands, and cause Rents to be
well paid again; Not only would every Traveller that now rides in a Coach,
travel on Horseback, if Coaches were down, and some of them with two or three
Servants, and so occasion a greater Consumption of the Provisions for Cattle:
But further every of these several Travelers, who before clubbed together for
a Dish or two of Meat, would have one, two, or three Dishes of Meat for himself
and his Servants; which would occasion the Consumption of six times as much
Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, and all sorts of Fish, Fowl, Poultry, and other
Provisions, as is now consumed on the Roads: And such Consumption would raise
the price of Lands, and cause better payment of Rents; especially if it be
considered, That not only will the Consumption be increased by those that
travel the Roads; but ten-times more would be spent by those who would be
employed in the making those things that Travelers must have when they ride;
who, if they have work, and can earn Money, will Eat and Drink of the best, as
formerly they did, when several Handicraft Tradesmen in London kept 20, 30, or
40 Journeymen at work, spent a quarter of Beef, and a Carcass of Mutton in a
week in their Houses; who since these Coaches set up, have fallen to a couple
of Apprentices; and though as eminent of their Trade as any about London, yet
can hardly earn Bread to put into their heads. If it be so then, that Running
Stage-Coaches and Caravans are so injurious to the Public, destructive to
Trade, and the occasion of the fall of Rents, it would be worth time to
consider what is in them worthy of their being countenanced and desired; And
whether the Inconveniences be not much greater than the Conveniences men
receive by them. If this way of traveling were the way that of all ways
appeared most beneficial, least expensive, conducing to Health, advantageous to
men in their business, absolutely necessary to some, useful to others, and
imposed upon none; There were some reason for men's being in love with them; but
if the contrary be apparent, then what madness possesses men to court their
Inconveniences and Mischiefs? Let us examine these things.

Men receive not the greatest benefit by traveling in these Coaches* For can
that way be beneficial to any that hinders and destroys Trade, prevents the
Consumption of the Provisions and Manufactures of the Kingdom, and thereby
lowers the Rents of Landlords?

For First, Can a Gentleman receive benefit or advantage by saving 5 l. per
Ann. in a journey, when by his manner of traveling he lowers his own Rents
three times as much in a year as he saves by his Journeys, by countenancing
that kind of conveyance that hinders the Consumption of the products of his own
Estate, and thereby makes his Tenants unable to pay their Rents?

2ly, Is it to be believed, That a Tradesman arrives at any profit by these
Coaches, though he should save a little Money when he rides in them, that he
must necessarily expend if he travels on Horseback? No, for this manner of
traveling hinders the Sale of those Commodities they deal in; of which much
more would be consumed than is, if such Coaches were down, and by the Sale
whereof they would get much more than they save by confining themselves to
traveling as aforesaid; so that plainly it is their interest to promote that
way of traveling, that tends to the greatest Consumption of the Manufacturies
or Commodities wherein they deal.

3ly, The Husbandmen, who live by the sweat of their Brows, in manuring the
Estates of the Gentry, they are undone by this easy carriage; for it hinders
their selling their Corn, Hay, and Straw, and other the products of their
Farms, and brings down the price of what they sell, thereby rendering them
unable to pay their Rents, or to hold their Farms without considerable
abatements: which if not given them, their Lands are thrown up into the
Landlords hands, and little or no benefit made by them.

4ly, The Grasiers, they complain for want of a Vent for their Cattle, which
they had before these Coaches were erected; Not that I do imagine Coaches to be
the only reason of the want of that Consumption, though it be evident they go
far in the promoting that mischief; for the want of People in England, the loss
of many thousands from amongst us of late years, and the leaving of eating off
Suppers by those that are left alive, go a great way therein. But these two may
be easily remedied; The former by the General Act of Naturalization, and
Liberty of Conscience, proposed before, which would bring all Foreigners in
amongst us; The latter, by men's spending less in Taverns, Plays, and Balls,
and keeping up in lieu thereof, the ancient laudable Customs of England, of
good Housekeeping, and thereby relieving the Poor. Half the Money that
Gentlemen idly spend in Taverns upon French Wines, for which the Coin of the
Kingdom is exhausted, or upon Plays, Bills, treating Mistresses, fine Clothes,
Toys from France, or other Foreign parts, would defray the charges of having
good Suppers every night; whereby the product of our own Lands would be
consumed, and that would raise Rents: Nay, I am verily persuaded, if it were
duly considered, and that all men, as formerly, would fall to eating of
Suppers, at least to dressing of them; and when dressed, if they eat not
themselves, would give them to the Poor, the increase of the Consumption would
raise the Rents of Lands, as much above what now they do go at (at least in
most places of England) as would defray the charges of those Suppers; If so,
would it not then be of great advantage to Men in their Estates, and to the
Kingdom in general?

But to proceed; If the Gentlement, the Tradesmen, the Husbandmen, the Grasier,
be not benefited by this traveling, I am sure the last sort of Travelers; To
wit,

The Poor, they cannot be profited thereby; For Wagons, or the Long Coaches
first invented, and still in use, would be most for their interest to travel
in, being far less expensive than the other; so that these Running Coaches are
not most beneficial to every sort of Travelers.

Secondly, Men do not travel in these Coaches with less expense of Money or
Time than on Horseback: For, on Horseback they may travel faster; and if they
please (all things duly considered) with as little, if not less charges.

For instance, From London to Exeter, Chester, or York, you pay 40 shillings
apiece in Summer time, 45 shillings in Winter for your Passage; and as much
from those places back to London: besides, in the Journey they change Coachmen
four times; and there are few Passengers but gives 12 pence to each Coachman at
the end of his Stage, which comes to 8 shillings in the Journey backward and
forward, and at least 3 shillings comes to each Passengers share to pay for the
Coachmens Drink on the Road; so that in Summer time the Passage backward and
forward to any of these places, costs 4 l. 11 s. in the Winter 5 l 1 s. and
this only for eight days riding in the Summer, and 12 in the Winter. Then when
the Passengers come to London, they must have Lodgings, which perhaps may cost
them five or six shillings a week, and that in fourteen days amounts unto 10
or 12 s. which makes the 4 l. 11 s. either 5 l. 1 s. or 5 l. 3 s. or the 5 l. 1
s. 5 l. 11 s. or 5 l. 13 s. besides the inconveniency of having Meat from the
Cooks, at double the price they might have it for in Inns. But if Stage-Coaches
were down, and men traveled again as formerly on Horseback, then when they
came into their Inns they would pay nothing for Lodgings; And as there would
excellent Horses be bred and kept by Gentlement for their own use, so would
there be by others that would keep them on purpose to Let; which would, as
formerly, be let at 10 or 12 s. per week, and in many places for 6, 8, or 9 s.
per week: but admitting the lowest price to be 12 s. if a Man comes from York,
Exeter, or Chester, to London, be five days a coming, five days going, and
stay twelve days in London to dispatch his business, (which is the most that
Country Chapmen usually to stay) all this would be but three weeks; so that
his Horse-hire would come but to 1 l. 16 s. his Horse-meat at 1 s. 2 d. a day,
(one with another) which is the highest that can be reckoned upon, and will
come but to 1 l. 5 s. in all 3 l. 1 s. so that there would be at least 40 or 50
s. saved of what Coach-hire and Lodgings will cost him; which would go a great
way in paying for Riding-Clothes, Stockings, Hats, Boots, Spurs, and other
Accoutrements for riding; and in my poor opinion, would be far better spent in
the buying of these things, by the making whereof the poor would be set at
work, and kept from being burthensom to the Parish, than to give it to those
Stage-Coachmen, to indulge that lazy, idle, habit of Body, that men, by
constant riding in these Coaches, have brought upon themselves: Besides, if
thus their Money were spent, they would save a great deal, which now (if Men of
any Estates) they pay for relief of those poor, who, for want of the work they
had before those Coaches were set up, and might have again if they were put
down, are fallen upon the several Parishes wherein they live, for maintenance:
which charge would be quickly taken off if they were restored to their work.
Thus in proportion may a Man save from all longer or shorter Stages. For
instance, from Northampton men pay for passage in Coach to London 16 s. and so
much back; from Bristol 25 s. from Bath 20 s. from Salisbury 20 or 25 s. from
Redding 7 s. the like sums back, and so in proportion for longer or shorter
Stages. Judge them, whether men may not hire Horses cheaper than 5 s. a day; I
am sure they may for half the money, especially if Coaches were down, that men
might receive encouragement; for, then there would be, as formerly, in all
great Cities and Towns of England, good and sufficient numbers of able Horses
kept to Let, and such a correspondency would be between all the places, that a
Man in any Town shall have a Horse to ride to what place he pleases, and
liberty to leave him when he comes to his Journeys end, without farther charge,
till he have dispatched his business: which done, he may at the same place hire
one to carry him back and be gone, without waiting a week or ten days after
his Affairs are ended, at vast charges, merely for a passage in a Coach; as
many of these Gentlemen are forced to do, who pretend it a point of good
Husbandry to travel in them, which hazard nevertheless they run, and often find
the smart of it: They never consider or account the charge thereof, if they
did, they would easily perceive, that traveling in Coaches is not the way of
traveling with least expense.

Thirdly, Traveling in these Coathes can neither prove advantageous to men's
Health or Business: For, what advantage is it to Man's Health, to be called out
of their Beds into these Coaches, an hour before day in the morning, to be
hurried in them from place to place place, till one hour, two, or three within
night; insomuch that after sitting all day in the Summer time stifled with
heat, and choked with the dust; or the Winter time starving and freezing with
cold, or choked with filthy Fogs, they are often brought into their Inns by
Torch-light, when it is too late to sit up to get a Supper; and next morning
they are forced into the Coach so early, that they can get no Breakfast. What
addition is this to men's Health or Business, to ride all day with strangers,
oftentimes sick, ancient, diseased Persons, or young Children crying; to whose
humors they are obliged to be subject, forced to bear with, and many times are
poisoned with their nasty Scents, and cripled by the crowd of the Boxes and
Bundles.

Is it for a Man's Health to travel with tired Jades, to be laid fast in the
foul Ways, and forced to wade up to the knees in mire; afterward sit in the
cold, till Teams of Horses can be sent to pull the Coach out? Is it for their
health to travel in rotten Coaches, and to have their Tackle, or Perch, or
Axletree broken, and then to wait three or four hours, sometimes half a day to
have them mended again, and then to travel all night to make good their Stage?
Is it for Man's pleasure or advantageous to their Healths and Business, to
travel with a mixed Company that he knows not how to converse with; to be
affronted by the rudeness of a surly, dogged, cursing, ill-natured Coachman,
necessitated to Lodge or Bait at the worst Inns on the Road, where there is no
accommodation fit for Gentlemen; and this merely because the Owners of the
Inns, and the Coachmen, are agreed together to cheat the Guests?

Is it for the advantage of Business, That a Man, when he sets out a Journey,
must come just at their hour, or be left behind: so that often he is forced,
when one hours staying would finish his Business, to go out of Town, leave it
undone, and make a new Journey about it? Is it for advantage of a Man's
Business, that though he have a Concern of great weight or moment to transact
upon the Road as he goes along, yet if it lie but a stones-cast out of the
Coach-way, the Coachman will not drive thither, nor stay for him at any place,
except the Baiting or Lodging-places where he calls, where they change Horses;
and there stay no longer than he pleases neither. To be forced, whatever
accident of sickness or illness happens, to ride these Coachmens Stages,
thought never so late in the night, or else to be left in the middle of a
Journey in a strange place; is this for the convenience or advantage of a Man's
Healch or Business? rather the quite contrary; Yet this has been many Persons
of good Qualities case, though they have offered to pay the whole Coach-hire,
all the Passengers charges, to have put into an Inn (late at night on this side
the set-Stage) yet have they been denied, forced to ride, though in peril of
their lives, till midnight: And it is not hard to instance in many that have
lost their lives by such usage.

All which Inconveniences, if Stage-Coaches were suppressed, would be remedied,
lazy humors be discountenanced; and a great convenience indeed it would be,
both to Travelers, and the Country through which they ride, for Men and Women
to travel on Horseback again.

For then they may, when their business is done at one place, presently take
Horse and go to another, without loss of time, or staying for a passage in a
Coach, set out as early in the morning, and take up as soon in the evening, and
bait as long, and as often by the way, and in what places they please, make
choice of their Company on the Road, avoid such as suit not with their tempers,
go out of the Roads when, and travel as long or short Journeys as they please,
keep out of Cold, Wet, or Foggs, and take into Inns, when the weather is not
fit to travel in, and so preserve their Healths. And by this means great
advantages would happen, for then all Towns, and every Inn, would have
something to do, Trade would be more diffused, many poor Families in the
Country would be maintained, that now are in a starving condition; Travelers
would come into their Inns before Candlelight, stay in the morning till Shops
open, understand the Trade of the place they are in, lay out moneys in buying
things they find fit for their use, and which are of the Manufactures of the
Town where they come; in some places, Silk or Worsted-Hose; in others, Lace,
Gloves, Stuffs, Boots, or Shoes, Linnen-Cloath, and other things, which would
be great relief and encouragement to the Manufacturers of those Commodities, as
well as to those that buy them, and bring money to those places where they are
made.

4ly. These Coaches are not absolutely necessary to any persons whatever; for
sick or aged people, or young children, if they have occasion to travel, may
ride in the long Waggon-Coaches, which were those that first were set up, and
are not now opposed, because they do little or no hurt: For, Gentlemen that are
able to ride on horseback, keep Coaches of their own, or to hire a Coach, will
not appear so sordid as to travel in them. And truly, if they be poor people
that are to travel, it is not fit they should be encouraged in their pride or
extravagancy, or suffered to ride amongst Gentlemen, or like persons of Honor
in a Coach, with four or six horses; and for sick and aged people, and young
children, these long Coaches are more convenient for them than running Coaches,
if they were to be continued up; for, they travel not such long journeys, go
not out so early in the morning, neither come they in so late at night; but
stay by the way, travel easily, without jolting men's bodies, or hurrying them
along, as the running Coaches do.

5ly. Neither are these running Coaches useful to any, for, those that are fit
to ride, or ought to be suffered to ride in them, are such, that if they have
business requiring a Coach, may either keep one themselves, or hire one.

6ly. But though these Coaches are neither absolutely necessary to some, nor
useful to others, yet they are imposed upon many; for, since they set up in
such multitudes, especially about London, men careless of keeping horses,
knowing the certainty of passage in them, have sold them, and must therefore,
when they travel, either ride in these Coaches, or not at all, there being few
or no Horses kept now to let out to hire.

If by what has been said upon this point, it happen Gentlemen may travel on
horseback, more to the advantage and benefit of Trade, and so to the public
good, with more advantage to their healths and business, and less expense of
money and time than they can in Stage-Coaches.

If these Stage-Coaches be not absolutely necessary to some, useful to what
other Coaches may be made to others, and yet this imposed upon many, what
reason can be given why they should not all or most of them be suppressed?

If they were not destructive to Trade, why should Petitions from almost all
sorts of Tradesmen, come up from most Cities and Towns in England against them,
as there has been lately presented to His Majesty and the Council? Why should
the Justices of Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, certify to His
Majesty and his honorable Privy Council, under their hands (as they have done)
that the great Mischiefs aforementioned, under which the Kingdom now suffers,
have been greatly occasioned by these Coaches, and that many thousands of
Families are ruined by them, as from London, Westminster, Salisbury, Middlesex,
and diverse other Cities, Counties and Towns, Certificates have come? Why should
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, at their Court at Guildhal, upon serious
consideration and debate of the Petition of the several Companies of London,
against the said Coaches, wherein most of these grievances are mentioned, allow
of the same, and give leave that it should be presented, if they were not
convinced, that they are destructive to Trade? For surely they understand
Trade, and were not so weak as to be cheated into their consent and approbation
(neither have they any time since repented of, or disowned the same) as the
Stage-Coachmen in false and scandalous Pamphlets have presumed to print;
notwithstanding which, they are ready to own the said Petition, and make good
the Contents thereof: And the Drapers, Haberdashers and Milliners, (who, they
pretend, would be prejudiced by their being superseded) are ready, with the
other Tradesmen mentioned in that Pamphlet, to evince to the World, they are
injured by their being kept up; so that the very Coach and Harness-Makers
themselves petition against them, as being mischievous to their Trades, in
regard they prevent the making of great Numbers of Coaches every year; which
must have been made, if Gentlemen had traveled in their own Coaches, and
thereby they hinder the Consumption of great quantities of Leather.

If all these things be true, what can be said against their being suppressed?

It is Objected, The Owners of these Coaches set them up for the convenience of
the Subjects; have betaken themselves to this painful way of living, and laid
out their whole Stocks, merely to accommodate Gentlemen, and have now no other
way to live, what shall become of them, if they be put down?

Ans. It is the case but of very few, that the suppressing of them would hurt:
for, if all Stage-Coaches were to be suppressed, I dare say five for one of those
that keep them would receive advantage thereby, as clearly will be evinced, if
it be considered, that when this business was before His Majesty in Council,
where it depends undetermined, none of the Stagers opposed the being put down,
except Exeter, Salisbury, Dorchester, Bristol, Southampton, Dover, Norwich,
Lincoln, York, Westchester, Worcester and Shrewsbury, who call themselves,
Stage-Coachmen upon the grand Roads of England; and there is not one Owner of
any of these Coaches, but has otherways to live, if he were prohibited driving
them; for, they are all of them either Innholders, or Coach or Harness-makers,
following those Trades, or Carriers, or licensed Coachmen in London; and may
live as well as the Hackney Coachmen in London: The other Stage-Coaches, are
all or most of them kept either by Innholders first, who (one in a Town) did
set up a Coach, and so carried all the Guests to his own house. Then a second
sets up another, and so a third and fourth in a Town: Which done, they run one
against another, purposely to get the Guests from each other houses; whereby
they not only destroy multitudes of horses, but are great losers themselves; so
that themselves would be thankful to have them put down, and yet are forced to
keep them up, until there shall be a general suppression, because otherwise
they shall lose their whole Trades. Or else the said Stage-Coaches are kept by
such, as before the late Act for reducing the number of Hackney Coaches in
London to 400, were Owners of Coaches, and drove Hackney there: But when the
number of 400 was full, and they not licensed, then to avoid the penalties of
the Act, they removed out of the City, dispersing themselves into every little
Town within twenty miles of London, where they set up for Stagers, and Drive
every Day to London, and in the night time they drive about the City, pay no 5
l. per annum, yet take away both the Town and Country work from those that do
pay it, and break and annoy the streets in the Cities and Suburbs thereof,
hinder the 400 from the Jobs and small Journeys they depended upon, when they
agreed to pay 5 l. a piece per annum for their Licenses; whereby they are many
of them ruined. But take it for granted it were so, that these Stage-Coachmen
had laid out all their Stocks for the use aforesaid, and must be undone if put
down, and there were at least 2000 of them, what is that? (of two evils the
lesser is to be chosen.) Have they not already destroyed very many Thousands of
Families? will not the continuing of them, in very short time, be the undoing
of many Thousands more? is the interest of these snrley, rude, debauched
Coachmen, to be put into the Balance with the many Thousands of Curriers,
Shoemakers, Sadlers, Girdlers, Spurriers, Cutlers, Lorainers, Cloathiers,
Cloath-workers, Cloath-drawers, Drapers, Tailors, and an hundred Trades more,
to which men were bound seven years Apprentiship to learn their Trades, and are
of great advantage to the public. Surely, they ought to be encouraged, being
the Manufacturers of the Staple-Commodities of the Kingdom; by the
manufacturing whereof, great profit does arise to the Public: Yet of these, if
occasion require, it will be made appear, above 100000, with their Families,
are in great measure ruined by them. And I pray you, who are advantaged
thereby? what persons are employed or set at work by them, save only a few
Servant-Coachmen, Postilions and Hostlers? whom they pretend they breed up and
make fit for the service of the Nobility and Gentry of the Land; a most
incomparable School to train men up in! and to fit them for the Gallows, more
likely than to live in sober Families; but in the mean time, while these are
breeding up, the Price and Rents of Lands are so brought down by hindrance
these Coaches do make of the Consumption of Provisions and Manufactures, that
in a short time few Gentlemen will be in a capacity to keep Coaches; so that if
all Running Stage-Coaches and Caravans were suppressed, it would do well. But if
some few Coaches were continued, (to wit) one to every Shire-Town in England,
to go once a week backwards and forwards, and to go through with the same
Horses they set forth with, and not travel above 30 miles a day in the Summer,
and 25 miles in the Winter, and to shift Inns every Journey, that so Trade
might be diffused; these would be sufficient to carry the Sick and the Lame,
that they pretend cannot travel on Horseback* and being thus regulated, they
would do little or no harm; especially if all be suppressed within 40 or 50
miles of London, where they are no way necessary, and yet so highly
destructive. But this, as well as the rest, I submit to judgment.

VIII.
THe Eight Thing Proposed is, That the Act for Transportation of Leather
unmanufactured, may be repealed, or at least not renewed after the expiration
thereof.

There would never have been any necessity for this Act, had it not been that
vast quantities of Hides are Iimported from Ireland, which brings down the
price of our English Hides. And for the Stage-Coaches, their hindering the
Consumption of that Leather in England, which, before they set up, was used for
Boots, Saddles, Portmantues, Hat-eases, Holsters, Belts, Girts, Reins, Stirrup
Leathers, and many other things now, become almost useless.

The making whereof, for Home-service and Foreign-Consumption, employed about
100000 Families, whose Livelihood depended upon the manufacturing of Leather,
whereby they got Money, with which they maintained their Families, spent five
or six good Joints of Meat in a week in their Houses, and wore good Clothes,
thereby occasioning the Consumption of great quantities of the Provisions and
Manufactures of the Kingdom, more than now are consumed. Till this Act passed,
it was felony to transport Leather unmanufactured, and then France, Spain,
Germany, and other parts, who could not be without our Leather, had vast
quantities of Boots, Shoes, and Saddles, with their Appurtenances, Portmantues,
Hat-Cases, Holsters, Trunks, etc. from England; by the making whereof many
thousands of Families got a handsome subsistence, and grew rich; but
Stage-Coaches hindering the Consumption at home as aforesaid; and Irish Hides
being Imported into England, and also great quantities from Ireland, exported
to Foreign Parts, our Hides fell in their price in England. The Question then
arose, how to raise them to their ancient value; and it was by the Parliament
conceived, that giving a liberty to transport the same unmanufactured, might
answer the end proposed; therefore an Act for that purpose was passed.

But sad has been, and yet is, the consequence thereof: for, ever since that
liberty given, the best of our Leather is constantly bought up, and transported
beyond Seas unmanufactured, Foreigners who formerly were supplied with Leather
wrought here, will not buy or carry over a pennyworth that is manufactured; so
that all those poor people who served Apprentiships to learn their Trades, and
whose Trade depended upon manufacturing for Foreign Consumption, are undone;
they that kept 20 or 30 Journey-men at work every day, cannot now (though
eminent men of their own Trades) keep two; by means whereof, upon computation,
at least 50000 Men and their Families Livelyhoods are wholly taken away, and
they so impoverished, that they are ready to receive Alms of the several
parishes wherein they live; whilst in the mean time Foreigners grow rich by
manufacturing one of the Staple Commodities of this Kingdom; and whereas till
this Act passed, all our old Boots and Shoes were bought up, mended here, and
then sent beyond the Seas, and there worn.

The case is now otherwise; for the best of our Leather is not only bought up
and transported unmanufactured and wrought beyond Seas; but when it is wrought,
it is then imported back, and vended here, to the great prejudice and
discouragement of Manufacturers in England, who have many of them been forced
(as great a want of People as there is in England) to transport themselves
beyond the Seas for want of work at home, and there have taught their Art to
Foreigners. What then does naturally follow all these things? What Consequence
can be drawn from hence, but this, that instead of 500 ls. worth of Leather
formerly sent beyond Seas manufactured, we send now as much Leather, but it is
not worth above 100 l. because the same is carried over unwrought: by which
means our Manufacturers lose 400 l. which they should have gotten, if the
Leather had been Cut and Wrought in England, and so thereby we grow poor; and
Foreigners grow rich, by gaining that 400 l. which our Manufacturers lose.

But this is not all; for, most of our Leather that is exported, goes into
France, with whom we never were able to keep up a Balance of Trade, but have
traded with them for ready Money, (they taking little or none of the
Manufactures of England in exchange for their Commodities). By a moderate
computation, from the best intelligence I can get, France receives from England
30000 ls. worth of our Leather every year, which they cannot be without (for,
our Leather-Manufacture, was the only Manufacture that they were forced to be
holden unto us for). 30000 ls. worth of our Leather manufactured, was worth in
France 120000 l. then at least 70000 l. of that went into our Manufacturers
Pockets, the rest to the Merchants, and what our Manufucturers got, was spent
in the Provisions and Manufactures of the Kingdom; which being consumed, bare a
better rate than now, and helped to keep up the Rents of Lands.

This Money we not only now lose, to our Impoverishment, and the French get, to
their Enriching; but considering that we now import as much (nay far more) of
French Goods into England than we did formerly; and taking it for granted, that
when we transported the most that ever we did, yet could not a balance of
Trade be kept up between the two Kingdoms, but our ready Money went for a great
part of the Goods imported; then must it naturally follow, that by sending our
Leather unmanufactured, which formerly was mannfactured, we must send over nigh
100000 l. more in ready Money than formerly we did, (or need to do were it not
for this Act) which furnishes France with our Coin, to pay their Workmen for
manufacturing of our Staple-Commodities, and greatly exhausteth the Treasure of
this Kingdom; But if this Act be repealed, and Irelands transporting of Raw
Hides be prevented, then France and other Foreigners must have Leather from
England manufactured, as formerly they had, whereby our Handicraft Tradesmen
would be set at work, and having work, would live handsomely as formerly they
did, to consume the Provisions and Manufactures of the Kingdom: So that to any
rational man it must be apparent, that this Act has not answered the end
designed, nor raised the price of Hides, as expected, nor can it: for Ireland
transporting vast quantities of raw Hides beyond the Seas, and Importing great
quantities of their Hides into England, as aforesaid, hinders the sale of our
Hides or Tanned Leather at any: considerable rates, either at home, or to
Foreigners, because we want a Consumption at home; and Foreigners choose to buy
their raw Hides rather than our Leather, by reason they can purchase them at a
third part of the price we can afford to sell ours at, and by tanning of them
employ their own Bark; which is a great mischief to the Gentry in England,
whose Bark, by reason thereof, sells at very low rates.

IX.
THe Ninth thing proposed is, That a Court in the nature of a Court of Requests
in London, be established for Westminster, Southwark, and all other parts
within the Weekly Bills of Mortality; and, if possible, in every City and Town
Corporate in England, to determine Differences between poor people for small
Debts, not exceeding 40 s. and for Words, Trespasses, Assaults and Batteries
(where the people pay neither Scot nor Lot) that so they may not be undone by
Lawsuits.

The Court of Requests in London is of excellent use, long continuance, and
has prevented the ruin of many thousands of Families, and might have done far
more, had it not been limited to the Liberties of the City; whereby all
Westminster, Southwark, Tower-Hamlets, Middlesex and Surry, within the Weekly
Bills of Mortalities, wherein the generality of the poor inhabit, are excluded
their Jurisdiction.

Of these Poor (for want of this Court) many are every year undone by
Lawsuits, commenced against each other for small debts, or trivial Actions,
for Words, Assaults, or Trespasses, the poorest oftentimes proving the
proudest, most quarrelsome and vexatious.

These are such who maintain themselves and Families, by turning and winding 20
or 40 s. a week, which they take upon their credit, and employ in buying and
selling Butchers-meat, Poultery-ware, and Fish, Herbs, Fruit and Roots,
Boiled-Wheat and Oat-cakes, Butter and Eggs, and diverse other things, which
they cry about the streets, or sell at Tavern-doors, or in little Bulks, as
Orenges, Limons, Oysters, Tape, Thred-laces, Silk and Ferret Ribbon, Childrens
Play-things, and such like small Commodities, whereby they keep their Families
from burthening they Parishes wherein they dwell; and yet are so poor, that
they are not rated to the Church and Poor where they trade.

These people are (the greatest part of them) most commonly indebted 20, 30. or
40 s. apiece for the Stock they trade with; nevertheless have more owing to
them, by the persons they sell their Wares to, than when received will pay such
their Debts; but there are cunning Fellows belonging to the Marshalsey, St.
Katherines, Whitechappel and Westminster (pretending to be Baillffs or other
Officers) placed in every part of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
thereof, who make it their business to enquire out these Poor and their
Creditors, and thereupon to contrive some stories whereby to incite their
Creditors to make a demand of their Debts; and if not presently paid, then to
arrest the Debtors: These Knaves also spend their whole time in promoting
differences between the poorer sort of people, for frivolous words, slight
trespasses, or pitiful small debts; which done, they are employed to arrest
men; and the person arrested, must either presently pay and give satisfaction,
or put in Bail; the which if he cannot do (as frequently it happens they
cannot, they laying their Actions high (though the occasion of action be very
small) then they are hurried over to the Knight Marshals Prison, or to some
other Goal, and put to great expense, lose their Credit and Trade, and very
many of them are utterly ruined by the charge of Arrests, Prison Fees, and the
Suits, though the verdict upon their Trials happen to be for them, as most
commonly it is, there being not one Action in ten brought in those Courts for
Words or Trespasses, that happens to be according to Law.

Nevertheless, if the said Defendants Demur, because the words are not
actionable, or the Plaintiff have a Verdict, and the Defendant move in Arrest
of Judgment, and the Judgment be Arrested, yet in neither of these Cases has
the Defendant any Costs; so that both Plaintiffs and Defendants spend their
money in vain; and the Parishes where the Defendants inhabit, are frequently
forced to redeem them out of the Marshalseys, White Chapel, St. Katharines,
and other Goals, or otherwise they should lie and starve in Prison, though the
Cause of Action were but a Trifle; the Charges and Fees oftentimes falling out
to be four, five or six times as much as originally the Action was brought for;
by reason whereof the recovering of 4 d. 6 d. or 12 d. sometimes costs 3 l. 4
l. or 6 l. Whereas if the Court desired were erected to end these Differences
in a summary, less expensive, and more expeditious way, the utter ruin of some
hundreds, if not thousands of Families, would be every year prevented, the
Parish charges greatly lessened, and quarrelsome vexatious Suits for small
Debts of 40 s. or under, or for Trespasses, Assaults, or words, would be
prevented.

In London, no Freeman within the Liberties dwelling, can be arrested or sued
for any Debt under Forty shillings; the Court of Conscience or Requests sits at
Guildhal Wednesday and Saturdays in every week, to hear Complaints, and take
course therein: Upon any Complaint they first send a Summons to the party
complained against, and that is served upon him by a sworn Officer, and costs 6
d. which done, the next Court day the Plaintiff must attend, and call the
Defendant, and enter his own appearance; else is nonsuited, loses his
Summons, and must begin again; but the Defendant runs no hazard in not
appearing the first day.

If the Defendant appear the second Court day after Summons, he prevents an
Attachment, and is ordered to pay his debt; for which the Plaintiff pays 4 d.

If the Defendant fail to appear the second Court day, before the Court rises,
the Court grants an Attachment; which costs, being executed, amount to 1 s. 10
d.

The Officer serves this Attachment, so soon as he can find the Defendant;
which done, he gives the Plaintiff notice, that the Defendant will meet him
next Court day, and that costs 4 d. more.

If the Defendant appear, and is cast, he pays for the Summons and Attachment;
which is but 2 s. eight pence in the whole.

But if the Defendannt appear not the third Court day after Attached, than the
Plaintiff comes and swears his Debt, and the Court orders payment thereof at
the Plaintiffs own house, if he pleases; which saves 8 d. that must be paid,
if it be brought into Court, to take it out again, and this Order costs 4 d.
more.

Of this Order the Officer gives the Defendant notice, and that he must meet
the Plaintiff in Court the third Court day after the making thereof.

If the Defendant appear not the third Court day, then upon the Plaintiffs
request, the Courts grants Judgment and Execution against him; which costs 2 s.

So that the whole Charge of Summons, Order and Attachment;

Second Order for Judgment, and the Judgment and Execution executed, comes
but to 4 s. 8 d.

And all is done in three weeks time: but the Suit in the Marshalsey, White
Chapel, or St. Katherines, or Westminster Courts, and Charges incident
thereunto, costs 4 l. or 5 l. when the Debt or Cause of Action was not worth
Five shillings.

The erecting the Court desired, would give a great credit to the Poor.

For, were such Courts erected, every Gentleman or person of any considerable
estate would lend a poor distressed neighbor Twenty, Thirty, or Forty
shillings, to put him in a way to live, or to prevent their being cast into
Prison, if arrested for a small sum; whereas now poor men are forced to borrow
of Brokers, pawn double the value of what they borrow, and pay above Cent. per
Cent. interest; which eats out their profit, so presses and grindes them, that
they frequently are incapacitated to redeem the Pledges left for the money
taken up (which is one other great mischief worthy the consideration of the
Parliament, and fit to be redressed) whereas whilst the Law is thus costly, men
are afraid to lend their Neighbors Thirty or Forty shillings to set them up
with, or to prevent their being imprisoned, because if they repay it not
without a Suit, the same may cost five or six times as much as the Original
Debt; and when the Creditor has Judgment, he is not sure of his Debt, but in
danger, through the poverty of the Creditor, to lose both Principal, Debt,
Interest and Charges, or undergo the hard Censures and Clamours of the poor, by
confining them to Prison; which no ingenuous or generous soul can endure the
thoughts of.

By the erecting this Court, there is none can be prejudiced, excepting,

First, Bailiffs, one of which fellows to arrest a poor man, though it be but
for three pence, four pence, or some other very small sum, makes the man pay
four or five shillings for the Arrest, hurries him into an Alehouse, and there
runs him twelve pence or two shillings on the score; and if not able presently
to pay the same, hurries him to Prison. Secondly, Several idle Persons, falsely
calling themselves Attorneys, who are as active as the Bailiffs, to promote and
carry on Suits begun, though but for trivial Matters, setting people together
by the ears, and living upon the ruin of the poor, make them sell their very
Beds from under them, or Clothes from off their backs, to pay their pretended
Fees, and the Fees of the Courts, which is too frequently done. Thirdly, Or the
Judges of the Marshalsey, Westminster, St. Katharines, White-Chappel, and other
Inferior Courts of Record, where small Debts under 40 s. may be recovered: but
certainly, they having their places given them gratis, and being persons of
generous education, will not oppose so charitable a work as this proposed,
though they should lose some profit thereby, such profit coming from such
miserable poor people, that it were charity in them rather to give them as much
as their Fees comes to, than to exact any thing from them.
And if they, by the Court desired, should lose a little profit, they will save
much time that they now spend in trying these Causes, and being Lawyers, may
certainly spend it to as great (if not better) advantage than what they will
lose by setting up the Judicature proposed.

Let these consider, that such Gentlemen, not being Lawyers, as shall be
appointed Judges of the Courts desired, will be greater losers than they are,
since they must sit and spend their Time and Money without any manner of
Compensation at all, save the satisfaction they will receive in being
instrumental of doing good to the Poor, which certainly they will do.

For whereas now it costs 5 or 6 l. to recover 5 or 6 s. by the way proposed, 4
s. 8 d. is all the Charge (though the Suits be spun out to the utmost
extremity) that any Suitor or Defendant can be put unto.

So by the setting up of this Court, Justice will be had speedier and cheaper;

The ruin of many poor People, by multitudes of vexatious Suits for small
Matters, will be prevented;

Love and Amity betwixt Neighbors will be preserved; Charges of the Parishes
lessened; Men's Liberties to follow their Callings, to their own and Families
Comfort, will be continued; and the Debts they owe, be more easily and speedily
paid;

And a Work very pleasing and acceptable to God will be done, who has
pronounced a blessing upon all those who consider the Poor, for whose relief
alone this is proposed.

X.
THe Tenth Thing Proposed is, That a bound be put to the extravagant Habits and
Expenses of all sorts of Persons; that Servants and Handicraft Tradesmen's
expensive ways be reduced, and no Foreign Manufactures (except from Ireland)
be suffered to be worn in England; but that the Importation and Exposing them
to Sale, be made Felony.

There is nothing ruins the Gentry and Tradesmen of England so much, as living
above their Estates or Profit arising by their Trades. How much all sorts of
men do this, I leave the World to judge, their Habits and other Expenses being
more extravagant and vain than ever was known; and not only do Masters and
Mistresses of Families run to excess in their own dresses, but suffer and
encourage their Servants also to do the same, which costs them dear at last;
for, all comes out of their Pockets, and it makes Servants so proud and
scornful, as to neglect their Duties, slight their Superiors, and upon every
little reproof to go from them.

How many Gentlemen are there in England that spend their whole yearly Incomes
upon clothing themselves, their Wives and Children? What way then have they to
answer their other Family Expenses, but by spending upon the main Stock?

How careless are Parents of their Childrens Education, bringing them up idly,
putting them upon no manner of employment, unless to Music and Dancing; using
them to Balls and Plays, and to keep vain Company; which they get such an
habit of, that they very hardly (if ever) can be broken from it, but spend-most
of their time in Gaming, Whoring, and Drinking; so that by that time they come
to their Estates, whatever their Fathers leave them, by following their
Examples, they quickly make it away, (if they have not run it out before they
come to it). Their Clothes must be of the Mode, Gentlemen of 3 or 400 per
annum, will be as fine, keep their Coaches, live as high as if they were Lords,
and had great Estates; and nothing will serve them but what is Foreign made,
whilst our own Contrymen starve for want of Work; insomuch now that our
English Manufacturers, of Silk especially, and Point-Laces, and Ribbons, (which
are become a general wear) cannot sell their Goods when they have made them; or
if they do, it is at such pitiful low rates, that they lose by their work, and
the Shopkeepers that buy them, when they come to show them to Customers, are
forced to avouch them to be Foreign made, or else they cannot sell them; so
that our Manufacturers are often necessitated to get Frenchmen to go with
their Wares, and sell them to Shopkeepers as French. Thereupon the Gentry
(though the Goods be English made) are so fond as to pay dearer for them than
otherwise they need to do, because of the Brokage which the Manufacturer pays
to those that sell them to the Shops, and so the Manufacturers get little or
nothing by them. So great a truth there is in this, that I could instance where
Persons of Quality have come into a Shop, seen a Commodity, liked it well, but
being ingeniously told that it was English made, would not buy it. The very
next day, the same Goods have been sent by a French woman to the Persons
desiring to buy the same, and they have bought them as French Goods, and paid
double as much for them as they might have had them for the day before in the
Shop.

Is not this a thing highly commendable in our Gentry, so to admire Foreigners,
and undervalue, discourage, and hurt their Native Contrymen? Did they
consider, or were they but sensible how they hurt and ruin them, themselves,
and their own Estates, by such their vain fancies, hindering the Consumption of
our Manufacturies, and impoverishing our Manufacturers, certainly they would
give it over. A further mischief there is also, That Gentlemen and Ladies do
fancy greatly to have their Servants that are about them, so fine and neat,
that they must be in their Silk-Gowns, and Peticoats laced, Whisks, and Cuffs,
fine Shoes and Stockings, that they will not do any ordinary Work; whereby they
are necessitated to keep more Servants than they used or need to do. And what
the Wages and Diet of every Servant comes to in a year, (especially about
London, where it is that most people are grown so vain) let themselves compute.

Come to the Citizens, who complain for want of a Trade, but without a Cause,
(though so many Tradesmen fail yearly) for there never was a greater Trade than
there is now. What reason is there then of their failing? It is high living,
every Tradesman thinking now to have as great a Trade, and as quickly to grow
rich, as those did that were of his Trade twenty or thirty years ago, never
considering that there are five times as many of most Trades as were then, and
that thereby Trade is more diffused, Shopkeepers of late years, through
covetousness of a little Money, taking double or treble the number of
Apprentices that formerly they kept, or indeed (if strictly looked after) than
they ought to keep, (nothing spoiling any particular Trade, more than to have
multiplicy of Traders in the same way); with these Apprentices they exact as
much more money as formerly they used to have, so that perhaps half their
Portion is gone to bind them Apprentices; which is a great madness, and no
reason to be given for it, but because Apprentices must live high, and wear
finer Clothes than formerly they did, wait on their Masters abroad, do none of
the servile Work that formerly they used to do; which kept them humble; and if
they were now obliged to the same, it would keep them from growing so proud and
scornful as they are, or taking the liberty they now do, of taunting at their
Superiors, quarrelling with their Services, Usage, and Diet, and going from
them, when fit to do them service; And if it happen that they do serve out
their Time, and have a 1000 l. to set up with, it is very well, and a fair
beginning, treble as much as many of their Masters had when they set up; who by
close living, and diligence, and great industry, after many years care and
pains, have arrived to an Estate of 30, 30, or 40000 l. and a good certain
custom, so consequently are able to buy their Commodities with ready Money,
cheaper than he that has but a small stock, and trades upon credit, and
thereby they are able to keep the custom from their Servants when they set up,
because they can give Customers a greater credit, and a longer time for
payment; yet a young Man, so soon as he comes out of his Time, not knowing
whether ever he shall attain to a full Trade, will have as good a House as his
Masters keep, as high a Table, lay out 4. or 500 l. out of his 1000 l. Stock,
in furnishing his House, and the Fine of the same; his design being thereby to
advance himself in a Match. And thereupon he gets a Wife, perhaps with a 1000
l. Portion; which, added to his own Stock, if the same had been kept together,
would have made 2000 l. but of this, one half of his being gone for a Fine of a
House and Furniture, as aforesaid, the Wife, out of Hers, will have fine
Clothes, Laces, Cupboards of Plate, Neck-Lace of Pearls, Jewels in her Ears,
Diamond-Rings on her Fingers, Bulls-Locks, or Towers; Laced or Imbroidered
Petticoats, Shoes and Silk-Hose. So that in these Things goes 3 or 400 l. more,
which might, most of it, have been saved.

Add to this the vast Rent he sits at, and must pay whether he has a Trade or
not; If this had been spared, he might have had it of his own to have traded
with: but this laid out, it lies dead, whilst he is forced for want thereof, to
Trade upon Credit for so much, and pay Interest for the same. This Credit if he
keeps not, he is lost; and being necessitated to trust, and trusting being
dangerous, many men are undone; partly by that, and partly by the
extravagancies of their good Wives; who being, through their Husbands vanity
and indiscretion, made so fine, will not stir out of Doors without a Coach; and
yet make such frequent and long visits, that they spend more in Coach-hire some
weeks, than the gains of the Shop comes to; and abroad they get new
Acquaintance, at Balls, Plays, or Dancing-Schools; and being young, pretty,
and in fine Clothes, are so courted and gallanted, that oftentimes they are
persuaded into such Inconveniences, as prove fatal to their Husbands, as well
as to themselves; but the Husbands may blame themselves, they being originally
the occasion thereof, and o their own ruin thereby; for, nothing will serve
them but to live at this rate, keep their Wives thus fine, expose them to
Temptations, by setting them in their Shops, in tempting Dresses, thinking to
invite Customers; and thereby very often they have that effect; but sometimes
those Customers make bold with the Ware that should not be sold or lent; and
once having attained that liberty, if both Parries agree, it is ten to one if
that poor Man be not presently blown up, either by the charge his Wife will put
him to in maintaining that Gallant, or by the Credit that good Gentleman shall
have in the Shop, to take up what he pleases. And then when gone as far as the
Owner can give credit for, he leaves the Shop and his Mistress to his care.
Nevertheless, sometimes men are undone, and yet their Wives are virtuous, (as
without doubt many thousands are, and more would be, were it not the Husbands
fault); That is, when after their being a while set up, and a little Estate
gotten, they grow high, keep their Coaches, must have their Countrey-Houses,
the Candles burning at both ends, never thinking they shall see an end of their
Gains. And their Wives forsooth must not be Nurses, but send their Children
abroad; so that reckoning the charge of keeping there, and frequent going to
see them, and the Gifts and good things that are unknown carried to the
Nurses; these high Expenses, accompanied with a decay and declination of Trade,
occasioned by the multiplicity of Traders, (as aforesaid) go far in destroying
young Beginners. Moreover, the keeping unnecessary Maidservants, giving them
great Wages, and maintaining them idle in fine Habits and Dresses, (who with
their vain and wanton carriages, oftentimes become snares to young men); this
finisheth the work, and both Masters, Mistresses, and Servants, come all to
ruin thereby.

One other great mischief to the young Tradesmen, who are industrious, close
husbands, and sober in their habits and expenses, is the great Rents they in
the City, when the Trade is gone to the other end of the Town where Rents are
low. Were all men of my mind, those who lived in London before the fire, and
are Freemen, and now, to the destruction of the City, live in the Suburbs,
merely to enrich themselves, they should starve before a penny should be laid
out amongst them: Why should they not come into the City again, and make that
the seat of Trade? which is the Metropolitan of England, and at such vast
charge, in Compliance with the Kings pleasure, is nobly rebuilt, and so many
thousands are undone by the building thereof, by having their houses stand
empty on their hands; such base treacherous men to the City, who no more value
their Oaths they took when bound Apprentices and made free, ought not to be
countenanced where they are, by buying any thing of them; there is not one of
them but is forsworn, if he duly weigh and consider the purport of his Oath.
And he that will make no Conscience of forswearing himself, merely to gain a
little advantage in his Trade, I am sure will make no Conscience of cheating of
me; therefore shall never have any of my custom.

One other great mischief to young Tradesmen is, that they, being but
beginners, are forced to keep Shops, in order to gain a custom, and thereby are
constrained to pay great Rents and Taxes, which are very hard upon London,
treeble as much in proportion, as upon any one County of England, and paid by
these young men, whilst your cunning rich ancient Tradesmen, having a large
Acquaintance, great Stock, and a full Trade, give over their Shops, and take a
Country House, where they live for a small Rent, pay not the sixth part of
Taxes that are paid in London, and so carry on their Trade in London privately
in Warehouses. I could name several of the Chief Magistrates that do so, but
will not at present, though they deserve it. Have they, through Gods blessing,
arrived by their Trades in the City to great Estates, and to be the chief
Magistrates thereof, only to be covetous and sordid, seeking to save a little
money, when they have so much that they know not what to do with it, and
thereby put all the Charges upon those young Shopkeepers, through their
Avarice? And thus many of these young men fall to ruin, whilst the elder run
away with all the Trade, and Engross the same into their own hands. It is a
great shame this should be suffered, and such men ought not to have any manner
of Government or Power in or over the City, who make use of it only to enrich
themselves, by destroying those they govern.

Moreover, Handicraft Tradesmens high wages, which they exact for their work,
is greatly mischievous, not only to every man that has occasion to use them,
whose particular occasion cannot be served but at far greater rates than
formerly, which, if that were all, would be little, but it is destructive to
Trade, hinders the consumption of our Manufactures by Foreigners, and the
exportation of those vast quantities that used to be transported, when the
manufacturing of them was so cheap as formerly; for, now Wool and Leather being
cheaper manufactured beyond the Seas than here, we are undersold in Foreign
Markets, to our great prejudice; which if not prevented, in few years will tend
to the total ruin and destruction of our Woollen and Leather Manufacturies. I
can give no better account for this advancement of their wages, than our
English peoples foolishness, in encouraging Foreigners beyond their own
Neighbors, wearing their Manufacturies, and neglecting the use of our own; by
means whereof our Manufacturers work is carried away from them: so that whereas
they had six days work formerly, they have not above three now, and having the
same families, must either have double the wages they had when they had full
Employ (which enhaunceth the price of the Commodities) or let their families
want bread three days in the week.

So the Case thus stands in short: As for the loss of the Foreign Trade we had,
and the want of the consumption that used to be of our Manufacturies in Foreign
parts, no other reason can be given, but that Foreigners are able to make their
work cheaper than we do, and thereby are able to undersel us wherever we
come; and the reason of their working cheaper is, because they live not so
high, neither are their expenses in wages and working so great as ours. If they
were, how could Foreigners fetch our Wool and Leaher, pay Freight and Custom
outward, manufacture it abroad, and then Import it back again, paying a second
Custom, and yet sell it cheaper here than we do ours? If this be true, and
thereby the Foreign Consumption of our Manufacturies be lost, the more reason
there is then, in my poor judgment, to endeavor the reducing the wages of our
Manufacturers, and themselves to a more sober, and less expensive way of
living, that thereby, if possible, we may regain that Trade: Which if we do, we
shall soon set our people at work (who now want bread.) And nothing can be more
conducing to this end, than to enjoin all English men not to wear any thing but
what is of our own Growth and Manufacturies; which will increase a Consumption
at home, and set those at work who now live idle, and by giving them full work,
would bring down their wages: so that then we having our Wool and Leather
cheaper than Foreiguers have, and being able to manufacture them at as easy
rates as they do, it will then necessarily follow, that we may undersel them in
Foreign Markets; which if we can do, and will be honest, make good substantial
and true work, that will hold out its weight, and the full length and breadth
they formerly did, we may regain that Foreign Trade.

And the better to effect this, all Foreign Manufacturies (except of Linen,
which we cannot be without) ought to be prohibited, and the exposing them to
sale made Felony (so as the person selling be privy to their being such) except
what is manufactured in Ireland; which of necessity we must make our selves
Masters of, otherwise they having Wool, and Leather, and Workmen cheaper then
we can have, will by supplying Foreign Markets at Lower rates than we can sell
for, gain that Trade; and thereby destroy ours. But if these be imported into
England, and bought by us, though we buy them cheap, yet when we have them, we
may hold up and advance their price, so as to make them bear equal proportion
with what we can afford our own for; (which we may do also with their Cattle if
Imported again) and being Masters both of their and our own, enforce Foreigners
(especially if the Exportation of Wool and Leather be prevented) to be
beholding to us for what they want, and can no where else have; whereby Trade
will be increased, Consumption of the Products of our Lands promoted, and
thereby the price of them will be raised, and consequently Lands yield better
Rents: And by this increase of Trade, His Majesty's Revenue by a moderate
Computation, would be advanced above One hundred thousand pounds per annum;
which would be an additional help toward payment of the Public Debts, and no
prejudice, but a great advantage to his Majesty's Subjects.

XI.
THe Eleventh Proposal is, That it may be lawful for any man to assign Bills,
Bonds, or other Securities, to any person, or persons whatsoever; and that by
virtue of such Assignment, the Interest in the said Debt due upon such
Security, may immediately be vested in the Assignee. And to the end that the
frauds by false Entries in Shop-Books may be prevented. That it be made
unlawful for any person after three years to sue for a Book-Debt, and that the
great Deceits used by many persons, who break merely to deceive Creditors, may
(if possible) by some severe and strict Law be prevented: Than which,

First, There is hardly any thing can be of greater advantage to Trade.
Secondly, Of greater security to the Gentry; that they shall not for the future
be wronged. Thirdly, Of more advantage to the Nation in general.
For want of power to assign Securities, many Tradesmen and Gentlemen are every
year undone.

It is true, that men commonly make Letters of Attorney to their Creditors, to
enable them to put Bonds, Bills, or other Securities, into suit, that are made
to them; but those Letters of Attorney are revokeable; so that the men to whom
they are made, are not secure, that the person that makes them, shall not
afterward revoke the same, or discharge any Suit brought upon any such Bill,
Bond, or other Security, by virtue of such Letters of Attorney: and so no man
will accept of any Bond entered into to another man, and a Letter of Attorney
from the person to whom the same is entered into, as a Security for any debt due
to himself from the person to whom such Bond is given. Tradesmen live upon
Credit, buy much upon Trust, are obliged to pay on certain days; on which if
they fail, their Credit is lost; and as they buy upon Credit, so they must sell
upon Trust: And if the person trusted by them, pay not at the time limited, yet
are they that trust them obliged to observe punctually their days of payment,
because the Credit of those Merchants that trust them, depends thereupon.
Nevertheless, many Tradesmen, because they cannot get in what is owing to them,
are enforced to fail in point of their payments, which lessens their Credit,
begets Suits; and those Suits occasion the ruin of many Families, although the
persons sued have in other men's hands good Debts, which, when received, would
be sufficient to answer all their Creditors.

But if the Assignment of Debts due upon Bill, Bond, or other Securities, were,
by Act of Parliament, made lawful, and it were Enacted, that such Assignments
should be irrevocable; and that the Interest in the Debts due upon such
Security, should by virtue of such Assignments, be actually vested in the
Assignee, then if A. owed B. the Sum of 500 l. and B. owed C. 500 l. his time
of payment were come, and he had no Moneys to pay the same, the Assignment of
A. his Bond to C. would be accepted, if he were a person answerable, in
discharge of B. his Debt. And if he had occasion to pay Money, and had it not
by him, C. might presently assign the said A. his Bond to D, and D. to E, etc.
And this would make all Bills, Bonds, and other Securities as good as ready
Money; which will be of great use to the Subjects, and prevent the multiplicity
of Suits that now happen; and thereby the ruins of many Families.

2ly. It will be of great advantage and security to the Gentry; for, if their
Bills, Bonds, or other Securities, be assignable, persons to whom they enter
into such Securities, though they want Money, will not be hasty to put their
Securities in Suit, or compel them (as now they are forced to do) frequently to
shift and alter Securities; which is chargeable and difficult; because, then
Bonds will be in the nature of ready money, and in Trade be equally as good,
when Assignments shall be Enacted to be irrevocable; and that Suits brought
thereupon by the Assignees, in their own Names, and to their own Uses, shall
not be discharged, but by delivering up the Securities themselves, and that not
without the consent of the person to whom by Endorsement on the back of such
Securities, it shall appear to have been last assigned: And to Enact that no
person shall be Sued for a Book-Debt after three years, would be of excellent
use both to Buyer and Seller.

For, frequently it has happened, that Gentlemen who had taken up Goods upon
Trust, living remote in the Country, have afterward sent up Money, and paid
for the same, but not seen the Book crossed; whereupon, many years after the
Death of the Buyer and Seller, by the Executor of the Seller, the Buyer his
Executor has been Sued for the same, and the Plaintiff has recovered against
him, merely because such a Debt has been found standing in the Book, and the
delivering of the Goods proved; and so a Verdict has passed against the
Executor of the Debtor, because he has not been able to prove payment for the
same.

How many, by letting Debts stand long in Shopkeepers Books, have when they
came to account with them, found Entries made of Goods never bought by them, or
of greater quantities than they had of such Goods as they did buy.

But if no Book-Debt shall be sued for after three years standing, it will
oblige the Shopkeepers to come to account once in three years, and get Bill or
Bond for their Moneys whilst things are fresh in memory, or else to sue for the
same, when if any thing be found unjust in their Books, the Creditor will be
able, by his memory, to discover the same, and prevent payment thereof.

Besides, it will prevent Perjury and other foul practices.

3ly. This Act desired would be of great advantage to the Nation in general;
for when passed, all Bills, Bonds, and other good Securities will be
Tanta-mount to ready Money, so that there will be 20000 l. or as good as 20000
l. in England, instead of every 1000 l. that now is passing in Trade; which
must necessarily be a great advantage to the public.

This Course is practiced in other Foreign Parts, and found of as great
importance and benefit to Trade, as can be imagined.

And for preventing the Mischiefs arising to Traders by the Knaveries of
persons pretending to be Bankrupts, and who break with design only to defraud
their Creditors, some further and stricter Act must be made than hitherto there
has been; otherwise there will be no trusting any man, it being frequent for
men of wicked and cheating Principles, when they design to break, knowing
themselves to be persons not suspected to fail, but of a good Credit, to take
up great Parcels of Goods, or Sums of Money of several other Tradesmen; which
so soon as they get into their hands, they dispose unto Friends in trust for
them, and their Wives, and Children; which done, then they presently do some
Act whereby they become Bankrupts; as such are prosecuted, Commissions taken
out to declare them Bankrupts whereupon they withdraw and abscond themselves in
the Country, till they can get Releases from their Creditors, or compound for
some small matter, or otherwise they take the King's Bench, lie within the
Rules, and frequently go abroad; and all that time have the Money they break
for, going in Trade in other Names; and from such their Trustees, they receive
the benefit thereof; wherewith they live high, whilst their Creditors are
undone by them; and if they cannot bring their Creditors to Composition, they
will continue all their lifetime in the King's Bench, and the Creditors get
nothing; so that their Creditors are frequently brought to small Composition:
Which done, then these Bankrupts immediately appear in their Shops again richer
than ever they were when first set up; and this with other honest men's Stocks,
who with their Families are undone through the Losses sustained by those men's
knavish breaking. And this Trick some men have played several times over;
therefore it is fit for the future, if possible, to be prevented.

XII.
THe Twelfth Proposal is, that the Newcastle-Trade for Coals be managed by
Commissioners for the King, whereby the Subject may be supplied with Coals at
easy Rates, and not be exacted upon, as they now are; and about 200000 l. per
Annum be coming to the Crown; which would be a further help toward the payment
of the public Debts.

I need not declare how the Subjects are abused in the price of Coals.

How many poor have been starved for want of Fuel, by reason of the horrid
prices put upon them; especially in time of War, either by the Merchant, or the
Woodmonger, or between them both.

That which I shall propose is,

That the whole Trade be managed by Commissioners for the benefit of the
public.

That those Commissioners take care to supply all parts of His Majesty's
Dominions with Coals.

That Coals be sold all the year long at 22 s. per Chaldron; at which rate they
may very well be afforded:

For at Newcastle they buy them for about 7 s. per Chaldron. which rate they
may very well be afforded:

The Newcastle-Chaldron makes five London-Chaldrons.

The Freight of each Chaldron is not above 6 s.

The Duty to the City for each Chaldron is but 3 s.

Lighterage, Wharfage, and Cartage may cost per Chaldron 4 s.

I compute the highest Rates that can be imagined.

And at these Rates, each Newcastle-Chaldron will lie the Commissioners but in
20 s.

If then three Newcastle-Chaldron computed at 3 l. make five London-Chaldrons,
and they be sold for 5 l. 10 s. there is very nigh half in half gotten thereby:
Considering then, how many hundred thousand Chaldron of Coals are spent every
year, and by a moderate computation, it will appear that near 200000 l. per
Annum advantage may arise hereby to the Public, and the Subject also receive a
great benefit by the same.

XIII.
THe last Proposal is, That the Fishing-Trade may be set up and encouraged, all
poor people set at work to make Fishing-Tackle, and be paid out of the yearly
Rates laid upon the Subjects for maintaining of the poor.

This would be of vast advantage to the Public.

The Money yearly paid by the Subjects for the relief of the Poor, is nigh as
much as an Assessment of 70000 l. a Month to the King.

This is employed only to maintain idle Persons, does great hurt rather than
good, makes a world of poor more than otherwise there would be, prevents
Industry and Laboriousness, Men and Women growing so idle and Proud, that they
will not work, but lie upon the Parish wherein they dwell, for Maintenance,
applying themselves to nothing but Begging or Pilfering, and breeding up their
Children accordingly, never putting them upon any thing that may render them
useful in their Generations, or beneficial either to themselves, or the Kingdom.

But if instead of giving them Weekly Allowances for maintaining them in their
Idleness, the Money collected were employed to set all of them that are able,
at work to some kind of Employment or other, suitable to their Capacities, it
would be of infinite Use and Advantage to the Nation: There are none except
Bedridden or Blind, but some Work or other may be found, that they may be
capable of doing; which, if they would not set unto when appointed them, they
should have Correction, rather than any Encouragement, which now they have, by
allowing them Weekly Maintenance. And thus, not only Men and Women would become
useful and beneficial to the Kingdom, but their Children should all of them be
employed and set at work, to do something or other that may keep them from
Idleness; which becoming habitual to them in their youth, they are seldom broke
off whilst they live.

Industry and Labor ought to be countenanced and encouraged, and Magistrates
and Gentry would do well to give Examples thereof to those amongst whom they
live.

If all the Poor now maintained in their Idleness, were set at work, and paid
out of the Money raised as aforesaid, those that now have two Shillings, or
three Shillings a Week, might by their Work earn so much; or suppose they could
earn but one Shilling sixpence a week, and nevertheless receive three
Shillings, it is half in half saved; so that a Moiety of what now is collected
from the people, might be spared to them, and yet the Poor be as well, or
better maintained than now.

But if Men, Women, and Children were set at work, few Families that now
receive two or three Shillings a week, but in all probability, would and might
earn four or five Shill. a week, help to Manufacture the Staple-Commodities of
the Kingdom at cheap Rates, and thereby bring down the Wages of
Handicrafts-men, which now are grown so high, that we have lost the Trade of
Foreign Consumption, because abroad Wool and Leather, and the Manufactures
thereof, are sold at lower Rates than we can afford ours at. This Mischief of
high Wages to Handicrafts-men, is occasioned by reason of the Idleness of so
vast a number of people in England, as there are, so that those that are
Industrious, and will work, make men pay what they please for their Wages; but
set the Poor at Work, and then these men will be forced to lower their Rates,
whereby we shall quickly come to sell as cheap as Foreigners do, and
consequently engross the Trade to our selves.

There are many ways to set the Poor at work, both old and young.

Women and Children, by Spinning of Linen, Woollen, and Woolsted, Carding,
Combing, Knitting, Working Plain-Work, or Points, Making Bone-Lace, or Thred-or
Silk-Laces, Bread, and diverse other things.

The Linnen-Trade, if well regulated, would employ some hundred thousands of
People; and if brought to perfection, might save vast Sums of Money, within the
Kingdom, which now are sent out for the same.

The Woollen and Leathern-Manufactories would employ Multitudes of Men, and
young youths, and vast quantities of Wool might be manufactured and consumed
in England, more than now is, if all the Tapestry we now use, were made here,
which is now imported from beyond the Seas. Also, if the Act for Burying in
Flannel (as ridiculous as men make it) were put in Execution, seeing Flannel
would be as good for that use, as Linen, abundance of our Poor would be
employed in making these things. And the Money now paid for these Foreign
Manufactures, would be kept in England, and defray the Charge of the
Manufacturing of them at home.

It is not to be imagined how many thousands of Men, Women, and Children the
Fishing-Trade (which is that I principally aim at) would keep in employment.
The making of the Nets, Sayls, Cordage, and other Materials for that use, the
Building of Fishing-Vessels, and the Catching and Curing of the Fish, when
caught, would find work for above two hundred thousand People, and would
increase the number of Seamen, Ship-wrights, and many Handicrafts-men: A great
Revenue, if well managed, would thereby arise to the Public; and the Fish
taken would be as good to us, as so much Ready-Money; and be taken off beyond
Seas, in Exchange for such Goods as we necessarily want, and have from Foreign
Parts, and now pay Ready Money for.

To conclude, Were the things Proposed as aforesaid done, as desired, Trade
would be encouraged and increased, the Provisions and Manufactures of the
Kingdom be in far greater quantities consumed, both at home and abroad, the
Price of Lands would be raised, Tenants be enabled to pay their Rents, the
Kingdom would be greatly enriched, and in a few years the Public Debts of the
Kingdom might be discharged, without Imposing any considerable Tax upon the
People.

FINIS.

