THE TRUE IDEA OF Jansenisme, BOTH HISTORICK AND DOGMATICK.

By T. G.

LONDON, Printed, for E. Calvert, at the West End of St. Paul's, and G. Widows
at the Maidenhead in Aldersgate Street. 1669.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THERE is not any thing, which those of the Roman Church do more commonly and
constantly boast of, (as there are many things, which they boast of to little
purpose, and with less truth;) than the Unity and Agreement in Doctrines, which
they have among themselves; and the most superlatively excellent way, that they
enjoy, for the preservation and continuance thereof. This Story, wit^ a
tragical exaggeration of differences amongst Protestants, serves constantly to
fill up many Pages in their Writings: and is the principal subject of their
Popular Declamations, where they have opportunity to vent them. And they have
told this Tale so often, that many of them, especially those of the common
sort, seem to believe it. Verum ad Populum phaleras. Those who are wise amongst
them, cannot but know the vanity and falsehood of this pretense. It has been
already demonstrated, and may be again if need require, that there is not one
point in which they differ from Protestants, wherein they are agreed among
themselves. However it cannot be denied, but that they industriously improve
all imaginable artifices to conceal, at least to give a colorable pretense
unto their intestine wranglings and debates: being herein, as to their design,
wiser than the children of Light; though the means, whereby they pursue it, are
remote enough both from wisdom and honesty. Where different Opinions, and
contradictory Assertions have already been vented, and have firmed their
station in the Writings of the Doctors of their Church; (as multitudes have
done, and that in and about Articles of great importance;) they are ready with
their Plea, that these differences, as managed by their Catholic Masters, are
not of Faith, or do not impugn it, which way soever they are determined. As
though the Faith of their Church were comprehensive of gross contradictions, in
and about the principal Articles of Religion: and those, some of them, such, as
that for Opinions of less importance they are ready to brand others for
Heretics, and to endeavor their extirpation from the face of the earth. This
is the whole of what can be pretended for what is past; and therefore
remediless. How destitute of truth and modesty their plea herein is, has been
declared by many. If any single Person, or lesser number of Men among them,
begin at any time to apprehend and divulge sentiments different from what is
generally received, (unless it be to make some advance in the furtherance and
promotion of their own Secular Interest and advantages; as all the late
inventions and bold attempts of the Jesuits, both in their Mystical and Moral
Divinity, openly and plainly do;) they have ways in readiness to cast them and
their Opinions out of all notice and consideration; where they must lie until
the Earth give up its dead, and disclose the blood that is secretly poured into
its womb. They seem indeed, at present, signally resolved to obviate all
progression in Opinions, true or false, unless they have a direct tendency to
the establishment, or adoreing of their Papal Omnipotency, and the increase of
their own Interest in the Consciences, and over the outward concerns of men.
And herein are they so blindly zealous, as to endeavor, at this day, to fix
and gild the Weathercock of Papal Personal Infallibility, yea, in matters of
Fact, on the top of that Tower, the visible rottenness of whose Foundations
threatens them with a downfall every moment. Some of their present differences,
as was observed, they know, are fixed beyond all possibility of reconciliation,
or hopes of removal. Such are those contradictory Opinions, which are the
inseparable adjuncts of some of their Religious Orders: which as they more and
more discover themselves to be irreconcilable, so the relinquishment of any of
them by their respective Assertors, is so remote from all expectation, that an
Age scarce produces an Instance of any one individual Person, renouncing the
Opinions of his own, and entertaining those of another Order; and if any such
should be found, he would be looked upon as a Fugitive, if not an Apostate. The
sense, I confess, of these differences seems to be taken from them by their
commonness and certainty. It passes for granted amongst them, that in some
things, wherein both sides esteem Religion deeply concerned, the Jesuits must
be of one Opinion, and the Dominicans must be of another: so must it be, in
other matters, between the Dominicans and Franciscans; the Hildebrandine
Jesuits and the Sorbonists also. They must believe contradictory assertions and
propositions in Religion; and write and preach contradictions, and confute the
Opinions of one another: and on that account endlesly pursue mutual feuds and
quarrels among themselves; and yet they are all at perfect agreement. But the
relief herein is, that these Orders being confirmed and established, all of
them, by the Pope, let them differ and contend whilst they please, so they fall
not into excesses evidently beyond the tedder of former strifes, their
contentions are to pass for agreements, and a part of that unity of Faith,
which they boast in. But yet notwithstanding all palliating pretenses, and the
use of their utmost diligence, their differences sometimes arise to such an
height, being animated with strong and vigorous spirits; as, if forcibly shut
up too long, may threaten their whole Church State with an Earthquake; that
they are necessitated t^ forego their ordinary Artifices an^ Excuses, and to
bring their batta^ ad Triarios, by venturing to seek for relief from the Papal
See. This usually is done by one of the Parties litigant; yet not until they
find, o^ the one hand, their own weakness^ or that of their cause, not to b^
maintained against the impression^ of their Adversaries: and, on the other, are
sufficiently prepared to manifest, that upon the consideration of the Persons
engaged; of the state of all things in the places where the Controversies are
agitated; and the Opinions themselves, whose confirmation they endeavor; that
the determination of the points in difference, according to their desire, is
not only suitable unto, and compliant with the present Interest of the Sea and
Court of Rome; but lies also in a handsome tendency to the enlargement of its
Authority and Reputation; little or no danger being to be feared from the
dis-satisfactions of the Adverse Party. These are the things, which, upon any
such address, the Court of Rome does heedfully and scrupulously enquire into.
Nor will it engage toward a decision of any controverted points, until it
has received full and ample satisfaction, that the determination of them has
an evident consistency with its honor, interest and advantage. Until it can
come to a Resolution herein, a thousand tergiversations, delays, pretenses of
avocation, and diversions by more important occasions, difficulties about the
things themselves, shall be pretended and pleaded. In the mean time, by their
Agents, Nuncioes, Emissaries and Confidents of all sorts abroad, they of the
Court endeavor to sound the minds of the great and the many, where the
Controversies are managed; and to take a just measure of the Interests of the
several Parties, engaged in the contest depending before his Holiness. If upon
search, inquiry and mature deliberation, it appears, that there is any thing
looking toward a balance between the Parties litigant; the managers of the
Politics of the Roman See proceed as warily, as if they feared a Scorpion
under every stone in their way; or should tread on deceitful ashes, that might
burn, if not consume them. For the most part, in such cases, his Holiness would
be glad, on any terms, to be freed from making a decision: and is oftentimes
more than half angry with those, whom he most favors, that they should bring
him into any straits, by their importunity to have an interposition of his
Authority on their behalf. But yet it may be things come at last to that pass,
that a continued suspense, or absolute refusal to determine any thing, is
judged to be more noxious and dangerous; than a determination against the
Interest of that Party, which the Court is fully satisfied to be ruinable,
though at present some way considerable. In this case a decision shall be made;
not direct, express or absolute, in terms and propositions affirming or
denying, with respect unto the controverted Opinions: but in words and terms
loose, ambiguous and general; only with a favorable aspect toward them of
that Party, to whom the Golden Ball of Conquest is finally intended. The use of
this forlorn is only to attempt the waters o^ strife, and to try whether they
ar^ fordable or no. If the Party supposed the most numerous, and of the most
prevailing Secular Interest be^fore, being now reinforced and en^couraged by
the noise of the Bull^ which they bring home in triumph^ can drive their
Adversaries from any of their former Posts, and ge^ ground against them: that
ground shall be firmed to them speedily by new Briefs, Orders or Decrees from
the Court; and so accordingly their whole progress shall be established, until
they arrive at a complete Conquest and Victory. But if, beyond expectation, the
adverse party do make a stand; and either by their number, ability, reputation,
popular favor, or Sovereign influence, seem probable to keep their ground: the
Court will not in haste engage into any further process; but rather ^eave the
first Bull to be reverently ^talled for a further occasion. In the mean time it
is not imaginable, with what crafts, subtilties, artifices, false promises, and
pretenses; by what endless Legal intricacies, Forms, Processes, Orders,
Rescripts, those, who have conduct of the Roman Court, do manage themselves,
and those, with whom they have to do on such occasions: all which are laid
open, and discovered unto the world, by men of their own Party and Profession.
And unto such a full evidence and manifestation are these things arrived, that
I much question, whether any man, of tolerable Learning and observation amongst
them, can be so unhappily and prodigiously stupid, as to look upon the Papal
determination of Controversies in Religion, any otherwise, than as a thing
utterly foreign to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; or a mere P^^litical Engine,
introduced by in (...) rest, managed by fraud, for the pr^^servation of such an
agreeme^^ amongst them, as may serve the a^^vantage of those that are entrust^^
with it. Were it not, but that (...) power and efficacy of prejudice, (...)
love of this present world, wi^^ other corrupt lusts and affection^^ do
continually manifest themselves in the ways of the Children of men (...) a man
could not but be astonished, tha^ all rational men should not nause^^ ate this
abominable Pageantry (...) deciding Controversies in Religion by the Roman
Tripos. An addre^^ made by crafty interested men, arm^ed with Commendatory
Letters from great Men and Princes, provided with money to gratify or bribe
Officers of all sorts; unto an Old Pope, who sometimes is so ingenious as^ to
confess, that he understands little in Divinity, and knows nothing of the
matter proposed to his decision: He, to take care of the interests of the Holy
See, which comprehends whatever is desirable to the carnal minds of men, in
power, wealth and pleasure, commends the matter to the craftiest of his
Cardinals and his Courtiers, so to manage it, as no detriment may arise
thereunto: Whatever the experience of Rule, Diligence, Dissimulation, false
Promises, spirited by distance and veneration of greatness, pomp and power, can
enable them to compass, these men will not fail to effect, so as to secure the
concerns of the Court. When this is done, and it appears upon advice, which way
they may steer safely and advantagiously for themselves, as to the various
Interests of the persons litigant; they advise the Pope what he is to determine
in a matter, that neither he, nor they have any tolerable understanding in, or
comprehension of. It may be, for the farther solemnity of the business, thre^
or four Friars of a side shall be admitted to dispute the matter in
con^troversie, before, the Pope himself or some of the Cardinals: wherei^ yet
it shall be so provided, th^^ those, on whose side the Conclav^ is resolved to
determine, shall have one way or other, advantage enough to give countenance to
the senten^^ before fixed on. When all is concluded and ready, a devout Bull
(...) drawn up in a due form of La^ wherein all these preceding jugling^ and
deceits, with others innume^rable, are Fathered upon the Inspi^ration and
assistance of the Hol^ Ghost, given unto the Pope, who ha^ the least hand, it
may be, in the matter. I dare not, I will not sa^ with that Papal Legate,
Quonia^ Populus vult decipi, decipiatur. But this I am apt to think; that
strong delusion does assuredly possess the minds of those, who can believe,
that such lies have any footstep or foundation in the Religion of Jesus Christ.
And herein consists that great means of agreement amongst themselves, whereof
they boast: which how long it will yield them relief in that kind, God only
knows: its foundation being in the sin and blindness of the world, its
continuance may be long, for ought I know. Now, Reader, that thou may not
suspect thy self imposed on, or any thing in the preceding Discourse to be
asserted either partially, or without due evidence of Truth: behold here an
Instance in the ensuing Treatise, wherein not only everything, that I have
declared, is exemplified to the full; but also sundry other ffects of the old
mysterious Iniquity the Roman See are plainly discovered. This is the Instance
of Jansenisme; the Rice, Progress, State and condition whereof the ensuing
Treatise gives an Historical account. There are very few, I suppose, amongst
us, who so little concern themselves in Religion, especially when it once comes
to bear a share in the public and political transactions of the Nations of the
world, who have not taken notice of the discourses and reports concerning
Jansenisme from the Neighbor Kingdom of France. To some, it may be, it is a
murmur, which they know not well what to make of, nor what is intended by it.
Others, in general, conceive it to be an expression of some differences in
Religion: but of what nature, importance or tendency; how or by whom agitated
or maintained, they know not. But whereas it comes under a double
consideration, there are two sorts of Persons, who judge themselves concerned
to obtain an acquaintance with it. For it is not only considerable as a
Controversy in Religion; on which account contemplative persons, or men of
Learning, professing the Truth of the Gospel, esteem themselves obliged to
inquire into it to the utmost: but also as it has an influence into the Civil
affairs of that Kingdom, and may have so into those of the whole Papal World;
in which respect men that are, or should be Politically wise and Counselors do
suppose, that the knowledge of the true state of it is not to be neglected by
them. But certain it is, that hitherto neither of these sorts could, in any
competent measure, attain their ends, without such an expense of time, pains
and diligence, as very few have either will, leisure or ability to be at. For
as the Theological part of this Controversy is, by the industry of engaged
persons, diffuse^ through Writings and Books (man of them bulkie and voluminous
almost innumerable; the greate^ number of them written in the Frenc^ Tongue,
whereunto the generality (...) Scholars amongst us are strangers^ that very few
have been able (...) make that accurate enquiry in^^ them, as is necessary to
give a ju^ comprehension of the whole matte^ under debate: so the Political
trans^actions, wherein it has been con^cerned, having been in the Court of
Princes foreign and remote from us, in Assemblies of Prelates, in A^cademical
Disputations and Processes it is no common or ordinary wor^ for any to obtain
an acquaintanc^ with them. Now I am greatly mi^staken, if both Divines and
Politicians will not find themselves much relieved, assisted and directed i^
their inquest, by the ensuing Historical narration; as well as others, who had
hitherto but a slender and uncertain report of this matter, will find
themselves brought out into the clear light of such an apprehension of it, as
to have in readiness a just measure of those future reports or Discourses
concerning it, that they may meet withal. Now whereas any long account of the
matter, treated of in this place, would but prevent the Reader in what he will
meet withal in the Discourse it self; I shall only add some such remarks upon
the whole, as may manifest, what has been before discoursed concerning the
unity of Doctrine in the Papal Church, and their Artifices to preserve a
pretense thereof, to be exactly exemplified in this one Instance of Jansenisme.
The System of Doctrines concerning the Grace of God, and the wills of men,
which now goes under the name of Jansenisme, as it is in general agreeabl^ unto
the Scripture; so it had firmed it self in the common profession o^ Christians,
by the Writings of some excellent persons, especially Augustine, and those who
followed him, unto such a general acceptance* as that the belief and
profession of it could never be utterly rooted out from the minds of men in the
Roman Church it self. For although it was variously depraved, vitiated,
obscured and opposed in and by the Writings of many of the Schoolmen; yet
always, in every Age, some or other Persons of signal Learning and ability
stood up, and pleaded for its vindication and confirmation, as to the substance
of it. Amongst whom our Renowned Bradwardine, who with singular diligence and
scholastic ability opposed the spreading of Pelagianisme in and over the Roman
Church, (which by various degrees had been, for a long season, insinuating it
self thereinto, and insensibly invading the remaining vitals of its Doctrine;)
deserves on all occasions a peculiar mention. Moreover, one whole Order of
their Friars, out of zeal for the Doctrine of Thomas, (who was less averse from
the Sentiments of the Ancients in this matter, than the most of that litigious
crew of Disputers, whom they call Schoolmen;) did retain some of the most
material Principles of this Doctrine, however not a little vitiated with
various intermixtures of their own. Not a full Age since, as will appear in the
ensuing account, after the lesser attempts of some more private persons,
Jansenius, a Bishop in Flanders, undertakes the explication and the vindication
of the whole Doctrine of the Effectual Grace of God, with the annexed Article^
principally out of the works of A^^stin. This honest endeavor of h^ being well
resented, accepted an^ approved by very many Learn^ Persons in Flanders, and
Fran^ especially; and looked on by other^ as an inroad made into the Kingdom of
Darkness and Error, which mig^ open a way to further light an knowledge among
the Papists them^selves; was immediately violent^ and virulently impugned by
the Jesuits, and those of their Party an^ Faction. But whereas, in their wonted
manner, they contented n^ themselves to oppose the Opinions (...) Jansenius and
his Followers, (wh^ knowing the small Reputation (...) Truth and the Scripture
now in (...) Papacy, durst not so much as avo^ them; but chose to shelter
themselves under the name of Augustine, and (...) call themselves his
Disciples;) in^ Theological or Scholastical way; but endeavored by artifices
to reproach their persons, and to render them odious, and greatly to be
suspected by the Church and State: they, on the other side, were necessitated,
in their own defense, to make a discovery of the Arts, Treacheries,
immoralities, Errors, Frauds, Lying, Calumniations, practiced and defended by
the Fathers of that Society, to the great satisfaction, and indeed benefit of
the Christian World. The Jesuits hereby enraged, endeavor yet farther by false
insinuations, complaints, Libels and suspicious Tales, managed principally by
the Confessors of Kings, Queens, and great Princes, most of their Society, in a
manner all of their Party and Faction, to oppress their Adversaries, and to
enrage the Powers of the Kingdom against them. This work going slowly on, as
being obstructed by some disputations with Conferenc^ in and among Assemblies
of the Clergy, the matter was devolved (...) the Court of Rome. How the who^
cause was there transacted, how de^termined, on what motives, grounds^ Reasons
and considerations the Pop^ and Conclave proceeded, with wha^ cunning and
caution as to the se^curing of their own secular inte^ rest, are exactly
reported and pub^lished by Monsieur St. Amor the Jansenist, in the Journal he
hat^ written of his own and their proceedings in that cause. How the Jesuits
have since pursued their success, by what ways and stratagem^ they have
managed their tottering cause and Interest; as also of other things before
mentioned, the Reader will have a faithful account in the following Narration,
composed by the Judicious Author, (enabled thereunto by all sorts of
Advan^^ges) and written for his benefit. ^his I was desired, and this I thought
^eet to acquaint thee withal: be^^g one, who in all things desires (...)
direction unto and establishment (...) that Truth, which is according un^^
Godliness.

John Owen.

A Premonition.
THis little Treatise owes (...) Production to a sober ^^riosity the Author
had, to satis^ himself and some inquisiti^ friends, touching the ^rue Id^ Rise,
and Progress of Jansenism (...) which has, for well nigh the^^ thirty years,
made so great noise in Europe; and in all like^ hood, will yet prove more
dif^^sive. And that which more ef^^ctually engaged the Author in (...)
Inquisition, was some advanta^^ he had to inform himself the^ in, from his
personal Conversat^ among the different Parties, co^^cerned in this
Controversy.

The Author himself being a person disinteressed, he conceives he may, with a
greater liberty, and exactitude of Spirit, make some Reflections on, and
Relation of this Affair. Neither does he act the part of a Disputant, but
Historian; with endeavors nakedly and faithfully to relate matters of fact,
and Doctrine, according to the best Memoires he could procure, both from one
and the other Party: wherein if he has failed of his design, it must be imputed
to the defects of his Intelligence, and not to any voluntary injustice of
Spirit.

Such was the Original of this little Piece; which was, in its first lines,
formed into a Letter, not exceeding the bounds of one Sheet, for the private
satisfaction, or rather divertisement, of some friends; but since enlarged upon
the persuasion of intelligent persons, that the subject may be o^ use, to
awaken men's expectations, etc. The Author has con^sidered, that this small
tract i^ like to meet with as many Judges as Readers; neither is he ignorant
what an hazard he runs, by committing it to public view ^ but that, which he
mostly affects* is such an exact and just Temperament of spirit, as not to be
moved or influenced by the various Judgments, much less humors of men, farther
than they tend to correct what is defectuous, and render him more serviceable
to the Public: and so far he hopes, that the most severe Censures will not be
less welcome, than advantageous.

The true Idea of Jansenisme, both Historick and Dogmatick.
PART I.
The Historick Idea of Jansenisme.
The Original of Jansenisme amongst the Ancients. 2. Baius the first Founder of
Jansenisme. 3. C. Jansenius's character, and formation of Jansenisme. 4. San
Cyran's assisting Jansenius, etc. 5. Jansenius's proper sentiments. 6. His
condemnation. 7. The more full relation thereof, etc. 8. That which made
Jansenius odious to the Romans, was his opposing Austin to the Popes Bull. 9.
The Jansenists Deputies at Rome, and their Agitations an. 1652. 10. Other
Memorials presented, by the Agents of the Jansenists to the Pope. 11. The Popes
Confession in behalf of the Jansenists. A Letter from a Doctor of the Sorbon,
prognosticating the little good succes which the Jansenists might expect from
Rome. Two Conferences at Paris in the behalf of the Jansenists. 12. The
Jansenists two first Papers prepared for the Congregation at Rome. 13. The
Dominicans interpose for the Jansenists, and accord with them. 14. The
Jansenists Agents, their Audience and Apologies to the Pope. 15. The
condemnation of the Jansenists an. 1653. The French Formularie ensuing upon the
condemnation of the Jansenists; and their arguments against the Imposition
there of. The Provincial Letters. The Jansenists Apologies against the
Imputation of Schism and Heresy. 16. An. 1662 Endeavors for Accommodement
betwixt the Jansenists and Molinists. The Jansenists caution against Signature
an^ Formularie. 17. The main Article, that the Jansenists conform to the
Thomists 18. How far the Jansenists yield herein 19. The breaking off the
Treaty. 20. The Jansenists Vindication by the Bishop of Comenge; his Letter to
the King. 21. The Molinists persecution of the Jansenists. 22. The Jansenists
multiplication and acceptance with Papists and Protestants. 23. Their Affairs*
an. 1668, 1669.

THE design of this Discourse being to give an Idea of Jansenisme,. 1. The
original of Jansenisme.
it will be necessary to take a concise view of its original; which sprang out
of the ashes of that old Controversy, 'twixt the Assertors of Free Grace, and
those who asserted Free Will. For Pelagius and his Adherents having made it
their business to advance corrupt Nature, and place it on the Royal Throne of
Sovereign Grace, the Lord raised up Austin and other Worthy Instruments to give
check to these Antichristian Infusions* whose Endeavors did, for some Ages, set
bounds to this flood of Pelagianisme. But when Antichrist arrived to his (...)
or perfect stature of a Man of Sin, this Pelagian torrent grew so violent: as
that it diffused its Malignant influences, throughout all the European Churches.

Yet were there not wanting some Gallant and brave Spirits, who opposed
themselves to these Pelagian Infusions. Amongst these we may reckon
Godescalcus, Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, Joh. Bacon, alias Baconthorpe, Tho.
Bradwardine, John Wicliff, Gregorius Ariminensis, and generally all such as
follow the Determinations of Tho. Aquinas, commonly called Thomists and
Dominicans; who, though in other points they have sufficiently approved
themselves Devoti of Antichrist, yet in these Articles relating to Free Grace,
they do generally adhere to Austin, and Thomas their Master. These Dominicans
or Thomists (who have bestowed good endeavors, and that succesfully, for the
suppressing of the Pelagian Dogmes) have been herein greatly opposed by the
Jesuits; a generation of men, who started up about the year 1540. and have ever
since made it a great part of their work, to defend, though covertly, the
Pelagian Principles, as that which they conceive would prove the most effectual
instrument to support the declining interest and Supremacy of the Roman Church.

The Head of this Jesuitick Faction was Molina, S. Amor Journal fol. 223.
who is said (by the Jansenists) to have outgone the Semipelagians, in that
these held, that only the beginnings of the first disposition to Grace proceed
from the power of man; but as for the rest they assented readily, that man is
governed by the motion and power of efficacious Grace; but Molina holds, that
man is the primum mobile, and chief Master of his own salvation, from the
beginning to the end: hence it was that he was condemned both in Spain, and at
Rome: only the execution of the Popes Bull was, upon the importuni^le of the
Jesuits, suspended as hereafter,. 9. This Jesuitick design, for the reviving of
Pelagianisme, being discovered by some sober Reforming Papists, they put forth
their most vigorous endeavors, for the timely preventing thereof, and
confirming the Doctrine of Free Grace, asserted by Austin, etc.

The first who engaged in this nobl^ design,. 2. M. Baius the first ^ounder of
Jansenisme.
for the vindication of Efficacio^^ Grace, was Michael Baius Doctor, and
Professor of Theology at Louvain; who, i^ his Lectures and Writings, stoutly
de^ended the corruption of Human Nature* the Sovereintie and Efficacy of
Divine Grace, with other Articles appenden^ thereto. In so much that at last
the^ were 78. Propositions collected out of (...) works, which, tending to the
Advanc^ of Free Grace, and Degrading of Fr^ Will, were condemned by a Bull
(...) Pius 5th, an. 1570. and afterward by a^nother Bull of Gregory 13th, an.
157^ And moreover Francis Tolet, the Jesuit^ was sent, by the said Pope, to
Louvain, (...) settle the University: by whose endea^vors, Michael Baius was
induced to r^^tract, and that by a solemn recantatio^ the said condemned
Propositions; yet so as that he still continued his privat^ persuasions
touching the same; which he ceased not to infuse into the Spirit of his
Disciples, etc. Cornelius Janseni^ as it is said, received the first impression
of his Doctrine touching ^fficaciou^ Grace from Jac. Jansonius an Adherent of
this Baius, who is thence made to be the first Founder of Jansenisme.
Concerning Baius's 78. Propositions, for the Vindication of Efficacious Grace,
and the corruption of Human Nature, and their symbolization with Jansenius his
Doctrine, See Lud. Bail Articul. de Great. Part. 1 Art. 1. etc.

The immediate Parent of Jansenisme was Cornelius Jansenius (Bishop of Ipre in
the Low Countries) borne at Leerdam,. 3. Cornelius Jansenius, his Original, and
formation of Jansenisme.
an obscure Town amongst the Dutch: who having spent his first studies in
Humanity at Vtrecht, acquired his Philosophy and Theology at Louvain from
Jacobus Jansonius, a stiff defender of Baius's opinions. Cornelius Jansenius
having been thoroughly principled with Baius's Principles at Louvain, he was
made Moderator of the College of Baion; where having contracted a friendship
with John Vergerius, then Canon of Baion, and afterward Abbot of San Cyran,
they enter into a strict Confederation, for the confirming and propagating the
revived Doctrine of Efficacious Grace, now called Jansenisme.

Jansenius returning again to Louvain, was made Prefect of S. Pulchers College*
and soon after, Professor for the explication of the Sacred Scriptures. About
which time also he writ a Book* styled Mars Gallicus, in favor of the Spanish
Interest; which, they say, was the ground of his being preferred to the
Bishopric of Ipre. He writ also three Books containing the body of
Jansenisme, collected out of Austins works, wherein he was incomparably verst:
For, as it is said, he read over the whole of Austin ten times, and his Books of
Grace thirty times. And indeed his design seems to be no other than that of
Austin, for the depressing of Corrupt Nature, and advancing of efficacious
Grace: whence he styles his Book Augustinus; which he thought not meet to
publish in his life time, but left it to his followers, dying, as his
adversaries avouch, of the Plague in the fifty eighth year of his Age, greatly
esteemed and beloved by the more serious Papists.

The great imputation the Jesuits cast upon Jansenius is his symbolizing with
Calvin, wherefore to purge himself, he writ, with some sharpnes, against the
Presbyterian Discipline; which Voctius has answered in his Desperata Causa
Papatus. His adversaries say, Les Provinciales lettres, let. 16. page 32. Edit.
Colo^ 1657.
it is a most certain truth, that for the hatching of Jansenisme the Port Royal
(a Covent in Paris) formed a Cabal in private for thirty years space; whereof
John Vergerius Abbot of San Cyran, and Corn. Jansenius Bishop of Ipre, were the
Heads. And it is apparent that Jansenius had a very great ass^stance, for the
forming and perfecting of his Augustine persuasions, from San Cyran. These
having brought their design to some ripenes, began to publish their opinions,
first at Paris, about 1637. both in Latin and French, thereby to awaken and
in^orme, not only the learned, but also Vulgar Capacities: wherein they proved
very successful; for in some few years a great part of France, as well
Ecclesiastics as others, was levened with Jansenisme.

In the Preface to Jansenius's works, we find this account of him. Cornelius
Jansenius was borne an. 1585. at Leerdam, a small Town of the Netherlands. --
When he entered on the Study of Theology, he was brought into the C^^lege of
Adrian 6. at Louvain, by Ja^ Jansonius the Moderator. After sharp a^ assiduous
studies, for some years, he (...) into a consumtion, and danger of his lif^
whence, by the advice of Physicians, (...) purposed, for change of Air, to go
in^^ France. He first went to Paris, when he instructed some youth. He then^
went into Cantabria, now called Bisca^ in Spain; where, by conversation wi^
learned men, and familiar communic^^tion of Studies, he made great Progr^ in
the understanding of the Father^ especially of St. Austin.

Being afterward recalled to Louvai^ he was made Prefect of S. Pulchers
Co^^lege; which he greatly adorned and a^^vanced. Afterward finding the care
(...) youth to hinder his studies, he retired (...) a private life, admitting
only the societ^ of a familiar Doctor. He thence was cal^led to be Regius
Professor, of the Sacre^ Scriptures: which he performed wit^ great learning and
profit, as it appea^ by his Commentaries. But his Magnanimity appeared most
after his being made Bishop of Ipre, in his Meditation and attemts to Reform
the Bishopric: which undoubtedly he had perfected, had not he been taken away
by a contagious death (with in one years space after his being Bishop) an. 1638.

He was of a most sharp, acute ingenie; a most profound judgment, and
capacious memory. He had somewhat of a subtle Choler; which he was wont
pleasantly to compare to corns of Gunpowder; which in one and the same moment,
are inflamed and expired. To these endowments of Nature, he added an immense
desire of Truth, and Indefatigable Study. Being asked by a companion, what
Attribute of God he most adored? he answered, his Truth. In the beginning of
his Theologick Studies, he mixed with the Scholemen, the Lecture of the
Fathers, especially of S. Austin; whence he learnt, how much the Scholemen
erred from Austin, in the head points of Grace and Free Will. He told his
familiars, he had read Austin's Works diligently, ten times over: and has Books
against the Pelagians thirty times. He said, that next to God and the
Scriptures, A^stin was to him instar omnium.

He strugled, for many years, with (...) old opinions, before he could reach
the intimate sense of S. Austin. He said (...) depended upon that one first
principl^^ ^ouching Grace. And he added, ther^ could be no truly spiritual life
formed^ but according to this Doctrine of Grace taught by Austin: and that
Christian hu^^militie was in a more particular regar^ founded hereon. -- Whence
he often consulted souls spiritual and truly humble, touching their sentiments of
Divine Adjutorie, the infirmity of Free Will, and the necessity of Divine
assistance to every good Act. He affirmed, that no one could be truly humble,
without the like Opinions of Divine Grace. He ended the last period of his Book
with his life, as though he had been borne for that design. He was not
superstitious, or scrupulous, but burned with masculine piety, and fervent
charity toward God and men. He prepared himself in the morning by Meditation,
and the whole day was but a continued Meditation of God, etc.

As for John du Verger, Abbot of S. Cy^an,. 4. San Cyran his assisting
Jansenius; as also his character.
I find him to have gained a great ^putation amongst the more serious
^atholicks. They say, that through the ^bundance of Grace, which possessed his
^eart, he extinguished, even from his ^ore tender years, all Ambition, all love
(...) riches, with all desire of human fa^r, and Ecclesiastic Dignity; and
having ^onsecrated the whole of his Spirit, la^ors, and life, for the defense
of truth, ^e lived in great solitude, even in Pari^ (...) self, for more than
twenty years; af^ecting to have his Spirit free from all ^rouble, inquietude,
vanity, and complea^ance; thereby to obtain the more leisure for the Study of
Wisdom. Thus did his Sanctity darken the luster of his Science; and his
Humility draw a veil upon all his Intellectual and Moral accomplishments; and,
as it is said, he labored as much not to seem eminent, as to be so in truth.
Which affected retirement and concelement of his excellent qualities, made him
to be esteemed by some, as Melancholic and Morose: but this imputation was
sufficiently removed by his Imprisonment; which rendered him mo^ famous and
serviceable, in that all so^ of persons had recourse to him for a^^vice. He had
indeed, as they say, a ma^^vellous fecunditie of Spirit, joined with natural
eloquence, and noblenes of speec^ which rendered him very useful; he b^^ing
capable, without long meditation to expres the highest Truths, and re^^der them
familiar and easy. He was v^^ry skilful in comforting, and establishin^
troubled Consciences; directing them (...) the blood of Christ, and his Grace
which Jansenius also was wont to do.

S. Cyran usually founded his advice o^ the Scriptures, which he ever commend^
as the best Rule and Guide for Christian^ He would often, in his life time,
discour^ of the Grandeurs of God; of the N^^thingnesses of the world, and of
the d^^ties of Christianity. His sage instruct^^ons were generally reputed by
the Devo^ Catholics, as Evangelick and Apostoli^ Counsels. Neither did he
propose a Ple^^tonick Idea of Soverein perfection, which might be better
admired than imitated^ but he gave counsels, general and particu^lar, most
easy and familiar for execut^^on, by the Grace of God; of which he was a great
Admirer; acknowledging still, that without Efficacious and Soverein Grace, we
could do nothing.

He prescribed the most excellent method for bearing afflictions, not with a
Philosophic Generositie, but with a Christian Constance, which he himself also
practiced, in an eminent degree, for the space of five years, whilst he was in
Prison, au Bois de Vincennes, near Paris; whence most of his Letters extant
were written, which seem very warm, and sparkling with that Divine fire which
burned in his heart. In these his Letters he gives us many sublime and choice
instructions; yet such as are most familiar and practicable. He exhorts much to
self emptines, spiritual poverty, humility, faith in Christ, and more
especially to love God more than our selves, and our neighbors as much as our
selves; which, according to his Master Austin, conteins the Morals, Logic,
Physics, and Politics of true Christian Wisdom. He is very much in showing
the usefulnes of afflictions; asserting, that it is the greatest temtation to
have no temtations. He also acquaints us with the Art and Skil^ of bearing
Christ's Cross, wherein h^ himself seems to have been familiarly and feelingly
versed, especially for the time of his Imprisonment, which wa^ very severe and
strict; besides many and very great infirmities of body, under which he
labored; yet with a very great vigor and vivacitie of Spirit; which his
Discourses, Letters and Actions sufficiently testified. During this time of his
imprisonment, notwithstanding the strictnes of his Guard, he was possessed with
a great calmnes and tranquillity of Spirit, without fear or trouble.

Touching the proper sentiments of Jansenius,. 5. Jansenius's proper sentiments.
and S. Cyran, and their mutual combination; we have a pretty true, though
invective, account given us by the Jesuit Gautriche, Histoire Saint (page 325.
edit. 1661.) In our Age, (says he) which is the seventeenth, Jansenius Bishop
of Ipres, incited by Du Verger Abbot of S. Cyran, as the Letters which they
have reciprocally written testify, has brought to light the errors of
Godescalcus, founded upon some passages of S. Austin, taken in the sense, and
after the fashion of Calvin. For after having supposed a terrible sort of
Predestination in God, by the which he chooses some of those whom he sees
envelopped in Original Sin, to save them; entirely abandonning the others unto
eternal damnation, he teaches consequently that Jesus Christ has not died for
these latter, nor merited any Grace sufficient for to save them; and that
therefore it is impossible, in this case, for them to observe the Christian
Law, to the observance whereof they are notwithstanding obliged: and farther,
that they cannot, says he, resist the movements of concupiscence; which
hurries them into sin; and that they sin necessarily; nevertheles he teaches,
against all sort of common sense, and against the holy Scripture, that they
cease not herein to have the Liberty required to merit or demerit; and that
the Predestined cease not to be likewise free in the actions of Grace, albeit
they cannot resist, when they are prevented therein, etc. Thus Gautruche.
Wherein we have much truth, thoug^ mixed with much sinister interpretati^on. We
have the whole of Jansenius^ Doctrine, for which he was condemned^ reduced by
his Adversaries to these fiv^ Propositions, composed by M. Corne^ as Denis
Raimond affirms.

1. Some Precepts of God are impossib^^ for persons just, willing, and
endeavoring according to the present strength they have to perform; and there
is wanting to the^ Grace, by which they may be made possible.

2. Interior Grace in the state of lapse^ nature is never resisted.

3. To merit and demerit, in the state (...) lapsed Nature, there is not
required in man a Liberty from Necessity; but a liberti^ from coaction
suffices.

4. The Semipelagians admitted a necessity of preventing, interior Grace to
all acts, even to the beginning of faith; but in this they were heretical, that
they made this Grace such, as that the human will might resist or obey it.

5. It is Semipelagian to affirm, that Christ died, and poured out his blood
universally for all men.

These Jansenian Propositions were sent,. 6. The condemnation of Jansenius.
by the Jesuits, together with an Epistle to the Pope, with desires, that the
whole might be determined by his Apostolic Authority. The Heads of the
Jansenists had recourse also to Rome, and after long contests, the Jesuits
obtained, May 31. 1653. a Bull from the Pope, whereby these five Propositions,
containing as they pretend, the substance of Jansenius's Errors, were
condemned, as rash, impious, and blasphemous. This Decree was received by the
Prelates of France, with the Kings approbation, July 15th of the same year. The
Jansenists finding themselves oppressed by calumnies and ^inister dealings,
durst not openly oppose the Popes Bull, only they contend that the five
Propositions were not condemned in that sense in which Jansenius asserted them.
Whereupon their Adversaries the Molinists (so styled from Molina their Head)
procured a Declaration from the Bishops of France, that the said five
Propositions were taken out of Jansenius's Augustinus, and condemned in his
sense. Which Judgment of these Bishops was confirmed by Innocent, an. 1654. as
also by a new Bull of Alexander the 7th, As Horat. Tur^illinus the Jesuit, in
his Epist. hist. on the year 1653.

But we have a more faithful and full relation,. 7. The more full relation of
the Jansenists condemnation, etc.
of these transactions 'twixt the Molinists and Jansenists at Rome, by M. de
Saint Amor, in his Journal: where he shows how this contest began first
amongst the Sorbonne Doctors about the year 1646. and continued very warm and
violent in the several Assemblies of the Faculty, from that time unto the year
1650. especially an. 1649.

We find a good account of the Reasons and Motives, Why the Jesuits were so
much offended at Jansenius, etc. St. Amor fol. 93.
which induced the Jesuits to condemn Jansenius's Augustinus, in the
Confession of M. Albizzi (the Jesuits Patron) unto St. Amor, in these words:
He told me (says S. Amor) that the Jesuits held themselves greatly offended
by Jansenius S. Augustinus, especially by the third Book, which I should find
was nothing but a continued detraction against Vasquez, Suarez, Gregorius a
Valentia, Bellarmine, etc. He added, that that Bishop was full of venom against
those Fathers, and the whole society; that he broke out into unimaginable
exorbitances against them; that this greatly provoked them against his Book,
and obliged them to solicit Urban VIII. for the prohibition which he made of
it; that had not he first assaulted them, perhaps they would not have thought
fit so to do; but after he set upon and outraged them as he did, it is no
wonder that they have endeavored to be revenged on him. He continued to
exaggerate to me the exorbitances of that Author, who not only fell foul upon
the Society, but even broke forth against Popes; as among other places of his
Book, that shows it, where he says: Haereo fateor, etc.

In the year 1650. the Jesuits or M^linists recommended their cause to the
Pope, by a Letter thus: -- Its ten years since that France has been disturbed
by Jansenius's Posthumous Book and Doctrine. Such movings ought to be allayed
by the Authority of the Council of Trent; also by the Bull of Urban 8th, and
the Decrees of Pius 5th, and Gregory 13th, against Baius* And thou have
vindicated the truth and vigor of this Bull, by a new Diplome. But, because no
one Proposi^tion apart has been censured, there (...) yet left place for the
Cavils of some which we hope may be wholly inte^^cluded, if your Holiness shall
clear^ and peremtorily define, what we (...) to believe herein, etc. This
Letter the Molinists endeavored to get subscribe^ in the Assembly of the
Clergy; b^^ perceiving this design un^easible; the propose it only to some
particular B^^shops inclined to their faction This Letter was subscribed at
first by 72. Bishops only, but afterward the number amounted unto 83.
. The Jansenists being persuaded, that it would be advantageous for them to
send (...) Rome, employed M. de S. Amor, wit^ others for the management of
their Af^fairs. Many of the French Prelates aff^^ctionately inclined to the
Jansenists, and therefore desired first a Conference wit^ the Popes Nuncio,
wherein they testified their dislike of the said Letter: Showing, That the
quality of Bishops empowered them to judge of Controversies arising within their
own Dioceses that this power was signally infringe^ by this Letter. They told
him furthe^ of the danger there was in judging this matter, without having
first examined the parties; and above all, what necessity there was, that
before any thing be done, the propositions in Question should be discussed and
scanned, according to the places from whence they were produced, etc. But these
Prelates being not perfectly satisfied with this oral Declaration to the Popes
Nuncio, they repete the same to the Pope himself, by a letter from Paris June
15. 1651. thus: Most Holy Father, S. Amor jour. fol. 67.
we have understood that some of our Brethren, Bishops of France, have written
to your Holiness touching an affair of very great importance, which last year
raised great disturbance, without any benefit, in the Theologick Faculty of
Paris: nor could the issue be otherwise; for being contrived purposely in
ambiguous terms, they could produce nothing of themselves, but disputes, full
of animosities, about the the various senses put upon them. Wherefore our
Brethren must give us leave to declare, that we cannot approve of their Design
in this matter. For, besides the Questions about Divine Grace, and
Predestination are full of difficulties, and not ordinarially handled without
violent contests; there are other ver^ considerable reasons, which give u^
ground to conceive, that this present time, is not fit, for the terminating o^
so important a difference; unles you^ Holiness will please, in order to passing
(...) solemn judgment upon it (which seem^ not to be their intention) to
proceed therein, according to the form practiced by our forefathers, to resume
the affair from its original, and to examine i^ wholly and entirely, to that
end summoning and hearing the reasons of either side. For otherwise the
condemned party, may with justice complain of having become so by the calumny
and Artifices of their Adversaries, etc.

S. Amor. fol. 76.
The Substance of this letter (as St. Amor gives it us) was, That the Divines
be first heard, for the distinguishing the several senses of the propositions;
that so the censure may fall only upon that which is bad, and which all the
world acknowledges such; but the catholic sense may be safe* and exemted from
the censures; that so both sides having been heard, each may receive his
Holines's judgment with respect, and without stir, and without having cause to
complain, of not having been heard; and to make new Remonstrances, which would
renew the Quarrel. The same St. Amor adds, that the 5. propositions were
contrived in obscure ambiguous and equivocal words, so as to be capable of
several very contrary senses, according to the different interpretations that
may be put upon them. That some of those senses are evidently heretical; others
most certainly Catholic, and containing the chief Truths of faith and
Christian Religion. That the Authors of those propositions framed them in this
manner, that so, under pretext of those bad senses, they might get a down right
absolute condemnation of them, and apply the same afterward to the Catholic
senses and Orthodoxe truths, which they include. That M. Cornet was the man
that first broacht them, proposing them to the Faculty, almost two years ago,
to get them censured; but a great number of Doctors presently understanding the
artifice, and discovering the dangerous consequences thereof, both to the
public, by some books publ^^ against that attemt, and to the Cour^ Parliament,
by two petitions wh^ they were constrained to present (...) stopping its
course; it incur^^ the indignation of all sincere a^ equitable persons, that
heard of (...) and was repressed by an Arrest of (...) Court, which prohibited
M. Corn^ and all others to pursue it, whereso^ the business having failed in the
facult^^ and being not thought fit to be set (...) foot in the Assembly of the
Clergi^ for fear of the same success, they reso^^ved to venture it to the Holy
See, etc.

Saint Amor being Agitator (...) the Jansenists Affairs at Rome he (...)
ordered,. 8. S. Amor. fol. 55.
by letter from Paris 3 Mar^^ 1651, Incessantly to inculcate to tho^ at Rome,
that the Question was sole^^ about effectual Grace, and sufficien^ Grace
subject to free will; and the neither Jansentus, nor his followers fur^ther
held the said propositions, than (...) they were reduced to the point of
effe^ctual Grace. And accordingly he di^ so; and after several conferences he
give^ us this observation. I observed (sait^ he) about this time, that one of
the capital causes why the name and opinions of Jansenius were so odious to the
Romans, Jansenius's opposing Austin to the Popes Bulls made him odious to the
Romans.
was this; namely that place of his Book, where objecting to himself against S.
Austins doctrine, the Bulls of Pius the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth, he
answers, that truly he is surprised at those Bulls: Haereo fateor, as if he
opposed the Authority of S. Austin to these Popes. S. Amor. fol. 119.
etc. This doubt and seeming combat has given great advantages to the Jesuits
against him etc.

October. 17. 1651. S. Amor had Audience of the Pope; wherein he insisted much
on the former desires of the Bishops, to have the 5. propositions, presented to
the Pope under equivocal terms, distinguished and cleared, that so the
condemnation, which followed, might be clear and distinct, etc. But the Pope
told him, that after Clement the eighth, had caused this matter to be debated,
in his presence for a long time, by the most excellent men; yet he could not
decide any thing therein, but was fain to impose a perpetual silence.. 9. The
Jansenists deputies at Rome and their agitations.
Wherefore it behoved to acquiesce in that order, and live in peace, etc.

December. 5. 1651. there arrived at Rome, the Deputies of the Jansenists, namely
M. Brousse; M. de Lalane (...) M. Angran, who together with S. ^mour, were to
agitate their Affairs; (...) order whereto, they make several visi^ and
conferences with Cardinals, and^ The first Audience they had of (...) Pope was
Jan. 21. An. 1652. (Ne^ Style) at the end whereof they deliver^ to him their
first memorial, pronounce^ by M. Brousse, wherein he insiste^ mostly on the
necessity of discussing an^ clearing the said 5. propositions, thereb^ to
discover Austins true sense and judge^ment thereof, etc. The Substance of the
Popes answer, was little different from that he gave Saint Amor alone. He told
them, that he would not have them make mention of Jansenius; because that after
his book had been examined and compared with the doctrine of S. Austin, they,
who had been employed therein by Urban the eighth found, that Jansenius held
propositions very different from St. Austins Sentiments, etc.

And because his Holiness spoke of what passed under Clement 8. as if after his
time nothing had been done in this affair; and that the thing remained
unde^^ded, M. Brousse prayed his Holiness to ^rmit him to revive in his memory,
^at point of history; and he told him, that after the death of Clement 8. when
the Choice of his successor was in agitation, it was determined in the
Conclave, before they preceded to Election, that he who should be chosen,
should finish what Clement had begun, touching the matter de Auxi^iis. That
therefore Paul V. (who succeeded Leo XI. Whose papacy lasted but a few days)
immediately after his promotion to S. Peter's Chair, reassembled those
Congregations; that the matters having been examined anew, at the instance of
the Jesuits, for defense of their Molina; who, they said, was ill understood,
and ill defended to the Congregations under Clement, the matter was at length
so terminated, after many Congregations, that 50 propositions of Molina were
condemned; that the Bull was prepared and ready to thunder forth, but that
which hindered it was the quarrel of Venice; from whence the Jesuits being
driven, prayed his Holiness not to publish that Bull, which would quite
overwhelme them; promisi^^ him (what they have not kept) (...) renounce Molina,
and no longer tea^ those evil Maxims, etc. St. Amor adde^ That in the like
case Clement 8. i^^ployed the whole year 1597, in asse^^bling the Consultors,
whom he cho^^ for his Congregation. That the first tim^ they were seen
together, was the 2d d^^ of 1598. That that year, and the for following, all
passed without the Pop^ being present in those Congregation^ That the first
time their Congregation^ were held in his presence, was Marc^ 20. 1603. That to
know how things went during these 5 years, he cause^ what passed among the
Consultors (...) be reported to himself from time (...) time, by persons sure
and faithful. Thu^ St. Amor Journal. fol. 146.

Being discoursing of the Congregation^ de Auxiliis, under Clement 8. I shall
add a story, which S. Amor (fol. 115.) says, he had from a learned
Dominican, who told him, that Clement 8. was at first very ill bent against the
doctrine o^ Grace, by reason of many complaints made to him, by the Jesuits
against the Dominicans, but being assured by the General of the Dominicans
(whom he greatly esteemed) that it was not an interest of the Schools that was
in question, but the cause of Faith that is concerned; and that the opinion,
which the Jesuits introduce into the Church, is a depriving God of his Crown;
so that it is no longer he that gives us Paradise; he is no longer master of his
Gifts and Graces, etc. This discourse, and the rest which the General added to
it, so affected Clement 8. that he was desirous to learn more particularities
about this matter, and from that time forward Clement 8. received many little
memoires from this General, which served him to inform himself therein. At
length when this General had given Clement 8. the first tinctures of this
matter, the Pope liked well his request, namely that he might present unto him,
some other Divines of his own order, with whom he might confer as agreably as
with him about these matters, etc.

The Molinists send also M. Hallier, Legault, and Joysell, Doctors of the
Faculty, as Deputies to Rome, to sue for Censure of the five Propositions,
(...) things already condemned, and without admitting any Examen or
Congregation Which were things mainly in^isted up on by the Jansenists.

July 11.. 10. Other Memorials presented by the Agents of the Jansenists to the
Pope.
1652. the Agents for the Jansenists had a Declaration from Cardi^nal Roma,
that the Pope had erected the Congregation they demanded, for the hearing and
determining their affairs. Bu^ their Adversaries, the Molinists, indeavored
what they could, to hinder an open hearing, in the presence of either side. In
the beginning of November, Lalane, St. Amor, and Angran, Solicitors for the
Jansenists, compose certain Memorials, which they present to the Pope with this
Preface. Most Holy Father, your Holiness having established the Congregation for
examination of the Grand Questions concerning Grace, we thought fit, before all
things, to compose two Writings, which we present to your Holiness; one whereof
contains what has passed in the affair under debate, and the other concerns
St. Austins Authority -- Soon after St. Austin's death, some Priests of France
found fault with his writings, and troubled the Peace of the Church, by
indiscreet Questions; whereupon Prosper and Hilarie had recourse unto Celestin
-- Who ordained that the Authority and Doctrine of Austin, should remain
inviolable. Molina having had the boldness in Spain, to renew these ancient
complaints made of the Priests of France, and once again to make head against
the same St. Austin, and this new Doctrine being accused to the Holy See, in
which Clement 8. presided at that time, this holy Pope would not have the cause
examined before him, till he had first ordained, that the Authority of S.
Austin should be approved -- The like did Pope Paul 5th afterward. Yet there
are found at this day New Censors amongst the Priests of France, who to defend
Molina's Doctrine, have had the Presumption to rise anew against St. Austin, by
Questions they borrow from the Schole of those Authors already condemned, and
who call in doubt the Principal Articles of Christian Grace. It Is for this
cause that w^ are come to your Holiness in the nam^ of some of the most
illustrious Bishop^ of France -- We have complained o^ the Propositions which
have been invented to prepare Ambushes for the Doctrine of St. Austin. And to
the en^ they may be examined, and this whol^ affair fully and perfectly
cleared; w^ have sued to your Holiness for the erection of a Congregation, in
which both sides might be heard viva vice, and by writing. Your Holiness has
accordingly established it: and to the the end your Holiness might have the
goodness to practice, from the entrance of this contest, the same that Pope
Celestin did heretofore, and Clement 8th since, in occasions perfectly like to
this, for the defense of S. Austins Doctrine and Authority, and to support with
a new recommendation; we have conceived, that before all things we ought to
summon our Adversaries to acknowledge the Authority and Doctrine of that Saint,
not only with unprofitable and ineffectual words, or deceitful Elogiums and
Praises, full of disguisement and fiction, but by solid and expres approbations
-- We know that there is no practice, or endeavor omitted by our Adversaries,
to hinder the effect of so just and necessary a Demand; we know that there is
nothing in the world, which they f^ar so much, as to be constrained to
subscribe, as they ought, to the authority of St. Austin, or to see your
Holiness, treading in the steps of Celestin 1. and Clement 8. confirm it anew,
and repres the temeritie of these Censors -- Your Holiness will hear with
wonder, that after having openly attaqued S. Austin's Doctrine, with their
utmost strength, both by themselves, and by the help of the Jesuits, whose
defenders and confederates they are, they now openly proclaim their submission
to it. They will have the boldness to profess themselves public Panegyrists,
and defenders of that Father, even in the presence of your Holiness. But their
doing thus, will be only to palliate the contemt they have of him, with feined
respect, and to free themselves from blame; it will be only to avoid the
punishment of their insolence wherewith they outrage him, (...) will be only to
hide the aversion whi^^ they have for his Doctrine, under (...) commendation
which they give un^ his person; it will be only to dimini^ the care, which is
to be had in these Co^^troversies, in examining which are (...) true sentiments
of that holy Father (...) and to make it believed, that it (...) not concerned
in the Propositions, sin^ themselves who impugn them p^^fess to follow the
Doctrine of the Father, and so reverence his autoriti^ to the end that having
avoided the co^^demnation of their temeritie by su^^ feined Elogiums of S.
Austin, and (...) off, without being obliged to subscri^ to any thing, they
may, with the^ Partisans, thence forward reject (...) authority with more
boldness than ever^ and banish his Doctrine from the^ Schools as Calvinistick:
especially (...) case your Holiness should condemn the Propositions: because
they will no fail afterward, to make the censu^^ fall upon S. Austin, and that
not with^out ground. These are the designs (...) our adversaries -- which if
they should take place, it would be an exposing the principal inheritance,
which the holy See possesses, to pillage, as no doubt it would come to pass
by the contemt of S. Austins Authority and Doctrine; it would be a nullifying
the authority of all the Fathers, -- it would imply, that the Church had
unjustly condemned the enemies of Grace; it would give occasion to believe,
that the holy Council of Trent favored the Pelagian Heretics, and gave new
forces to the Calvinists. This Epistle was subscribed thus: Noel de La Lane,
Louis de St. Amor, Louis Angran.


The Pope would not receive these Jansenists Writings, etc.

July 1652..11. The Popes Confession in behalf of the Jansenists.
St. Amor (as he repo^^ fol. 211.) received a visit from (...) Archbishop who
told him, that he (...) conferred with the Pope that morni^^ about their
Affairs. That his Hol^ himself gave occasion to the Discour^ and told him, That
he still remembr^ the time, when the Congregations (...) Auxiliis were held
under Clement (...) and Paul 5. that he knew all (...) world was then for the
Dominica^ against the Jesuits; that for a lo^ while together, the publication
of (...) Bull, whereby the Jesuits were co^^demned, was daily expected; that
^^vertheles it was not published, thoug^ they well deserved it. But it was
co^ceived, that the Holy See acted pr^^dently, in not publishing their
con^demnation; because, though the sai^ Definition, would have appeared wi^^
the general satisfaction of all intelligent persons, yet those matters
surpassed the reach of the unlearned, and the generality of the faithful. That
moreover the Pope said, that he knew the Jesuits Sentiments were not good; and
that if he condemned them, there were no persons of Learning and Ability
throughout Europe, but would be satisfied and well pleased therewith; but that
these Truths were so far above the ordinary capacity of man, and the weak
being much more numerous than the strong, more would be scandalized, than
edified with such condemnation, etc.

The more to elucidate the Intrigues of the Molinists, and to discover what
suspicions there were amongst the wiser Jansenists, of gaining little advantage
to their cause, by applications to Rome, I shall give the mention of some
memorable passages, written in an elegant Letter, by a Doctor of the Sorbon, to
St. Amor, St. Amor Journal ^ol. 205.
dated June 16. 1652. Sir I received, together, the two large Letters you writ
me, A Letter from a Doctor of the Sorbon, touching the little advantage the
Jansenists might e^pect from Rome.
full of testimonies, of the confidence and friendship, wherewith you are
pleased to honor me. If I durst, I should find fault with your going too far
therein: for I can make no other construction of your too favorable judgment
of me, than that it proceeds from a singular Affection, which gives you an
opinion of me, far above what I acknowledge in my^self. I have always written
unto you in sincerity; and freely signified unto you my thoughts and
sentiments concerning your journey to Rome, about the Affairs which you manage
there, and concerning the proposals, which you have made to me. And because I
see things not altered, or at least varied only in appearance, and some
circumstances, I cannot change my judgment or disposition. It Is true, what you
tell me, that Residence at Rome is dangerous, in regard of the corruption of
the mind, which oftentimes carries its poison into the bottom of the heart,
without being taken notice of, insensibly corrupting Faith and Reason it self,
by human prudence, and a manner of life and deportment altogether Political,
which people contract there, unles they be prevented, by Gods special
protection and favor. And to tell you the truth, though I am much averse from
that vice, which passes for virtue in the world, yet I account not my self so
strong, but that I think fit to avoid even the occasions of it. Nevertheles
it is not this alone, which keeps me from coming to you, and taking upon me that
part, which you would assign me, in the Affairs, wherein you are engaged. If I
conceived I could be as serviceable therein as you apprehend, and could it
reasonably be hoped, matters would be so carried, and have such Effects and
Issues as you aim at, solitude should no longer detain me, nor the danger of
the ways, and Residence at Rome, keep me from offering my sel^ to God, to do
him service, and second you in that, which you endeavor to perform to him. But
I am so strongly persuaded of the contrary, both by potent consideration taken
from human Prudence, as well as from Reasons Divine, and founded upon the
present posture of things, that all the Remonstrances in your Letter, have not
moved me; although otherwise I may say (I think) without flattery, that I am
so devoted to satisfy my friends, as far as my ability reaches, that I can
scarce deny any thing unto them, without doing violence to my self; especially
in things wherein the service of God is concerned -- No Sir, I ca^ not believe,
that ever there will be (...) regular and free Conference, about the matters in
contest at this day: an^ should there be one appointed, an^ persons found
capable of debating the questions on either side, and Judge^ intelligent enough
of the Truth, an^ sufficiently impartial to determine them (which is very
difficult, not to say morally impossible) I could not promise to my self, the
succes, you aim at, and seem to hold for certain. All that could be hoped, so
far as I see, from such a conference, and most upright Judges, is, that things
would remain as they are. Should the Arbitrators be disposed to do some thing
more, and to pronounce in favor of Truth; they who have been inveigled into the
contrary part, the Temporal Powers engaged with them, and the Spiritual would
quite stop the passing of such judgment, thereby to avoid offending many of
the world; and, under pretense of eschewing division, leave things as they are.
If you judge my conjectures, and the consequences I draw from them disagreeing
from your own thoughts, yet I am confident you cannot but say, that the
suppositions which I make, and from whence I draw these consequences, are very
favorable. For leaving you to find persons capable to propose, and maintain the
Truth befittingly in a regular conference, I think you will not be backward to
confess, that there is not the least likelihood of finding Judges sufficiently
intelligent, in these matters; sufficiently well affected to truth, and
sufficiently armed, against all sorts of Interests, to pronounce in its favor,
when they have discovered it. And if there were truly such, undoutedly one of
the Parties would except against them, or elude and prevent their judgment.
These matters have been agitated, examined and determined also, in abundance of
the most important questions and difficulties, by the Authority of two great
Popes, very learned, and of upright Intentions: and you know what have been the
Issue of those conferences, which lasted many years. You are far from seeing
your Affairs in so fair a way; and if you promise your self a better issue
thereof, I attribute i^ to your Zele, and the Affections you have for the cause
you manage; which makes you build too much, and ground the hopes of your justly
desired succes, upon the good reception that has been shown you, and the fair
words which have been given you. You will permit me to mind you, that that coin
is very current in the world, and more in the place where you are, than in any
other: it is that wherewith all payment is ordinarily made; and many times where
there is least Will and Power to give, the promises are largest. -- All the
proposals of Accommodation made you, touching the Bishop of Ipres Book, seem to
be as suspicious, as the promises that are given you, and are of much more
dangerous consequence. You know, Sir, by experience, in some general and
particular Assemblies of the Faculty, in which you were present, how all
people easily hearkened unto such Accommodations; how it is easy to be
inveigled to remit some thing of the Interest of Truth, in such cases, either
by surprise, or by weakness, covered with the pretext of peace; and how such
Accommodations and Modifications are prejudicial to the Truth. These are wounds
which prove afterward irremediable; because they are made by such, as profess
to defend it; and in this they injure it, more than they, who openly imp^gne
it, and are its greatest enemies. I confess to you, I could never read without
pity (and I speak it too without any indignation) the Objections and Proposals
made to you, about the Bishop of Ipres Book, and the Bull: and that which most
amazes me, is, that they which made these Objections and Proposals, pass for
persons very intelligent, and well affected toward the Truths of Grace. For to
reply, that M. d' Ipre, intending to justify some propositions of S. Austins,
found among those of Baius, which have been condemned, and desirous to
reconcile the Authority of the Holy See, and of the Bull, which seems to
condemn them, says Haereo; it is but to quarrel with that great Lover and
Defender of S. Austin; and to indict him for a word, and for a word very well
spoken, and which shows his great moderation, amidst his great knowledge, and
zele for the Truth. How frequently does S. Austin use the same manner of
speech, when he meets with some difficulty. Other particulars wherewith he is
charged, flow from the same fountain, and are no less unjust than groundles.
If he has written of the matters of Grace, since a prohibition of the Holy
See, he is not the only man that has done so; but it is he alone that has
written in that manner that he has done, having only reported the sentiments
of S. Austin, whom the Church owneth, not only as one of its pillars, but as
its Master and Teacher, particularly in the matters of Grace: and he writ his
Book being a Prelat and Pastor of the Church. Nevertheles, by a most manifest
injustice, endeavors are used to get his Book subjected to censure, and to
acquit all others -- You see, Sir, with what liberty I write: it is an evidence
of the sincerity of that Affection I bare you, and of the confidence I have in
yours. Assure your self, I do not forget you, in my Addresses to God; I
represent to him your Affairs and Necessities as mine own, and beseech him to
make me, as I desire to be, always more and more yours; which I shall look
upon as his mercy toward me, and the making me more to be his. I desire you
to beg the same, etc.

This Apologetick Letter, in the behalf of Jansenius, against the Molinists, I
am ^pt to belief was written by Mr. Ar^auld Doctor of the Sorbon, and then Head
of the Jansenists.

August 1652. There were two Conferences held at Paris, in the presence of some
persons of Quality, between M. de Saint Bevre and F. l' Abbe the Jesuit,
touching the Subject of a work published by this Father, in reference to the
controversy, betwixt the Jansenists and Molinists. The Father (says St. Amor
fol 126.) received much confusion therein, having been convinced of foul
dealing or little intelligence of the points, whereupon they conferred. The
Substance of this conference is given in a letter, which M. de Saint Bevre
writes to M. St. Amor, from Paris, Aug. 2. 1652. thus: Sir The discourse of
(...) Annat. is the common discourse of the Society. Those good Fathers
publish^ here, as well as at Rome, that the Po^ is to pronounce with all speed;
and whi^ they are told there is no congregation y^ settled, in which the parties
may be hear^ they answer, that his Holiness will (...) hear any parties; and
that their Societ^ has resolved, not to enter into a conferenc^ either at
Paris or at Rome, touchin^ the controverted doctrine. This is what the F.
L'Abbe said to me in the conferenc^ I had with him -- wherein he propo^sed to
dispute at large of matters (...) doctrine; whereunto I assented. H^ propounded
5 points 1. That M. d' I^^ was condemnable, as having written ^^gainst the
Council of Trent, and consequently against S. Austin, That a (...) moved by
Grace, is necessitated, as to hi^ liberty. Whereunto he was answered, (...)
That such a man was necessitated, in sen^^ composito, but not in sensu diviso,
an^ told, that M. d' Ipre says no more (...) which is not condemnable, unles
the whole Schole of S. Thomas be condemned too. After many Contestations the
Father was obliged to consent with us. The Second was concerning sufficient
Grace; and it was proved to him, that M. d' Ipre denied none but the
Molinistick. The Third was concerning the necessity of sinning without Grace.
The Fourth concerned the Commandments: and I showed him, that the Doctrine
maintained by us, as to this point, was held by all the Thomists, the Defenders
of Congruous Grace, and the Church in her prayers. The Fifth Question was
reduced to final perseverance; wherein I proved, that what the Father held, was
the Doctrine of the Pelagians, etc.

August 15.. 12. August. 15. 1652.
1652. the Delegats for the Jansenists received an extraordinary summons, from
Cardinal Roma, at the instigation of M. Albizzi, to provide, within a
fortnight, the Writings, which they were to deliver unto the Congregation. The
two first they got ready within the time, The Jansenists two first Papers
prepared for the Congregation*
and subscribed on Austins day. The first contained, what passed about the five
Propositions, since M. Cornet propounded them to the Faculty, from July 1.
1649. till that time: namely what was done in the Assemblies of the Faculty
July, The Contents of the first Paper. S. Amor Journal fol. 219.
August, and September, 1649. The false censure, which they published throughout
all France, and sent to Rome, under the name of the Deputies^f the Faculty;
what was done in Parliament, October. 5. and concerning the patcht peace, made in
the Faculty, in September; the Theses, which M. Hallier signed as Syndic; in
which the first and third Proposition, in the sense wherein we held them, were
maintained in Sorbon, with his approbation, Jan. 1650. The Letter, which M. de
Vabres procured to be subscribed, by a multitude of Bishops; the subscriptions
begged here and there in all societies, etc. One thing also these Deputies of
the Jansenists observed, in this writing, not before observed; namely, that all
these enterprises were designed to procure, by such scandalous and oblique
ways; the destruction of S. Austin's Doctrine; which they veiled under the
obscurities of these Equivocal Propositions, contrived purposely to deceive.
They declared further by anticipation, that they purposed not to maintain the
Pro^ositions in any other sense, than in that, which they should demonstrate to
be suitable to S. Austins Doctrine; Wherefore ^hey concluded this first
writing, requesting most humbly, that to the end all things might be done, in
this Affair, without fraud and confusion, before the examination of the
Propositions were proceeded unto, they might be altered and reduced into the
several senses, whereof they were capable, in such sort, that they might be
free from all equivocation. -- That the senses being thus distinguished, and
separated into several Propositions, we might declare, which were those which
we abhorred, and anathematized, with the whole Catholic Church; that our
Adversaries might be obliged to keep the same course, etc.

They added also, to the end the Doctrine of S. Austin might remain safe and
entire in the Church, and to give their Adversaries place to clear themselves,
the Propositions following.

1. That any Doctrine, Proposition, or Opinion, touching the matter of Grace,
Free Will, or Divine Predestination, which shall be found to be St. Austins, or
nece^^sarily coherent with his Doctrine, cann^^ be in any wise condemned either
of Here^^ or Error, or with any other kind of ce^^sure whatsoever.

2. That never any Doctrine of S. Austi^^ has been condemned of error by any
Pope^ or approved Councils.

3. That the Council of Trent has (...) defined or taught any thing, that is
con^trary, in any sort, to S. Austins Doctrine (...) Grace.

4. That all which S. Austin has hel^ against the Pelagians, and Semipelagian^
as Catholic Doctrine, ought likewise to (...) held for such.

5. That to affirm, that S. Austins Doctrine, touching Grace, is uncertain,
contrary to its self, exorbitant, obscure, hars^ unworthy of the Clemency of
God, little suitable for edification of the faithful, etc* i^ injurious to the
whole Catholic Church.

6. That supposing the Holy Scriptures, and Definitions of Popes and Councils;
the Doctrine of S. Austin touching Grace is a most clear and certain rule, by
which the Propositions in question, and all other generally whatever,
concerning Grace, Fre^ Will and Divine Predestination, may be examined, with
certainty, and also by right ought to be so.

These six Propositions the Deputies of the Jansenists demanded, that their
adversaries might be obliged to acknowledge, together with them for true, and
indubitable, in order to the clear and plain stating of principles on which
both sides were to proceed.

This was the substance of their first writing, which had this Title, The first
Information upon matter of Fact.

Their second Writing was larger than the former, The Jansenists second Writing.
and contained their first information concerning matter of Right, and was thus
entitled: The Tradition of the whole Church in reference to the Authority of
S. Austins Doctrine. This second Writing contained eminent Testimonies,
touching this matter, of more than twenty Popes, of as many General Councils,
National, or Provincial, and about sixty either Fathers, Saints, or illustrious
Divines, etc.

And to prevent the imputation of being tedious, they deew a model of both
their Writings, the Conclusion whereof was, that having thus established the
Auhtoritie of S. Austins Doctrine, they h^^ nothing to fear, in reference to
(...) Propositions; since they were (...) likewise to show clearly, that the
sens^ in which they held them, was as cer^tainly the Doctrine of S. Austin, as
th^^ had shown invincibly, that his Doctrine was that of the Church. And mo^^
over they published this Cartel of Defi^ance to the whole Molinistick Parti^
That they were certain, and spoke (...) without fear, That that holy Doct^^
would be found so congruous to a^ that they maintained, that their adversaries,
however they might rack their brains, could never propose any argument, drawn
from human reason* or the Holy Scriptures, which they could not make them see,
had been proposed to S. Austin, by the Pelagians or Semipelagians, and resolved
against them by this holy Doctor; and which we could not in like manner refute,
very easily, against our Adversaries, by the answers and Doctrine, which we
should extract out of his works. Wherefore they further said, That there was
nothing they wished more, that as soon as the authority of the said Doctrine was
acknowledged, and confirmed, as it ought to be between their adversaries, and
them, to proceed forthwith, with equal diligence and confidence, to make
appear, in the examen of the Propositions, what that Doctrine was.

What issue and effect these Writings obtained, St. Amor part 5. chap. 14.
fol. 256.
is given us by St. Amor thus: We were busied, says he, at Rome all this
Month (of November) in the most vigorous and assiduous pursuit, that was
lawful for us to make there, for the first Audience in the Congregation; which
we demanded might be granted to us together with our adversaries, after our
first Writings had been communicated to them; to the end they might come to
such an audience, prepared to answer to those Writings, and to what we should
add thereunto viva voce. We could neither obtain to have a day set for such a
first Audience; nor that our Writings should be communicated; nor know whether
they would grant us either one or the other. In the mean time the Jesuits and the
Doctors, their Adherents, continued triumphing at Paris before hand, for the
approaching condemnation of the Propositions, of which they held themselves
sure, and in which they involved ours. By this means they caused great
doubtings in our friends, what might be the issue of the Congregation; which
was signified to us, by a Letter, wherein they injoined us severely not to
deliver any instruction, which might engage us in a single process by writing.
Also M. de Saint Beave writ to me, to continue our instances, that the Authors
of the Propositions might be known, our innocence declared, and the Necessity
of Effectual Grace established, which was the whole point of the question; and
that if we could not obtain this, that at least it might be inserted into the
Bull, in case any were made, that we had always declared, that we undertook
the defense of the Propositions only in the sense, wherein they employed the
Necessity of Effectual Grace: that by this means the Bull would be favorable
to us, and moreover make our adversaries pass for Calumniators and successors
of the Semipelagians, as well in their manners and proceedings, as in their
Doctrine.

In the beginning of the year, 1653.. 13. The Dominicans interposing for the
Jansenists, and how far they agree. S. Amor. fol. 309*
The Agents of the Jansenists solicit afresh, for the reception of their
Writings, and Memorial. And the General of the Dominicans, with the rest of
that Order at Rome, interposed effectually in the behalf of the Jansenists.
They prepared a Memorial, which they intended to present to the Pope, wherein
they gave a full elucidation of the Controversy, and that more expressly than
the Jansenists durst do. For 1. They defend Jansenius expressly, in reference
to the five Propositions, and formally maintain, that they were not his, etc.
2. St. Amor says, that although these Dominicans explicated these
Propositions, in the same manner as they did, and, no less than they,
maintained the common Doctrine of Effectual Grace; yet these Dominicans did it
in terms incomparably more powerful, than the Jansenists durst express
themselves in. 3. These Dominicans show, that the Jesuits have three pri^^cipal
intentions in this Affair. 1. To (...) Molina his opinion obliquely define^^ 2.
To overthrow all that was done (...) ten years, in the Congregation de
A^^xiliis: And 3. To ruin S. Austins A^toritie, etc. But the Pope would gi^^
no Audience to the General of the D^^minicans herein, though he request^ i^
seventeen or eighteen times.

March 4. 1653. Cardinal Barbarin d^^mands of S. Amor, S. Amor. fol. 322.
why they ((...) Jansenists) did not wholly join wi^^ the Dominicans? to which
he answer^ thus: They do their own business, a^ we ours: we may have our
particul^ aims and pretensions, though their Do^ctrine be no wise different
from ou^^ at least at the bottom. The Cardin^ fell to speak of Jansenius, and
said, the he admitted the same sufficient Grace^ which the Thomists taught: for
which he cited chap. 3. lib. 4. S. Amor an^swered him, That he could not
affir^ any thing as to that, but no doub^ there are such small Graces, as the
Th^^mists call sufficient, and acknowledge as well as they, not to be such
really in the sense, wherein the world takes the word sufficient, since they do
not suffice; there being need, besides these Graces, of that which is effectual
by it self, to perform the good action, which would not be done without it, etc.

April 8. In the evening, says S. Amor, I visited F. Reginald a Thomist, who
speaking concerning their sufficient Grace, I told him, we agreed in the thing,
and therefore needed not dispute about words. That we could not grant, those
small Graces were given unto all generally; nor should we say, that they gave a
perfect, next, and complete power; because those terms were abused, as well as
that of sufficient, the world understanding thereby a power whereunto nothing
is wanting; though we denied not the thing which they understood by those words
of next power. Thus S. Amor fol. 335.

May 4. S. Amor was assured,. 14. The Agents of the Jansenists their Audience
before the Pope, and Apology.
that there was a Bull or Constitution made, by which the Propositions were
condemned: which put them upon fresh addresses to the Pope. May 19. the Pope
gave the Agents of the Jansenists a Grand Audience: which was the first and
last they had, of all that had been promised them. Mr. de Lalane Abbot of
Valcroissant, pronounced an Oration, in the name o^ the rest, before the Pope,
in these words:

Most Holy Father, St. Amor fol. 355.
We are obliged to represent to your Holiness, by how many Artifices, and secret
Ambushes, some persons employ certain obscure, equivocal, and maliciously
contrived Propositions, to undermine the Church at this day, by assaulting, and
indangering the Doctrine of S. Austin, touching the Grace of Jesus Christ, so
often approved by the Holy See, and autorized, without discontinuance, by the
universal consent of the whole Church. -- This enterprise, against the Grace of
Jesus Christ, has proceeded so far, that in regard of the close union of S.
Austin with S. Paul, in what concerns this matter, we see, that at this day,
the Enterprizers fear not to attaque them both together, by daring to accuse
them both of having passed even into excesses. -- It Is not, Most Holy Father,
by vain imaginations, but by invincible proofs, that we shall manifest to your
Holiness, this public Conspiracy of the Jesuits formed against S. Austin.
Behold, in my hands, above an hundred Propositions against that Saint, drawn
out of several Books made since fifty years, by the Jesuits; which show, that
the boldness, wherewith they assault him, increases daily, in such sort, that
they incessantly charge him with new, and greater outrages. -- We know Most
Holy Father, that our Adversaries make semblance of reverencing his Authority:
But this is only to put a feigned respect upon their real disdain. It Is only to
hide their aversion from his Doctrine under the commendation of his person. --
Let our Adversaries choose to take him wholly, or leave him wholly to us: --
But our Adversaries would have not only S. Austin, but also the Grace of Jesus
Christ divided -- We confess that this matter is spinose. Nature, which
flatters us, never cease to oppose in us the mystery of the Grace of Jesus
Christ: Our Reason seeks means, on all sides, to free it self from that
absolute submission which we are obliged to have for God. It insinuates every
thing that favors this connatural pride in us. S. Austin himself confesses,
that without thinking of it, he continued long in the error of the
Semipelagians, and got not out of it, 'till after a deep meditation of the holy
Scriptures; particularly of S. Paul. And therefore it is no wonder, that, in all
times, there have been found so many difficulties and repugnances, to cure the
minds of the faithful of the error of Pelagianisme. Besides all which, there is
a determinate resolution for Molina's de^ence of the whole society o^ the
Jesuits -- But Most Holy Father, though Nature and Reason are very unapt to
comprehend, what is the Grace of Jesus Christ, and though this Doctrine be
invelopped, as with so many clouds, by the various new inventions o^ new
Divines, and by the equivocations of the Propositions in question;
nevertheless we dare boldly affirm, that albeit this mystery is very
profound, ye^ it is not so difficult to understand, provided the means be used,
etc.

The Jansenists presented also to the ^ope a compendious Distinction of the
five ^ropositions, touching Grace; showing in ^ree columns the several senses,
where^f the said Propositions are capable: of which see S. Amor. S. Amor.
fol. 374.
fol. 365. When M. (...) Valcroissant had ended his Oration, he ^old the Pope,
his Holiness should be much more enlightened in the things, which were alleged,
when they came to be treated more leisurely and thoroughly before him, in the
presence of their adversaries. -- He added further, that the connection, which
he had mos^ clearly demonstrated of the Propositions reduced to their sense,
with the point of Effectual Grace by it self, evidently showed the necessity
of beginning the discussion of this Affair, by the examen and proof of the
Efficacy of Grace, by it self; both because all the rest depends upon it, and
the proof of it serves for a general proof of the Propositions. St. Amour^ fol,
375.
-- When the Abbot of Valcroissant had done, Des Mares began, and continued the
series of his Discourse, (as they had agreed) and undertook the proof of the
Efficacy of Grace. His first argument was taken from the Prayers of the
Church, an^ lasted three quarters of an hour, etc.

May 26.. 15. The Jansenists condemned.
there was a strong Rumo^ touching the publication of the Bull^ against the
five Propositions, which wa^ accordingly, in some short time after*
accomplished.

The BULL runs thus:

Sanctissimi in Christo Patris, ac D. N. Innocentii, divina Providentia Papae,
decimi constitutio, qua declarantur ac definiuntur quinque Propositiones in
materia fidei.
Innocentius Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei,
universis Christi fidelibus, salutem and apostolicam benedictionem.
CVm occasion impressionis libri, cui titulus Augustinus Cornelii Jansenii
Episcopi Iprensis, inter alias ejus opiniones lis orta fuit, praesertim in
Gallia, super quinque ex illis, complures Galliarum Episcopi apud nos
institerunt, ut easdem Propositiones nobis oblatas expenderemus, ac de
unaquaque earum certam and conspicuam ferremus sententiam.

Tenor vero praefatarum Propositionum est ut sequitur.

1. Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus justis, volentibus, ac conantibus, secundum
praesentes quas habent vires* sunt impossibilia; deest quoque illi^ gratia qua
possibilia fiunt.

2. Interiori gratiae, in statu naturae lapsae, nunquam resistitur.

3. Ad merendum ac demerendum i^ statu naturae lapsae non requiritur in homine
libertas a necessitate, sed sufficit libertas a coactione.

4. Semipelagiani admittebant pr^venientis Gratiae interioris necessitatem ad
singnlos actus, etiam ad initium fidei: and in hoc erant haeretici, quod
vellent talem esse, cui potest humana voluntas resistere.

5. Semipelagianum est dicere Christum pro omnibus omnino hominibus mortuum
esse, vel sanguinem fudisse.

Nos quidem inter multiplices curas, quae animum nostrum quotidie pulsent, illa
imprimis cordi est, ut Ecclesia Dei, nobis ex alto commissa, purgatis pravarum
opinionum errori^us, tuto militare, and tanquam navis in tranquillo mari,
sedatis omnium tempestatum fluctibus ac procellis, secura navigare, and ad
optatum portum pervenire possit.

Pro rei gravitate coram aliquibus S. R. e Cardinalibus, ad id specialiter
saepe congregatis, a plurimis in Sancta The^l^gia Magistris, easdem quinque
Prop^sitiones, and supra nobis oblatas singulatim diligenter examinari,
eorumque suffragia tum voce, tum scripto relata mature consideravimus;
eosdemque Magistros variis coram nobis act^s congregationibus prolixe super
eisdem, and super earum qualibet disserentes audivimus.

Cum autem ab initio hujusmodi discussionis ad divinum implorandum auxilium
multorum Christi fidelium preces tum privatim tum public indixissemus,
postmodum iteratis iisdem ferventius, ac per nos implorata s^llicite Spiritus
Sancti assistentia, tandem divino numine favent^ ad infra Scriptam devenimus
declarationem and definitionem.

1a* Primam praedictarum propositionum, Aliqua Dei praecepta, etc. Temerariam,
impiam, blasphemam, anathemate damnatam, and haereticam declaramus.

2a. Secundam, Interiori gratiae, etc. haereticam declaramus, and uti talem
damnamus.

3a. Tertiam, Ad Merendum ac demerendum, etc. haereticam declaramus, ac ut^
talem damnamus.

4a. Quartam, Semipelagiani admitte^bant, etc. falsam and haereticam
declaramus, and uti talem damnamus.

5a. Quintam, Semipelagianum, etc. falsam, temerariam, scandalosam; and
intellectam ex sensu ut Christus tantum pro s^lute praedestinatorum mortuus
sit, impiam, blasphemam, contumeliosam, divinae pieta^ derogantem, and
haereticam declaramus.

Mandamus igitur omnibus Christi fidelibus utriusque sexus, ne de dictis
propositionibus sentire, docere, praedicare alite^ praesumant, quam in hac
praesenti nostr^ declaratione and definitione continetur, su^ Censuris and
poenis contra haereticos, and eorum fautores in jure expressis.

Praecipimus pariter omnibus Patriarchii^, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis aliisque
locorum ordinariis, nec non haereticae pravitatis inquisitoribus, ut
contradictores and rebels quoscunque per censuras and poenas praedictas,
invocato etiam ad hoc, si opus fuerit, auxilio brachii Saecularis, omnino,
coerce^nt, and compescant.

Non intendentes tamen per hanc declarationem and definitionem, super
praedictis quinque, Propositionibus factam approbare ullatenus alias opiniones,
quae continentur in praedicto libro Cornelii Jansesenii.

Datum Romae apud Sanctam Mariam majorem anno Domini 1653. pride. Call. Junii
Pontifi. G. Gualtorius. Hi. Datarius P. Campinius.

June 13. St. Amor fol. 412.
The Agents of the Jansenists signed this Resolution (before they went to take
leave of the Pope) After the Publication of the Popes Decree against the five
Propositions, there being no more hope to obtain of his Holiness the solemn and
Regular Congregation, which we solicited for the space of two years, as most
necessary in this conjuncture, in order to a full clearing of matters
controverted between St. Austin's Disciples, and those of Molina, we conceived
that we had nothing left but to prepare our selves to return into France. -- We
have judged in the presence of God, that we ought not to subscribe the
condemnation of those Propositions, without excepting the sense of Grace
effectual by it self, and St. Austin's Doctrine, which the enemies of both have
designed, in obtaining this condemnation, to overthrow -- We have resolved not
to subscribe that condemnation, though the Pope require it of us, but with this
clause. Propositiones ab Innocentio Papa X. damnatas nos iterum damnamus, ut
semper antea damnavimus, salva tum Gratia Christi per seipsam efficaci ad
singulos pietatis actus necessaria, tum doctrina Sancti Augustini; quibus nolle
se praejudicium ullum afferre, Summus Pontifex multaties testatus est. With
this mind the Agents of the Jansenists De la Lane, D^smares, St. Amor,
Manassier and Angran went to take leave of the Pope, where they found all
things otherwise than they feared, the Pope declaring great satisfaction in
their deportment, etc.

The five Propositions of Jansenius having been condemned by a Bull of Innocent
10th, The French Formularie for the condemning of the Jansenists.
( May 31. 1653.) and upon the Jansenists pretending these Propositions were
not condemned in Jansenius's sense, there being a new Bull given out by
Alexander 7. condemning these Propositions in the sense of Jansenius, the
Jansenists were hereby crushed, and brought under a severe Persecution. For
hereupon the Molinists got the General Assembly of the French Clergy (as I
take it an. 1654.) to frame a Formularie, answerable to the foresaid Bull of
Alexander 7. for the condemning of these five Propositions in Jansenius's
sense; which all Ecclesiastics were ordered to sign, or else to be deprived of
all Ecclesiastic employment. This formularie great numbers, in heart
Jansenists, are induced, by virtue of some mental reservations, to subscribe
unto; but such as are thorough paced and professed Jansenists, look upon it as
their great glory and Interest, to pass for Non-Conformists, though with the
loss of their Dignities and Preferments; yea with incurring the censure of
Excommunication. See these arguments in La Simple Verite opposee a la Fausse
edee du Jansenisme. a Paris 1664.
The Arguments, by which the Jansenists defend themselves against signing this
formularie are these. 1. That there is no Ordinance of the Church, which
commands all the world to sign her decisions under pain of Heresy. 2. That
the Pope commands none to sign it; neither has he as yet made any person to
sign it. 3. No one speaks of signing this formularie in Foreign Provinces, nor
in the whole Church. 4. None but the Assembly of the Clergy has ordained,
that we sign her formularie; but this Ordinance is neglected by all as
illegitime, it having not been approved by the Pope, nor by the Bishops; yea,
the Jesuits themselves have been constrained to abandon this Formularie,
whereof notwithstanding they were the Authors.

The Jansenists, though excluded from all public employment, The Provincial
Letters.
cease not to defend themselves and their cause, partly by Apologies for
themselves, and partly by attaquing their enemies the Jesuits, especially as to
Morals. An. 1656. there were published seventeen Letters to a Provincial,
(which in the English Version is styled the Mystery of Jesuitisme) wherein the
corrupt notions, principles, and distinctions of the Jesuits, for permitting
and allowing the practice of all manner of ^in, are brought to light. These
Letters have much galled the Jesuits, especially since they have been examined
and censured by some of the Bishops and Ecclesiastic Assemblies of France.

After the condemnation of Jansenius, The Jansenists Apologies*
his Adherents the Jansenists, to wipe off the aspersion of heresy imputed to
their charge, first, as to name, call themselves, not Jansenists, La simple
Verite page 1.
but Disciples of S. Austin; For (say they) Jansenius makes Profession to teach
nothing; but to report simply what St. Austin taught on the matter of Grace and
Free Will, without b^ing any thing more than his Interpreter. In such sort,
that if any could clearly discover any one point, throughout his whole Book,
which was from himself, and not from St. Austin, he should be abandoned by all,
and condemned by his own proper judgment. Whereas (add they) Molina, on the
contrary, vaunts to have published a Doctrine which was never known before; and
his followers the Jesuits glory in the title of being Molinists.

As to the thing it self, and matter of their Doctrine, the Jansenists
endeavored to vindicate themselves from the imputation of ^eresie by certain
Articles, and Apologetick Discourses touching their opinions. As for their
Articles we find this mention of them in their own writings. La simple V^rite.
page 5.
Now these Divines (say they, meaning the Jansenists) have exposed their
sentiments, in the Articles which they sent unto the Pope, and his Holiness has,
by his last Brief, declared, That they contained an holy and Orthodoxe
Doctrine. The Bishops, and most habile Divines, who have seen these Articles,
have given the same judgment of them avowing, that they had nothing in them
but what was Orthodoxe. And Mr. the Bishop of Commenge has expressly testified
it to the King, when he had the honor to present the Declaration of these
Divines to this Majesty, which entirely referred to the Doctrine of these
Articles.

The Jansenists also vindicate themselves from the imputation of heresy, by
several Apologies they publish in defense of Jansenius, Refutation de la Fausse
Relat. du P. Ferrier cap. 10.
and themselves, touching their sense of the five Propositions condemned.
Arnauld (in Latin Arnoldus) the chief of the Jansenists, after a Letter of his,
which was censured, writ a Theologick Dissertation, the design whereof was, to
confirm their manner of speaking touching Efficacious Grace. This Dissertation
was composed on the occasion of a Writing, which the Abbot Hilarion (a person
particularly esteemed by the three former Popes) sent him from Rome, touching
Efficacious Grace. Wherefore this Dissertation having been sent to Rome, (first
in Manuscript, and afterward printed) not only to the Abbot Hilarion, but also
to Cardinal Barberin, and to another Cardinal; it found favorable acceptance
with them. And notwithstanding all the importunity, which the Jesuits used, to
render this Doctor odious at Rome, yet could they never get this his
Dissertation condemned. The design of this his Theologick Disertation, was to
prove Efficacious Grace; which he makes good by more than eighty passages of
Scripture, of Popes, of Councils, of Fathers, of Divines both ancient and
modern, yea of the Jesuits themselves.

Since the year 1654. the whole controversy, 'twixt the Jansenists and
Molinists, has been reduced to a matter of Fact, Refutat. de la Fausse relation
du P. Ferrier (1664.) page 3^.
viz. What is the sense of Jansenius touching these five Propositions? The
Jansenists tell us, they have accurately declared, what they intend by the
sense of Jansenius, in the first and third Disquisition of Paul Irenaeus: as
also in the first and fourth part of Denis Raymond; which were composed on
purpose to clear the sense of Jansenius, as also that of his Adherents about
these five Propositions. Denis Raymond being one, to whom the Jansenists refer
us touching the sense of Jansenius, about the 5. Propositions, I shall briefly
relate his explication thereof. Denis Raymond in the Profession of his faith,
before the Table of his Book, makes this general Declaration. That I may leave
no room for suspicion, I declare farther, that by the sense of Jansenius, which
I sustain, I intend no other Doctrine on the subject of the five Propositions,
than that of Efficacious Grace, of it self necessary to all actions of Piety,
in that manner, in which it has ever been, and still is sustained by the Schole
of St. Thomas, and is recognized as Orthodoxe by all the Church; and I reject
as an heresy that saying, That this Efficacious Grace necessitates the Will,
and that it takes away the power of non-consenting, as it follows in this Book.
More particularly, Denis Raimond (Premiere Party Chap. 1.) makes good these
Articles, viz.

Art. 1. That Jansenius undertook not to oppose sufficient Grace as delivered
by the Thomists, but as laid down by Molina, page 33.

Art. 2. That when Jansenius calls s^ffi^cient Grace a Monstre, he sp^aks only
(...) Suarez's sufficient Grace of Congruitie, not (...) that maintained by the
Thomists, page 36.

Art. 3. That Jansenius does recognize the Sufficient Grace of the New Thomists
as to i^s realitie, albeit he gives it not that name, nor holds, that it gives
a proxime power of operating, page 37.

Art. 4. That Jansenius, in what he was taught of the next power, has said
nothing, but what is conform to S. Augustine, S. Thomas, and the ancient
Thomists, with many of the New page 41.

Ar^. 5. That Janseni^s, in what he has delivered of Efficacious Grace,
^ffirming, that it gives not only the wi^^ to act, but also forces; likewise
that it ^ides the feebleness, and heals the infirmity of the will, has
taught nothing; but what agrees with the sentiments of all the Thomists, albeit
some speak in other terms, page 49.

Thus Denis Raimond Eclaircissement du fait, and du sens de Jansenius a Cologne
1660.

Paulus Irenaeus ( to whom also we are referred) tells us, (Disquisit. 1. Art.
3.) that the whole Doctrine of Jansenius, as relating to the five Propositions,
as contained under these two heads. 1. That Efficacious Grace, by which the
Will in infallibly, but without necessity, applied and determined to act
graciously, is necessary to all good actions and to prayer it self. Neither
does Jansenius attribute more efficacy to this grace, than the Thomists. 2.
That in the state of corrupt nature there is no sufficient Grace in the
Molinian sense, etc.

Thus the estate of Affairs stood betwixt the Jansenists and Molinists unto the
year 1662. Neither can I as yet learn, that there passed any thing
considerable, besides what has been mentioned, save persecution, of which
hereafter.

About the end of the year 1662. there being a likelihood of a breach 'twixt
the King of France,. 16. An. 1662. Endeavors for Accommodation 'twixt the
Jansenists and Molinists.
and the Pope, the Molinists begin to incline to terms of accommodement with
the Jansenists: neither were there wanting some moderate Bishops (well-wishers
to the Jansenists) who were very zealous in the prosecution of this design; who
also received a Commission from the King, to transact this affair, and bring it
to some issue. The Prelates, who had part in this Conference, were Mr. the
Bishop of Comenge, Mr. the Archbishop of Paris, and Mr. the Bishop of Laon. The
Agents in behalf of the Jansenists (who named themselves the Disciples of St.
Austin) were the Sieurs de Lalane, Girard, etc. Arnauld (the Head of the
Jansenists) refused to engage in this Conference, as it is conjectured, from a
Pr^vision he had of its little success. In the behalf of the Molinists, there
appeared none but P. Ferrier the Jesuit, who was notwithstanding (as it is
said*) influenced and acted by his Chronie P. Annat, on whom the whole society
of the Jesuits repose the main stresse of their designs and affairs against
Jansenisme.

The chief of the Prelates, that were Mediators in this Treaty, was Monsieur de
Comenge, who sent from Tolouze, a writing thus titled, A Project for
Accommodement between those whom we call Jansenists, Against Signature and
Formularie.
and those who are named Molinists, debated betwixt the Bishop de Comenge, and
P. Ferrier the Jesuit. The chief point this Project or Writing contained in
favor of the Jansenists, was, that it should not be exacted from them, any
signature, touching the matter of fact, (viz. Refutat. d^ P. Ferrier chap. 2.
p. 13.
whether these five Propositions were in Jansenius, and condemned in his sense)
nor yet touching the formularie, but only a respectuous silence. For the
Jansenists would not engage in this Treaty of Accommodement, till there was a
Promise given them, that they would not speak, either of signature, or of
formularie; and moreover, that the peace of the Church should not be made to
depend on a question of Fact. This Preliminary Article, which the Molinists
yielded unto, gave the Jansenists, after the Treaty was broken off* great
occasion of scandal: In that say they, this whole Treaty was on their part (
viz. the Jesuits) no other than one continued perfidie; seeing that they have
since avowed, that they always meant, they should condemn the sense of
Jansenius; that is to say, that they should acknowledge, that the Doctrine
condemned in the five Propositions had been taught by Jansenius. This direction
of the intention or mental reservation in the Molinists, made the Jansenists
accuse them of Collusion, etc.

This Treaty began about February 18.. 17.
1663. (New Style.) That which was first proposed by the Bishop of Comenge,
Refut. de P. Ferrier cap. 6.
as the most proper expedient to reconcile the two parties, was, that the
Jansenists, to free themselves from all suspicion, should declare, That they
had no other sentiment about this matter, save what was taught by the Thomists.
The main Article required of the Jansenists, is that they conform to the
Thomists.
But inasmuch as there is a difference amongst the Thomists; and that (for
example) the manner of speech used by Gregory Ariminensis, Estius and many
others, is different from that of Alvarez; the Molinists demanded, that the
Jansenists should reduce themselves, to the form of speech used by Alvarez,
and others, who writ according to his sentiment. And the reason they alleged
of their demand was, that Alvarez having assisted at the Congregations de
Auxiliis, there is a grand appearance, that he, and those others who writ at the
same time, and since took up this mode of speech to salve Liberty, according
to the movements and sentiments which the Popes Clement 8. and Paul 5th had;
albeit they made no Decree on this matter. It was added, that if the Jansenists
would determine in this, all contestations would end; because the opinion of
these Thomists being taught as Orthodox, there remained not betwixt the
Jansenists and the Molinists any more, than the Contestation which has for a
long time been between the S^hole of the Dominicans, and that of the Jesuits,
which has not made any rupture of communion, nor yet of charity between these
two Orders. And in this their hearts would be entirely reunited, albeit their
Schools were not.

The Jansenists answer to this Proposition contained these two parts:. 18. The
Jansenists Reply touching their conformity to the Thomists.
1. That they had refused, and that not without reason, to tie themselves up
generally by a public engagement, to all the expressions of Alvarez; because
he was not the rule of the Church, or measure of their faith. Yea, many famous
Divines and entire Faculties; as those of Lovain and Doway, serve not
themselves of all his expressions. 2. The other part of their reply was a
Declaration at the same time, that there was in the explication of their
sentiments, which they were disposed to give on the five Propositions, that
which was conform, not only to the Doctrine, but also to the expressions of
these New Thomists. The Disciples of St. Austin (add they) have always said,
Refutat. du P. Ferrier cap. 6.
that the Doctrine of Jansenius on the five Propositions, seemed not to them
different from that of the Thomists. And farther to vindicate Jansenius from
the imputation cast upon him, touching his opposition to the Thomists, they
add, 1. That the design of Jansenius was not directly to render himself
conform to the Thomists. 2. That yet in the chief of those points, wherein the
error of Jansenius is made to consist, his Doctrine is not only by consequence,
but formally conform to that of the Thomists. 3. That the most part of those
general and indefinite Propositions, by reason of which they would fain
persuade the world, that Jansenius was opposite to the Thomists, he himself in
other parts of his Book does so restrain and limit, as that it is evident he
intended nothing less than Nonconformitie to the Thomists. And whereas it
might be objected, that the Author des Lettres au Provincial (which is called
the Mystery of Jesuitisme) in his second Letter, complains sadly against the
Thomists, for not publishing fully what they understood by sufficient Grace:
the answer hereunto is, That the said ingenious Author used, and that not
without reason, somewhat more than ordinary warmth and indignation against some
particular persons of the Order of S. Dominick, who being joined to the
Molinists by a Spirit of Cabal and of faction, served themselves of the
equivocate term of Sufficient Grace, thereby to deceive the world, as though
they were agreed. In fine; the Jansenists declared, That the Doctrine of
Jansenius, touching the five Propositions, seemed to them nothing different
from that of the Thomists: and to give a specimen hereof, they instanced in the
point of Efficacious Grace; which said they, as it is explicated by the
defenders of Jansenius, is reduced to this Proposition, common to all the
Thomists, Omnis gratia Christi est efficax alicu^us effectus, ad quem prxime
ordinatur, and quem Deus absoluta voluntate intendit.
viz. every Grace of Christ (...) efficacious of some effect unto which it
(...) nextly ordained, and which God, by hi^ absolute will, does intend. But to
declare their conformity to the Thomists more ^ully, Mr. de Lalane gave the
Bishop of Comenge the Articles of their Doctrine, touching the five
Propositions.

Notwithstanding these Concessions of the Jansenists,. 19. The breaking off the
Treaty of the Jansenists Apology.
the Molinists were not satisfied, but began to fly off unto their old demands
(peradventure from a praevision they had of an accord betwixt their King and
Pope) for a signing the Formularie, and condemning the sense of Jansenius, on
the five Propositions. This the Jansenists judged a very hard and unreasonable
demand. 1. Because it was formally and expressly against the main Praeliminary
Article, granted in order to the Treaty. 2. If they could (add they) have
signed the Formularie, etc. they had not needed any such Treaty for
accommodement, for they should then have been esteemed as good Catholics as
their adversaries the Molinists. 3. They judged it too great tyranny to make
the peace of the Church depend upon a matter purely of fact, and not of faith:
For (say they) suppose the Disciples of St. Austin (asserting that the five
propositions condemned, were not to be found in Jansenius's book, nor yet
condemned in his sense) should be deceived in this their Interpretation of
Jansenius, yet, seeing they condemned the five Propositions, as well as others,
their Error was not in a question of Faith, but purely of fact, such as could
not bespeak them Heretics. For, add they, the common light of Reason as well
as Faith, teaches the most simple, that two things essentially separate, viz.
a particular fact, and a Doctrine of Faith, may also be separated in the
creance of Believers, and therefore there is no shadow to imagine, but that one
may assent, that the Doctrine of the five Propositions is Haeretian, without
assenting, that they are to be found in the Book of Jansenius: as if the
haeresie of the Doctrine should depend on Jansenius; or that it should be
haeresie no where but in his book. Thus the Jansenists apologize, etc. But the
Molinists adhering violently to their demands for the signing the Formularie,
etc. the Treaty broke off.

The Jansenists to purge themselves,. 20. The Jansenists Vindication by the
Bishop of Com^nge his Letter to the King.
after this Treaty drew up certain Articles, (which I suppose were the same
with those they offered in the Treaty) containing the explication of their own
sentiments, on the five condemned propositions. These Articles they sent to
Rome, with their submission to the Pope, not (as they phrase it) a submission
of Faith, but only a submission of Respect or Discipline; which notwithstanding
was acceptable to the Pope. After this Mr. De Lalane, and Mr. Girard presented
a Declaration to the King, by the hand of the Bishop of Comenge, containing the
Abridgement of what they had offered in the Treaty, and what was comprehended
in their Articles sent to Rome. This Declaration having been condemned by some
of the Bishops, is vindicated by a Letter from the Bishop of Comenge ^o the
King, dated Jan. 21. 1664. Thus,

I avow Sir, that it seemed to me, after I had obliged those whom they call
Jansenists to declare (their sense) there could not be any more of heresy or
heretics in the Church, the door being shut both to Error and opiniatretie. In
effect, Sir, in those Conferences, which the Sieurs, the Abbot De Lalane and
Girard had, in the names of all those who are engaged in this cause with P.
Ferrier the Jesuit, they were reduced to declare so neatly what was their
Doctrine on the subject of the five Propositions condemned, (wherein all that
is called Jansenisme is comprehended) as also to speak so precisely the
language of the Thomists, which is received in the Church, that there cannot
remain any thing of Error in their Dogme, -- In such sort, Sir, that on the
one side making them to speak as the Catholic Schools speak; and on the other
side, they having submitted themselves to have no other sentiments, but those
of the Holy See, there remains not more of Error, or of Opiniatretie. Now their
last Declaration, which I had the honor to present to your Majesty, signed by
(...) Sieurs de Lalane and Girard, is but (...) Abregement of all that we have
do^ in nine months travail. They rene^ in this Act the Assurance which the have
given me, and the Sea by me, (...) to have any other sentiments on (...) five
Propositions, but what a^ contained in their Articles, and t^^ submission which
they have made (...) these very Articles to the judgement^ his Ho^ines. For
this Declaration (...) relative to the Articles, which we^ sent and submitted
to the Pope, an^ which contain the sentiments of the^ Theologiens on the five
Propositions. -- It is true, Sir, that they place not (...) the same rank the
submission, which they render to the Definition of Dogmes, and that which they
render to the Definition of particular facts; because the one is a submission
of Faith, and the other is a submission of Respect, and (...) Discipline.
Things being thus dismingled and differenced, Sir, your Majesty may, when you
please, give peace to the Church of France, in pursuit of the generous dess^in
which your piety has given you to (...), etc. Thus the Bishop of Comenge in
behalf of the Jansenists.

The Molinists since the Treaty,. 21. The Molinists persecution of the
Jansenists.
have been very active and pressing on the King for his Declaration, against
all such as will not sign the Formularie, and condemnation of Jansenius's book.
The Jansenists have not been wanting, to give their reasons against such
rigorous procedures; affirming, That there was not as yet any ordinance of the
Church obliging thereto; neither was this Formularie approved by the Pope or
Bishops, yea that the Jesuits themselves were forced to abandon it as before.
The Jansenists also published in the year 1664. certain Apologies for
themselves: but all could not secure them against the unwearied endeavors of
their adversaries the Molinists, who obtained the Popes Bull for the imposing
the Formularies, as also the Kings Confirmation of the same.

The Popes Bull runs, as it follows:

ALexander, Bishop, Servant of Servants of God,
for perpetual memory.
The Reason of Apostolic Government, by Divine Providence committed to us,
though undeserving, requires that we apply our whole mind and care, so far as
we may, in the Lord, unto such matters chiefly, as are most conducible to the
conservation and propagation of the Catholic Religion, to the salvation of
souls, and to the repose of Believers. 'Twas from the Intuition hereof, that we
endeavored the Second year of our Pontificat, by an express constitution
published by us on this design, to put a period to the Heresy of Cornelius
Jansenius, which spread it self principally in France, and which after it had
been well-nigh stif^ed by Innocent 10th our Predecessor of happy memory,
ceased not as a Serpent, whose head is broken, to make fresh efforts, and to
appear willing to save it self by its ordinary turnings and windings. But as
the enemy of mankind has an infinity of Artifices to hinder the succes of
good designs, our endeavors (whose only but was to oblige all those who have
erred, to re-enter into the way of salvation) have not had that issue we
desired; albeit our desires have been happily seconded by the pains and
industry, with which our Venerable Brethren, the Archbishops and Bishops of
the Kingdom of France have applied themselves, so far as they could, to cause
the said Apostolic Constitutions to be executed; and by the singular piety of
our very dear Son in our Lord, the most Christian King, who has for the same
purpose afforded us the succor of his hand, with an extraordinary vigor and
constance. Moreover, the most Christian King being induced, by the zeal he has
for Religion, to remonstrate to us by his Ambassador, that the best remedy to
extirpate the restes of this contagious M^ladie, is to cause all the World to
sign one Formularie founded on our Authority. In pursuit whereof, we command
that all Ecclesiastiques, etc. to subscribe the following Formularie.

IN. submit my self to the Apostoli^^ Constitution of Innocent X. dated, Man
31. 1653. and to the Constitution of Alexander 7th, dated Oct. 16. 1656. the
chi^ Bishops: and I do with a sincere mind re^ject and condemn the V
Propositions, t^^ken out of Cornelius Jansenius's Boo^ named Augustinus, and in
the sense intended by the same Author, as the Ap^-stolick^ seat has, by the
said Constitution condemned them. And thus I swear. G^ so help me, and these
holy Evangels (...) God. Given at Rome, Feb. 15. 1665.
This Bull was, April 29. 1665. ( Sti^ Novo) ratified by a Declaration of the
King of France, enjoining the execution of the same. But the Popes Nuncio
imposing the said Bull on the Ecclesiastick^ of France, without regard to the
King^ Authority, there issued forth, May 6^ 1665. an Arrest of the Parliament
(...) Paris, prohibiting the said Bull, etc. Whereupon the Archbishop of
Paris, to comprimize the matter 'twixt the Pope and King, enjoins the Signature
of ^he Formularie by his own Power.

The Molinists are full of indignation and passionate Invectives against the
Jansenists, and all that incline to them; whereof we have a sufficient instance
in their severitie against one of their own Society P. de la Croix, Ref^t. de
la Fausse Relat. du P. Ferrier cap. 12.
who testifying more affection for the Doctrine of S. Austin, than for that of
Molina, was much persecuted by his Brethren the Jesuits; and notwithstanding
his innocence and candor of deportment, and his more than forty years
profession in their Society, he was shut up in a cruel Prison at La Flesche,
where he ended his days, none but God and themselves knows how.

The Jansenists,. 22. The Jansenists multiplication and acceptance with
serious Papists and Protestants.
notwithstanding their great persecution, to this very day, have many and great
friends amongst the more serious and sober of the Nobles, Clergy, and People of
France. Many of the Bishops incline toward them, who (as I now hear) refuse to
sign the Formularie for the condemnation of Jansenius. Amongst the Regulars,
some whole Covents, yea whole Orders a^ levened with Jansenisme; though their
Zeal be not so warm as to quit their preferment for their Principles. The Peers
de L' Oratoire, or Preaching Fri^ars are generally Jansenists, as it appears by
their famous Theses of Efficacious Grace, which they dedicated (...) the
General Assembly of the Clergy (...) France, An. 1657. wherein they asse^
that sufficient Grace does infallibly wa^ its effect, whereas efficacious Grace
do^ infal^ibly produce it in every state. The Dominicans also symbolize very
far, (...) not in every point, with the Jansenists (as has been before shown)
though they dare not profess any considerable favor or kindness toward them,
but rathe^ some of them, out of a spirit of faction, or Interest, fall in with
the Molinists. Yea, not only in France, but also in Flanders, Jansenisme has
taken very deep rooting, especially in the Universities of Louvain, and Doway,
where the Jesuits are as much hated, as by their professed enemies the
Jansenists. The Protestants generally have a great favor and kindness for the
Jansenists. This Conference was at Caen, Feb. (...). 1664.
It Is not long since that Mr. Bochart (Pastor at Caen,) discoursing with an
English Gentleman, about the downfall of Antichrist, gave this as one reason
of the approach thereof, viz. from the multiplying of the Jansenists, and the
Orthodoxalitie of their Opinions, etc. And albeit the Jansenists hitherto have
not dared to profess any great affection for or inclination toward those of
the Reformed Religion; yet it is conceived they want it not, but rather
opportunity. Jansenists in his August. Tom. 3. de Great. l. 8. c. 21. in answer
to this Objection, that his Doctrine was Calvinistick, says, All things that
heretics teach are not heretical. If Calvin agree with Austin and the ancient
Fathers, in any point, we must not be angry with Austin for Calvin's sake, but
congratulate Calvin for Austins sake. I once also met with this expression in
one of their Papers, where being accused of Calvinisme, they reply thus: If
Calvin and Luther be in the right, let them be absolved, rather than that the
Truth should be condemned. The great Crime the Jesuits accuse the Jansenists
of, is their symbolizing with the Calvinists: Wherefore somewhile since the
Molinists pictured the Jansenist with his arms open, embracing Calvin. The
Jansenists to vindicate themselves from this Imputation, now and then write a
book against the Calvinists.

Notwithstanding the Popes Bull,. 23.
the Kings Declaration, and the Archbishop of Paris's Ordinance for the
Signature of the Formularie, great numbers of the Ecclesiastics of France,
both Secular and Regular, have refused to subscribe the same. Yea there are
four Bishops, who have, even till the end of the last Summer, 1668. dissented
herefrom; and by the interposure of other Prelates, have brought the Pope to be
satisfied, that they consent to the condemnation of the V Propositions formerly
sentenced, without any mention of the Books of Jansenius: to which they have
given their obedience, and accordingly subscribed. Hence (as I hear) the
Jansenists by the Kings interposure, are again restored to their Dignities and
preferments in the Sorbon, and elsewhere. The last news we hear of the
Jansenists, is their consultations about setting up a Patriarch in France,
which the Popes Nuncio complained of to the King, as that which would bring
great Detriment to his Holiness.

PART II.
The Dogmatick Idea of Jansenisme.
The Principles of Jansenisme as laid down by Jansenius. 1. Efficacious Grace
the first Principle of Jansenisme: of habitual and actual adjutorie. 2. The
traduction of Original sin. 3. How far Invincible ignorance is sin. 4. Of
sinful Concupiscence, 1 John 2. 16. 5. Of the nature of Fruition, and that God
is its alone object. 6. Why love to the creature for it self is irregular. 7.
The pestiferous effects of creature-love and fruition. 8. No free will to good.
9. Indifference not essential to Liberty, neither does voluntary Necessity
exclude it. 10. The state of pure Nature, since the fall, is but a philosophic
figment 11. Love to God in the state of Innocence both natural and
supernatural* How love to God is a debt to huma^ Nature, and yet of Grace. 12.
Ther^ is no natural Grace or Happiness, b^ what is supernatural. 13. How G^
cannot but punish sin: Sin the greate^ punishment of sin. 14. No Obligation on
God to give Grace to such as improve Naturals. 15. The impotence (...) the Law
as to salvation, and the irr^^tation of sin thereby. 16. Of Medic^^nal
efficacious Grace, and its necessiti^ 17. The nature of efficacious Grace i^
Divine suavity. 18. There is no sufficient Grace but what is efficaciou^ 19.
How many ways Gods Precept are useful and possible, without sufficient Grace.
20. The Distributions (...) Efficacious Grace into preventing an^ subsequent.
21. All Grace in love (...) God. 22. Of servile fear, its causes* etc. 23. Of
Free Will, its nature, etc. 24. The mode of reconciling Free-wi^^ with
Efficacious Grace. 25. Of Pre^destination, its act, object, motives, etc* 26.
Of Reprobation, and against Vn^versal Grace. 27. Against Scholastic Theology.
28. The Jansenists D^gmes of faith, touching the perfection of Scriptures,
efficacious Grace, justification by faith, etc. 29. Their practical Theology.
30. Their Principles as to Church Discipline: 1. That there is no humane
infallible judge in matters of faith. 2. That Church^power is declarative only.
3. For liberty of Conscience, etc.

HAving given some Historick account of Jansenisme,. 1. The Principles of
Jansenisme.
its Authors, Rise, and Progress, together with sundry particularities, as to
matter of fact: we now proceed to its Principles both Dogmatick and Practick;
wherein we may be more affirmative and peremptory, than in former matters of
fact. The Principles of Jansenisme (as of all Religi^n) have a threefold (...)
or regard. 1. To Faith or Doctrine. 1. The Notional Principles of Jansenisme as
laid down by Jansenius.
2. To Discipline and Worship. 3. To Morals, or Conversation. We shall begin
with the first, namely the Principles of Jansenisme relating unto Faith; which
though in themselves more speculative and national, yet have they a very
soverein influence on practice. These national principles of Jansenisme may be
considered, as laid down by Jansenius, the Founder of this Sect, or as taken up
by his Adhaerents. We shall first consider them, as they are to be found in
Jansenius his Augustinus, which is made the source and measure of Jansenisme.
And here we may not engage so deeply, as to extract a perfect Idea of all
Jansenius's Doctrine; but shall content our selves to cull forth and collect
such particular notions of his, as carry in them some note of peculiaritie and
remarque, whence the denomination of Jansenisme received its Original. And in
this undertaking we shall follow Jansenius, (...), in his own words
(translated) and method, as well as sense, so near as we may.

1. As (...), ^. Efficacious Grace the first Principle of Jansenisme.
the first lie or Idol of Molinisme consists in the asserting of Free Will; so,
(...), the first Truth of Jansenisme regards Efficacious Grace. This is the
first great fundamental notion, which I have remarqued in Jansenius and his
Adhaerents, who indeed are great Advancers of Efficacious Grace, but as great
Abasers of Corrupt Nature; friends of Free Grace, but professed enemies of
Free Will. So Jansenius (in his August. Tom. 2. fol. 60.) distinguishes of a
twofold Adjutorie, or Divine Assistance: Of a twofold Adjutorie habitual and
actual.
the one he calls an Adjutorie sine quo non, without which we cannot act: the
other he calls an Adjutorie quo, by which we act. The first he makes to be only
habitual, preparatory and potential, whereby the Powers of the Soul are
prepared, corroborated, and capacitated to act: the second he makes to be an
actual, energetick or influential Adjutorie, whence follows the application
and determination of the power to act. Habitual Grace.
The former potential habitual Adjutories he supposes to be in the same rank,
with the Power or Faculty, for whose corroboration and assistance they are
given: for out of them and the power which they inform, there is constituted
one entire complete operative faculty; whence the power clothed with, or
informed by these habitual Adjutories, receives the denomination of an actus
primus, a first act, which gives not (...), Phil. 2. 13. the will, Phil. 2. 13.
and the do, but only a complete power of willing and doing. Amongst these
dispositive potential Adjutories or Assistances he reckons all Habits or
Powers* as Intelligible species or Ideas, and the light of Intelligence,
commonly stile^ intellectual Habits; as all moral Habits Dispositions, and
Preparatory Graces, seated in the will. Of Actual Grace, and its necessity.
As for the adjutoriu^ quo, the Adjutorie by which we act, o^ actual
Assistance, he proves, by invincible arguments, that both the Will, and the
freeness of the will, as to whatever is morally good, depends immediately and
wholly on the actual Adjutorie or concourse of Efficacious Grace. This he
proves at large, in his Tom. 3. lib. 1. c. 2, 3. but especially, cap. 4. fol.
6. where he gives this Demonstrative reason from the cause, why no M^tion or
Act of the Will can be Morally good, without the Adjutorie of Efficacious
Grace: The true root (says he) why no work morally good, can be done without
Grace freeing or uncaptivating the will, is this: That which by the bondage of
Concupiscence is taken from good works, is not some supernaturalitie of the
work, or the Reason of merit, but it is the very formal Reason, by which a good
work is constituted such; so that upon the defect thereof sin ipso facto
follows. For the Pondus or weight of Concupiscence, with which the soul is
possessed, wrests it from the love of justice and rectitude, which is
necessarily and essentially required in every good work, and fastens it to some
Creature. But of this more hereafter.

2. Another great Principle,. 2. 2. The traduction of Original sin.
on which Jansenius does largely discourse in order to the subversion of
Molinisme, is touching the Traduction or propagation of Original sin, etc. So
Jansen. August. Tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 6. fol. 86. I find it, says he, to be the
undubitable opinion of Austin, That Original sin is no otherwise propagated,
from the first man to Posterity, but by the lust or Concupiscence of the
flesh; that by the magnitude of that sin all humane nature should be vitiated.
For by this it comes to pass, that this Concupiscential Law, or evil of Nature,
being propagated, also Original sin should be propagated. This he does more
fully explicate in what follows, cap. 19. of this lib. 1. Where he proves out
of Austin, that good or evil Qualities are propagated, not by Emigration, but
Afficiencie (i. e. by affecting what is produced) by reason whereof there is
some like Quality propagated, as lights are propagated by Afficiencie, without
emigration. Jansenius asserts here a Prolifick force in the seed; also a great
efficacy in the fancy of the Parent, for the propagation of original sin;
concluding, that the depraved Imagination and Lust of the Parents have a mighty
force and influence on the Morals of their children. And whereas it may be
demanded, how the soul can receive Impuritie from the body? he replies, that
the soul, by the defilement of the flesh, becomes fleshly: for the society of
sinful flesh hinders it from savoring any thing that is spiritual: as liquors
receive a tang from the vessel,. 3. The depravation of the understanding: and
how far invincible ignorance is sin.
etc.

Jansenius proceeds, from his Discourse of Original Sin in general, to the
particular branches thereof; and begins with the Depravation of the
Understanding. So in his Tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 5, 6. fol. 128. Where that which
deserves special remarque is, that he proves, against the common persuasion of
the Schools, that invincible ignorance of what is our duty is both sinful and
punishable. His words are these, Invincible ignorance, which flows from
necessity, not from the will, is not without sin. By invincible ignorance he
means such as cannot be overcome by any human diligence. And first he takes it
for granted, Jansen. Aug. to. 2. lib. 2. c. 2, 3, 4, 5.
that invincible penal ignorance, wherein we are borne, wants not sin. Then he
comes to a distribution of Ignorance, into Ignorance of Law, and of Fact: as
for Ignorance of Law, it is either of the Divine Pos^tive Law, or of the natural
Law; and thence he concludes, That the question is not of invincible Ignorance,
as to matter of Fact, or as to the Divine Positive Law, both which excuse from
sin; but of invincible Ignorance as to the Law of Nature, or any branch
thereof. Now that this invincible Ignorance of Natures Law, excuses not from
sin, he proves, 1. Because the knowledge of the said natural Law is c^nnatural
to human Nature, 2. If invincible Ignorance of the Law of Nature should excuse
sin, there is n^ reason why judicial ex^^cation or blindness should not also
excuse sin: for both are a sort of ignorance; and both are invincible to
corrupt nature only, but vincible by Divine Grace and Power. Thus Jans. Aug.
Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 6. fo. 127, etc.

Hence Jansenius passes on to the corruption of the Will and Affections;. 4.
Of concupiscence, and its natural propention unto the creature.
which he discourses of under the notion of Concupiscence. So Tom. 2. lib. 2.
cap. 7. fol. 130. Concupiscence (says he) which Tullie calls Lust, and the
Platonists Pleasure, or delectation, is nothing else than an habitual pondus or
weight, by which the soul is inclined and bent to the fruition of the
creatures. For whether this concupiscence be the very sensitive Appetite and
Will, as destitute of Grace, and, by their own gravitie and weight, prone to
the appetition of things created, as many will have it; or whether it be
somewhat superadded to these powers, as Austin rather inclines; (whether one or
the other) its still like an inveterate custom, pertinaciously propelling to the
fruition of Pleasures: Whence Austin more than once calls it, a natural, and,
as to all human power, invincible custom. The ^ject of this concupiscence he
makes to (...), what ever is not God; and particu^rly all pleasures, not only
of the body, ^ut also of the mind. Whence he does, ^ith Austin, reckon not
only the Epicu^ans, but also the Stoics, and other ^hilosophers, who placed
the chiefest good (...) Wisdom or Virtue, as sensual voluptuous ^ersons, who
lived according to the flesh, (...) Romans 8. 4, 5. Romans 8. 4, 5.
The End of this Concu^iscence he makes to be, the fruition of the creature.
For all love either terminates on God, and so it is charity, or on the creature,
and so it is concupiscence; which according to Austin, is, quandouti^ur
fruendis, ac fruimur utendis, an use of things to be enjoyed, and an enjoyment
of things to be used. Thence, in what follows, cap. 8. fol. 132, etc. he gives
us the distribution of Concupiscence, according to that 1 John 2. 16. 1 John 2.
16.
into 1. The Concupiscence of the sensitive part, or the lusts of the flesh;
which comprehends all the Pravitie of the external senses, etc. 2. The
Concupiscence of knowing, or curiosity, termed the lust of the eye. 3. T^^
Concupiscence of excelling, called the pride of life. These three Parts of
Concupiscence he makes the roots of (...) sin.

Jansenius having discoursed at large (...) the Adherence of the Will to the
creature which he calls Concupiscence,. 5. Of the Nature of fruition; and that
God is the alone object thereof.
he come^ to treat of the Wills Adhesion to God, under the Notion of Fruition.
So Tom. 2* lib. 2. cap. 16. fol. 150* etc. Man^ (says he) love those things
they know not they love; but this their love is discovered by fruition: for
love without fruition cannot be understood; as neither fruition without love:
seeing love is the ^eginning of fruition; and fruition the end of love; for
none injoys any thing but what he loves; and none loves any thing but what he
would fain enjoy. Whence it comes to pass, that as there is no Fruition, but
what is seasoned with love, so there is no love, but what tends to frution.
Therefore love, says Austin, is nothing else, but the will desiring or tending
to the fruition of somewhat -- For love, as a hidden fountain, precedeth
fruition; and fruition as an open stream or lake wherein love is drowned, is
more manifest than Love: Wherefore there is the greatest vicinitie betwixt
fruition and love; so that Austin, explicating the reason of fruition, says,
that to enjoy any thing, is by love to adhere unto it, for it self. For if we
do not adhere unto the thing for it self, we do not properly love it, but that
other thing, for which we adhere to it. Fruition properly is not love, but the
fruit, effect, and end thereof. For love when its object is absent, breaks
forth into desire; and when present and possessed, into fruition and joy; which
is the center that terminates its motion. These things being thus explicated;
it evidently follows, (adds he) according to Austin, that a rational creature
may enjoy nothing but God only. For we enjoy only that which we love for it
self; wherein our objective happiness consists -- From this immobile principle
it follows. 1. That all use of the creature, which is not referred unto God, is
sin. 2. That all fruition of the creature, no less than the love thereof, is
sin. 3. That to use God for the obtaining the creature* is sin: which
perversitie is found in all sin; whilst we would enjoy things t^ be used, and
use things to be enjoyed. Whence sprang that rule of Austin, that all human
perversion is, when men would enjoy things to be used, and use things to be
enjoyed: And again, all ordination and virtue, is to enjoy things to be
enjoyed, and to use things to be used. For this is commanded, not only by
Christian Discipline, but also by that natural order which the eternal Law has
constituted: Which order is apparently disturbed when any enjoy the means as
the end, or stick in the way, as in the term or end. Hence cap. 21. fol. 164.
he adds, This the Spirit of God most savingly indicates unto us, that there is
no true^ self-love than that, whereby we love God with all the heart: and
because the most refined and noble love of God, consists in a man's being
abstracted from the reflection, and consideration of himself, it thence
follows, that by how much the more a man forgets himself, by so much the more
noble and exact regard he has unto himself. Thus, by ^n admirable kind of
contention, the more (...) man denies himself, the more he seeks himself; the
more he is emptied of self, ^he more he is filled with God. To relin^uish God
is to embrace nothing.

Hence Jansenius (Tom. 2. lib. 2. c. 19. ^l.. 6. Why love to the creature for
it self i^ irregular.
156.) gives us a demonstration from because, why it is unlawful, for a
creature (...) terminate on himself or on the crea^ure, as the ultimate object
of his love. Because this is the natural condition of a rati^nal creature, to
be placed under God, but ^bove all corporeous Beings. Now this order (...)
preserved by regular Loves and Weights. ^or a weight, according to Austin, is
the ^mpetus or Bent of every thing toward its ^roper place. And the weight of
a rati^nal creature is his love, which is the ^dea, and measure of corporeous
weights. This Pondus or weight of love, is infused into a rational creature,
for the preservation of natural order; that so he may be subject to God, but
Lord of all inferior things. For such is the nature of love, that it subjugates
the person loving to the thing beloved. What we love we serve, and are inferior
unto: whence it follows that the Lover is affected with (...) the perturbations
of the thing be love^ Seeing therefore God, the first Truth a^ chiefest Good,
is alone superior to the r^^tional creature, to him alone we oug^ to su^ject
our selves, by the weight (...) love: which when we do, we act ra^onally and
virtuously: for virtue, whi^ implies the best state of a rational cre^^ture, is
nothing else but the order of lo^^ whereby, as by a weight, the soul kee^ it
self below that which is most supre^ and above that which is below it, in (...)
middle state, according to the obligati^ and appointment of the eternal La^
Hence the root of all sin is an inordin^ adherence to the creature, etc.

Thence Jansenius proceeds to demonstrate the pestiferous effects of inordin^
love,. 7. Seven Pestiferous effects of creature love and fruition.
which terminates on the creature So Tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 20. fol. 159. The
first effect (says he) which the love (...) the creature produces in the
soul, (...) amission of liberty. Whence also follows incapacitie of judgment.
2. Another effect of this inordinate love to the creature, is, that it
transformes us into the ^^^enesse of those things we love. For all ^ve tends to
unity, so far as it is possi^e; and albeit it comes short thereof, (...) it
leaves a likeness. For all likeness (...) but a defective Unity: So that by
the ^rce of love, a man that loves the flesh, is ^ereby made fl^sh^y. 3. Hence
follows ano^^er effect of creature love; the alligation or ^inding the heart to
the things beloved. This at first is insensible, but yet by fre^uent acts, this
inordinate love increas^th; so that at last, from delight there ^riseth
custom; and from custom necessi^ie. 4. Whence also follows a difficulty of
rending the heart from, and grief in parting with beloveds. 5. Hence likewise
results instabilitie and inquietude of soul. 6. Whence also proceeds defilement
of soul: for love is a kind of touch, yea, it is an intimate ingr^sse, or
entering into the thing beloved; which, if it be more ignoble than the lover,
does blemish and contaminate its dignity. This Impuritie clouds and darkens the
mind, obstructing its s^renitie of judgment. 7. Lastly, From this hebetude of
mind, and alligation to creatures, proceeds a perverse use of things; which is
another pestiferous effect of creature love. For we can ne^ use things well,
till we have spirits (...) obliged from them: a mind chained the creature by
inordinate love, (...) but abuse it. Whence he conclud^ fol. 162. That all
things must be refer^ unto God, not only in the habitual co^^tution of the
soul, but also in actual, or least virtual intention thereof.

These things being premised touchi^ inordinate and ordinate love or fruiti^
Jansenius proceeds to prove that (...) Will cannot be the Parent of any w^
spiritualy or morally good.. 8. No Free Will to good.
So Tom. 2. (...) 3. cap. 14. We judge, says he, (...) opinion of Austin, and
his Disciples (...) indubitable. 1. That no good wo^ no not morally such, can
be perfor^ by Free Will, unless it be freed by ^wird^ and that not of every
kind, but of fai^^ 2. That the Liberty of abstaining fr^ sin is lost, and a
necessity of sinni^ even in every act, introduced: beca^ whatever is not of
^aith, is sin. T^ he farther demonstrates, Cap. 17. fol. 2^ Because, according
to the principle (...) Austin, there can be no Work (...) good, but what is
referred unto God, for himself. Whence lib. 4. cap. 11. he proves, That the
virtues of the Roman and Greek Philosophers were vain and sinful, because
swollen with pride. And cap. 12. he particularizeth in the pride of the
Stoics, who held, That the Offices of virtue were desirable because
consentaneous to reason; wherein they made reason their God. He farther
demonstrates the Pride of the Stoics and Peripateticks, in making virtue to be
the chiefest Good, which, says he, is in Austins sense, to live according to
the flesh, Romans 8. 5. Hence also he proceeds to demonstrate, Tom. 2. lib. 4.
cap. 16. That there are no seeds of virtue naturally in men. He grants, that if
we consider the Office of virtue materially and nakedly, without regard to its
form or end, there may be said to be some seminal dispositions naturally
implanted in human nature: whence sprang those heroic acts of the Romans, etc.
But adds he, this Office of virtue is but as the matter or corpse; it is the End
that is the Form, or soul of virtue. Then he concludes, that this opinion of
the see^s of virtue inherent in human nature, was traduced, by the
Semipelagians, from the Gentile Philosophers, viz. the Peripateticks, Stoics,
etc. whose opinion Tullie lib. 5. de ^inib. thus relates: Nature induced the
elements of virtue, -- but she only begins virtue, and no more. These
Philosophic opinions of the seeds of virtue, adds he, the Pelagians,
Semipelagians and Scholemen have brought into the Christian Schools: whence
also the Scholemen distinguish virtue into Natural and supernatural: which is a
distinction not known to former Ages.

Jansenius having demonstrated the Impossibility of Free Will to good,. 9.
Necessity of sin excludes not human liberty: neither is Indifference
essential thereto.
with the necessity of sinning in lapsed nature, he goes on to remove that
common Pelagian objection, viz. that this necessity of sin destroys human
Liberty. For the full solution hereof, he gives us an exact Idea of the
Liberty of the Will, and its combination with some necessity. Thus Tom. 2.
lib. 4. cap. 24. Where he proves at large, That Liberty includes not, in its
formal reason or nature, Indifference to good and evil. He shows, that this
false Idea of Liberty was taken up by the Pelagians, from the institution of
Gentile Philosophers, who fancying nothing more as requisite to good, but the
mere office, or naked matter, asserted an Indifference to good and evil in all;
wherein they placed Liberty, as the Pelagians and Scholemen after them. But
that Indifference to good and evil is not essential or necessary to Liberty,
Jansenius proves, 1. From the Devils, who are determined to evil, yet freely.
2. From the good Angels, who are determined to good, yet freely. 3. From the
cognation 'twixt Liberty and Voluntarinesse: For as an act of the Will may be
voluntary so also free, though immobile and necessarily determined; and that
according to the confession of the Schools, which grant that a desultori us
mobilitie, or mutabilitie of will, is not of the ess^nce of Liberty, but its
imperfection. He farther proves, that Liberty is the same with voluntarines;
yea, the same with the will it self, which cease not to be most free, when
it is most fixed and necessary. Yea, this firmitie and necessity, which arises
from the wills own natural vehemence, or voluntary tendence is so far from
prejudicing its Liberty, as that it does greatly corroborate^ and confirm the
same. He tells us also, that these false ^dea's of human liberty were derived
from Aristotle, who measured every thing by his own reason* Whereas others of
the Ancients had more Orthodoxe notions of human liberty making it the same
with rational spontaneitie, or voluntarines, etc. of these things Jansenius
discourses at large, in what follows, chap. 25. also in his Tom. 3^ lib. 6.
cap. 3. 5. 10, 25, 35, 37, etc.

The Molinists to maintain their (...),. 10. Against a state of pure Nature.
or great Diana of free will, invented a middle state which they call (...)
state of pure Nature, without sin or Grace. This Jansenius greatly opposes, as
tha^ which was greatly derog^tory to the Wisdom and Grace of God. So in his
Tom. 2. (...) spends two or three whole Books in disproving this state of pure
Nature. 1. H^ tells us, that such a state of pure Nature was altogether unknown
to Austin* and the Primitive Church: it having been obtruded upon us by the
Gentile Philosophers, and Christian Heretics the Pelagians, etc. so fol. 278.
Then he passes ( l. 1. c. 1. fol. 279.) to what the latter Scholemen mean by
this their state of pure nature, viz. a Negative Purity, wherein they suppose
a man to be created without Sin, or, Grace: I presume the same with Aristotle's
rasa tabula, which he likened the soul unto. Now that there cannot be such a
state of pure nature, Jansenius proves, 1. From the order or regard a rational
creature has unto God, as his first princ^ple and last end or good: For says
he, it is impossible that a rational creature should be produced by God in a
connatural manner, without some regard to his last and most connatural end. So
cap. 3. fol. 282. For, the reason of Divine Providence, and the connatural
order of things require, that as things proceed from a first principle, so they
tend to some last end. Yea, this flows from the very Institution of Human
Nature, and is founded in its very Essence, that it adhere to God, as its
supreme principle and last end. Which not to do is sin. 2. Seeing a rational
creature cannot be made without a will regularly inclined to God as Creator,
hence follows a necessity of Grace, to inspire this will, whereby the
possibility of a state of pure nature is overturned, etc. 3. All love
terminates either on the creature, and so it is concupiscence, or on God, and so
it is Divine Charity, or love, etc. Whence it follows, there can be no middle
state 'twixt sin and Grace, because the will always adheres to God or the
creature.

Hence Jansenius proceeds to demonstrate,. 11. Love to God in the state of
Innocence, both natural and supernatural.
That Love to God was in the state of Innocence a gift naturally due to humane
Nature, and yet of Grace given to it. So Tom. 2. de Pur. Not. l. 1. c. 15. If
(says he) a rational creature cannot be created without love to God, then
hence occurs a weighty difficulty, whether this love may be styled natural, or
supernatural: a debt or Grace. To which he replies thus: It seems to me that
both may be affirmed without a contradiction. That this love is supernatural,
is beyond controversy amongst all Catholics; for, as eternal bliss, so the
Love of God, which is the way thereto, is in like manner supernatural: for
though one and the other be the action of a creature, yet neither flows from the
principles of nature, or natural faculties and force. This love to God may be
called also natural, not only as consentaneous unto Nature; but 1. On the part
o^ reason: as the natural light of reason dictates, that God is to be beloved
above all, and that by the most natural, strict and universal obligation, than
which nothing is more moral, essential, and eternally obliging to human Nature,
etc. 2. This love of God may be said to be natural, in regard of the will, as
God is the most natural end of its choice, according to that of Scotus, God is
the natural end of man, although not to be obtained naturally. Whence he starts
another difficulty, cap. Whether this love to God be a debt to human Nature.
17. fol. 312. Whether this love to God, be a debt due to human Nature? to
which he replies, 1. That God is to be loved by his creature in every state. 2.
That this love, although it be consentaneous to human nature, yet it is the
effect of supernatural Grace. 3. Hence (says he) it is most safe to affirm,
that a rational creature considered without any foregoing sin, cannot be
created without love to God; at least without a sufficient faculty, by which
he may be enabled to cleave unto God, as his Creator: for otherwise the will
should be void of ^s natural rectitude, and so sinful, etc. Which to impute to
God, is a note of blasphemy, whereby he is made the Author of sin. How of
Grace.
Thence Jansenius proceeds cap. 20. fol. 320. to show how this love to God,
though a debt due to human Nature, proceeds notwithstanding from Grace. 1.
There are, says he, certain debts or decent connaturalities, congruencies, and
equities, which spring not from the right of the creature, but from the Grace
of God. For God is often said to be a debtor to himself, his own attributes, not
only to his Justice, but also to his Wisdom and Goodness, etc. 2. Again, the
very nature of a Rational creature, is the gratuitous and free gift of God; so
in like manner the rectitude of the same nature, which though inseparable, yet
it arises not from any merit of the creature, but from such arguments or
reasons as concern the attributes of God, his Wisdom and Goodness.

From the foresaid hypothesis,. 12. There is no natural virtue or happiness, but
what is supernatural.
that there is no such thing as a state of pure Nature, Jansenius rationally
concludes against, and rejects that usual distinction amongst the Scholemen of
virtue and beatitude, into natural and supernatural, etc. So Tom. 2. de Not.
Pura lib. 2. cap. 2. fol. 326. Where he tells us, That he has often wondered how
it came to pass, that the ancient Philosophers, Socrates, Plato, etc.
discoursed more accurately, and truly of the lapsed state of man, than the late
Scholemen? Neither adds he, can I find any other reason hereof than this, that
the late Scholemen have all followed the pur-blind reasonings of Aristotle; who
being ignorant of his own imbecillitie, and not sensible of any supernatural
adjutorie, taught men to expect all good from their own virtue, etc. Hence the
Pelagians sucked all their poison: which the Scholemen endeavoring to moderate
and allay, have framed two men in one, a Philosopher, and a Christian: Whence,
what ever they find in the Philosopher, touching free will or natural virtue
they apply to their Philosopher; and whatever they find in Scripture, touching
Grace, they refer to their Christian. Thus they frame a double virtue and
happiness, one natural, another supernatural. So again, Jansen. Tom. 2. lib.
4. de Great. Christi, cap. 16. fol. 255. The Scholemen, says he, finding the
Pelagian Infusions touching seeds of virtue, repugnant to the Catholic
Doctrine, they frame a double man in a single, and so double charity, double
virtues, double works; the one natural, the other supernatural; whereof there
is not the least footsteps in Austin, who terms the Philosophers and
Scholemens natural virtues but splendid sins. So Tom. 2. de pur. Not. lib. 2.
c. 5. fol. 332. The Scholemen, says Jansenius, confess, that man cannot be in a
connatural mode created, but for some last end: hence they are forced to coin a
twofold beatitude, one natural, the other supernatural, etc. Then he concludes
cap. 8. That as this state of pure Nature derived its original from the error
of Gentile Philosophy; so likewise this imagination of natural happiness, etc.
In brief, he demonstrates clearly, that these common notions, so frequent in
the Schools, touching natural and moral virtues and happiness, as distinct from
spiritual or supernatural, are but a mere chimera, or figment, hatched first in
the Gentile Schools, and thence derived by the Pelagians and Scholemen into the
Christian Schools, with no small prejudice to the Christian Faith. That there
cannot indeed be any action or work naturally or morally good, but what is such
supernaturally and spiritually is very evident, because the rule of all good,
whether natural, moral, or spiritual is one and the same, namely, the Will of
God revealed in the Moral Law, which gives the esse morale, the moral Being,
morality or formal constitution to all moral good or virtue, whether natural
or supernatural. Besides all good that is truly such, requires an integrity or
fulness of causes, a good principle and end, as well as matter or duty,
according to that Theologick M^xime, Good consists of all its causes, but evil
of any defect.

Hence Jansenius proceeds to prove,. 13. That God cannot but punish sin.
that there is a kind of necessity on God, for the punishing of sin. So Tom.
2. de Pura Not. lib. 3. cap. 2. That God, says he, can permit sin, whereby his
order is disturbed, to go unpunished, Austin every where rejects, as a Paradoxe
irreconcilable with Divine Justice. And this necessity of punishing sin
results not hence, that God has thus by his peculiar will constituted, but from
the very sanction of the Eternal Law, against which God cannot act, any more
than against himself, seeing it is nothing else, but Gods eternal Reason and
Will. The punishment of sin is sin.
Then he proceeds cap. 3, 4. to show, what those punishments are, which are so
inseparably and indispensably fastened to sin, 1. Horror of Conscience.
viz. 1. Horror of Conscience, which is often more intolerable than death it
self. And if there be at any time security on sinners, yet this arises not
from any health of conscience, but from its s^upor. Now by how much the more
stupid conscience is, by so much the more uncurable it is: as in the body, so
in conscience, stupidnes is a disease worse than the most torturing dolors or
pains. 2. Inquietude.
2. Another inseparable punishment of sin, is a perpetual inquietude. 3. Loss
of God.
3. But another more weighty and intimate punishment of sin, is the loss of
the chiefest good. For although no one sins but with his will, yet no one parts
with his chiefest good, but against his will. 4. Adherence to the creature.
4. This is followed with another punishment, which is adherence to the
creature, and by how much the more pleasingly and securely the sinner enjoyes
the creature, by so much the more it is fastened to it, and therefore by so much
the more miserable. 5. Sin is the worst punishment of it self.
5. Sin is an unseparable punishment of it self. For though sin precisely as
voluntary, is not a punishment but offense, yet as it is the offense of a
rational creature, so it is an evil, which none would voluntarily partake of:
For none chooses pure sin. The greatest punishment of sin, says Seneca is in
it self: it is no sooner committed but punished by its very act. Whence
Jansenius, cap. 11, etc. fol. 382. proceeds largely to prove that no evil can
be inflicted by God on an innocent person; which overturnes the Molinists state
of pure nature.

Jansenius,. 14. No obligation on God to give Grace to such as improve Naturals.
the more effectually to undermine the Jesuits great Idol of Free Will, proves
Tom. 3. de Great. Christi, lib. 1. c. 5. fol. 7. That God is not bound by any
stable Law, to give Grace to him that does what he can by the force of nature
to improve the abilities he has. For (says he) there is no Law or Ordination
of God: by which Grace is conferred on sinners that do nothing of good: but
this is dispensed, not only altogether freely, but also according to the most
profound Laws of Divine Gubernation; whereby Grace is sometimes imparted to the
most heinous sinners, and denied to others more righteous. Whence the question
is resolved into this, Whether Grace be infallibly given to those who are less
sinful. That Grace is not thus dispensed, is evident, in children, who without
peradventure are less sinful than persons adult, and yet frequently excluded
from having any share in Divine Grace. The like as to persons adult. And indeed
this Law obliging God to dispense forth Grace, according to men's improvement of
Naturals, is but a vain Comment found out by such, who being not able to bear
the inscrutable profunditie and liber^ie of imparting Grace, were willing to
frame certain chains, whereby Nature and Grace should be knit together, that so
condemned Nature might as it were by certain scales or degrees pass from one
to the other. Thus Jansenius.

Hence Jansenius undertakes to prove the Impotence of the Law as to salvation,.
15. The impotence of the Law as to salvation with the irritation of sin thereby.
and its prevalence as to the irritation of sin. So Tom. 3. de Great. lib. 1.
cap. 8. The knowledge of the Law, (says he) although it removes the ignorance
of our duty, yet it leaves concupiscence more difficult to be overcome, more
flourishing and strong than before. And whoever imagines, that the Law was
given to the Jews immediately for this end, that so they might by institution
thereof be brought to a more facility of righteousness is greatly deceived. For
lust being repressed, is increased; and being like to be deprived of its lusted
good, it burns more strongly for the enjoyment of it. Yea, the Law is so far
from lessening sin, as that it aggravates the same, and shuts up the sinner
under a more severe condemnation. 1. In that he now sins against more light,
etc. 2. In that, if the sinner be brought to any partial or imperfect
conformity to the precepts of the Law, he presently is puffed up with pride,
carnal confidence, and self-sufficience which is the worst of sins. Then cap.
16. 18. he proves, That the Grace of the Law, affects the mind only, not the
will: it shows the disease, but does not cure it, etc. of which more hereafter.

Jansenius having demonstrated the Impotence of the Law,. 16. Of medicinal
efficacious Grace its ^ecessitie.
in combination with Free will, to confer Grace, he thence proceeds to prove
the Necessity and efficacy of Christ's medicinal Grace, etc. So Tom. 3. de
Great. lib. 2. cap. 22. The genuine nature (says he) of medicinal Grace
consists herein, that it give not only an habitual or potential capacity, but
also an actual Adjutorie, or Assistance, whereby the will may be determined
(hic and nunc) immediately unto good. Then cap. 24. he proves more largely,
That this medicinal Grace is Vorticordious or most potent. 1. In that it does,
by an ineffable suavitie, mixed with power, effectually overcome the heart. 2.
In that God is the alone supreme Agent in this work. 3. In that this Medicinal
Grace is such, as that its effect depends not on the will, but the will is by
it determined: whence Austin says, the will cannot resist this Grace, but that
she is more in the power of Gods triumphant victorious Grace, than in her own,
etc. Whence he proceeds to prove, that the Molinists Conditional Grace
destroies Christ's Medicinal Grace, and the difference 'twixt the Grace of a
sick, and that of a sound will, etc. cap. 25.

Hence,. 17. The nature of efficacious Grace in Divine suavitie.
lib. 4. de Great. c. 1, etc. Jansenius proceeds to discourse more fully of the
nature of this Medicinal Efficacious Grace, which he styles a spiritual
suavitie, or celestial delectation, whereby the will is prevented, and bent to
will and do whatever God has appointed it should will and do. This he
afterward calls the Inspiration of Charity, with other Affections naturally
flowing thence. That this medicinal Grace is, as to its substance, a spiritual
suavitie or delectation infused from Heaven, he demonstrates out of Austin, 1.
By an induction of every kind of good, which owes its original to this
Inspiration of Divine suavitie infused by God. 2. He proves the same from the
contrary, namely sin, which springs from a terrene suavitie. 3. From the
conflict 'twixt these opposite suavities. 4. From the nature of the will, which
by reason of its infirmity embraces nothing, but what delights: and by how
much the more it delights in any act, by so much the more strongly it acts
or works. Then cap. 11. he tells us, that this heavenly delectation, is a
vital indeliberate act, dropped into the soul by God; which implies both love and
desire of, as also complacence and satisfaction in its proper objects. He makes
Love to be the principal cause of this Delectation, which tends to its center
God, by the motion of desires, and terminates or rests therein by satisfaction
and delight. For who ever loves God, does so far possess him, and thence
injoies him with delight, and and also delights in him with enjoyment, etc.

Jansenius having made some entrance on the explication and demonstration of
Efficacious Grace,. 18. No sufficient Grace but what is efficacious.
he asserts and proves, Tom. 3. de Great. lib. 3. cap. 1, 2, 3. That men in
their lapsed state are afforded no sufficient Grace, but what is also
efficacious. For, says he, this Adjutorie purely sufficient belongs to the
Grace of Nature, and is altogether unuseful for the reparation of persons
lapsed, although it should be augmented to six hundred degrees of sufficience:
Yea, it cannot be asserted, since the fall, unless with a greater delusion than
that of the Pelagians, taking away origina^ sin, we will allow unto Nature
unwounded force. Yea, what can be produced more monstrous, than such a kind of
Adjutorie, distinct from all the rest, which was never from the beginning of
the fall, nor shall be to the day of judgment, conferred on the human will. So
cap. 5. -- 11. he proves, That the Law was given to the Jews, and to many
Christians, without any such sufficient or adjuvant Grace. And unbelievers want
this sufficient Grace as well the next as more remote, and all the principles
thereof, etc.

Hence Jansenius passes on to show, how many ways the precepts of God may be
said to be possible,. 19. How many ways the Precepts of God may be said to be
possible and useful without sufficient Grace.
without asserting such a sufficient Grace: So Tom. 3. de Great. lib. 3. cap.
15, etc. That the Possibility of Gods commands, on which the Liberty of Will,
and the Reason of sin depends, may be more fully explicated, it must be
observed, how many ways a man may be said to be able, etc. 1. Most remotely,
by the flexibilitie of human liberty. 2. Somewhat more nearly, by faith and
love. 3. But most completely by the Assistance of actual Grace. This complete
power, which actual Grace gives, is always joined, and that inseparably, with
an actual will. Thus therefore the precepts of God are possible, 1. To the just
by faith and love. 2. To unbelievers, by virtue of the flexibilitie of natural
liberty, neither does the suspension of actual Grace at all excuse their moral
impotence, of observing the Precepts; because this impotence is not antecedent
but consequent and voluntary, arising from the perverse disposition of the
will, which, by how much the more fixed it is; by so much the more inexcusable
it is, so far is it from excusing sin. Then cap. 17. Jansenius proves, that
these Divine Precepts are very useful, (though impossible to be kept) by
unbelievers, without the vain figment of sufficient Grace, and that 1. To
discover men's duty. 2. To discover their infirmity. 3. To render them
inexcusable. 4. As a medium of judicial hardness. 5. But especially as to the
Elect, these Precepts and Exhortations are useful: 1. To teach them (...)
infirmity, their blindness and hardness (...) heart, etc. 2. To make them of
(...) miss and humble spirits, willing to (...) saved in Gods way, and on
terms (...) free Grace. God commands a du^^ beyond our strength, thereby to
dri^^ us out of our selves to Christ. 3. To^gether with the Word of Precept,
(...) gives out a word of Power, etc.

Jansenius having discoursed of (...) Nature and Necessity of Efficacious Gra^
he proceeds to treat of the several kin^ thereof.. 20. The distribution of
Grace into Praeventing, subsequent, operant, cooperant, excitant, adjuvant.
Thus Tom. 3. lib. 4. de Gr^ cap. 12. to the 19th, where having give^ the
sentiments of Suarez, and Vasque^ and their defects herein, he lays do^ a
division of his own conformable (...) the mind of Austin, and so distribut^^
Grace, 1. Into Praevenient and subseque^ Which names (says he) are
respe^ctive; whose term is not Grace, ((...) though one Grace did precede the
other) but the acts of the Will. For Grace is said to be praevenient, because
it prevents every good motion of the will; and subsequent, as it follows the
foregoing good motion. This division had its rise not from the Metaphysick
Speculation of the latter Scholemen, but from that famous Pelagian
Controversy, Whether the Will begins the first good mo^ion, so as that Grace
follows the good ^otion of the will? or whether on the ^^^trary, Grace
praecedes, etc. Hence Grace operant, is the same with praeve^ient, and Grace
co-operant the same with ^bsequent. Hence also Grace excitant is ^iled, that
which begins the first good ^otion in the will, and Grace adjuvant is that
which assists any good already be^un in the will, etc.

Jansenius having finished his Discourse (...) Medicinal Efficacious Grace,. 21.
An Virtue consists in love to Go^.
he pro^eeds to the effect thereof, namely to ^irtue, which he makes to
consist, radi^ally and principally in Love to God. So ^om. 3. de Great. lib. 5.
cap. 3, etc. Austin (says he) teaches us, that the virtue of a Rational
creature, is no other than love to God. Which Doctrine indeed seems very
exotic to the Sectators of Aristotle's Morals; but yet, if it be duly weighed,
it will be found to be most true. For man's chiefest goo^ and virtue consists in
adhering to God* which is done by love. Virtue is nothing else but a rectified
will. Henc^ he proves, that all the Cardinal Virtue^ Prudence, Temper^^ce,
Justice, Fortitude; yea, those which they term supernatural, as Faith and
Hope, have (...) their original from Love to God. Hen^ also he proves, cap. 9.
10. That love (...) concupiscence which refers all to self, (...) respect of
God, is vicious: yet it is not repugnant to love to God, to have an e^ on the
reward: for love to God for himself is the only reward of our love to God, i.
e. consummate love to God, is the only reward of our present inchoate love to
God.

Hence Jansenius passes on to treat of the fear of Hell,. 22. Of (...) fear o^
Hell, its causes, effects, etc.
its causes, properties, and effects. So Tom. 3. de Great, lib. 5. cap. 21. etc.
where he shows, that the fear of Hell, considered in its self, is lawful and
profitable; because it is an avoiding of evil, yea, it may be subordinate to
our last end: And whereas some stick or acquiesce in this fear, as (...) the
term or center; this is the fault (...) him that fears, not of the fear. He ^en
distinguishes 'twixt ordinate and ^ordinate fear of Hell: Ordinate is that
whereby the fault is more feared than the punishment; inordinate, when the
punishment is feared more than the fault; which some call servile fear. Thence
he leads us to the Springhead of this fear of Hell, showing, how it springs
not from a spirit of Adoption, which inspires celestial suavities into the
heart; but from the spirit of bondage, or a certain general Grace of of God.
Yet adds he, this fear of Hell is attributed to the Grace of God, because 1.
It proceeds from a Legal faith of Gods Eternal Judgment, which is a gift of
God. 2. God follows this apprehension of future Judgment with comminations,
threats, and commotions of Conscience, etc. 3. God works this fear by softening
the heart; and that either by the immission of temporal tribulations, or by the
ablation of carnal delights, which harden Conscience. Thence he shows, cap. 25.
that this fear of Hell is not from the special grace of Christ, 1. Because it
produces a Legal Righteousness. 2. It does not sever the heart from sin;
because the sinner flies not from sin, but from punishment; he abhors sin, not
as sin, but as dolorifick or painful: there remains still in such, a depraved
will, which is chained by fear of Hell, but not mortified or extinguished. Hence
cap. 35. he proceeds to Explicate the good effects of this legal fear in order
to a thorough conversion: and so he concludes, that this servile fear of hell,
as it is fear, so it is good, but as servile, so it is evil.

Jansenius having discoursed at large of medicinal Grace,. 23. Of Free Will,
its nature, etc.
its nature, and effects, he returns again to the main hindge or head of the
Controversy, to discourse more fully of Free Will, its nature, etc. Thus Tom.
3. de Great. lib. 6. cap. 1. etc. fol. 255. where he begins with this sad
Lamentation: There is deserved and great matter of grief, that some are so
given to human, and for the most part fallacious r^tiocinations, as that they
suppose it more meet to draw the intelligence of free will from Aristotle, and
the Gentile Philosophy, than from the bosom of the ancient Church: namely,
because this matter exceeds not the bounds of natural reason, therefore (as
they conceit) it must be measured by reason. Neither indeed is the Pelagian
haeresie concerning Grace and Free Will any other than pure Aristotelick
Philosophy. Hence he goes on to prove, that Free Will according to Austin,
signifies nothing more than the power or act of the will, which is alone
properly and immediately free, whereas the Reason is free, only by
participation from the will. Then he proceeds to show, ( cap. 3. etc.) That
free is opposed to servile or captive, and implies somewhat positive, which is
nothing else but to be sui juris, under its own power, and so to act freely, is
to have our act in our own power, i. e. in the power of our own will: So
amongst the Greeks, that is styled free, which is (...), in our power, which
they also called (...); which Basil opposes (...), whence it follows that all
the internal and external faculties and acts are so far free, as they are in
the power of, or subject to the will. For whatever we will is in our power. The
will is always, yea essentially free in every act, though necessarily
determined thereto. He farther proves (from cap. 9. to cap. 38.) the essential
combination of a voluntary necessity with the wills freedom; and that by
arguments both artificial and autoritative: showing, how this necessity of the
will flows from its self, its self-moving power, as in God, Christ, glorified
Saints, etc.

Hence Jansenius Tom.. 24. The manner of conciliating efficacious Grace with
the Liberty of the Will.
3. de Great. lib. 8. cap. 6. unto 21. is engaged in that intricate difficulty
of reconciling efficacious Grace with human Liberty, The mode (says he, cap.
6.) of conciliating Divine Grace with free will is so difficult to be
discerned, according to Austin, that when the liberty of the will is defended,
the Grace of God seems to be denied; and when the Grace of God is asserted, the
liberty of the will may be thought to be taken away. Hence Austin, to
manifest, that the liberty of the will continues safe under Grace, and that
both might very well conspire together in one, he never attempted any thing
against the Pelagians, which excluded the will from an instrumental concurrence
with the Grace of God, etc. Then he adds, cap. 15. This very thing John Scotus
does professedly teach, whilst he clearly delivers, That a necessity of
willing, is consistent with the liberty of willing; because says he, the
will, by reason of the firmitie of its Liberty, does impose a necessity on it
self, both in exerting its act, as also in persevering or fixing it ^elf in
act. Hence he farther declares, that the will always keeps its mode of acting
freely, and it is impossible that this mode of acting freely, should be by any
power whatsoever, taken from her. ^hus Jansenius who cap. 18. adds farther
thus, The Catholics say, that by the Grace of God working in us every good
work is done, yet that we are not compelled against our will to believe or that
Grace is violent; because if the will be compelled or forced it does not will.
And they add the reason, because God by Grace does not destroy reason and
will, but enables men to will aright. The like cap. 19. It cannot be (says
Jansenius) but that the will must be free, therefore if Grace enables and makes
us to will, it enables and makes us also to will freely, so that there can be
no repugnance 'twixt Grace and the liberty of the will -- Therefore no
necessity, no ^fficacie on the acts of the will, is to be feared but only
force, coaction, and violent necessity. Thence cap. 21. he answers the
objection of those who pretended, That this his concord of the wills liberty
with efficacious Grace differed not from the opinion of Calvin, etc. To which
he replies, That if Calvin agrees with Austin in any point, we must not have
indignation against Austin for Calvin's sake, but rather thank Calvin for
Austins sake, etc. In brief Jansenius (following Austin) gives a singular
method for the conciliating Divine Grace and human Liberty; namely, by virtue
of that secret, yet powerful sweetness (which the Schools term connaturalitie)
which attends the operation o^ medicinal efficacious Grace, whereby it is
rendered no less compleasant and sweet, ^^an powerful. This happy concordance
(...) efficacious Grace with human liberty is ^xcellently illustrated by
Gibieuf, in his ^^rned Treatise of the Liberty of the ^ill, wherein he
discovers himself to be Jansenist thoroughout, which has ^rought him under the
odium of the Molinists, especially of Annatus, who ^as answered him.

Jansenius having discoursed most ^argely of the Doctrine of Efficacious
Grace,. 25. Of Divine Predestination.
he at last determines or centers ^n the root, head or spring of all, viz. in
Predestination. So in his Tom. 3. lib. 9. de Great. cap. 1, etc. Where he begins
in ^his Preface thus. The dispute of Predestination is so intimately conjoined
to that of Grace, that the nature of the one cannot be exactly known, without
the knowledge of the other. Whence it comes to pass, that look into how many
parts the neoterick Schools are diltracted, about the operation of Grace, so
many dissensions in opinion have they also about Predestination: every party
contending in their manner, according as the Grace they defend requires. But
the principal difficulties in this matter have had their rise from the too
great contention of Philosophic ratiocinations, etc. Jansenius after his
Preface proceeds ( cap. 1. fol. 364.) to the explication of Predestination,
both name and thing. As to its names, he tells us, That to predestinate
properly signifies to praedecree, praedefine, praedetermine somewhat. Thus the
Greek (...) signifies, as Romans 8. 29. Ephesians. 1. 5, 11. And because every
Praedefinition of God must necessarily, eternally precede its temporal effects,
hence instead of (...) sometimes the simple (...) is used, as Romans 1. 4. Luke
22. 22. Acts 2. 23. Acts 17. 26, 31. Acts 10. 42. In all which places (...)
signifies the same with (...); whence (...) is sometimes rendered simply to
decree; because to decree with God is the same with to praedecree. Hence ( cap.
2. fol. 366 he concludes, That from this principle it is no way difficult to
resolve many Scholastic Questions. For hence it is manifest, 1. That the object
of Predestination is not things eternal, but temporal. 2. That Gods
Predestination regards his own affairs: things to be done by him, not merely by
others. For we decree things we are to do, either by working, commanding or
persuading, etc. 3. That Gods Decrees regard both end and means: for they
include all God does. 4. Hence also it comes to pass, that children may be
predestined to glory without previous faith, as well as persons adult by
ordinate merits: for there is no difference in the Decree. 5. That
Predestination regards not only Good, but also Evil, etc. Hence Jansenius (cap.
5.) proceeds to the more full explication of Predestination; which, says he,
is expressed in Scripture by many aequipollent names: for sometimes it is called
Dilection; because God by it wills nothing but good to his creature. Sometimes
it is termed Election; because he chooses one and refuses another: sometimes
it is styled Purpose; because it is not a sterile dilection, but an efficacious
decree of conferring some benefit. Lastly, It Is called a preparation; because
the Decrees of God are as it were pregnant, or big with child, till they
break forth into operation. Election not founded on a Praevision of Faith or
Merits.
Jansenius having given a general explication of Predestination, he passes on
( cap. 15. to 25.) to the head of the Controversy to prove that Efficacious
Election, is not founded on any praevision of merits: 1. He proves the
absolutenes of Divine Election from the Efficacy of Gods will which reaches
both end and means, cap. 17. 2. From Gods efficacious Intention and Will, as to
the salvation of Infants, who cannot be supposed to have any merits, etc. cap.
19. 3. From Gods admirable Gubernation or Disposition of all things, so as that
every thing tends for good to the Elect; which argues a most efficacious
Intention and absolute will of Providence. 4. From Gods contrary Providence
toward the reprobate, cap. 20. 5. He takes another Argument from Gods
Efficacious Vocation, according to his own purpose, which extends it self to
all the effects of Election, even in infants, which argues an absolute purpose,
cap. 21. 6. Then he concludes ( cap. 25.) that the very nature and profunditie
of free Grace requires that the reason of the effusion or of the substraction
thereof, be fetched from the very good pleasure of the Giver, not from any thing
in the persons to whom it is given.

Hence Jansenius proceeds to discourse of Reprobation,. 26. Of Reprobation.
which he makes to be (according to Austin) Gods leaving men under their
original damnation, etc. So Tom. 3. de Great. lib. 10. cap. 2. etc. Where
explicating the distinction given by Modern Divines of Reprobation into
Negative and Positive, he concludes the nullitie of this distinction, by
showing how negative Reprobation includes also positive. The like he farther
inculcates, cap. 3. But according to Austin (adds he) there is no negative
Reprobation to be allowed, because in every sign or moment of Divine account,
it ever has adjoined to it (by reason of the object or person on which both
falls) positive Reprobation. Then having discoursed at large of the Acts and
Effects of this positive absolute Reprobation (cap. 5. 9. 13. etc.) he
concludes, with an Apology for God his sovereintie, and just procedure herein,
(cap. 17.) It may not (says he) seem a wonder to any, that God should create,
conserve, and govern such a number of Reprobates without any purpose of saving
them. For they serve for that purpose to which they are meet, and very
necessary in this state of matters: namely, that in them the severitie and
justice of Divine Vengeance against sin, Against Universal Grace.
as also the magnitude of mercy toward the Elect might be shown forth. For
they who have coined that exotic kind of Predestination, wherein God is
exposed and brought in, as ready to pour out his Graces indifferently unto all,
that he who will may free himself; whilst they seem to lay open the bowels of
Election toward all, they do wholly evacuate the whole of Gods love toward
the Elect, which is so greatly applauded in the Scriptures, and S. Austin, etc.
Lastly, Jansenius (fol. 446.) draws a lively and large parallel 'twixt the
Semipelagians and these New Scholemen or Molinists in all points of moment
referring to Grace, etc.

Hence Jansenius (as also his Comrade St. Cyran). 27. Against Scholastic
Theology.
entertained a deep displeasure against that abstruse, cloudy, and wrangling
kind of Theology brought in by the Scholemen, in imitation of Aristotle, etc.
So Jansen. Tom. 2. de Not. pur. lib. 2. c. 2. fol. 326. Where he shows, how
the Scholemen sucked in from Aristotle, their notions of a state of pure Nature,
Free will, etc. Thus they joined Aristotle with Christ, and his Philosophy
with the Scripture, as Dagon with the Ark. So again Tom. 2. lib. proaem. cap.
28. he says, that the Scholemen being drunken with the love of too much
Philosophy, would fain dig forth, penetrate, form, and judge of the hidden
Mysteries of Grace, according to the rules of reason. Hence that ardor of
questioning and disputing every thing. Hence their Theology became stuffed
with an heap of innumerable opinions, by which all things, though never so
contrary, are made probable: whence a general (...), or Scepticisme: for
nothing is more natural, than of Peripateticks men should become Academicks,
etc. Thus much of Jansenisme as I find it delivered by Jansenius.

We now proceed to discourse a little of Jansenisme,. 28. ^he Jan^nists ^ogmes
^f Faith.
as taken up and maintained by the Sectators of Jansenius, who in the general
touching their sense of Jansenius, refer us to the first and third Disquisition
of Paul Ireneus, as also to the first and fourth part of Denis Raymond, Wherein
(say they) the Jansenists have declared exactly what they understand by the
sense of Jansenius: Moreover how far they symbolize with, and are willing to
conform unto, the expressions of the Thomists has been before in the historick
narrative sufficiently mentioned. But to give some particular Dogmes of the
Jansenists as to faith.

1. They generally (following Jansenius and St. Cyran herein) begin to have a
good esteem of the Sacred Scriptures: and to vindicate much their perfection as
the only rule of faith: I met with this expression in one of their Papers, La
simple Verite a Paris. 1664.
viz. That it is an heresy to judge of heresies without the Word of God. This
farther appears by their late Translation of the Scriptures.

2. As for Jansenius's Doctrine touching efficacious Grace, they reduce it to
this Proposition maintained by all the Thomists, viz. That all the Grace of
Christ is efficaciously productive of some effect to which it is nextly
ordained, and which God by an absolute will, intends. So Refutation du P.
Ferrier c. 4.

3. Hence they allow not any Grace to be sufficient, but what is also
efficacious. So Refutat. du P. Ferrier, c. 11. page 64. Because (say they) this
word Grace sufficient is not to be found, either in the Scripture, or in the
Councils, or in the Fathers, etc. therefore no Jesuit has right to oblige us to
make use of it farther than we please. And to show their dislike of this
sufficient Grace, which the M^linists do so much Idolize, the Jansenists a
while since, in a Show at Paris, framed a Chariot wherein sat two Virgins; the
one with fair and beautiful fruit in her hands without use, which they called
sufficient Grace; the other with fruit useful and nourishing, which they styled
Grace Efficacious. See their sentiments of Sufficient Grace, Part 1.

4. The Jansenists (as Jansenius and St. Cyran their heads) Of Justifi^ation by
^aith ^one.
seem good friends to Justification by Free Grace, and Faith in the blood of
Christ, without any regard to human merits as abused in the Popish sense. It Is
true they make use of the name merit, but in no other sense than it was used by
Austin, without any approbation of the thing, as the ground of Justification.
This is manifest not only from their Books, but also by their Practice. It was
the usual method of Jansenius, for the comforting of afflicted consciences, to
send them to the blood of Christ alone: and Mr. St Cyran seems mighty warm and
pressing on this point. The like instances I have had touching others of this
persuasion in France, who being to deal with dying persons, insisted much upon
pressing them to have recourse to the blood of Christ.

Neither indeed are the Jansenists verst only in speculative and notional,. 29.
Their practical Theology.
but also in practick and active Theology; especially the chief of them
Jansenius and St. Cyran seem to have had a very deep, broad, spiritual light
and insight into the Mysteries of the Gospel, and true Godliness; and I am apt
to persuade my self, they had some feeling apprehensions and inward
acquaintance with those choice Gospel truths, they commend to others. They talk
much of studying the Scriptures, and acquainting our selves with the mind and
Spirit of God therein; they press, with some affectionate importunity, to the
renouncing our own righteousness, strength, wisdom, wills, etc. They greatly
commend to us spiritual poverty, soul-humilitie, heart-mortification,
self-emptinesse, and abjection, etc. These things they insist upon, not
according to the Monkish mode of external mortification, but in a Gospel
strain, with so much meekness of wisdom, and yet with so much spiritual
passion and warmth, as if their words were but sparks, or ideas of that Divine
fire which burned in their hearts. This I have particularly observed in Mr. St.
Cyrans Epistles, in reading whereof, and comparing his expressions with the
Character and Idea I have of his Spirit, and life, I must confess I have been
much recreated. But thus much of their Doctrine.

The Jansenists begin also to have very moderate and favorable persuasions
about Church Discipline; Their principles of Church Discipline.
as it appears by these particulars.

1. They are come now generally to disavow, 1. That there is no human
infallible Judge in matters of Faith.
not only the Popes, but all human Infallibility. This is one of the last
refuges they have made use of against their adversaries, as it appears by a
Paper of theirs lately published, titled, Abrege d'un Traicte intitule
l'Illusion Theologique. The sum whereof they comprise in this Syllogism: One
ought not to hold for Heretics any, but such as resist an Infallible
Authority in matters of faith. Now its certain, the Pope has not such an
Authority. Therefore, etc. The second Proposition, add they, is clear; (as
well as the first;) for an Infallible Authority i^ Soverein in its kind, and
acknowledges no superior, etc.

2. Hence they also hold, 2. That the definition of Dogmes belongs to the Word,
and the definition of facts to the Church; to which we owe only a submission of
respect, not of Faith.
that the Definition of Dogmes and submission of faith thereto, belongs only to
the Word of God; which they make to be the measure of faith, and seat of all
Church Power. So the Bishop of Comenge in his Letter to the King, an. 1664.
touching the Jansenists, speaks thus of them; It is true, Sire, that they place
not in the same rank the submission which they render to the Definition of
Dogmes, and that which they render to the Definition of particular facts;
because the one is a submission of faith, and the other a submission of
respect, and of Discipline. The truth, Sire, of things revealed by God, may not
enter into comparison with those not revealed; the Dogmes are revealed, and not
particular facts -- We ought therefore to separate the Dogmes and fact decided
in the Constitutions receive^ by the whole Church; to the en^ that we submit to
the one with (...) submission of faith, and to the other with a submission of
pure respect. Thus also the Jansenists themselves, in their La simple verite, a
Paris 1664. The common light of reason (say they) shows, even to the most
gross, that two things that are essentially separate, as a particular fact,
and a Doctrine of faith, may be also separate in the creance of believers, etc.
Hence also the Jansenists assert,

3. That the Church has only a Declarative power, and that as to matters of
fact and Discipline; i. e. Ministerial only, and subordinate unto that of
Christ. This is evident by their La simple Verite page 60. In the state of this
life the Church demands of her children nothing but love and accord: and the
obedience she requires of them, touching the facts which she decides, is
nothing but modesty and peace; not a creance or belief. She commands them to
believe nothing, but what she has learnt of Jesus Christ. She declares to them
his Word, not her own; leaving to them, as other things, so also that liberty,
which he has given unto them; provided, that they loose not that respect, which
they owe to their Mother, and trouble not the union of her children. Thus the
Jansenists of the Churches Power and Discipline.

4. Hence also, 4. Liberty of Conscience.
as it naturally follows, the Jansenists allow, yea contend for a Liberty of
Conscience, as to matters of fact, and Ecclesiastic determinations about
things indifferent, or things not clearly revealed. This evidently appears by,
and flows from what was lastly mentioned of them: where all that they require
to the Churches definitions, is only a submission of respect; and in case of
difference in persuasions, a respectuous silence, so far as the Churches Peace
and Unity require^ it, etc.

5. Hence also we see what Uniformity, 5. What Uniformitie is requisite.
and Obedience they require, as to Church determinations about matters of fact,
(which is the alone object of her power:) namely a submission of respect, or in
case of differences a respectuous silence only, not a submission of faith.

6. Hence as to Church Censures they hold, 6. Of Censures.
( La simple Verite page 58.) that Excommunication implies a penal death of the
soul: and seeing this death is the last of punishments, which the Church can
impose, she ought not to ordain it, but conformably to the Scripture, and holy
Decrees, which are those of the Spirit of God; for undubitable crimes, and
worthy of death, against those who are convicted.

7. Touching Schism, 7. Of Schism.
they hold, that be is the Schismatic, who treats others more Catholic than
himself, as guilty of Schism.

As for Heresy, they say, 8. Of Her^sie.
1. It Is an Heresy to judge of Heresies without the Word of God. 2. That it is
an Heresy to believe, that all those, who have a spice of Heresy, are
Heretics. They make Heresy to consist mostly in the affection; as in their La
simple Verite, page 50.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 24. for works, read Augustinus: p. 15. l. 11. for au r. at: p.
16. l. 22. r. Gautruche: p. 20. ^. 22. r. Jansenius's Augustinus: l. 25. for
against r. from: p. 23. l. 27. after besides, add that: p. 53. l. 26. r. drew:
p. 66. l. 19. for nos r. nobis: p. 78. l. 10. for was r. has: p. 81. l. 2. for
it r. there: p. 87. l. 24. r. Heretical: p. 93. l. 23. r. rest: p. 139. l. 22.
for by r. to: p. 148. l. ult. for compleasant r. pleasant.


