THE Grand Pyrate: Or, the LIFE and DEATH OF Capt. GEORGE CVSACK The great
Sea-Robber. WITH An Account of all his notorious Robberies both at Sea and
Land. TOGETHER With his TRIAL, CONDEMNATION, and EXECVTION.

Taken by an Impartial Hand.

Licensed November. 19. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the Sign of the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. MDCLXXVI.

THE GRAND PIRATE, Or the LIFE and DEATH of Captain GEORGE CUSACK.
THE World has been long entertained with Accounts of Highway-men and
Land-Robbers, but Piracies and Sea-Robbers being for the most part either under
the guard and protection of some States, that avowedly drive this infamous
Traffic, as they of Algiers and Salley do, or on the pretense of a Commission
from some Prince engaged in a War with his Neighbors; therefore it is hoped
that the following Account shall be received and read generally, since it
contains some of the passages of the most signal Sea-Robber, that perhaps this
Age has known, who encouraged with success, did with a most daring boldness,
drive that cursed Trade for 15 years, and not daunted with one misfortune,
continued and improved in his villainous course of life, till at length this
Captain George Cusack (for that was his name) was taken, and being found guilty
of unparalleled Crimes, was put to death at the Execution Dock on Monday the
Eighteenth of January, 1674. according to the Sentence past upon him.

GEorge Cusack Son to one Mr. Cusack of Granstowen in the County of East-Meath
in Ireland, was bred a Scholar and a Roman Catholic, and was disposed by his
Parents for a Friar, but the wildness of his youth not agreeing with a
Religious Life, made him first rob his nearest Kinsman Mr. Benedict Arthur of
Sixty pounds and his Watch within two Miles of Dublin in the year 53; after
which he went to serve as a private Soldier in Flanders, but the severity of
that Discipline not agreeing with his looser temper, he did betake himself to
Sea-Service in several Privateers, where he continued for some time in a
private capacity; but after frequent removals, his first Rise was to the degree
of a Gunners Mate aboard of Captain North, in a Voyage to Guinney; where being
very mutinous, and usual punishments not being able to keep him in order, his
Captain put him aboard the Gift Frigate, Captain Reynolds Commander, in whom he
sailed to Barbados; and after his return entered himself a Midship-man aboard
Sir Edward Spragge: by whom being employed as a Press-Master in the former
Dutch War, amongst many others he pressed one that was in the hands of the
Bailiffs, taken by them upon Execution, and carried him clear away; for which
and for being a grand Mutineer, he was afterward seized, and committed a
Prisoner to the Marshalsey for some months.

But at last being set at liberty, and having resolutions to raise himself by
any sinister ways, and determining to surprise and run away with the first
good Ship he could get employment in, it so happened, that in the year 1668.
being at Cadiz in Spain, he was entertained as Gunner aboard the Hopewell of
Tangier, Captain Lambert Bartholomew Welters Commander, a Vessel of about 250
Tuns, and 24 Guns, bound from Tangier to Virginia, and richly laden, who
sailing from Cadiz the second of September, and the next day springing a Leak,
thereupon by the general opinion of Officers aboard, it was thought best to put
in at the Grand Canar^es to stop it, where meeting with contrary winds, they
constrained them to make more Southerly. Upon the Eighth of October following
at One of the Clock in the Morning, being in 24 Degrees and about 40 Minutes
Northern Latitude, and about 220 English Leagues Westward from ^erre, the said
George Cusack, with one Richard Parslow, one of the Mates or Pilots, and
several others of their Confederates, having privately armed themselves, fell
upon the Watches, and by violence seized the said Captain Lambert, Thomas Power
Merchant and Supercargo of the said Vessel, Daniel Gilson chief Mate, together
with the Boatswain, Carpenter, Butler, and several others, having first through
the great Cabin door shot the Cabbin-Boy through the Thigh, and the Carpenter
upon the Deck through the Buttock, whom they also wounded in the Arm, together
with the Boatswain, all whom this Cusack commanded unto the Round-house,
placing Guards over them, where they apprehended every minute to be murdered
and thrown overboard; at last he hawled out the small Boat of tht Ship, and by
violence forced into the Boat Captain Lambert, with the chief Mate, the wounded
Carpenter, the Butler with three Seamen more, whom he exposed to the mercy of
the Ocean, denying them the Longboat, though they begged it upon their knees,
without giving any reason for so inhumane an action, or having any provocation
thereunto.

The said Thomas Power being commanded out of the Round-house with the rest,
observing the said Cusack to be the principal Conspirator, desired to speak a
few words with him before he was put off, who replied, God damme, what you have
to say, say quickly; whereupon the said Power desired him to Pistol him there,
rather than to expose him to the mercy of the Sea, for he had rather dye a
sudden death, than a certain lingering one; but withal told him, he conceived
he had a better way for the saving of his life, for a day or two might be of
use to him till he had taken an account of the Ships Cargo, and how she was
stored with Water and Provision, which having done, he might Pistol him, or
throw him overboard at pleasure. Upon which the said Cusack forthwith commanded
the said Power into the great Cabin, under the command of two Musketeers,
straightly charging them upon pain of death to shoot him if he spoke to any man.
The Boat being fired at by a small shot out of the Gun-room by one Edward
Barry, and forced away, Cusack together with ^ar^ow, the same day broke open
Captain Lambert's Chests, and there divided betwixt them all the Goods and
Money in equal proportion, together with all the things of value belonging to
Captain Lambert in the great Cabin, declaring their resolution of running away
with the Ships and Cargo, and of taking or sinking all Ships or Vessels they
should meet with belonging to any Nation, English only excepted: promising to
all persons aboard that joined with them, their proportion and shares of the
Ship and Cargo; together with all other Ships they should afterward take or
surprise, according to the Laws of Pleron: to which end he ordered to be drawn
up in Writing an Obligation to himself as Captain, and the said Parslow as
Lieutenant, expressing the Resolutions of the Subscribers upon their Oaths to
live and die with them in this their present design, to which there subscribed
one Thomas Carre alias Richardson, formerly Gunners Mate, whom he now made
Master; one Nathanael Estan alias Hillon, whom he made Masters Mate, Moses
White made Boatswain; thirteen Servants (who all voluntarily entered themselves
upon the said Voyage for Virginia) together with most of the Seamen, many of
them not daring to refuse. The persons names not subscribing nor consenting
being John Samuel the former Boatswain, sore wounded; Jacob Marrelly the
Surgeon, Leonard Cornelly the Carpenters Mate, Jacob Cornelly the chief Boy,
with three other Cabin Boys, and Benjamin Wilbius servant to the said Thomas
Power. All whom they forced along with them. The persons unwillingly or
constrainedly subscribing the Writings were, Thomas Wildsmith, Sergeant Andrew
Mattes, and one Clark of Tangier Seamen. After the seizure of the Ship he
possessed himself of all Letters and Writings relating to the Voyage, as well
belonging to Captain Lambert, as also those in the possession of Thomas Power,
except three Papers only which Power has concealed and reserved, almost all
which he threw over board, lest any of them should discover his Piratical
proceedings, and could not be persuaded to save a great large Bible that
constantly lay upon the great Cabin Table, from the mercy of the Waves, which
whiles some of his own Crew endeavored to persuade him to, he replied, You
Cowards, what do you think to go to Heaven and do such Actions as these? No, I
will make you Officers in Hell under me; and with that threw the Bible out at
the great Cabin window, saying Go thou thy way Divinity, what have we to do
with thee* Upon which he presently altered his Course, and set Say^ for
Guinney, intending there to convert the Cargo into Gold; in ten days time he
run into fourteen Degrees and a half of Northern Latitude, but not being able
to find the Cape de Verde Islands, and being ignorant whether he was to
Windward or Leeward of any of them, and not having above a months fresh Water,
he determined to Sail full West, in hopes either of falling in with some of
the Islands, or at worst to have the advantage of a Trade Wind for Barbados,
where he arrived the fourth of November following; during this passage, as also
before, he often solicited Thomas Power to close with him in his design,
profering him not only his own goods, but the moiety of the Cargo besides,
which Power refusing, wrought in Cusack such a jealousy of him, heightened with
the discontents of his Confederates, that it was daily expected when Power
should be murdered, and thrown overboard, being judged the only person that
was in a capacity of discovering their piratical proceedings. The Boat with
seven men forced to Sea, being concluded without fail lost, this merry Crew
often drunk to them in Hell, though indeed they had more reason to conclude it
nearer to themselves, which they were far enough from having any apprehension
of, witness their daily Song, and their drunken bouts, which was

HANG sorrow, let us cast away care,
the World is bound to find us:
Thou and I, and all must die,
And leave this World behind us.
The Bell shall ring, the Clark shall sing,
The Good old Wife shall wind us.
The Sexton shall lay our Bodies in Clay
Where the Devil in Hell shall find us.
In this passage she espied a Sail to Windward, to whom she gave chase some
hours, supposing it to be a Portuguize from Brazile, whom they intended to make
a prize of, but were out-sayled by her, before their arrival at Barbados,
where they determined to touch and sell for ready money, as much of the Cargo
as they could, as also to carry as many men as they could get. They forced
Power to draw up several Articles of their own dictating, to prevent the
discovery of the Vessel, which they had likewise altered all they could, and
now called her the Valiant Prince, pretending her to belong to Dublin, from
whence she was freighted to Cadiz, laden with loose Pipe-staves,etc. by Cusack,
Barshow, and others; and that there she invested the produce of her Goods in
the present Cargo aboard, and was bound for Iamaica, and so back for Dublin;
and that she has lost her Boat at Sea in foul weather with seven men in it;
when she sprung a Leak, that she touched there to take in fresh Water, and to
stop her Leak only: which pretenses being proclaimed at the Mainmast, it was
declared present Death to every man that gave out otherwise; with Order to sail
forthwith.

At Carl^^^^ Bay the Fourth of November, they saluted the Fort with seven Guns,
who returned one: without touching, they keep their Course for Speights Bay,
where they hoped to Treat with more privacy and security; but before they
arrived there, a Sloop with the Kings Jack and Ancient out, was making after
them; Cusacks Vessel lay by for her, and upon her coming up, invited her Boat
aboard, who examined Cusack whence he was, and whither bound, who answered as
formerly agreed on. The Boat left one Thomas Fox aboard to bring him to an
Anchor in Speights Bay, who immediately acquainted Cusack with the safe arrival
of the Boat, and the seven men in her that he pretended he had lost at Sea, and
that if he touched there, my Lord Willoughby would presently seize him; that
Captain Lambert had acquainted my Lord with all particulars; and that there was
a Privateer setting out, that was ordered to pursue and retake him; that the
said Fox knew his design, and resolved to live and die with him. Upon which
Information Cusack called for a Pistol, and also Parslow fired at the small
Boat of the Sloop, but neither going off, the Sloop steered away, which Cusack
repented he had not either sunk, or forcibly carried away with him.

From thence he immediately resolved for Martinico a French Island, and about
eleven a Clock the same night he was overtaken by a small Vessel manned out by
my Lord Willoughby; who being to Windward, and within shot of Cusack, he fired
about eleven Guns at her; upon which the Vessel immediately tacked and returned
without firing a Gun; the next Day being betwixt Sancta Lucia and Martinico,
and being becalmed toward the Evening, he espied a Katch plying to Windward,
which he made toward all he could, but night coming on, he haled out and
manned his Longboat with twelve men, whom he doubly armed, and commanded them
to Board and take her whatsoever she was; the Longboat haling her, received
this account, That she belonged to Flushing, and was bound to Sirenam, and
desired them to keep off; upon which they durst not attempt her: but Cusack by
this time coming up (the Katch not altering her Course) hailes her himself,
being within Musket shot, and commands her to Strike, otherwise he would sink
her; but receiving no answer, he fired about ten Guns at her, besides some
Small-shot, thinking himself sure of her; but in half an hours time she got the
Windward and escaped; but what damage is uncertain.

The Eighth of November being Sunday, by break of day, with the King's Jack and
Ancient out he came to an Anchor, betwixt the Town of Martinico and Carbat,
giving himself out for a Man of War, bound from London to Iamaica; that he
intended to touch at, but had missed Barbados, and wanting Water and Wood
touched there to supply himself, which all the men aboard were then to give out
upon pain of Death. With these pretenses he sent his Boat ashore to the Fort,
in which returned aboard with him one Mr. Blake an Englishman, pretending
himself an Interpreter, with two Englishmen more, and some French, who
acquainted him, that the Governor was at Carbat at Church; and that it was
both customary for others, and would be necessary for him to kiss his hands;
assuring him of all fair accommodation there. Upon their importunity, together
with the invitation of the Captain of the Guard (by whom he sent the said
Governor a large Looking-Glass as a Present) he was prevailed with to go
ashore, and presently commanded with him Thomas Power: the Church being near
the Seaside, and their Service then ended, the Governor Monsier la Bier (with
many followers) meets Cusac, who discoursed with him in French: Power it seems
conceiving there was then before him a most fit Opportunity, not only to
discover the piratical proceedings of Cusack, but to recover the Vessel and
Cargo, and bring the Pirates to condign punishment, acquaints the Governor
with the sum and substance of what has been here related touching the Ship in
the presence of Cusack, which was interpreted to him by the Black in the
presence and hearing of two or three Englishmen more and many French, desiring
the Governor that he would secure Cusack, with the Boats Crew (who all
alleged their Vessel a Man of War, and Power only a Passenger, whom they were
to deliver at Iamaica, to which they were all ready to give their Oaths) Power
profering to make good the Truth of his accusation with his Life, and for the
better satisfaction of the Governor, then produced the Orders and Instructions
of his Principals, together with his Letter of Attorney, and Captain Lambert's
General Bill of Lading, signed with his own hand, (which Papers, it seems,
Power had privately secured) desiring they might be read; but Monsieur la Bier
would neither suffer them to be read, nor secure Cusack, nor protect Power, nor
send for other Testimonies from aboard, though he was earnestly entreated to do
it; only ordered Power to draw up in writing what he had to charge Cusack with,
and he would give him a farther hearing: Power not being believed, and being
forced to shift for himself, Cusack with what men he could get makes haste
aboard; and not daring to stay to weigh his Anchor, cuts his Cable the same
night, and stands off to Sea, and the next Morning early sends his Boat ashore
doubly armed to Leeward of the Town, and Waters and Woods by force, or at least
by private connivence.

From thence he makes for Mountserrat, where he and the rest of his
Confederates being under the sense of their own guilt, and knowing themselves
fully discovered; endeavored to piece up a kind of agreement with the
Governor Colonel Stapleton, but not daring to trust themselves under his
power, and being informed that my Lord Willoughby was then upon his way for
England, and intended to visit and strengthen the Leeward Islands in his
passage, he withdrew himself to a small Island called Anguilla, where the
Governor Captain Howel (being informed of their villainy, by the dispersed
intelligence of Power) upon his coming ashore seized him and his Boats Crew,
the particulars whereof you have here exposed to your perusal as it was taken
out of Cusacks own Journal, under his own handwriting, by which you may not
only discover the nature of the man, but from thence experience how custom in
sin begets in some men an opinion of the lawfulness of their actions, though
never so criminal, villainous or injurious.

December the 9th. 1668. I went ashore, says he, with five men to look after
six men that runn'd from the Ship, and some five miles in the Country after I
drunk a little Molby at Captain Hews, one Roch comes in and told me that two
Dutchmen run away with the Boat, and hearing this I arose to go away, and stepped
some 40 or 50 paces from the House, they told me if I went any further I was a
dead man, then I did suppose I was betrayed; then came one suddenly and
proffered to lay hold on me, thinking that I had nothing but my Cane, with that
I pulled out a Pocket Pistol and bid him stand off; and so came through two of
their ambushes, meeting in my way one of their Lieutenants, called Lieutenant
Derrick, whom I trust in amongst the rest of his consorts in the wood, and so
going along until my wearied legs missing the pathway were forced into the
woods, where they were sufficiently torn, till at last being very dry with such
unsatiable thirst, I found a puddle of rain water which contained to the value
of a pint betwixt two Rocks, sharing to every one his portion, we marched
further, and being troubled with the former thirst, we spied a House in the
wilderness but the place a little plainer, where I espied a woman big with
child, fearing to fright the woman we asked for some water which she tendered to
us at our request, and withal taking notice of our wearied limbs to be scarce
able to sustain our bodies treated me with a civil entertainment in her house,
which was a Cup of cold water, being at that present more welcome to me than
Gold, there I stayed for two hours to revive my thirsty soul which breathed for
air, after this little space of time comes one John Merideth, and one Bedhell,
both Merchants who courted me to yield upon terms, and deliver my Sword and
Pistols to them, and the Governor should do the same, to which I did give
consent being unable to live in those solitary and rather venomous woods, where
Mirwings and Musculers sting'd us as bad as Wasps, then honor was forced to
yield to unworthiness, for as as soon as the Governor (or rather a Swine driver)
had spied my Rapier in one of those Gentlemen's hands he forced him to deliver
my Rapier and Pistols, and this finished, till the next day following he
summonned me again, and I delivered my self up upon conditions that I should
have all my clothes and moneys belonging unto me in the Ship. But what could I
expect of a rebellious and unworthy Bandida which never did familiar himself
with men, but with wild goats in those woods, he left me with one suit of
clothes and one shirt to my back, continuing among those Satyrs from the eighth
day to the fifteenth, to requite my former kindness sent up with me two more,
the Boatswain and another, all three in Irons, down a Shallops hold, denying me
only to breath in the Hatch-way, as if that I had perpetrated the greatest
murder in the world, which was a great vexation to my Spirit, which with great
courage being never inferior to any, overcame this villainous action with
patience.

It would be too tedious to insert here the havoc that was made of the Ship
and Cargo and Stores, with the hard usage of Captain Lambert, and the
Supercargo Power, the design of this Paper being only to pursue the life and
action of Cusack who from hence was sent up in Irons to Barbado's where being
committed to the Marshals Custody, and afterward to the Common-Goal, he with
several other Felons broke Prison, and seizing upon an empty. Boat ventured to
Sea, and touching at an Indian Island or two to refresh themselves got down to
Tartodos a French Island, where being arrived he met with an opportunity of
surprising another Ship to a greater value, the Particulars whereof you have as
follows.

A Frigate of 250 Tuns and 28 Guns mounted, called the Saint Joseph, belonging
to David Godfry of Lisbon Merchant, and others his partners then residing at
Rochel, being laden with Campeach Wood, Varenus Tobacco, Coco, and other
Merchandise to the value of 125000 pieces of Eight, whereof 20000 were in ready
money, and being ready to sail in the Month of March 1669. whereof one Peter
Asdel was Captain, and Stephen Goliard Merchant or Supercargo; who considering
the hazard the Ship and Cargo might run by the Spanish Men of War in those
parts, who make prize of all Ships but their own betwixt the Tropic, thought
it convenient for the better security of the Ship to strengthen her with as
many men as they could conveniently get, and amongst many others unfortunately
received aboard George Cusack and his Fellows, who having now been used and
pretty well experimented in the Trade of surprising, and having beforehand
contrived and agreed upon their designed Treachery, the First of April
following being the same night of their departure, they fell upon the Master
and Merchant, and the rest of the French aboard being 27 in number, whom having
mastered and secured in the Hold, they immediately set Sail for Carthagine, and
there exposed them to the mercy of the Spaniards their sore enemies without any
relief or maintenance in a most miserable condition, where they remained 17
Months in close Imprisonment; he and his followers in the mean time making for
New England, conclude they might now pass with more security and out of fear of
discovery, the proprietors being in no condition to pursue them or disperse
Intelligence concerning the fact; during this passage we may reasonably
conclude their carriage and behavior was not much different from that of their
former, if we consider only the new name they gave the second Piratical
purchase, calling her now by the name of the Flying Devil, as indeed she might
be so termed, as having none but Devils aboard her; however though the wind
that fills Pirates Sayls does in no case justify their actions, they shortly
after arrived safely upon the Coasts of New England, where in a short time they
disposed of the Cargo of their Vessel, and afterward burnt the Hull, as will
appear more particularly by the ensuing Letter from thence.

Boston, N. E. December. 23. 1673. Mr. GEORGE NEVIL,
SIR, Yours by Mr. Tirry I received, and should have been glad without the
recommendation of our Kinsman upon that common account of Courtesy and
assistance, that the course of Commerce and obligations of humanity is due to
strangers to have opportunities and means to have answered your request; but as
I was at Rochel when the Pyrat Cusack came into these parts, so I cannot
particularly as quaint you with his negotiations here; but since my return home
by proenrations from Mr. Bossereao an Agent from Rochel, I have been put upon
enquiry after the concernment you recommended to me, and find that the
Jurisdiction under which I live, viz. the Colonie, never countenanced the
importation of any of his Commodities, but upon penalty of forfeiture
interdicted the same, however some of the inhabitants of this place, and
persons of considerable interest and estates concerned themselves with the
person that purchased the Cargo, and landed and disposed of the same in the
Colonie of New Plymouth, and also made purchase of the Ship, and in exchange
furnished the Pyrate with a small vessel or two to transport himself and
Comrades, and upon consider ation that the Frigate was not worth setting to Sea
or not worthy to drink any other water, the Artillery, Ammunition, Sails and
Furniture^ being secured they burnt the bottom. I understand that the common
people of the Colony manifested agreat dissatisfaction at the concernment of
those that interested themselves, also that the authority resented the same,
and took security from one Dominick Bodkin an Irish man, the principal
correspondent with Cusack, to respond the claims of such as were concerned in
the said Ship, and should in a year and a day prosecute the same; but the said
term being elapsed and no demand made, his Bonds became void, and he by the
improving of what his profit was there, is become very considerable, and this
year has been here with a very rich Cargo; and had the order you intimate met
him, it might possibly have prevailed for some competent satisfaction; the
Magistrates and People hearing a general displacency against those that were
concerned, but him in particular, as being the only and immediate Agent; he is
gone hence for Virginia and thence is intended for Flanders, with at least a
1000 Hogs heads of Tobacco in two Ships upon his employment; and in regard his
success here has been so good, it is probable he may come here again. Hereby
your self or friends may know how to govern their expectations, and wherein I
may serve you or them I shall be ready to assure you I am

Your faithful friend and servant, Richard Wharton.


Cusack having thus altered the property both of Vessel and goods, and being no
doubt plentifully stored both with moneys and rich goods, his insatiate desire
still thirsting after more, he could not forbear enlarging his own share,
though with the loss of several of his own Crew, who being big with
expectations of their proportions of the whole product, and being resolved to
be more than ordinarily merry ashore, at parting he gives them a small sum of
money to that purpose, and whilst they were in the height of their merriment,
he with the rest of his Countrymen and principal Confederates make all the Sail
they could, leaving their Fellows as empty of their hopes, as full of their
liquor, a pleasant but not sufficient reward for such villains. Hence he steers
his course for Ireland, and though report gives an account of some small
depredations he was guilty of in his way thither, yet I am unwilling to trouble
the Reader with matters of uncertainty, his whole life being a series of
continued Villainies, of which there are too many and too true instances.

Being therefore arrived in Ireland, and having disposed of the product of his
ill gotten purchases as he thought most convenient, and that the might follow
his old trade with less suspicion, he provides himself with an old Greenland
Shallop, and with others of his Crew putting to Sea, in Saint George his
Channel, they meet with a Malligo Ship of Twenty four Guns, fraighted by own
Mr. Fleming, and bound for Glasco in Scotland, whom they made toward all they
could, and coming up with her pretended themselves to be Shipwrackt men, and
were ready to starve for want of sustenance, the Captain out of pity received
them aboard as distressed men, and having plentifully relieved them with all
things necessary, little expecting so sad a return of his kindness, they
according to their wonted custom seized the Vessel, and carried her for
Galloway in Ireland, where they disposed of her and her Cargo, and sent the
Captain and his men in the Greenland Shallop to the mercy of the Seas, who by
Gods providence got the English shores.

But now his many and frequent Piracies having rendered him notorious in those
Seas, he thought it most safe to retire himself for some time within land, and
to that end having provided himself with Horses, he associates himself with a
Company of Tories, and after many robberies, he could not forbear falling upon
the House of one William Chanvelly a Quaker, for which some Months after he was
apprehended and committed to Prison in Dublin, where putting in Bail for his
appearance the Term following, in the interim he made for England, acquainting
his Bail that he was gone thither to endeavor to procure his pardon, which if
he obtained he would then return in certain weeks, otherwise he must shift for
himself.

After his private abode in England for some time, he went over for Holland,
where prying to and again for some advantage, and pretending to have deserted
the French Service, and that he intended for England, having several associates
along with him he became acquainted with one Simon Harcourt, who was taken on
by one Mr. Calhoon owner of the Ship Robert, for Master of that Ship upon a
Voyage to Newcastle, with whom confederating for the surprise of the Vessel,
they accordingly effected their design as particularly appears by the
depositions following.

Edward Creswel of Londonderry makes Oath, that about the first day of July
last past, being aboard the Ship, called the Robert, one Mr. Calhoone being
owner, the said Ship being bound from Amsterdam to Newcastle, one Simon
Harcourt being Master, did take in one Smith, alias Dixon, alias Cusack, with
several others of the said Cusacks Companions, pretending them selves to be
passengers, and the said Ship being at Sea, this Deponent did often observe the
said Harcourt and Cusack and the rest of the pretended Passengers whispering
together, which gave this Deponent cause to believe, that the said Harcourt and
Cusack, and the rest of his pretended Passengers, did intend to surprise and
seize the said Ship; soon after one of Cusacks Companions (this Deponent being
asleep) came to him with a Sword drawn in his hand, and did awake this Deponent
striking him over the* face with the flat of his Sword, and calling him Dog,
Swearing several Oaths, using the Deponent in a very ill manner, and said the
Ship was their own, and that they seized her by Virtue of a French Commission,
and afterward came up with three Ships, two Swedes, and one Dane, and Robbed
them, leaving them not so much as Victuals to maintain them for Twenty four
Hours, having taken their Sails, Cables and Anchors, leaving them to the mercy
of the Sea, and one Main-Sail; and having begged on their knees for their
Fore-Sail, and Anchor, in a passion they let their Water go out of their Casks
which was more dear to them than their Victuals, he bidding them go, the Devil
would furnish them with Sails and Anchors; this Deponent having humbly begged
for a Suit of his own Clothes, after all being taken from him but his Shirt and
his Drawers, Cusack with his Sword drawn caused him to leap over board, and if
the Danes Boat had not been near, (whom they had Robbed) this Deponent had been
drowned; and this Deponent further makes Oath that they took out of the said
Swede Ship, a parcel of Dollars to the value of 1000. as this Deponent on Oath
believes, with much other Merchant goods; It was made out upon Oath by the
Master of the said Swede Ship, before the Council of Elsenore, that he did take
out of the said Ship all the Victuals and Water, excepting half a Barrel of
Water and a little broken Bisquet, and left them but with one Sail and one
Anchor, and that the said Ship was left to the mercy of the Sea, having
fourteen days Sailing to Elsenore.

Jurat. the 22 day of September, 1674. coram me,

Ma. Bramston.



Being possessed of the Vessel, soon after that he seized another Ship called
the Saint Anne of 500 Tuns, bound from Norway to London with Timber and Deals,
chiefly belonging to Captain Shorter of the Bank-side; and at the same time
seized an old Fly-Boat belonging to a Dane, which after having plundered and
taken away her Fore-sayl, with one Anchor and a Cable, and utterly disabled
her, he put the men into her that belonged to the Saint Anne, and turned her
adrift, whom it pleased God, after much hazard and hardship, to send safe
ashore near Yarmouth; but he immediately sailed with the Saint Anne to Aberdeen
in Scotland, where (having disposed of parcel of her loading by the way) he
sold her and her remaining loading for betwixt 2 and 3 hundred pound, though
she was esteemed worth about three thousand pound: after which he came to the
Thames, and had the confidence to come to an Anchor betwixt the Forts at
Gravesend, where he continued two nights and a day; but not finding himself
secure there, he retired to Lee-Road, where he lay nine days before any
discovery was made of him; but notice being given to one Lieutenant Colonel
Kennedy, (who was the man that took him) by the Owner of the Ship Robert of her
surprise, and Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy receiving intimation of her being at
Lee, obtained a Warrant for her apprehension from the Court of Admiralty, which
was accordingly executed, as appears by the following Deposition.

James Dalton of Saint Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, makes
Oath, that he this Deponent on the twenty fourth of August last came to Lee
with Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy, about ten of the Clock in the Evening, and the
said Colonel Kennedy then having a Warrant from the Judge of the Admiralty to
seize a Ship called the Robert, this Deponent then knowing her to be a Robber
or Pirate, for he sailed in her when she belonged to one Mr. Calhoone the right
Owner, and was on board her when she was surprised by Captain Cusack, alias
Smith, alias Dixon, who then came as a Passenger in her from Amsterdam about
June last; about four Leagues from the Fly, the said Smith, alias Dixon, alias
Cusack, seized the said Ship; and a few hours after came up with three Ships,
viz. two Swedes and one Dane, and robbed them of their Sayls, Anchors,
Merohandize, and Provisio^^, leaving nothing but one Sail and Anchor to each*
and left them to the mercy of God and the Sea, and (...) into Alford Creek, and
sold the Plunder there, this Deponent being then one of the Ships Company; all
which this Deponent in formed the Justice of in the presence of the said
Lieutenant Colonel Kennedy when they came to him with the Warrant of Admiralty
to seize the said Ship: and further, that he was a notorious and desperate
person, he cared a^t what he did. And this Deponent too then desired the said
Justice to be very careful of the Prisoners which he had on (...) out of the
Ship, for they would use all violent and desperate means to carry off the said
Ship, their lives being at stake: and the said Justice replied, they were all
honest men, the Ship should not be taken away, he would secure it, which he
said in presence of Colonel Kennedy and one Mr. Dermot and others;
notwithstanding that the said Justice did say, that he had a suspicion of them
the next Morning after the Ship came.

Jurat. 18. die September. 1674. Coram me,

Ma. Bramston.



The said Ship-Robber being thus secured at Lee, and his Sayls brought ashore,
and secured there also, Cusack at the same time being absent upon new designs
for more purchase, but hearing how things went, makes all the haste he could to
Lee, where he and his Comrades partly by force, and partly by connivence,
repossest themselves of Ship and Sayls, and turned the man ashore that was in
possession of her; Colonel Kennedy then being with the Judge of the Admiralty
for a special Warrant: which being obtained, he returned with one of his
Majesty's Yachts, and Mr. Ioynes the Marshal of the Admiralty, who pursued the
said Vessel, and found her at Anchor near the Essex-shore, waiting for more of
their Comrades to come aboard. When Cusack saw the Kings Yacht and Colors, he
would have engaged, but his men would not: he being on the Deck with a Pistol
in each hand, swore God dam him that he should be hanged, which was to the
great grief and loss of many a Merchant, that his Oath was not sooner kept, and
to the good of others so soon, leaving his Ship plentifully victualled with
fresh Meat; for he and his Crew the two Nights they were gone had stolen a
number of Sheep from Essex, according to their wonted custom, whereof some
killed, some alive were found aboard: he was constrained with the rest to
submit himself a Prisoner, and from thence was brought and committed to the
Marshalsey in Southwark.

It now remains, that I give you an Account of the Trial and Sentence of this
famous Pirate, which cannot be better taken than from the Account then, which
follows.

AN Exact Narrative OF THE TRIALS OF THE PIRATES: AND All the PROCEEDINGS at the
late Jail-delivery of the Admiralty, Held in the Old-Bayly, on Thursday and
Saturday, the 7th and 9th of Ian. 1674/5. WHERE Eight Persons were Condemned to
dye. Viz. Capt. George Cusack, alias Dixon, alias Smith. Gerrard Coundon.
William Collingwood. Gerrard Stack. Henry Lovewell. Simon Harcourt. Michael
Fitzgerald.
For taking, and Robbing Two Ships, viz. the Robert, near the Fly: And the Anne
on the Dogger-Sands; With several others. And many other Circumstances there
very Remarkable: The like Court having not been held for many years before.

Printed in the Year, 1675.

AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Trials of the Pirates; AND All the PROCEEDINGS at the
late Jail-delivery of the Admiralty; Held in the Old Bailey, on Thursday, and
Saturday, the 7th and 9th of January, 1674/5.
CAptain George Cusack, sometimes called Dixon, and at other times Smith, with
several of his Confederates, having been detained above Six Months Prisoners in
the Marshalses, in order to their Trials: Which at last was appointed to be on
Thursday the 7th of January Instant, at Iustice-Hall in the Old Bailey, as a
Place most convenient for that purpose. But this Captain, being it seems
Conscious to his own Merits, and apprehensive of the Danger; on Monday before
in the Nightime, broke Prison; Getting first down a Chimney into a lower
Chamber, and then by a Rope into a Garden, and so Cleverly made his Escape: And
could not be heard of till this very Thursday, just as the Court was going to
sit.

At which time, Diligent Enquiry having been made all ways, and Rewards
promised for his Discovery; News came, That there was notice of him at a
certain House toward the Upper end of Holbourn. Where immediately after he was
taken in Bed with a Woman; who was brought along with him, forthwith to the
Old Bailey, and was by some reported to be his Sister. The other Prisoners were
brought over the Water with a strong Guard.

The Court was held by a Special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-delivery, directed to Honorable Persons of the Court of Admiralty; and
several of his Majesty's Justices of the Courts at Westminster, etc. A Silver
Oar was born before the Judge of the Admiralty; And Three Anchors put upon a
Cloth above the Kings-Arms, over the Bench.

The Judge after the Commission read, gave his Charge to the Grand-Inquest, in
an Excellent Oration, acquainting them with his Majesty's Right of Sovereignty
over the British Seas; even to the very Shoars of his Neighbors. That they
have always been accounted, The Royal Chambers of our English Monarchs: Whose
Jurisdiction extends to punish all Outrages, Violences and Offenses whatsoever,
committed thereupon, by any persons, (whether his Subjects, or Strangers,) upon
Ships, Persons, or Goods, of our own Nation; or others in Amity with us. Then
he showed the heynousness of the Crime of Pyracy; That it was against the Law
of Nations; Destructive to Commerce: and therefore particularly branded by our
English Laws, by being excepted out of the benefit of Clergy; allowed in other
cases. Dividing the Offenses he had to give them in Charge, as the subjects of
their Enquiry at this time, into things against the Statute Law; and things
contrary to the Laws, Customs and Usages of the Admiralty. On each of which, he
particularly enlarged. And amongst other things, declared the Ceremony of the
Flagg, to be our King's Indubitable Right; whereby all Ships whatsoever, in
those Seas, are bound to strike to those of his Majesty's, where ever they
meet them: And that all that refuse so to do, are severely punishable by the
Laws of the Admiralty, etc.

Immediately after this, Six Prisoners were brought to the Bar, viz. George
Cusack, William Coundon, Gerrard Stack, Simon Harcourt, Henry Lovewell, and
William Collingwood; Who were Indicted, For that on the Third day of July last
past, they Pyratically, and Feloniously did set upon a Ship called the Robert,
near a place called the Fly, on the Coasts of Holland. And by another
Indictment, That they had Feloniously stoll'n several Goods out of another
Ship, whose name to the Jurors was unknown. To both these Indictments they
pleaded Not Guilty. But upon the Evidence, the Case appeared to be in effect
thus: Cusack, and others of his Company, having a Design to Rob this Ship, and
understanding the Master wanted Seamen, set Two of their Confederates to offer
their Service to him. Where they were entertained; and at last betrayed the
Ship into his hands: which he carried it away.

The Captain at the first took some exceptions to the Jury; not for any
prejudice against any particular men of them; but because they were Citizens;
who did not (he said) understand Maritime-Affairs. And that it was necessary,
Sea-Captains, and Masters of Ships should have been Impannell'd. Upon which
occasion he cried out, We will be Tried (my Lord) by men of our own Trade!
Which being understood in another sense, made not only the Audience, but his
fellow Prisoners to laugh heartily. But being overruled in this, he next
insisted on a Commission from the French King. Which was read; but was found to
be directed to another person: But he alleged, it was his Kinsman, who had the
Grant of a Commission at the same time; and that by mistake the Commissions
were changed: and so his Kinsman's Commission sent to him from Callice to
London; where he paid a Sum of Money for it to the French Resident: And that he
not being able to read French, could not perceive the Error, but acted by it;
not doubting but that it had been his own. And that this Ship the Robert, was
never made any free Ship of England; but the Owners were Dutch, and lived in
Rotterdam: and that he hoped the Court would allow of his Commission.

The Court told him, The Commission was nothing worth. For if it had been
directed to him, (as it was not) there was yet no power given him thereby to
seize Ships of England, as this proved to be. Besides, they ask't, How he durst
take a Commission from any Foreign Prince, directly contrary to the late
Treaty, and his Majesty's Proclamation? To which he Replied, That his
Commission bore date before that Proclamation. And besides insisted, That
whereas by the Indictment he was charged with an Offense committed Super altum
Mare, upon the Sea; This Ship was taken in one of the Dutch Ports, and so not
appertaining to the Jurisdiction of the English Admiralty. But this the
Witnesses refuted, proving she was taken Three Leagues out at Sea, from the Fly.

This Mr. Cusack appeared to be a Person of a Clear Courage, and good
understanding: he pleaded very well for his life; but the matter was too foul
to be washed off with good words.

The Court having withdrawn about an hour, returned to give Judgment. Which was
performed in most Grave and Solid Speeches; setting forth the nature, and
aggravations of their Crimes; and advising them to prepare for death, etc.
Captain Cusack presented a Petition; wherein he begged his life very
pathetically: Recounting his former Services; and offering himself to the
Service of his Majesty's Galleys at Tangier, till by his future good Demeanor
and Services, he might wash off the stains of his late ill Actions, etc. Most
of the others presented Petitions also, desiring Mercy and Favor of the Court:
who proceeded to give Judgment. Which against Captain Cusack, and the Seven
others, before mentioned, to be Convicted for Pyracy and Robbery, was, That
they should be hanged till they were dead.

FINIS.

