THE FOURTH PRINCIPLE OF Christ's Doctrine VINDICATED.

BEING A Brief Answer to Mr. H. Danvers Book, Entitled, A Treatise of Laying
on of Hands.

Plainly Evincing the true Antiquity and Perpetuity of that Despised
Ministration of Prayer, with Imposition of Hands for the Promise of the SPIRIT.

To which is added, A Discourse of the Successors of the Apostles, wherein the
Office of the Messengers of Christ and the Church is Asserted to be Perpetual,
and of Divine Authority, in the same Nature as Bishops, Elders, etc.

By THO. GRANTHAM.

Ps. 119. 173. Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To all the Pastors of the Baptized Churches, more especially to those who
either omit, or are indifferent about the Fourth Principle, Heb. 6. 2.
Brethren and Fathers,
YOU must needs have a greater sense of the matters Treated on in this Book
then other men, and are more Eminently concerned to consider what is to be done
in them. God has made you the Stewards of his Mysteries, and among the rest,
has committed the Fourth Principle, Heb. 6. 2. to your Trust; a necessity
therefore lies upon you to be as Faithful in that as in the Rest.

I shall upon this occasion offer a few things to your Enquiry and
Consideration, and the first is this.

Whether ever it entered into your Hearts to Teach with Diligence, and to
handle distinctly the Duties and Blessings which concern this Principle, so
that the Breasts of your Churches have afforded the sincere Milk of this Word
or Principle, as well as of the rest? And if not, then whether the true Reason
be not, because you know not what to say or do about it?

2. Whether slightly to pass over one Principle or Foundation Doctrine, do not
endanger making the rest like it, and whether we can well support our other
Principles against such an Adversary as should take us upon the Account of our
neglect in this particular.

3. Whether the neglect of this Principle do not lead Christians too much to
neglect one of the greatest Blessings of the New Covenant, even the Sealing
Spirit of Promise, whiles the means once so useful to obtain it, is by you
wholly laid aside.

I humbly beseech you to consider these things, as also what I have here
presented to you in the ensuing Discourses; To the Pening whereof, had I not
been constrained by the unnecessary and unseasonable oppositions made against
the Truths contended for; I should more gladly have spared this Labor, for to
me it is nothing Pleasant but very Grievous, that when many are seeking for
those things that might make for Peace, still new occasions do Intervene to
Revive (if not to augme^ Controversy.

How seasonably Mr. Danvers was in^ated to forbear Writing against his
Brethren, some of you are not ignorant, and how little he has gained by his
unnecessary undertaking, will be yet more evident; and if his Zeal shall yet
enforce further opposition, he may rationally believe those that make
Conscience of this Truth, cannot but endeavor to defend it.

God has endued some of you with moderate and healing Spirits, I entreat all
such to stand up for Peace, to do what they can to prevent these public Jars,
I desire to be so happy, as to see an end of this Controversy.

What I have written, is my judgment and Conscience, I have not writ for
Discourse sake. Nor have I injured the sense of any Author I meddle with, so
far as I know, but have dealt with all good Conscience therein, what I fail in
by reason of humane frailty, I know every good Christian will Pardon me
therein. I am

Your Brother and Fellow Servant. THOMAS GRANTHAM.

THE FOURTH PRINCIPLE OF CHRIST'S DOCTRINE VINDICATED.
HOw hard a thing it is to bring those Sacred Truths of the Gospel to their due
Use and Estimation in the Church, which have been abused by the Corruption of
the Ages past, those cannot be ignorant, whose Lot it has been to Labor in
that glorious Undertaking, which yet is more particularly made manifest at this
time by a late Book Entitled, A Treatise of Laying on of Hands; wherein the
Churches adhearing to that Principle, are not only represented to the World as
founded in Sin, Schism, Error, and Ignorance, By Mr. D. But the Principle it
self also rendered Erroneous, The Principle is this, viz. The promise of the
Holy Spirit which God has made, and Christ obtained for the Church under the
New Testament, and Prayer with the Laying on of hands as the way of* God for
his people wherein to obtain it.
and presented to the world with such a Robe of Folly put upon it by the Vauity
of Men in many Ages past, as may expose it to the Mockage of the ignorant, who
know not to distinguish between Truth and men's sinful Adjuncts wherewith it
has been encumbered, any more then the Soldiers who clothed Christ in a Purple
Robe, and when they had done derided him. By which kind of dealing it were
easy for the Adversaries of other Truths as Baptism and the Table of the Lord,
to disgrace them to the World, since they also have been as much attended with
Chrisms, Crossings, Creamings, Exercisms, Exsuffiations, Sponsors, Spitings,
Saltings, and Superstitions, or Idolatrous Adorations, as this despised Truth
of Prayer with Imposition of Hands for the promised Spirit.. All which Sacred
(and in their places precious) Truths shall yet be more fully restored to their
Integrity and Estemation in the Churches of Christ Maugre opposition.

Toward the advancing a work of which import, Mr. H. D. has had a prize put
into his hand, but wanted a heart to make use of it, with respect to the Fourth
Principle of Christ's Doctrine, choosing rather to disgrace it what in him lay,
whereby he has as much ignobled himself, as he justly advanced his repute in
the Churches, by his useful Labors in his late Treatise of Baptism. Of which
being seasonably admonished, he must expect now to be more sharply reproved.

His Book consists of two General Parts, the first Historical, showing the
opinion of other men concerning the Laying on of Hands: The second Polemical,
showing his own opinion in opposition to most men in sundry important
Particulars.

1. From the Historical part with the Title page there is somewhat gained for
the Truth which he would destroy, whilst he tells us, An account is given both
from Scripture and Antiquity, how it has been practiced in all Ages since
Christ. And beginning with the Scripture, he plainly sets down the use of that
service by the Apostles in several places, only he minceth the matter in
respect of the end for which they observed it as hereafter is showed.

2. He proceeds to other Authorities, about whom he deals not so fair as might
be wished, and likewise he seems too bold. 1. Not fair, because he begins with
a spurious Author, who would besmear the Truth in question, with Unction or
Chrism in the first Age, and chiefly he insists upon such Authors, and such
passages in those Authors, who express something of their own or others
Vanities, in conjunction with Prayer and laying on of Hands; thereby designing
(I fear) to make the thing in question the less acceptable to the Reader; and
having done thus, he labors to impeach the Imposition of hands, (as now
contended for) as if Antiquity were not on our side in this Controversy. For
the first Testimony of any credit (in his own Judgment) which is brought by
him, is that of Calixtus (alias Calistus) and having made him the Author of
Confirmation, (which indeed he was not) he puts the Mark of Pope upon him, to
make the cause he opposes still the more hateful, whereas, though he were
Bishop of the Roman Church about the year 221. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. c. 20.
yet it is certain the Popedom (as now commonly understood) had then no being
in that Church. True it is, Calistus had his mistakes or errors, as well as
other Fathers, and yet some whom Mr. D. mentions with greater Estemation, had
as great (or greater) mistakes then he. However, all that can fairly be said in
this case against Calistus, is, that he helped forward the use of Oil in the
Service of Prayer with Imposition of Hands, but laying on of Hands, (called by
some Confirmation) was in use in the Churches long before, as now I shall show.

For since we have the Scriptures, Acts 8. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. A^ts 19. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Heb. 6. 2. most clearly showing the practice of Prayer with
Imposition of Hands for the promised spirit, (as we shall more full demonstrate
in our second Part) we shall not need to produce any other witness for that
Age, and for the second, we have better evidence than Dynis, or Justin Martyrs
Responses; for Tertullian (whom Mr. D. tells us he had quoted, page 26. but
strangly mistakes himself, having not mentioned him, nor any sentence out of
him) is our witness for the second Century in which he lived and flourished in
the year 202. in the profession of Christianity, under Severus and Antonius,
and wrote an Apology about that time for the Christians, and therefore must
needs be able to give an account of the usage of the Church in the second
Century, his words are these. When we are come out of the Laver, [meaning
Baptism] Tertul. d^ Baptism.
afterward the hand is laid on by Blessing [meaning by Prayer] calling upon,
and inviting tree Holy Ghost. And again, Like as in Baptism the Flesh is washed,
that the Soul may be made clean; so in Laying on of Tertul. d^ Resurrect.
Hands the Flesh is over-shadowed, that the Soul may be illuminated by the Holy
Spirit.

Moreover, we find in Eusebius. expressly, Prayer and Laying on Eusebius lib. 7.
cap. 2.
of Hands, on persons to be united to the Church, called. The ANCIENT MANNER,
and this was about the middle of this Century or Age wherein Tertullian Lived,
being in the days of Stephen Bishop of the Roman Church, Anno 256. and here is
not the least mention of Chrysm, And for the Unction mentioned in Tertul. de
Bapits showed by the Learned Protestants, to be that which was used at Baptism,
and not at laying on of Hands.
or any vain Ceremony. Since then this Service is said to be Ancient at that
time, it may well refer to the Apostolical Century, being but about 150. years
upward; however, its full evidence for the practice in the second Century,
which is sufficient to our present purpose.

These witnesses may also serve for the Third Century, living (as before) both
in the second and third, to whom we may add Urban Bishop of the Roman Church,
whose words as cited by Mr. D. are very harmless words (abating the term
Sacrament, etc.) which be these, That the Sacrament of Confirmation be
immediately given after Baptism, and that all the faithful are to wait for the
Spirit by the Imposition of the B. Hands.

Cyprian also who flourished about the middle of the 300. gives Testimony to
the Practice now contended for, saying, It is to little purpose to lay hands on
them [that returned from Heresie] unless they receive also the Baptism of the
Church, for then at the length they may be sanctified perfectly, etc.

For the Fourth Century, though enough is done by Mr. D. to show they were for
Prayer with Imposition of hands after Baptism, for the Spirit of Promise; yet
since their witness may be more clearly set down, I will add somewhat in that
behalf.

And however Melchiades is Sure I am, in this Man's days, both Christians and
all men had free Liberty to serve God as they saw they ought, this man not
seeking to hinder it, which is not like the Popes of our days. He governed the
Roman Church, Anno 312. and it certainly gratifies the Papists too much, to
acknowledge Popes to have been ever since the time of Clement, as Mr. D. is
pleased to do, page 7.
Popified by Mr. D. yet his Doctrine is not so dangerous as is pretended, for
when he says, Baptism and Imposition of Hands are to be joined together, he is
very consonant to the Apostles practice, Acts 8. and to their Writings, Heb. 6.
2. And when he says, The one is not to be done without the other, his meaning
may be honest, as if a man should say, you ought not to observe one Ordinance
alone, but keep them all. And his saying, The one is not perfect alone; if he
mean, that the perfection of one Ordinance is not such but that we have need of
the rest, all is well enough still, but if he mean Baptism, as such is not
perfect without the other, then for my part I think otherwise; but supposing
him mistaken in some things touching this matter, yet sure his Errors were as
tolerable as theirs that would destroy the thing altogether.

Jerome (who flourished Anno 390. under Valentinian Junior, does not only say,
That it is the Custom of the Church, that upon the Baptized hands should be
Imposed [as Mr. D.] but he also says, Its an observation Apostolical, (which
he might well say, Act. 8. Act. 19. 2 Timothy 1. 6.) and plainly says, It is
found in the A^ts of the Apostles.

Augustine, who lived Anno 395. in the Reign of Theodosius, informs us, That
^ands was laid upon Heretics (returning to the Church) for the uniting of
Charity, which is the greatest gift of the Holy Ghost, which well agrees with
Mr. D. who brings him in saying, Imposition of hands after Baptism was
necessary for the gifts of the Spirit.

Thus much for the Fathers, we shall now observe briefly what Mr. D. has
brought out of the Counsels touching the Point in Controversy.

And first, I observe he fronts his List of them, with the Council of Laodecea,
An. 315. rather then with the Council of Eliberius, which bears date, even
from his own Pen, five years before the other; The reason is manifest, for
though the first set down, speaks not a word of Imposition of hands, or
Confirmation, yet it mentions Chrism, and the other speaks plainly of
Imposition of hands, but mentions not Chrysm; therefore that the Reader might
more stumble at the truth in hand, he has occasion given to do so by the
strange phrases of the Council of Laodecea, and yet Mr. D. Pretends to take up
the stumbling blocks out of the way of Gods People.

Well, for matter of Fact, however these Councels may witness for the
Imposition of hands (at least that of Eliberius) in the third and fourth
hundreds, they living the greatest Part of their time (probably) in the 300.
That we have much elder evidence then this, may I conceive be fairly collected
(yet I will speak under Correction) from the 72. Epistle of Ciprian written to
Stephen Bishop of the Roman Church about 50. years before the Council of
Eliberius, in which one reason rendered why the Council of Carthage, before
that time, had concluded for the Baptizing of returning Heretics, is grounded
upon the unprofitableness of imposition of hands without it; which shows that
both this Council and Ciprian approved thereof; now add that forecited out of
Eusebius, that in the days of this writing between Ciprian and Stephen, prayer
with imposition of hands was called the Ancient Manner, etc. then we infer,
that here were Fathers in this Council with Ciprian, who were sufficient
evidence for the practice contended for, for the second hundred, for if there
were any at that Council aged 70. or 80. years, they then had lived so much of
their time in the second Century as to be able to attest of their own knowledge
the practice now called Ancient. And for the first Century the Scripture is our
Cannon. So then, we have sufficient evidence from Scripture, and good Antiquity
that this Truth began to be practiced in the Apostles days, and continued in
the Churches for four hundred years together, (not without Corruption creeping
into it, I grant, and alas that was the case of most Truths, as well as of
that.)

It were needless to proceed to the following Ages, from which more plenty of
Testimonies may be produced, the Church increasing, and Records being more
carefully preserved then they could be in the first Ages, yet here I will add
that notable testimony of the Council of Mentz, or Meguntine, who says,
Sacramentum Confirmationis ab initia sola manum impositione, exlubitum: Nam cum
initio Spiritus Sanctus, ad evidentiorum recentis ad hinc fidei Confirmationem
signo visibili influerit confirmatis externa Unction, tum opus non erat.
In the beginning the Sacrament of Confirmation was exhibited only by the
Imposition of Hands, the Holy Ghost appearing by evident signs there was no
need of outward anointing. The same is testified Intervil. chap. 16. The
Sacrament of Confirmation was Celebrated in the beginning only, with the laying
on of Hands, and says Alex* de Hales, The Apostles Confirmed with the only
Imposition of Hands, without any certain form of words or outward Element. Thus
the Purity of Truth in this, as in other cases, is evidenced even by those that
have not kept it in the Purity thereof. Now whereas I said Mr. D. was too bold,
etc. my meaning is in this, that he so confidently tells us the Greek Church
did reject Imposition of Hands, etc. and that the Waldenses did the like, for
such Negatives are hard to be demonstrated; for what if some or many of them
did reject it, yet if many, or some of them did receive it, what then is become
of this Negation? That they did reject (or at least many of them) the Popish
Sacrament of Confirmation, in respect of diverse usages therein, I can readily
believe, but that they did reject Prayer, with the laying on of Hands, for the
Promised Spirit, I see no good reason to Believe, partly for that we have an
account from a great Antiquary of the form of words, and of the Prayer used by
the Greek Church in their Imposition of Hands Translated out of the Greek
Euchologian. (...), etc. Thou O Lord, the most Compassionate and great King of
all, graciously impart to this Person the gift of thy Holy, Almighty, and
adorable Spirit, The form of words used in their Confirmation are so far from a
rejection of all that the Papists hold in that Point that they seem to have too
great affinity therewith, viz. Sigillatos primo, scilicit unctos unguento
Chrismatis and signantes eos dicimus sigillum doni Spiritus Sancti.
partly for that some of the Grecian Bishops are certainly found to approve of
Prayer, with laying on of Hands, as Eusebius* for example, who not only Records
it, (as I showed before) for the Ancient Manner of the Church, but also reckons
it amongst the Errors of Novatus, for that he slighted the Imposition of Hands
for the obtaining the Holy Spirit, lib. 6. chap. 42. from whose neglect, it is
like his followers (whom Mr. D. so highly commends) did also lightly esteem it
to their own reproach, and the ill example of Mr. D. and others, in this and
former ages.

Again, Gregory Nazianzen and Theodoret, both Grecians, are aleadged by the
said Antiquary, as giving evidence for the truth in Controversy, calling it, A
holy Mystagogy, wherein they that are initiated, receive as in a shadow the
Invisible grace of the most holy Spirit.

I have not the History whence Mr. D. fetches the Testimony concerning the
Waldensian Brethren, their rejecting Imposition of hands, nor need much be said
to it, since from the very passage alleged by Mr. D. it appears not that they
were Enemies to Prayer, with putting on of Hands for the promised Spirit, but
only of those vanities wherewith it was encumbered in the Papacy.

For, to say nothing of the slender Evasion of that Testimony born by some of
them to that Truth, alleged by Mr. D. p. 27. which is no better an Argument
then if he would prove us his Brethren, not to be of the Baptized Churches,
because we presented to King CHARLES the Second an Apology or Confession of
Faith, wherein we asserted Laying on of Hands, and the general point, or
Christ's Death for all men; when yet diverse of our Christian Brethren, no less
fearing God then our selves, do oppose us in both particulars, and Print
against us, yea, in their Addresses to Authorities do present (perhaps)
something contrary* to us in these particulars. What then? are either they or
we therefore to be accounted none of the Baptized Churches? God forbid. In like
manner those called Hussites are not to be denied to be Waldenses, because of
some variation about Imposition of hands, since its evident such diversities
have befallen in one thing or other, the most serious Christians in every age.
But I say to let this pass,

The very passage cited out of Paul Perrin, page 329. etc. proves not that for
which it is brought, for the things denied in that sentence are, First, That
the Sacrament of Confirmation was Instituted by Christ, meaning the Popish
Sacrament, they having occasion only to witness against that. 2. That Christ
was not Confirmed in his own Person. Meaning in the Popish way of Chrism; etc.
[for that he prayed, and that the Father (who only could Luke 3. 21, 22. Joh.
6. 27.
Seal him) did Seal him with the Holy Ghost immediately after his Baptism is
evident, and so he was confirmed in his own person.] 3. That Baptism is perfect
without that Sacrament. Hereby only rejecting their conceit that think or make
it an appurtenance of Baptism. That this only is their meaning is evident, for
say they, God is Blaspheamed by it. 2. It was introduced by the Instigation of
the Devil to seduce the People, and deprive them of the Faith of the Church, 3.
To draw them to believe Ceremonies, and the necessity of Bishops, [meaning
doubtless Lord Bishop, etc. and not the Overseers of Christ's poor people.]

But surely no man can imagine that those Waldenses were so mad-headed, to say
or think that Prayer with Imposition of Hands for the Spirit of Promise,
according to the Example of the Apostles, simply so considered, and as the next
privilege to holy Baptism, was introduced by the Devil! No, Mr. D. himself is
not offended thereat, page 51. and truly should the Waldenses have had such a
meaning, their Testimony for our Churches succession would be very
inconsiderable.

Wherefore, (to suppose some of them ignorant of what some Churches in this Age
do know concerning the simplicity of this practice, having so continual
occasion from the Papists to be scandalized against it) shall this plead for
you to follow them in that particular? I trow not, our Forefathers may find
that tolerable in the day of Judgment which we shall not find so, having the
advantages which they were not acquainted with. Wherefore, though it be the
unworthy design of Mr. D. in the Historical part of his Book, to make the
Imposition of Hands (as now contended for by his Brethren) to be originally a
Papistical, Babylonish, and Antichristian Ceremony, not used by the Greeks or
any other Churches differing from the Papists, (except our late Reformers some
of them) yet this being little more then his bare word, It may be sufficient to
balance him with the Testimony of Dr. Jer. Tailor, who says,

That Laying on of Hands, was firmly believed by all the Primitive Church, and
became an Universal Practice in all Ages; the Latin Church and the Greek
always did use it, -- It was Ancient and long before Popery entered into the
World, and this Rite has been more abused by Popery then any thing, and to
this day the Bigots (or Jesuits) of the Roman Church) are the greatest Enemies
to it, and from them the Presbyterians.

Yea, such is the evidence of this Despised Truth, that Mr. Calvin, a man
sufficiently (and yet justly) sharp against Chrism, and such vanities; yet is
constrained to own the primitive use of this Ordinance (so I call it) and
desires once and again, it were restored, and because Mr. D. has not fully set
down his words, I will here recite them. Such Laying on of Hands, (says he) as
is done simply, instead of Blessing, I praise, and would that it were at this
day restored to the pure use thereof. And again, I would to God we did keep
still the manner which I have said to have been in old time, Call. Instit. l. 4.
c. 19. S. 4. and S. 13. To whose good desires we may join those of Hommius, and
the Leyden Professors, set down by Mr. D. page 27. viz. That this business of
Confirmation were drained from Antichristian mixtures, both as to Name, Nature,
Matter, Form, Administrator, and Subject also. From all which its remarkable,
that there has been as holy Breathings after the Restoration of this precious
Truth, as other of the paths of Righteousness, and therefore the more
intolerable is it for Mr. D. or any other now to oppose themselves against it,
being now as graciously Restored to its pure use in many Churches of Christ, as
any other Ordinance whatsoever.

So that by this time I hope its apparent, how little reason Mr. D. had to ask
this insinuating Question, page 32. Is there not good ground think you to
suspect the Justice and Truth of that Cause that cannot otherwise be defended
nor maintained but by suborned witnesses, and Knights of the Post? For truly,
as these witnesses are not suborned, but in the rank of Humane Testimonies for
matter of Fact very considerable, so neither is it true, that there are no
better ways to maintain this Truth, seeing the Divine Authority of this Sacred
Truth stands not upon man, but upon the Word of God, as we have in some
former Treatises, and shall now again in our second part further demonstrate.

The Second Part.
TO say nothing here of Mr. Ds. Exceptions against the grounds and ends for, or
from which, others beside the Baptized Crristians do observe Prayer with
Imposition of hands but to leave them to their own Defense; we shall consider
briefly the force of his opposition against his Brethren, among whom,
respecting the Practice of Prayer, with the Laying on of Hands, he very well
observes.

First, The Name which we (or rather the Lord) gives this Rite, Laying on of
Hands.

Second, The Subjects, viz. All Baptized Believers, Men and Women,

Third, The Administrators, viz. The Elders or Presbyters, [or

Fourth, The end for the Promised Spirit to Confirm the Baptized, and orderly
to admit into the Church, [to Confirm, only as the ways of God do, all help to
Edify, and strengthen Gods People.]

Fifth, The Time or Order in which this is Administered, betwixt Baptism and the
Supper, or presently after Baptism. If no imergency require some Iteration.


Sixth, The Principal Ground upon which they assert it, viz. The Scripture,
especially from Heb. 6. 2. Act. 8. 17. and 19. 2. 6.

When Mr. D. comes to oppose us in these Particulars, p. 40. he inverts the
order here propounded, and begins with the last particular in the first place,
but first he premises several things. And first he is pleased to say.

That we do not affirm, or deliver our opinion upon Heb. 6. 2. with so much
modesty or Sobriety as the Presbyterians or Independants, and the reason is
only, because we determine plainly what Laying on of Hands is meant, Heb. 6.
2. and pass it not only as a probability, or to this purpose.

To this I answer, That this is so far from Insobriety, that there is a
necessity that we be possitive in this Case, else it must be granted that this
first Principle cannot be known, and then it supposes no man able to teach
another, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God. And indeed, upon
this Rock has Mr. D. run himself, after all his Expositions on Heb. 6. 2. and
is forced page 49. to suppose that he is not able to tell us what laying on of
Hands is intended, Heb. 6. 2. But alas, its more then a supposition, for if he
do know infallibly what it is, why does he not tell us which it is, or why are
we counted immodest for showing it possitively, unless he arrogate more to
himself then he will allow to us.
and gives this as a reason of his supposition, viz. There are many things in
Paul's Epistles which are hard and difficult to be understood, which (says he)
the Ignorant do wrest,. Which sentence he has verified, for not knowing what
to say, concerning Heb. 6. 2. certainly, he has by saying many things at a
venture, exceedingly wrested this place, and first by supposing this Laying on
of Hands to be one of the hard things in Paul's Epistles. The contrary being
most plain, for these Principles Heb. 6. 1. 2. are opposed to the things that
are hard to be uttered, Heb. 5. being also called Milk for Babes, and not
strong Meat. As also because the Hebrew Cristians are blamed, for that they
might have been (and were not) teachers of these Principles, but needed to be
taught again which were the first Principles. Yea verily, this is to make all
things in Christianity hard and difficult, for if the first Rudiments be so,
what can be easy?

It is high time therefore for Mr. D. and others with him, to see the vanity of
these pretenses, and speedily to consider, that there is as much need to be
possitive in the business of the fourth Principle, Heb. 6. 2. as any of the
rest, and that a Teacher may with as much ground and credit, plead ignorance to
them all, as to any one of them; and how dangerous it is to make Principles (or
any of them) but probabilities only, a man that has but half an eye may easily
perceive.

Secondly, Mr. D. sets down two Principles (as he calls them) to be as a Line
to carry us through the work, As if Mr. D. his Principles were more Infallible
then those in Heb. 6.
viz.

1. That to every Ordinance of Christ there must be some plain positive word of
Institution to Confirm it. 2. To practice any thing in the worship of God, for
an Ordinance of his, without an Institution, is Will Worship and Superstition
But surely the first of these propositions is not to taken without some such
exposition as this, viz. That what any Man affirms to be a solemn part of the
worship of God, for the Church of God, it must be warranted by the holy
Scriptures without wresting them. But Mr. D. taking the first proposition in a
ridged sense, counts all we say from Heb. 2. as nothing, unless we can show
where it is said, Let all Baptiz^d Beleivers have hands laid on them, with as
much plainness as its said, Let all Beleivers be Baptized, and eat the Lords
Supper. But this is very irrational to imagine, that every institution of
Christ must be expressed in the Scripture with equal Plainness, for if they be
but found there, it is Sufficient. Nay, the very ordinances he mentions, are
not equal in their plainness, in respect of the Individualls that are to
partake of them, Precept and President being in that behalf much plainer for
Baptism then the Lords Table. Again the government of the Church by Messengers,
Bishops, and Deacons, etc. is an Institution of Christ. But if I ask for a
precept in terminis that in the ordination of these officers, prayer and
Imposition of hands must be used, I dare say Mr. D. cannot show it. Neither is
he able show me any President that any but the Apostles Laid Hands on Deacons,
Nor any President at all, of any one Elder of any particular Church that was
ordained by Prayer with the Laying on of Hands, yet surely there is sufficient
in the Scriptures to warrant us in these things, respectively; and thus we
shall come to consider more Particularly what Mr. D. has done to clear the
same of Heb. 6. as he promises in his title page, and yet in his lines
pretendes it cannot be cleared, as I have showed, whilst the most he himself
arrives at* or allows us (with his Good liking) to attain to, is but
probability. P. 40. Heb. 6. 1. 2.


For the ground of our practice in praying to the Lord with the imposition of
Hands; The Connection of the Principles or the order wherein they are propounded
to us, is eminently considerable, because, principles, or first rudiments of
Religion* both in faith and practice (as they are practical) do Equally*
concern individuals, both in respect of the things so denominated, and the
order of them (except in cases of immergency) as is more fully showed in our.
S. for peace, Part. the Second*

Mr. D. P. 41. denies that there is the Least warranty in this text for the
faith or practice of the Church, in praying with the imposition of hands etc.
and yet in the next page he tells us it is very true the Doctine of Laying on
of hands is here reckoned among the principles of the Doctrine of Christ; But
withal he denis laying on of hands on all Baptized Beleivers to be taught or
practiced by Christ, observing from the Waldenses, that John did not lay hands
upon Christ after he Baptized him. etc.

I Answer, Christ himself being he that was sent of God to Baptize with the
Holy Ghost, as the great Author of that Donation, from the Father it was not
meet that John should pray for Christ, yet behold the very order wherein Christ
received the Spirit is very teachable to the Saints in their waiting upon God
for that Heavenly gift, for when he was Baptized then he prayed, and the holy
Ghost desended upon him, being them sealed by God the Father, who also by voice
from Heaven declared him to be his beloved Son, Math. 3. 16. 17. Luke 3. 21.
John 6. 27. How Suitable therefore is it, to the example of Christ, for all
such as are Baptized, speedily to wait upon God for the gift of his holy
Spirit, with Prayer and Imposition of Hands, having the Apostles walking in
that very path before us, and God Almighty Crowning that way by giveing a
blessing to his Children, even then sealing them also, to the day of
Redemption, by the Spirit of Promise, Acts 19. 6. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30.

But says Mr. D. we find not that Christ taught this laying on of hands, etc.
To which it were sufficient to say that we do not find where Christ either
taught or practiced Laying on of hands on Deacons or other officers, all that
we find is, that he Lift up his hands and Blessed his Apostles, and yet who
dare doubt, but that the Apostles were taught of God how to ordain his
Ministers, and there is the same reason to believe they were taught of God to
pray with Laying on of hands for the promised Spirit, specially when God so
signally owned them in that undertaking, Act. 8. 17.

Mr. D. names many Churches that are not said to have hands Laid on them, and
that to be reckoned among their principles which is so frivilous an objection
as I marvel he should use it, he knows there be some Churches who are not said
to be Baptized nor to have the Lords Table among them, nor any Church save one
to have had Decons ordained by Laying on of hands, and yet finding these things
religiously held in some Churches, we safely conclude other Churches had the
like. And why may not the example of two or three Churches, in the case of
prayer with Laying on of hands for the promised Spirit satisfy, as well as the
example of one Church only in another case?

Mr. D. p. 43. puts this objection, why should Laying on of hands be reckoned
among the beginning principles, if it was not to be practiced by all, etc.
which he answers after this manner, your Argument is falacious, as though no
act done upon or practiced by others, might be matter of Doctrine to us without
being engaged to do the same.

But I reply, That the Argument being used, only with repect to things
Fundamental, or the first Principles of the Christian Religion, is very sound
and concluding (and therefore not answered nor touched by Mr. Ds. extending it
to all other acts, but disingeniously abused) for both the Doctrine and
practice of all the Principles, Heb. 6. 1. 2. belongs equally to all, otherwise
it will follow that the first Churches had the Principles of Religion both in
the Doctrinal and Practick parts, but we have only the Theory, we must learn
them, but not practice them, for ^s says Mr. D. p. 45. Beleivers must be
taught it, meanning Laying on of hands, but that they are obliged therefore to
practice it, is not here (i. e. in Heb. 6.) or else where to be found. Surely
this is the way to destroy such Principles as are practical, to leave nothing
of them in the Churches now but talking of them only.

Mr. D. being pressed by the consideration of Laying on of Hands, as it is Milk
for Babes in Christ, undertakes to show that some other Laying on of hands may
be that also; and names the imposition of hands to heal the Sick Mark 16. 18.
Surely he may with as much truth and reason tell us that the Mark. 16. 18. is
Milk for Babes in Christ also, this is the effect of men's stumbling at truth,
they make themselves ridiculous, for who would think that so judicious a person
should make that a Principle, and such an one too as belongs to all Christians
equally, as it is a Principle, which indeed scarce belongs to one of ten
thousand? Again, Laying on of hands to heal the sick belongs to them that are
without (the sick persons in the Church having a special ordinance provided
for there comfort in sickness, Jam. 5.) and therefore not to be called Milk for
Babes in the Church. But suppose that Laying on of hands to heal the Sick, do
at all belong to the Church, yet the oldest Christian, is as much concerned in
it as the youngest Christian, who being sick may seek for cure that way as well
as the other. Neither is this laying on of hands properly called Confirmation,
as Mr. D. Imagins P. 44. for the word was confirmed with signs which followed
prayer and Preaching, as well as laying on of hands on the sick, yea prayer and
laying on of Hands on Baptized Believers had signs also following it, so then
all these may as properly be called Confirmation as any one of them, and yet
Mr. D. will not allow Imposition of hands for the holy Spirit to be properly so
called. But, Similie Similus est ratio. And to conclude this, note further that
seeing Imposition of hands for the holy Spirit is for the obtaning of
Spiritual Gifts; and the Imposition of hands on the sick for the exercise of
Spiritual gifts received, the first is even therefore much more like to be
Milk for Babes then the latter.

Mr. D. further says, Laying on of hands Heb. 6. 2. contains that for the
investiture of Church Officers* and his reason is because these Principles are
very Comprehensive, he says also that the Lords Supper may pass for a
beginning Teaching as well as Baptism. He tells us also that the Laying on of
hands, Heb. 6. 2. is as plural as Baptisms, P. 43. 50. 51.

1. I answer, to make Imposition of hands on Decons and other officers, a
Principle appertaining to the beginning of a Christian Man, is very obsurd,
because first Principles are necessary to the being of Churches; whereas the
Imposition of hands on officers, presupposes a Church already founded, and as
such to have made their election of some to manage their affairs as a Church,
after which election, the Laying on of hands to ratify it is to be performed.

Secondly, Mr. D. faithfullness in thus expounding, Heb. 6. 2. may well be
suspected, for does he indeed make it his work to Preach that Laying on of
hands, which is the next Principle to Baptism, Heb. 6. Is the Imposition of
hands on Deacons, etc. does he I say Teach the Babes this, as he Teaches the
other five Principles? I believe if he do so, he is singular; sure I am, before
the controversy arose about Laying on of hands for the promised Spirit, none of
them (that I could ever hear of) said any thing at all about the Imposition of
hands, Heb. 6. 2. And as I have reason to believe that there is not one
Minister in those Churches, not under the forth Principle, as by us urged, that
does teach the babes that they must receive as that Principle, Heb. 6. that
Doctrine touching the Investiture of Church officers; so if they did Teach
thus, I would gladly know the ground of such Doctrine at least from some
example in that case, and I am sure all the objections made by them against us,
would be far more ^orceable against themselves.

Thirdly, I grant the Principles Heb. 6. to be very Comprehensive, yet as
Principles to be owned by Babes in Christ, I say they do not contain all
Christian performames, for if so, it would follow that few or none have yet
Learned their Principles, and then why the Apostle should make it so strange
that the Hebrews should need to be taught these Principles, I can see no
reason, so then the Principles Heb. 6. 1. 2. may be duly Learned, where many
things in point of Christian faith and practice are not yet attained. The
foundation I grant has relation to the Superstructure, but yet the foundation
may be perfectly laid where the superstructure is yet wanting. The seed time
and planting, leads to the Harvest and time of Fruit, but yet these things are
truly Separable.

Fourthly, To make the Lords Supper pass for a beginning Teaching as well as
Babtism, is presumption indeed, the one appertaining only to the newborn for
admission into the Church; the other to the most grown Christian (as well as
others) for his edification, And one would think that Mr. D. who must have such
plain Scripture for what we urge, as beginning Principles, should not thus vary
from his own Rule when he assigns any thing for such.

Fifthly, I fear Mr. D. is some what guilty -- of pertinacity, in saying the
Laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. is as plural as Baptisms, seeing he cannot be
ignorant how Mr. Fisher has unvailed that mistake in answer to a Query wherein
I think Mr. D. was concerned; which, as he terms a grevious and gross mistake,
so he shows that the Laying on, Heb. 6. 2: is a substantive of the singular
number both in the Greek and English, and some of the Learned and Judicious of
his own partly, have (to my knowledge) confessed that to be an egregious
mistake, and since he gives no reason for his persisting in his former opinion;
but barely contradicts his opponents, it is to me very Suspicious, that he has
nothing to defend himself withal, save his Sic volo, sic jubeo.

And here let me note, that seeing Heb. 6. 2. speaks but of one Laying on of
Hand, there is a necessity that we determine which it is, else we must confess
none can know the first Principles. But to take off the force of our Arguments
for the necessity of Imposition of hands with prayer for the holy Spirit as a
Principle in the more complete Constitution of Christian Churches, Mr. D. is
pleased to ask this question.

If every one of these Principles in Heb. 6. are so absolutely to be taken in
by Babes, and without which we are not esteem them communicable, what do you
say to the Doctrine of Baptisms in the text, one of the Principles and
foundations of the Gospel, must be all Baptized with the Baptism of the holy
Ghost and of sufferings also, or not to be received into Communion?

The reception of the holy Spirit according to the promise D. after this
manner. Seeing you suppose a man may be admitted to communion without two
Baptisms of the three, Heb. 6. 2. why do you make the other so absolutely
necessary; now let him defend him self for that practical part of the doctrine
of Baptisms, and thereby he will defend me for that practick part of the fourth
principle.

2. But if any shall deny the promise of the spirit, with which all Christians
are to pray that they may be baptized [contrary to the late dangerous doctrine
of some, who would restrain the Baptism of the Spirit to miraculous gifts,
opperations or signs, etc. and persuade us the Baptism of the Spirit is
ceased] or that shall deny the doctrine of Sufferings, or Sufferings themselves
as not pertaining to them; or if any shall teach others to deny these truths,
as you teach others to deny prayer, with imposition of hands, and will needs
persist in opposing themselves against all endeavors used to reform and amend
them, I say, such may lawfully be denied communion in the Churches of God, and
thus we have considered Mr. D. his several expositions upon Heb. 6. 2.

Of the Laying on of Hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Neither has Mr. D. wrote advisedly P. 48. where he teaches that the
imposition of Hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. and 1 Timothy 4. 14. are both one, for as much
as they are evidently distinguished in three respects, as first,

In respect of the persons administering them. That in 2 Timothy 1. 6. being
performed by Paul only, the laying on of my Hands, the other by more then he, 1 Timothy 4. 14. The Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, surely, if more had
acted in the first then Paul himself, he would not have arrogated the whole
service to himself, as if the blessing received came by what he did, and the
rest stood but for Ciphers; no, this is nothing like that humble Apostle who
was less in his own eye, then the least of all Saints; neither can it be proved
that he was one of the Presbytery that Ordained Timothy, (though Mr. D.
concludes he was) though perhaps he might be one of them.

2. The Gifts are clearly distinguished, Those 2 Timothy 1. 6. being the Gifts
which are common to all Saints, as much as to Timothy, namely, 1. The Spirit of
Love, which all that are born of God, do share in by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5.
2. Power or strength (...) virtutis, not (...) potestas, authority, and this
strength all Saints have need of. 3. (...) sobrietatis sobriety, or soundness
of mind, which also every true Christian should have, hence its plain, that the
Gift of God which Timothy received by the Laying on of Hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. in
every part of it is that which is common to all Saints, insomuch as he that
has not the Spirit of Christ in these respects may well fear he is none of his.

On the other side, it is evident to all men that Paul in 1 Timothy 4. 14. speaks
of the Ministerial Gift, Authority, or Trust, which was committed to Timothy by
the consent of the Prophets, and by the Laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

3. From the Scope of the Apostle in these places respectively, for in 1 Timothy
4. 14. Paul is clearly in hand with the matters of Timothies Office, verse. 11.
to the end. But in 2 Timothy 1. 6. he speaks to him as he might have spoke to any
other Christian, Man or Woman, for finding him under some Temptation and Fears
he comforts him, by telling him he hoped his Faith was unfeigned, and supports
him against Fear, by noting, that it was not the effect of the Spirit which God
gave him, by the putting on of his Hands, and therefore exhorts him not to be
ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord, nor of Paul the Lords Prisoner, but to be
a partaker of the affliction according to the Power of God. Then he moves him
to consider how free the grace of God was, by which he is saved, and not to be
valued by the works of righteousness which he had done; and thus he speaks from
verse. 1. to verse. 13. and then begins to treat of the business of his Office,
the whole matter and contexture of the former part of the Chapter, being such
as touched not his Office, but his State as a Christian. This Text being duly
considered, helps more to the opening Heb. 6. 2. then any other place, in this
respect, viz. for that it plainly shows the common graces of the Spirit, was as
really the end of Prayer with the Imposition of Hands as the gifts which are
notified by many.

Nor is it material which some object in this Case, that (...) is interpreted
elsewhere of Miraculous gifts, etc. Because 1. If the Interpreter had so done,
he had forsaken the proper scope of the Apostle, whose business being to
support Timothy against fear, etc. The Spirit of inward grace and fortitude,
was most suitable to be insisted on, to that purpose. 2. Because the word (...)
is frequently used to express inward strength or fortitude of mind; for
Example, 1 Cor. 12. 10. (...), potens sum, I am strong, or when I am weak, then
I am strong, Ephesians. 6. 10. (...) confortamini in Domino, be strong in the Lord.

Of the meaning of Acts 8. 15, 17, and 19. 2. 6.
How clear places these are that the Apostles prayed with laying on of hands,
for the newly Baptized, indifferently, even for both Men and Women, that they
might receive the Spirit of Promise; and that as generally as Baptism it self
was performed in the Cities of Samaria, and Ephesus, and by consequence first
at Jerusalem, and so in other places also, I need say but little in this place,
having fully spoken to these things in my S. for Peace, and Pedobapt. Apol.
which are yet unanswered; yet I shall endeavor to show the mistakes of Mr. D.
concerning them; And first,

He will needs suppose Peter and John to perform Prayer with Imposition of
hands at Samaria, by virtue of their extraordinary gifts, not being willing to
allow their Office as Ministers or Apostles, to have any thing to do with that
action; But this is far from Truth, for if extraordinary gifts had sufficiently
capacitated men to do this work without Ministerial authority, Philip the
Deacon, being eminently gifted that way, might have imposed hands for the
Promised Spirit, as well as Peter and John, yet he meddles not with this
Service at all, neither his Office as a Deacon, nor his gifts to do wonders,
impowering him thereto in his own Judgment, for had he been otherwise minded,
or understood his privilidge to be such as Mr. D. supposed it to be, he had
opportunity and occasion enough to do that work as well as any other; but his
forbearance is an argument he knew it did not belong to his Ministry, in an
ordinary way, since there was a Ministry to be had, to whom that and other
things for the Settlement of the Church did more properly belong. Wherefore we
must needs reject that passage of Mr. D. page 6. where he tells us the
Administrator of Laying on of hands was any gifted Believer, etc. by which
conceit even Women, from whom extraordinary gifts are not withheld, might
administer this Service.

But that this was an act of Office, appears partly by what is already said,
and partly for that the Church at Jerusalem sent not gifted Brethren only, but
men endowed with Authority, to fet in order such things as were wanting in that
Church, which though much prepared for settlement, by the Labors of Philip,
yet cannot rationally be supposed to be so settled as was meet, for it is said,
only they were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: And the first thing we
hear they do for them, is to pray that they may receive the Holy Ghost, etc.
And this they did for them all, both Men and Women, as is in part granted by
Mr. D. whiles he grants it to be performed upon those on whom the Holy Ghost
was not fallen, and says the Text, He was fallen on none of them. Yet Mr. D.
would make an Exception of some of them, because Simon was found in the gaul of
bitterness. But this corruption appearing not till after the Service of Prayer,
with laying on of Hands was performed, it concludes not at all, but that Simon
might be included in the Prayer of the Apostles, and have hands laid on him
also, yea, and receive of those gifts too, seeing God does not withhold them
from Hypocrites. And beside, the words of Peter denying him to have any Part or
Lot in that matter, refers to the Administration of the Ordinance, and not to
his submission to it; Give me this power also, that on whomsoever I Lay my
hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost; In this matter Peter denis Simon to have
any part.

Furthermore, Mr. D. does certainly mistake, Act. 19. 2. in saying the Twelve
Disciples at Ephesus were of the Church, whereas the Scripture, and Reason, do
hoth inform us they could not be Imbodied with the Church there, as yet,
because they are now said to be found, and called certain Disciples, the words
implying they were hitherto unknown, for otherwise why should they be said to
be found by Paul, more then the whole Church, if indeed they had been a part of
the Church. Again, their great ignorance of the Holy Ghost shows plainly they
were not united to the Body or Church at Ephesus, where doubtless Acquilla and
Priscilla had not been wanting to teach the way of the Lord perfectly. And
Lastly, their being Baptized again, shows plainly they were not of the Church,
You see I do adhere to the Ancient Exposition of this place, rather then to our
late Curtailed Expositions made by the Paedobaptists, who because they are
unwilling to mend their Errors in Baptism, would fain have Paul to be of their
mind, but they should remember that Reformation or amendment is no Error.
for if they had, why must not the Church also be Baptized again as well as
they?

Now therefore, let it be considered, that had there been 120. instead of these
12. persons, in the same case with themselves, the Question of the Apostle,
Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye Believed? had concerned them all; and
then he must be but a partial Minister that would* refuse to pray for all,
seeing all wanted the same Blessing, and had equal right to it, by virtue of
the same promise. And that Paul had an eye to the Promise, as it is general, is
most plain, by his next Question, Unto what then were ye Baptized? as if he
should say, your very Baptism if it be right, did inform you of, and entitle to
the promise of the Holy Ghost, into whose name also ye ought to be Baptized.

Thus I trust we have sufficiently cleared the first ground of our Religious
observation of Prayer, with the Imposition of Hands for the Promised Spirit, 1.
From the consideration of the Nature, Order, or Connection of the Principles, as
they are contained and propounded, Heb. 6. 1, 2. 2. From the care of the
Apostles, in the seeking to God in the use of this So I call it for five
Causes, 1. Because of Prayer, the Moral part. 2. Because of Imposition of Hands
the Ritual part. 3. Because of the Promise to which it refers, as the blessing
signified by it. 4. Because it is placed among the Fundamentals of Religion, or
called a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ. 5. Because it will bear the
denomination of an Ordinance, as well as Imposition of Hands on Deacons, or
other Officers of Christ's Church.
Ordinance, that the Churches might enjoy the benefit of the Promise of the
Holy Spirit, which they knew belonged to them as they were the called of the
Lord. And because the Nature and extent of that great Gospel Promise is a
weighty consideration whereupon to ground the practice of Prayer with the
Imposition of Hands, and without which the practice would be very
insignificant, I shall therefore add something, to show the perpetual Right of
the Church to that blessed Promise, even to the end of the world: For it is
remarkable that those that oppose us in the fourth Principle deal much after
the manner of the Quakers in their opposing Baptism, hammering only upon the
practick part, which they can easily despise, but when the more spiritual part
of these Ordinances is considered, this takes off the courage of the most
confident opposer.

Of the second Ground of the Practice of Prayer and Laying on of Hands, to wit,
the Promise of the Spirit, and the Churches right to it, to the end of the
World.
M. D. is pleased to say, page 47. That in neither of those two places [meaning
Acts 8. Acts 19.] can we find that there was a Laying on of Hands immediately
after Baptism, nor with any certainty upon all, and every Member of the Church,
nor to such an end as can be attainable in after times.

But though Mr. D. cannot find the two first, yet many have Acts 8. within a
short time after, and as soon as they had a fit opportunity to do it, is plain
enough, verse. 15. 16, 17. and for Acts 19. 5. It Is said, when they heard this,
they were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in the very next words
it is said* when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them.

And that the same individuals said to be Baptized* are as clearly found to
have hands imposed, and Prayer made for them, that they might receive the Holy
Spirit, is so very plain, that nothing but exceeding great weakness, or great
perverseness can hinder any man from seeing it. And whether the end for which
Prayer, with Imposition of Hands can now be attained, is the business now to be
considered.

And if it Cannot, the reason is, for that the Promise made to the Church then,
is since taken away do jure, so that we may not lawfully ask it; for men not
having the Promise, is no argument, James 4. 2, 3. -- ye have not, because ye
ask not, ye ask and have not, because ye ask amiss.

Now, that the gracious promise of the Holy Spirit [at least] as it belonged to
the Members of the Church in the Primitive times, and that in every part of it,
from the time of its first effusion upon the day of Penticost, Acts 2. does
belong to the Church throughout all Ages to the end of the world, I hope to
evince to the satisfaction of such as desire to know the Truth in this matter,
which I shall do by transcribing and somewhat enlarging what we have already
offered in our Paedobaptist Apology for the Baptized Churches. But Note that we
have proved that the promised Spirit is truly received where the sealing Graces
are received, though gifts be not received, and the promise being received, the
end of Imposition of Hands is received. See our Sigh for Peace.


Beside, the Cloud of Witnesses, Some of which I will here incert in a Column
by themselves, Job 14. 16, 17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth. Joh. 7. 38. He that believes on me -- out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of Living Water, -- but this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on his Name should receive. Acts 2. 23. Therefore being by the right
hand of the Father exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of
the Spirit, he has shed forth that which you now see and hear. Acts 2. 38, 39.
For the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off,
even to as many as the Lord our God shall call, ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as you are
called in one hope of your calling. -- And he gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Tearchers, till we all come to
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 30. -- The Holy
Spirit of God, by which ye are sealed to the day of Redemption. 1 Cor. 31.
Covet earnestly the best Gifts, -- Covet to Prophecy, and forbid not to speak
with Tongues, we Prophecy in part, -- but when that which is perfect is come,
then that which is in part shall be done away* Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has
Redeemed us, -- that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that
they might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. Isa. 59. 21. As for
me, this is my Covenant with them* says the Lord, my Spirit which is upon
thee, and the words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, from hence forth for ever.
which the Holy Scriptures do afford in this Case, we shall more particularly
consider what the Apostle has offered, 1 Cor. 12. 13, 14. Chapters. And 1.
whereas it is his designed Subject to discourse of the Gifts of the Spirit, so
he does inform us, that God has Set those Gifts in his Church, i. e. has
placed and fixed that one spirit (whose opperations are diverse or many) in that
one body, not for a few days only, and then to leave her as a Body without a
Spirit for ever after in respect of SPIRITUAL GIFTS, but to abide there as in
his Temple, both by Gifts and Graces, even the same, which Christ by virtue of
his ascension obtained when he ascended on high, which gifts are given to the
Church for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the Body till the
whole be completed.

Again, the Promise of the Spirit is made by our Lord himself 2. From the
extent of the Promise.
to the Church for ever, John. 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, etc. I say
this Promise is made to the Church; for it were a strange exposition to
restrain this [FOR EVER] to the age of the Apostles (as some do) for seeing the
Apostles or the Churches, could neither pray nor Prophecy as they ought, but
as that Spirit of Promise did help their infitmity; it is strange the
Succeeding Churches should be able to do those duties, though deprived of that
gracious assistance; for it is evident that the Spirit of Promise is a Spirit
of Prayer, and Prophecy is one of the most excellent gifts thereof, as before
we have showed.

That great Apostle S. Peter, dates the Promise of the holy Spirit very
Largely, as descending to the very skirt or Last age of the Church of God on
earth, whiles he asserts it is the right and interest of all Saints, even as
many as the Lord your God should call, Acts. 2. 39. And he hear takes the
Promise in that sense wherein Joel meant it, and the Christian Church had then
received it, which clearly intends both the gifts and graces of it, for as it is
sure they then received great gifts, so it is said great grace was upon them all;
this very promise of the Father is by this Apostle appropriated to all the
called of the Lord (as we said) even the servants and handmaids in these days.

Now, These days must either be a few days at the beginning of the Gospel, or
it must be referred to the whole time of that glorious dispensation; if the
first, then how shall all the called of the Lord receive it? Or who will tell
us when these days expired. But we know that these days; the Latter days,
Last time, and Last days, are used with some frequency in Scripture to point
out the whole time of the Gospel, or Christian Church, as it succeeds the time
of the Law.

During all which time we are sure that the duties in general 3. From the
Nature and perpetuity of the duties of the Church.
(and perhaps some difficult undertakings not formerly known) which were
imposed upon the first Churches, are laid upon the Church to the end of the
World, Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, etc. Must the Churches now contend earnestly for the faith (and
that against both old and new errors) must she be still the salt of the earth,
the light of the world? Must she still strive to Preach the Gospel of the
Kingdom to all Nations? must she keep herself in the Love of God, building up
her self in her most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, etc. if these
Duties remain, and the Lord requires that she should glorify him in the
constant and faithful discharge thereof, as also in suffering for his sake; it
cannot reasonably be immagined that he should recall his holy Spirit, in the
gifts thereof, from his Servants, who when they had all those gifts, had
nothing that was superfluous, but stood in need of all, to furnish them for the
work they had to do, as the Churches of Christ; since then our God does require
the same services of his Churches now, which (in general) he required of the
Churches in the first ages of the Gospel, Let us not imamagin he will require
the same Brick, and not allow the same Straw, for he is not like Pharaoh, but
just in all that he requires.

That the gifts of the Spirit here intended by our Apostles, are 4. That the
Nature and perpetuity of the Exhortations to seek for the Spirit.
the portion of the Church in every age (as her right) appears further from
the Nature of the exhortation she is under to ask them, Luke 11. 13. How much
more shall your Heavenly Father, give his holy Spirit to them that asked it; --
ask and it shall be given unto you, ver. 10. How frequent is the Apostle in
these three Chapters, in exhortations to this Church (and in them to all
Churches) to desire Spiritual gifts, to covet earnestly the best gifts, to
covet to Prophecy, wishing that they may speak with tongues, and warning them
not to Prohibit that gift. Now to what purpose is all this, if these gifts be
ceased? and if the Church may not now expect them, why should she ask them? I
hope no man will say, these exhortations are now out of date, least in so
doing, ^ deprive us of the exhortation to Charity also, for they are so Linked
together, as the one cannot cease (as it is an exhortation) before the other.
Follow after Charity, and desire Spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1.

Thus we see the Church being under Perpetual exhortations to Seek for
Spiritual gifts without any restriction, necessarily infers her perpetual
right to them, and every of them, which consideration alone is Sufficient (as I
conceive) to satisfy any Christian that the promise of the Spirit (even the
same that was given to the first Churches generally, in respect of its gifts as
well as graces) belongs to the Church of Christ thoughout all ages.

Let us now consider, whether the Church of God do not 5. From the continuation
of Spiritual gifts in the Church to this day.
even now enjoy the promised Spirit, in the gifts and graces of it at this day?
For the graces, I think none do question it, and yet should the fruits or
graces of the Spirit (as they may be distinguished from gifts) which now
appear, be strictly considered, by what did formerly shine forth in the
Churches, it might without all peradventure put us to some pause, yet may we
not thence conclude, that the graces thereof are ceased, but it would surely
become a Provocation to cry mightily unto God for an enlargment of what in that
behalf we have received.

And as I intend not to boast of the gifts of any, so I may safely presume that
the gifts received in these days by the Church of God, are far greater then I
can set down, or give you account of, because the Church being diffused though
many Nations, her gifts must needs be unknown to me: I will then restrain my
observations to the Churches in this poor Island, who may not vie with all
Churches, but rather in humility conclude themselves inferious to many in
respect of gifts: And yet shall we say she has none of the gifts of Gods holy
Spirit? or may we not rather say, she has many that are endowed with a Word Of
Knowledge, and that merely by gift from God, having otherwise no capacity or
faculty more then others, but therein far short of many of their Brethren; only
the gift of God, and no natural faculty, maks the differance. How have men of
knowledge, in this world, been found to have no skill in the things of God, and
the foolish to attain knowledge, and some to excel so far as to confound the
wisdom of the wise, and to bring to naught the understanding of the prudent,
yea, we still see that out of the mouths of Babes, our God ordains strength
sometimes to still the Enemy.

And as WISDOM is useful to direct, so has God given it to such as fear
him, who if we respect their education, etc. could never have acquired it; some
by a word of wisdom here, understand the well ordering of affairs in the
Church; others the right or most useful application of the word, surely
according to these expositions (which are not to be contemned) the Church has
some given her of the Lord to go before her in the exercise of this gift of the
Spirit.

Neither is the gift of healing so abnegated but that something of it has
appeared, as many Living witnesses by experience have testified, and how far
faith (over and beside the common faith of Christianity) has therein appeared,
as also in some memorable undertakings against Satan himself, or his malicious
designs, with some Good success becomes others, to consider more then it does
me to write: as for my own part I rest satisfied herein, that Miracles are not
ceased ( de jure) as a gift to the Church of God, though perhaps ( de facto)
they are but rarely found, as being in the wisdom of God not so necessary, now
in many places as in times past. Now for the gifts of Prophecy which the
Apostle here intends, it is certain the Church enjoyes it graciously in these
days, since she has them, that by the gift of Gods Spirit (and not by acquired
Arts) do minister to her the word of Life, by exhortation to edification and
comfort; which yet she could not have, if the gifts were ceased, seeing
Prophecy is not only one of the gifts of the Spirit, but the very best and
greatest of all the rest.

Nor is the Spirit of our God removed in the gift of discerning of Spirits, for
if it were, false Spirits had by their subtilty ere this day, made havoc of
the Churches, but through the grace of God, notwithstanding all their cunning
craftiness, they have been discovered, and their clandestine hypocritical and
ruinous designs prevented. And though perhaps Charity for some time has born
with such, in hope of the best, yet this is no other thing then ought to be, as
may be seen by the carriage of our Lord toward Judas, and his Apostles toward
others.

For Revelations, there might perhaps sometimes be strange or hidden things,
made known by some special Gift of God; and who can say God may not do such
things now, however, it is not unsafe to understand the Revelations here meant
by 1 Cor. 14. 30. If any thing be Revealed to another that sits by let the
first hold his Peace, etc. which cannot so well be understood of any new
Oracle, as of some further Subject, or more full Explication of the matter
treated on by him that spoke first, according to which Exposition (which is
probable enough) we may say the Church has yet the Gift of Revelation, which
also she is to pray for continually, Ephesians. 1. 17. That the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him.

And thus far we seem to be got safe, not any thing so materially intervening
as to conclude against the continuance of these Spiritual Gifts in the Church
to this day, so that the present repairers of the House of God, his Church I
mean, may comfort themselves by the consideration of the words of the Prophet,
Hag. 2. 5. According to the word which I Covenanted with you when you came out
of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you, fear ye not.

But now the gifts of Tongues, and Interpretation of Tongues, these! where
shaal we find them? Doubtless these gifts are rarely (if at all) found, in
these days, and in this Nation, so as to suite with those, who frequently in
some Churches received those gifts. The reasons are many, (but none such as
conclude any thing rationally for the ceasation of those gifts, in respect of
the Churches right to them) as first, these gifts differ much from the rest,
chiefly in this, that they may be supplied another way, for the conversion of
persons of all Languages, or such as can speak diverse Tongues, and interpret
the same by means of Education, does well supply the absence of those gifts. It
is probable that Paul made use of his Education in speaking other Languages, as
may be perceived by his discourses in the Acts of the Apostles; and by the
Epistles which he wrote to several Churches, using therein (frequently) the
Greek Tongue, as is generally confessed.
2. The Churches in this, (and I suppose other Nations, have very little
present need of these gifts, and therefore considering they are not so
necessary as the rest, the Apostle* leaves these with a forbid them not, whilst
the rest he wills us to covet earnestly. But 3. one great cause (as I suppose)
why these gifts are so much absent; and the other no more received, is because
we ask them not at all, or else we ask amiss, ( for he is faithful that
promised) and indeed Christians generally have been so far from asking these
gifts of the Spirit, that in Truth they have been arguing that these gifts of
the Spirit are not attainable, and then it is no wonder they have not been
received. And where there has been any measure of understanding of the
Interest which we have in these gifts of the Spirit, their Faith has been, and
perhaps is very low, and attended with great wavering, and then little is to be
expected at the hand of the Almighty, Jam. 1. 6, 7. For he that wavereth, is
like a wave of the Sea, driven of the wind* and tossed, for let not that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

And here let me premonish you that are most concerned in the service of the
Churches, of one thing which* (by my little Reading) I perceive to have been
one great provocation to the* Lord to withdraw the gifts of his Spirit in times
past, (and I doubt now is) a desire to be too curious and formal in performing
that work which God gave gifts for, to wit, the Ministering his blessed Word;
for when the Churches grew populous, and great personages came to her
Communion, the unwary Pastors let go the simplicity of the Gospel, addicting
themselves so much to curiosity, that some Councels decreed that a Bishop, (or
overseer in the Church of Christ) should not read Heathen Authors; and Gratian
is said to have this passage on the like occasion, viz. does he not seem to
walk in vanity and darkness of mind, who vexing himself day and night in the
studies of Logic, in the persuit of Physical speculations, one while elevates
himself above the highest Heavens, and afterward throws himself below the
nethermost part of the Earth. True it is, the use that may be made of Reading,
is one thing, and the abuse is another. However, this I desire, that the least
gift of God be preferred in Ministering the Word above the greatest of Human
Arts, otherwise we are in danger to incur the guilt of despising Prophesyings.

Lastly, the Truth under enquiry, appears from the great 6. From the utter
silence of the Scripture, as to the privation of the gifts of the Spirit.
silence of the Scripture, as to the privation or taking away of any of the
gifts of the Spirit, till that which is perfect be come, 1 Cor. 13. 8, 9.
Charity never fails, but whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail;
whether there be Tongues* they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it
shall vanish away; for we know in part, and we Prophecy in part; But when that
which is perfect is come, THEN that which is in part shall be done away.

Hence observe a final and full determination of the matter in question; if any
ask when the gifts of Knowledge, Prophecy, and Tongues, etc. shall cease, The
Apostles Answer is, even THEN when that which is perfect is come, or when we
come to see face to face, or as we are seen. So then, seeing the gifts of the
Spirit do yet remain to the Church ( de jure) and every of them as her need
requires are attainable, it remains that we humbly consider our wants, and
desire spiritual gifts, yea, let us covet earnestly the best gifts.

The Conclusion is, that howsoever it is too true* that the gifts received by
the present Churches are but low, (and truly so are her graces) yet hence we
may not, we ought not, to infer that the gifts promised are ceased, or that the
Church has now no interest therein; but contrariwise, as it is evident the
promise both of gifts and graces belongs to us, as we are the called of God, we
ought to stir one another up with all diligence and full assurance, to seek
for the promise of the Spirit, which being received, will abundantly supply our
wants, help our infirmities, convince the contrary minded, by its powerful
evidence and demonstration in the Ministry of the Word and Prayer.

There be two things Objected against that which we have said, The First,
If the promise of the Spirit do thus belong to the Church,

1. Those gifts do not argue the Infallibility of him that has Corinth had
been Infallible, which yet they were not, witness their great want of Wisdom
how to use their gifts to edification, as also the Apostles referring what they
delivered to trial and censure, telling us of gifted Persons in general, (and
as such, not excluding himself*) that they see but darkly, Prophecy but in
part, know but in part, so that perfection herein is not to be pretended.

2. That the Apostles did deliver infallible and undoubted* Verities, for all
others to submit as to the very word of God, proceeded not hence, viz. because
they were gifted men, but as they were the chosen witnesses of God, and
purposely ordained by him to that very end, for which cause they say that just
one, heard the words of his Mouth, and by Infallible proofs were assured of the
Resurrection of our Lord, and of his Will concerning his Church or Kingdom,
Joh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you
that you should go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain,
that whatsoever you shall ask* the Father in my Name, he may give it you. Act.
10. 40. 41. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly, not to all
the people, but to witnesses, chosen before of God, even to ^ who did eat and
drink with him after he rose from the Dead, Act. (...) The God of our Fathers
has chosen thee, that thou should (...) and see that Just one, and should
hear the Voice of his (...), FOR thou shall be his witness unto all men of what
thou have SEEN AND HEARD.

These are the Fathers of the Churches, the Foundation Layers, the Master
Builders, in such an elevated consideration, as that the Authority of one of
them, is to be valued above the authority of ten thousand subsequent Teachers,
which is a greater number then ever yet conveined in a general Council, 1 Cor.
4. 15. These were such Fathers, as laid up such a Stock of Doctrine for their
Children, as whosoever brings not along with them, is not to be received, 2 John
8. 9; 10. verses, and whosoever corrupts their Doctrine, by adding* taking
away, or perverting the same, is to be held accursed, to be (...) in the City
of God, and the Book of Life.

The result is this, gifted Persons, on whom the Holy Ghost fell, as it did on
the Apostles at the beginning, were not thereby empowered to propose new
Oracles, or to be (...) Competitors, and if any pretend to such power in (...)
they shall fulfill that sentence, 2 Timothy 3. 9. They shall (...) no further, for
their folly shall be made manifest to all men, ^ theirs also was.

If the Gifts of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. have continent in the

It is true that People do pretend to Miracles, as ^is said in They often tell us
of Antiquity, but sacred Antiquity they have none, for in the Apostles time
they had ^ being in the World* for if they had had then any Being, the Apostle
Paul would certainly have given some account of such a Church State as they
maintain in his Epistle to the Romans. But this he has not done in any part of
that Epistle, and yet speaks expressly of the Estate of the Church of Christ
then at Rome, therefore the Papists at that time had no being at Rome, and
consequently no where else; for the Church at Rome, and all other Churches in
the Apostles days were of one manner of Constitution and Government.

2. But put case now, that since they have had some being in the world, some
signs or wonders have been done among them, yet hence to infer the Truth of
their Church State is very unsafe, since before an equal Judge, others will be
found to have as clear a claim to Miracles as themselves. Which yet shall avail
them nothing, because they wanted Truth with their gifts, Matthew. 7. 22. Many
shall say unto me in that day, Have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy
Name have we not cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wondrous works? And
then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity.

And though our Savior says, no Man can do a Miracle in his name and Lightly
speak evil of him; yet that very Speech Supposes the thing Possible. It does
not follow therefore that wheresoever Miraculous gifts are, [or the gifts of
the Spirit, as Prophecy, etc.] that there is the true Church [ and therefore
Let not the great Preachers of any sort deceive themselves, that because of
their abillity that way they are therefore owned of God as Ministers of his
Churches, for it is evident the false Apostles seemed to outvie Paul himself in
2 Cor. 10. 10.
wording their Matters.] But the Church is only known by her conformity to the
Doctrine of God our Savior, chiefly in her care of the Principles Heb. 6. 1. 2.
of Christianity (to which she knows the whole Body of Christian Doctrine is
reducible) For we are his House if built upon that foundation of Repentance,
Faith, etc. and pertakers of him IF we hold the beginning of our Confidence
Heb. 3. 6. 14.
steadfast to the end, and not otherwise; if any come to you and bring not this
Doctrine (though he can talk Like an Angel) receive him not to house; no,
though he work Miracles. For thus says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 23.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives the a
sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he speak unto
thee, [ now observe, if he do this] saying, let us go after other Gods (which
thou have not known) and let us serve them, thou shall not hearken to the words
of that Prophet -- for the Lord your God proves you to know whether you Love
the Lord your God with all your Heart and withal your Soul. And hence Learn
this one thing; That Gods Truth is not to give place to any gifts, but all
gifts ought Subserve to the furtherance of the truth, therefore regard no man
but as he regards the Truth.

To conclude, as we ought not to be Ignorant of the gifts of the Spirit so
neither of the means ordained of God to obtain these gifts; The primative
Churches herein our best guides as the word directs, and it is well known (and I
think granted on all hands) that they used the holy Ordinance of Solemn Prayer
and Imposition of hands, for obtaining the promised Spirit, at least with
respect to these gifts. Now be it so (though I say for the graces also, 2 Timothy
1. 6. 7.) then seeing these gifts are promised to us as well as unto them, and
are attainable, and in part attained by many, what should hinder the Churches
but that now they should tread in this path with Faith and full assurance that
a Blessing is in it? As in holy Baptism* we are placed (as it were) among those
whose sins are washed away in the Blood of the Lamb. So in this holy Ordinance
of Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, we are in a solemn manner ^ed into the
Promise of the Holy Spirit. And as the pardon of our sins signified in Baptism,
does not prevent, but better capacitate us to Pray daily, Forgive us our
Trespasses* So the Prayer of Gods Ministers, with the Imposition of Hands, does
put us into a better capacity to seek daily for the gifts and graces of the
Spirit, because now solemnly admitted to the gracious obtaining of the Promise,
in that very way wherein the primative Saints were admitted thereunto, Acts 8.
15, 17. Acts 19. 2, 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7. Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Who, when they were come down, Prayed for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.

Wherefore, I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God which
is in thee, by the putting on of my hands.

Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed, and when Paul had laid his
Hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them.

The foundation of Repentance from Dead works, and of Faith toward God, of the
Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands, etc.

What shall I say? the Scriptures are evidence sufficient that this Ordinance
is of Divine Institution, is from Heaven. The promise which it leads to is
perpetual and universal, it belongs to the whole Body. There is one Body and
one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling.

But now (after this Digression, which I hope will not offend) to return to Mr.
D. I trust by this time he will consider that there is no good ground for him,
or any body else to say, the End of Prayer, with Laying on of Hands, cannot be
attained.

Neither is there any reason for Mr. D. to be astonished (as he pretends, p.
35.) because we urge him to produce better evidence for Women's receiving the
Lords Supper; Or clearer Precept or President for the Ordination of Officers by
Prayer and Laying on of Hands, then we are able to produce in our Case, nor
need he count this a thing either unreasonable or dangerous, etc. For how
should this be dangerous? must not the grounds of one practice be examined as
well as another? Or why unreasonable? Is not our Brethren bound to stand to
their Principles one time as well as at another? Or will they impose Principles
to lead us through the whole work (as Mr. D. page 40.) and not be lead by them
themselves?

For my part, I am fully satisfied there is sufficient ground in holy Scripture
for Women's coming to the Table of the Lord, and for the Ordination of Church
Officers by Prayer and Laying on of Hands; And I do solemnly profess, to
dislike any Principle or Practice in Religion, which cannot fairly be
demonstrated by the evidence of Holy Scripture; But, yet this I must needs say,
That there is as clear (if not clearer) grounds for the Fourth Principle as we
hold it, as there is for either of the other points, specially the latter. For
first, Women's receiving at the Lords Table, it is gathered by a rational
deduction from the Holy Scripture, as appears by Mr. D. page 54. wherein he
has done well as others in the same case has done before him; yet should any
man use his own Weapons against him, which he uses against his Brethren, they
might worst him because of his inconsistency, though his cause be good.

2. In all the Scripture there is no express command to Lay hands on Deacons,
nor any Example that Prayer was used at all in their Ordination, nor that any
but Apostles ordained such Officers, and but one example for that neither; and
for (...) of particular Congregations, not one Example that Hands was imposed
on them, or Prayer used in the act of their Ordination, nor any plain Precept
for so doing (as is said before) yet Mr. D. is satisfied in these things, and
thinks 2 Timothy 5. 22. a full precept for Imposing Hands upon Officers, (howbeit
his Brethren no less judicious then himself, believe no such thing as is seen
in their Search for Schism) And to speak as it is, this place is an express
prohibition to Lay Hands on any man suddenly, and though it may hence be
inferred, that Hands ought to be Laid on some men deliberately, yet this is a
consequence, and when so much is granted, he is yet to prove that this is meant
of Officers (for some think otherwise) and here he must use our Logic from
Heb. 6. 2. It can be no other, Ergo, it must be that on Officers, and his
Antecedent must be demonstrated by reason, with which he may easily satisfy
me, but if another will not be satisfied with him, I cannot help him, because
he denies the same reason in our case, which he makes use of in his own.

By this it may appear, how little cause Mr. D. had to be grieved at us, as if
we should slight the Wisdom or Authority of Christ, or as if we should think we
had (...) sufficient direction in the Scripture for all parts of Gods Worship;
for we do cordially believe these holy Directions to be sufficient, yet as one
of the Ancients truly said, these things are so penned, as that he that will
learn, may learn; and he that will cavil, may find occasion. And the truth is,
those are they whose arguings do render these directions insufficient, who
destroy or condemn the same reason in another, which they allow in themselves,
specially when they become pertinacious.

Sufficient therefore is that which has been said, if not to convert them (in
this particular) yet to leave them without excuse, Quia exore judicium.

But to the residue, who have stumbled at this Truth, either through our
default, in not asserting this Truth as was meet; or their own, in not duly
considering what we say, or through those unhappy Divisions which have fallen
out, through the heats of men intemperately Zealous on either side; I say to
these I now address my self.

Declaring in all faithfulness, that though the Truth in question is to me as
dear as other Truths, (and therefore am resolved, what in me is, to defend it
with the rest) yet I stand ready to abate whatsoever, upon a fair Trial, may
appear too harsh, or any way justly offensive as to the business of separation;
not doubting (though I was unconcerned in the Original, of the division) that
Mr. D. has too much cause to complain of some, whose unkindness to their
Brethren, in the ill mannagement of a good Cause might prejudice the Truth it
self; but withal, I must tell him, he was too short in that he did not also
blame some of his own party, whose impatience and imprudence, too much provoked
to that Division, which by all means should have been prevented. And let me
faithful to Mr. D. in remembering him of the saying, Medicae Cura teipsum, for
he that blames another for making unnatural separations, should remember, that
he that Judges another, and does the same thing, is in danger of the Judgment
of God.

The Conclusion.
Finally, I am resolved to meet my opposite (after all this conflict) in that
friendly and moderate passage wherein at Length he delivers himself, saying, P.
51. We are not offended at a practice of that kind, be it Listing up, or Laying
on of Hands, provided it be not urged as a thing of absolute necessity.

To which I say, let the Spirit of opposition to the Practice of Prayer with
Imposition of hands for the Spirit of God, but be laid aside, that the truth
may grow as God shall enlighten his people in it; And then let an Expedient be
Concluded, for settling all the Churches concerned in such a state, as may
comport with the peace of the whole, and the Presperity of every part.

To which purpose I could wish that a Competent number of select Brethren on
both parts might convene this Summer to consult and offer such an expedient to
the Churches, for the accomplishment of this happy end, for I never expect to
see an end of this Controversy by writing Books one against another.

FINIS.

