THE BAPTIST AGAINST THE PAPIST: OR, The SCRIPTURE and ROME in Contention about
the SUPREME SEAT of JUDGMENT, in CONTROVERSIES of RELIGION. Together with Ten
Arguments or Reasons, discovering the present Papal Church of Rome, to be no
true Church of Christ. WHEREIN It is also evinced, That the present Assemblies
of Baptized Believers, are the true Church of Jesus Christ.

By THO. GRANTHAM, a Prisoner for Truths sake.

Luke 16. 29, 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. -- If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one
should rise from the dead.

Ezekiel. 20. 18, 19. But I said unto their children -- Walk ye not in the
Statutes of your fathers, etc. -- I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes,
and keep my Judgments, and do them --

Joh. 12. 48. The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge you in the last
day.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
NOt because I envy those of the Papal Church, or desire them any evil; Not
that I desire they should be exposed to a suffering condition for matters of
Religion, or that they should be denied any liberty in that respect which I
desire my self, nor for any other prejudice (God knows) do I publish this
small Treatise: But because I judge my self concerned at this time to give my
Testimony for the Truth, against some Papal Tenants; for diverse causes: As
first,

I am at this time under restraint, and though nothing has been laid to my
charge, yet it is rumored by some that I am a Papist; yea, in this place of my
Confinement, have I been told to my face by some of the Protestant Clergy,
that I am a Roman Jesuit. And indeed this is an ordinary aspersion which has
been cast upon those in general to whom I am related upon a religious account,
viz. That we are all Papists, or will turn Papists, etc. and this, not so much
to our personal prejudice, as to the dishonor of that ancient way of Truth by
us professed. Secondly,

A more particular occasion of the publication of this Treatise, proceeded from
the Papists themselves, in sending Seven Queries to the Baptized Congregations
in this County (commonly called Anabaptists) To which, through the importunity
of some Friends, I formed a brief Answer; little thinking, I confess, that so
much contention would have risen thereupon, as since I have met with. And I
likewise confess, that the undertaking is such, as that it requires a more fit
Instrument than my self to manage it.

Nevertheless, I hope I may say, that hitherto what has come to pass in this
contest, has fallen out rather to the furtherance of the Truth; for which
cause I have thought fit to offer it to the perusal of others, so much of it I
mean, as I conceive is at present needful; and that is the substance of what
has passed about the means whereby we must decide or resolve Controversies in
Religion.

It now wants but few months of a year, since I sent my final Answer,
containing a Review of all that had been said in way of Answer to the Queries
before, in which I produced the Testimony of diverse Ancient Dictors, as
concurring with what I had therein spoken, and, as being directly opposite to
my Antagonist.

But I have heard of late, that he is gone out of this Nation, so that I expect
no more Reply from him. And though for diverse Reasons hereafter showed, I have
not published the whole Discourse (which, if need be, may in due time be
brought to light) yet I have thought it meet here to set down all the Seven
Queries, that so if any Christian, of suitable endowments, for the Vindication
of Truth, against the opposition that lies in the said Queries, shall think
fit to lay forth his Talent in that Service, he may take hold of this occasion
wherein to do it, (for the Queries were not directed to any particular person)
however, I shall join to each Query, one Antiquery, which may serve at this
present to blunt the edge of them, as they carry an opposition to the Truth.

The QUERIES. The ANTI-QUERIES. Query 1. Antiq. 1. Whether we are to resolve
all Differences in point of Religion, only out of the written Word of God?
What Differences in point of Religion can you resolve without the written Word
of God? and whether the written Word of God be a perfect Rule for matters of
Religion? Query 2. Antiq. 2. How know you precisely what is the true Word of
God? Whether some Book must not of necessity speak for it self? and whether the
Scripture does not best deserve this privilege? And whether it be not a bold
presumption to say, there are no holy Books but them which we or you have
received for such, since those which we have, tell us, there are other holy
Writings, which never yet came to our hands, nor to yours? Query 3. Antiq. 3.
How know you that your Copies and Translations of the Bible are the true Word
of God? since the Original Writings are not come to your hands. What Copies and
Translations of the Bible have you that are more true than ours? and where are
the Original Manuscripts of the Prophets and Apostles? Qu. 4. Antiq. 4. Where
we differ about the sense of the Word, by whom must we be tried? the dead
Letter cannot explain it self. When we differ about the true Church, and about
the meaning of Authors, by whom must we be tried? They cannot speak for
themselves more than the Scripture: and whether the Scriptures, compared
together, do not explain themselves? also, whether it be not an opprobrious and
ignominious speech for you to call the Scripture a dead Letter? and whether the
true lovers of the Scripture ever vouchsafed it such ill, and indeed improper
language? Qu. 5. Antiq. 5. What clear Text have you out of Scripture for the
procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son? or, for changing the
Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday? or prohibiting Poligamy, or Infant Baptism?
And, whether there be not as clear Texts to prove unwritten Tradition,
Purgatory, and the real Presence? Whether the Baptism of the true Church be not
one? and whether that one be not expressly found in the Scripture? And whether
the Scripture does not prohibit all beside that one? And whether the Papists
have not confessed in many of their Books, that Infant Baptism is not found in,
nor grounded upon the Scripture? and then, whether it be not clear, that all
the Texts which speak of Baptism, do not prohibit Infant Baptism? Also, whether
Joh. 15. 26. and 14. 26. and 16. 7. be not clear Texts that the holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son? Also, whether 1 Cor. 7. 1, 2, 3. do not
as much prohibit one man for having two Wives, and one woman for having two
Husbands? and whether it do not clearly prohibit the latter? Also, whether
there be any that hold the first day under the notion of a Sabbath among the
Baptized Churches? and yet whether there be not clear Texts for the religious
observation of it? Act. 20. 7. Also, whether it he not absurd for you to ask
for clear Texts to prove unwritten things? Also, whether Rurgatory, and the
Real Presence, as you hold them, is not plainly destructive to some Articles of
the Christian Faith? Qu. 6. Antiq. 6. Whether Universality both for time and
place, be not an evident mark of the true Church? What Church can you name that
has that mark? And whether the Woman that John saw, was not Rome? And whether
her Cup was not universally received, so that all Nations were drunk thereby?
Qu. 7. Antiq. 7. Whether you have really this mark, that is, whether you can
fetch out of all Ages and Nations, Professors of your Religion; in particular,
you are desired to name but one or two in the first six hundred years after
Christ of your Profession; for example, such as held the sole-sufficiency of
Scripture for deciding Controversies, and denied the lawfulness and usefulness
of Infant Baptism? Whether any man can show this mark, as it is here called
for, without the help of humane History? and whether humane History be a rule
or ground for divine Faith? And whether humane Histories (especially those of
the first three hundred) after Christ, were not most, if not all, burnt, which
concerned the Church? and whether those that remain are not contradictory one
to another? Also, whether Infant Baptism was so much as heard of in the first
hundred? and then, how could any be named that denied the usefulness thereof?
Also, whether a Church, whose gathering, constitution and government is
answerable to the Scripture, be not the true Church of Christ? And whether the
Churches of the Baptists do not therein exceed all other whatsoever?

Thus, Reader, I have given thee some account of the causes why I publish this
Treatise; I desire thee to peruse it diligently. If in any thing the Truth be
dishonored, through any Error maintained by me, (of which yet I do solemnly
profess I am not conscious to my self) then do not forbear to blame me in a
christian sort: only, if thou perceivest me deficient in point of Language and
Method, I desire thee to bear with that; for I am one that gets my bread by the
labor of my hands, and never saluted the Schools to gain the knowledge of
their Arts.

From the Common-Goal in the Castle of Lincoln, the 10th of the 11 month,
(commonly called January) 1662. Farewell.

TO THE Nameless Author OF THE VII. QUERIES; And in him, to all the SONS of
PAPAL ROME In the County of LINCOLN.
HItherto the things pertaining to Religion, as they concern the Baptized
Congregations, (commonly called Anabaptists) and you that are commonly called
Papists, have been very little controverted. And whether it shall ever please
God to try his Peoples Faith and Stedfastness, by your open opposition, as he
has done it by others, I may not presume to determine; nor doubt I, but if it
shall so fall out, he will advance his Truth thereby.

It is most certain, that of those many ways whereby the ancient path of the
Gospel has for a long time been opposed, there is not found any more potent
than yours; and the rather, because your subtilty is utterly unknown to the
generality of Christians in this Age and Nation, where your Religion has, as
it were, lain dormant for many years.

The most dangerous stratagem wherewith you usually assail your opposits, is,
your denial of the Scripture, etc. the high doom of Judgment in matters of
Faith; and ascribe that dignity to your selves, under pretense of your being
the Church; wherein if you conquer any one, your work is, as it were, wholly
accomplished.

Whereupon, I have here presented to the world, somewhat of your skill, in this
important Question, Whether we are to resolve all Differences in point of
Religion, only out of the written Word of God? yea, I have faithfully
transcribed your last Reply to my Answers, which contains the sum of what you
said in all your other Papers. Whereby the Reader will discern (if I think
right) wisdom used to the hurt of them that have received it. I have forborne at
this time to publish all that has passed between us about the seven Queries;
partly, for that one thing is often repeated in our several Papers; and partly,
and indeed especially, for that it is to little purpose to controvert any
particular point of Religion, till we be agreed about the Judge, that must
determine our Differences. Now, whereas you do ascribe this Prerogative to your
selves, under pretense of your being the Church of Christ, I have therefore
laid down several Reasons, by which it may appear, that you are not the Church,
and so not that Judge, whereunto you pretend to be so willing to adhere.

I have likewise showed, that we, your opposits, have the true claim to the
title of Christ's Church; that so, if you will appeal to her, you must then
appeal to us; which yet we believe you will not be persuaded to, nor indeed do
we desire you should, whilst this is the Question, Whether we, or you, be the
Church? No, we are content to say with Augustine, Ask not us August. contra
Max. l. 3. c. 14.
in this case, we will not ask you, but let this matter be tried by the
Scripture: yea, says he, let the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles be Judge,
Yea, we say further in his words, Let matter with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason, counted by authority of the Scriptures, not proper to any
but indifferent Witnesses to both parts.

My final Answer to the first of the seven Queries, I have here published, with
as little alteration or addition as possibly I could, to give the Reader a true
understanding of the matters in difference. And if you publish any thing
hereupon, I desire no fairer dealing from you, than you have in this case from
me.

I have seriously considered what should be the design of your Queries; and
hitherto it appears to be chiefly, to exalt the authority of men's Traditions,
above the lively Oracles of God, the Scriptures. For though it should be
granted (which you can never prove) that there has continued a true Church at
Rome ever since it was there planted; yet would it not follow, that all which
your Church holds under the title of Ecclesiastical Tradition, must needs be
obeyed by us; for it is certain that the Jews did retain the state of a true
Church, when yet their Traditions (however by them accounted) were but the
Traditions of men, which both the Prophets and Christ himself, termed vain
Worship; especially such of them as made void the Commands of God, as we are
sure many of yours do* and therefore, as Christ said to them, Why do you
transgress the Command of God by your Tradition? the same we are humbly bold to
say to you, when Mar. 7.
you ask us, why we transgress your Traditions? for surely, of none can it more
fitly be said than of you, that laying aside the Commandments of God, you hold
the Tradition of men.

THO. GRANTHAM.

THE BAPTIST AGAINST THE PAPIST.
The FIRST PART shows, the SCRIPTURE and ROME to be in Contention about the
SUPREME SEAT of JUDGMENT in Controversies of RELIGION.
THe first of all Controversies is founded upon this Query: What is the
authoritative Judge of Controversies? And indeed till there be some agreement
in this point, there can be no expectation of any fruitful issue of any
Controversy.

Now all Controversies amongst the sons of men, are reduceable to one of these
two heads, namely, things humane, or, things divine; things precisely
pertaining to this life, or things which only pertain to that which is to come;
concerns of a secular consideration, or concerns of a religious consideration.
And according to the nature of these Controversies, such ought the Judge for
decision thereof to be.

Concerning this Judge of Religious Controversies, there are diverse opinions.
Some say that the Light, or that of God in Every Man, is this only infallible
Judge of all Religious Controversies. But if this be admitted, a multitude of
inconveniences must needs follow, of which this is not the least, That there
can be no end of Controversies, because, if every man have this Judge of all
Debates in himself, and he aver, that what he says and does is according to
the voice of this Judge (or, that of God in him) no man can take in hand to
judge contrary thereunto, without becoming the Judge's Judge, and so violate
the Rule proposed. For this opinion refers not doubtful matters to that of God
in some men, or a select number of men, but to that of God in every man.

There is another Opinion, which says, That amongst all men which pretend to
own Christ, and challenge to themselves the title of his Church, and yet do
deny each other to have an interest in that title; That amongst all such
parties of the sons of men, the only infallible and authoritative Judge of
their Controversies about Religion, is the LORD Himself, as he speaks by his
Spirit in the holy Scriptures; together with right Reason: or thus, which is
all one, The Apostles and Prophets, as they speak in their holy Writings, are
the only infallible authoritative Judge in these Controversies. Yet three
things are in this Opinion allowed: first, That the living voice of the Pastors
(with the Church) in their respective Ages wherein they live, are of great
importance in order to the terminating strife in the Church, as a Church.
Secondly, That Records of Antiquity are of some usefulness for the resolving
some Controversies, and for the better discovery of some Errors, yet not so
absolutely necessary, but that the Church may sufficiently resolve her
Controversies without them. Thirdly, That there is a Judgment of Science to be
allowed every man, as touching all things which he chooses or refuses in
matters of Religion, to be used with moderation and discreet subjection. And
this is the Opinion to which for my part I do adhere.

There is another Opinion which says, That the Papal Church of Rome is the
Supreme Judge and Catholic Moderatrix of all Disputes in matters of Faith, and
that All are bound to hear and obey her Voice under pain of Damnation; and that
the Scriptures, as taken in the second Opinion, is not the Judge of
Controversies. Now this is the Opinion which at this time I am to examine,
which in much seriousness I humbly purpose to do, and leave it to the sober
consideration of all men.

And for the better discharge of this duty, it is meet we should understand
what the Papists mean by the Church of Rome. And this I find, that under that
title they would involve the whole Church of Christ from the Apostles days
until this present time, at least all the Faithful since the time that Paul
declares the Roman Church to have been famous, as Romans 1. 8. But this is the
very thing denied by us: for though we willingly grant that there was a very
famous Church at Rome, when Paul wrote his Epistle to them; yet it follows
not, that there is such a Church there now, or that all that ever from that
time to this have walked in the steps of true Faith, must needs be supposed to
have been Members of the Roman Church, or rather of the Church of Rome (so
called) especially since it was Papal. So that in this Controversy they must
be content to define the Church of Rome on this wise, (viz.) All that in any
Age since Christ, was of the same Faith and Practice in things religious, which
is at this day found in the Papal Church of Rome, and those only, are the
persons of whom the Papal Church of Rome does consist. And indeed this is as
much as they can reasonably desire; for if those holy men who lived in times
past, were of a Faith and Practice contradistinct to that which Rome has now
received, Then may not the present Papal Church without wrong, challenge them
to be of their Church? As for example: Paul, who bore witness for Christ at
Rome, and the Christians there in his days, was of the Church of Christ at
Rome; yet we deny that they were any part of the Papal Church of Rome.

The Church of Rome therefore, defined as before, I do deny to be the
infallible authoritative Judge of all Controversies about matters of Faith or
Religion: And I do further say, That the Scriptures and right Reason, as laid
down in the second opinion, much more deserves to be received for this supreme
Judge of Controversies, than the Papal Church of Rome: and that there is not an
other Umpire that can so effectually decide the Controversies of Religion,
which depend between such parties of men as lay claim to the Title of Christ's
Church, and yet deny each other to have an interest therein.

And how far forth the truth in this Point has been evidenced in that pro and
con Discourse (so far as it relates to the first of them) which has been
occasioned by the writing of the Seven Queries I have before spoken of, is here
offered to the Consideration of all sober men, that profess to own the Glorious
Gospel of the blessed God and our Savior Jesus Christ. The first Query of the
Seven was this, propounded by the nameless Papist.

PAPIST. Whether we are to resolve all differences in point of Religion, only
out of the written Word of God?


BAPTIST. To which Question these ensuing Answers were given before I received
the Adversaries last Paper, which, with the Answers thereunto, I will
transcribe verbatim. I say the Answers were,

That the word Controversies being understood of such Controversies only as
depend between those parties of men who deny each other to be the Church; that
then there is no other way whereby WE can resolve those Controversies, but by
the assistance of God's Spirit speaking to us [through the undoubted Prophets,
and Apostles, and Primitive Churches] in the lively Oracles of God, the
Scriptures of Truth, together with the help of right Reason in a way of
subserviency to those divine directions. Or, if the word Controversies, shall
relate only to all such Controversies as fall within the compass of the Church,
that then to the former means, we are to join the living Voice and Authority of
the Church (in present being) assembled with her Pastors, as the ordinary
means appointed of God to terminate strife in the Churches. But if the Division
in the Church be so great, as that it be not this way decissive; or the Doubt
so secret, as not this way to be resolved; there is not then a better way, than
for both Parties to reason it out till Truth and Innocence do prevail, as the
two Tribes and an half did with the other Tribes of Israel, and prevailed,
Joshua 22. or in some doubtful cases the use of Lots may be admitted for the
resolution of them, Acts 1.


PAPIST. It is worth observing, how many windings and turnings you have to
avoid the difficulty of this Query; Whether we are to resolve all differences
in point of Religion, only out of the written Word of God? First, you leave out
the word [only] in which lay the very knot of the difficulty. 2. Then you give
me a piece of an Answer, and keep in the living voice of the Church, as a
reserve for your Second Paper. 3. When you are showed how you for sake your old
fort, the sole sufficiency of Scripture, as if you were afraid to come too near
us, you give back again, and do your worst to discredit this living voice of
the Church, so that in effect it stands but for a mere cipher, as I foresaw it
would when it came once to the scanning. 4. Upon second thoughts, finding your
error, by putting the Query, What is become of the living voice of the Church?
you shuffle again, and would gladly make something of it; but this something,
in the end, falls to just nothing, as I shall make it further appear by ripping
up the particulars of this your last Answer.


BAPTIST. I have used no windings to avoid the difficulty of the first Query;
but you are to know, that when I first answered it, I took the word
Controversy to relate only to such Controversies as depend between such
persons as deny each other to have any present right to either the Name or
Privileges of the Church. And indeed, I do not see how any other sense can be
made of this Query: for, under that word WE, I suppose you included no more but
your self and Church, on the one party; and us, to whom you sent the Queries,
on the other party; and we well know that you account us no members of the
Church; and you likewise know that we have the same opinion of you; but when
your Observations (or Second Paper) took into the Query all Controversies which
fall within the compass of the Church, as such, I could do no less than tell
you, that my Answer did not exclude the living voice of the Church in such
cases; [but that my Answer does only exclude every such voice as exalts it
self above the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures: And whereas in your Third
Paper, you told me, That to appeal to Councils and Fathers, is a clear way to
agree all our differences; I told you that this is a very cloudy way, and that
because they are contrary to themselves, and one another. 2. Till they be
agreed, they cannot agree us. 3. And since you take not the Scripture as being
of any authority, till they, as the Church, give it you; I demanded, by what
you would agree them in their divisions? 4. And to show you how they are
divided, I gave you diverse Instances concerning their divisions, as also
touching the corruption which has been found in diverse Popes.]


PAPIST. 1. I had no reason to take notice of your excluding from the living
voice of the Church, every voice exalting it self above the voice of Scripture,
because it was a very needless Exception, since the Church arrogates no such
power, but only to interpret the voice of Scripture.

2. Why this way of taking the sense of Scripture from the living voice of the
Church, should be so cloudy as you say it is, I do no more understand, than
that the living voice of a Judge should be a cloudy way to understand the Law
by.

As for your Riddles, how we are to reconcile the Fathers and Councils when
they seem to clash with their own Assertions, but by having recourse to
Scripture: I Answer briefly, That General Councils have no such contradictions
as you speak of. And as for the holy Fathers, when there is any such difficulty
in any one of them, we must look upon the rest what they say, and to follow
their unanimous consent: for if we take them singly, no doubt they have erred,
and these errors we know by their dissenting from the rest; for otherwise,
certainly the authority of any one of the ancient Fathers, when he expounds
Scripture, or relates the Christian practice of his time, and is not censured
or contradicted by the rest, or condemned by the Church in a General Council,
is of greater authority to decide Controversies in point of Religion, or to
know the true meaning of Scripture, than any thing you have alleged, as we
shall see by and by, when I have first examined what you bring to discredit the
Fathers and Councils.

Against the Fathers, you first bring St. Aug. retract. 21. contradicting
himself by saying, that, Matthew. 16. Christ built not his Church upon Peter, but
upon Peter 's Faith: sure you read not St. Aug. for he there expounds that
place of Christ himself, and not of the Faith of St. Peter; nor does he recall
his expounding it elsewhere of St. Peter, but leaves both Expositions as
probable, concluding thus; Hunc autem sententiam quae sit probalitur eligat
lector. Is this fair dealing? Again, you bring in St. Aug. contra. Petil. c. 2,
3, 4. as contrary to himself and me, because he teaches, That the Church is to
be found out by the words of Christ. But though (I doubt) you cannot make this
appear in any of these three Chapters, yet were it nothing to the purpose; for
we deny not but the Church is to be found out by these clear marks, whereby the
holy Scripture has deciphered her.

Next, you allege St. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 22. and St. Ambrose de Sacrament.
calling the Blessed Sacrament, a similitude or figure of Christ's Body and
Blood. I Answer. 1. That it is the Opinion of the Learned, that neither St.
Chrysostom. nor indeed any Grecian, could be Author of that work. 2. I say, the
Sacrament may be truly called the similitude of Christ's Body and Blood,
because it is not given in the form of flesh and blood, of which men would have
a horror, as the same St. Amb. observes, but under the Forms of Bread and Wine.

The next is St. Dinis Eccl. Herarch. but quoting no place, I have not yet met
with it; I am sure that work is so clearly for us in this very point, that our
Adversaries the Calvinists, and Calvin, denies it to be his: St. Aug. and
Tertull. are as clear for us, and what you bring out of them clearly answered
by Bellarm. de Euchar. And you are to know that it is a general rule amongst
the Learned, that we are to explicate obscure places by those that are clear,
if we mean to know the Opinion of any Author, it being impossible for any man
to write so warily, but that sometbing may be objected out of him (especially
if he have writ much, as it is our case) which may seem contrary to what he
expressly teaches. And you had need observe this rule in expounding the
Scriptures themselves, or otherwise you will meet with a thousand absurdities
and contradictions.

Against the Councils you produce that of Constantinople under Constant.
Copron. as crying down Transubstantiation. But this was a factious Meeting,
never owned for a Council, neither by the Greek nor Latin Fathers, and
expressly condemned in the Nicene Council: and the jest is, this Mock-Council
was so far from condemning Transubstantiation as you affirm, that they swore by
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist, to abolish the Worship of
Images: [Something should here have been said concerning Bertram, who is said
to have opposed Transubstantiation; but in the transcription of my Third Paper,
there was an Errata, and the Instance is not material; so that what is said
about him, I will expunge in both Papers.]

You say further against the Authority of Councils, That they have contradicted
each other in their Decrees, about the Laityes communicating in one or both
kinds: But we grant that the Church may vary in Customs of this nature, which
being indifferent, may be altered as she shall think fit, according to several
circumstances: What we deny is, that the Church, or General Councils ever made
contrary Decrees about the belief of any point of Faith.

It is no wonder that you have a fling against the Pope, after you have been so
bold with Holy Fathers, and General Councils; but I must tell you, Though many
of our Divines hold him infallible, when he speaks ex Cathedra, as they call
it, yet is it not the Opinion of all, and consequently no Article of our Faith.
Only we agree in this, That for preserving peace in the Church, all are bound
so far to submit to the Popes Decrees, as not to oppose them until a General
Council be called, from whose Judgment we admit no Appeal. What you say of the
wicked Lives of some of them, is nothing to the purpose; for as wicked Caiphas
played the Prophet, so might the Bishops of Rome, with the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, be true interpreters of God's Word, for all their wicked lives;
such Gratia gratis date, which are given for the good of others, do not argue
his Sanctity that has them.

To make you a true Prophet, I will here cry out, What is become of the living
voice of the Church, since you have done what you can to discredit her, by
casting all the dirt you can in her face, as it is evident, unless you will
throw out the Holy Fathers and General Councils (the Churches Representatives)
out of the Church!


BAPTIST. I perceive our Judgments differ concerning the living voice of the
Church, what it is? I have told you, That I take it for the present Church and
her Pastors, in those particular Ages wherein they live. You take this living
voice to be the Decrees of Councils, and Books of the ancient Fathers. And here
I cannot but marvel, why you should be willing to Appeal to the Books of the
Ancients, and their written Decrees, as a living voice, and clear way to decide
our Controversies, and yet appeal from the Books of the Prophets and Apostles,
as being but dead Letters, and senceless Characters. Certainly, if any Writings
now extant, may be called the Churches living voice, the Holy Scripture does
better deserve that title than any other. Nor will it suffice here to object
(as it is the Papists usual way) that our difference is about the Scripture and
the Sense thereof, etc. for the same difference is found amongst us, touching
the Books and Sense of Councils and Fathers: yea, I think I may be bold to say,
That even the Learned are so much divided concerning them in both respects, as
that they can never be therein reconciled.

But is it so? that the voice of the Fathers, etc. who only speak in their
Writings, is a means or way of equal clearing to decide our differences, as the
voice of a living Judge in a Case of Law amongst men? Then what reasonable man
can render a reason, that the voices of the Prophets and Apostles, though only
speaking to us in their Books and Decrees, may not be appealed to, as a clear
way to decide our differences? Since all men, professing Christianity, must
confess that the Prophets and Apostles speak with as much Life and Power,
Certainty and Authority, as any that ever writ since their time: No-whither now
can you turn your selves, but to your selves (as I have formerly noted) and
take upon you to be the only living voice, that must, without control,
interpret Fathers, Councils, and Scriptures too; and when you have done, sit
down as Judge, to give Sentence for your selves, and against your opposers.

Well, you have assigned us a Judge of Controversies; To wit, the Fathers and
Councils of the Church (long ago deceased) and this is a clear way, you say, to
agree all. But I have noted that it is a very cloudy way, and that because they
could not yet agree themselves; for they are opposite each to other to this
day, insomuch as you are utterly unable to reconcile them, since (as I have
showed) you must not make use of the Scripture to that purpose; because, before
the Scripture can have any authority to any purpose, (according to your
Judgment) your Councils must deliver it to us as the Word of God; which they
cannot do till they be found, First, holy Fathers and Councils of the Church;
And secondly, at unity among themselves, and each with himself. And I have
asked you, How you will effect this difficult work? To which you Answer; First,
That General Councils have no such Controversies as I talk of. Secondly, That
when there is such difficulty in any one of the Fathers, we must look upon the
rest what they say, and so follow their unanimous consent; for (say you) if we
take them singly, no doubt they have erred, and these errors we know by their
dissenting from the rest.

I answer first, That General Councils have erred, and that in matters of
Faith, is undeniable, if Records may be credited rather than you. As first, The
Council of Arimi. did err so, as to conclude These were both General Councils
for the Arrian Heresy, namely, That there was a time when Christ was not the
Son of God: and sure you account that an error in point of Faith. Secondly,
The Council of Ephesus did err so, as to conclude for the Eutichian Heresy,
namely, That the Body of Christ was not of one Substance with ours; and is not
this an error in point of Faith? Or will you say, that these things were never
contradicted and censured by other Councils? These things are not denied by
your eminent Disputant. See the Book entitled, Certamen Religiosum. So then it
appears, that General Councils have erred, and contradicted each another in
very high points of Faith.

Moreover, as to the things whereof I chiefly spoke in my last Paper, it is
manifest that Councils have contradicted one another about the Sacraments; for
the Council of Constance, confirmed by Pope Martin the Fifth, does curse the
Laity, or excommunicate such as receive the Sacrament in both kinds. And yet by
the Council of Basil, the Laity are allowed to receive it in both; which
Council was also confirmed by a Pope, namely, Felix the Fifth. Sure one of
these Councils must needs err. But you have a way to salve this error (such as
it is) and that is to tell me, That the Church may vary in customs of this
nature. Sure this is a corrupt opinion, by which it will follow, That we have
no certainty of, nor constancy in any Ordinance of Christ; for if the Church
have power to take the Cup away, she has power also to take the Bread away;
for certainly she has as much to do with the one, as the other. But truly this
your variation, as it is clear beside the Institution of Mat. 26 1 Cor. 11
Christ, and the Doctrine of Paul, so it has in a manner destroyed both
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, as is evident by the practice used in
diverse of your Masses, where the People partake neither of the Bread nor Cup.
As also your Peda-Rantism, has in a great measure defrauded the Sons of men of
the Baptism of Repentance.

But be pleased to consider, that this your sacrilegious division of Cyprian
Sermon. Penet.
this Sacrament, is condemned by Cyprian, Gelasius, and others. First, Cyprian
says, How can we exhort the People to shed their blood for Christ, if we deny
them the Blood of him? Gelas. consec. Did. 2.


The division of this Mystery cannot be without great Sacrilege, says
Gelasius.

Again, you cannot be ignorant how the Council of Carthage, decreed the Books
of Tobit, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Sapience, and Maccabees, should be received
for Canonical, notwithstanding they were rejected out of the sacred Canon by
the Council of Laodicea; and here by the way I may take notice, how you would
have me walk by such a rule as you your self do not observe; for you propose
the Judgment of those who lived nearest to the Apostles times, as my safest
rule to walk by, supposing they knew the Mind of God, or Christ, better than
those that came after; but then why do you reject the Judgment of the Laodicean
Council, which is more ancient than that of Carthage, which yet you follow in
receiving the Books of Maccabees into your Canon of holy Scripture.

Secondly, It is mavelous to see, what work you make in reconciling the
Fathers without the Scriptures. And seeing you are so hardy as to undertake
this task without Scripture, as undoubtedly you see you must, or else grant,
that the Scripture must be that whereby we must decide all Controversies in
Religion; for certainly, if we must decide all the Fathers Controversies in
Religion with or by the Scripture, it is not then very likely that either we or
they should decide ours without them: but I say, since you have undertaken to
decide the Fathers Differences without Scripture, pray tell me, before you
meddle with their Differences, how you know them to be holy Fathers of the
Church? can you prove them Church Members without Scripture? I believe this is
as hard a task as to reconcile their Differences without Scripture; and yet
this also must you do, before you can look upon the Scripture as any Rule for
either them, or your self.

You tell me, if I take the Fathers singly, no doubt they have erred: yet you
say I must follow their unanimous Consent, (a pretty Paradox) Follow their
Consent! in what? why say you, in their Interpretation of Scripture. Of
Scripture! Why there is no such thing as yet for them to interpret; for you
know (that by your own direction) we have laid by the Scripture, and must
reconcile these Fathers by themselves. Miserable Guide! have thou not led me
into a Labyrinth, and run thy self into a sufficient Maze? I Will back again and
see how these Fathers themselves direct me in this difficult point. And first I
meet with famous Augustine, who tells me how he took notice of the Fathers that
were before him. Says he,

My consent without exception I owe not to any Father, were he never Aug. de
Not. and Great.
so well learned, but only to the Canonical Scripture: For whereas the Lord
has not spoken, who of us can say it is this or that? and if he do say so, how
can he prove it? Yea, says he, I require the voice of the Shepherd read me
this matter out of the Prophets, Psalms, the Gospel, or Aug. in John. Tract. 94.
the Apostles Epistles. Neither (says he) ought we to take the dispensations
OF ALL MEN, how CATHOLIC SOEVER they be, or be they never so commendable as we
take the canonical Scriptures, as though we may not (saving the honor that is
due to such men) reprove or refuse any thing of their Writings, if we find they
meant otherwise than the Verity does allow, by the help of God found by us, or
by others. Again, he says, I am not moved with Cyprian's Epistles; for Aug. ad
Fortunat.
I do not take the Letters of Cyp. as the Canonical Scripture, but I do try his
Writings BY THE CANONICAL SCRIPTURE; and whatsoever in them does agree with the
Authority of the holy Scripture, I do receive it with his Commendation; and
whatsoever does not -- -- I do by his good leave refuse it.

And for further testimony of Augustine's integrity, hear what he says of
himself: Trust not me, (says he) nor credit my Writings, as if they were
Canonical Scripture, but whatsoever THOU find in the Word, although thou
did not believe it before, yet ground thy Faith on it now; and whatsoever
thou read of mine, unless thou know it certainly to be true, give no certain
assent unto it. Again, he thus teaches, We August. Prolog. l. 3. de Trin.
must be partakers of other men's Writings, wholly after the manner of Bees; for
they fly not alike to all Flowers, nor where they sit do they snatch all quite
away, but snatching so much as may serve to their honey-making, they take their
leave of the rest. Even so we, if we be wise, having gotten so much of others
as is sound and agreeable to Truth, we will leap over the rest. Which rule, if
we keep in reading and alleging the Fathers words, we shall not swerve from
our Profession, the Scriptures shall have the sovereign place, and yet the
Doctors of the Church shall lose no part of their due estimation.

And says Origin, We have need to bring the Scriptures for witness, Orig. in
Jer. hom. 1.
for our Meanings and Expositions without them, have no credit, -- -- the
discussing of our Judgments must be taken ONLY of the Scriptures.

Thus you see the Fathers were not of your mind, that the Readers of their
Books should not try them by the Scripture, but the contrary; and that as we
find them consenting to, or dissenting from Scripture (not one another as you
teach) accordingly they advise us to believe, or not believe them.

As I have said, it is a cloudy way to appeal to Councils and Fathers, so you
now prove my saying true: for I alleged Augustine, as being opposite to you
and your Church, touching the meaning of Matthew. 16. Upon this Rock, etc. and,
first, you tell me I read him not; but I must tell you, I read him after a
Scholar sufficient: and though your reading differ something from his, yet they
both destroy the received Opinion of your Church concerning that Text; for if
Christ be that Rock, as you confess Augustine there teaches, then it cannot be
meant positively of Peter, and so not consequently of your Popes.

My quotation out of Chrysostom in Ps. 22. you invalidate, by telling me, that
Book was not writ by him. And this I find to be the usual way of Learned-men,
when the passage alleged is clear and convincing, then a suspicion must be
cast upon the Book, etc. I could instance the best part of a thousand Books,
Epistles, etc. which are entitled under the names of the Ancient Fathers;
amongst which, as you observe, is reckoned the Book of Dynis the Areopagite,
which I alleged in my Rejoinder. And do not these things contribute something
toward the proof of my Assertion, namely, That it is a cloudy way to appeal to
Fathers and Councils to decide Controversies in Religion. If then your way be
cloudy, mine must needs be clear, unless you can assign a third way, opposite to
both; for undoubtedly there is a clear way to decide Controversies.

You again prescribe me a way to find the meaning of the Fathers, and that is,
to explicate their obscure places by such as are plain, etc. But by your leave,
we can neither know which of their speeches are obscure or plain, without some
rule whereby to know this. And now, what can supply this our necessity? For
example, Augustine is sometimes read, affirming the Sacrament to be the real
Body and Blood of Christ; otherwhiles he is read directly opposite to this: And
how can you, or any body else, tell which of these sayings is clear or obscure,
fith none must be permitted the use of his reason (by you) in this
Controversy; and how he should judge according to Faith, I know not, since you,
as yet, debar us of that by which Faith NOW comes, namely, the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles as contained in the Scriptures.


PAPIST. Something you would say for this living Voice of the Church you once
had required as necessary to resolve Differences in Religion, but this
signifies nothing in our present Query: for, after all your shifting, I cannot
perceive that you make use of her Authority in point of Faith, (which is our
Qu.) but only to take up other quarrels, by exhorting, reproving, etc. and in
this also it seems you will be your own Judge, whether she follow Christ or no.

Three things you affirm in relation to the Churches Authority. 1. That she is
to rule her self according to Scripture; which no body denies. 2. That the
Church in former Ages is not to be a Rule for after Ages to rule themselves by;
because she could not foresee the Controversies that rise up afterward. What
if the same Errors be revived now, which in their times were condemned, is not
the Judgment of the Church in those days a safe President for us to condemn
the same Errors? Besides, Is it not evident that the Pastors of the Church, the
nearer they were to Christ's time, were the better able to judge of Christ's
Doctrine? You say, 3dly. That the Church is to be no Rule for those that are
out of her communion. A strange Assertion. As if a clear light (as the Church
is in holy Scripture) with so many marks to know her by; as Unity, Sanctity,
Universality, Miracles, etc. were not a good means for him that gropes in the
dark to find out his way. Look well upon these marks, and you will find them to
agree Only to the Roman Catholic Church, and to no upstart Congregation, and
consequently, that you ought in all reason to give her the hearing in matters
of Faith, and to have recourse unto her, as to the pillar and ground of Truth,
1 Timothy 3. which place you let slip, and this under pain of being accounted a
Heathen, etc. Matthew. 18. for though this place does point out chiefly the
obedience which Members of the Church owe her in point of Discipline, as you
say well enough, yet has it no small force in our present Debate, since those
that will not hear her Voice when she echoes out the Voice of God, may well be
esteemed by her as a Heathen. And in your own sense I suppose you will have
your proviso, That the Church is to be obeyed only when she rules according to
God's Word, of which you will be Judge too: So in conclusion all comes to this,
That you and your spirit must be Judge of all Disputes. And then have not I
reason to ask again (since I, or any body else, may challenge as large a share
in the Spirit and right Reason as you) who shall take up the Quarrel? And is
not my comparison here very pat, That there must needs be as great confusion in
your Church, as in a Kingdom where every one were left to decide his own case?
This was not the old way, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. and Malach. 2. 7.
which places you had no mind to take notice of: and yet you charge me for
letting pass your Instance of St. Stephen, concerning the Libertines,
Alexandrians, etc. which makes nothing at all for your pretended Evidence of
God's Word: For though his Judgment might be well taken in expounding
Scripture, as being full of the holy Ghost, and confirming what he said by
Miracles, as the Scripture tells us he did, yet this is not your case, for I
think you will not arrogate so much to your self.

What you say of Christ and his Apostles vindicating their Doctrine out of
Scripture, is very true, and our Church does the same: but it is not true, that
either Christ, or the primitive Saints were always wont to send their
Proselytes to the Scripture, to regulate their Faith. Did not Christ himself
send St. Paul to Ananias for instruction? Had you been of his counsel, you
would have rather wished him to look into the Word of God, and see there what
he was to do. And when there arose a Debate, even in the Apostles days, about
the necessity of Circumcision, Act. 15. did they not assemble the Church, and
so pronounce Sentence conciliariter, with a visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis?


BAPTIST. [It is here worth noting how you dispute beyond the due bounds of the
Query, which, as it concerns you Papists and us Baptists, has no relation to
the Differences which arise in the Church, as such, and indeed you go amiss in
this matter throughout the whole Discourse.]

Here you seem to acknowledge, that the Church ought to rule according to
Scripture; but you will allow me to judge whether she do so or not. But I
answer, that there is a Judgment of Science, as well as a Judgment
Authoritative; the latter I know cannot be exercised by me, nor any other
Member of the Church, because this Power lies in the Church as imbodied
together; but the former, to wit, a Judgment of Science or Knowledge, is
particular to each individual, and so my self, if a Member of the Church, am
allowed the exercise thereof, even in matters of Religion, 1 Cor. 10. 15. I
speak to wise men: judge ye what I say. The Apostle does not here give, any
wise man at Corinth leave to judge of that which he said, so as to censure what
he had delivered, yet he must exercise his understanding to judge of what Paul
had said, thereby to find out the verity of what was spoken. But yet I do
confess, that our case, and the case of Christians then, do differ: for Paul
was a Foundation-layer, a Master Builder, (so that the Members might not so
well judge then, as now, yet) the Church now is to build upon the Foundation
which is laid already: and you know that I have in my Rejoinder acknowledged,
that it very nearly concerns particular Members of the Church, to have great
regard to the Judgment of the Church, when, after serious debate, they deliver
their Sentence in any point disputable. And further (as touching your Church)
you tell me anon, that even a Heathen may judge of the holiness of your Church,
by the Law of Conscience; and then, why may he not by the same Law judge your
Church concerning her unholiness? nay verily, he must be able to speak both
ways, or else he has no Judgment. And if a Heathen have this privilege and
ability, then why not a man professing Christianity, who has not only the
Conscience-Law, but also the written Law of God, by which he understands things
more excellent, Romans 2. From all this I only conclude, that each particular
ought to have the free exercise of his Judgment in what he chooses or refuses,
since without this he cannot choose or refuse any thing with confidence, nor to
his comfort.

And concerning Controversies in the Church, I do not see that (in these days)
we are bound to follow the sentence of a multitude, (though assembled in
Council) SO, as to hold their Sentence absolutely infallible; for the promise
of infallibility is not made to a certain select number The Apostles are here
excepted
of Bishops, but to the Church, taken collectively; and we may remember that a
great Assembly of Prophets in the old Church, erred in Judgment with unanimous
consent, when yet the Lord had one Micaiah at home which understood the truth
of his Will. Wherefore I here conclude, although the Members of the Church
ought to weigh with great respect the things concluded of by their Pastors, yet
so may it be that they may swerve from the Truth, whilst God clears it up by
some particular rather than by such an Assembly. And to this agrees very well a
saying of Gerson, If it should so happen that there should be a General Council
assembled, in Gerson exam. of Doct.
which such a man were present as is well instructed, If the greatest part
should decline through Malice or IGNORANCE, to the opposition of the Gospel,
such a Layman may be objected, against the said General Council. And says
Panormitan, In matters WHICH, CONCERN Panor. chap. signif.
FAITH, the saying of a Layman ought to be preferred before that of the Pope,
if his saying be more probable by better authority of Scripture than that of
the Pope.

You often tell me, that to appeal to the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures,
etc. is not a sufficient way to decide OUR Controversies, and that because you
may challenge them to be for you, etc. To which I answer, by retorting your
Argument thus, That which you call the living Voice of the Church, to wit,
Volumns of Fathers, and Decrees of Councils, is therefore insufficient to
decide OUR Controversies, because your opposites do say they are for them, and
against you: and now you must answer your own Query, viz. Who must take up this
Quarrel? You answer, that we must explicate them one by another; the places
which are obscure, by such as are plain. And then I still ask you, why we may
not as well agree our selves this way by the Volumns of the Prophets and
Apostles?

I showed before, how you misapply that Text, Matthew. 18. and though the case is
so plain, as that you cannot defend your self, yet you seem loath to decline
your error, and would fasten a very gross passage upon me; namely, that I
should say, That the Church is no Rule for those that are out of her Communion,
as not to be a light for such as grope in the dark. A manifest wrong; I only
say and prove, That those that are not of the Church, are not within the power
of her Discipline; nor can she reasonably desire unconverted ones to appeal to
her Judgment Seat in Controversies between them and her. And I asked you, If
you would not scorn us, if we should call upon you to appeal unto us as your
Judges, Whether we, or you, be the Church? and not doubting but you would, I
concluded, that it is equally absurd for you, to desire us to appeal to you as
our Judges. But you may find it plain enough in my Papers, That I do believe
the Church SO to be a Rule to the world, as to show them the way of Life, and
so a good means for their Illumination and Conversion. --

As for your three Texts, 1 Timothy 3. Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. Malachi 2. 7. As they do
your cause no good, so they do mine no harm: I grant the Church is the pillar
and ground of the Truth, and that she has Power to hear and determine all
Controversies among her Members, as aforesaid; and that it is the duty of the
Members, to enquire of their Pastors, what is the way of God concerning them:
But what of all this? Ergo, The Papal Church of Rome is the only infallible
Judge, and Moderatrix of all Contention about Religion. Ergo, we must all
appeal to the Papal Church of Rome, as our Judge, in this Question, Whether we
be of the Church, or not? though we be in doubt, Whether she her self be a true
Church, or not? yea, though we are satisfied she is not. Are not these
Monstrous Consequences?

Be it here observed, That I do believe the Church of Christ to be the Pillar
of Truth, so, as that she was never so over-clouded with error, but that she
has enjoyed the fruition of that Promise, Matthew. 16. in some good measure ever
since it was made: Nor shall she ever so close with the gates of Hell, as by
general consent, and full authority to dissert that Faith, which having Christ
for its object, is the Rock she is built upon: and therefore you see, I hold
the Church cannot err (in some sense) and indeed, he that holds the contrary,
must (for ought I see) raze out that Promise, Matthew. 16. and many other. And
yet nothing from all this accrues to the Papal Church of Rome.

I alleged Stephen, as defending the Truth by the authority of Scripture Only,
etc. Nor can it be groundedly imagined, that (had it been the mind of God, that
such as are not of the Church, should be summoned to her Tribunal) Stephen
(being full of the holy Spirit, the leader into all truth) would have omitted
the use of that means, but he knew that such authority the Church had none, as
I showed from 1 Cor. 5. What have I to do to judge them that are without? do
not ye also judge them that are within? And therefore he could not mention any
such power. And though Stephen did many wonders among the People, yet at this
time when he so powerfully vanquished his adversaries, he did none at all, but
only overcame them by the assistance of the Spirit speaking in the Scripture,
etc. I desired you to show me but one Instance, where ever any of the Primitive
Saints did appeal to the Church, of which they were present Members, as Judge
between them and such as never received their Doctrine: but you have not done
it, nor indeed can it be done. As I showed, that Stephen appealed to Scripture
ONLY, etc. so I also showed, That it was the way of Christ and his Apostles,
frequently to vindicate their Doctrine against such as were not of their
Church, by appealing to the Scriptue (especially amongst such as owned the
Scripture) this you confess; and also you tell me, that your Church does the
same: But this cannot be true of All your Doctrine, because you have told me,
That many Points of your Faith are resolved without the written Word of God; or
else you never answered my first Antiquery, which demands, What Controversy
in Religion you can resolve without the written Word of God? And in your Answer
you assigned, The Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son,
Sabbath, Infant Baptism, and MANY OTHER POINTS OF FAITH; and I shall show anon,
that we have it pro confesso, from your Champions, that there be some Points of
your Faith, which is not GROUNDED UPON, nor MENTIONED IN the SCRIPTURES; and
therefore your Church cannot vindicate such Points of her Faith and Doctrine by
the Scripture.

Although Christ sent Paul to Ananias for instruction, yet it follows not,
that we must take Romes instructions without Scripture. Is there no difference
between the time that now is, and then was? Much of the Scripture (if not all
the New Testament) was then unwritten. Again, Ananias was immediately sent of
God. If you are so sent, prove it to us, as Ananias did, by showing the Miracle
of restoring Paul's sight. If you are not so sent, to what purpose do you
allege this Text? I believe I might form you a monsirous Consequence here.


PAPIST. You that will not trust the Churches Judgment, lay down four ways of
resolving Doubts; The first, To argue it out till Truth prevail. But if we must
argue only out of Scripture, and be our own Interpreters of it, there can be no
end of arguing, as I have often showed. The second, To appeal to God as the two
Tribes did, Josh. 22. A rare way to end Controversies, to look for Miracles in
our Disputes. The third, To appeal to Scripture, and right Reason: But if I
challenge them to be on my side, who must take up the difference? The fourth,
To cast Lots. But though the Apostles did it, who certainly were inspired to do
so, yet must not we presume to tempt God, or to look for the like Miracles, or
to build our Faith upon such doubtful events.


BAPTIST. You here wrong us, to say, that we will not trust the Judgment of the
Church; for the Church, truly and universally taken, we do credit, as her that
is appointed of the Father, to be the Pillar and Ground of the Truth; of which
Church, we take the Prophets and Apostles to be the principal Members, and so
in all Points of Faith, to be credited in the first place. But if by Church,
you mean the Papal Church of Rome, I confess we dare not trust her Judgment,
at least, not in all that she says; for example these following: 1. Your
Church tells us, That it is not needful for the Scriptures to be read to, or by
the Laity, in a tongue which they understand: and that though they Pray (after
another) in Latin, though they understand not what they say, yet such prayer
is sufficient, Rhem. Test. Annot. in 1 Corinthians. 2. Your Church tells us,
That the Sacrifice of your Mass, is available to take away, or obtain
remission of sins by the work wrought. Con. Trident. Sess. 22. That the whole
Mass is a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead; and whosoever says, it
is only a commemoration of Christ's Death, etc. is accursed. Con. Trent. 3.
Your Church holds, That such as deny that the real Flesh and Blood of Christ,
is in the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, ought to be burnt to death. 4. Your
Church holds, and tells us, That Images, and old clothes of Saints, ought to be
worshipped with religious Worship. 5. That men are AS FULLY Justified by good
Works, AS THEY ARE DAMNED BY evil Works. 6. That it is unlawful for Ministers
of Christ to Marry. 7. That the Scripture does not contain all things necessary
to Salvation. To omit many other, these are Points of your Churches Judgment,
which we dare not trust, till by you, or some other, proved to be Truths.

I assigned the use of Lots as lawful in some doubtful cases to end
Controversies, and for proof, I quoted Acts 7. and this you will not allow for
two Reasons. 1. Because (you say) the Apostles were inspired to use them; but
were it so (as that you cannot prove) yet it cannot be denied, but we may do
some things which they were inspired to do: for the Holy Ghost was to lead them
into all Truth, and they were to lead us into the same Truth, by their Example
and Doctrine, Joh. 16. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2. And be it here observed, That the
Holy Ghost led those, our Teachers, to ordain the Ministry by Prayer, and
laying on of Hands, Acts 6, and Acts 13. which practice of theirs, is a good
president to act by; a president I say; for this practice is not expressly
commanded in Scripture, no more than the use of Lots in the election of
Ministers. If it here be objected, That Christ might give laying on of hands in
Precept when he was with his Apostles. I Answer, So also might he give them the
other to be used, when there might be persons found of seemingly equal fitness
to serve the Church. 2. You reckon the use of Lots, Acts 1. amongst Miracles,
as your other Reason, why we may not use them to decide any Controversy; but
why you should so do, I see no more reason, than to say Josh. 22. mentioned any
Miracles toward the composure of the difference between the two Tribes, and
Israel; where in truth no such thing can be found, though you seem to affirm it.


PAPIST. In my last Paper, I took notice how you sent us to Heaven for
Miracles, to take up our Quarrels after the Example of Moses, whose cause was
cleared that way: Here you deny you brought in the Instance of Moses to this
purpose, which, how true it is, every one that can read must needs see. For,
are not these your words? But you say, Reason is on my side, etc. and demand by
whom we must be tried, who must take up the quarrel? I answ. Even the same that
took up quarrels of this nature in times past, Exodus 7, etc. Do you not here
tell us plainly, That God must take up our quarrels Note, there is not the word
AS in my words, only I say the same, that is, God must take up our quarrels;
and how that must be, is showed in my Answer following.
AS he did those of Moses? And truly otherwise I might (as you foresaw) very
possibly tell you, that your Allegation was nothing to the Question, Who must
take up the quarrel? It is pretty to see what stuff you make of it, and then
how you digress, to rail at our Baptism and Pastors; I say, rail: for you
bring no proof at all.


BAPTIST. I have said enough to satisfy any reasonable man, that it does not
follow from my alleging Exodus 7. that I send you, or any body else, to Heaven
for Miracles to decide our Controversies. For at the first I showed, that in
the case of Moses there was Miracle against Miracle; only God gave a note of
distinction between those signs, insomuch as the Serpent that came of Moses Rod
devoured the other: from whence I only noted, That it is God's way to give some
powerful note of distinction, between the Witness of his Servants, and
Deceivers. And now, is not this my Observation very pertinent to our case? You
say, you are the Church. We say, we are the Church. Here is Testimony against
Testimony, as there was Miracle against Miracle; and if the Lord do not now
give some powerful note of distinction between our Doctrine and yours,
concerning the Church, as he did between Stephen's and the Alexandrians, I
pray, who must take up the quarrel between U S? Is it fit that you should be
Judge in your own case here? If so, why may not we? If the Councils and Fathers
were of the Papal Church, then it is not any more reasonable that you should
summon us to their Arbitriment, than it is for us to summon you to the Judgment
of our Predecessors; but forasmuch as you and we are agreed, that the Prophets
and Apostles were infallibly assisted to write the Mind of God for us to
observe; therefore it is most reasonable that we should both appeal to them. If
you object, the Prophets, etc. are not alive to interpret their Writings, and
that our difference is about the sense thereof; I Answer, This objection is
every way as forceable against the Decrees of Councils, and Volumns of Fathers;
for their Writings must be interpreted, expounded, etc. and we differ about the
meaning of them. Secondly, the way you assign us to agree them, is to consult
them together, etc. Now I would know, why we may not be allowed this way to
seek out the meaning of the Prophets and Apostles? In a word, there is not one
Objection which yet I have met with, levelled against our appealing to holy
Scripture, etc. as the only infallible means to decide all Controversies
between YOU and US; but the same objections are more forceable against all that
you appeal to, for decision of the said Controversies.


PAPIST. You except against our Miracles, because we bring them to prove our
Church by; but if it appear as it does, that God works Miracles upon those that
actually call upon his Blessed Mother, and his other Saints, or whilst they are
performing some of our Religious practices, which you abhor, is it not an
argument that God approves them? It is God then, and not we, that brings
Miracles to prove our Church.


BAPTIST. You will still have your Miracles to be an infallible mark of the
truth of your Church, especially those of the Blessed Virgin (you mean the
Image so called at Loreto) or as you phrased it in your third Paper, The Lady
of Loreto. But let me tell you, that there is small cause you should refer me
to what is done there, as an infallible mark that your Church is the Church of
Christ. For by the relation of two eyewitnesses, which I have read, it is a
place of most gross Idolatry, blind devotion, and deceit. One of which Authors,
was once a Teacher of your Church, who, before his separation from you,
traveled to Loreto, to see if the Image of the Virgin would inform him of the
truth or falsehood of the Roman Church, as it is now constituted; for he was
doubtful in this matter, and had been informed, that if any person were guilty
of Mortal sin (which if the Papal Church be the Church of Christ, he concluded
he must needs be guilty of, in questioning her, at least in the Judgment of the
Friars, who waited there upon that Image) he had been informed (I say) that if
such as were guilty of Mortal sin, did but pray before the Lady of Loreto, the
said Image would either blush, or fall into a sweat, and so resolve the
Petitioner in the affirmative. But if we may believe the Lady of Loreto, and
this Informant, then it is no Mortal sin to think, that the Papal Church is not
the Church of Christ: For this doubtful man prayed earnestly, and beheld the
Lady as steadfastly, but no sweat nor change befell her at all. Therefore,
according to the Friars rule, it is no Mortal sin to think the Papal Church of
Rome is not the Church of Christ.

But this one thing is especially observable here, That whereas you would
persuade your self, and others, that I send men to Heaven for Miracles to
decide Controversies; it is manifest that you are the man that is herein
guilty: For the Controversy is, Whether the Papal Church of Rome, be the
Church of Christ? You affirm; I deny. To decide this Controversy, you refer me
to Miracles, as the special means, or chief mark, whereby I may be resolved in
this matter, as is evident in this, and your two former Papers; So that what
you would cast upon me, falls clearly upon your self, save that, instead of
sending me to Heaven, you send me to Loreto.

[In my Rejoinder I urged, that of necessity the Scripture must decide all our
Controversies, as aforesaid; because, as things now stand, the Word (or
Scripture) is antecedent to the Church, so that inasmuch as it is impossible to
find the Church without the Scripture, it supposes clearly that the Scripture
must be found before the Church: and so, if the Scripture must of necessity
resolve this great Controversy about the Church, it consequently follows
that they must resolve all Controversies; because all Religious Controversies
are involved in this one general Query, Where is, and who are the Church?]

Something here, which the Adversary does further write, is omitted, because it
may be more fitly taken notice of afterward.


PAPIST. I had reason to take notice of your general saying, that the Word was
antecedent to Faith and the Church, since there was a Church, and consequently
Faith before the Scripture was written. Now it seems you meant not the
Scripture by the Word, but I know not what Word, which was afterward committed
to writing. It is past my understanding what Word you mean; for since it cannot
be Verbum Scriptum before it be written, It must either be Verbum Traditum, and
I suppose you will not allow that; or Verbum Dei Patris; and that cannot be the
Word you speak of, as committed to writing.


BAPTIST. By that Word which was antecedent to Faith and the Church, as it
relates to the Church under the Patriarchs, etc. I mean the Word which God
spoke to them, and by them, at sundry times, and in diverse Heb. 1. 1.
manners. And if you take that term [Word] to relate to the Church of Christ in
its plantation, then I speak partly of the written Word of God, and partly of
that which was (at that time) only spoken by word of mouth, by Christ and his
faithful Stewards; and if you will call this part of the word, Verbum Traditum,
I say, that is the Word I speak of. And I do also say, this Word was afterward
committed to writing; which Word, together with the former, I mean that of the
Prophets, is that whereon the Church (as now considered) is founded Not denying
Christ to be her foundation in the main. Ephesians. 2. 20.
, by which she must be known. And in this sense, I say, the holy Scripture is
now antecedent to the Church. And therefore well spoke that Learned person,
Chrysostom, when he forewarned the sons of men, that if they took heed to any
thing, in Chrisost. Hom. in Mat. 24
order to their knowing the Church (in the latter times) beside Scripture, they
would fall headlong into the Abomination which makes desolate, and not be able
to know the true Church.


BAPTIST. I Think it meet here to give the Reader some account of my Judgment
of these five Texts, which I brought to justify my Answer to the first Query;
which, with my Answer, was as follows.

Qu. Whether we are to resolve all Differences in point of Religion, only out
of the written Word of God?

Answ. The Spirit speaking in the Scripture, together with right Reason as
truly subservient, is that whereby we are to resolve all Differences, etc. For
proof I cited, Isa. 8. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 1 John 4. 6. 2 John 9, 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
2. where note, that under the term We, ought not to be understood, any person
but the Papists on the one part, and the Baptists on the other, who do deny
each other to be the Church of Christ.

Now that the Church is to defend her self against all that come to spoil her
of her Church State, by the Scripture only (as that which includes her whole
strength) is that which I brought these Texts to prove.

And first for that place, Isa. 8. 20. The Prophet foreseeing a Judgment coming
upon Israel, even such, as God would hide himself from them; and the Law and
Testimony should be like a Book bound and sealed up; as ver. 16 and 17.
compared with chapter 29. 11, 12. The Prophet likewise foreseeing, that when God
should hide his face, Israel would enquire of Wisards, and such as spoke from
familiar Spirits (as Saul did, when under the like judgment, as 1 Samuel 28. 6,
7, 8.) wherefore the Prophet, that he might warn the remnant of faithful ones,
whom he foresaw would be as wonders amongst the rest, commands them, as from
the Lord, that WHEN men should say unto them, Seek unto such as have familiar
spirits, etc. to go to the LAW, as being their way to go to God himself: for
says he, Should not a People seek unto their God? To the LAW, etc. and
certifies them that by that they should know Deceivers; for, says he, If they
speak not according to This Word, [the Law] there is no light in them: So that
I infer thus much, that when such as are enemies to the Church come to invade
the Saints with their deceit, the only infallible way to know them to be
Deceivers, is, to enquire of God's Law and Testimony. I know that Israel had
the Testimony or standing Oracle, beside the written Law. And the Church now
has the new Testimony open in the Church, beside the Law and Prophets; and
hereunto, I say, the Church is only to apply her self, as aforesaid, to find
out the deceit of those who would rob her of that inheritance, which she
holds by the deeds of God's Law, and Promises, contained in Scripture; by
these, as the only infallible Rule, she knows those to be liars, who say they
are the Church, and are not.

And to this agrees the next three Scriptures, the very reading whereof
shows, that when the Controversy is between the Church and such as pretend
falsely to that Title, the only infallible means to refel them, is, the Spirit
speaking in Scripture, etc.

For thus says the first of them: If any man teach otherwise, and consent not
to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
that is according to Godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, etc.

Thus says the second, He that knows God, hears us: he that is not of God,
hears not us. Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the spirit of Error.

The third says thus, Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, has not God. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the
Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed.

From these Texts it appears, that unless the Papists can produce something
which they can infallibly prove to be Christ's Doctrine, beside what is
contained in holy Scripture; or, that the Apostles may be heard as infallibly
by some other means, as by the holy Scripture; or, that the Saints received
some Doctrine for Christ's, that is not contained in the Scripture; I say,
unless they can infallibly show something of this nature, my Answer is good.
But if they can produce any other thing of such authority, then I acknowledge
my Answer to be deficient. Howbeit, if any man, or the Church her self, do
decide a Controversy, by insisting upon the Scripture, this is no more than my
Answer included; for I do not imagine that the Church must not pronounce what
is contained in the Scripture: but if she has power to speak as from the Lord
(in these days) when yet the Scripture says no such thing, then I profess my
self short of understanding the power of the Church.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. I only made use of this Text thus far, that in Religious
Controversies the Apostle gives Reason her place, and therefore desired to be
delivered from unreasonable men.


PAPIST. ONce more you offer to justify your Consequences drawn out of the
five Texts. But I ask once more, To what purpose did you bring them? was it not
to prove what you had said in your Answer to my Query, That the Scripture, so
we took right Reason along with us, was sufficient to resolve all Controversies
in matters of Faith? No rational man can read your first Paper but must think
so; and indeed, otherwise you must have brought them to prove something that
was not under debate, which had been impertinent. Must not that very Assertion
of yours be the Consequence to these five Texts? and them, have I not reason to
cry out, that there never appeared such Monstrous Consequences? But, to avoid
this inconvenience you fall into the other, and will have some of your Texts
brought to prove certain Propositions, which you had not mentioned in your
Answer. Howsoever, let us now see what you make of them. Isa. 8. 20. God's
People are commanded to have recourse rather to the Law, etc. than to
superstitious Oracles, Ad Legem magis, etc. And they have a sign given them to
convince such Oracles of falsehood, if they speak not according to the Word or
Prophecy of Isaiah. This is the clear sense of that place, out of which you
draw this strange consequence. Ergo, the Scripture, etc. is to resolve all
matters of Faith. A strange Consequence, I say, as will appear, if we turn your
Euthymeme into a Syllogism, thus: Recourse is to be had rather to the Law; than
to false Oracles, whose falsehood appears, if they speak not according to the
Word or Prophecy of Isaiah. But if this be so, the Scriptures, etc. are to
resolve all points of Faith. Ergo, etc. What a prodigious minor have we here?
How does it follow, that because God's Word is to be more credited than
superstitioas Oracles; or, that such Oracles are not to be credited, when they
speak against God's Word: Therefore the Scriptures, etc. are to resolve all
points of Faith. I know you have not the word rather in your English
Translation as we have in ours, but the clear sense of the place bears as much.

1 Timothy 6. 3. says, they are proud that teach contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ. Ergo, you infer that the Scripture is to judge whose Doctrine is of
pride. This is as mad a conclusion as the last; for when there is no clear Text
of Scripture for either side, as it often happens, or Scripture brought on both
sides; How can the Scripture judge whether party be proud? or, how can it be
judge of its own sense, when it is alleged on both sides, who both pretend to
have the Spirit and Reason on their sides?

1 John 4. 6. Those that hear not the Apostles, are not of God, nor have his
Spirit. Ergo, say you, the Scripture resolves who are religious: Does it follow
out of this Text, that when parties contend, that they hear the Apostles, the
Scripture, can resolve the difference, and pronounce who are religious? etc.
Not at all.

2 John 9. 10. Gives Judgment against those that follow not Christ's Doctrine.
You infer ergo the Scripture must try whether men bring this Doctrine. Strange
Logic: for unless your Text proved that the Scripture contains all Christ's
Doctrine, which it does not, your Consequence must needs be faulty.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. you say proves, that Reason is some ways necessary to decide
Controversies in Religion. I will not examine the goodness of this Consequence,
but I am sure you need not have brought Scripture to have proved so manifest a
Truth, which cannot be denied by any, but such as pretend to have so much of
the Spirit, that methinks they should have little need of the use of Reason.


BAPTIST. Concerning my five Texts, and what I infer thence, I need not speak
much here; yet it is worthy observing how apparently you miss the clear sense
of Isa. 8. 20. whilst you restrain the relatives [this word] to the Word or
Prophecy of Isaiah, whereas it is as clear as the Sun at noon, that they ought
to be referred to the Law and Testimony; for thus I read, To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to This Word. Having thus missed the
sense of the Text, then in all that you say further, you discover a taunting
spirit, endeavoring to bespatter me with what dirt comes next to hand.

I did not quote any one of the five Texts, as taking it singly to prove the
whole Assertion; and therefore you did injure my understanding, to argue from
them apart, as brought to prove the whole Position; but I brought them to prove
such Propositions, as being laid together, do amount to so much as my Assertion
(as I explicate it) does contain. For the first four Texts do all of them show,
how God's People ought to try and defend themselves against such as oppose the
Church and Truth of God, as I showed in my Rejoinder: and the fifth, gives
Reason her place in Religious Contests. But there is not one of the Arguments
which I formed from my five Quotations, but you deprave and abuse it, by both
adding terms of your own, and omitting mine; yea, sometimes whole sentenoes:
and when you have so done, you flout at the Conclusions. Which dealing is too
bad for a sober Disputant,

It were a very easy thing to turn all your Objections here against the
Scripture as insufficient to resolve differences in Religion, upon the Church
as therefore insufficient to resolve them. For, whereas you say, That when both
Parties pretend to have Scripture and Reason on their sides, then the Scripture
cannot decide the Controversy; Might not I as well say, when both parties
pretend to have the Church on their side (as that is the case between us) the
Church then cannot decide our difference?

Again, where you seem to say, that when both parties contending, do say they
hear the Apostles, that then the Apostles cannot (as they speak in the
Scriptures) decide the Controversy: Has not this the same force against the
Church, when both parties contend they hear the Church? See how you can defend
your self, and I doubt not but therein you will defend my Arguments for the
Scripture.

And because you do cry up the Fathers, etc. for so clear a way to decide all
our Controversies, I will therefore show you, that they do clearly avouch the
Answer which I have given to this your first Query, as will evidently appear to
the impartial Reader of the several Quotations which I have before alleged,
and which do here follow.


The ANSWER to the FIRST QUERY, Avouched sufficient by the Sentence of diverse
DOCTORS, both Ancient and Modern.
Whether of us be Schismatics? ask not me, I Aug. cont. Petil. c. 85
will not ask you. Let Christ be asked, that he may show us his Church.

Neither must I allege the Nicene Council; nor you the Arimi. I am neither
bound to the one, nor you to the Aug. cont. Max. l. 3. c. 14
other; let the matter be tried by the Scripture.

Augustine says, Let the Scriptures judge; let Christ judge; let the Apostles
judge. Yea, it is confessed by the Papists, that Aug. Optatus, and Basil,
summoned their Adversaries to the arbitriment S. N. Antidot.
of holy Scriptures, and did allow the sufficiency of holy Scripture to decide
the Controversies depending between them.

In time past, says Chrysostom, there were many ways to know Chrysostom. Hom.
in Matthew.
the Church of Christ (viz.) by good Life, by Miracles, by Chastity, etc. but
from the time that Heresies did take hold of the Church, it IS ONLY known by
the Scripture, which is the true Church.

Again, he says, The Lord then knowing that so great confusion would come in
the latter days, therefore willed the Christians that would take to the
sureness of true Faith, to have refuge to nothing but to the Scripture;
otherwise, says he, if they regard other things they shall perish, not
understanding what the true Church is.

[Thus my Answer is avouched good, as it respects the means to decide the
differences which are about the Church. Next, hear what they say touching such
differences as are in the Church.]

Iren. If there be any disagreement risen up among Christians Iren. l. 3 cap. 4.
concerning Controversies in Religion, what better course is there to be taken,
than to have our recourse into the Most ancient Churches, [which must needs be
those planted by the Apostles, considering the time when he lived] and to
receive from thence, what shall be certain and manifest.

Augustine. Because the Scripture cannot deceive, whosoever fears to be misled in
the obscurity of this Question, let him ask COUNSEL Aug. 7. Tome cont. Eres.
of that Church which the SCRIPTURE, without any ambiguity points out.

Constantine Mag. There are the Gospel, the Prophets and Apostles, which do
teach us what to hold in Religion; wherefore expelling all hostile and bitter
contention, let us seek the Solution of these Questions out of the Scriptures.
Thus spoke this famous Emperor in the Council of Nice, at what time the Bishops
had like to have jarred into pieces.

THus have I given an impartial Relation of what has passed between the Popish
Querist and my Self, in our two last Papers, (which contains the sum of what
passed in the other) as touching this Question about the Judge of
Controversies. And now, for further satisfaction, That the Scripture, as
aforesaid, ought to be admitted the high Prerogative of Judge in our Debates;
consider, that of necessity it must be so. My reason is, because either the
Scripture, or some other Writings, must be our Judge, especially in this
important Question, WHICH IS THE TRUE CHURCH? For when we contend about her, it
is very unreasonable, that any party contending for that title, should be
permitted to give Judgment in their own cause: As for example, The present
Assembly of Papists say, That they are the true Church: and the present
Assemblies of Baptists say, That they are the true Church. Is it fit that
either party contending, should here give Judgment decissive? What then must we
do? why of necessity we must to some Writings, whereby to be decided or agreed
in this Controversy. These Writings must be either the Scriptures, or some
other; but no other can compare with those, so that they do deserve this
Prerogative better than any other.

The Papists ordinary way in this difficulty, is to tell us, that we must here
be tried by the Tradition of our Forefathers; in which they say, we cannot be
deceived: which Tradition, they say, is the only thing that is unquestionable,
and needs no other ground to stand upon, but Author 7. Qu.
it self. And against the Scripture's being received, upon its own evidence or
authority, they usually do thus object, that before we can receive what it
teaches, we must be assured of its truth. And again, T. B. End to Contro.
they say, the Scripture may not be the Judge of Controversy, because it may
be corrupted, translated, ill interpreted, not rightly understood. And by
these, and other like objections, they usually in all their Writings,
invalidate the Scriptures certainty, authority, and sufficiency, that so they
advance the authority of their Traditions.

But let it be seriously considered, whether these Objections have not the same
force against what they rest upon, which they have against the holy Scripture?
First then, whereas they tell us, the Scripture cannot teach us any thing, till
we be assured of its truth: Does not this conclude against any other thing as
strongly? Ought we not to be assured of the truth of the Church before we
receive her documents? Ought we not to be assured of the truth of that
Tradition which we receive for the Rule of our Faith? But how must we be
assured of the truth of the Papal Church, and Tradition? There is not a man
living, that can remember when either began, and so avouch its beginning to be
of divine Institution, and the continnance of the same ever since its
beginning, to have been without any corruption: What then must we do? Why we
must search Romes Records. And then I ask, are they not as questonable, and
liable to mis-interpretations, as easily mis-understood as the Records of God?
What is now become of these Objections, the force whereof is evidently against
the Papal Church and her Traditions, of the truth whereof we must be assured
BEFORE we can be taught by either of them.

I say again, There is not a man of all the Papists that can evidence Rome to
have been a Church two hundred years ago, and then much less one thousand six
hundred years ago. So that OF NECESSITY we must to the Writings of some men
(whom we never saw write one word) to find the Church. And then I would know
why we may not make enquiry at the Pen of Paul, what the Church was at first,
and what it ought to be now, as well as at the Pen of Augustine. Cannot the Pen
of Peter the Apostle give us as good information in this matter, as the Pen of
any Pope, pretending to be his Successor? If the Papists answer, That we know
not the Pen of Peter or Paul: We answer, as well as they know the Pen of
Augustine or Gregory. If they say Paul's Writings may be corrupted, and must be
interpreted, may be mis-understood. I return the same Answer of all other Books
whatsoever; yea, those which contains Romes Tradition. See therefore what is
gained by devising objections against the authority or certainty of the holy
Scriptures. Such doings do only tend to the destruction of all Faith, making
every thing doubtful, and the effect is the ushering in of all uncleanness on
the one hand, or if men miss this snare, they are catched in another, viz. to
walk at random as their own, or other men's fancy leads them. This is evident by
what we have seen in the Ranters on the one hand, and the Papists and Quakers
on the other.

Let us trace this matter a little further, thus. The Papists Traditions (most,
if not all of which, have been committed to Writing several hundreds of years
ago) must speak for themselves, are unquestionable of themselves, must
challenge no ground but themselves to stand upon: But the sacred Scripture
which has especial Promise from God for its preservation, Psalm. 12. must have
none of these high privileges allowed it; Is not this a most peccant
Assertion? Again, Peter and Paul must be no Judges of Controversies in
Religion, as they speak to us in their Epistles; but the Popes of Rome, dead
long ago, and now only speak in their Writings, yet they must be our infallible
Judges in these Controversies. The great Council of Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren, Acts 15. can be no Judge of any Controversy, though their Decrees
are yet extant among us; but the Council of Trent, who only speak in their
Decrees, must be our Judge, and that so as from their Judgments no appeal can
be admitted. The Apostolical Council sends forth their Decrees in the Name of
the holy Ghost, and themselves; and in those their Decrees, they prohibit the
eating of blood, and strangled things, etc. But the Papal Councils will send
forth a Decree directly opposite to this, and yet signed with these powerful
words; Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis. If we appeal in this matter to the
Apostolical Council, they may not be permitted to pronounce a Sentence
decissive. But from the sentence of the Papal Council we must in no wise
appeal. Can any thing be said more unworthily?

Thus then, First, the godly Reader may perceive, That whether he be able to
answer all the cunning Objections that men, by reason of the long experience
they have had in the ways of deceit, have found out; yet he has an Argument
of NECESSITY wherewith to oppose their subtilty. And, Secondly, he has the
advantage of all their own objections, against themselves; yea, against their
Church, Tradition, and all that they stand upon. Being seasonably retorted upon
them. Wherefore I shall conclude with the Psalmist's words,

Psalm. 64. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they
commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall see them? They search out
iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thoughts of
every one of them, and the heart is deep. But God shall shoot at them with an
arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded. So they shall make their own tongues to
fall upon themselves: all that see them, shall flee away. And all men shall
fear, and shall declare the work of God: for they shall wisely consider of his
doings.
THE SECOND PART, SHOWS, That the present Papal Church of Rome, is not the
Church of Christ, for diverse important Causes or Reasons.
WE have heard of how dangerous a Consequence that Papal Opinion is, which
leads them to set up their own Authority (under pretense of their being the
Church) above the holy Scripture; insomuch as they allow it no Authority, till
it be delivered to us for God's Word, by their Church; so that by this
Doctrine, we must find their Church, before we can find the Word of God, as it
is contained in the Scripture.

Upon which Consideration, we shall endeavor to show, That the present Papal
Church, is not the true Church of Christ; and therefore what Power soever the
Church has, yet they cannot have it; Because they are not the Church of Christ.

The First Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, cannot possibly prove her self to be the
Church of Christ: Therefore she is not the Church of Christ.

The First Reason maintained.
THe Consequence of the Argument no understanding man can deny; for unless a
party pretending to be the Church of Christ, can some ways sufficiently prove
that they are his Church, they cannot reasonably blame any body that refuses so
to account of them. And for the Antecedent, namely, that it is impossible for
the present Papal Church to prove her self the Church of Christ, it is evident
from this ground, viz. They make both the Scripture, and all other Writings,
depend on their Church for their Authority; and therefore they must prove
themselves to be the Church without the help of any authentical or
authoritative Writings; which thing is impossible for them to do.

Being thus divested of the help of all Records, as is more fully showed above,
there remains now nothing for them to lean upon but their own Evidence, or the
Tradition of their Forefathers; not that which is contained in any Records,
but only that which has been delivered by word from man to man, etc. But alas!
what Tradition is this they speak of? Not the Tradition of the Church to us,
till the persons delivering the same, be found to be the Church; which, as
before, they cannot be found to be, without the Scripture. And for their own
Evidence, that may not prove them to be the Church to those that contend with
them; it cannot avail them, since each party contending in this case, will, and
may, as reasonably as the Papists, look that their own Testimony should be as
available for these, as the other for those.

It is as vain here to tell us, they are the Church, because the true marks of
the Church do agree to the Papal Church, and none else. For, first, the true
marks of the Church are confessed by the Papists, to be found in the Scripture;
which Scripture they receive not, but from the authority of their Church (yea,
their present Church) so Author of the 7. Queries
that till the Scripture can tell us authoritatively which be the marks of the
Church, no Church can be found by those marks; nor can the Scripture tell us of
those marks authoritatively, till Rome, as a Church, give it us for God's Word:
So then Rome must be found the Church, before there be any marks to find her
by; which is impossible.

As for example: To clear this matter further, the Papists say, That Holiness
is a mark of the true Church: But now set the Holy Scripture aside, and how
shall I know holiness from unholiness, without the Scripture? Here the Papists
being in a strait, rather than they will let the Law of God, or the Scripture,
have the pre-eminence, do Answer thus; That we have a Law in our Consciences,
which Author of the 7. Queries
dictates what is good, and what is otherwise; and by this Law, even a Heathen
may judge our Church holier than any other Congregations of Christians.

What a miserable plunge (of Heathenism or Quakerism) are they brought to here?
How do they know that a Heathen may, by the Law of Conscience, judge their
Church to be more holy than ANY other Congregation of Christians? Were they
ever Heathens to know this? But alas! what holiness can a Heathen judge of?
Surely not that which is an infallible mark of the true Church; for this
Spiritual matter is foolishness to the Natural man, nor can he know it, because
it is spiritually discerned. It is true, there is a Holiness discernable by the
Law of our Consciences. But this only, is not an infallible mark, that any
Society is the Church of Christ; nor did ever any man (I am persuaded) hold
forth such a Doctrine, that was a faithful Minister of the New Testament, or
Spirit.

Again, What of this kind of Holiness, whereof a Heathen (as such) can judge,
is there found among the Papists, which may not be found among the Baptists?
yea, among those that are opposite to both, as the Quakers, and others; yea,
among the very Jews and Turks may be found as much of this kind of Holiness as
among the Papists, if any credit may be given to Histories.

Sometimes the Papists do object the It would be here noted, That neither the
marks of Unity, Universality, etc. nor the Creed, do prove a People that has
them all, to be the Church; because none of them mention Baptism, without which
there cannot be a visible Church.
Creed as sufficient, to demonstrate a man to be a Member of the Church, though
he know not whether there be any Scripture. But I Answer, How shall this be
proved to be the Creed? it must not be its own evidence; for then the Scripture
may as well speak for it self, which the Papists will not allow; nor can the
Church of Rome confer any authority upon the Creed, till they be found to be
the Church: So then this is the Conclusion, Rome must be found to be the
Church, before there be a Creed.

I do therefore humbly desire these few Observations may be seriously thought
upon by all sober men, but especially the Papists, that so men may give to the
holy Scriptures, that which is proper to them; that is, That they may speak,
without control, both for themselves, and every thing else of a Religious
consideration; or else all Volumns of the Ancients, and Societies of men,
pretending to Christianity (as things stand in our days) must depart into
utter silence.

The Second Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, has no Baptism: Therefore she is not the
Church of Christ.

The Second Reason maintained.
BY the word Baptism in the Argument, I mean only the Baptism of Water in the
Name of the Father, etc. or, which is all one, the Baptism of Repentance for
the Remission of sins. Now that the present Papal Church of Rome has not this
Baptism, is evident by this Argument, taken from their own Confession, viz.

The Baptism of the true Church is found in the Scripture. But the Baptism of
the present Papal Church of Rome is not grounded upon, nor mentioned in the
Scripture. Therefore the present Papal Church of Rome has no Baptism.

The first Proposition is most clear, from Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Act. 2. Act. 8.
Act. 9. Act. 16. Act. 18. Act. 19. Act. 22. 16. Romans 6. Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2. 11,
12. Heb. 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

And, that the Papists Baptism is not found in the Scripture, I prove thus.
Because they themselves do confess, that Infant Baptism is not mentioned in the
Scripture, nor grounded upon the Scripture, nor any Scripture for it. See to
this purpose, the Works of Bellarmine; and a Book, entitled, An Antidote,
written by S. N. a Popish Doctor; as also T. B. his End to Controversy. In
which Books you will find the very words which I have repeated. Add hereunto
the Answer which I received from the Author of the Seven Queries, when I asked
him what Controversies in Religion he could resolve without the written Word of
God? he assigned Infant Baptism, as one that was so to be resolved.

So then, we have it pro confesso from the Papists own mouths, That their
Baptism (which is Infant Baptism) is a Scriptureless-Baptism: Therefore say I,
it is no Baptism.

No Baptism, I say; because the Church has but one Baptism of Water, and it is
mentioned in the Scripture, and grounded upon it, and much Scripture found for
it; so is not Infant Baptism, which is the Baptism of the present Papal Church.
Therefore the Papal Baptism, is no Baptism. How can they defend themselves?
Will they say, the Church has a Scripture-Baptism, and an unwritten Baptism?
This they must say and prove, or else deny their Infant Baptism.

But, secondly, The present Papal Church is so adulterated in the manner of the
Administration of Baptism, as that, had they a true subject for Baptism, yet,
they would be found to have no Baptism. This will appear as clear as the Light,
from the Papists own confession; for they grant, that the ancient and primitive
way of baptizing, was, by dipping the party baptized, over the head and ears in
Water; and that it was their Church which changed this way, to a little
sprinkling upon the forehead. This is plainly to be seen in a Book, entitled,
Certamen Religiosum.

This bold Change, which men, without any allowance from God, have made in this
Ministration of Baptism, is directly against the Scripture. Mat. 3. 16. Mark
15. 9. John 3. 23. Act. 8. 38, 39. Romans 6. In all which places it is evident,
that our Lord Jesus, John Baptist, and the other Baptists of those times, did
so understand the mind of God in respect of the manner of the Administration of
Baptism, as that they thought it could not be done without so much Water as
they might go into (both the Person baptizing, and the Person to be baptized)
And now, do not all that will presume to satisfy themselves in this thing with
a few drops of Water put on the face only, from a Man's fingers ends, or out of
a Glass in the Midwifes pocket, lay great folly and ignorance to the charge of
Christ and his primitive followers? doubtless such, as is not less than the
folly of that man, that has occasion only for one Gill of Water, and he may
take it up at the side of the Brook, and yet will needs wade into the middle of
a River to take it up; or a man that has occasion to wash his hands only,
which he may perform very commodiously without wetting his foot, and yet is so
simple that he will needs go into the middle of the River to that purpose,
especially such a River where there is much Water. I say, the practice of
Sprinkling which the Papists and others use, if that answer the mind of God in
the case of Baptism, does even thus reflect upon Christ and the Christians in
those days. But let our Saviors practice herein be justified, and all such
practices as tend to the rendering it ridiculous, condemned.

The Papists only Reserve for the defense of Infant Baptism, is this: They say
it is an Apostolical Tradition, that is, a Precept delivered by the Apostles
Word, but not mentioned in their Writings.

This I shall show to be utterly false, for diverse important Reasons. First, No
Apostolical Tradition, tends to the making null or void any Apostolical
Writing. But Infant Sprinkling makes null and void all that is written in the
Scriptures, concerning the subject and manner of Baptism, in all that part of
the World where the Papists (or such as they) get the Civil Power on their
side: yea, we see that by this means the sons of men are great enemies to the
way of God in this matter. How long have many Nations lain destitute of the
knowledge of the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, by reason of
the interposition of this cloudy Tradition of Pedo-Rantism? How have men,
pretending to be Ministers of Christ, never, in many Generations, preached
Peter's Doctrine, Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, for the Remission
of sins? Note this Observation well; for although the Baptism of Repentance,
etc. has not been cried down in the Nations of Christendom, (by such as
counted themselves the only Preachers of the Gospel) yet it was not for that
these Nations had no need of the practice of Baptism; for they daily have
practiced something under that notion, which is rheir Infant-sprinkling; So
that it is plain, Infant Baptism makes void the Apostolical Writings: Therefore
Infant Baptism is no Apostolical Tradition.

Secondly, Infant Baptism is not an Apostolical Tradition, because no mention
is made of it in the first hundred of years after Christ. Although I am not
much read, yet I have used the utmost of my diligence to know the Truth in this
Point, and I have attained to sufficient satisfaction, that the greatest
favourer of Infant Baptism that yet I have met with, durst not say that ever he
saw any Record of Antiquity that mentioned such a thing, and that the
Scriptures do not mention it, the Papists grant.

And because the Papists make such boast of the consent which they have in this
matter from Antiquity, I will therefore here put in something by way of
Evidence to the contrary. For it is certain that Infant Baptism, as it was not
heard of in the first hundred, so neither was it generally received till above
half a thousand years revolved from Christ, as is undeniable; for that it is
plain, that the most famous (or at least, very famous) Christian Parents
brought up their Children without having them baptized; such were the Parents
of Greg. Nazianzen, Ambrose, Augustine, and others; yea, the Emperor
Constantius, born of Christian Parents, was not baptized till he was about
thirty years of age See a Book, entitled, A well grounded Treattise concerning
Baptism.
. See also these ensuing Testimonies.

I will declare unto you, how we offer up our selves unto God in Justin Mart.
in or at. ad Autho. pium.
Baptism. After that we are renewed through Christ, such as are instructed in
the Faith, and believe that which we teach them, being to live according to the
same; we admonish to fast and pray, and we fast and pray with them; then they
are brought to the Water, and there calling on the Name of the Father, etc.
they are washed in it. So says Erasmus, paraphrase on Matthew. 28. If they
believe that which you teach them, and begin to be repentant of their former
life, then dip them In Water, In the Name, etc.

The Lord commanded his Apostles, that they should first instruct Jerome. super
Mat. 28
all Nations, and afterward baptize those that were instructed: for it cannot
be that the body should receive the Sacrament of Baptism, unless the soul have
received before the true Faith.

Our Savior did not slightly command to baptize, but first of all Athan. in
sermon. 3. cont. Arrian.
he said, teach, and then baptize, that true Faith might come by teaching, and
Baptism be perfected by Faith.

Haimo says, In this place (Matthew. 28.) is set down a Rule rightly how to
baptize, that is, that Teaching should go before Baptism: for, he says, Teach
all Nations, (and then he says) and baptize them: for, Haimo. in postil. sup.
text
he that is to be baptized, must be before instructed, that he first learn to
believe, that which in Baptism he shall receive: For, as Faith without Works is
dead; so Works, if they have no Faith, are nothing worth.

Beda says, All they that came to the Apostles to be baptized, were instructed
of them, and when they were instructed concerning the Sacrament Beda super Act.
19.
of Baptism, they received the holy administration thereof.

Tertullian, who lived about the time when Infant Baptism began to appear, did
dispute against it, as an unnecessary practice, for diverse causes. 1. For that
it is not meet to commit heavenly things, to those Tertul. qui sunt Bapt.
parvil.
who are not capable of keeping treasure of an earthly nature. 2. For that the
Sponsors might be endangered. 3. For that it became them that were to be
baptized, to fast, pray, and confess their sins. 4. Because they that receive
Christ, must ask him; let them (that is, little ones) come therefore, says he,
while they are youths, whilst wherein they come, they are taught, etc.

Augustine says, We spend much time in exhorting those whom we baptize --
Ludovicus vives, commenting upon this place, says, Lest Aug. de Civitat. Dei.
any man should mistake this place of Augustine, let him know that in old time
it was the custom to baptize NONE, except they were of full age, and did desire
Baptism in their own persons, and that several times, and did understand what
that Mystical Water meant, which we see resembled in our baptizing of Infants.

[Lo here your Pedo-baptism is not the old custom of the Church.]

The Third Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, is a National Church: Therefore she is not
the Church of Christ.

The third Reason maintained.
1. TO make the Gospel Church National, consequently destroys the Doctrine of
Conversion, as it is a principle of the Doctrine of Christ appertaining to the
beginning of a Christian man: For, if men can regenerate, or beget persons to
God in their infancy, then the Word of Regeneration or new birth is needless in
order to our admission into the Church of Christ, and so the preaching of Faith
and Repentance must cease (as it is a Principle pertaining to a Christian man)
in all those Nations which are called Christendom, which is a great part of the
World. And indeed, Experience has long ago proved this Conclusion to be most
true; for since the Church (as they term it) was National, the Word, or Work of
Conversion, has been little known in the life and power of it: nay, verily,
the very term [Conversion] is become a reproach among our
National-Churchmembers. But thus to make the Word of Conversion unnecessary, in
order to persons admission into the Church of Christ, is contrary to the
Scripture, John 3. 5. Luke 24. 47. Matthew. 20. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17. Heb. 8. 10,
11. Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28. Matthew. 3. 8, 9, 10.

2. To make the Gospel Church National, puts an end to the Doctrine of Christ
touching that Separation, and those Divisions, which for the Gospel-sake must
be in Nations and Families, as appears from these Scriptures; John 15. 19. and
17. 14, 16. Acts 2. 40, 47. 1 Cor. 6. Luke 12. 49, to 54. And therefore in vain
does any person think to do God service, by compelling Families, Towns,
Countries, Nations, or many Nations, to be of one mind in matters of Religion.
I say, it is in vain, because the Scripture foresees, and also foreshews, that
the contrary effects must follow the preaching of the Gospel; and yet they may,
yea, and ought to live in one form of Civil Government: for that is the will of
God concerning every soul, Romans 13. 1, to 8.

3. The Gospel Church cannot be National; because that takes away from her,
Persecution for the Gospel-sake, and makes her become a Persecutor: For it is
impossible for a Church to be National without penal Laws, whereby to force men
to that kind of Worship which the greater part approves, which may as possibly
be false as true. But the true Church must not look to be free from
Persecution, if she live godly in Christ Jesus; nor is any thing more 2 Cor. 5.
20.
uncomly for her than to punish or persecute men into a Conformity to her Faith
or religious practice, John 15. 19, 20. Mat. 10. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12. Luke 9. 56.
And the greatest part of the Revelations do show, that the Church was to be in
a suffering condition, and are therefore bid to be patient, until the coming of
the Lord, Jam. 5.

4. A National-Church cannot observe the discipline of the Church of Christ;
for, in the case of withdrawing from disorderly persons, they do not only
separate men of disorder from the Church, both in Civil and Religious concerns,
but they cast them wholly out of the World, from all Markets and Fairs, yea,
quite out of their Livelihoods, etc. which kind of Excommunication the
Scripture foresees to be proper to the Churches Adversary, Rev. 13. 16, 17.

5. If the Gospel Church ought to be National, then she was imperfect in point
of Power in the Apostles days: for she had not then any Power to put Heretics
to death for their Heresy. But to say, that the Primitive Church wanted any
Power to punish any sin, as it concerns the Church to punish it, is to
disparage the Apostolical Churches, and is also contrary to the Scriptures,
which plainly show they had Power then to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5, 6.

The Fourth Reason.
The Papal Church increases her self more by the Carnal Sword, than by the
Spiritual Word: Therefore she is not the Church of Christ.

The fourth Reason maintained.
THat such Churches as are National, do most increase their numbers, and keep
them also when they have them, by the terror of Death and Penal Laws, both
Experience shows, and Reason tells that it cannot be otherwise. How often has
our Nation changed their Religion, with the breath of a Prince? sometime to
Popery, and otherwhiles to Protestancy, and under O. Cromwell to a compound of
half Presbytery and half Independency, according to the temper of those that
sat at the Stern of Affairs? And now, how are they turned again to Prelacy? Of
which last change, I say, if any have conformed, as judging it their duty to
God so to do, those (though this does not justify their way to be good, yet)
are honest men: But if any for self-interest have done it, they are the very
dregs of men, and will be any thing, and so nothing.

2. I remember a notable saying of Hillary, who lived about the 4th or 5th
hundred, and in his days the Church was a degenerating from her Regeneral
Constitution into a National Form, where he Hillar. contra Auxen.
says, Ambition does aid it self by the Name of CHRIST; the Church does fear
and compel the People through Banishments and Imprisonment, to believe her in
those things, which she had received through being imprisoned -- She that could
not be beloved of Christ if the World had not hated her, now glories to be
extolled and beloved of the World, etc.

And that the Papal Church has ordinarily increased her self more by terror of
the Carnal Sword than the Word of God, doleful Histories do declare; namely
these, Sleidan Comment. A Book entitled, The Indians Tears, or, Inquisition
for Blood: as also, Fox his Acts and Monuments.

And here I think it meet to give an instance from one of their own
Historiagraphers, namely Fabinus. He tells us that after Austin the Monk had
gotten a considerable settlement in England, it happened that there was a
Council assembled in this Nation, where Austin proposed several things, to
which the other Bishops could not consent; but, by your leave, when Austin
could not prevail by the Word (or rather, his words) he told them, If they
would not submit, they should be compelled, by the wasting that should be made
in their Country through War and Misery. This was not Paul's way, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

The Fifth Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, labors to keep the World in darkness, and
the Church also: Therefore she is not the Church of Christ.

The fifth Reason maintained.
THe Consequence of this Argument no man can deny; for there is nothing more
opposite to the true Church, than to love, or cause darkness to seize upon any.
And that the present Papal Church of Rome labors to keep all men in darkness,
is thus proved. 1. She forbids almost all men to read the Scriptures, and
thereupon has greatly withstood the Translation of them into every Tongue, as
is evident, partly from what History declares, and partly from that which
themselves do say. To omit History, hear what they say themselves. In their
Preface to the Reader in the Rhemist Testament, thus they speak:

Order was taken by the Deputies of the late famous Council of Trent in this
behalf, and confirmed by supreme Authority, That the Scripture, though truly
translated into the vulgar Tongues, yet may not be indifferently read of all
men, nor of any other than such as have express Order thereunto of their lawful
Ordinaries. So that we see the Liberty here given, is unlike the Liberty given
by Christ to his enemies, whom he commanded to search the Scripture, John 5.
39. And the rich Glutton's Friends are said to have the Prophets and Moses,
Luke 16. 29. Israel was of old indifinitly required to lay up the Book of the
Law in their heart; to talk of it as they sat in their houses; as they went
abroad; they must teach them to their children, and write them upon the posts
of their doors, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, to 9.

Notwithstanding all this and much more liberty given by the Lord both to his
Enemies and Friends, to read his Word, you see the Council of Trent will have
none permitted, but whom the Ordinaries permit, to read the Scripture, and
they are only such as they judge discreet, etc. Pref. Rhem. Test.

Is it not strange that men, pretending to be Christ's true Followers, should
thus contradict him? He allowed that to his Enemies, which they will not allow
to his Friends. Sure they have neither heard his Voice, nor seen his Shape, or,
at least, not learned of him. Miserable is the Gospel Church by the Council of
Trents Doctrine, they have not that privilege which Israel under the Law was
allowed; and yet they are as strictly bound to bring up their Children in the
admonition of the Lord; which they cannot do, unless they have the Law in their
heart, that so they may talk of it to their Children. But surely, those that
will not let the Law come within the sight of our eyes, have no mind it should
ever come in our hearts: So then they labor to keep us in the dark.

What can they say against men's reading the Scripture, which has not the same
force against the hearing of it preached? Did not some conceive as gross
opinions concerning Christ's saying, men must eat his flesh, as some have by
reading them? The Jews thought they were so to be understood, as that they
might eat his real flesh; and that was not a greater nor a less Error, than is
found in the Papists, who read the same word. It is doubtless a shrewd sign
that those who will not suffer us to see the Law of God, do not intend that we
shall hear very much of it; peradventure such Points as talk of Tithes, etc.

Yea, it is evident, that they intend not to let us hear much that shall profit
us; for they have devised, that the very Prayers and Services of their Church,
be said and sung in a tongue which the People understand not. Yea, they tell
us, That it is enough for the People to understand that the Prayer is made to
call upon God in all our desires; and more than this is not necessary (they
say:) So that the poor People in the Papacy, know not what are the things
desired; only they are told, The Prayer is made to God in all that is therein
desired. Are not these People kept in darkness? But says Paul, How should the
unlearned say, Amen? 1 Cor. 14.

That which is most strange, is, That the Papists should deliver this dark
Doctrine, from 1 Cor. 14. then which no Scripture more requires an
understanding in those that pray, and in those that join with them; nor does
any Scripture more clearly show us, to how little purpose it is to perform any
Service in the Church in an unknown tongue. Read the Chapter; says Paul, If I
come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you? -- but in the
Church I will speak five words with my understanding, that I may instruct
others also, rather than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. These are
Paul's words, as the Papists themselves translate them.

Another way whereby they keep men in darkness is this, They cumber men's minds
with such a MULTITUDE of Ceremonies, and Repetitions in their Prayers, that the
mind is sufficiently charged to remember how many times over they must say some
two or three words; nay, it is evident this is no wrong, witness their Beads
which serve to supply the defect of their memories. As I remember, there is not
less than fifty Orations and Postulations, etc. which Willit. Synops.
the Priest is to make, and act, before the Bread be Consecrated when they say
Mass; and the like doings they have in the most of their Services, which I can
more desire the Lord would deliver them from, than mention.

The Sixth Reason.
The present Papal Church, is generally (if not only at this day) gathered of
persons unregenerate, or not new born, as the Scriptures do require new birth
in that case: Therefore she is not the Church of Christ.

The Sixth Reason maintained.
1. THe Scripture says, That except a man (or any one) be born again (SO) as
to be like the wind THAT BLOWS, and that blows in such sort, as the sound
thereof IS HEARD, he cannot enter into the Kingdom (or Church) of God: But the
many millions of Infants, whereof the Papal Church consists mostly (if not
only) in respect of her Members Initiation, are not thus regenerate. So that
the Papal Church is gathered (generally) of such Persons as are not so
regenerate, as Persons ought to be, and must of necessity be, before they be
admitted into the Church of Christ. The Seed of the Woman (or Gospel Church)
are all such as have the Faith of Jesus, and keep the Commandments of God, at
least in Profession; for that is the thing that is absolutely necessary, in
order to any Person's admission into the Church of Christ, John 3. 5, 6. 2 Cor.
5. 16, 17. Rev. 12. ult. Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28.

2. All the Children of the new Covenant, or Church of Christ, do DIFFER from
the Church under Moses, SO, as that they, each individual, do so know the Lord,
as that they need not, in some sort, teach one another, saying, Know the Lord,
Heb. 8. Jer. 31. But either all, or the generality of the Papal Church, differ
nothing from the Church under Moses, in respect of their KNOWLEDGE, when
admitted into their Church, Being such as are not capable of the first, or
least degree of the knowledge of him.

3. There appears no more sign of Regeneration, or New Birth, in the Infants,
or Members of the Papal Church, at their admission, than there appears in such
as the Papists say are not regenerate. Now where the Spirit of regeneration is,
it is not without some demonstrable operation; for says Christ, The wind
blows, etc. and thou hear the sound thereof, etc. SO IS EVERY One that is
born of the Spirit. So that I conclude, That the Infants whom the Papists say
they baptize, are not born of the Spirit, unless they can give some
demonstrative sign of it.

4. There can be no Regeneration in an ordinary way, without preaching the
Doctrine of Christ, Romans 10. But the Papal Church is generally (if not only)
gathered without the Word preached, in order to the regeneration of the
Members, before their admission. Therefore they are not regenerate in an
ordinary way. And if they have an extraordinary regeneration, let them show it.

The Seventh Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, maintains the Doctrine of Devils, and that
so violently, as that they punish the Non-observation thereof with
Excommunication and Death: Therefore she is not the Church of Christ.

This Argument maintained.
THis Reason, or Argument, may seem to be harshly laid down; yet if it be true,
there is necessity to propound it. And for the truth of it, I desire you weigh
what follows.

1. To forbid Marriage, and to command to abstain from Meats which God has
created to be received, of such as believe and obey the Truth; this is the
doctrine of Devils. But it is well known that the Papists do forbid the whole
Calling of their Clergy to Marry, and thousands beside of those that live in
their Monasteries and Nunries, etc. and this under pain of Cursing and Death.
You shall hear them speak their own words, wherein they do not only prohibit
Marriage for ever to such as enter into the Ministry; but if any be married,
and afterward come into the Ministry, they wholly deprive such of the
enjoyment of their Yoke-fellows. Thus they speak; The cause why the Church
requires chastity in the Clergy, and Rhem. Test. Annot.
forbids not only fornication, but all carnal copulation, even in lawful
wedlock, is to the end, that God's Priests be not divided from him by the clogs
of Marriage, but be clean and pure from all the fleshly acts of copulation: And
this doctrine they teach from 1 Cor. 7. where if you read the 4, 5, 6, 7.
verses, you may easily learn the quite contrary Doctrine. Again, They teach
from 1 Timothy 3. 2. That none shall Marry that come into holy Orders. And, that
if any of the Clergy, in other Countries, had been permitted, in times past,
to enjoy their Wives, yet they Rhem. Test. Annot.
now declare it to be against the Apostles Rule; And this they say is the
Sentence of the Council of Nice. But surely Paul's words are clear contrary;
for he says, A Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife, having his Children in
subjection, etc.

In further proof of this matter, it is upon Record, That Greg. 7. An. 1070.
did enforce Ministers by Excommunication, to leave their Wives. And Urban 2.
Anno. 1066. Decreed, That it might be Did. 32 cap. 10.
lawful to make the Ministers Wives bond-women. And Fox records, That it was
made Felony, by the Act of the Six Articles, for Ministers to marry Wives, Fox,
p. 1135. And this cruelty Bellarmine defends by a saying of Jerome, That a
Bishop begetting Children, shall be condemned as an Adulterer.

Now whereas I say they forbid Meats, etc. I do not mean, that it is not meet
for the Church to Fast and Pray, and in such a sense to forbid meat. But for
their Church to forbid one kind of meat above another; as that we may not eat
Eggs in Lent, and diverse other creatures which God has created, to be received
of such as believe. For the true way of Fasting, is a total fasting for the
time (unless necessity deny.) And truly the Papal Fast of Lent is in a manner
no Fast, which allows the drinking of Wines, and the eating to the full of such
delicacies as do inflame the flesh as much as Eggs, etc. which yet the Papists
by no means will permit men to eat. For my Author tells me, That they make the
eating of Eggs in Lent, a damnable sin. Fox, p. 1043. I might fill much Paper
about their forbidding meats. But to proceed:

The Eighth Reason.
The present Papal Church of Rome, is Mystery Babylon: Therefore she is not the
Church of Christ.

The Eighth Reason maintained.
1. I Know, that generally all that dissent from Rome, do account her as in her
present state to be Mystery Babylon; And truly for my part, I have considered
of this matter, and I find it is so clearly meant of Rome, that even the
Papists do not wholly exempt her from this Name. Yet they deny that Rome, as
now considered, is Mystery Babylon; only, say they, it is to be referred to
Rome in her Heathenish estate. But thus I reason;

2. If the present Papal Church of Rome be not Mystery Babylon, then either the
Papists, or some body else, can show us a People which better deserves that
title. But this no man can do (so far as yet I have learned) and therefore (as
yet) I must say, The present Papal Church of Rome (together with her Daughter
Churches) is Mystery Babylon. And for further proof in this Point, I thus
reason:

3. The present Papal Church has the Marks of Mystery Babylon; therefore she
is Mystery Babylon.

I prove it thus:

One Mark of Mystery Babylon, is a Regiment over the Kings of the Earth, Rev.
17. The Woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the
Kings of the Earth. This Mark the present Papal Church of Rome has above all
other; Witness the Papists own Books, T. B. End to Controv. chap. 26, 27. where
he sets up the Pope above all Kings and Emperors; and plainly calls the Popes,
Kings and Monarchs; and the Papal Church, he terms an invincible Empress, etc.

Another Mark of Mystery Babylon, is great Riches and wordly Pomp. That Rome,
in her present Church State, has this Mark, her Doctor, T. B. is my witness.
So is Helen. Geog. p. 192, 193. and Napier, Rev. 9. which Authors show her
Riches (even of the Clergy only) to be quite out of the reach of the best
Arithmaticks to pass an Entrado upon it. Add to all other witnesses that of
Expeperience, and it will show us, That when their Church had her domination in
this Land, they knew where the best Ground lay; as the Ruins of their Abbeys do
evince. Compare all these with Rev. 18. and see if they do not agree.

Another Mark of Mystery Babylon is, She sits upon Nations, Tongues, and
Peoples. Rome has this Mark; T. B. in his End to Controversies, chap. 26, 27.

Another Mark of Mystery Babylon is, She enslaves the Souls of men, and is
drunk with blood. Now that the Papal Church of Rome has this Mark, I need only
to refer my Readers to those large Histories of Sleidan, Fox, and Benzo the
Italian.

Lastly, As I noted, it is confessed by the Papists, That Mystery Babylon, Rev.
17. and 18. chapters, is meant of Rome; only they think to free themselves from
the force of that blow, by telling us, That it is meant of Rome in her
Heathenism, and under the persecuting Emperors. But this is but a poor shift,
as may appear, by showing, That the Ancients do write against Rome, as Mystery
Babylon, Fab. Chron.
after the persecuting Emperors were down; for the Papists say, That Constatine
put an end to the Persecution, when he was converted, which was about the year
300, and a few odd years; at which time the Papists say, That Rome was given up
to the Pope. 1. Jeroms, who lived about the fourth hundred, writing to Eustoch.
and Marcelus, does Rhem. Test. Annot. in Rev. 17.
apply these words to Rome, viz. Fly out of Babylon, let every man save his own
Soul, for Babylon is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils. Yea, he
says further, as he is quoted by the Protestants, That Rome IS the Babylonical
Harlot, according to the Revelation of St. John, appointed for the birth of
Antichrist, which there should arise, and exercise all tyranny; and from thence
should deceive the whole world with his wicked Wiles.

And Augustine is most clear in this matter, in his Book of the Aug. de
Civitat. Dei, lib. 18.
City of God; where he calls Rome another Babylon in the West. And Babylon in
the East, first Rome: and Rome of Italy, second Babylon. Willing men to
consider, That in the beginning of the City of God, which was in Abraham's
time, the first Rome, that was, Eastern Babylon was builded in Chaldea. And
about what the first Babylon was destroyed, lest the City of God should want
her Enemy, the second Babylon, which is Rome in Italy, was erected.

Chrysostom says, Antichrist shall invade the vacant Empire of Rome, and
assay to draw unto himself the Empires both of God and Chrysostom. in Rev. 13.
man. Thus it seems that Rome was accounted Mystery Babylon, four or five
hundred years after Christ; and if she be not now, what she was then in that
respect, I desire to be informed where that blood-drunken Fornicatrix,
mentioned, Revelation 17. is now to be found.

The Ninth Reason.
The present Papal Church has not those Marks, which they themselves assign as
the Marks by which the true Church can only be known infallibly: Therefore the
present Papal Church of Rome, is not the Church of Christ.

Those Marks are; 1. ANTIQUITY. 2. SUCCESSION. 3. UNIVERSALITY (of Time and
Place. 4. VISABILITY. 5. SANCTITY. 6. UNITY. 7. MIRACLES, etc.


These are the Principal.

The Ninth Reason maintained.
THat the present Papal Church cannot have the true Mark of Antiquity, is thus
evidenced; viz. The Papal Church is a National Church; But no Gospel Church was
National in the first Age: Therefore no National Church has the true Mark of
Antiquity.

The strength of this Argument lies in the clear difference of the state of
the Church under Abraham and Moses, to what it was under Christ and his
Apostles. For,

The Jewish Church, which was to be National, took its form in a National way,
even in the very first Family where it began, as appears, Genesis 17. where
Parents, Children, and Servants too, must all be brought into that Church State
forthwith, or not be suffered to co-habit together. Which order must be kept in
all the Families of the Jews, as well in respect of their Servants, such as
they bought with money, as their Children, or any other. And so the Jewish
Church, both in its beginning and its continuance, acted forth it self in a way
suitable to it self.

But when the Gospel Church began, it is very evident, that it Luke 12 51, 52,
53. Mat. 10 34, 35. Luke, 21. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 11, 13, 15, 21, 22, 23.
took its beginning in the division of Families, and that by virtue of Christ's
Doctrine; who affirms, That he came to send fire on the Earth; not Peace, but
rather Division: For says he, From henceforth there shall be fix^^ in one
house divided three against two, and two against three; the Father against the
Son, and the Son against the Father; the Daughter against the Mother, and the
Mother against the Daughter, etc. and all this for the Gospel sake. Here a man
must leave Father, Mother, Wife and Children; For this cause ye shall be
betrayed, both by Parents and Kinsfolks. For this cause the unbelieving Husband
will put away his believing Wife. And for this cause the Servant may refuse to
follow his unbelieving Master, being Christ's freeman, and yet dwell in his
Service as a Servant notwithstanding.

Thus it is evident, That the Gospel Church took its beginning in a way quite
contrary to the Form of a National Church, even by turning the World (or Church
of the Jews) up-side down, which caused the Jews to cry out, MEN OF ISRAEL,
HELP.

This is yet more evident, by that thundering Doctrine of the Baptist, when he
said, Think not, or begin not to say within your selves, Mat. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5.
16, 17, 18. Gal. 3. 2 6, 29. Acts 10 35. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.
We have Abraham to our Father. No, says Paul, We (meaning the Gospel Church)
which are of Faith, are the Seed of Abraham, and Heirs according to Promise;
For the Promise (which chiefly) is enjoyed in the Gospel, was not made to such
as were born after the Flesh, but such as are born after the Spirit; Whereupon
he says, We henceforth know No man after the Flesh [or because he descends
from the loins of Abraham, or any other.] For if any man be in Christ (so as to
be a demonstrable or visible Member of his Gospel Church) he is a new creature.
Old things are passed away, [yea, the old privilege of standing in the Church
by the Father's interest, though the Seed of Abraham himself] is [now] passed,
behold all things [in this respect] are become new. Whereupon Peter
contributeth his sentence, and says, Of a truth I perceive God is no respecter
of Persons, [but the Persons accepted upon a Gospel-account, so as to be his
Church, are such as in every Nation fear him, and work Righteousness [which no
Infant can do.] But what? Has God rejected Infants wholly, that now he will
not show them so much favor as afore-time? God forbid. He has not shut up his
tender Mercies from them wholly, or in part; For as they are such, and dying in
their infancy through Adam's transgression, so in Christ shall they be made
alive. Wherefore look how far soever they Romans 5. 16, 18.
fall in the first man of the Earth, so far they shall be restored by the Lord
from Heaven; yea, the Gift to them by Christ shall exceed the Loss they had by
Adam. But if they live to years of understanding, and become actual sinners
against God, then the way appointed for the remission of their sins, is, to
repent, and be baptized, Acts 2. 38, to 41.
every one of them, that they may receive the holy Ghost, and so be by it led
into all Truth; and attain at the end the salvation of their souls, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Another Argument whereby it appears the Church of Christ cannot be National,
is this; No man is bound to become a Christian under pain of corporal
punishment, as Death, etc. but living peaceably as men, no man has power to
compel them to be baptized, or to walk in the Christian Profession, as is clear
from the Texts before recited. Now take away Force in matters of Religion, and
a National Church cannot stand in an absolute National Form; this all
experience can testify.

Again, That the Church of Christ at the first, or in the first Ages was not
National (in the first method or way wherein a Church begins to be so,
namely, by the admission of Infants into the Church) is very evident; because
it is utterly incredible, that the many thousands of Infants, of such as in
those days believed, should be admitted into the Church, and not so much as
the whisper of such a thing to be found in all the holy Writings of the
Apostles. And beside, I have showed from the Testimony of Vives, (Augustines
Commentor) That the Church had not the custom to baptize Infants in old time.

It is likewise certain (if History be true) That the Gospel Church used no
compulsion in matters of Faith for more than three hundred years after Christ.
About which time Constantine ordained grievous punishments for such as spoke
against Fab. Chron. 4th part. Yet this Eusebius does seem to contradict.
Christ; and allowed the Christians, to use the Unbelievers hardly. But God did
not bless these doings: for Constantine became an Arrian Heretic, and
persecuted the Bishop that baptized him, as also others that continued faithful.

Hence then I conclude, That seeing the present Papal Church of Rome has not
the true Mark of Antiquity, Therefore they lose at once, the next three,
Succession, Universality, and Visibility: For, Antiquity being wanting, no true
Succession can be found; because the Root of Succession, if good, must be the
Antiquity of it. So take Antiquity from them, and then wanting that first Age,
they cannot be found in every Age; and not being found in every Age, especially
the first Age, then they lose Visibility, as themselves propose it for a Mark
of the Church. And for their Holiness, I have spoken to that before, and surely
it is but like their neighbors. And for their Miracles, I have given you a
taste of them from Loreto: and beside, others do claim that mark as well as
they; Yea, the Turks produce Miracles; and the Protestants do the like; and
others, as the Quakers, the like: and the Baptists can say of a truth, that God
has done for and amongst them, some things which have Willit. Synops. Papis.
exceeded the course of Nature. And so their Miracles will not more prove them
a Church, than the Miracles of others will prove the contrary, unless they can
prove the others to be Illusions.

And that they have not the mark of Unity, is evident, if History may be
heeded; for, says my Author, there is an hundred Sects of Monks and Friars
amongst them, and some of them so divided, as they burnt one another for
matters of Religion. And for different Opinions, there are no less than three
hundred. See Fox Act. and Monument. p. 260. and Willit, in his Book called,
Tetrastilon Papis.

I know the Papists do make a great deal of noise about their Pastoral
Succession, as if they could derive it from man to man, up to the Apostle
Peter. But I find the learned Protestants making it a great Question, whether
ever Peter was Bishop of Rome, or not. And Jerome is said to have seen some old
Books, which show, that Jerome, in ep. ad Romans
Narcissus ruled the Roman Church, when Paul saluted him and his Family, in his
Epistle to the Romans.

No small contention is there likewise among the Learned, Whether Linus or
Clement were the second Bishop of Rome: So that this Pastoral Succession the
Papists pretend to, meets with shrewd Objections in the very first and second
person of that Line.

Against the uninterrupted continuance of their pretended Succession, many
things are objected: as, That there were sometimes three, and sometimes two
Popes, and that for more than twenty years time together; so that no man could
tell where the true Pastoral Authority lay. And then comes in that strange
disaster of Joan the female Pope, who for almost three years cut the chain of
this pretended Succession. This thing is famous in History.

Lastly, Although the Papists could prove a continued Succession of persons
claiming the Title of Universal Bishop, yet this would not justify them all to
be the Pastors of Christ's Church. For these two Rules are given us even by the
Ancients; 1. That Peter left his Innocence hereditary as well as his Seat; and
that he which has not the one as well as the other, is not Peter's Successor.
2. That it is not the Chair, but the Doctrine that makes a Bishop. Now, 3dly,
add but Paul's Rule in this matter, 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. and then I am bold
to affirm, That many Popes of Rome were not the true Successors of Peter in
Pastoral Authority. For I find it laid to the charge of diverse Popes, that they
were Drunken-Whoremongers, Thieves, given more to War than Christ, rooted in
all unspeakable sin; furious men, profane Scoffers of Christ; Incestuous
persons, Murderers, Poysoners of their own Parents and Kindred; open Sodomites
or Buggerers; Blasphemers, incorrigible Heretics, Enchanters; callers upon the
Devil to help them to play at Dice; Drinkers of the Devil's Health, and
Traitors to Princes. These things are so notorious and evidently true of the
Popes of Rome, as that the Papists do not deny them. T. B. End to Controvers.
and the Author of the Seven Queries, as you may see in part before. Yea,
Bernard was not a little moved with the wickedness of the Popes of Rome, when
he called them, Tyrants, Defrauders, Raveners, Traitors, Darkness of the World,
Wolves and Devils. And, can we think that Succession to be good which is
derived from Devils? I need say no more. See, for the proof of all that I have
said, these Books; Fox Act. and Monument. Willit Synops. Prediaux's Introduct.

The Tenth Reason.
The present Assemblies of Baptized Believers, and they only, are the true
visible Church of Jesus Christ: Therefore the present Papal Church of Rome, is
not the Church of Christ.

The Explanation of this Reason, or Argument.
THis Reason or Argument is not so to be understood, as if we do shut all men
out of Heaven who are not Members of our Church. No verily: This is the express
Doctrine of the Papists: for they say, that out of the Church is no Salvation;
and by Church they mean, only those that adhere to the Papal Church of Rome:
and hereupon they teach expressly (and so do some Protestants also) That without
Baptism, or the desire of Baptism, etc. none can be saved: And therefore it is
that they give power to Midwives to baptize Children sometimes between the Womb
and the World.

That which we teach, is this, That the ordinary way appointed for men to
receive Salvation in, is, The preaching of Repentance and Remission of sins to
all Nations, in the Name of Jesus Christ; and the Luke 24
administration of Baptism, as a pledge thereof, to all that give acceptance to
these Glad-tydings; and upon this account this Ministration is called, The
Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. And we do teach, as a most
infallible Doctrine, That without profession of Faith, manifestation of
Repentance, and being baptized with Water in the Name of Jesus Christ, etc. no
person can be orderly admitted into the Church or Kingdom of God on Earth. And
that therefore it concerns every man, living to years of understanding, and
having the Gospel tendered to him, only to look for Salvation this way, as he
will answer it before the Lord, for contemning God's ordinary way, and
presuming to challenge the Grace of Eternal Life in a way of his own devising.

Nevertheless, we do not hence conclude, That all persons shall be damned that
seek not Life in this way. For, first, No Infant can seek for it in the way
which the Gospel proposes Life to men of years: Yet surely it is a most cruel
Doctrine to say, that any Infants dying in their infancy shall be damned in
Hell, because (as one very well said) God will not damn any persons for that
which they cannot help.

Again, in Romans 1st. and 2d. chapters, Paul teaches, That if the sons of men
act forth themselves in a way of Love, Fear, Obedience, and Reverence to their
Creator, according to the means of Light vouchsafed to them, that this shall be
as much as shall be required of them, in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of all men by Jesus Christ (for God will not gather where he has not
strewed) at which time, God will not judge them by the Law that never had it.
Howbeit, let all that have it (I mean his written Law) expect to be judged by
it. And therefore, though we will not presume to judge of the final state of
this or that Society of men professing conscionably this or that Form of
Worship, but leave that wholly to the Lord; yet we will not cease humbly to beg
of all such persons in the Name of Jesus Christ, that they having his Law,
would carefully observe the terms whereupon Life is held forth unto them, and
become such glad receivers of the Word, as is mentioned, Acts 2. 41. Then they
which gladly received the Word, were baptized: and the same day were added to
the Church about three thousand souls. The Argument thus explained, I shall now
endeavor to make it good.

The Tenth Argument maintained.
That the present Assemblies of Baptized Believers, and no other present
Assemblies of men, are the true Church of Christ, I prove, thus: Either the
present Assemblies of Baptized Believers, or else some other Assemblies now in
the practice of Infant Alias, Rantism
Baptism, must be the true Church of Christ; because without Baptism, the
Papists say (and say truly too) there can be no true Church of Christ at this
day: Now these two ways of Baptizing only (I mean of Water Baptism) is
pretended as necessary in order to a visible Church State: viz. the dipping or
baptizing persons upon their personal profession of Faith, as the present
Assemblies of the Baptists do practice; or baptizing (or rather sprinkling) of
Infants without personal profession of Faith, as the present National Churches
do practice.

For most undoubtedly, the true and legitimate claim to this Title of Christ's
Church, must be found in one of these two Parties: And that no National
Assembly, gathered together by Pedo-baptism, can fairly claim this Title, I
have showed before, whither now I refer my Reader. And for the evincing yet
further, that the present Assemblies of Baptized Believers are the true visible
Church of Christ, I thus argue:

They, and they only, have the true Ecclesiastical Marks of truly Ancient
Primitive or Apostolical Gathering, Constitution and Government: Therefore
they, and they only, are the true Church of Jesus Christ.

These three points, namely, Gathering, Constitution and Government, I take (if
right) to be the infallible Marks of a true Church. And that the present
Assemblies of Baptized Believers, and they only, have them, will be evident to
him that considers what they were at first, and how they agree with what in
these respects is only found in the Assemblies of the Baptized Congregations.

The truly Ancient, Primitive and Apostolical Gathering, in respect of the
first means used in order thereunto, was the preaching Repentance and Remission
of sins, or the Gospel unto every Creature; and upon their conviction, to
command them, as from the Lord, to be baptized, every one of them, in the Name,
etc. as appears, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. Acts 2. 38. Acts 8. 37.
Acts 10. 47, 48. And herein only the present Assemblies of Baptized Believers
do closely follow Christ's Primitive Ministers.

The Primative and Apostolical Gathering of the Church of Christ in respect of
the subjects gathered, were only such, as through the virtue and prevalency of
the Word preached, or made known, did give a demonstration of their
Regeneration by the profession of Faith, and manifestation of Repentance, and
being dipped in Water in the Name of the Father, etc. For the proof whereof I
appeal to those several Scriptures alleged against the gathering of Christ's
Church of such persons, as of whose Regeneration no demonstration is or can be
given, answerable to what the Scripture does require, in order to persons
admission into the Kingdom of God or Church on Earth. And, secondly, I appeal
to the practice of the Apostles acting, in pursuance of that Commission given
them in that behalf. And, thirdly, I do appeal to the Churches themselves,
which were gathered by the Apostles, as they are described to us in these
several Texts following.

These Texts do show to the diligent Reader, that here is such things spoken of
this numerous Church, as is necessarily exclusive of any Infants being admitted
into their Society, as to participate of any Church Ordinance: And the like
will appear to the Scripture-searching Soul, in all those other Churches; as
the respective places will sufficiently convince.

I have it freely granted, under the hand of a learned Clergyman, That
Churches, at the first, were gathered only as we affirm: but he tells me, That
when Persecution ceased, God took in all Nations, or whole Nations; which
hitherto he has not proved.

The Church at Jerusalem. Acts 1. 15, 21, 22. Acts 2. 41, 42. Heb. 5, 6, and 8,
Chapters. The Church at Samaria. Acts 8. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. The Church at
Cesaria. Acts 10. 33, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. The Church at Antioch. Acts 11. 20,
21, 23, 26. Acts 13. 12. with Acts 9. 38. The Church at Philippi. Acts 16. 12,
13, 14, 15, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40. Phil. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The Church at
Thessalonica. Acts 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3, 10, 11. The Church at
Colosse. Coloss. 1. 4, 5, 6. Coloss. 2. 10, 11, 12. The Church at Corinth. Acts
8. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 2. The Church at Rome. Acts 28. 24. Romans
6. 3, 14. The Church at Ephesus. Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 1. 13,
14, 15. The Church at Galatia. Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28, 29. Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6.

These Scriptures, duly considered, show, That all those famous Churches were
gathered in a way contrary to that of the National Churches, and consonant to
the way of the present Baptized Churches. And be it here observed, that no man
ever yet could show by any Record of such Authority as may suffice to be a
Foundation of Faith in this case, that by the Apostles any were ever admitted
into the Church in their infancy. Wherefore look well upon the Scripture, and
then upon the gathering of the Churches of the Baptists, and you will find that
they, and they only, have the true Ancient Primitive or Apostolical-mark of
Church-gathering.

Of CONSTITUTION.
THey only can be truly constituted that are rightly gathered, which the
Baptized Churches only are. The Primitive Constitution of the Church consisted
principally in these two heads; viz. Free-fellowship in the Doctrine of the
Apostles; Acts 2. 40, 41, 42, 47. Job. 1. 11, 12, 13. Act. 17. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
5, 6, 9. 1 John 1. 3. Rev. 22. 17.

No force of a worldly nature was used in the begetting or continuing her
Fellowship, for it was a mutual consent.

The second thing pertaining to the Constitution, consists in the disposing of
her Members to those places to which they are fitted to serve in the body, 1
Cor. 12. 27. with verse. 18. 28. Acts 6. 3, 4.

Now that the present Assemblies of the Baptized Believers, have this form of
Constitution in both respects, is evident to all that will take knowledge of
their Constitution.

Of GOVERNMENT.
THe true Ancient Primitive and Apostolical Government of the Church, was only
Spiritual, and did recide not in the Pastors apart from the Church, but in the
Pastors together with the Church; yet so, as that those to whom the Church has
committed her Power, are the Instruments, that in the Name of Christ and his
Church, are to exercise Government, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. and 5. 20.

This Government consists in these things; Exhortations, Rebukes, Reproofs,
etc. with all long-Suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 1. 2. And if this prevail not
with the Offenders, then is the power of Excommunication to be exercised, to
the withholding their Privileges in the Church, and to the delivering them up
to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh; and for saving the sinner from his
sin. And if this prevail not, then the sinners sin is retained, till the day of
Judgment. But if the sinner be humbled, the sin is by the Church to be
remitted, and the Offender restored, Matthew. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5, 11,
13. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. Tit. 3. 11. Joh. 20. 23.

And this Government is to be exercised without partiality, 1 Timothy 5. 21. and
without respect to filthy lucre, 1 Pet. 5. 2. and without domination or
lordship, 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6, 7, 8.

Now that this Government is only found in the present Assemblies of Baptized
Believers, is thus proved; Out of the Church it cannot be, and in the Church it
must be, Ephesians. 4. till all the Saints be perfected; and that this Society, and
no other, can be the Church, I have also proved; and for further evidence I
refer every one to the exercise of the present Churches of baptized Believers,
in point of Ecclesiastical Government.

As for other Marks, it is needless to insist upon them; for that Church which
has these, cannot be without the other, so far as they are necessary. Yea, let
it be well observed, That that Church which has true Antiquity, is the Church
alone, which has the Promise of Succession, or whatsoever else is needful in a
way of necessity in order to her being: And therefore, though we could not
prove by History, those things which many make great boast of; yet, having the
most certain Mark [Antiquity] we have the other in Promise, and therefore must
believe that the Church has not failed of the accomplishment of them; for
Histories (some of them) be quite lost; and others, partly silent, and partly
contradictory about these things. Again, if History did mention an
un-interrupted continuance of Baptized Churches, such, I mean, as we contend
for, yet it would be but Testis humano, and so no foundation of Faith: And
beside, it would suppose, that the Church of Christ is so beholding to humane
History, as it is impossible for her to prove her self the Church of Christ
without it, though she have the holy Scripture. But this is surely to make the
Church to stand upon too sandy a foundation.

THE END.
The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
THe Author being at a great distance, so that he could not attend the Press,
this Treatise was hastily read over by a Friend of his, who having observed
these few faults, desires thee to correct them with thy Pen, as also any other
which thou shall meet with, that probably he has overseen.

Page 16. line 19. for will allow, read, will not allow. P. 20. l. 23. f.
these following, r. in these things following. P. 31. l. 22. f. they advance,
r. they might advance.


