A Friendly Epistle TO THE Bishops and Ministers OF THE Church of England FOR
Plain Truth and sound Peace BETWEEN The Pious Protestants of the Church of
ENGLAND, AND Those of the Baptized Believers.
Written with the Advice of diverse Pastors and Brethren of the Baptized
Congregations, By THO. GRANTHAM.

Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the
Lord. Heb. 12. 14.

London, Printed in the Year, 1680.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Complaint is both great and just, that Christians are so divided amongst
themselves, that it is hard for an impartial Christian to find where to fix for
his own comfortable Society. And this Calamity is much aggravated by the
backwardness of each Party to offer any thing to accommodate these Differences,
each expecting rather that their Opposites should wholly conform to their
Sentiments, and relinquish their own.

And what may be thought (in that case) of this present Overture we cannot
certainly divine, nor will be too confident that there is nothing of that
nature in it. But of this we will be confident, that the things here desired,
do carry much of their reasonableness in the very nature of them, and have
their approbation both from the sacred Word, and the Works of those to whom
they now address themselves for a Christian Compliance.

But it will be said, What are the Men that make this Overture?

Our Answer is, We are the Servants of the Living God; or, We are Christians;
and having seen the Discords and Ruins which have befallen the Christian
Nations, do heartily desire those Breaches may be made up. And as it is not, so
it is hoped it will not be deemed, any Transgression of the Law of God or man
for any Christians to seek for Peace one with another in the By Truth in this
place we intend chiefly what is needful to a true Church State, and an holy
Life.
Truth, notwithstanding their differing Circumstances in respect of worldly
Honors, or the disparity of their Education; seeing they ought all to be
clothed with humility; the strong to bear the infirmity of the weak, and not
to please themselves. The Brother of high degree to rejoice in that he is made
low, and the Chief to become Servant to the rest.

When Paul heard of the Divisions which happened in the Church at Corinth, how
does he blame them for their Carnality as the cause, and bestir himself to
recover their Unity, in the truth which at first they had received? 1 Cor. 1.
10. Now I beseech you Brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye
be perfectly joined together, in the same mind, and in the same Judgment.
Referring them to the Foundation, and Rule of all Christian Unity, that only
Christ was Crucified for them; that Christ is not to be divided; and that they
were baptized in the Name of Christ, and that therefore they should not follow
any Man, but as he follows Christ.

But it seems this great Apostle did not live to see an end of their Divisions,
as appears not only from the close of his last Epistle to them, 2 Cor. 12. 20,
21. but also from the Epistle of Clement (who survived him) which he wrote upon
the occasion of that ungodly Sedition (so he calls it) which had kindled among
them through pride and self-love, which he vehemently labored to extinguish by
many Arguments, but specially by reducing them to the blessed Example of Christ
their Leader, and the practice of such as lived after a godly sort. His words
are these: Christ Jesus our Lord the Scepter of the Majesty of God, came not in
vain boasting of Arrogance and Pride, although he could do all things, but in
humility of mind, according as the Holy Spirit had spoken concerning him. --
See, beloved Friends, what an Example is given unto us: for if the Lord was so
humble, what shall we do, who are come under the yoke of his Grace? -- let us
stick to these therefore who live godly and peaceably, and not to them who
hypocritically only seem to desire Peace: for somewhere he says, they blessed
with their Mouth, but with their Heart they cursed; -- for their Heart was not
right with Him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.

Now if the Points in Controversy among the Christians at Corinth, were of as
great moment as ours (as that may be made evident 1 Cor 3. 3, 4. and 11. 18,
19, 20, 21. and 15. 12, 29. 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. see also Clem. Ep. at large and
it will fully appear.
); then it is as rational for us to seek for concord each with other, as it was
for Paul and Clement to seek to unite them. And hence we are the more desirous
to make this present Overture for Christian Amity with the pious Protestants in
the Church of England, for diverse Causes: And first;

As it is very evident there has bin a great departure from the simplicity of
the Gospel (both in the Form and Power of it) since the plantation of it in the
World by Christ and his Apostles; so also it is certain that many good Men in
Ages past, as well as in this present Age, have still bin laboring (and that
oftentimes under great trials) for the Restoration of the Truth to its Purity,
some in one point, and some in another more especially.

And here the English Protestant has bin as active as others, some in
reforming diverse things in Doctrine and Practice; others in keeping the ground
they have gained, against the opposers of Reformation.

Now this Work (as it is of God,) ought to be carried on in the Nations of the
World to its perfection. Namely, till the Truths of the Gospel be delivered
from all humane Innovations which have encumbered it, to the disturbance of the
peace of Christians in all ages since they found opportunity to crowd
themselves into the Service of God.

But the great obstruction of this work of Reformation, has bin the falling out
of the Reformers among themselves. And this is the case of the sober
Protestant, and the Baptized Believer, in this Age and Nation: the latter not
so honoring the first as he ought, with respect to what God has done by him;
and the former despising the latter, by whom God is pleased (notwithstanding)
to bring to light some ancient Truths which the former overslip'd, or took not
due notice of* And by this impatience and disrespect in each toward other,
they prove inimical to the very Work, which in the main they both design to
promote.

It is the way of ingenuous Men in reviving decayed Arts, to honor their
Predecessors, though inferior to themselves, and to encourage those that
succeed to attempt things more excellent. Why are not Christians as ingenuous
in their endeavors to restore decayed Religion? There is nothing in the
Author of our Profession, or the Profession it felf, but candor and ingenuity.
Wherefore if we intend the furtherance of the Work of Reformation, hitherto
carried on through manifold Afflictions, let us timely consider our common
Interest, which is to make one Shoulder to defend what our Ancestors have
worthily atcheived; as also to join our industry for the restoration of every
Truth which they omitted.

2. Our second Motive shall respect the 39 Articles of the Church of England,
in which if a few things (which are not of the substance of the Christian
Religion) were explained or amended, it were a very easy thing for the Church
of England, and the Baptized Believers in this Nation, to compose their
differences in point of Doctrine and Faith, as touching the Basis, or
foundation of the Christian Religion. And to the intent that Unity may be
herein attained between us, we shall humbly beg leave with plainness to show
(when we offer our Proposals) the Particulars whereof we are doubtful in some
of the said Articles.

Our third Motive to seek for Concord with the pious Protestant, is the
contents of that remarkable This Letter has been printed about 24 years, and
never yet contradicted by Dr. Barlow. See Mr. Tombs his Praeface to the Reader
in the third part of his full Review of the Dispute concerning Infant Baptism.
p. 8, 9.
Letter, long since sent to Mr. J. Tombs B. D. (upon occasion of his learned
Disputations concerning the Restoration of holy Baptism to its primitive use)
and written by that Reverend Man Dr. Barlow, now Lord Bishop of Lincoln, which
verbatim is as follows:

-- I am a friend to your person (whom I have known (though unknown to you)
this 31 years) and to your opinion too (as to the main of it); for I believe
and know, that there is neither Precept nor Practice in Scripture for
Paedobaptism, nor any just Evidence for it, for about two hundred years after
Christ. The first who bears witness to Infant Baptism practiced in the Church,
is Tertullian, but so, as he expressly dislikes and condemns it as an
unwarrantable and irrational Custom. And Nazianzen a good while after him (in
his Oration (...), dislikes it too, and would not have Infants brought to
Baptism till they were of some age, and able to answer for themselves. Sure I
am that in the primitive times they were first to be Catechumeni, and then
(...), Illuminati, or Baptizati, and this not only Children of Pagans, or
Pagans converted, but Children of Christian Parents, Nazianzen (though a
Bishop's Son) being not baptized till he was about 30 years of age, as appears
in his life; and the like is evident of some others. The Truth is, Infant
Baptism did (how or by whom I know not) come in, in the second Century, and in
the 3d and 4th began to be practiced, though not generally, and defended as
lawful from that Text (grossly misunderstood) Joh. 3. 5. Upon the like gross
mistake of Joh. 6. 53. they did for many Centuries (both in the Greek and Latin
Church) communicate Infants, and give them the Lord's Supper, and I confess
they might do both as well as either: but although they baptized some Infants, and
thought it lawful so to do, yet Austin was the first that ever said it was
necessary inde durus pater Infantum. I have seen what my learned and worthy
Friend Dr. Hammond, Mr. Baxter and others say in defense of it, and I confess I
wonder not a little that men of such great parts should say so much to so
little purpose, for I have not yet seen any thing like an Argument for it.


And not only this Letter, but many other Testimonies which are found in the
Writings of learned Protestants Mr. Baxter tells us, many both Papists and
Prela^ists, have maintained that Infant Baptism is not determined in Scripture,
but depends on the Tradition of the Church. Def. Princ. of Love, p. 7. And Dr.
Jer. Tailor tells us, there is no prime Tradition for Infant Baptism. See his
Disswas. from Popery.
to the same purpose (as has bin shown by diverse hands in our Books now
extant) do greatly persuade us to hope, that the Controversies about Baptism
draws toward an end, and were this point well agreed, many other things would
be therewith so moderated, as that we should (by Gods help) approach that
Blessing, to have one Heart and one Way.

4. Our fourth Motive is taken from that great dread which seems to be at
present upon this Land, of the encroachment of Popery: but what is in this God
knows, nor shall we concern our selves with secrets. And seeing it is
rational to believe, that nothing shall sooner bring such Fears and heavy
Judgments upon us, than our own Dissentions and Divisions (in which there is
too much dissenting from the Truth) therefore do we the more earnestly desire
to dispose our minds to unite in Truth and Charity, with all such as love God
and their Neighbor, and walk according to the general rules of Christianity:
resolving to bear what (with a good Conscience) may be born for Peacesake in
the Truth, in which we shall (upon a friendly and free Debate) be agreed.

Our last and principal Motive, is, That hereby God shall be glorified, in the
furtherance of a Faithful and Impartial Reformation of Life and Religion, when
we who have had so great a share in contending one against another, shall after
a Christian and Manly sort, cease our conflicts each with other, by stooping to
what of sincere Truth has appeared in our Disputes: and not leave our
Divisions Hereditary to our Posterity, but rather a pious Example of our
Charity to be by them pursued.

For seeing it is a rational presumption, that there has bin said what well
can be said, on both sides; what then remains but that we bend our minds to
cease our strife by such a Christian Compliance, as may justly render us
willing to be overcome by Truth on both parts, where the matter shall require
it.

And herein let none so much consult his own glory as the good of Christians in
general; as it is written, Let no Man seek his own, but every Man another
wealth. And again, let every one of us please his Neighbor for his good to
Edification. And let that Christian speech of Clement come to mind and conclude
this Preface:

Is there any one then (says he) that is bravely spirited among you? Is there
any one that has compassion? Does any one abound with Charity? Let him say, If
this Contention (Sedition or Schism) be for me, or by my means, I will depart,
I will go my ways whithersoever you please; I will do what the rest commands.
Only let the Sheepfold of Christ enjoy peace with Note, that the Division at
Corinth was occasioned by laying aside the primitive Institution of Christ
concerning the Ministry, the ancient Bishops or Elders being thrust out, etc.
And our Divisions are occasioned by either the laying aside, or the not duly
observing Christ's Ordinances touching the Constitution and Government of his
Church according to the primitive pattern.
the Elders which God has placed over it. He that shall do this, shall
purchase to himself great Glory in the Lord, and every place shall receive him.

(...) Prayer to God for his Blessing upon this present endeavor for Concord
amongst Dissenting Christians.
O Most Mighty, most Holy, and most Gracious God! What are we that we should
speak unto Thee, the God of Heaven and Earth? We beseech thee pardon our
unworthiness, and for the sake of Christ our Savior, hear this Prayer, which
in his Name we do with our whole Heart pour out before thy Majesty.

O Lord, in thy Fatherly Compassion behold the sad Divisions which have
befallen the Christian People throughout the whole World. And seeing nothing is
too hard for Thee, Graciously be pleased to move upon the Hearts of all sober
and Heavenly-minded Christians (however differing in some Points concerning the
Christian Profession) and so work by thy Spirit of Power, Love and Wisdom, that
they may be so united in Brotherly Affection, as speedily to consider one
another in Love: And to have compassion one of another under their unhappy
differences in Opinion. O destroy the Spirit of Pride and BLOOD-THIRSTINESS
from amongst the Christian People. And let all that are called by that Name be
ashamed that ever such wrath has bin found amongst them, and let them be
humbled before thy Majesty in the remembrance of it, O Lord, we beseech thee.

Most Gracious God, we confess unto Thee, we are not worthy to undertake any
thing in behalf of the Peace and Unity of divided Christians: But thou (O God)
that despisest not the base and weak things of this World, be entreated to
bless our present Enterprise, as it is consistent with thy pleasure, to the
good of thy People universally; That they may be one in Truth and Peace,
according to thy Word, which is Truth.

We beseech thee to bow the Heart of the Mighty, the Wise and Honorable in the
Christian Nations, to study Truth and Peace, to condescend to any thing for thy
Glory, and thy Peoples Happiness: and we pray, that none who are called by thy
Name, may any longer be puffed up, for one, and against another. O teach those
that love Thee, to strive together with one mind for the Truth and Power of
Religion according to the Gospel.

Good Lord, be entreated for thy Names sake, in behalf of all those that are of
pious meaning, in these Nations especially, that their Hearts being entirely
knit together in the great and more necessary parts of thy Worship, they may
Glorify thy Name with one consent, by a charitable forbearance, in things
which are not sinful in thy sight.

We entreat Thee (our God) make us thy Servants ever to be ready on our parts,
to evidence by act, what here we propose in words, and grant thy Spirit to
enable us herein to serve Thee, and all such as fear Thee, and love thy
Testimonies.

And grant that none of thy People may uncharitably censure this our
undertaking for Concord amongst thy Servants. Grant them Patience to consider
what is here offered, and where we may seem deficient herein, lead others to
supply what is wanting, that through thy Blessing upon our united Endeavors,
the Good here intended may be prosperously promoted, to thy Praise, O Lord, to
the great increase of Charity, and therewith to the true comfort of thy People
throughout the whole World. Even so, Lord God Almighty; Even, so, Amen.

A Friendly Epistle TO All the Bishops and Ministers OF THE Church of England.
Reverend Sirs,
MAy it please you in the meekness and gentleness of Christ, to lay aside (a
little) those exterior Honors which are conferred upon you, and to condescend
to Men of low degree, and in that Condescension seriously to ponder, what is
herein with Humility and Sincerity submitted to your Consideration.

We do seriously account it a part of our Infelicity, to see the Distractions
and Divisions, which are in our Land, about things relating to the Worship of
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; and therewithal it is too evident that the
Power of Godliness is much neglected, and the Ways of Christianity greatly
depraved, whereupon many that love the Lord Jesus, are so estranged among
themselves, as to become Adversaries to their own Peace, and the Comfort of
each other.

May it then please God, to lead us all to the Consideration of these ill
Effects, and to remove the Causes of them. And seeing we may perhaps be under
worse Apprehensions concerning one another, than there is real cause for, let
it be calmly considered on both parts, that our greatest differences are about
Ceremonies; And those also of Humane device (as we conceive) the best of which
are not worth the loss of one Soul, and therefore in no wise fit to adventure
the breach of our Peace and Christian Concord, for their sake, which may be the
cause of perishing to many.

May it therefore seem well pleasing to you, the Bishops of the Church of
England, with your Brethren of the Ministry, to admit of some friendly and
free Debate with the Bishops and Teachers of the Baptized Churches in this
Nation; to try if by any means a way may be found to bring us to Christian
Concrd in the Gospel of God.

To effect this, is either impossible, or difficult only. Not the first, since
our differences lie not in the doctrinal part of any Foundation-Article of the
Christian Religion, so much as in the application or practick part of them.

For, to touch a little the grand points about which we differ, viz. Sacred
Baptism, and the Discipline of the Church, of these we spoke the same thing;
for thus you teach, That in Baptism there is an inward and spiritual Grace, and
an outward and visible Sign; And that Repentance, whereby we forsake Sin, And
Faith, whereby we steadfastly believe the Promises See your Church Catechism.
of God made to us in that Sacrament, are the things required of all Persons
that are to be baptized. And hereunto we do most heartily subscribe.

And touching holy Discipline, your Doctrine is, That the manner of proceeding
in Excommunication, is first by gentle Admonition, and that once or twice given
with the Spirit of meekness, if the fault be not notoriously known: and next by
open reprehension, afterward by public sentence of the Church to put him from
the company of the faithful, to deliver him to Satan, to denounce him an
Heathen and a Publican, if no Admonitions will serve, and the crimes be very
offensive. To this Doctrine like wise we do give our full consent.

Nevertheless it must be granted a very great difficulty (as things now stand)
to reform what is really amiss on your part in the practice relating to those
two points of the Christian Religion; especially seeing that the worldly
interest of so many carnal-minded men, seems to depend upon the continuation of
the Errors which have befallen you in the practice of these holy Institutes.

Howbeit this Difficulty is not greater than it was to reform, what was as
really amiss in that great Ordinance, the Lord's Table, whether we consider
their Error who for many Centuries gave the Communion to Infants; or theirs,
who by their Transubstantiation destroy the very nature of the Sacrament.

Nor shall we here forget, but thankfully remember the great Travel and
Sufferings of your Martyrs, and the pious Zeal which appeared in many of them,
when called to reduce that holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper from many
corruptions, by which it had been profaned.

But yet we must needs condole their shortness, in not looking with like
diligence into the pristine purity of the other Sacrament. By which oversight,
we which survive them, are exposed the more to our present Difficulties. And
hence we may borrow that passage in 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Because ye did it not at
the first, therefore the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought
him not after the due order. And here we ought to learn, that seeing God would
not indulge his Servant David in such an oversight (when yet his intention was
very pious) will have his own Methods duly observed in things pertaining to his
Service.

Your Wisdoms know very well who has said, A little Leaven leaveneth the whole
lump; and that every Plant which the heavenly Father has not planted, must be
rooted up; and how vain the Worship (even of the true God) is esteemed by
Christ, which is taught by the Precepts of Men? All which cries aloud that
Religion be restored to its primitive Purity, that so Men may give unto God the
things that are God's, and cease to serve him with their own inventions.

What we shall here propose to these holy Ends, is no more than what at present
we conceive to be very needful; Howbeit, we may not prescribe to you, but only
offer an occasion to your Wisdoms to consider us as Christians, not as Enemies.
For it is evident that those Coercive ways which some incline to, and under
which we have bin, and still are exercised, are not like to effect Christian
Amity and Unity, but rather to make the Breach much wider.

That then it may please God (even the God of Peace) to direct your Wisdoms to
those wholesome Methods, which may be natural to procure and continue a lasting
Peace between us in the Truth of the Gospel, shall be our Prayer to him for
you, and in whose fear we humbly make these following Proposals. And first.

I. Concerning the 39 Articles, etc.
As we have already hinted, that (in our judgment) some things in the 39
Articles of the Church do admit of some amendment, We shall therefore humbly
propose our Doubts in that case, that the Fundamentals being secured, other
things may the more easily be reconciled.

1. Our first scruple concerns the third Article, where it requires, Belief
that Christ went down into Hell, besides his being in the state of the Dead,
and buried in the Sepulcher. Now this Passage is so dubious, as that even Mr.
Rogers, who wrote a Book in defense of the 39 Articles, does confess, that the
native and undoubted Sense of this Article is not known, so that we conceive it
ought not to be required as an Article necessary to the Christian And it is
granted by learned Protestants, that this clause of Christ's Descent into Hell
was not always in the 4th Article of the Creed, as the Nicen Creed, and diverse
others do witness. See Mr. Ross's Abridgment of Divinity, page 115.
Faith.

2. In the 8th Article all things contained in the three Creeds, are required
[throughly to be believed,] in some of which, is the said clause, of Christ's
Descension into Hell, (the meaning whereof is doubtful.) And some terms in the
Creed of Athanasius, are so hard to be understood, that we think they ought not
to be imposed as necessary: We humbly conceive the Modesty of Hillary, more
safe than some os the Zealous Speeches of Athanasius, who tells us That
whatsoever is used more, than the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is beyond the
compass of Speech, the reach of See Mr. Calvin Instit. L. 1. Chap. 13. Sect. 5.
out of whom this Quotation is taken.
of Sense, and the capacity of Understanding. And though he had used the Words
[Three Hypostasis] yet he confesses This is to do things unlawful, to speak
that which ought not to be spoken, to attempt things not licensed, to put
things in peril of the Speech of Men, which ought to be kept in the
Religiousness of minds. And Austin confesses that it ought not to be spoken,
[How] the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are three. A Holy Trinity there is, but
[how] it subsisteth God only knows.

And here both the Modesty and Caution of Mr. Calvin also is worth our
Consideration, who speaking of the Titles, or Expressions, viz. A Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, says,

If the Names have not been without cause invented, we ought to take heed that
in rejecting them we be not justly blamed of proud Presumptuousness. I would to
God (says he) they where buried indeed, so that THIS FAITH WERE AGREED OF ALL
MEN, That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are ONE GOD, and yet that the Father
is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost the Son, but distinct by certain Properties.
Instit. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5.

3. The 13th Article would have it believed, that no Works done without Faith
in Jesus Christ are pleasant to God, etc. Which we think is doubtful,
considering how it is said that the Prayers and Alms of Cornelius were come up
for a Memorial before God. Act. 10. 1, 2, 3. yet it is certain he did not then
know Jesus Christ.

4. The 18th Article seems doubtful, where it teaches, that none can be saved
who diligently frame their life according to the Light or Law of Nature, etc.
Whereas if God have given them no other Law or Light to walk by, we conceive it
more safe for us to leave them to the Lord (who will not gather where he has
not strewed) than thus to censure them.

5. The second Paragraph of the 27th Article may well be omited, seeing it is
granted by learned Protestants, that there is no plain Scripture for Infant
Baptism. Instead of which Paragraph it may safely be inserted, that the Infants
of Christians should be devoted to God by Prayer and Blessing, which may be
justified by the Law of Nature, and specially by the Words of Christ, Mat. 19.
6.

6. The 36 Article not necessary to be imposed as an Article of the Christian
Faith, seeing that Book of Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, ordering of
Priests and Deacons, is not of Divine Authority; and it must needs be more safe
to refer the business of Consecrating, or ordaining Christ's Ministers (of what
rank soever) to the Rules given in the holy Scripture.

And hence we do further conceive, it is very needful that those severe
Sentences of Excommunication contained in the Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical (specially these two, contained in Can. 5. and 9.) be recalled.
For seeing they themselves (that composed the 39 Articles) were but Men,
(though pious Men) and therefore (as themselves teach, Art. 21.) might possibly
err, even in things pertaining to God. Therefore (as they further say) things
ordained by them, have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it may be
declared, that they be taken out of the Word of God. Nor ought the Church to
enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation, which is either
against or besides the Word of God, as they also teach, Article 20. Thus much
of the 39 Articles.

II. Concerning the visible Church of Christ.
1. As it is rightly acknowledged by Christians generally, and particularly by
the Church of England, Article 19. That the Church of Christ is a Congregation
of faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments
duly administered according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, which of
necessity are requisite to the same; So it may be as truly observed that none
be admitted Members of this Visible Church, or Mystical Body of Christ; till
they give evidence that they are faithful, at least by their personal
Profession of the Faith of Christ, and Willingness to walk in newness of Life,
according to the Principles or general Rules of the Christian Religion,
contained in the holy Scriptures, the Rule of Faith.

2. And seeing it is the Work of God through which Man with the Heart believes
unto Righteousness, from which Faith only can proceed that Confession with the
Mouth which is to Salvation; That therefore it may be firmly agreed, that
humane force or violence is not the means ordained of God to propagate the
Church of Christ. But that preaching the Gospel, and walking holily in Charity
toward all Men, are the true and proper means to increase the Church,
according to the Will and Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all
Nations in that behalf.

III. Concerning Regeneration, and Baptism.
1. That as Conversion or Regeneration is necessary to the Christian-state of
every Sinner, so it may be jointly held and professed that the Baptism of
Repentance, for Remission of Sins, is an Ordinance of Christ, and necessary to
the Admission of all Men to the Privileges of his Church: and that the things
required of all that are to be baptized, are Repentance, whereby they forsake
Sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the Promises of God, made to
them in that Sacrament.

2. That as it is granted on all hands, that Immersion in Water agrees best
with the Word baptize, and was the primitive way of baptizing; so this
Ordinance may therein be restored to its purity according to its primitive
Institution; And that to this end, there may be Baptisterions, or fit Places to
baptize in, appointed for the Solemn Performance of this Ordinance.

IV. Concerning Infants, or Little-Children.
1. That all Infants of Christians be solemnly devoted to Christ by Prayer and
Blessing, and that the Ministers of Christ be assistant in this Work, not
forbidding them this Blessing, Mat. 19. 13, 14.

2. That every Minister of Christ residing in any Country-Village be obliged,
in Consideration of convenient maintenance, to teach all the Children in his
precincts to read the Holy Scriptures, and to instruct them in the Principles
of the Christian Religion (Heb. 6. 1, 2.) and that they may be baptized, when
they shall profess Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. And that the like care be used in Cities, and great Towns, in such
manner as may be most convenient.

5. Concerning laying on of Hands.
1. That the fourth Principle of Christ's Doctrine (called Laying on of Hands,)
be restored (...) its due use and purity in the Church* namely, tha^ when any
Converts are Baptized, then Praye^^ with the Laying on of Hands, be speedily
made t^ God for them, that they may receive the Promi^^ of the Spirit by Faith,
and that it may retain i^ ancient Titles, given it by the Holy Ghost, (viz.
Laying on of Hands, or a Principle of the Doctrine (...) Christ.

2. To the end this service of God be not neglecte^ that it may be allowed,
that all faithful Oversee^ of particular Congregations, may perfor^ this
Service upon the newly Baptized; speciall^ in the absence of such a Minister as
has a mo^^ general charge, be he called the Angel, or Messenger of the
Churches. And that care be taken that the Christians who have not known the
Principle of Christ's Doctrine, be deliberately instructed concerning it,
before they be made comformable to it.

6. Concerning public Prayers, and the manner (...) singing the Praises of God
in the Churches. An^ of the removal of such Ceremonies as (...) not to
Edification.
1. Seeing the Prayers contained in holy Scripture (and especially the Lords
Prayer) are suf^icient to direct the Man of God in that duty of Prayer in the
Church, that therefore the Book of Common Prayer be not imposed, and that ^t
may be in the liberty of the Minister to pray ^n the Church according to the
ability which God has given him, that so the Spirit of Prayer, as well as the
Order of it, may be preser^ed.

2. That it be jointly agreed that singing the Praises of God in Psalms, Hymns,
and Spiritual ^ongs, is a holy Ordinance of God, and that ^he order and Spirit
of that Duty be restored *God assisting) according to 1 Cor. 14. and other
Rules contained in the Holy Scripture. And that Musical Instruments, bowing to
the Altar, the ^ign of the Cross, the Surplice, or any other, unne^essary
Ceremony, be prudently removed out of ^he Service of God in all Churches.

7. Concerning Church Discipline.
1. That the Exercise of Discipline be restored in (...) Churches according to
the Scriptures, and (...) Doctrine of the Church of England, fore^^cited in
this Epistle.

2. To the intent that no Sinner be indulged in ^is Iniquity for Money, that it
may not be p^r^itted that any Officer concerned in the Execution of Discipline,
take any manner of Fees o^ the Offenders, or any other Person for them And that
such Ministers be entrusted with the Exercise of Discipline, as are Men of know
Integrity, Holiness and self-Denial. And th^^ holy Discipline be executed in or
near the plac^ where the Offenses are committed, accordin^ to the Order of the
primitive Churches.

8. Concerning Ordination, and Preaching the Word.
1. That the Election and Ordination of Min^sters, of what Rank soever, be
restored (wher^in it shall appear to have been neglected) in (...) most solemn
manner that may be, accordi^^ to the Scriptures: And that such Ministe^^ among
the Baptized Believers, as shall be fou^^ to have been so elected and ordained,
be ^^lowed to preach the Gospel, to edify the People, and to dispense the holy
Ordinances.

2. That the primitive liberty of prophesyi^^ to Edification, Exhortation, and
Comfort, be (...) stored to the Church, i. e. as it shall please (...) to give
Men the Gift of Teaching, Exhorta^^on, etc. they may be permitted with Prude^^
to edify the People by the modest Exercise^^ their Gifts in the Churches.

9. Concerning the M^intenance of Christ's Ministers, and the Relief of poor
Christiant.
1. That it be agreed, that the Relief of the Poor, (...) that those who preach
the Gospel should (...) of the Gospel, are God's Ordinances, and (...) be
performed with all Faithfulness by all ^hristians according to their Ability.
But that (...) Methods for performance of them, are ^^ythes for the one, or
Assessment for the other, (...) only jure humano, and that therefore the same
^^wer Magistratical which gave being to these ^ethods, may lawfully alter the
same to the ^tter when they please.

2. And that therefore it be further agreed and ^^clared, that the way asfign'd
in holy Scripture (...) the support of Christ's Ministers, and the ^^lief of
Poor Christians, is by a free Contribu^^on, to be constantly upheld in the
Churches, ^^cording to every ones Ability; and the Mo^^y so collected to be
entrusted in the Hands (...) the Deacons of the Church, and by them to (...)
faithfully distributed as occasion requires. and that therefore such as will
stand to Christ's ^^lowance, and for his Namesake minister the ^ospel freely
to the Gentiles, may be still had in ^eputation; and sent forth by the Church
(...) restore Christianity where it is corrupted; (...) to plant the Gospel
where it is not known.

10. Concerning Separation.
1. It Is here propounded, as greatly necessary to a tru^ Christian state, that
some effectual Course be resolve^ upon, to keep (as far as may be consistent
with Trut^ and Charity) a holy and just Distinction, between thos^ who lead
wicked and Scandalous Lives, and them tha^ live holily, according to the
general Rules of Christianity, without respect of Persons.

2. That this Care be taken more especially concerning the Ministry; otherwise
we shall still have multitudes of profane and debauched Men set up as Leaders.
And we see by Experientce the People are too ready to follow their ill
Examples, and the consequence mus^ needs be lamentable; as it is written, They
eat up the Sins of my People; and set their Heart on their Iniquities, and
there shall be like People like Priest; And (...) will punish them for their
Ways, and reward the^ their Doings. Jer. 15. 18.

II. Concerning the means to effect the Unity desired.
1. That it would please you, the Bishops of the Church of England, to petition
the King's Majesty, that it may be made lawful by an Act of Parliament, or by
his Royal Permission, for a competent Number of Representatives of such
Dissenters, as have a mind to unite with the Church of England, to meet in
Christian Counsel with your selves, and to agree (upon mature Deliberation) on
such Articles as may (if God see i^ good) put a Period to our present
Animosities and Divisions.

2. That if these Proposals do not hold Agreement with the good old way of
Christianity, then we desire they may be rejected, and that you would be
pl^ased to propose things which may be more effectual to procure the Unity
desired. For our Record is on high, and we have also the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in Sim^licity, and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by ^he Grace of God, we desire to have our Conversation (...) the Gospel
with you, and with all that love Christ (...) our Nation. Trusting in the Lord,
that the u^^ting of such in the Truth in general, may effectually love many to
Jealousy with themselves, who are now ^^tangled in Error, or involved in
Profaneness, that ^hey may be converted from the Evil of their Ways, and
^onsequently our Nation to abound with all Blessings, ^specially the Blessing
of the Gospel of Peace. For Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is,
and of that which is to come.

Finally, if these Endeavors for Christian Concord with all that fear God, and
work Righteousness in this Nation, be rejected, yet herein shall we have some
Peace and Comfort, that we have made the best Essay we could for Brotherly
Concord with them: Being also ^eriously desirous utterly to forget all the hard
things which in time past we have suffered from our Contrymen. Hoping that
the sober Protestant has had good Occasion by this time to observe, that God
Almighty has pleaded the Innocence of our Principles and Purpose, from the
Evils too frequently* and most unjustly suggested against them; and that
therefore we may now with the greater freedom of Speech, express our selves as
in the Premises, and conclude with the modest Speech of Augustine.

This then is our Desire, which we do allege by these Letters unto your
Reverence, First, if it may be that you would confer with our Bishops peaceably
Aug. Ep. 58. ad Jan. and Donat.
and quie^ly, to the End that Error be taken away from those in whom it shall
be found, and not that Men be taken away, nor punished, but gently corrected.

But before we shut up this Epistle it will be needful to answer two Objections
which may seem to be of (...) we have said.

Obj* 1. It will be objected, That we ask or desir^ many things, and grant but
few.

Ans. 1. That we hope we have desired nothing bu^ what is rational, according
to the sound Principles (...) Christianity; and which will be profitable to the
Church of God, when granted.

2. We stand ready to hear what our Friends of the Church of England, will
require of us, to answer tho^ Kindnesses which we desire of them, and hope we
shadeny them nothing which we may lawfully grant.

2. Obj. That the Alteration which we propose in t^^ case of Baptism, amounts
to a Renunciation of th^^ Christianity, and to begin anew to become Christians*

Ans. The Church of England does not only retai^ the Substance of what Truth
^he has received concernin^ Baptism, by altering to the better; but will
indeed the be consistant with the Truth of her own Doctrine in the fi^
paragraph of her 27th Article, and her vulgar Catechis^ which she has rather
made void hitherto by the Custo^ of Paedobaptism.

2. If we take the Text Act. 19. 5. according to t^ Exposition of the Ancients,
and diverse Modern Writ^ (as that is indeed the native and clear Sense of t^
place) It will then be a good president to the Chur^^ of England to alter the
Subject and Manner of her Ba^tism; for here we see, these Ephesians being not
right instructed concerning the grounds of Baptism, when the were baptized unto
John's Baptism, are therefore ba^tized again, upon more perfect Instruction;
Yet (...) they not renounce the least part of Christianity, (...) any Truth
which they had received concerning Baptis^ But did rather perfect that Infirm
Baptism which the had received. And it is a just Presumption that the first
Baptism was more valid then Paedobaptism, (...) Infants know nothing at all,
either what they do, what is done to them, but oppose it what in them (...),
whereas these at Ephesus were Disciples, ver. 1, ^uch as did know unto what
they had been baptized, (...). 3, and yet are baptized again, because not duly
in^ormed before concerning the grounds of Baptism; and ^his is written for our
Learning, when our case is like ^heirs.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Reader may be confident, we are not without foresight, that our hearty
desire and endeavor for Truth and Peace, will be little regarded by many; some
will cen^ure us, others contemn us, and what we have here pro^osed.

But be it so, yet we also hope some will consider what we ^ave offered; and
may it but give some Light to a better ^nderstanding of the Case depending, or
move any whose ^ircumstances may render them more serviceable to promote Truth
and Peace amongst Dissenting Christians, We shall ^e content to labor, and
suffer reproach, because we trust (...) the living God.

Since the precedent Epistle was written, some of us have (...) a Sermon lately
preached by Dr. Stillingfleet, on Phil. ^ 16. wherein he also endeavors for
Peace amongst Dissening Christians; but there is one thing necessary (which he
^oes not much meddle with) and that is to show, That the church he would have
us to communicate with, is such for Constitution and Government as was that at
Philippi. ^hen he shall do this, he may be confident small faults ^^ll not keep
us from her Communion: And that she may (...) such, is the unfeigned desire and
eadeavour of the Au^^ors of the precedent Epistle.

FINIS.

