THE Infants Advocate, AGAINST The cruel Doctrine of those Presbyterians, who
hold, That the greatest part of Dying Infants shall be DAMNED. In Answer to a
Book of Mr. GILES FIRMIN'S, entitled, Scripture Warrant, etc. By THO. GRANTHAM.

Exodus 32. 32, 33. Yet now, if thou will, forgive their Sin; and if not, blot
me, I pray thee, out of thy Book which thou have written. And the Lord said
unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my Book.
Matthew. 18. 10, 11, 14. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little Ones;
for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of my
Father which is in Heaven. For the Son of Man came to seek, and to save that
which is lost -- Even so it is not the Will of your Father which is in Heaven,
that one of these little Ones should perish. London, Printed by J. D. for the
Author. 1688.

The PREFACE.
Honest Reader;
I Could not have thought that a Man reputed wise, an old Professor, and one
who so bears himself upon his Father's Covenant (whom he will have to be a Son
of Abraham, and so himself to be Abraham's Son also) could have given such
evident Proof of the contrary, as by his Book he has brought forth. Sure I am,
I answered his two Questions in much Love and Faithfulness, according to my
Ability, being thereunto desired by some of his Neighbors: And I hope no
Impartial Reader will censure me to be a Scoffer, as Mr. Firmin does: But truly
I think he was pleased to throw that Dirt, that he might have some pretense to
give scope to his ill Spirit, to exercise it self that way.

I confess I use these words upon the occasion of his talking so high of his
Father's Covenant [ that it would even make a well Man sick, to see what
pitiful work he makes of it.] And here I will give thee an account of it, and
then judge of me as thou please.

Says Mr. F. When I could not tell where to lay hold (meaning in his dismal
Temptations) my Parental Covenant and Infant Baptism was a support to me. So
that I bless God, 1. For Abraham' s Covenant. 2. I bless God that I had Godly
Parents. 3. I bless God my Parents were no Anabaptists, etc. Only a word, some
may think you had Godly Parents, mine were not so: It may be I had a Godly
Grandfather, or a Mother; Had you so? no doubt but you may improve the Covenant
from him. The second Commandment will help you -- others may say, Baptized I
am, but my Parents bad enough. Well, art awake? and art in earnest for Christ
and the saving Blessings come by him? you may improve your Covenant. A Woman
putting a Question, how she might know whether ever she had these
Qualifications? Mr. F. tells us, that whilst he was troubled about making out
these Qualifications, there comes a Motion into my Mind, (says he) What say
you to your Father's Covenant? you know your Parents were Godly -- will you
stand to your Father's Covenant? Here my Qualification was the choice of my
Father's God, who was mine before by an external Covenant: But now to have him
my God, my Portion by an internal Covenant, and Efficacy, here I was pent up.
Will you choose or refuse him? etc.

Now whether this Discourse will not almost make a well Man sick (I mean a
serious Christian troubled) to hear a wise Man talk at this rate? And whether
he does not lay his Foundation upon his Qualification? for by that, says he,
was the choice of my Father's God. And does he not also set up his Will as high
as ever any did, in choosing or refusing God to be his God, his Portion by
internal Covenant and Efficacy? Sure he does.

Mr. F's great business is to abuse and disgrace me, by false and foolish
Stories, which have been told him by others, which I pass by as unworthy
observation. And then he falls in with the Papists against me, in the case of
abstaining from, or eating Blood, justifying himself and them in the latter.
Tho he confesses the believing Gentiles were forbidden to eat Blood by that
Decree, Act. 15. 29. And when these Decrees were repealed; he cannot tell; and
whilst he makes us for observing them, such as do not believe the Blood of
Christ to be our Atonement; and that we hold some things to be unclean of
themselves; he condemns also the Primitive Christians, who religiously
abstained from Blood for several hundred Years after Christ, and makes himself
wiser than the Apostles; for had they known such to be the consequence, they
would not have made them, nor have delivered them to be kept as they did, Acts
16. 4.

We know that that which goes into the Man defiles not, and therefore Blood
defiles not, but acting against God's Word defiled Evah, even by eating that
which was good for Food; and so may Mr. F. defile himself, for he says he will
eat Blood Puddings, S. A. by which he means, Sir Anabaptist: and indeed a
scornful Spirit breaths in many Pages of his late Books.

He is pleased to throw Dirt upon me very freely, about an escape of the Pen or
Press, I am not sure which, and yet he being a Scholar, and acquainted with
such over-sights, could not but discern, unless Malice blinded him, that it was
an oversight. The Passage is about the time when Transubstantiation came into
the World, and the Book which he quarrels has it thus: How rigidly do they
impose the Decrees of the Trent-Councils: Where note, the word Councils being
plural, he might easily have supposed Lateran, which was wanting; for thus it
stands in the Catechism of the Papists (of which I give notice Page 55.) The
Lateran and Trent Councils, and from thence I took the date of
Transubstantiation. Not but that I have read the same in other Authors. But
here he brands me with gross Ignorance, and I grant I am not so well read as
himself, if that will please him. And my rejoicing is this, that in Simplicity
and Godly Sincerity I wrote that Book which he despises; and I hope God will
bless my Endeavors, in which I trust, I have no other scope but his Glory and
the good of all Men; heartily desiring that all Truth were restored to its
Primitive Purity and Simplicity.

As to his three first Chapters, I shall say little to them at present, being
very well satisfied with my Answers to his two Questions, notwithstanding all
that he has said to render them invalid. The chief thing which I design in this
Reply is, to maintain (what in me is) the Mercy of God to all dying Infants,
against Mr. F. and others, whose cruel Doctrine sends them by Millions to
Hellish Torments, as appears by this Book of Mr. Firmin's, p. 8. If all dying
Infants shall be saved; there will be Millions in Heaven (says he) in whom the
Spirit of God -- had nothing to do in their Salvation. I say, to maintain the
Salvation of all dying Infants against those who would thus damn them, is
especially my present undertaking. And if Mr. F. be disposed to urge me
further, it is a Subject I am willing to debate with him, when and how he
pleases, so that we may discourse in Love* as becomes Christians. And as to the
Questions about Sacred Baptism, that Work may perhaps be undertaken in a
particular Treatise by it self. In the mean time, let it be considered, that it
has been granted both by Papists and Protestants, (and those of the more
Learned sort too) That there is no Scripture for Infant Baptism. That the
Scripture shows us no other way of baptizing, but by dipping. Yea, I lately
asked a It was not the Bp of Norwich, for I never saw him, nor did I ever
dispute any Doctor out of the room, as Mr. F. has both foolishly and falsely
reported in Print, with no less than six other false and very frivolous Tales,
in half a Page*
Doctor of the Church of England very seriously, Whether he held Infant Baptism
to be of Divine Institution? Who very freely gave me this Answer, No truly, I
only look upon it as a Church-Rite. But then, whether the Church have such
Power, as to make Rites and Ceremonies in Religion, and particularly thus to
alter the subject and manner of Baptism, as has confessedly been done by the
Church of Rome, and in part by the Church of England, is the business for this
present Age to take into their most serious Consideration.

T. G.

The INFANTS ADVOCATE, against the cruel Doctrine of those Presbyterians, who
hold, That the greatest part of Dying Infants are DAMNED.
Division 1.
MR Giles Firmin was pleased to print two Questions, and desires those, whom he
calls Anabaptists, to answer them; and at the request of some of his
Neighbors, I wrote a brief, and I hope, a modest Answer to them, not for
Contention, but for Satisfaction to such as desire to know the truth in the
matters thereby put to the Question by Mr. F. who finds himself aggrieved, tho
nothing is done but what he desired; that is, his Questions answered: And tho
he says they are not, yet that shall not provoke me to say much to him
concerning them. But seeing by this occasion we are unavoidably fallen upon the
business of Infants-Salvation; Whether God Almighty ordained Baptism, or any
other Rite to be necessary to their Salvation? or, Whether the greatest, or any
part of Dying Infants shall be damned in Hellish Torments? A Question of great
weight and importance; I find my self concerned to proceed in opposing that
cruel Doctrine, which would send Millions of dying Infants to Hell Torments.

It was the Judgment of Austin, and many others, that unless Infants were
baptized, and received the Lord's Supper, they could not be saved: And Mr.
Firmin seems to be of the same Mind with respect to their Baptism: and
moreover, he holds that Infants must have Faith and Repentance, as necessary to
their Salvation, or they must all perish. I will set down his own words.

In Page 90. of his Plea, he speaks thus: To return to Infants, They must be
regenerate, and have Faith some way, else they must perish. And in his Book
entitled, Scripture warrant, etc. he speaks thus, Page 76. They who are
regenerate, have Faith and Repentance. But all Infants saved, are regenerated:
Therefore all Infants saved, have Faith and Repentance. And in Page 21. he
counts it an Error in me for supposing, If Isaac had died before he was eight
days old, he might have been saved. So (says he) this Covenant (meaning the
Covenant of Circumcision) might have been spared. And in Page 40. The same
(says he) I may say for Baptism, being Christ's own Institution, This is the
Hand of the Spirit accompanying it, when and where he pleases, shall be the
means to convey Spiritual Blessings to the Hearts of some Infants, and prove to
them the washing of Regeneration. So that, I think, I have done him no wrong in
the account I have given of his Opinion. To all which I answer.

To intermit a little the business of Infants Faith and Repentance, we will
consider what he says of Circumcision and Baptism.

He tells us, Page 39. That he cannot conceive how it can consist with the
Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness of God, to institute an Ordinance in his Church,
for spiritual and saving Ends, and strictly to command this Ordinance to be
administered to such Subjects as Children of eight days old -- and he himself
not work with his own Institution, when and where he pleases, to the good and
benefit of that Subject to whom it is administered, this Subject having need of
the Spiritual Good, signified and sealed thereby. It does implicitly charge the
Institution with Vanity. To which I reply.

1. Considering what Mr. F. says of Isaac dying before the eighth day, (which I
noted before) his sense is this; that from the time that Circumcision was
instituted, it makes that Covenant of Circumcision a Vanity, to think any of
Abraham's Seed (tho but Infants of eight days old) could be saved if not
circumcised: And then, I pray, what is like to become of all the World beside,
who had no Interest in the Covenant of Circumcision? Must they not all perish?
We shall hear more of that anon.

2. And besides this, tho he makes Circumcision thus necessary to the Salvation
of Infants, yet he does not believe that all Infants that were circumcised were
saved; for these words of his [ when and where he pleases] carry this sense in
a Presbyterian Breast, that tho Circumcision did by express order belong to all
the Males of Abraham's Seed, being eight days old, yet perhaps but few of many
of them should be saved: which I evidently showed in my Answers to Mr. F's
Question, and to Mr. Petto.

Now here I do profess to believe, that Almighty God did not thus ordain
Circumcision to be absolutely necessary; because they, to wit, Infants, can
neither understand his Will herein, nor desire it, neither hinder it; it wholly
depends on others to do it for them, and why then they should perish if it be
not done, no reason can be showed: but that which is the hardest thing of all,
is, that if Isaac had died before the eighth day, he should not be saved, when
yet it was not lawful to circumcise him. What is this? Does God damn Infants
for dying before they be eight days old? or for not having that done to them
which by God's Law ought not to be done before the eighth day? This is the
cruelst Doctrine that can be. And I will show how contrary it is to the
Doctrine of Learned Protestants. One says thus upon Genesis 17. 14. It is no good
reading to say the uncircumcised Man-Child, but [Zachar] the Male, etc. shall
be Dr. Willit Hexap. in Genesis p. 196, etc.
cut off; for the Infant of eight days old, mentioned ver. 12. is of purpose
omitted here. Hence then it is inferred, that there was no such absolute
necessity of Circumcision, that Children wanting it should be damned. Again,
This place cannot be understood of Infants that are uncircumcised, 1. That
addition, the eighth day, is used only by the Septuagint, it is not in the
Hebrew. 2. The words are, qui non circumciderit, he which shall not circumcise.
So reads the Original, the Chaldee Paraphrast, Junius, etc. which shows
that it must be understood of them that are Adulti, and not of Infants --. If
Infants be not circumcised it is the Parents fault -- as may appear in the
Example of Moses, whom the Lord punished, and not the Child for neglecting it.

3. Concerning Baptism, I do believe it to be a very solemn Ordinance, and also
very useful in the Church of God; yet I do not find that it is the Hand of the
Spirit to convey Grace to the Heart of any Infant, seeing what it conveys, it
does it by Faith and by its Figure; representing the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, and ours with him, etc. of all which Infants know
nothing, being sprinkled, as I formerly showed, very often when they are fast
asleep; and if awake, they know nothing of the Mystery of Baptism.

But Mr. F. brought three Scriptures to prove his Doctrine, we shall now
consider them; Ephesians. 5. 26. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it;
that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of Water, through the
Word. I allow Baptismal Water to be here meant; but then we see it does not
cleanse but by or through the Word, nor does the Word profit unless it be mixed
with Faith in them that hear it; Heb. 4. 1, 2. The Church is purified in
obeying the Truth through the Spirit; 1 Pet. 1. 22. And Baptism saves us, as it
is the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ.
And to this agree his other two Scriptures, Tit. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now
Infants being incapable of being cleansed by Baptism according to the sense of
these Scriptures, we may in no wise apply them to Infant Baptism.

Divis. 2.
And because it may be most convenient to treat of Regeneration in this place,
we will here consider Mr. F's Arguments to prove that Infants have Faith and
Repentance. His first Argument is as follows.

Arg. 1. If all, even adult Persons, are passive in the work of Regeneration,
then Infants are capable of Regeneration. But the Antecedent is true.
Answ. 1. Here we are told that grown Persons are passive (that is, they do
nothing at all) in the work of Regeneration; this is the meaning of his
Antecedent. Now if this be true, as he says it is, then if they do nothing,
they neither hear the Word, nor believe it, nor repent, nor hate nor turn from
Sin; for these are at least some of the parts of the work of Regeneration. Now
I would fain know who is active in all this, if the Party regenerate be not?
St. Paul tells us, With the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with
the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10. When Peter showed the
Jews their Sin, and preached Christ to them, they were pricked to the Heart:
Now observe, they came to hear the Word, they gave Audience, they gave Credit
to it, God blessed the Word with Power: Now they cry out, What shall we do?
Peter exhort them to repent, etc. and they gladly receive his word, and had the
washing of Regeneration the same day. Now let God have the Glory of this, and
all Conversions, who is the first Mover in it, and the Efficient Cause of it;
yet he is absurd that will say, Man is as passive as an Infant that can neither
hear, nor receive any Instruction at all. And therefore I deny his Antecedent,
it is not true, the Adult are some way active in the work of Conversion; yea
all that know the work, do know what wrestling with Corruption is, and how
unable they are to overcome in the Conflict with Satan and Flesh, without
Supernatural Strength, or Aid from Heaven, but yet They act, and wait for help
in all their actings.

2. Men are commanded to hear, that their Souls may live, Isa. 55. If they hear
and obey not, they sin against God, Romans 10. 16, 17, 18. We grant that the
Power Converting, is not of the Creature; We are not sufficient of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves. All our Faculties are given us of God.
It Is our duty to put these Faculties into Act; to hear, repent, and believe, is
Man's Duty. It is not the Duty of Infants to hear, repent, believe, etc.
therefore they are not regenerated this way. What you urge from the Shunamite's
Son and Lazarus, being both dead, and so equally passive as to rise from Death,
is wholly impertinent, and being put into Argument, is false; for thus you must
argue, if you say any thing, Infants dead are as capable to rise as the Adult,
being dead. Ergo, They are as capable of hearing, beleiving, and repenting as
the Adult. The Consequence is false; many Instances we have of the Adult, who
hear, believe, and repent; but no Instance of one Infant ever regenerated this
way.

3. As for your captious Demands about our being quickened, etc. you may well
spare them, till you give better Evidence of your own Conversion; for your
Books do evidently show, that a jeering idle Spirit has dominion in you.
Howbeit this we say; The Original Cause of our Conversion, is the Love of God:
The meritorious Cause, is the Blood of Christ: The ministerial Cause, is the
Evidence of Truth, or the Word of Truth: The efficient Cause, is the Power of
God's Grace, John 1. 12. The formal Cause, is believing and obeying the Truth
through the Spirit: The final Cause, is God's Glory and our Salvation; to the
obtaining of which all our Faculties of Hearing, Understanding, Will, and
Affection, are given us of God to be put into Act. This is not required of
Infants; and how they are sanctified by the Spirit, God only knows.

4. But now, says Mr. Firmin, I will not have him for my God, who cannot most
omnipotently make me both will, and do what he will.

But I reply, These are great swelling words of Vanity, and nothing to the
purpose: We dispute not what God can do; for he can, of a Stone in the Street,
make a better Man than either of us. And we deny not, but God has sometimes,
and may still, if he please, convert some by miraculous Operations. But to say
that all Conversions are miraculous, as Mr. F. does, is very false. Paul was
converted miraculously, so was not Lydia. What I say upon Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. is
mistaken by you, for I extend it further than to the Resurrection of the Body;
for I expressly say he has power to do whatsoever he pleases, and so to raise us
up, etc. but if I was short or obscure, this is my meaning, The Faith of
Christians is agreeable to the power which God showed in Christ when he raised
him from the dead; and I think 1 Pet. 1. 3. does very well explain Ephesians. 1.
19, 20. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us again to a lively Hope, by the
Resurrection of Christ from the Dead.

Mr. Firmin argues thus; They who are regenerated, have Faith and Repentance:
but all Infants saved, are regenerated: Therefore all Infants saved, have Faith
and Repentance.

Answ. 1. Here is a fault in your Logic, You bid me understand what that
Fallacy Ignoratio Elenchi is, and here you are fallen into that Fallacy your
self.
your Major should have been universal, or else you conclude nothing rationally.

2. Therefore I deny the Major, and say, Some may be regenerated (I mean
cleansed from Sin, renewed by Christ, and made fit for Heaven) without Faith
and Repenuance, namely, Infants; and sure I am Mr. F. shall never be able to
prove his Major, being taken universally; and if he like not to mend his Major,
I reject his Argument, and retort it thus.

3. They that are regenerated, do continue in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. But all Infants saved are
regenerated. Ergo, All Infants saved continue steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. Now as this
Argument is fallacious, so certainly is yours. Again,

4. You that make all Conversion miraculous, how can you tie Regeneration to
Faith and Repentance, as it respects Infants? Do not you contradict your self,
Mr. Firmin, in this? May not God sanctify Infants what way he pleases, but
must be limited to your Methods? Sir, what he does in the Regeneration of
Infants is a Secret, let it alone to him.

5. But let us hear Dr. Tailor, one of your own Mind as to Poedo-baptism, yet
he says, Let Infants be pressed with all the Inconveniences which are
consequent to Original Sin; yet it will not be laid to their Charge, so as to
condemn them: Or if it could, yet the Mercy and absolute Goodness of God will
secure them, if he take them away before they can glorify him by a free
Obedience -- For as Infants without their own consent -- contracted the Guilt
of Adam' s Sin, and are liable to all the Punishments which can with Justice
descend upon his Posterity, who are personally innocent: so Infants shall be
restored -- by the second Adam, by the Redemption of Jesus Christ, by his
Righteousness and Mercies, applied either immediately, or how, or when he
pleases to appoint. And here Mr. F. may learn from Dr. Tailor, how Infants may
be guilty of Sin, and yet Innocent; which he would make a Contradiction in me.

Mr. F. tells us his Major (last denied) is clear from our own Confession, in
that we say Faith and Repentance are the two parts of Regeneration: but he that
grants this, extends it only to the Adult, of whom these are things required;
and not to Infants, of whom they are not required; so that this is a mere
Caption, unbecoming a grave Disputant. But let us hear how he proves his Minor.
They (says he) who are born unclean, that are sinful and corrupt by Nature,
must be regenerated before they can be saved. But so are Infants born.
Therefore, etc.

Answ. It is not denied by us that Infants are born unclean, and we grant that
before they come to Heaven they must be cleansed, so that you might have spared
this Argument. The thing you are to prove is, That Infants cannot be cleansed
without Faith and Repentance. But this you cunningly slide over, and you will
find it to be an undertaking too hard for you, and I think you are the first
Man that ever attempted it.

It is not your telling us again of your Seminal Faith that will do it, which,
as you refer it to Infants, is a mere Chimera of your own Brain. But when you
speak of the Adult, you seem to speak sense in these words, When God
regenerates an Adult Person, he does first infuse the Principles, Seeds, Habits
of all the Graces of the Spirit. When the Sower went out to sow, Mat 13. 3. it
was but the Seeds of Faith and Repentance which he did sow, which was first
received, and these Seeds grew up, Mark* 4. 27.

Now, Sir, if you will stand to this, and these Texts to govern your Speech, we
may very well come to agree. What then is the Seed here spoken of? Our Savior
tells us, it is the Word of God, which Men hear preached unto them; Is this the
Seminal Faith and Repentance which you talk on? Then this Seminal Faith is not
in Infants, for as they cannot hear the Word, so no Sower, or Preacher is sent
to them. And I suppose you would not baptize an Adult Person, tho he has heard
the Word, unless you see some effect of it, at least that the tender blade
appear: for Persons are not made Disciples or Christians by being baptized; but
they are baptized because they are made Disciples, John 4. 1. Mat. 28. 19.
Mathetusate panta ta ethne Baptizantes autous. And Disciples may be called
Christians, Acts 11. Now with what Conscience then can you baptize an Infant,
that never to your knowledge received this Seed at all?

But Mr. F. bids us twy-fallow and try-fallow our Ground, and sow no seed, for
according to your Doctrine (says he) you may have a Crop without it. But by
his favor this is not our case, but his own, for he sows no Seed to Infants,
and yet he will have a Crop of them; for he will have them baptized asleep or
awake by force. Now Baptism is an Act of Obedience springing from the Word (
the Seed) sown; Acts 2. 38, 40. Act. 8. 12. Nay more, he exacts this Crop of
Infants not only before he sow any Seed, or before any be sown by any other
that he knows of, but also before he so much as Twy-fallow, or plow at all. And
thus whilst he thought to kick the Husbandman on the breech, he has kicked up
his own Heels.

Mr. F. quotes 1 John 3. 9. It is the Seed which remains. Peter' s Faith failed
sadly (says he) as to the Act, but the Seed remained. This would lead us to
another Question [as it is his manner to confound his Discourses with
Diversities] but I shall hold him to the Parable of the Sower, alleged by
himself Mat. 13. And then I may tell him the Seed only remains in good and
honest Hearts, but not in every place where it is sown, nor in every place
where it is received; remember the Highway, and the Stony and Thorny Ground.

Mr. F's Arg. 2. No unclean Person shall see God; Heb. 12. 14. But Infants by
Nature are unclean. If the Scripture be believed, they must bear the Image in
which they were created by God, that ever see the face of God.
Answ. Should I retort this Argument, I might show the infirmity of its form.
But I shall take your Sense. I suppose by the Major you mean no unclean or
wicked Person, as such, shall see God. And by the Minor you mean that Infants
are born of sinful Parents, polluted by Original Sin, and so under
Condemnation; And therefore before they can come to Heaven they must be
cleansed from these Pollutions, etc. If this be your Sense I agree with you.
But then your Argument touches not the Question, which is, Whether Infants are
not made clean from their Pollutions, and freed from Condemnation, without
having Faith and Repentance? I say they may, because God requires not these
things of Infants. But you argue further.

Mr. F. All the Members of the Kingdom of Heaven are holy: but Children are
Members of the Kingdom of Heaven: Not by Birth, it is by Regeneration.

Answ. First, Here I think you have given your Cause its deaths blow. It seems
now that the Infants of Believers are no more holy by their Birth of believing
Parents than others; and whether they be regenerated you cannot tell, for you
do not hold that all the Children of Believers are saved. What is now become of
the Birth-priviledg so much gloried in by Mr. Baxter, and others? We have been
told Infants are holy by Birth, if one Parent be but a Believer; and that
Children of Believers are holy by Prerogative of Seed. But now you confess the
Truth, and I grant Infants are not holy by Birth, let their Parents be never so
Christian. And I have already granted that Infants must be cleansed from all
Sin before they come to Heaven. But yet you touch not the Question, Whether
they cannot be cleansed from Sin without they have Faith and Repentance; one
would think you begin to be afraid of the Question, and I am sure you have
cause so to be.

Arg. 3. Mr. F. tells us, If Adam had continued in Innocence, his Children had
born the Image of God from the Birth: I never heard it denied. That which I
infer hence is, that Children are capable of the Image of God, and receiving
the Seeds of all Grace it was so then, why not now?
Answ. What manner of the Image of God Infants should have born, had Adam
continued innocent, is unknown to Man; and it is but vain to concern our selves
about that which cannot be known: but this we know, it should not have stood in
Faith and Repentance as now, because in both these we confess our selves
Sinners, and this is enough to show the vanity of your Question, if so then,
why not now? But you proceed thus;

Mr. F. Shall the sin of one Person be so mischievous, to deprive Adam and all
his Posterity of the Image of God, and bring the Seeds of all Corruption into
their Nature, and shall the Grace of God be denied to renew his Image in little
Children, when and where he pleases? Children being a great part of the World,
shall the Spirit of God have nothing to do in their Hearts?

Answ. I know no Man more faulty than Mr. F. in this matter; for he will not
allow the Grace of God to have any thing to do with the greatest part of
Infants. I doubt not but God does all things needful for them, to make them
holy, by the Blood of Christ; his Grace and Spirit. But all this shall be done
without Faith and Repentance; because God does not require it of Infants; if he
does, name your Text.

Mr. F. now tells us* Adam's Disobedience far* exceeds the Obedience of Christ,
which he compares in Justification, Romans 5. 16, 17, 18. for his Disobedience
could defile all his Posterity, but Christ's Obedience does not cleanse and
regenerate one Child.

Answ. Come St. Paul, thou have told us that such as thou art by Letters when
absent, such thou will be indeed when present, 2 Cor. 10. 11. Wherefore I shall
give place to thee to answer for thy self, by the very places which Mr. F. has
quoted out of thy Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 5. 16, 17, 18. And not as it was
by one that sinned, so is the Gift: for the Judgment was of one to
Condemnation; but the free-Gift is of many Offenses to Justification. For if by
the Offense of one, Death reigned by one much more they which receive abundance
of Grace and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in Life by one, Jesus
Christ. Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon All Men* to
Condemnation; even so, by the Righteousness of one, the free-Gift came upon All
Men unto Justification of Life. And whereas Mr. F. boldly tells us, that
Christ's Obedience does not cleanse and regenerate one Child. I ask him whose
Obedience then does cleanse Infants? Let St. Paul answer again, ver. 19. As by
one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners: SO by the Obedience of one shall
many be made Righteous. Blessed Paul, thou have answered to the Life. Mr.
Firmin says, Christ's Obedience does not cleanse and regenerate one Child. Thou
say, Christ's Obedience made many righteous; and they that are made righteous
are clean and regenerated sufficiently. Blessed Apostle! thou have turned the
Wisdom of the Wise into Foolishness. What follows in this Paragraph is answered
before, and for his uncivil Expressions in the close of it I shall pass them by.

Mr. Firmin's Arg. 4. If all Children dying such are justified and saved, then
there will be Millions in Heaven, in whom the Spirit of God, as the third
Person in the Blessed Trinity, had nothing to do in their Salvation.
Answ. First, I take notice that Mr. Firmin by this Argument would have
Millions of Infants damned, because in his Judgment the Spirit of God has
nothing to do with Millions of them in the business of Salvation. This, this is
that wicked Doctrine which I oppose.

2. But how will he prove that the Spirit has to do in the business of the
Salvation of any of them, more than I shall prove he has to do in the
Salvation of all dying Infants? He would prove it by two things, (1.) Because
the distinct Subsistences have their distinct manner of working. (2.) Because
Regeneration is given to the Spirit. Now, suppose this be true, it does not
prove that some Infants have the assistance of the Spirit, and some dying
Infants have no assistance from him. Thus he beats* the Air, but proves not any
thing at all relating to the Point in Question.

3. But I will prove that all dying Infants have all that assistance of the
Spirit (in the business of Salvation) which is any way needful for them. I do
it thus:

All those dying Infants, for whom Christ shed his precious Blood, have
sufficient assistance from the Spirit, in the business of their Salvation.

But Christ shed his precious Blood for all dying Infants: Ergo, All dying
Infants have sufficient assistance from the Spirit in the business of their
Salvation.

The Major is evident, because no dying Infant does resist the Holy Ghost, and
because God is no Respecter of Persons. The Minor is evident because Christ
died for all, tasted Death for every Man; he bought them that deny him, and
bring upon themselves swift Destruction: And seeing his tender Mercies are over
all his Works, the holy Spirit is not wanting to further the Salvation of any
dying Infant. Deuteronomy. 10. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Psalm. 145.
9. Come Mr. Firmin, let me come near you; it may be you have had some Children
that died in their Infancy as well as I. Show me a reason now why my dying
Infants might not have the application of Christ's Blood by the holy Spirit, as
well as yours? As for the manner of the Spirit's operation herein, I suppose we
know it both alike, that is, not at all. Nevertheless I do believe the Father,
Son, and holy Spirit does what is needful in their respective operations, tho I
know not in all Points how it is done in the case of dying Infants. It is
enough that we have Christ's Testimony, that to them belongs the Kingdom, that
is, to all in that state, for he rejects not any one of them, neither in these
words, nor in any other that proceeded from his sacred Lips, nor from the Pens
of the Writers of the Holy Scriptures; And then what is Mr. Firmin that he
should by this presumptuous Argument send many Millions of them to Hell?
because in his conceit, the Holy Ghost has nothing to do with them in the
business of their Salvation; the Spirit's Operations being limited by him
herein to the Infants of Believers only; and if you look well to his Notions,
there is not a few of them too, who have no help from the holy Spirit, for they
being not all elect, must be damned for all their Baptism; and this is the
kindness he has to write a Plea for Infants.

Divis. 3.
Wherein is considered, whether the Covenant of Grace was taken from the whole
World, and appropriated only to Abraham and his Seed, from the time of the
making the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17.

Mr. Firmin, p. 20.] Now I come to my Question, and shall make it appear your
Answer signifies nothing. You tell me of a Covenant of Grace made with the
whole World in the promised Seed to Adam, etc. I tell you, while Adam, Noah,
and Abraham lived under that Covenant made with the whole World, God was
pleased to make a Covenant with Abraham, and with none other but Abraham, to be
his God, and the God of his Seed, and sealed this Covenant, by which Covenant
and Seal, God did separate and divide all Abraham's Seed from the World, living
under the Covenant you speak of. Answ. 1. It is evident, that either Mr. Firmin
holds, That the Covenant made with Adam, Noah, and Abraham, before that
mentioned Genesis 17. was not the Covenant of Grace; or else that Covenant, Genesis
17. was not the Covenant of Grace; or that the Covenant of Grace was now taken
from all the World, and appropriated and restrained to Abraham and his Seed
only. The latter is clearly his sense, that God was now only the God of Abraham
and his Seed in the Covenant of Grace, and of none other.

But this Doctrine is most false and absurd, as I evidently showed to Mr.
Petto, to this effect. We ought to understand that Abraham and his Seed was not
the only Persons in the World, which were under the Covenant of Grace, at that
time when God made with Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. For (as
Mr. Broughton observes) Sem lived 50 Years after the Covenant of Circumcision
was made with Abraham; and diverse other holy Men lived long after the Covenant
of Circumcision was made; who were all true Worshippers of God according to the
Covenant of Grace: Melchisedeck blessing Abraham, (from whence St. Paul infers,
that he was greater than Abraham, Heb. 7. 7.) yet neither he, nor the rest of
the Patriarchs were concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision.

And as neither these, nor their Infants or Posterity, were liable to any loss
of the Covenant of Grace, by their not being Circumcised after the manner of
Abraham; so neither Job, nor other Worthy Men that were not of the Seed of
Abraham, had no necessity at all to be concerned in the Covenant of
Circumcision: From whence it must needs follow, That God did not intend the
Sign of Circumcision, as necessary to entitle Men to the Covenant of Grace, nor
that none could be Saved who were not under the Covenant of Circumcision. But
certain it is, the Covenant of Circumcision was appropriate to Abraham, and to
his Seed, for very great Ends, respecting special Preservation to the Family of
Abraham, as being now the Family from whence Christ should proceed according to
the Flesh: And with whom God would presence himself in a Land of Promise, by a
distinct way of Worship from all other Nations, who were then falling very fast
to Idolatry.

Again, Mr. F. telling us, That God made that Covenant of Circumcision with
Abraham, and none other. By this he has given a fatal Blow to his Cause, which
he is so zealous to defend. Because by this, it is evident, that the Covenant
made with Abraham, Genesis 17. considered as it was peculiar to him and his Seed,
and no other, no not of the Patriarchs then living, it was therefore (at least
so considered) not the Covenant of Grace. But it was only, so considered; the
Covenant of Circumcision, as it is also called, Acts 7. 8. without any such
adjunct as the Covenant of Grace; as if all that were not in that peculiar
Covenant throughout the World, must be damned without Mercy. No, no, God had
his tender Mercies for others, tho this Covenant was peculiar to Abraham.

God was no such respecter of Persons when he made the Covenant with Abraham,
Genesis 17. But in every Nation, from the beginning even to the end of the World,
all that feared the Lord, and wrought Righteousness, found acceptance with him.
This old Truth, Peter himself (being tinctured with this Notion, that God had
no Grace for any but Abraham's Seed) could not perceive, till God by Miracle
did reveal it to him; no tho his Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. did oblige him to
teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature, yet till now he
durst not preach to the Gentiles, Acts 10.

And therefore it is the less strange, that Mr. Firmin, and such as he, who
take themselves to be Abraham's Seed, because they are born according to the
Flesh of such as they take to be Believers, should be so cruelly dark in this
glorious Truth, that God is no respecter of Persons. Nor do I see any thing
more liable to puff Men up with Pride, than this, that they were in the
Covenant of Grace from their Infancy, because their Parents were Believers, or
at least one of them, or their Grandfather, etc. was so; as Mr. F. words it.

This Opinion undid the Jews generally, and I doubt it has spoiled many of the
Gentiles. Our blessed Savior, John 8. has a long Disputation to deliver the
Jews from this their vain Confidence, which they built upon their being
Abraham's Seed. And St. Paul bent his Style against the same thing, Romans 2. 26,
27, 28, 29. and Chap. 3. ver. 19. to the end. But the more they labored to
undeceive these deceived Jews* the more they were hated by them; and if we meet
with the same measure, we must bear it. For indeed, scarce any so fierce
against us, for extending the Grace of God to all Men, as being therein no
respecter of Persons, and yet showing to Sinners the necessity of actual
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, as necessary
to their Membership in the Church Militant, by the Baptism of Repentance for
Remission of Sins; I say, none so fierce against us, as those who boast they
are Abraham's Seed, because descended from Gentiles, who they suppose to be
Believers. But let me have a care, I must now Answer for my self, for Mr.
Firmin demands of me, Page 21.

By what Scripture-Warrant do you reduce our Children, into the state of the
Children of Adam, or Noah, etc. since we are never called their Children, but
only Abraham' s, whose Seed differ from theirs by a special Covenant made with
Them, and sealed with Them. To which of them did God say, I will be the God of
thy Seed, and I will seal it?

But I reply. These seem to me to be great swelling words of Vanity, much worse
in a Gentile than in a Jew. And I would know what special Covenant has God
made with Mr. F. and his Seed, which he has denied to Tho. Grantham and his
Seed? But to the Question.

1. I am far from denying Abraham's Fatherhood over the Faithful Christians;
but I deny that every Believer that has an Infant, is the Father of the
Faithful. And I deny many to have any right to that Title, who boast much of
it, because they do not the works of Abraham, but despise those that worship
God according to his Will. Thus did not Abraham: But thus does Mr. Firmin.

2. I find that Adam was the Son of God, Luke 3. Whether called so merely for
his Creation, or for that after the Promise, Genesis 3. 15. He walked with God, or
for both, I will not dispute. And I find that Christ's Descent is reckoned from
Adam, and the Savior of the World was first promised to him, and to proceed
from him; and therein was the Covenant of Grace in the first place made with
him, and in him with all Mankind who then were in him: Nor do I find that this
gracious Covenant was ever repealed, but is in force to this day, as is granted
by Mr. Baxter.

3. I find that Noah found Grace in the sight of the Lord, being righteous
before God. And I know that Mr. Baxter, and other Learned Christians,
acknowledge the Covenant made with Noah and his Generations, to be a Covenant of
Grace, and of perpetual Duration, being indeed the renewal of the Covenant made
with Adam. I find also, that Noah became Heir of the Righteousness which is by
Faith, and that his Faith did lead him to believe that which was as difficult
to Sense, as that Abraham should have a Son, viz. That the whole World should
be Drowned: His Faith also was made perfect by Works, for, Whatsoever the Lord
Commanded, that did Noah.

4. I find that all men from the time of the Flood, are the Generations of
Noah, and that he was perfect in his Generation, a Just Man, and one that
walks with God; and as one of his Sons proved wicked, so did one of the Sons
of Abraham. I do also find in Scripture, that we are all called the Sons of
Adam; To you, O Men, I call, and my Voice is to the Sons of Adam, or Man, Prove.
8. 4. And as the Sons of Adam, God shows them what is Good, even to do Justly,
to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with their God, Mich. 6.

Now from these Scripture-Warrants, I honor my Great Grandfather Adam, because
to him was committed the first Oracles of God, making known the Covenant of
Grace: I honor my Grandfather Noah, because he was Heir of the Righteousness
of Faith, and had the second Edition of the Covenant of Grace, extended to all
his Generations, till by Sin they eject themselves. I likewise honor my Father
Abraham, because he had the third Edition of the Covenant of Grace, as a
Blessing to all Nations, or to all the Families of the Earth, Genesis 12. And also
for that God was pleased to choose his Posterity, as the People from whom Men
should look for their Savior, with respect to his Descent according to the
Flesh, and of this Covenant, as also of the Land of Promise was Circumcision
given as a Sign to his Posterity, that they might not mix with other Nations,
in Life or Religion; but to Abraham himself, as a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, which he had near 30 Years before he was Circumcised.

But for all this, I know that in Gospel Times, unless we crucified the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, we cannot be Abraham' s Seed, nor Heirs
according to the Promise, Gal. 3. 29. And the Seal of our Sonship and Right to
the Inheritance, is the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 30.

Mr. Firmin. Now suppose that were true which is the great business of your
Pamphlet, to prove that all dying Infants are saved. That thereby you may take
off the Odium which lies upon you for shutting the Children of Believers out of
the Church, and denying them Baptism, they being under the Covenant of Grace
made with Adam, (as you say) Tell me, Is this Covenant of God with Abraham's
Seed in vain? Does the holy One make vain Covenants? As to his Seed, they were
well enough before: If Isaac die before the 8th day, he is saved, so that this
Covenant might have been spared.

Answer. 1. I have said enough to show that Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. was
not in vain; but I am sure you here make a vain use of it. For had Isaac died
before he was Eight Days old, in your Judgment he had not been saved, and
consequently no Male Infants which died before they were Circumcised were
saved. This is that wretched Doctrine which I oppose. And seeing you make
Baptism as necessary to Salvation as Circumcision was, and call it the Seal of
the Covenant; you either make Infants which die unbaptized, saved by an
unsealed Covenant, (as you speak) or else you damn all Infants which die
unbaptized. No other sense can be made of your strange Questions, P. 73.

Your Question is this. Are they all Justified and Saved? then it must be by a
Covenant of Grace. And shall they be under the Covenant so, as to be in a
justified and saved state by it, and not have the Seal of the Covenant? As if
the Covenant of Grace were of no use to poor Infants, without the Crossing,
Sprinkling, or (as you) Pouring a little Water on their Forehead, for which you
have no Rule at all in the Word of God. I cannot but admire your great
Blindness.

2. The Covenant of Circumcision might not now be spared, because God had now
designed, to honor Abraham's Faith, and to make him and his Posterity famous
both for Multitude, Religion, and other Excellencies, but chiefly to point out
all Nations from whence to look for a Savior; which accordingly was foreknown
and expected by many other Nations, by means of the Covenant made with Abraham.
But you add:

If their Seed die while little ones, I hope they are not further from
Salvation by this Covenant, nor Parents the less hope -- two strings to a Bow
are good. But I answer:

1. You so string your Bow of Salvation for Infants that you break it, and so
kill more Infants than you save, yea, an Isaac himself cannot escape you, but
must perish, if he die before the 8th day. Pray, Sir, what manner of Doctrine
is this? is it in the power of Infants to live till the 8th day? And if God
take them away before the 8th day, will God damn them because they were not
Circumcised, when yet by his own Law they might not have it? Are these the
comfortable Strings you give Parents to the Bow of Infants Salvation?

2. Hence it is evident that it is you, not I, that make Infants further off
from Salvation by the Covenant of Circumcision. For I say, (though all the
Commands of God be good in their place and use) yet he never ordained any Rite,
to be necessary to the salvation of poor Infants. But according to your
Doctrine, if Infants died before the Covenant of Circumcision was made, whether
the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh day, their Salvation
was never the more doubtful for that. But now the Case is very hard, for if
Isaac himself die before the 8th day he is lost, according to your sense of the
Covenant. What follows, I have answered before.

Mr. Firmin. Yet again, as to that Notion wherein you so much glory, I have
made five remarkable Demonstrations, as you call them, to prove it; you must
make three more Demonstrations, or else these five will not do the Feat. 1.
That God does save those that are under that Covenant, without any Condition in
it. Name that Text, I pray.

Answ. 1. Here observe again, Mr. Firmin is in good Earnest, that no Infants
can be saved, unless they keep the Condition of the Covenant. And he makes
Heart-Circumcision, and the Circumcision of the Flesh, both necessary
Conditions of the Covenant, for Infants Salvation in the time of the Law, or
ever since Abraham's time. And Repentance, and Faith, and Baptism, the
Condition in the Gospel.

2. I am to demonstrate the contrary, which with much ease (by God's Grace) I
shall do. I say then, Almighty God made a Covenant of Grace with Adam in the
Promised Seed, Genesis 15. in which Covenant stood the Salvation of all dying
Infants; and yet no Condition was there to be annexed on the part of Infants;
howbeit, Faith was necessary on Adam's part, or else he had sinned in not
believing the Promise In the Book of Wisdom, we read, That Wisdom preserved the
first Father of the World, and brought him out of his Offense, Chap. 10. 1.
which is agreeable to the Canonical Scripture, Luke 3. 38. because Adam is
called the Son of God. Dr. Willit. Hexap. in Genesis p. 56.
. And its evident, Abel had Faith in this Promise by his offering a Lamb, a
Figure of Christ the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. See Diod. on
Genesis 4.

To prove that God requires nothing of Duty, as a Condition of the Covenant on
the part of Infants in order to Salvation, I will set down two Texts, Deuteronomy. 11.
1. to 10. Romans 5. 14, 18. And I also give you this Argument: Circumcision it
self was not appointed to be a Condition of the Covenant of Grace, necessary to
the Salvation of so much as one Infant. Ergo, There was never any thing imposed
or required of Infants as a necessary Condition of the Covenant, for the
Salvation of Infants.

The Consequence I suppose will not be denied, because nothing can be pretended
with so much probability this way, as Circumcision: And for the Major it is
clear from the case of Moses's Child, Exodus 4. 24, 25. where we find that God
sought not to kill the Child, because it was not Circumcised the 8th Day, but
he sought to kill Moses; which shows the Child was not guilty of Sin in this
Case. And that this Note may be the more acceptable, I shall make some Addition
to the Testimonies formerly given, and here show the Judgment of some Learned
Writers in this Case. Cajetan (a Man no less Zealous for Infant Baptism than
Mr. Firmin, yet) writes thus: Consentaneum est, etc. It is sit that none should
be Punished, but they which had committed the Fault: But Infants can commit no
Fault, therefore the punishment here assigned does belong to the Adult only,
they only be rightfully Punished, which only are justly blamed for the omission
of Circumcision. And says a Protestant Doctor upon this Sentence, Put Baptism
(meaning of Infants) in the place of Circumcision, and this Sentence is most
true of the one, as well as of the other. Yea, the Ancients, quoted by the said
Doctor, tell us, Circumcision did See Diodat. upon Genesis 17. 14. who is also
clear in this Point.
not profit the Soul, but was only a sign of Grace: For Children when they
understand not what is done to them, can reap no profit thereby to their Souls,
Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Genesis And Irenaeus is alleged to say, Circumcision was only
given as a Sign to the People. The conclusion is, that as it is certain that
Infants shall be cleansed and renewed, before they come to Heaven; so God has
not tied this Mercy to any Ritual, or thing to be done by us, but by the
Obedience of Christ, and his Free Grace, sanctifies them in a manner unknown to
us.

Mr. Firmin. 2. You must demonstrate (says he) that by this Covenant he saves
those who have lost the Image of God, and are corrupt by Nature, for
Infant-Regeneration, and Heart-Circumcision, is denied by you, and yours.

Answ. This Demonstration also will easily be made, or else I am sure Mr.
Firmin and my self, shall not be Saved, for that we are as corrupt by Nature,
and have lost the Image of God as much as any Infant; nay, we are sent to
Infants to learn the Qualifications we want.

And as all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; so they are
Justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus;
Romans 3. 23, 25. And tho Christ is set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood, for the Remission of Sins that are past through the forbearance
of God; yet this Faith is not required of Infants, because they cannot believe
on him of whom they have not heard, Romans 10. And tho you reply, That this is
spoken of the Adult, yet you are to know as it is the Adult only to whom the
Gospel is preached, so it is the Adult only who are required to believe. As for
the Way of the Almighty in the business of Infants Regeneration, it is a thing
not revealed; and therefore you do but vainly pretend to know it. And seeing it
is said, That we know not the Way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones do grow* in
the Womb of her that is with Child. It is strange that Mr. Firmin should know
after what manner the Hearts of Infants are Circumcised, and how they are
Regenerate. It is enough for us to know that they are redeemed by Christ, and
saved by Grace; for in knowing this, we know our Gracious God will deny them no
Supplies which is needful for them.

If this do not satisfy Mr. F. then let him give some account to the World now
he is grown up, how the Spirit did work in the business of his Regeneration in
his Infancy; and if he can give no account of his own Infant-Regeneration,
then, I think, it will be hard for him to give it of the manner of the
Regeneration of other Infants.

Mr. Firmin. 3. You must demonstrate, that tho Infants have not actually sinned
against the Covenant of Grace, yet they have not unbelief and impenitency
seminally, which are quite opposite to the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. 1. I conceive nothing can be spoke more irrationally, nor unrighteously,
than to suggest that poor Infants have Unbelief and Impenitency in them. And
yet so it is, the seeds of those Impieties at least Mr. F. will have to be in
them: And I demand of him, how he knows this? And how he can tell when these
Sins against the Covenant of Grace, are purged from Infants? Seeing he has told
us they are not holy by their Birth, I would know whether they be purged before
their Birth, or after? But let us hear our Savior's Judgment of little
Children, which all will grant to be more worth than Mr. Firmin's.

He speaks of some just Persons which need no Repentance, whom he opposes to
such as have gone astray. I will not presume, that this is only meant of
Infants, to whom our Lord tells us the Kingdom of Heaven belongs; but I humbly
conceive, as it is true of them, so it does include them, as being of that
Number.

Again, He tells us, Except we be Converted and become as little Children, we
cannot see the Kingdom of God. But if Infants be guilty of Unbelief and
Impenitency, in such a degree, as these Sins in them are quite opposite to the
Covenant of Grace, we should have but little benefit by such Conversion: And
thus he reflects upon Christ in his Directions to his Followers, as if Christ
gave not good Counsel herein.

St. Paul exhorts Christians, as touching Malice, to be Children; in which
Speech he is directly contrary to Mr. F. And St. Peter would have us like
newborn Babes, i. e. to lay aside all Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, and evil
Speaking. But if Unbelief and Impenitency be in them Seminally, these Impieties
are there also; and then they are bad Presidents, being as wicked as it is
possible for them to be, in Mr. F's judgment.

However, Mr. F. is compelled to confess, Infants are not guilty of any Actual
Sin against the Covenant of Grace. And then, who made you a Judge of their
Hearts, Sir? Sure this is an Attempt too high for any Man.

But I must demonstrate that Infants have not unbelief seminally. Well, I will
plead their Cause as well as I can; and I Argue for them thus:

They who have no object of Faith propounded to them seminally, can have no
unbelief seminally. But Infants have no object of Faith propounded to them
seminally. Ergo, They can have no unbelief seminally.

If Mr. F. deny the Minor, I will hold him to his own Law, Affirmanti incumbit
probatio. If he affirm that Infants have an object of Faith propounded to them
seminally, let him prove it. As for the Major, our Savior's words, John 15.
22. do establish it; and indeed, This is the Condemnation, that Light is come
--, and Men love Darkness. He that has no Light cannot be blamed, because he
cannot see. Our Lord charges not the sin of Unbelief, till means to believe was
rejected; And will he be more unkind to the Infant, than to the grown Person?
Who can have so vile an opinion of the Almighty!

But I must demonstrate also, that Infants have not Impenitency seminally, yea,
such Impenitency as is quite opposite to the Covenant of Grace.

Well, I reply, first, by way of Admiration, That ever such wild Notions should
issue from a Learned Head, that so he might have some specious pretense to damn
poor Infants: But God has said, He will turn the Wisdom of Wise Men backward,
and make Diviners mad, Isa. 44. 25.

2. Impenitency supposes the Party charged, first, to be guilty of some Sin
committed, or desired, or conceived. But nothing of this can be justly charged
against Infants. Consider them acquitted of Original Sin, by the Mercy of God
in their Redeemer; Who shall lay any thing to their charge? What have they done?

Mr. Firmin. Do you ask what have they done? Did you never see Revenge, Wrath,
Pride, Envy, Rebellion against, and Striking of Parents, acting in little
Children?

Answ. 1. These are not Infants of Eight days old, etc. but such who by the ill
Example of their Tutors, quickly may learn these things. Otherwise, if the
Child thinks it has cause to be Angry, and to make Defense, it does no more
than you will vindicate in your own Cause. And why does not Charity make you
think the best of Infants, seeing you ought to think no evil of the weak
actions of grown Persons? O, thou that can see such Beams, as Revenge, Wrath,
Pride, Rebellion, etc. in the Eyes of poor Infants! pluck these Beams out of
thine own, which evidently are thy Distempers from the Books which thou have
written, in which, not many Pages are free from Tincture of some of these
Diseases. But you add:

Blessed Austin observed a Sucking Child, that was not able to articulate one
word, look with a Countenance even pale with Envy, upon his fellow-Suckling,
which shared with him in the same Milk; which made the holy Man cry out, Ubi,
Domine? Quando, Domine?

Reply, How did Austin know that the Child was pale with Envy? Suppose this
good Man himself had sat down to Dinner, and another snatch it all away from
him, perhaps he would have looked Pale also; for such we must suppose the
Child's case to be, when another takes the Breast, it thinks all is gone, for
it yet understands not the Rules of Hospitality, or Good-fellowship, being
unsensible of the others Necessity. The poor Child attended its own
preservation as Nature taught it; a poor ground on which to build so severe a
Charge. Should the best of God's People be tried, how duly they make others
sharers in their Blessings, who have need of Relief, they may perhaps be more
justly charged than that Sucking Child; Judge no poor Infants, lest ye be judged.

To conclude: Seminal Faith, Seminal Repentance, Seminal Unbelief, and Seminal
Impenitency, are things of which we have no account in Scripture. And though I
would not offend Mr. Firmin, nor at all disparage his Scholarship, which I
acknowledge to be abundantly more than mine; yet when I consider Learning in
Saint Paul's sense, 2 Timothy 3. 14. I cannot but think these to be very wild and
unlearned Notions, which no Man can be assured of, nor give a good account that
he learned them of any of the Master Builders, the holy Apostles. And who ever
asserts these things, shall never be able to prove them, viz. That some Infants
have Faith and Repentance seminally; and others have Unbelief and Impenitency
seminally. And (which is another Impossibility) no Man can distinguish the
Infants one from another. Nor can it ever be proved, that Seminal Faith and
Repentance (if yet any Body can tell what it is) do give us any ground to
baptize any Body. For,

Suppose we take this Seminal Faith and Repentance to be the faculties of
Credence and Sorrow: Or suppose some take them to be some secret Inspirations
of the Spirit, yet since they appear not to us, it is as if they were not. For
that Rule is good in this Case, De^ non apparentibus, and non existantibus
eidem est ratio. It is the profession of Faith and Repentance, that qualifies a
Person (in respect of us) for Sacred Baptism; the Church is not judge of of
Hearts, they are only known to God infallibly.

Division 4. Concerning Original Sin.
It would even grieve a Sober Christian, to read the strange Immaginations
which Men have Published about Original Sin; and the Extremes they have run
into on the Right Hand, and on the Left, censuring one another very severely
for their differing apprehensions in this Matter. And it is remarkable, how
cruelly Censarious Mr. Firmin is against my self in particular, representing me
as a Master among the worst sort of Anabaptists, who, he says, denies Original
Sin.

Concerning which, he tells you, we are Rotten. That the foundation of
Anabaptism lies in denying Original Sin. That in this we are given up to more
blindness than the Heathens, etc. To all which I Answer:

1. If I be one of the worst of my Brethren in this Point, I hope the rest will
be better thought of by Men of Moderation for my sake, when they have had (what
violent Mr. Firmin has not) patience to consider what I have published upon
the account of Original Sin, (and that long before I heard there was such a Man
in the World as Mr. Firmin) in my Christianismus Primitivus, Book 2. Page 77,
78. thus you read me.

2. For the better attaining to a powerful conviction of Sin, and a sense of
Man's wretchedness by reason of Sin, it is necessary to understate the general
state of Transgression, into which Mankind is involved; concerning which we
find the Scripture gives this Testimony, That all have sinned, and come short
of the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. And that by one Man Sin entered into the World,
-- for that all have sinned. And that the whole World lies in wickedness;
which is also evident by common Experience, every Nation being greatly
corrupted through the abounding of Iniquity; and the universality of the ways
of Sin does evince the same -- that the Apostle might well say, Both Jew and
Gentile are all under Sin.

3. The Sin of Mankind is either Original, or Actual. The first is come upon
all, even the very Infant-state of Mankind lie under it, of whom that saying is
true, They have not sinned after the similitude of Adam' s Transgression; yet,
Death reigning over them, proves the Transgression of Adam to be upon them.
This is that Root-Sin, called the Sin of the World, John 1. 29. whereof none
are free. Nor is it convenient to extenuate or lessen this Sin, either in its
nature, or the punishment it brings with it; it being indeed the Filum
certissimum, or Leading-Thred to all other Iniquities, Mankind being hereby
corrupt Ab Origin, and wholly deprived of the Glory of God, without the
intervening Mercy of a Savior.

And hence we find David, when complaining of his sinful state, looks back to
his corrupt Original, amongst the rest of his Iniquities, complaining, Psalm.
51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me.
Knowing as Job says, None can bring a clean thing out of an unclean one. So
that they are not to be despised, who say, that in our Humiliation for Sin, we
ought to bewail this our Sinful Original, which had been to Adam's Posterity
like the Sin of Traitors, which brings with it corruption of Blood to their
Offspring, for which they must bear the shame of such Transgressions. How do
we find that the Sin of Progenitors was wont to be lamented by their Offspring
among the Israelites? And is there not the same reason Adam's Children should
do the like, as being sensible of the evil Consequences thereof? We also may
say, Our Father has sinned, and we have born his Iniquity.

4. And hence I like the saying of Irenaeus well, which I will give in English,
because Mr. F. is pleased to lock it up in Latin. Omnes enim venit, etc.
Christ came to save all by himself, all I say, who are born again in God;
Infants, Little ones, Boys, and Young Men, and Old Men: But as for his, Ideo
per omnem venit aetatem, I let that alone, for I do not find that Christ passed
through the age of Old Men; yet I say, he came to Sanctify every Age, and
therefore every Age who do not profane the Blood of Christ by which they were
Sanctified (as I am sure no Infant does) they shall certainly be Saved by him,
and hence the Salvation of all dying Infants, is apparent enough. But how
Infants are born again in God, is a secret, and not to be Demonstrated by Mr.
Firmin, nor any other. Surely had I written as Irenaeus does, he would have
said I exclude the Operation of the Holy Ghost; for Irenaeus says, he came to
save all by himself, yet as it is certain that the Holy Spirit is not wanting to
the Aged Sinner, there is no ground to doubt of his care of poor Infants.

Division 5. Of Free Will.
Concerning Free Will, Mr. F. calls it our Diana, and an Imperial Majesty,
representing us to deny God to be most Blessed, because if his Will be
resisted, he failing of his End, is to want a degree of Blessedness, etc. I
Answer:

1. Then it seems, according to Mr. F. all that God wills to be saved, must,
and therefore shall be Saved; and the rest he wills to be Damned, and they
shall therefore be Damned. But how he can reconcile his Doctrines to these
Scriptures, I cannot tell, which says, I live, I Will not the death of the
Wicked. And that this is good in the sight of God, etc. who will have all Men
to be Saved.

2. Was it God's Will, that when he brought Israel out of Egypt, that their
Carcases should fall in the Wilderness? If it were not, then he wanted a degree
of Blessedness. Was it God's Will that Adam should fall, and bring himself and
his Posterity into so many Miseries? If not, God was not most Blessed, because
he failed of his End. If you say, it was God's Will that Adam should fall, and
that Israel must fall in the Wilderness, you had as good tell us, that God has
Decreed all the evil Actions that Men do, and that they must do them, else God
cannot be most Blessed, because he should fail of his End, if these evil
Actions were not done. This is his Logic, let him look to it. But,

3. What I conceive to be Truth concerning Free Will, I will give you a short
account from what I have formerly published in a little Catechism, where in
Page 21. I put these Questions and Answers following. -- What mean you by the
third part of Repentance? Answ. I mean, first, a boly loathing of Sin, because
it is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. and because God hates it. And because Christ
died because of it. 2. To abstain from the act of Sin, in Desire, Word, and
Deed, as much as possible. God saw their Works, that they turned from their
Evil Ways. Break off thy Sins by Righteousness: Repent ye therefore and be
Converted. This is to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance.

Quest. Has Man any liberty of Will, and any measure of Power thus to hate and
forsake Sin? Answ. 1. By the Bounty of God, Man has some liberty and power
this way. He is not chained to his Sins of Necessity. Choose you this day whom
you will serve. To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Mary
has chosen the good part. 2. Man's infirmity in the exercise of this Liberty
and Power is so great, that he is not to depend upon this Liberty and Power,
but upon the Strength of God in the use of them, Hos. 14. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 5.

Now let any Sober Christian tell me, how it is possible to make the Will of
Man an Imperial Majesty out of my Words, that is, a Majesty that has no Peer;
for no less than such a Slander would serve Mr. Firmin to fix upon us,
especially upon my self* For what cause he is so inveterate, I know not.

But come, Mr. Firmin, will the Doctrine of a chief Man of your own please you?
if so, you and I may agree in his Sentence. Thus he speaks; Austin as well as
Pelagius* Calvin as well as the Arminians; the Dominicans as well as the
Jesuits, all generally maintain that Man has Free Will. Origin is condemned by
Epiphanius, for saying that Man had lost the Image of God* -- This Image is
twofold, 1. Natural, i. e. Reason and Free Will. 2. Qualitative, or Ethical,
i. e. Our Holiness, and this is lost, and by Grace restored. No Man of Brains
can deny, that Man has a Will naturally free; it is free from Violence. --
It Is a self-determining Principle, but is not freed from evil Dispositions* Mr.
Baxter's Preface to his Call to the Unconverted. I think I need say no more to
a Wise Man: And I am sure, this is as much as any Wise Man among us will say in
this Matter.

CONCLUSION.
Mr. Firmin seems displeased at the multitude which will be Saved; if my
Opinion be true, that all Dying Infants shall be Saved: I will give you his own
words.

I pray (says he) whose Opinion are you of, Huberus? the promiscuous Salvation
of all. Or are you of Caelius Secundus Curio' s Opinion, That the number of the
Elect and Saved is much greater than the number of the Reprobate and Damned?
Whether you, or these, or Christ, be truest, (Mat. 7. 14. few find it) the Day
of Judgment will determine.

Here, Sir, you show your Spirit. But for answer: Although I know that God is
not willing that any should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2
Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 4. yet I see too much cause to fear, that but very few of
the many, to whom God is so long suffering to lead them to Repentance, will
consider his Goodness therein: And that the far greater part will despise the
Riches of God's Goodness, and treasure up unto themselves Wrath against the Day
of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. And in this very
respect, I fear, some old Professors, such especially as have been Teachers of
others, and yet have not learned either Civility, or Honesty, in treating those
who differ from them in Opinion.

As to the Text, Mat. 7. 14. blessed be God, Infants are in no danger by it,
they may all be Saved, and so the number of the Saved be much the greater by
them; for seeing they none of them are walking in the Broad-way which leads to
Destruction; they must needs go the Way which leads to Life, Tho as it is a
strait way of Faith and Obedience, and many Crosses for Christ's sake, they can
neither seek nor find it; yet their Redeemer has found it for them, and has
declared their Right to Heaven, and will therefore in his own Time and Way,
bring them to the Enjoyment of that Kingdom which he has prepared for them, as
well as others. But here also we see, you are unkind to many Dying Infants,
whilst you are sending them to Hell with those who walk in the Broad-way.

FINIS.

