THE HISTORY of ye WAR of CYPRUS


THE HISTORY OF THE WAR OF CYPRUS.

Written Originally in Latin.

With a New Map of the Island.

LONDON, Printed by J. Rawlins, and sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1687.

Licensed, November 26. 1686.

TO. L'ESTRANGE.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS, Baron of WEM, Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship, I hope, will pardon the Boldness of this Dedication, and permit
the Presenter of it, to pay that Honor and Veneration, which is due from All to
your Lordship's Eminent Character, and most Illustrious Merits. To which,
nothing can do greater Right, than what has come from the Mouths of the late
flagitious Rebels themselves, who were so highly sensible of your Lordship's
Wisdom and Courage, in opposing their Hellish and Damnable Designs, that their
Principal Leaders were used to please themselves with nothing more, than with
the Thoughts and Wishes of making your Lordship a Sacrifice to their Malice and
Revenge.

I will not attempt to speak here of what you suffered for your Inflexible
Loyalty from a Seditious Cabal, nor of our Obligations to your Auspicious
Conduct, which nipt the growing Faction in the Bud, and stopped the Torrent of
Enthusiastic Frenzy, and by a bold Stroke of Justice, set at Liberty those who
were condemned, unheard, to a perpetual Confinement.

It were a Task too hard for me, to undertake a particular Description of
these, and other Instances of your Lordship's Goodness and Courage, which will
be the chief Subject of the most lasting History of our Times.

All that I pretend to, is, to make some public Acknowledgement of the just
Sense I have of your Lordship's Great and Exemplary Virtues, and to testify in
all Sincerity, that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient and humbly Devoted Servant, Robert
Midgley.

TO THE READER.
THE Title of this Book seems to promise but a narrow History; and those that
only like great Revolutions, and variety of several Events, which have happened
in a long Sequel of Time, will not perhaps be much prepossessed in its Favor:
The Conquest of an Island, although honored with the Title of a Kingdom, which
was completed in the second Campaign, will appear to them too short to furnish
an Historian, with choice Materials. But supposing the Interest which all
Europe had in this Affair, did not make it, as indeed it did, one of the most
famous Accidents of the preceding Age; yet the taking of Nicosia, and
desolation thereof, being the Capital City of the Island of Cyprus, the Siege
and Surrender of Famagusta, which capitulated not till after a four Months
vigorous Resistance, and the memorable Victory of Lepanto, deserve the exact
Care, which the Bishop of Amelia has taken in Publishing them.

The Republic of Venice, never saw her self so threatened by the Ottoman
Empire, as when Selim the Second, formed the Design of snatching from her this
Kingdom; and never Enterprise was carried on in the Divan, with more dexterity
and secrecy. The Church then governed by Pope Pius the Fifth (who was since
Canonized) was at the same time attacked by several Reformers, authorized by
Secular Powers; and the Infidels, who always make advantage of the Disunion of
Christians, improved so favorable an opportunity to the enlargement of their
Territories and Religion.

The Pope alarmed by the foresight of these Misfortunes, dispatched Nuncio's,
sent Legates to all the Princes of Europe; and not content with these his good
Endeavors, set out a Fleet at his own Charge, and offered to conduct it in
Person for the Venetians.

Every Prince consented or refused to enter into the League proposed by his
Holiness, according as he was interessed to break off, or keep in with the
Port, and the Advantage he found in the Ruin or Preservation of the Republic.

But the Course which the King of Spain, Philip the Second, held, is a Piece of
the most refined Policy. The Legate had no sooner represented him with the
danger, wherein the Republic lay, but he undertook to send a great Force, to
its Assistance, and gave Orders at the same time, for the equipping of a
considerable Fleet. All Christendom could expect no less from a Monarch, who
wore so many Crowns, and honored himself with the Title of Most Catholic
King. But his Design was only to merit this Title in appearance; seeing the
slowness which he used in making ready this Fleet, and the secret Orders he
gave to Requiescens, Chief of the Council, to Don John of Austria, tended only
to ruin the Republic, and by this means reduce Italy under his Power.

The Ministers, and Venetian Generals happily penetrated into the secret
Designs of Philip, and gave speedy Notice to their Masters.

The Venetians, justly grieved to find how unsincerely they were dealt with,
made no scruple to accommodate themselves with the Turk, without the
participation of the Confederates, although this was expressly forbidden by the
Treaty, they made with the Christian Princes.

It is in the summing up of this variety of Interests, that our Author dives
into, and discovers the Intrigues and Motions of the principal Courts of
Europe; and we may well credit his Abilities and Faithfulness, from the Part
which Cardinal Commendon gives him in all these important Mysteries of State.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
A Description of the Isle of Cyprus. The Manners of its Inhabitants. The
Dryness of the Territory. Its Abundance. Malignity of Air. Its different
Possessors. Conquered by the Romans from the Kings of Egypt. King Peter
massacred by his Subjects. The Genoeses take Famagusta. Catharine Cornaro
espouses King James. Demits his Crown to her at his Death. She retires to
Venice, and delivers the Kingdom into the hand of the Senate; who fortify
Nicosia, the Capital City of the Island. Solomon the Father of five Children.
Selim, the youngest, succeeds him. His Inclinations. Mahomet Chief Vizier.
Jealousy of Mustapha, and Piali, touching the Favor of Mahomet. Selim
despised by the Soldiers. Blind Obedience of the Musulmans. Unhappy State of
the Jews. They retire from Spain into Portugal. Their Obstinacy. Selim excites
the taking of the Isle of Cyprus. Hospitals and Moscs built by the Sultans with
the Spoils taken from the Christians. Selim designs the Conquest of Cyprus for
the building of an Hospital and a Mosc* Discourse of Mustapha to engage him in
this Enterprise. Mahomet endeavors to divert him from it. He advises him to
succor the Moors in Spain. A great Dearth in Italy. The Arsenal of Venice is
burnt. The Disorder which this Fire causes. The Senate mistrust some
Conspiracy. A Jew called Miches, is suspected. The News of this Fire carried to
Constantinople. The Artifice of Mahomet to deceive the Venetians. The
Ambassador of Venice discovers this Minister's Secret. The Grand Signior sends
a Denunciation of War to the Republic. The Doge returns his Answer in Writing.
The sudden Death of Lauredon, Doge of Venice. Mocenigo succeeds him. The
Epirots treat with the Venetians. The City of Supoto besieged and taken by the
Venetians. The Plague destroys their Navy. The Birth of Cardinal Granvil. His
Aversion to the Venetians. The Firmness of Cardinal Commendon. Mark Anthony
Colonni, General of the Pope's Army. Contest between the Generals touching the
Means of succouring Cyprus. Reasons of the Distrust the Venetians had of John
Andrew Doria, General of the Spanish Galleys.

CYPRI INSULA


THE HISTORY OF THE WAR of CYPRVS.
The First Book.
MOst of the Ancient Geographers and Historians, have mentioned the Isle of
Cyprus with Commendation. Some of them have divided it into Nine Kingdoms,
although the whole Island scarcely deserves such a Title. She is situated in that
part of the Mediterranean Sea, which lies nearest Asia, between Cilicia and
Syria. The Seas of Pamphylia and Egypt, with the Gulf of Lajazzo, anciently
called the Sein Isique, surround her, lying from the Continent about sixty
Miles over against Cilicia, and eighty distant from Syria. It Is thought she was
heretofore a Peninsula, joining on that side of Asia, being separated by the
violence of a Flood, which overran all those Parts. She contains about two
hundred Miles in Length, and sixty five in Largeness; and is in Circuit near
five hundred. It Is said there were heretofore fifteen considerable Cities: But
at present there are only reckoned five, which are well inhabited, Nicosia,
Famagusta, Baffo, Lamisso, and Cerines. The rest are Towns to the number of
eight hundred and forty; and Villages, divided into eleven Regions or Quarters,
named Baffo, Andimes, Limisso, Massota, Sasines, Mesarea, Crusso, Pendengia,
Cerines, Carpasso, Visconti; This Island is reckoned at present to contain
about two hundred thousand Inhabitants, a small number in comparison of that
with which 'twas peopled under the Reign of the Emperor Trajan: seeing that
according to the Report of Di^n Cassius, in the Life of this Prince, the Jews
massacred in one day two hundred and forty thousand Cypriots, to free
themselves from the Tyranny of the Roman Empire. The Inhabitants of this Island
were separated into four different States, the Nobility, Commonalty, the
Freed-Men and Slaves. The two last were only employed in Husbandry, and the
others lived in Cities, and accustomed the Country People (contrary to Right)
to Servitude and Slavery. They afterward enfranchised the greatest part of
these, whom they called Francomates. Those who not yet enjoyed their Liberty,
called themselves Paresiens. They all mortally hated the Nobility; and
especially these latter, being worst used by them. The Militia of the Country
was drawn from the Freed-Men, and consisted of a certain number of Regiments
and Companies.

The Heat of the Climate is the Cause why the Cypriots are ordinarily of a mean
stature, and approach rather to Leanness than Fatness. They are more dexterous
and nimble, than strong and vigorous: They are of the same Complexion as most
Greeks; their Hair is black, and their Wits delicate and surpassing; but their
Plenty has made them soft and debauched, and subject to Wine and Women. He was
not counted a considerable man among them, who was not commonly served in
Silver; and the Peasants had each of them a Cup, a Spoon, a Knife, Handle and
Fork of the same Metal. The Gentry lived in as great splendour as Princes: Their
Houses were filled with Officers and Domestics. They were magnificent in
Household Stuff, as well as in Clothes The Furniture of their Tables was equal
to the Richness of their Cupboards of Plate; and the Expense they were at in
Dogs and Horses, was answerable to this their Profusion and Luxury. The
Incontinency and Looseness of their Women, has given occasion to Poets to feign,
That as soon as Venus came out of the Sea, of whose Froth they say she sprang,
she first Landed at Cyprus, and was thereupon first named Cypriana, and
Paphienna, because of a magnificent Temple built in Honor of her, in the
famous City of Paphos.

This Isle abounding in all sort of things, yet suffers often times by the great
scarcity of Water. We read in the Annals of this Country, that the Inhabitants
were driven out by an extraordinary drought, and that for seventeen years
together there was no Rain. She is watered with no River. The Rain sometimes in
the Winter causes Torrents, which fall from the Mountains with great swiftness,
but are soon dried up by the excessive heat of the Summer.

There are several Wells and Fountains, but they are subject to the
forementioned Inconvenience: Yet does the Earth bring forth of it self a
prodigious quantity of Fruits. A Third part of Wheat, and other Grains which
they gather, is more than what is sufficient for the Inhabitants. Their Wines
are so delicious, that they are counted the best of all Greece; and the Isle
produces so great abundance thereof, that it is thought Selim, who was more
addicted to Wine than any of the Ottoman Emperors, had no greater Motive to
conquer it, than that of possessing so delicious a Vineyard. They made so much
Salt, that the Venetians yearly drew three hundred thousand Crowns, as a Tax on
that quantity which Strangers bought up there. Silk and Sugar make up another
great part of its Revenues. She is no less fertile in Olives, Honey, Wax,
Saffron, Flax, and several other necessary Commodites; but especially in choice
Medicinal Herbs and Drugs. They have also Mines of different Metals. There is
likewise to be found several Precious Stones; and in general, whatsoever the
Earth contains that is rich and rare in the depth of its Bowels. Its Air, in
truth, is not answerable to the goodness of its Soil; immoderate heats rendering
the whole Island unhealthy, and in some parts contagious, so that it seems as
if its Malignity would ravish from the Cypriots the pleasure of a long
enjoyment of Natures Favors; few of them arriving to great maturity of Years.

This Country was first invaded by Tyrants; from whose hands the Kings of Egypt
rescued it. Publius Clodius, as well known by the hatred which Cicero's
Banishment drew on him, as by his Boldness and Birth, took it from the Kings of
Egypt. This young Roman falling into the hands of Pirates, sent to Ptolomy for
Money to pay his Ransom; who offering only a small Sum to the Corsary's, they
freely gave Clodius his Liberty; who, after that, sought means to revenge
himself of the slight value the King of Egypt set on him.

As Soon as he saw himself Tribune of the People, he made a Decree, by which the
Isle of Cyprus was declared a Province of the Roman Empire; and Mark Cato was
presently ordered to take possession of it, and transport its Riches to Rome.
He found such vast Treasures, as gave cause to think they had tempted the
Romans covetous humor.

Ptolomy was so ashamed and enraged to see himself stripped of this State by a
Citizen of the Republic, that he ended his Life with Despair and Vexation.

After the Fall of the Roman Empire, that of Constantinople possessed this Isle
to the Year 1190, when Richard King of England, took it from Isaac Comnenus,
who had made himself the Tyrant of it; and drove him thence, for refusing the
use of his Havens to the Fleet, which he conducted to the Recovery of Jerusalem.

He sold it sometime after to the Templers, whose Order was then most rich and
flourishing: But their Establishment in this Island, having excited several
Seditions, they yielded their Purchase to Guy de Lusignan, King of Jerusalem,
whom the Infidels had despoyled of his Crown. Guy died two years after his
Possession, and left the Isle to his Brother Amaury; under whose Government,
she was re-peopled, and rendered more fertile than heretofore, having drawn
thither several Families of Strangers, by virtue of Immunities, Exemptions and
Privileges. He sent a famous Embassy to Rome, to obtain of the Pope the Title
of King. Hugo, his Son, succeeded him; who left his Crown to his Son Henry: He
was the Father of Hugo the Second, who died young, and without Children.
Another Hugo, his Cousin-German, Son to the Prince of Pouille, and Isabella,
Henry's Sister, was placed on the Throne, as his nearest Relation, and took the
Surname of Lusignan, to make himself more agreeable to the Cypriots. John, his
Son, inherited his Crown, and likewise left it to his Son, Henry the Second.
This Prince being troubled with the Falling Sickness, was declared unfit to
succeed; and his Brother Amaury, having caused him to be taken by force, sent
him to Aiton, the King of Armenia, his Brother-in-Law; who shut him up in
Prison. This Treason remained not long unpunished; for the Usurper was
assassinated in his Bed by one of the Officers of his Chamber, named Simonnet.
Henry was afterward established; to whom succeeded Hugo, his Nephew. This
Hugo, the Third of that Name, was Father of Peter, who merited by his rare
Valor, the Surname of Courageous. This Kingdom had never been so flourishing
as it was under the Reign of this brave Prince. He settled a Commerce in the
City of Famagusta, with all the Neighboring States; which enriched his
Subjects, and yielded him also an infinite Treasure. He set out a Fleet of
Fifty Galleys, with which, the King of Spain, and those of the Isle of Rhodes,
having joined their Forces, he took the City of Alexandria, and carried his
Conquests as far as Syria.

After these glorious Exploits, he intended to go to Rome, to pay his Respects
to that See; but during his Absence, the Count de Rocas, to whom he had left
the Government of his State, debauched the Queen, his Wife, and usurped the
Sovereign Authority.

Peter advertised of this on his way, returns speedily to Cyprus, seizes on
the Traitor, and delivers him into the Hands of his Justices, to be punished
according to the Laws of the Country: But his great Estate, his Credit, and the
Protection of the Queen, having corrupted his Judges, he was discharged as
innocent; and Visconti, Master of the King's Household, his Accuser, condemned
to a perpetual Banishment: This Prince being rendered furious and cruel by the
unjustice of this Proceeding, extended his Revenge so far, as made all the
Cypriots suffer: He loaded 'em with Irons, and condemned 'em to die on the
least complaint, and meanest appearance of the smallest Crime. He ravished the
Honor of their Wives and Daughters, and exposed them moreover to the Brutality
of the Ministers of his Passion, not suffering them to spare any.

To increase the Terror and Confusion of his Subjects, he caused a new Prison
to be built in the most public part of the City, and forced whom he pleased of
the Inhabitants, of both Sexes, to work at it: But a courageous bold Woman
animated them to a Revolt, in this manner; Being a Gentlewoman born, and
finding her self forced to serve Brick-layers and Masons, held up her Coats and
Shift to her knees, and remained in this immodest posture in expectation of the
King, who was to come to see the Workmen, attended by all his Court.

So soon as he was over against her, she let down her Coats, and sat on the
ground; but she arose presently after he was past, with such Impudence as
scandalized the Beholders. Every one surpised with this Spectacle, and being
not able to guess at the Reason, some asked her, why she was not ashamed of her
Nakedness save only in the presence of the King? She answered coldly, that she
and the Women with her, did not look so exactly about 'em; for having seen no
Man but the King, she thought she should not offend against Modesty, but only
in regard of him: These People netled by this sharp Reproach, fell on the
Prince, and massacred him. His Son, named Petrin, or Petrote, was set up in his
place. This new King, having done the Ambassadors of Venice and Genoa, the
honor to eat at his Table, these Ministers could not agree about Precedence;
but he decided it in favor of the Venetians. The Genoeses, to be revenged of
the Affront which they pretended to have received, conspired against him: But
their Conspiracy being detected, all the Genoeses about the Palace, were seized
on; who were thrown immediately down from an high Tower on the points of the
Halberts. All of that Nation were used throughout the whole Island in the same
manner. The Republic of Genoa, concerned at this Usage, declared War against
the King of Cyprus; and for that end, set forth a Fleet of Ships, under the
Command of Peter Fregosa. This Captain made himself Master of Famagusta, being
of intelligence with the Queen Mother, whose Treason reduced her Son to such an
extremity, that he consented to yield the Place to the Genoeses, and pay them a
yearly Tribute; and for the surer Payment thereof, gave Prince James, his
Uncle, and his Cousin-Germans for Hostages. His Death put his Uncle in
possession of the Crown, being then a Prisoner at Genoa: but he demitted it
into the hands of his Son John the Second, otherwise Janus, being thus called
from the City of Genoa, where he was born; the Mamelucs made War against him,
and overthrew him in a Combat, wherein he was taken Prisoner, and thence
carried into Egypt: These Barbarians restored him not to his Liberty, till they
had drawn great Sums from him, and engaged him to pay eight thousand Crowns
yearly Tribute; whereunto his Successors should be also bound for ever to the
Kings of Egypt,

This Tribute was punctually paid, and the Venetians become Masters of the
Place, thought themselves obliged to send it every year to Constantinople,
since the extinction of the Mamelucs, from whom Selim conquered Egypt. Janus
had only one Son, named John, a Prince of a weak Constitution both of Body and
Mind, whom the Queen, his Wife, governed at her Will: Their only Daughter,
named Charlotta, was first married to a Prince of the Family of Portugal, who
having been poisoned, she espoused Lewis, Son to the Duke of Savoy. He reigned
not long after the Decease of John, his Father-in-Law. James, Bastard-Brother
to the Queen, who was designed for the Archbishopric of Nicosia, could not
suffer a Stranger to bereave him of the Crown; so renouncing his Ecclesiastical
Profession, he had recourse to the Protection of the Mamelucs, by whose
Assistance, he drove out the Queen Charlotte, and Prince Lewis, her Husband,
recovered Famagusta from the Genoeses, and made himself Master of the whole
Island. He considered he needed the Assistance of the Venetians, to confirm him
in the Throne; and therefore sent Ambassadors to the Republic, to desire a
Venetian Lady, chosen by the Senate, to make her Queen of Cyprus. The Venetians
cast their Eyes on Catharine, the Daughter of Mark Anthony Cornaro, being of
one of the most ancient Families in Venice. She was adopted by the Senate, and
afterward conducted to the Isle of Cyprus, to King James. This Prince died
some time after his Marriage, and left the Queen pregnant; whom he made by his
Will Heiress with the Child which she was to bring into the World: She was
delivered of a Boy, who was likewise named James, and lived not above ten
Months.

The Grand Signior, and the King of Syria, considered the Isle of Cyprus as a
State very commodious for them. On the other hand, Ferdinand, King of Naples,
looked on Queen Catharine, as a Person well qualified for him. Which alarming
the Venetians, who thought themselves to have most Right to the Island, they
sent George Cornaro, the Brother of this Princess, to pre-engage her in favor
of the Republic. His Reasons and Entreaties met with such prevalency in the
Mind of his Sister, that she demised her Estate in the year 1489. sixteen years
after the death of the King her Husband; and Francis Prioli, Admiral of the
Venetian Forces, went and took possession of it in the Name of the Republic.
Catharine at the same time retiring to Venice, the Seniory gave her a small
Town in the Mountains de la March Trevisanna, where she confined her self all
the rest of her days, and lived there in much tranquillity to a great Age. This
Acquisition gave as great trouble to the Senate, as it did yield honor to the
Republic; for if it were glorious to 'em to reduce a Kingdom into a Province,
and to extend their Dominion as far as Asia, whence by this means they might
draw great Advantages, it was on the other hand troublesome to them to have a
State environed with those of the Grand Signior, and continually threatened by
this formidable Power. That which heightened the more their inquietude, was,
That there was no fortified place in the whole Island except the City of
Famagusta, which was too weak to resist the Invasions of the Infidels.

Selim, who since declared War with the Venetians, was then Governor of
Cilicia, and learnt them by his Conduct, that he earnestly intended the
Conquest of this Island. These Suspicions obliged the Senate to send thither
Julius Savorniani, with a plenary Power. He was a Person of Noble Birth, whose
long Services, together with those of his Father, had rendered him deservedly
famous. He was ordered to fortify the Island as he thought fit, but with all
possible diligence, lest he should be prevented by Solomon the Sultan, who was
then at War with the Emperor Maximilian in Hungary, and commanded his Army in
person.

Savorniani, who was a man of a lively and undertaking Spirit, took Shipping
as soon as ever he had his Dispatches. Scarcely was he arrived on the Island,
but he began to surround it, and view those Places which most needed to be
fortified, with such an exact diligence as answered the good Opinion the Senate
had of him. He thought at first to build new Walls, and raise new Forts to the
City of Nicosia, being the Capital of the Kingdom, situated in the midst of the
Island, and was then about four Miles in compass. The Nobility made their usual
Residence there; the Riches of the Inhabitants rendered her the most wealthy
and important place of all the Country; and had she been put in a capacity to
sustain a Siege, might have proved, by reason of its greatness, most commodious
for a Retreat to the Country People in a time of War. Neither did the Charge,
nor Difficulty of the Enterprise, which had always deterred the preceding
Governors, discourage Savorniani. Having assembled the Nobility, he showed them
the interest they had to fortify their City, to secure their Possessions from
the Rapine and Avarice of the Barbarians; and that it was of great Consequence
to their particular preservation, and that of the whole State, these Works
should be finished before the end of six Months. These Gentlemen comprehending
the danger wherewith they were threatened, returned Savorniani their Thanks,
approve his Design, and offer him all that in them lay to facilitate it. He
then caused several Workmen and Slaves to come to Nicosia, he pulled down the
ancient Walls and adjoining Houses, and drew a new Line in a round Figure, less
than the former, which beginning from an Eminency Northward, near the old
Walls, ended at 400 paces near the first Circumvallation: He fortified it with
twelve Bastions in such a manner that each defended the other with its Cannon.
He chose as many of the best qualified Gentlemen; to every one of which he
committed the care of carrying forward a Bastion, and permitted them for a
recompense, to call them after their Names. He thought he ought thus to engage
them to advance these Works, and edge 'em on by this little point of Honor to
spare no cost nor pains to hasten forward so important a Matter. He encouraged
them himself by his vigilance and diligence, going about incessantly from one
Work to another, and not loosing a moment the Workmen out of his sight. This
Enterprise was carried on with such a diligence as surpised all People: for
these Bastions and the Wall were in a short time brought on to a reasonable
height, and the Ditch made deep enough to defend it self against a great Army.
The Noise and Reputation of this Work gave the more joy and hopes to the
Republic, because it cost her but little, and because one of her Magistrates
had so happily and speedily finished it. But the Turks took offense at it, and
seemed strangly out of humor to see an Island fortified against 'emselves in
the heart of their Empire, which they had always looked on with discontent in
the hands of the Venetians, although without defense, and exposed as a prey

It Is certain that Solomon conceived an extreme spite at it: He fancied the
Venetians showed by this precaution a great contempt of his Age, and expected
he would never return from his expedition in Germany, where he then made War
with that vigor and resolution as became a young Victorious Prince. It Is
thought he would have stripped them of it, had he lived longer: but dying in
Hungary, at the Siege of Sigeth, Mustapha, one of the Generals of his Army,
inspired his Son Selim, who succeeded him, with his Father's Hatred and
Resentment. This new Emperor believing likewise the Venetians had fortified
this Isle against him, resolved on the Design which he had long premeditated,
of conquering it.

And being come to the beginning of his Reign, it is not amiss to show the
Reader his Humor, his Genius, and Conduct; having first in few words given an
Account of the Princes his Brethrens Destiny.

Solomon had five Sons, whose Birth could no less contribute to the happiness
and honor of his Reign, than the Victories he had gained, had not Ambition and
Jealousy stifled in his Heart the Sentiments of Nature. Mustapha, his eldest
Son, whose Mother was a Circasian Slave, had acquired by his excellent
Qualities, the Love and Esteem of the whole Ottoman Empire. He was especially
adored by the Soldiery. His excellent Virtues, instead of rejoicing his
Father, excited his Jealousy and Defiance; so that suspecting him to design
the bereaving him of his Crown, he raised an Army, under pretense of carrying
the War into Persia, and causing him to be seized on in his Camp, made his
Eunuchs strangle him in his presence. Gengirus, surnamed Crump-Back, by reason
of his Deformity, affrighted at the barbarous usage of his Brother, ended his
Life in Rage and Despair, vomiting out a Thousand Curses at the Cruelty of his
Father. Bajazet the Third, being likewise suspected by Solomon, as being no
less beloved by the Army than his brother Mustapha, was forced by the ill usage
he received, to preserve himself by open force, and lost unfortunately a
Battle; after which, flying for Protection to Tammas, the King of Persia; this
cruel and Perfidious Prince, affrighted by Solyman's Threatenings, or corrupted
by his Money, delivered him to Executioners, who accompanied the Ambassadors
which the Grand Signior had sent him. Mahomet died in the Flower of his Age;
and Selim, Roxalana's Son, thus became, by the death of his four Brothers,
Solyman's only Heir.

He was born in 1520, the same Year wherein died his Grandfather Selim, and was
educated in the Art of Government according to the Turkish Maxims. As Soon as he
was at Age, he had the Charge of Adrianople, and took on him after the Death of
his Brother Mahomet, the Government of Cilicia, which he ruled during Solyman's
Life. This Prince was very happy, if we compare his Fortune with the sad
Disaster of his Brethren, who left him sole and peaceable Heir of a mighty
Empire; But on the other hand, very unlike in his manner of Governing, to his
Predecessor. He showed from his Infancy no inclination to War, nor Quality
befitting a Prince; but on the contrary, degenerating from the Sobriety of his
Ancestors, he plunged himself into all kinds of Debauchery, and especially in
Drunkenness, against the express Prohibition of his Law. His Table, which,
according to the Custom of the Seralio, should be mean and frugal, was covered
with the most delicious and costly Meats, and always surrounded with Dwarfs,
Buffoons and Parasites. He usually made one of his Bashaws to dine with him,
called Achmet, a gluttonous, drunken Fellow, who rendered himself acceptable to
his Prince, by drinking with him whole days together; they usually held on
their Debaucheries till Midnight, and were commonly carried away from the Table
de^^^ drunk. This Excess in Eating and Drinking, made Selim so gross and
unwieldy, that together with the Redness which the Wine gave the Whiteness of
his Complexion, he resembled very well the Poet's Bacchus, when leaving the
Table, he reposed himself cross-legg'd on Carpets, according to the Turkish
manner. He was addicted to all those Vices which attend excessive Drinking. He
was much in the Seralio, amongst the Ladies; and yet this Passion could not
keep him from a more brutish and abominable one, which is too common amongst
filthy wretches, who know no Measure nor Rule in their Sensualities. He caused
to be brought up with great Care, several youths, the comliest of which, served
about his Person; on whom he would sometimes bestow great Pensions, and
considerable Employments, according to their Capacity. He took much delight in
seeing them wrestle, draw the Bow, and perform their other Exercises in the
Gardens of the Seralio: But this was always in private, lest he should abase
the Majesty of so great an Emperor; and therefore appeared but seldom at these
Spectacles. When he went forth to take the Diversion of Hunting, on the side of
Asia, with his Dogs and Falcons, he passed over the Channel in covered Boats,
instead of riding on Horseback out of Constantinople. He minded as little the
enlarging his Territories, as depriving himself of the Pleasures he enjoyed in
a shameful Repose. Softness and Flattery had so corrupted his Mind, that he
thought ^^mself above all humane Greatness. Had he followed his own
Inclinations, and not been led by his Ministers, he would have been content
with the Conquests of his Ancestors, and languished in the soft Life of the
Seralio, suffering all the Princes in Europe to live in Peace.

Piali, and Mustapha, who had long commanded his Father's Armies, were two of
his greatest Confidents; and the Favor of Piali was grounded on the Honor of
his Alliance. Solomon returning victorious from the Siege of Belgrade, found
him lying exposed in the Fields; where, his Mother, frighted by the March of
the Army, had left him. This Prince, in his Passage, took the Pleasure of
Hunting, and seeing the Child, whom the Dogs were about to devour, gave order
it should be taken up, and carried to Constantinople. He was educated in the
Seralio with great Care; and his towardly Inclinations, joined to the progress
which he made in his Exercises, recommended him so greatly to the Grand
Signior's Affection, that he gave him his Son Selim's Daughter in Marriage. The
Ottoman Princes acknowledge no other Nobility of Extraction in their Empire;
giving their Daughters in Marriage to such of their Slaves, whom they believe
merited this Honor by their Services. Piali, having long commanded the
Sultan's Landforces, was made Captain Bassa of the Sea.

Mustapha had attended Selim from his Infancy, and corrupted his few good
Inclinations through too much Mildness and Indulgence. But that which acquired
him greatest Favor, was the signal Service, he did him in the Fight betwixt
him and his Brother Bajazet; for these two ambitious Princes were in dispute
about the Empire, in Solyman's Lifetime. Selim's Army was routed, and he
himself was put to flight; when Mustapha rallying his Troops, made him return
to a second Charge; and falling on Bajazet with an incredible Valor, he won
the Victory from him, and wholly defeated him; But Mahomet was he, who of all
the Ministers of the Port, most absolutely possessed his Master's Favor, and
had also given him the greatest and most important Mark of Fidelity and
Affection: For as soon as Solomon expired in Hungary, he was so prudent, as to
keep his Death secret, and pressed forward the Siege of Sigeth, with as great
vigor, as if the Grand Signior had been yet alive; so that he carried the Place
by Assault, maugre all the Efforts of the German Empire. He at the same time
dispatched Couriers to Selim, to advertize him of his Father's Death, advising
him to hasten to Constantinople, before this News were known there. Mahomet
well knew the Soldiers contemned Selim, because of his averseness to Wars;
loudly talking during his Father's Life, That he was not of the Ottoman Race,
but that Roxalana, his Mother, pretending a big Belly, had Fathered on Solomon
the Child of a certain Jewish Woman; and therefore they stuck not to call him
according to his supposed Birth.

And to make this Calumny pass the better, they added, he was a Favourer of the
Jews, who are more abominable and odious amongst the Turks, than amongst any
other People; and therefore to gratify one John Miches, a Fugivive from Spain,
for his Judaism, he obtained of his Father Solomon, one of the ancient Cities
of Palestine, and several Countries round about, to establish a Colony of those
wretched People. These Rumors made the greatest part of the Army to prefer
Amurah, a Prince of Twenty years of Age, whose Inclinations were answerable to
his Birth. But thus Mahomet settled the Crown on Selim's Head without
opposition; and for a Reward of this Service, the new Emperor gave him the
Seals, with the Quality of Grand Vizier, which is the first Minister in the
Ottoman Empire: He was already his Son-in-Law; so that Selim committed the
Government to his Care, and gave himself over to the Pleasures and Softness of
the Seralio.

Mahomet was too quick-sighted, not to perceive, that a Favor like his, must
draw on him much Envy: That Princes often change their Favorites, and suffer
with regret, those, to whom they believe they are much obliged, respecting them
as importunate Creditors, they endeavor to get rid of them as soon as any
specious Pretense offers it self to color their Ingratitude. The Example of
Ibrahim, a Favorite of Solyman's, whom a Sultaness ruined, without letting the
World know the Occasion, made him wary and solicitous to strengthen himself in
his high Places. He began by freeing Selim from the perplexity of Affairs,
which might disturb his Pleasures. He afterward removed all those who were not
his Friends, from the Prince's Presence, and brought into their Places such as
were affectionated to his Service; and by this means ruled all at his will. The
Bassaes and other Visiers acted only by his Directions, and each of them made
their Court to him in the same manner as if he had been their Emperor.

Since the renewing of the Treaty, and Alliance between the Port and the
neighboring States, and confirmation thereof between Solomon and the Republic
of Venice, signed three years after, the Ottoman Empire enjoyed a profound
Peace; the Continuation of which seemed to be lasting, by means of Selim's
sluggish and luxurious humor. But the Soldiers being accustomed under the
preceding Reigns, to Pillage on the neighboring Countries, tired with Ease,
murmured at the Grand Visier's conduct of Affairs; saying, he abused his
Interest in the Grand Signior; and instead of bringing him off from his
Debauches, rather enticed him to continue them; dissuading him from following
the Example of his Father and Grandfather, who had conquered so many Kingdoms,
and carried their victorious Arms to the Ends of the World. They added, That
this Lethargy brought shame to the Majesty of the Ottoman Empire; and that the
Idleness wherein so many brave Men were suffered to spend their days, was no
less dishonorable than the Softness of their Sovereign; That his Grandfather,
whose Name he did bear, had not thus reigned, who by several Conquests acquired
with immortal Honor, by the entire Defeat of the Mamelucs, had made himself
Master of all Egypt; That the Sultans were not set up to enjoy peaceably what
their Predecessors had left them, but to enlarge their Empire by new Conquests,
and reduce the Universe to the Mohammedan Law: That it belonged only to private
persons to busy themselves in conserving their Possessions; but Sovereigns
should have no other End than to benefit their Country: That though Selim wanted
Gourage and Conduct to tread in his Ancestors steps, yet ought he to maintain
his Empire by the same ways it was established; and that as great Motions, and
the noise of War, keep men in breath, and stir up Valor and Ambition, so Rest
and Luxury serve only to abase and depress them: That their Emperors did not
get their Possessions by Drunkenness and Luxury, but by Labor and Hardship:
That Selim, not contented to frustrate them of the Largess which the new
Emperors usually bestowed on the Soldiery, at their first coming to the Crown,
would also deprive them of the only means to defend themselves against Poverty
and Misery, although the flourishing State of the Empire was the effect of
their Labor and Faithfulness; and, That, in fine, 'twas very hard to buy thus
dear the Friendship of the Prime Vizier, whose covetous Humor could not be
satisfied, though the whole World should drain it self dry to fill it.

The Soldiers were discontented at Selim's Advancement to the Empire, and not
following the Custom of distributing Money amongst them, which the Sultans are
wont to do; and especially the Janissaries, who were persuaded that Mahomet was
the Author of this Retrenchment. Mustapha and Piali, whose Favor this Chief
Minister endeavored to ruin, secretly entertained and cherished these
Complaints and Murmurs. Piali had been disgraced, and thrown out of his Office,
but the Tears and Prayers of his Wife regained his Re-establishment from the
Emperor, this Princesses Father. Mustapha, having been sent against certain
People who inhabit along the Coasts of the Red Sea, had met with bad Success in
his Expedition, by the Treachery of Synam, Bassa of Egypt: he was accused, not
only for making War with a kind of indifferency, but treating underhand with
the Revolters, to dismember Egypt, and share it betwixt them.

Synam, who sought all ways to procure Favor from the Prime Vizier, became his
Accuser, and Mustapha's Crime appeared more plainly, by having espoused the
Daughter of King Tomonbeius, when Selim I* exterminated the Mamelucs. Mahomet,
who knew the jealous Temper of the Prince, represented to him this Affair, as a
matter that required a most severe Chastisement; and thereupon obliged him to
send an Executioner into Egypt, to bring him Mustapha's Head. It Is a Custom
established by these Barbarians, from the Tyrannical Power of the Sovereigns,
and blind Obedience of the People, that as soon as the Grand Signior requires
the Head of one of his Generals, though he then commanded all the Forces of the
Empire, he submissively offers himself to the Will of the Executioner. Mustapha
having notice of his Disgrace and Sentence, parts immediately from Egypt to
Constantinople; where Amurah, the Grand Signior's Eldest Son, persuaded of his
Innocence, took him under his Protection, and presented him himself to his
Father; Mustapha casting himself at Selim's Feet, told him with great Freedom,
I will obey without the least Repugnancy your Highnesses Orders, if I am
sentenced to Death; but if my Enemies, abusing their Power, and your Bounty,
overwhelm me by the blackness of their Calumnies, I shall have at least the
Consolation, that it shall be my Sovereign, and not they that shall pronounce
my Doom. He afterward justified himself in all things alleged against him,
and showed so clearly his Innocence, that he obtained not only his Grace, but
Places of greater Trust. These Ministers being jealous of the Favor and Credit
which Mahomet enjoyed during the Peace, earnestly desired War, to secure
themselves against so dangerous and potent a Rival. Mahomet alarmed by the
Complaints of the Soldiers, and Murmurs of the Janissaries, which grew every
day louder and more frequent, believed he ought, for the averting of this
Storm, to undertake some Military Exploit. This being the only means for the
quieting the Janissaries Spirits, who thirsted after Mischief and Pillage, and
remove at the same time from the Court his Enemies, in sending them away, to
expose their Lives in the Gra^^ Signior's Service: And thus the chief Ministers
of the Port, although with different Interests, concurred in promoting a War.

Miches, whom we have already mentioned, was one of Mustapha's Confidents, by
means of his frequent Access to the Grand Signior. He was a Jew by Birth, a
wandering Nation, eve^ since their committing the worst of Murders, namely, that
on the Son of God, whose Blood is on them and their Children to this day. These
People are hated, and distinguished by Marks of Infamy in all places where they
traffic; not being suffered to bear the least Office in any place whatsoever.
They were greatly multiplied in Spain, and acquired great wealth there by their
false Dealings and Usury. Their way of lending Money, appeared at first very
profitable to the People; but when it was perceived in the Sequel, that this
facility of borrowing, gave occasion to Luxury and Prodigality, and that People
of Quality, as well as the ordinary sort were near ruined by prodigious Sums of
Interest-money; the Kings of Spain thought it necessary to remedy so great an
Abuse. This People being exceedingly increased, as I before mentioned, by means
of their Averseness to Celibacy, esteeming Barrenness a Curse; the Kings of
Spain would suffer them no longer in their Territories; commanding them to
depart thence, or abjure their Judaism. The greatest part of them loving their
Commerce better than their Religion, chose rather to quit that than their
Country; and the rest withdrew themselves to Portugal; which, yet received
them on condition, They should remain their Slaves, if they departed not the
Kingdom after a certain time, although they had given them a great deal of Money
to be suffered amongst them. They designed to pass over to Mauritania; but
finding no Vessels, on the day marked for their Passage, by the falsness of the
Portugueses, they lost their Liberty, according to the Agreement made betwixt
'em. After the Death of John the Second, Emanuel, who succeeded him, drew them
out of Slavery, to obtain the Reputation of a merciful Prince: But finding,
that kindness prevailed nothing on the hard-heartedness of these People, he
took from them their Children, and caused them to be Baptized; driving out
their Parents from his Dominions. The horror of so cruel a Separation,
converted more than the Confiscation of their Estates did in Spain. But the
outward Profession of Christian Religion, changed not their Minds; practicing
no less secretly their Judaish Superstitions. The King of Portugal set up a
severe Inquisition against them. The Relapsers convicted, were burnt alive, and
their Posterity declared for ever infamous. This Tribunal consists still in
Portugal. Its Rigor causes many to withdraw into several parts of the World;
who being privately brought up in the ancient Belief of their Fathers, although
born amongst Christians, remain fixed to the Dreams of their Rabbis, by the
horror they are inspired with from their Infancy against our Religion. These
People are called by the Spaniards, Marani; and Miches was one of the most
considerable amongst them. They had sent him to Venice, to obtain, if possible,
from the Republic an Habitation, in some of the Neighboring Islands: But the
Senate having refused to gratify his Request, he retired out of humor, to
Constantinople; where he married a rich Widow, by whose means he arrived from a
miserable Condition, to great Wealth, and became the eminentest Jew in that
Country. Being a Person of great insinuation and address, he soon found means,
by Presents, and Flatteries, to have access to Selim, who was then Governor
only of Cilicia, Solomon his Father, at that time reigning; and by force of
Presents, was admitted by this Prince into a near familiarity, and knowledge of
his most private Occasions. This man was no stranger to the State of Affairs in
most Parts of Christendom, but especially in the Interests of those of Venice,
and therefore employed all his Skill and Interest with the Grand Signior, to be
revenged on that Republic, for the Denial he lately received from them. He
often entertained the Sultan, with the Fertility of the Isle of Cyprus, the
Excellency of its Fruits, and especially, the Delicacy of its Wine, which this
Prince usually tasted to Excess. He moreover asserted some kind of Right to
this unjust Invasion; that the V^netians had usurped it; that it belonged
lawfully to his Highness, seeing it made a part of the Kingdom of Egypt; and
that it was in quality of the Mameluc's Successor, the Republic paid him an
annual Tribute.

When the Wine, Sugar, and other Fruits, which the Governors of Cyprus were
wont to send every year to Selim, were presented; Miches derided these
Presents, telling the Emperor, to set him against the Republic, that they were
more becoming the mean spiritedness of the Merchants that sent them, than the
greatness of the Prince that received them. He added, That the Venetians made
continual infractions in the last Treaty of Peace, in receiving into their
Ports such as were Pirates, and Enemies to his Highness: That the Spaniards and
Knights of Malta, made not a Prize on the Turks, but under the intelligence of
the Republic; and, That, if he suffered the Mediterranean Sea to be infested
with these Robbers, all his Subjects must give over Trading; which would be as
disadvantageous to his Reputation, as contrary to his Profit: That the
Mohammedan Religion was no less interessed, seeing by this means the Accesses to
Meca were blocked up, and all Liberty taken away of visiting Mahomet's Tomb,
whither so many devout Turks went on Pilgrimage: That under pretense of chasing
the Corsary's, they pursued his Subjects with so great rage and fury, that they
cut the Throats of those who surrendered without fighting. He at the end
flattered him on the immense extent of his Power; and assuring him that the
Venetians would abandon to him the Island, as soon as ever his Army should set
footing in it; he confirmed this Prince, who otherwise slighted the Republic
of Venice, in the Design of invading this Kingdom, as soon as Solomon should
leave him the Empire.

Some have affirmed, he gave the possession of it to this Miches, and that in
the midst of a great Debauch, he had called him King of Cyprus: But whether he
really designed to set the Crown on the Head of this profligate Jew, which is
very contrary to the usual Genius of the Turkish Policy and Customs, or only to
gratify his Appetite to delicious Wines; he in regard to this Project,
fortified that part of Cilicia, which is over against the Island, and divided
only by a space of sixty Miles.

The pains the Turks took to fortify a Place so long neglected, gave great
Suspicions to the Venetians: But Selim being become Emperor, forgot this
Enterprise; the remembrance of which was not to be offered to a Prince,
languishing in effeminate Pleasures. Yet did Miches and Mustapha spend whole
days and nights in projecting, how to bring him handsomely to undertake the old
Design; and they thought no way could be better than to rouse him by the
Murmurings of his Soldiers, who loudly demanded a War. They made use also of
some of the Women-Favourites, who hated Mahomet, to give him this Advice; and
Selim, disturbed with this troublesome Relation, would know this Ministers
Opinion: Mahomet counseled him to yield to a War; telling him, what a happy
opportunity offered it self for it; the Moors of Spain having sent to entreat
assistance from his Highness, against the Tyranny of King Phillip the Second.

The Novelty of this Enterprise, surpised the more the Grand Signior, being
ignorant why the Moors would revolt against Spain, and what Forces they were
able to raise against their Sovereign: But he willingly received the
Proposition of turning his Arms on the side of Cyprus; whereupon, Mahomet
having showed him he could not declare a War against the Venetians, without
violating the Oath he had taken; the Council thereupon broke up, without
determining any thing, though Selim mattered not much the Scruples which were
offered him.

The Ottoman Emperors believe nothing so great, nor magnificent, whereby to
eternize their Names, as to be the Founders of Mosques and Places of Religious
Worship. These Edifices are lightened within by an infinite number of Lamps,
which are always burning during their Ceremonies, and they have Priests, and
particular Ministers belonging to each of them; the Porches, and several other
parts of these Churches, are paved with Marble, enriched with quantity of
Precious Stones, and wrought by several skilful Italian Architects, who, for
Gainsake, make no scruple to be hired by these Heathens. But this Magnificence
reaches further; they build Hospitals near these Mosques, called Kervansarai,
of as beautiful Structure as the other, in which are put all poor and sick
People, who are as neatly, as carefully looked after. All Travelers may remain
there three days, without distinction of Country or Religion. Slaves are
therein received, as well as those that are Free, and the greatness of their
Number makes no man refused. There are also several Children brought up in
them. Selim had a Design to build one of these Hospitals, with a Mosque, which
should surpass, not only in Largeness and Richness, the Kervansarai of Solomon
his Father, but likewise all those which had been raised by his Predecessors.
The Mufti, who is (as it were) the High Priest amongst them, showed him, 'twas
an ancient Custom, established by God's Appointment, to employ in these fort of
Foundations, the Booty gained from the Enemies of his Empire; and especially
from the Christians, who most contemn the Prophet, and his Law. Selim, well
pleased to hear the Mufti thus deliver himself, resolved, from that time, on
the Conquest of the Kingdom of Cyprus; and determined the Revenues to the
building of a new Hospital.

Mustapha, whilst these things were in agitation, found a seasonable time,
which he had long sought, of enteraining the Sultan in private. He remembered
him, That the Turkish Emperors began their Reign with some Military Enterprise,
and valued more the Respect and Submission paid them by their Subjects, on the
account of a Victory, or some Conquest, than from their Right of Sovereignty.
That Selim, his Grandfather, whose Memory will be precious to all Ages, came no
sooner to the Throne, than he carried his Arms to Persia, and having won a
signal Victory in the Plains of Calderana, from the Sophi Ismael, a Prince
renowned for his Valor, he made himself Master of Tauris, then the Capital
City of that great and famous People: and that this Advantage was only a
Prelude to the Glory he afterward acquired by the same Arms. That Solomon, his
Highness's Father, burning with Zeal to his Religion, made War with the
Christians, Enemies to the Alcoran, and signalized his first Campaign by the
taking of Belgrade, from which the Emperors Amurah and Mahomet had shamefully
raised the Siege with considerable loss; and by this Conquest, bereaved the
Hungarians of their Reputation of being the best Soldiers in Europe: He
afterward took the Isle of Rhodes from the Jerusalem Knights, the Turks sworn
irreconcilable Enemies, with the same valor and speed: That the Venetians had
likewise felt the effort of his victorious Arms; and being straightned
sometimes by Hunger, otherwhiles by his Troops, they were forced, for the
saving of the Isles of Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfou; to consent to a shameful
Peace, and to yield him Naplousia and Malvasia, Places of Consequence, and
great Strength, with all the Morea: That the Venetian State, being destined to
furnish the Ottoman Empire with Conquests, they ought to reckon on a certain
Victory, in declaring War against this Republic: That, he justly drew it upon
her, by fortifying a Tributary Kingdom, as if she would maintain by Force what
she held only at his Highness's Pleasure: That Solomon would not have suffered
this Insolency, but driven out the Venetians from the Isle of Cyprus, as a
punishment, for putting themselves into a posture of Defense, whilst he made
War in Hungary, and thus profiting by his Absence; he having been often heard
to say, some time before his Death, in a great Passion, That if he returned
Conqueror to Constantinople, he would turn all his Forces toward that Island,
attacking it both by Sea and Land: That his Highness should the rather enter
into this his Father's Resentment, seeing God had permitted the Venetians to
fail of their respect toward him at his coming to the Crown, by protecting
such as pillaged his Frontiers, and exercised their Rapines as well by Land as
Sea: That the Ports of the Isle of Cyprus served for a shelter and place of
Retreat to the Christian Pirates, who continually chased the Turkish Vessels;
and to have satisfaction for all this, there needed only a Design to be
undertaken, whose Success, though sufficiently honorable, was neither perilous,
nor impossible: What Consternation, added he, will it be to all Christendom, to
see the Venetians driven out of this Isle, when they are most confident on
their Strength, having fortified the Capital City in the midst of the Country;
which, notwithstanding its deep Ditches, and new Ramparts, cannot long hold out
against an Army, which has been ever successful? That the Conjuncture was
favorable, by reason of the Christian Princes Divisions, being almost all of
them perplexed with Domestic Wars, disunited by Differences in Religion, and
consequently not in a capacity to assist the Venetians: That the King of Spain
was busied in reducing the Moors, and pacifying the Troubles in the Low
Countries: That, besides the League made between his Highness and the King of
France, this Prince was too young, and his Kingdom too much weakened by
intestine Wars, to interest himself in this Quarrel. As for the Emperor
Maximilian, it was not to be expected he would break the Peace lately made;
having experienced his Weakness, and so expose himself a second time with such
small Forces, in hopes of the assistance of the Princes of the Empire; whose
Troops are seldom in a sufficient readiness to do any good Service. As to the
King of Poland, being instructed by his Father's Example, and made wise at his
Neighbor's Cost, he must understand his own Interest too well, to break the
Peace he made with the Ottoman Port; so that the Venetians, forsaken on all
sides, must inevitably lose the Isle of Cyprus, before the News of it can come
to the Senate. Should Fortune moreover (adds he) favor this Enterprise, a man
might set on foot still greater Designs against this Republic, to the Ruin of
the Naval Forces of all Christendom; and by this means open a way to invade all
Italy: a thing not unthought of by your Predecessors: That the Idleness wherein
the Venetians had languished this thirty years last past, by means of the Peace
Solomon had granted them, rendered the Conquest of their whole State very
easy; having forgotten the Art of making War, there being but few left of the
ancient Officers and Soldiers; so that seeing themselves in a manner lost,
they must submit to such Conditions as would please his Highness to impose, and
yield their Necks to the Yoke, rather than undergo all the Calamities of War.
So that in fine, his Army enriched and laden with Spoil, would return in
Triumph to Constantinople, followed by a prodigious number of Slaves and
Captives, making Vows and Wishes for the continuance of his prosperous Reign;
which would presage him a continual Series of Victories and Conquests, and an
immortal Glory, by the Defeat of the Christians, the most averse People to the
Mohammedan Law

Piali, who seconded Mustapha and Miches in their Arguments with the Emperor,
helped to confirm him in the Design of this Conquest. And Selim, whose natural
Pride was increased by the Representation of his Grandeur, the Confidence he
had in his Power, and the Respect of his Subjects, which extends even to
Adoration, esteemed himself as the most mighty Monarch on Earth; and despising
other Sovereigns, supposed there could be no Fleets opposed, nor Land Armies
able to resist his; so that this War, in his opinion, must be finished from the
moment Mustapha proposed it; had not Mahomet, who would avert this Tempest from
falling on the Republic, brought some difficulties; for whether he feared the
taking of the Isle of Cyprus, would increase his Enemies Credit, or was willing
to keep the Pension he received from the Venetians, to keep up the Peace, he
made use of the pretense of Religion; and told the Grand Signior, he would do
well to consult the Mufti on so important an Undertaking, and know his Sense
touching the infraction of a Treaty so solemnly sworn. And being not well
assured of the Mufti, how his Answer would be, he undertook himself to show the
Grand Signior, That 'twas more advantageous and honorable to carry the War
into Spain, to succor there a Nation that was of the same Religion, and
implored his Protection, and in hopes thereof, had already taken Arms against
the Tyranny of Spain, and alarmed the whole Country by their vigorous
Resistance; That this Enterprise would draw no new Enemies upon him; for the
Venetians would not assist the Spaniards; but on the contrary, if the Republic
was Assaulted, the Spaniards would infallibly assist them: That the Spanish
Militia were not so valiant, and brave in their own Country as out of it: That
all Christendom was lost when Spain should be subdued: That France, betwixt
whom and Spain, there are ancient Hatreds, and Jealousies, edged on by the
Disgraces she received in the last War, and engaged by an Alliance, and several
good Offices from the Port, would be glad of this opportunity of Revenge, and
take part against the Spaniards; there being also as much, or more Honor in
protecting unfortunate Believers, related to him by the Sacred Bond of
Religion, than Profit in making himself Master of all Spain: whereas, should he
abandon the Moors to the Executioners of Spain, to set upon a State, with which
he lived in Peace, he must undergo an universal Reproach of breaking his Word
to his Allies, and wanting Compassion for miserable Wretches, forced to
renounce their Mohammedan Religion, and embrace the Christian, by the violence
of Torments. These Reasons moved not Selim; and if he appeared less hot on the
War of Cyprus, 'twas rather because he would not disoblige the Prime Vizier,
whose Opinion he disliked, than to determine what he was resolved to do; for
believing every thing just which he pleased to undertake, his greatest Concern
was to put it in speedy Execution. The Riches of the Isle of Cyprus, and the
Work in which he would surpass all the former Emperors, made such an Impression
in his Mind, that he had not the power to resist it. Yet had this Undertaking
been further put off by the Address of the Grand Visi^r, had not such News
arrived from Italy to Miches and Mustapha, as hastened the Execution of it.

In the Year 1569. Italy was affiicted with such scarcity, as made all the
Cities thereabouts feel the smart of it, and expect a terrible Famine. Sicily
and Pouille, which are, as it were, the Storehouses of Italy, were as empty of
Corn as other Places. Yet the Triumvirs thought on an Expedient, which much
helped the City: They issued out an Order, by which they promised a great Price
to such Merchants as should bring Grain; which brought so many Vessels laden
with it to Venice, that the People scarcely felt the Scarcity, with which other
parts were afflicted. But that which was worse than this, and hastened the War
which the Infidels projected against the Republic, was, That on the 13th. of
September at Night, in the same Year, the Powder took Fire in the Arsenal of
Venice, and blew up the Magazines, with such a dreadful Blow, that all the
Inhabitants, dismayed at the Noise, came out into the Streets, and public
places, lest they should be overwhelmed in the Ruin of their Houses. The Sky
seemed in a light Fire, which caused such a terrible Consternation, that
several imagined Venice was threatened on all Parts; and such as were most
fearful, reckoned the Day of Judgment was now come. The violence of this Fire,
made it self felt to the most solid Edifices of the City; and the very Boats in
the Channels were lifted up in the Air by it. But that which surpasses all
Belief, was, that the neighboring Isles were shaken by it; and it was known
afterward that the Inhabitants of Trevisa and Padoa, and those of some Towns
at greater distance, saw at that time, their Windows, as it were, all on Fire,
and heard such a noise under ground, as made 'em fear a terrible Earthquake.
The Houses near the Arsenal, buried several Persons of both Sexes under their
Ruin.

This terrible Disturbance being somewhat abated, and the public Consternation
lessened, they began to suspect some secret Conspiracy. The Senate put the
Noble Venetians in Arms; whose Rendezvous was in the Place of St. Mark, whence
were sent to all the Quarters of the Town such as were able to do Service.

These Suspicions were increased, as soon as it was known the Arsenal was burnt;
this being the Part by which the Republic might receive its Death's Wound.
Paul Troni was sent by Order from the Senate to the Arsenal, to be more
perfectly informed. He found all the Gates of it open; but not one of those
which followed him, had the boldness to enter: And had not Trony himself showed
them an Example in his own person, they would have all abandoned him. Some
Nobles assisted him in an exact view of all places; of which he made his
Relation to the Senate; and assured them he saw no Remains of Fire, nor the
least appearance of a new Flame. He found the Walls and Towers on the side of
the Isle of Muran, overthrown from top to bottom, without the Magazines, or
Sea-Equipages being any ways damnifi'd. The Convent of the Religious, called
Celestins, and all the Houses round about, underwent the same Misfortune as the
Towers and Ramparts. The Nobility, which were up in Arms, guarded the Town
several days and nights, and equipped two Galleys for their Security without.
But forasmuch as it appeared in the Sequel, this Disaster could not be a mere
Accident, the Fire having taken several Magazines at the same time, 'tho far
distant from one another: There were great Rewards promised to those who could
discover the Authors; and a Discourse ran, that the villainous Miches had
secretly sent some Turks to Venice, who committed this horrible Fact; a
dreadful stroke without doubt, and the worst humane Malice could invent, and
which would have caused a greater desolation, if some days before this Mischief
happened, there had not been taken from the Magazines, by the Senate's order
two hundred thousand weight of Powder, to be sent to Corfou, and other places
dependant on the Republic: For what a Devastation would not so great a
quantity of Powder have made, if Forty Thousand weight only which remained in
the Arsenal, overthrew so many houses and so terribly shocked the Town? Venice,
without doubt, according to the opinion of the most knowing persons, must have
been laid in Ashes, and the most flourishing and beautiful City in the World,
committed wholly to the Flames, by the Treachery of Barbarians, whose
Perfidiousness cannot inspire all Christian Nations with too much horror.

This sad Misfortune was quickly bruited over all Europe, and Report made, as
is usual, That the Loss was greater than it was. A Rumor was spread that the
Arsenal of Venice was entirely consumed; that the Fire had not spared the
Artillery, and all the Guns were melted down. Yet did the Loss amount only to
forty thousand weight of Powder, and what they must disburst to build up the
Walls and Towers, which were re-edified with great diligence.

This News coming to Constantinople, neither the Favor nor Address of the
Prime Vizier, could prolong the Denunciation of War against the Venetians:
Miches showing Letters brought him by certain Jews from Venice; on Receipt of
which, he spread a Report, that the Republic was reduced to such a Condition,
whence they would not be able to raise themselves in several years; and withal,
that they were so greatly afflicted with Scarcity, that the common sort were
ready to starve for want of Bread. Mustapha, on his side, affirmed, that so
favorable an opportunity was not to be neglected, which seemed to be offered
them by Heaven; the Signiory wanting Ammunition and Equipage for a Naval Army,
they might not only possess themselves of the Isle of Cyprus, but extend their
Conquests to the Republic; which, being busied to defend it self from Famine,
would less mind the preserving of an Island so far distant, and the City
wanting Bread, she could not be in a capacity to furnish a Fleet with
Provisions and Ammunitions; especially since the fireing of the Arsenal: That
they needed not scruple the Execution of a Treaty of Peace made with God's
Enemies and his holy Prophets; there being nothing so worthy a Muselman, as his
undertaking the entire destruction of Christians: This being the sense of all
their Priests of the Law, especially, considering the Venetians, as the first
Breakers of the Peace: That other reasonings were the more weak and suspicious,
by being offered by ^uch who received underhand considerable Sums from the
Republic: That there could be nothing worse advised, than the carrying the
Ott^man Forces to the farthest part of the West, when they were attacked by an
Enemy, placed in the Bowels of the Empire: That the Enterprise must be rash, to
march to the conquering of a State situated in another World, and defended by
all the Forces of Germany and Italy; seeing this could not be done, but by
hazzarding the Honor of the Former Acquisitions of the Ottoman Emperors; when,
on the other hand, they might by an easy Conquest chastise the Venetians for
their Insolency and Falsehood: That the establishment of an Empire, consisted
not in extending the sovereignty of it to far remote countries, but in
enlarging its Limits through the Neighboring States: That a Conqueror, who
would assure his Conquest, should rather consult what is commodious and proper,
than what answers his own covetous and ambitious Humor: And as to what
concerned the Moors Revolt, this tended rather to the incapacitating of the
King of Spain, to make any Engagements with the Venetians: That the whole Force
of the War should fall upon them, whereby this famous Republic, whose Forces
by Sea, serve as a shelter to all Italy, and Christendom, being subdued, and
its Capital City made Tributary, Spain might thenceforward be easily invaded,
together with all the Western Principalities.

Selim puffed up with Pride, and big with hopes at the hearing of this
flattering Discourse, resolved on War against the Venetians; but for a show of
Equity, he made the Mufti be consulted; who returned an Answer agreeable to the
Grand Signior's Designs. He afterward caused Mahomet to be sent for into his
Presence; to whom he showed his Resolutions; which this Minister had still the
boldness to oppose. This Contradiction so provoked the Sultan, that he
reproached the Grand Vizier with being in the Interests of the Republic;
calling him Christian and Unbeliever. Mahomet, astonished at this sharp
Reprehension, held down his Head, and kept himself in an awful silence:
Whereupon, Selim becoming sedate, and repenting his severe Treatment of the
Prime Officer in his Empire, to whose Fidelity he had openly professed he owed
his Establishment, by way of Reparation, told him in soft terms; That 'twas to
no purpose to endeavor to dissuade him from a Design which he was fully
resolved on; and therefore he required only of him to order the Preparations
for this War, according to the Place he exercised under him.

Mahomet being strangely mortified, and fearing moreover the ill Offices which
his Enemies had done him, endeavored only to re establish himself in his
Masters Favor, by the diligence he used in his Preparations for this
Enterprise; and advised the Grand Signior to keep it Secret, assuring him, he
would so order the Matter, that the Venetians should be surprised, and their
Isle conquered before they were in a capacity to defend it. Mahomet, the better
to deceive them, imparted to the Venetian Ambassador, as a Secret, that the
Sultan was setting forth a great Fleet against the King of Spain. He built
several Vessels to transport the Army, and listed great numbers of Sea men,
made Provision of Arms, Victuals, and Money, and at the same time ordered the
Bassa's of Greece, and Anatolia, to get their Horse and Foot, in a readiness to
be at the place of Rendezvous appointed by his Highness; giving out to all
Persons, that this Armado was designed against the Spaniards, and those of
Arabia, who had, it seems, lately rebelled. He assigned this Army to meet at a
Seaport Town of Cilicia, called Finicia.

Mark Anthony Barbaro, then Ambassador to the Republic at Constantinople, who
spared neither his Money, nor his Person, to discover the secret Designs of the
Vizier, had learnt the real intent of these Preparations: Whereupon, he sent
word to the Senate to take care of the Isle of Cyprus; advising them to send
Forces thither immediately, without which, the Turks would soon become Masters
of the Place; giving them likewise a full Account of whatsoever he had
observed; and that the Prime Vizier had sent for him, to assure him there were
no Designs on their parts against the Republic; the Grand Signior resolving to
keep the Peace made Thirty years since, in the time of Solomon, his Father: The
Fleet putting out to Sea, being intended for the Assistance of the Moors, who
had taken up Arms in Spain, to maintain their Liberties and Religion against
the Tyranny of King Philip; and might therefore assure, the Senate from him,
that they needed not to be alarmed, and save the Charge of setting out a Fleet;
but that they ought not to trust to his Word, whose drift it was (as far as he
could perceive) to hinder the sending of an Italian Garrison to the Island;
knowing the Cypriots were not able of themselves, to resist the first Attack of
the Turkish Army: That they would do well therefore to put the Place in a
posture of Defense before the War was declared; seeing the Reports as touching
Spain, for which they levied Soldiers, in Sicily, and the Neighboring Parts
of Cyprus, was too gross an Artifice for one not to see through it. Mahomet
stopped most of those Couriers in the way, which Barbaro dispatched to Venice; so
that the War broke out before the Venetians, amused by the false News of the
Enterprise against Spain, could send them any Forces to defend the Island. But
all things breathing War at Constantinople, and the neighboring Provinces; and
it being impossible to hide any longer the Grand Signior's real Design: the
Chief Vizier sent therefore for their Ambassador, to tell him, his Highness
intended to take Possession of the Kingdom of Cyprus, as having a just and
ancient Right to that Crown: That this State served only for a Haven to
Corsary's, and Enemies to the Ottoman Empire: But if they would surrender it by
fair means, the Peace and Agreement should continue: Whereas, on the other
hand, should they make the least show of Resistance against the Emperor's Will,
and oblige him to seize on it by force, he could not pass his Word for his
Moderation, and resting satisfied with this Conquest. After this Discourse,
made in the Name of the Sultan, Mahomet spoke of his own Head to Barbaro, and
counseled him as a Friend, to try how far he could prevail with the Senate to
gratify Selim; seeing 'twas impossible they could hold it out long against so
formidable a Strength; it being to be feared lest their Endeavors to preserve
a Country so far distant, should expose the whole State to a manifest danger.

This seemed rather a Declaration of War to the Venetian Ambassador, than a
telling him they intended such a thing; and he seeing no likelihood of averting
the Tempest which had so suddenly gathered, he sought, only to gain time, that
the Venetians might make some Preparations: And to this end, he used great
Instances with Mahomet, to oblige him to show the Grand Signior, That the
Republic had ever faithfully kept the Treaties of Peace, never failing in the
least respect to his Highness: Remembering him also, the Almighty had ever
punished those who violated the public Faith, and solemn Oaths. He, in fine,
assured the Vizier, that if he rendered this good Office to the Signiory, the
Republic would not fail to make Acknowledgments suitable to the greatness of
the Benefit. Mahomet answered him, he would not do well to cherish the least
Thought of continuing the Peace on any other condition, than that of
surrendering the Isle of Cyprus; and thereupon Barbaro, who sought only for
Delays, desired, before any Acts of Hostility broke out, that some person might
be sent from the Grand Signior to Venice, to see whether the Senate could not
find some other means to satisfy him, without breaking the Peace; whose Treaty
should be executed on both sides, to prevent any Scuffle on the Frontiers of
the two States, which might perhaps produce an open Rupture. It Is certain,
Selim had some cause of Complaint against the Venetians; but it was not of that
weight as to excuse the troubling of all Christendom for it.

Mahomet easily comprehended the Ambassador's Design, and what he required, no
ways hindering his Preparations, which he advanced during the Winter; and it
looking better for Selim to declare War against the Senate, before he sent an
Army into the Field, he promised to send Notice of it; hoping the Venetians, on
serious consideration, would sacrifice the Isle of Cyprus to the Good and Quiet
of their State; which obtained, he might employ these Forces in the so much
mentioned Enterprise against the King of Spain.

He chose one Abraham to declare the War to Venice; the same that was sent
thither some years before, to renew the Treaty. He was a Polonian born of the
House of the Strassis, a Family considerable enough in the Province of Russia.
He lost his Liberty from his Infancy; and becoming Turk, followed the Military
Profession, and was made a kind of Knight at Arms. The Knowledge he had of the
most usual Tongues in Europe, procured his being employed by the Infidels in
several important Negotiations. Barbaro caused him to be accompanied by Lewis
Bonrici, one of the Secretaries belonging to the Senate; a Person skilled and
faithful in Business, and also by his eldest Son, under pretense of greater
Credit and Security amongst the Venetians; but in effect, to inform the Senate
of the present State of Affairs, by Bonrici, and to preserve his Son from that
Servitude with which all the Venetians at Constantinople were threatened. It Is
said the Prime Vizier ordered the Chiaus, when when he was to receive his
Dispatches, after he had declared the Grand Signior's Will to the Senate, to
give out privately some Words of Accommodation, and promised him to second his
Project with his Favor and Credit.

The Venetians received continually Advice, as well from those whom they had
sent to learn the Motions of the Infidels, as the Governors of the Cities of
Dalmatia and Illyria, That the Turks not only prepared themselves for War, but
already began it; and that these Barbarians, thirsting after Spoil, knowing the
Sultan's Design, made every day Incursions on the Republick's Countries, having
burnt and pillaged several Villages, and filled all the Country with Terror.
Great and considerable Garrisons were immediately sent to these Parts, to
hinder this Vastation; and Savoriani was ordered to get into Zara, the Capital
Town of Dalmatia, a Place of great Strength and Consequence, by reason of its
situation, and which the Turks would certainly attack, considering the
advantages and Commotities they might draw thence, in becoming Masters of it.
To this Magistrate was committed also the Care of preserving the whole Province.

Jerome de Martiningo, of the Family of the ancient Lords of Bresse, have
heretofore exercised a Place of good Command in the Venetian Army, came and
offered his Service to the Senate. He was ordered to transport himself with
Three Thousand choice Men into the Isle of Cyprus; a small Number, in
comparison of the dreadful Multitude of the Barbarians, with which the Island
was to be overrun; but who might have valiantly defended it, had they met with
a happy Passage. Martiningo had four Ships appointed him, to conduct these
Succors to Famagusta.

Savoriani advised the Senate to send over at least Eight Thousand Men into the
Island, which could not be kept with a less Force: But Martiningo, being
jealous lest Savoriani envied his Reputation, and desirous to show his Capacity
and Bravery, would needs undertake to defend Famagusta with Three Thousand; and
the Senate approving his Zeal and Forwardness, imprudently consented to so
hardy a Proposal. Those who are Chief Officers in a Commonwealth, do many times
manage the public Treasury with the same Thrift and Sparingness they use in
their own Domestic Affairs; and think they thus mightily oblige the Republic.
But the Venetians perceived too late their Folly in sending Three Thousand Men,
against an innumerable Army.

In the Senate's Deliberations, about the Conduct of this War, some were for
strengthening the Garrisons every where, and keeping only on the Defensive
side. Others were for setting out as great a Naval Army as was possible, and
fight the Infidels on the first occasion, and thereby decide at one stroke the
Fate of the Kingdom of Cyprus. This last Advice was approved as the most
profitable and honorable: The Senate hoped the King of Spain, who was
equipping a great Fleet, would come to their assistance, and likewise expected,
that Pope Pius V. whose Zeal and Courage were well known to them, would assist
them in so urgent an occasion. Jerome Zani was made General of the Sea-Forces.
This Employ is of the number of those which have no Authority but out of
Venice; but the Power of it is then of Sovereign Extent, and there is no Appeal
allowed from the Sentence of this Supreme Magistrate. The Senate made choice of
several vigorous and resolute Gentlemen from amongst the Nobility, to make
Commanders of their Frigates and Galleys; and Seamen and Slaves were sent for
from the other Cities of the Republic, to Venice. They proceeded on the
setting forth fourscore and ten Galleys; whose Furniture and Equipage could be
supplied from the Arsenal. They built twenty two at Candia, which were joined
with thirty six others that were armed against Corsary's, and to keep the Sea
open along the sides of this Island. They likewise equipped twelve Vessels
called Galeasses, by reason of their prodigious Greatness. These are moved both
with Sails and Oars, and appear on the Sea like so many floating Castles. The
weight of these Bulky Vessels braves the violence of the Waves, and fears no
Storm nor Tempest. They moreover equipped twenty Vessels laden with Men and
Ammunition; not to mention the Galliots, and several other lesser Boats; the
Conduct of which, they gave to Hermolaus Tripoli, a careful and active
Commander. Such a considerable Fleet so soon made ready, notwithstanding the
disadvantages the Senate then lay under, surpised with astonishment the
neighboring Nations. It Is certain the Pope permitted great Transportations of
Corn from Anconia to Venice, and a great Subsidy to be raised from the Clergy.

In the mean time, the Senate read Bonrici's Letters, by which they were
informed of the coming of the Chiaus, the occasion of his Voyage, and all that
past between Barbaro and the Chief Vizier. Bonrici having learnt at his
Departure from Constantinople, that Acts of Hostility were already began on the
Frontiers, became afraid lest Mahomet's Son, (who was Bassa of Epirus, and had
stopped those whom the Governor of Cataro had sent to carry Presents on his
part) should oblige the Envoy to return back the same way he came. In this
Apprehension he proposed the dispatching of one of his People to Ragusa,
charged with Packets of Advice to Venice, to the end they might have a Galley
sent them for their readier and surer Passage. The Envoy approving this
Expedient, Bonrici wrote his Sense in Characters, lest his Packets should be
intercepted. The Senate well satisfied of the Care and Diligence of Bonrici,
ordered Francis Troni to attend them with a Galley at Ragusa. They arrived
after some days, and returned safe; but Troni was forbid to enter Venice: which
obliged him to lie at Anchor at the Ports Mouth, till further Order. In the
mean while Bonrici Landed, and having confirmed by word of Mouth, what was
contained in his Letters, he was ordered the next day to fetch the Chiaus in a
Gondollo, and bring him to the Senate. He was brought up the Channel, and
Landed at St. Mark's; which Place was so crowded, that it was no small
difficulty to make way for him. The murmurings of the People, who gnasht their
Teeth with rage and indignation against the breaking of the Peace, struck the
Chiaus with such Terror, that he took Bonrici by the hand, the better to secure
his Life; for he saw himself in no small danger.

As Soon as he entered the Senate House, after a short Preamble, he presented
Selim's Letter, and that also of the Prime Vizier. The Grand Signior complained
in his, That, the Uscots, who were Christians, and Allies of the Republic,
continually molested his Subjects; and, that the Venetians, instead of hindering
these Violences, encouraged the Robbers underhand to commit them: That,
animated with mortal hatred against the Turkish Pirates, they gave no Quarter
to those that fell into their hands; cutting their Throats at the time they
cried for Mercy, and yielded without Resistance. But that which was most
insupportable to his Highness, was, the Isle of Cyprus's becoming a shelter for
Pirates, which disturbed the Commerce of the Mediterranean Seas: That, being
Master of all the Countries, which surrounded this Isle, it lay on him to
secure the Navigation to those Parts; and therefore if they designed the
continuance of the Peace which they had so often broken, they must yield him
this Island, chastise the Uscots, and treat his Subjects henceforward with more
humanity: That, if they liked these Terms, they should receive kind Remarks of
his Gratitude and Favor; but if on the contrary, they refused these reasonable
Conditions, he was in a capacity to do himself speedy Justice, and make them
repent of their Folly.

The Prime Visier's Letter contained only Matters treated of between him and
the Venetian Ambassador; exhorting the Senate to grant freely what the Grand
Signior desired. They had already resolved what to answer the Envoy; and the
Doge was of opinion to give it him in Writing. The Venetians affirmed in their
Reply, That, notwithstanding the ill usage which the Subjects of the Republic
had received, that Peace had been ever of their part most religiously observed:
That, the Uscots were a poor sort of People, who living on Robbery, fell
indifferently on both Turks and Christians: That, it was allowable by right of
War, to give no Quarter to Pirates; and, as to the Kingdom of Cyprus, it
belonged to the Republic: That, the Corsary's were so far from being
entertained in their Ports, that there were four Galleys constantly kept to
hinder their Entrance: But if the Grand Signior made use of these Pretenses to
color the breaking of the Peace, the Senate was resolved courageously to
defend themselves; hoping the Divine Justice would revenge their Quarrel, and
protect their Innocence. The Chiaus being dismissed, was carried in a Gondolo to
the Galley in which he came, which tarried for him at the Haven's Mouth; which
immediately hoysted Sail on his coming on Board, and transported him to the
Frontiers of the State; having received no Civilities or Presents from the
Republic. But Mark Anthony Barbaro's Lady sent him, by the permission of the
Senate, some Refreshments and a Silk Vest, to the end her Husband might be the
less rudely used at Constantinople, where the Chiaus returned without any
likelihood of an Accommodation.

The Declaration of War made the Nobility and Commonaly pass over from their
Consternation to Choler and Boldness; and the young People, irritated at the
perfidiousness of Selim, conceived a great Contempt at his Dissoluteness and
want of Sense of Honor, against whose Forces they hoped to maintain their
Right; provided Heaven declared it self not against them; whereas the ancienter
sort, more experienced, foresaw the Danger of breaking off at any time with so
formidable a Power: But fearing on the other hand, that in granting his
Demands, this would be an encouragement to them to ask more, and that the State
weakened by degrees with these Compliances, would at length grow contemptible to
her Allies, as well as to her Enemies. On these Considerations, they resolved
themselves into a War, without harkening to any Proposal of renewing the Peace.
Politicians found this Resolution more generous than prudent; for by amusing
the Enemy with some sort of Negotiation, a stop might be put to their Army; its
heat might be abated; and Time gained to provide for the Defense of Cyprus:
Moreover, perhaps the Storm might have been laid with Money, which oftener
prevails than Arms on these Barbarians, whose Avarice enclines them to hearken
to any such kind of Proposal. But the Ardor of both the Nobility and
Commonalty, who strove to give Testimonies of their Fidelity, hindered them
from making these Reflections. All the neighboring Cities belonging to the
Republic, showed the same Earnestness; sending Offers to the Senate, each
according to their Ability. People came from all parts to Venice; some
proffered their Estates, others their Persons; and the greatest part to serve
in the Wars at their own Charge. So many offered to embark themselves, that the
Senate fearing to expose at one time such Numbers of Illustrious Persons, sent
several of them home, having first praised their Zeal and Courage. All the
other Cities of Italy gave Marks of the same inclination, to defend the
Republic; and the time being appointed, when the Fleet should set forth for
the Isle of Corfou, the General Zani weighed Anchor, and sailed to Zara, to
order the Affairs of Dalmatia, whilst all the Forces got themselves in a
readiness.

Lauredon, Doge of Venice, Aged fourscore and ten, died suddenly in coming from
the Senate, in the midst of the Gonsultations for the War; and it being feared,
lest the different Interests of Parties, should draw out in length the Choice
of a new Doge, and those who had right of Election, being far distant, should
abandon their Posts in so perilous a Conjuncture, the Senate ordained that the
number of Electors should be reduced to Forty. 'Twas necessary, for the
satisfaction of the People, and the exigency of the present Affairs, to choose
a Person of extraordinary Courage and Prudence; not following the ancient
Custom of peaceable times, which was to elect one of a common Capacity, and of
a Humor rather to be governed than govern. Amongft all those who stood
conspicuous, none appeared more fit and worthy than Lewis Mocenigo, both by his
Nobility, his Alliances, and great Place, being a Procurator of St. Mark. He
had acquired an high Esteem, by a faithful discharge of several Employs; and
the establishment of the ancient Discipline was expected from a Person of his
Wisdom and Experience. The Forty Electors shut up in the Palace to make this
Choice, were not long in their Deliberations. In short, Mocenigo had all their
Suffrages, and took possession of his new Dignity. The same day he was elected,
he made a thankful Speech, which confirmed the advantageous Opinion of his
Capacity; he protested that he would endeavor to merit by his Services the
Honor conferred on him.

Sebastian Venieri, who, though very ancient, felt none of the Infirmities of old
Age, commanded in the Isle of Corfou, with a Sovereign Authority. He being
weary of Ease, hearkened with pleasure to a Proposition which was privately made
him by Deputies from the Epirots, who inhabit near Mount Chimera. These People
tired with the Turkish Slavery, were for taking part with the Republic; on
condition she would protect them, and send necessary Assistance, to defend them
from the Resentment of the Infidels. They desired to begin by the Siege of
Supoto, a City garrisoned by the Turks; assuring, this Place would be no sooner
taken, but the greatest part of the Epirots would declare themselves in favor
of the Venetians: Venieri liked the Proposition, and all things being regulated
by the Mediation of Marmorio, General of the Grecian Cavalry in Corfou, a man
of great Credit amongst the Epirots; he took for Hostages, some of the
Principal of this Nation, and made all diligence to get ready Preparatives for
the Siege. Fifteen hundred Foot, with some Horse, were immediately transported
to the firm Land. The Place, although situated on a Mountain in the midst of
several others, and better fortified by Nature than Art, was easily invested.
The Venetian Batteries, whence the Cannon played, did no great Execution:
Marmario, who had the ordering of it, desiring to take from the Besieged all
hope of Relief, possessed himself of those high Grounds which commanded the
Place, and such parts by means of which they might have Communication with the
Country: He picked out for this Design the most resolute among the Epirots,
who made themselves Masters of this Post, after a fierce Combat, in which the
Besieged were repulsed to their Gates. The Turks fired several times their
Cannon from their Walls; but having not any expert Gunners amongst them, they
burst two of their greatest Pieces, by over charging them, which set fire on
all their Powder. This Accident, together with the Belief that the Army of the
Besieged was greater than indeed it was, and that all Epirus had revolted,
hindered them not from defending themselves, out of a desperate Obstinacy.
Venieri intending to profit by this Error, disposed all things for a general
Assault the next Morning. The Infidels having notice of this Attack, stole away
privately out of the Town in the Night, excepting a few, who preferring a
glorious Death to a shameful Flight, were put to the Sword, in sustaining the
Fury of the Assailants. The Fugitives were pursued, and made Prisoners by the
Epirots, who knew the ways of the Country. Venieri having left a Garrison in
the Place, the Government of which, committing to Marmorio, he returned himself
to Corfou, proud of his good Success. Zani arrived there in the beginning of
the Summer, having tarried long at Zara, in expectation of the Arrival of the
Fleet; to which were to be joined the King of Spain's and the Pope's. He judged
it not fitting to set out to Sea without a considerable Assistance; having
Order from the Senate to sail to Cyprus, and fight the Enemy, as soon as the
Confederates should join him. 'Twas generally believed, that had he parted
immediately after Colonni was arrived with the Pope's Galleys, without staying
for the King of Spain's, and made directly for Cyprus; the Place might have
been preserved. Quirini joined him at the same time with twenty five Galleys of
Candia, and took in his passage a Castle in the Morea, defended by the
Infidels, whence he drew out twenty Pieces of Cannon. Zani, not willing to lose
time at Corfou, sent Sforza Palavicinus, General of the Land-Army, with forty
Galleys, to besiege Margariti, a City of Epirus; which was kept by a strong
Garrison, by reason of the Importance and Commodiousness of the Place. Sforza
Landed five thousand Men; but drawing near the Town, whether he feared the
Enemies Horse might fall too fiercely on him, or finding the Enterprise, on a
second view, too dangerous, he put his Men on Board again, without daring to
stay for the Turks; aliedging, for his Excuse, That he did not believe the
Place to be so far distant from the Sea: He afterward sent to Zani for new
Orders; who enjoined him to call a Council of War; in which, it was determined,
to abide by this Siege, it being not for the Honor of the Republic to draw
back. He desired the Officers of the Fleet to provide him with Cannon for
Battery; which they willingly undertook, though their Carriage was extreme
difficult: But Palavacinus's Courage again failing him, showed them, that this
Expedition would prove more dangerous than profitable; and thereupon embarked
himself and his Men: Although this General, to regain his Honor, earnestly
desired Pe^mission to return again the third time, but with more Men, yet it
was not thought fitting to hazard a third Trial; so that nothing was more
undertaken all the while the Fleet remained at Corfou.

In the mean time, this great Army, having spent most of the Summer in the
Ports, by the neglect of the Commanders, the Seamen living in Gormandizing and
Idleness, fell into a contagious Distemper, with which also the Soldiers were
as greatly afflicted. This Sickness increasing, carried away great Numbers; so
that Zani, supposing Exercise and change of Air, would in some sort cure them,
set Sail for Candia: But whether their Provisions were already corrupted, or
these new raised Men, not accustomed to the Seas; the Sickness increased to
that height, that in two days time, it cleared a whole Ship; and those that
were put in their places, incurred the same Fate. Both Soldiers and Seamen
falling one upon another, and suffering insupportable Dolors, breathed out the
last moment of their Lives. They were thrown into the Sea, as soon as they
expired, and sometimes before. Those that performed this sad Office, expected
soon to receive the same themselves, from other hands; and the horror of Death
might be plainly read on each man's Face. The excessive Heats, and Malignity of
the Air, increased still the Mortality; and when arrived at Candia, there were
found missing twenty thousand Men. The General much perplexed, how to repair
this Loss, forced the Candiots to find him Seamen and Soldiers; and though
several were drawn out from the Isles of Zant and Cephalonia, and the Providors
Quirini and Canali had taken multitudes into Service, by the Senate's Order,
out of Isles belonging to the Infidels; yet with all this the Army was scarcely
well recruited.

The Venetians, at the beginning of this War, had sent to request Assistance
from Pope Pius V. who was not over-satisfi'd with the Senate, for their
frequent Encroachments on the Papal Authority, and their Connivance at Heresy
and Heretics, which began to spring up in their Chief City. Yet did the
Interest of Religion, threatened by so cruel an Enemy, awake the Zeal of this
Holy Man; and as soon as he understood the Danger to which the Republic, lay
exposed, he assembled the Sacred College, imparted this grievous News to the
Cardinals, and conferred with them touching the means of preventing this
dreadful Storm.

Antony Perennot, surnamed Cardinal Granvil, was then at Rome; his Father was
but a Black-Smith's Son in the Franch County, yet a Person whose Virtue was as
high as his Birth mean; he had introduced himself by his Merit in^o favor with
Charles the Fifth; who employing him in the Government of Affairs in the Low
Countries, he had there acquired vast Riches. Antony Perennot, of whom we
speak, made use of the Estate his Father left him, to get still more, under the
Reign of Philip the 2d. whose Esteem and Confidence he gained by his Prudence
and Learning, in which he was carefully brought up from his tender years: But
his natural Pride, increased by his Fortune and Favor at Court, had made his
Insolence insupportable to all the World. The whole Consistory was for
assisting the Venetians in so urgent an occasion, except Granvil; who
declaiming against the Republic, affirmed her unworthy the Protection of the
Holy See, by offering to make peace with the Infidels on dishonorable
Conditions; notwithstanding the Alliance with which the Emperor had honored
them, and the Assistance he had sent them. He added, That his Holiness would do
well to sit still, and let this Affair take its course a while, and when the
Venetians should be made sensible, by their losses of some Provinces, or defeat
of their Army, of the need they had of Succors, it would be then time enough to
assist them: That it seemed as if Heaven exposed them to this Invasion of the
Infidels, as a punishment of their Indifference and Insensibility, at the sight
of the Dangers wherewith other Christian States had been threatened; and to show
them the necessity, wherein they might be reduced, of imploring the Aid and
Protection of their Neighbors. This Discourse raised a secret Murmur amongst
the Cardinals Cornaro, Amulio and Delphini, all three Subjects of the
Republic; but the Respect they bore the King of Spain, and fear of displeasing
Granvil, held them in silence. Cardinal John Francis Commend^n, a Person of
singular Virtue, whom neither Fear nor Favor could withhold from his Duty, not
being able to dissemble his Resentments, as his Countrymen did; refuted
whatsoever Outrages this Flemming offered against the Interests of Italy, and
that with such clear and weighty Reasonings, as would admit of no
Contradiction: He recited the ancient Services rendered by the Venetians to all
Christendom, and especially to the Holy See; he showed, That there was all the
Reason in the World for assisting of them now, and sustaining the generous
Resentment they conceived against the infraction of the Peace by the Infidels,
and not stay till they were beaten; this dereliction of them being likely to
discourage them, and drive them into despair: That, he knew not for what
reason, or on what Politics they must be weakened before their Quarrel
defended: For if their Valor was mistrusted before there was occasion, what
Confidence must be put in it when it should be overcome? That they would
remember what they owed their Country and themselves, if the Pope and other
Christian Princes, who were no less interessed than they in this War, would
assist them against the violence of the Infidels: That, all who were born
Italians, were equally persuaded the Signiory was no more threatened than other
Christian States; and that other Princes of Italy had the same reason to resist
this common Enemy: And that in fine, he was greatly surpised, to hear the
Senate charged as with a Fault, the making the last Peace with the Port; their
Alli^s having treated them in such a manner, as made them complain in all the
Courts of Christendom; and in consideration of which, it would be well for the
Honor of a certain Christian Prince, wholly to lose the Memory of it. A Speech
so discreet and generous having been approved by the Sacred College, all the
Cardinals were of opinion to grant assistance to the Republic.

The Pope caused twelve Galleys to be equipt, which the Signiory sent him from
Anconia, without Equipage, and other Military Provisions: The great Master of
Malta furnished out three others: The Duke of Savoy four: Of which Fleet his
Holiness gave the Command to Mark Anthony Colonni, a Person of Illustrious
Birth and extraordinary Merit.

Pius V. who understood not so well the Art of War, as the Government of the
Church, suffered himself to be led into an esteem of Colonni, by means of some
Conferences with him on the present State of Affairs, and by his offers of
Service, which made him to be preferred before several Princes of Italy, who
sought all occasions to obtain this Employ: He made himself so worthy of it,
and showed so much Prudence and Valor in the emergencies of War or Peace, that
his Credit with the Pope still increased, notwithstanding the Envy and
Jealousy of the Spaniards, who continually endeavored to do him ill Offices.
The Venetians would not at first acknowledge him Chief of the Army of the Holy
See, supposing him too much devoted to the Spanish Interest; because he
possessed some Towns dependant on that Crown: But he knew so well to disabuse
them, by a sincere Application to their Service, that they would have willingly
trusted him with the full Command of their whole Army. The Pope sent at the
same time to the King of Spain, Lewis Torici, Auditor of the Reta, to entreat
him to join his Fleet with the Venetians, and contract an Alliance with them,
according to the Design which he had often proposed; his Holiness assuring him
he would not only interess himself in this Confederacy, but enter therein, and
assist the Republic to the utmost of his Power. Pius V. made the same
Declaration to Michael Soriani, the Venetian Ambassador at Rome.

The King of Spain returned no Answer to the Proposition of Alliance, but
promised to set out fifty Galleys immediately to Sicily, with Order to obey him
whom the Pope should choose to command them.

Colonni expected long the Spanish Fleet; and John Andrew Doria, who conducted
it, did not arrive at Messina till July; neither would he weigh Anchor, said
he, till he received Orders from the King of Spain, and used all his Endeavors
to retain the Pope's Galleys. Colonni sent speedy notice of this to his
Holiness, who immediately dispatched a Courier into Spain, to press the King to
make good his Promise: But the Answer arriving at Rome not before the Twelfth
of August, Colonni and Doria did not depart till the Twenty fifth for Candia,
where they set footing after Twelve days Navigation; although Zani had Order, as
we have already said, to attempt the Delivery of Cyprus, and fight the
Infidels, if they offered to hinder them from it. The Season being far spent,
and the Fleet in no good order, made him dread the Event of a Battle: He called
a Council of War, on what was most expedient to be undertaken; Antony Canali
and James Celsi were Providors to the Venetian Army; the Republic never
confiding the Sovereign Command to one only General. These Officers are indeed
inferior to him, yet he can determine nothing, unless one of these two be of
his Opinion. Sforza Palavicinus was admitted into this private Council; an
Honor which no Stranger ever had before. But because it was possible they
might divide in contrary Opinions of equal Authority, they resolved to submit
to that which was the General's; and this Regulation was constantly and
strictly observed afterward. Celsi and Palavicinus were not for going directly
to Cyprus; alleging, That the Tempests which are frequent in Autumn, were to
be considered: That the greatest part of the Seamen were not well acquainted
with those Seas; and moreover, their Companies were not complete; so that
should the Turks accept of an Engagement, and be worsted, yet could they get
such Recruits at Land, as would put their Fleet again in a good Condition; and
should they refuse a Defiance, they had Places of Retreat in Cilicia, and
several other Ports, where the Christians dared not attack them, but would be
forced to retreat themselves, lest they ruin their whole Fleet; so that it
would be better to send Men and Ammunition to Cyprus, for the Defense and
Refreshment of the Isle, than to hazard at once the Safety of the State, which
consisted alone in the Maritine Forces: That to save the Honor of so great a
Navy, they might attack the Castles of the Dardanello's, lying at the Mouth of
the Hellespont, or fall on the Isle of Nigropont, and take by Assault Chalcis,
its Capital Town: That, this Conquest, which was certain, would make amends for
the Isle of Cyprus, in case the Infidels should be obstinate in its Invasion;
and should they come to the assistance of Nigropont, thy would by this
diversion ease the Cypriots, and give the Enemy Battle with greater confidence
of Victory, the two Armies being of equal strength.

Zani leaned to this Opinion, but he suffered the Providor Canali to speak
before him; who said, that besides the Senate ordered immediate Succors to be
given the Cypriots; whose Case otherwise would prove desperate, it was far more
reasonable and natural, to endeavor the Conservation of ones own, than to
become Master of that which is another's: That the Succors which were to be put
into Famagusta, would signify nothing to Nicosia; on the taking of which,
depended the loss of the whole Island: That, if it were already too late to
endeavor its Deliverance, the Season would much less permit them to besiege
Castles further distant, and so near to Constantinople, that the Grand Signior
might behold them from the Windows of the Seralio; nor to think of the taking
of Nigropont, for which, they must Land Men and Cannon, to batter Chalcis, the
Capital Town; against which 'twas almost impossible to raise Batteries: That
the North-East Wind, which then blowed, would carry them in four days to
Cyprus, and might return with a Southern Wind, which rises commonly at the
beginning of Autumn: That the Isle of Cyprus was the real cause of the War; the
Title of Conqueror being due only to that Party which should become Master of
it: That it was very strange, the King of Spain's and the Pope's Fleets, which
had been expected all the Summer, should set out only to deliberate, whether
they were to succor a Country, for the securing of which, these Forces were
ordered to fight: That if the Infidels kept themselves in their Ports for fear
of engaging; besides, that they should be then in a capacity to relieve
Nicosia, there might be good advantage made of this Distrust; and the
Confederate Army would gain greater Reputation: That if they, on the contrary,
accepted the Defiance, they might in the uncertainty of the Event, hope well
from the Justice of their Cause, and promise something from the Protection of
Heaven; and although they had not so many Ships as the Barbarians, theirs were on
the other hand far better; their Fleet consisting of an hundred and fourscore
Galleys, and twelve Galeasses, which amounted to a good Naval Army; besides
other Vessels designed only to carry Ammunition and Provisions, whereof, in
case of necessity, a good use might be made: That it was true, the Turkish Navy
was greater, as consisting of sixty Galleys, and about fifty Frigates, besides
several small Vessels, whose multitude was troublesome, rather than
disadvantageous in a Fight: That, in short, it were better to expose themselves
to a Defeat, than the shameful Reproaches of having left People, who threw
themselves on the Republic for Protection: That they would draw on them the
hatred of all Christendom, should the Infidels take from them a Kingdom before
the Eyes of so powerful a Fleet; and if Fortune were not favorable to them,
the Senate would have at least this consolation, of having used its utmost
Endeavors, according to its generous Maxims, rather to risque its whole Estate,
than to leave her Subjects to the Invasion of an Usurper.

Zani was shaken by this Discourse; and being unwilling to bear alone the
Reproaches he must have undergone from the Senate, if he executed not its
Orders; he entered into Canali's Sentiment, and concluded it necessary to be
followed: But there happened a fresh Contest, which occasioned another Perplexity
more troublesome than the former. Zani and Doria being gone in search of Mark
Antony Colonni, to regulate with him the first Difficulty, he was of opinion to
go immediately to the Succor of the Isle of Cyprus: Pompey Colonni, his
Kinsman, and Alvarez Basano, General of the Neapolitan Galleys, were also of
this Mind: But Doria upholding on the contrary Celsi and Palavicinus's sense,
obstinately affirmed, The Venetian Army was no to be exposed, in their
languishing condition from the contagious Distemper, to the danger of a Fleet
so well equipped; and reproached Colonni with sacrificing the Spanish Army to
the proud and ambitious humor of the Venetians. Whereunto he replied, That it
would be far more p^ofitable and glorious for the King of Spain to lose all his
Ships in an Engagement, than fail in what all Europe expected from so puissant
a Sovereign: That there was no need of bringing an Army so far, and which has
been so long time looked for, if they came only to behold a Kingdom taken by
the Infidels, who would become far more formidable by casting a Terror into the
Confederates Army, than in conquering the Isle of Cyprus: That it was but
reasonable to yield to the Opinion of those Persons who were most concerned,
and who would be an Example to the rest, and first engage in this generous
Expedition. Colonni added, The Pope ordered him expressly to sail up to the
Enemy, and terminate this War by the decision of a Combat; so that he could not
avoid the following those Orders; the inexecution of which, would be
prejudicious to his Honor, and that of all Europe. Doria, fearing to be
thought cowardly, or ill-intentioned, yielded at last; but sold his Compliance
dear, in finishing the Campaign sooner by half than need required; for using
all Delays till the Thirteenth of September in Deliberations, he publicly
declared, his Return should be on the First of October, with all his Fleet,
wheresoever it lay; being willing the Venetians should be informed of this, to
the end they might not pretend a Surprise. The other Generals were agreed, That
in case of an Engagement, all the Confederate Vessels should be mixed without
any Formalities of Precedence; to the end the Glory and Danger being equally
divided, each might do his Duty, and be animated by Emulation and example. But
Doria declared, he would not engage unless the right Wing were given him. The
Venetians netled with this unseasonable Pretention, began to suspect his
Sincerity, and believed he designed this Place, to be in a better capacity of
retreating, in case the Christians should be defeated. This General was of
Gen^a, a Republic much fallen from its ancient Grandeur; but yet still
retaining the old Dispute of Power and Honor with that of Venice. Besides the
hatred of the Genoes^s against the Venetians, D^ria moreo^er had a P^que with
them for complaining against Andr^w his Uncle, and reproaching him with being
Chief of their Fleet in the Year 1536. when he spared the Infidels, from whom
he might have easily won a Signal Victory; keeping them blocked up in the Gulf
of Ambracia: Yet were the Venetians forced to smother their Resentments; for
besides that Doria slighted their Reproaches, he threw on them the
unprofitableness of this Campaign, and highly complained of the ill Estate of
their Army, considering the Interest they had in this important Affair.

The Fleets having set Sail from the Port of Candia, a City which gives Name to
the Isle, of which it is the Capital; came and cast Anchor at Chiti, where
Doria would needs have a gene^al Muster made, and that both Spaniards and
Venetians should visit one another's ^^^^els. He sailed out of the Port into
the full Sea for this Design, and ordered, according to Custom, the Shalops to
be hoysted up, lest the Soldiers should secretly pass over from one Vessel to
another. The Venetians not following him, he gave out, there needed no further
proof to discover their ill Order and Weakness. Having worn out near three
weeks in these kind of Contests, the Christian Army hoysted Sail on the
Seventeenth of September; before which, there were sent out two Frigates to make
Discovery; and in this time, there wanted not Jars and Disagreements. The
Captain-Galley, on Board of which the General is, has only Right to carry the
Lanthorn, to denote the Course which all the rest must hold. Zani lighted not
his, designing to defer this Honor to Mark Antony Colonni; but Doria believing
he need not give the same deference to the General of the Pope's Galleys,
caused also one to be lighted; saying, for a color, he feared lest there
should happen some Tempest, wherein the Spanish Galleys might lose the sight of
his. Colonni, naturally jealous of the Honors of the Generalship, could hardly
suffer this Rhodomontado, and made the Venetians understand as much; who
excused themselves, by owning that the Republic was indebted to him for his
Moderation.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK.
THE Peasants of the Isle of Cyprus design a Revolt. Nicholas Dandoli, Chief
Magistrate of Nicosia, possesses himself of the Government of the whole Island.
Lawrence Tipoli, and Mark Antony Bragadini, Chief Magistrates in Famagusta.
Baglioni, for opposing the Descent of the Infidels, contrary to the Opinion of
Bandoli, and the Count de Rocas. Decree of the Senate, to set all the Slaves in
the Island at Liberty. The Turks Land without Resistance. The Number of their
Men and Ships. Two Runagates persuade Mustapha to begin at the Siege of
Nicosia. The Turks sit down before it. The Besieged make a Sally, but with bad
Success. Valor of the Italian Soldiers. Rocas and Palacio killed on the
Breaches of the Walls. The City taken by Assault. Cruelties exercised therein.
Desperate Action of a Nicosian Lady. Another generous Action of a Cypriot
Slave. Cerines surrendered to the Turks. They March to Famagusta. Doria
suspected by the Venetians. Quarrel betwixt Doria and Colonni. Venieri put in
the Place of Zani, General of the Venetian Fleet. His Disgrace. Senate's
Deliberation on the League with Spain. Don John of Austria named Generalissimo
of the Confederate Army. Granvil opposes the Conclusion of the Treaty. The
Venetians make some Advances tending to a Peace with the Port. Colonni's
Harangue to the Senate. The League decreed by them. The Pope regulates its
Particulars.

THE HISTORY OF THE WAR of CYPRVS.
The Second Book.
THE first Rumors of this War, being spread over Cyprus, produced different
Effects in the Minds of its Inhabitants, every one being pleased or displeased
according as they were interessed. The Country People expected Ease from their
Labors, in some new Revolution; their Masters, who used them with too great
severity, having forced them to such a Desperation, that they had thoughts,
more than once, of delivering their Country to the Infidels: And for want of a
better Commander, they chose a certain Schoolmaster, whom they intended to
proclaim King, under the Protection of the Grand Signior: But the Venetians
having Notice of the Design, before the Rebels treated with the Port, punished
this pretended Monarch, according to the greatness of his Crime. The Nobility
were willing enough to take Arms for the Defense of their Country; but there
being no Sovereign Magistrate in the Isle, and the Officers aspiring Jealousies
producing Emulations and Hatreds, things were but ill ordered for a Defense,
against that Storm which was now fallen on them. In the beginning of the Year
1570. the Venetian Ambassador at Constantinople, sent Notice to the Cypriots of
the Declaration of War. Nicholas Dandoli was then Podestat of Nicosia, and had
succeeded Lawrence Bembo, whose Death proved very projudicial to the Affairs of
the Republic. Dandoli, who being but a mere Lawyer, took on him the Government
of his own head; was a man of great Insolency, and wholly unworthy of such an
Employ. Lawrence Tipoly and Mark Antony Bragandini were then at Famagusta, the
former in quality of Podestat; the other exercising the Magisterial Function;
and both well acquitting themselves of their Duties Astor Baglioni commanded
the Garrison; who was a Leader of good Experience, full of Courage, and of no
less Prudence, but had neither Men, nor Authority sufficient to withstand a
great Force.

As Soon as this News was known at Nicosia, there was held a Council, consisting
of the principal Citizens, to advise and order what was necessary in this
extraordinary State of Affairs. 'Twas first determined, to cause all the Corn
and Grain of the Country round about, to be transported into the Town; which
was accordingly with great diligence executed. Dandoli, whose first Care was,
to finish the new Fortifications, had no Genius or Experience in these sort of
Affairs: And when it was decreed, that these Works should be continued
according to Savoriani's Platform, and the Bastions begun by his Order, carried
on by the same Gentlemen to whom that Care was committed; Dandoli showed, That
the Money would be ill managed, and soon consumed, if several Persons had the
disposal of it; wherefore he was for keeping it himself, and finishing only one
Bastion at a time, and thus dismissed the greatest part of the Workmen. He
ordered other Affairs in the same manner; for according as the Report rose or
abated of the Turk's Army, so he increased or diminished the Preparatives for
the War: And when it was believed as a thing certain, That the Turkish Fleet
would not set out from Constantinople that Summer, all things were carried on
at such a negligent rate, that Baglioni, and such as understood those Affairs,
continually advertised Dandoli to stand on his Guard, and expect a sudden
Invasion from the Enemy. Eugenius Sinclitici, Count de Rocas, one of the best
Families of the Kingdom of Cyprus, having been deputed to Venice, to entreat
assistance, returned to the Island, with the Title of General of the Horse,
which the Senate had given him; with the News, That the War was certainly
declared; but he brought neither Men nor Ships. All People were strangely
surpised to see him thus return; considering the Condition of the Isle, the
Weakness of the Garrison, Scarcity of Arms, and especially of Muskets; so that
it was thought, his new Honor had made some decay in his Senses; seeing he
forgot to represent these wants to the State. The Cypriots finding themselves
thus frustrated in their expectations, made bad Relations of his Voyage;
affirming, his going to Venice, was only for an Airy Title of Honor, to
satisfy his Vanity, rather than the Exigencies of the Island; so that he would
have done as well to have staid at home with his Lady; they having no need of a
Captain, who brought nothing but a Name, and neglected the Duties of the Office.

James Nores, Count de Tripoli, betwixt whom and Rocas reigned an hereditary
Jealousy, envying the Honor which Rocas came from receiving, entertained
these Complaints and Murmurs: and his Merit having acquired great Credit
amongst the Nobility, the Public conceived the greater Hatred and Contempt
against his Enemy; which proved very hurtful to the Welfare of the Country.
When the Council was assembled, Rocas and Dandoli were of contrary Opinions; so
that no good could be expected to the present State of Affairs: And thus the
Winter was past over in Quarrels and fruitless Debates.

In the beginning of the Spring, there arose a Dispute between the Magistrates
of Nicosia and Famagusta, touching the Transport of Grain, which was gathered
in the fruitful Plains of Messara, equally distantfrom these two Towns. 'Twas
thought fitting, for the adjusting of this Difference, to agree on a Place and
Time, wherein all the Magistrates and Military Officers should meet; in which
Assembly, Matters concerning the War, should be treated on, and each Person his
Function and Post allotted him, that he might be in a readiness on the first
Occasion: Which Meeting was held at a Place called Aschia; where all present
exhorted one another to lay aside their Differences, and jointly concur to the
common Safety. They afterward decreed, That the Corn of the Territory of
Messara, should be equally shared between Famagusta and Nicosia; each of them
gathering that part which lay nearest them. They moreover Ordered, when this
was done, That the Countries which were farthest distant, and whose Crops would
be troublesome to be transported, should be laid waste, to hinder the Enemy from
Forage. But they after changed their Design into that of preserving them for
the refreshment of the Christian Army, which they expected would come to their
Assistance; contenting themselves with pulling down all Mills, to deprive the
Enemy of the Use of them; who yet profited by so abundant a Crop when they
least expected it; having already stored themselves with Provisions from
Cilicia. After a long Deliberation of what Place Baglioni should undertake the
Defense, 'twas resolved, he should shut himself up in Famagusta; which
according to all appearances, was to be first besieged; and that in expectation
of the Three Thousand Men which Martiningo was to bring them from Venice, there
should be a like Number chosen from among the Freed Men of the Island, to
strengthen the Garrison: That there should be as many put into Nicosia, with
some new Levies raised out of the Country; and the Citizens of both Places,
were to take Arms, and be listed into Companies; which should be commanded by
young Gentlemen. There was afterward an Account taken f the Number of Men each
of these Cities could well contain; and those who lived far in the Country,
were Ordered to leave their Villages, and retire to these Places of Strength.
The mixed Multitude, such as Women, Children, and aged Persons, were enjoined to
betake themselves to the Woods and Mountains, with whatsoever they could carry;
and several were sent out to discover in what Parts they could be in most
surety. John Susomini, a prudent and careful Person, had the Charge of leading
them thither with their Goods and Chattels. Cerines, a Maritine Town, situated
over against Cilicia, was ordered to be ruined; as not being in a condition to
hold out a Siege; and its Artillery to be transported to Nicosia: But some
being of a contrary Opinion, 'twas thought expedient to communicate this Affair
to the Senate, and expect its Orders. The greatest Difficulty agitated, was,
Whether 'twere most advantageous to oppose the Enemies Descent, or let them
Land without Resistance? Rocas and Dandoli, who endeavored to raise their
Reputation in Military Affairs, by singular Opinions, rejected such as were
necessary to be followed; and constantly maintained, by a fatal obstinacy to
their Country, That the Infidels should be suffered to Land. Astor Baglioni
endeavored on the contrary, to make them embrace a more generous Resolution:
He vehemently set before them, That there is nothing more dangerous than
Despair or Distrust at the sight of an Enemy; People seldom coming to
themselves in such a kind of Consternation: That he knew, after a particular
Search, there were more Horse in the Island than was conceived; there being
enough to mount eight Thousand Men; the greatest part of which, might be Armed
with Lances, and the rest with Carabins and Muskets; and in this Equipage might
successfully oppose the Infidels Landing; and being seconded by choice Men of
the rest of the Militia, and five and twenty Thousand Foot, drawn up on the
Hills of Salines, on the Seacoast; the sight of so considerable an Army would
perhaps put a stop to the Enemies Fleet, and defer their Landing: That
whatsoever might happen, they must of necessity oppose them, though they should
fail, and be overpowered by their Number: That in fine, All the Rules of War
obliged them to resist their Entrance, unless they designed to render
themselves contemptible to their Enemies, and cast the Cypriots into a
Consternation.

All the Gentry that assisted at this Council, were of Baglioni's Opinion, and
promised him to use their utmost Endeavors to facilitate the execution of this
Design: But Dandoli and Rocas persisted in maintaining, there were only
Famagusta and Nicosia to be defended; and that the Malignity of the Air, with
the excessive Heats would drive away the Turks from the other Parts of the
Island.

Rocas added, that Palavicinus had been of the same Opinion in Venice; which
was approved by the Senate; and therefore he must yield without wavering, to
the Sentiment of so great a Captain, being likewise confirmed by the Sovereign
Council, without the least respect to the Reasons which might be alleged to
the contrary. Baglioni interrupting him, To what purpose (said he) is
Palavicinus and the Senate cited? Are we not here on the Spot, and consequently
far better instructed in the present Exigency of Affairs, than all the
Republic joined together, who judge only from a simple Relation? It is Men,
and not Counsel, which ought to have been sent us from Venice. The Passion,
with which he was transported, made him add, That if no body else would follow
him, he would go to the Seaside with his Friends and Domestics, to receive
the Infidels at their Descent; for he would never consent they should Land, as
if the Country was to be delivered to them by Agreement: That he would give
them some Demonstrations of Courage, at least with his small Company, if he
could not hinder their Design; it being a grievous shame to be exposed to the
Raillery of these Barbarians, and hear them say, The Venetians were so
affrighted at the News of their Coming, that they were not able to bear the
sight of them. The two Chiefs hardening themselves in their Obstinacy, as fast
as they found Resistance, Baglioni added, He would lead up as many Horse as he
could find in the humor to attend him to the place most in danger; at least to
learn the Force and Number of the Barbarians; being not able to bear the
Reproaches which would be cast on his Country. That they had not one Person of
sufficient Valor to face the Enemy. Dandoli made Answer, He might do as he
pleased; but would never consent to his having any Troops committed to him:
Saying moreover, he would send Notice to the Senate of the Success of so rash
an Enterprise. Baglioni, who knew the Senate confided more in the Providors,
than in the Military Officers, and that they do more approve a discreet
Conduct, than a bold and honorable Exploit, pretended to persist in his
Resolution, but intended to do nothing contrary to the Providors determination.

The Assembly being broke up, each Person departed to his Post, to execute the
Orders which belonged to him.

Things being in this condition, and all People bewailing this Disunion amongst
the Chief Persons in Authority, the Vessels on which Martiningo was embarked
with the three Thousand Men which the Senate sent to Cyprus, touched at
Famagusta, and brought the sad News of the Death of their Commander; whose Age
not being able to undergo the Tediousness of the Voyage, increased by the ill
Air, he died in the way, not suffering them to carry him to shore, in order to
his Recovery. He was the more regretted, by reason his Death was accompanied
with that of the greatest part of his Men, seized by the same Distemper; so
that the Remainder arrived in such a condition, as sensibly touched all who
were interessed in the Welfare of the Republic.

On a Belief that the Infidels would begin by the Siege of Famagusta, the
Defense thereof was committed to Baglioni; and Rocas returned to Nicosia, to
command that Garrison. And it being well known that neither Dandoli, nor He
understood the Art of War, they had therefore two old Officers given 'em;
Ranconi and Palacio, to assist them in their Councils, in case they had
Docility enough to be instructed. Since the Conference at Aschia, Affairs moved
but slowly, and the carrying on of the Fortifications was in a manner
neglected. The Officers encouraged the Soldiers in their Laziness, by telling
them, The Turks would undertake nothing till the next Campaign, so that they
had time enough to provide for the Defense of the Country. They were also so
imprudent as to suffer the Freed Men newly listed, to return home, and bring if
they would, their Wives into the Garrisons.

Scarcely were they got to their Villages, but Nicosia was alarmed by the
Discovery of Twenty five Sail of Turks Men of War, lying at Anchor over against
the Isle of Baffo. This News strangely surprised the Officers, and cast the
People into a horrible Consternation. 'Twas thought immediately the whole Fleet
was not far distant from this Squadron; and indeed they were in the right; for
these were sent before, commanded by Siroc, one of the General Officers, with
Order to make Descent on the Island, and get information from the first that
fell into his hands, of the State and Strength of the Country, the Designs and
Motions of the Governors, and to return quickly with an Account of what he had
learnt. Siroc landed at a Place called Lara, with five hundred Foot, seized on
some Peasants, whose Villages he burnt and pillaged. This Booty having drawn
him farther into the Island, he was charged by a Regiment of Epirot-Horse,
whose Quarters lay near Lara, and beaten back to his own Vessels; leaving
eleven of his Men dead on the place, and two of 'em were taken Prisoners, with
one of their Ensigns. Zandochio, who commanded this Regiment of Horse, entered
into Nicosia, puffed up with this small advantage, and caused to be carried
before him, on the top of Lances, the Heads of these Enemies that were killed.
'Twas known from these two Prisoners, That the Barbarian Army lay in the Port
of Finicia; and that the Sultans never before set out such a numerous Fleet, so
well stored with Men, and all sorts of Provision and Ammunition necessary for
so prodigious an Army: That the Vizier, who commanded it, was still employed in
embarking the Horse, and would soon follow in Person. Those who expected this
inundation of Barbarians not before the next Summer, and consequently believed
the Danger at a great distance, were terribly alarmed; seeing the Enemy so
near. Dandoli and Rocas, who walked every day about the Town, full of Pride and
Confidence, found themselves immediately possessed with such a disheartning
Faintness and Terror, the Effects whereof could not be concealed from every
vulgar Eye: They at last saw themselves void of Counsel and Experience; their
Fortifications unfinished, their Garrison without Arms, and much weakened by the
Leave they had given the Freed-Men. They mistrusted the Fidelity of their
Slaves, the incapacity of their Officers of War, and their Authority and Power
over the Soldiers: They sent immediately Commands to the Freed-Men to return to
Nicosia: But most of these rude and brutish People refused to obey their
Orders, and withdrew into the Forests and Mountains, believing themselves in
greater safety, and more at liberty there, than within the Walls; so that
scarcely five hundred, of the seven thousand who were Mustered, returned: 'Twas
also proposed to give Liberty to the Slaves; and this was, without doubt, an
excellent means to make them forget the Tyranny of their Masters, and engage
them faithfully to serve the Republic, had not this Means been thought on too
late: Yet was it proclaimed throughout all the Island, That the Senate granted
a full and perfect Liberty in general to all those who were born Slaves;
exhorting them, for an Acknowledgment of this Grace, that such amongst them as
were able to bear Arms, should repair with diligence to Nic^sia and Famagusta,
for the common Defense of the Country. This Bait drew not many; and excepting
some who lived in the neighboring parts, and could not handsomely get away,
they all withdrew into the Mountains with their Families, and whatsoever they
could carry along with them.

This Proclamation was made about the Seventh of June; and in the First of July
following the Ottoman Fleet appeared, making with full Sail toward the Island.
They cast Anchor at Baffo, and rode there only one day, and then came up to
Limisso, where they Landed some small Forces, to be informed of the Country:
They were charged by the Epir^t Cavalry, and constrained to return to their
Vessels with some Loss. The Barbarians advanced the next Morning as far as
Salines, entering into the Gulf which bears that Name; and though they expected
to fight at their Descent, yet did they Land all their Forces without the least
resistance. Baglioni still endeavored to vindicate the Cypriots from this
Affro^t, and required, to no purpose, some Horse to contend with them on the
Shore.

But Dandoli and Rocas kept with them all the Cavalry; and whether they feared
they should be beaten, or agreed together to disgust this brave Commander, they
contented themselves with being Spectators of their Landing. Mustapha took this
for a good Omen of their base and foolish Conduct; and his Army promised to
themselves, as well as he, an assured Victory. This Navy consisted in near four
hundred Vessels of all kinds. There were one hundred and sixty Galleys, or
Frigates, near fifty Galliots; the rest were laden with Victuals, Ammunition,
and Soldiers. But this Number aggrandiz'd extremely the Fleet, which extended
it self as far as the Eye could reach; and the Cypriots, affrighted at this
terrible Aspect, kept a sad and solitary Silence at the noise of the Shouts of
Joy uttered by the Soldiers and Seamen. Rocas and Dandoli shut themselves up
in Nicosia with their Horse; and Baglioni retired to Famagusta; which was the
first Place to be besieged, according to the Report of the Fugitives and
Prisoners. The Turkish Army consisted of seventy thousand Men, without
reckoning the Slaves, and such as followed the Camp; which made in all,
according to exact computation, above an hundred thousand Men. There were near
nine thousand Janissaries in this Expedition; in whose Valor the Turks put
their greatest Confidence. They had two thousand Horse, and as many Mules, and
other Beasts of Carriage.

All this Army was soon Landed; and Mustapha, who was the Principal Author of
the War, had the general Command of them. Hali and Piali were jointly
Commanders of the Fleet; but this latter with more Authority than his
Companion, according to the Custom of the Turks, who always appoint two
Admirals; one of which has greater Power than the other. They Landed none of
the Men belonging to them, for fear of being surprised by the Christians Fleet,
which they expected must certainly come to the Succor of the Island.

Mustapha, having for some days refreshed his Army, he during that timecaused
a general Muster to be made of it, and informed himself of the state and
strength of the Cypriots; preparing all things for the Siege of Famagusta,
according to what he had designed before he parted from Constantinople: But he
received an Information, which obliged him to think of another Enterprise. Two
Greeks habituated in Nicosia, stole secretly thence in the Night, and came into
into the Camp: They were led to his Tent; where they declared, they had Matters
of importance to discover to him, whence they might draw great Advantages,
provided their Relations found Credit with him, and they a certain Reward
proportionable to the Service they were able to render him: And to procure an
entire Confidence from him, they told him their intentions were to become
Mahometans.

The Vizier having sent for his Interpreters, and dismissed those about him, they
showed how Nicosia, whose Fortifications and Strength they were exactly
acquainted with, was not in a condition to hold out long; giving him a perfect
Account of the Place, the Incapacity of the Commanders, for whom the Soldiers
had a great Aversion and Contempt; of the ill State of the Garrison, and small
Provision of Victuals and Ammunition for the sustaining a Siege. These things,
part of which were too true, were so exaggerated by these two Fugitives, that
Mustapha easily suffered himself to be persuaded by them. They represented him
with the immense Riches which were shut up in Nicosia, with all the Nobility of
the Isle, to tempt his Avarice, by the hopes of an inestimable Booty: They
assured him, on so easy a Conquest depended that of the whole Country: They
continually put him out of Conceit with besieging Famagusta, by showing him the
Garrison was strong there, and its Commander would defend the Place to the last
Extremity; and moreover, the taking of it could not much advance his Affairs:
That he ought to march straight to Nicosia, to which Place they would be his
Guides, and lead him the nearest way; entreating him to keep them as Hostages
and Pledges of an assured Victory. The Vizier persuaded by these earnest
Remonstrances, gave over his first Design, commends the Zeal of these
Renegadoes, makes them Presents, promises them great Rewards, and shows them
publicly all Respect imaginable: He communicated the next Morning to Piali,
Chief Bassa of the Sea, whatsoever he learnt from these Traitors; but Piali was
not of opinion these Villains should be so soon and so greatly credited: He
would have the Vizier believe, that the first Enterprise was of far greater
Importance; especially considering the Sultan had likewise approved of it; and
might be carried on at the same time both by Sea and Land, the Christians not
being in a capacity to sustain these two different Attacks: That the Loss of
Famagusta, depriving the Nicosians of all hopes of Succor, they must surrender
to such an Army: That Nicosia, the Capital of the Kingdom, and situated in the
midst of the Country, had lately been fortified by the Venetians, with great
Care and Charge; which was sufficient to show thence must be expected a
vigorous Defense, the Place being in such a condition: That the Nobility, and
all the Riches of the Isle being therein included, it is to be expected, the
Gentry, animated by a desire to preserve their Treasure and Families, must hold
out in Defense to the last Breath: That he would not empty his Ships of
Soldiers to increase the Land-Army, before he understood what Strength he
needed to withstand the Christian Fleet, which would infallibly come to the
Assistance of the Besieged. Thus did Piali declare himself: Whether this was
his real Opinion, or that he was nettled to see a Design undertaken in which he
could have no part: But Mustapha stuck the closer to this new Project; by
having put some Christian Prisoners to the Torture, the violence of which made
'em confirm the greatest part of those things the two Greeks had spoken. Being
thus resolved, he sent three thousand Men toward Famagusta, to conceal his
real Design, with Order to march secretly thither, lest Baglioni, who knew well
the Ground, should charge them at a disadvantage, to possess themselves of all
Avenues, and hinder any Communication betwixt the two Cities. He gave a Cypriot
Monk, who was found amongst the Prisoners, some Letters to the Chief of the
Nobility, stuffed with proud and threatening Terms, which these Barbarians
commonly use to exalt the Power of their Sovereigns, which they insolently
equal to that of the Almighty. He treated in his Letters, with an insupportable
Disdainfulness, not only the Venetians, but all Christians in general; and
summonn'd at the same time, the Cypriots to deliver to him their Capital City;
and put him in possession of their whole State, with a promise to let them live
in an entire Liberty, and suffer them to enjoy their Religion and Estates. The
Nicosians returning no Answer to such unreasonable Propositions, Mustapha took
this so hainously, that he wasted all the Country round about. The Inhabitants
of the Borough of Leiparus felt the first Effects of his Cruelty: But whether
they were disgusted by the bad Usage they had long received from the Nobility,
or would secure themselves from being pillaged, and their Houses from being
burnt, they surrendered themselves to the Infidels, on advantageous Conditions;
and several other small Places followed their Example. The Nicosians thought
themselves obliged to punish this Fact, to prevent the ill Consequences of it;
and therefore sent some Regiments under the Command of Demetrius Lascaris,
which being arrived at Leiparus, cut all the Inhabitants Throats, during an
obscure Night, whom they surprised in their Beds; not sparing a man of them,
and burnt the Village. This severe Chastisement affrighted the neighboring
parts, and kept the rest of the Isle within the Bounds of their Duty.

In the mean time, Mustapha parted from Salines, at the Head of two thousand
Horse, and a considerable Body of Foot, ordering the rest of his Army to follow
him with the Artillery and Baggage; and after six days March, came, and posted
himself within four Niles of Nicosia. There were in the Town fifteen hundred
Italians, a thousand Gentlemen, with their Domestics, two thousand Freed-men
of the new raised Forces, two thousand of other Foot, drawn from different
parts of the Island, two thousand five hundred Citizens in Arms, two hundred
Epirot-Foot, five hundred Horse of the same Nation, and a thousand other
Cavaliers, consisting of Gentry: Besides as many Slaves, as were found able to
do Service, had Arms given 'em, and the Place was furnished with all sorts of
Ammunition and Provisions for a long Siege. Besides, the multitude of
unserviceable People, which were retired into inaccessible places; more then
twenty thousand Men, able to defend the Country, were gone to seek for Safety
in the same Retreats. There might have been drawn a great Succor from so
considerable a Number, had there been Arms for 'em, and a Commander capable to
manage them. Captain Palaceo, a Person of a consummated Experience, and who
was sent to Nicosia, as has been already observed, to assist Rocas and Dandoli
with his Advice, was for charging the Enemy in their March with all the Horse,
and a part of the Foot; assuring them, they would be surpised by this vigorous
opposition, and put in Disorder before they could be formed into a Body. Although
these two Generals were often ruled by Palaceo's Opinion, yet they now again
reassumed their former Obstinacy, and rejected this wholesome Advice.

The whole Turkish Army came up the next Morning, being the Twenty Second of
July, to the Vizier, who caused his Tent to be set in a Plain at the Foot of a
little Hill, called Mandia, from the neighboring Village: He extended his Camp
as far as a Countrey-Seat belonging to Demetrius. Having found all the Wells
thereabouts poisoned, he caused new ones to be dug, and proved several to be
wholesome Water; so that the Christians, who thought to poison the Infidels, or
make them undergo an extreme Thirst, had the displeasure of seeing this their
Stratagem of none effect. Mustapha surrounded the Place at the Head of his
Cavalry, to view it, and draw out the Garrison; but Dandoli and Rocas would not
suffer the Nobility nor Epirots to sally forth; who burnt with a desire of
charging the Infidels. The Vizier, who often turned his Head toward the side
of the Ramparts, seeing no body appear, cried out in Laughing, The Christians
were to blame in believing themselves secure behind their Walls. He caused
Lines to be drawn as near as could be to the Body of the Town: He raised his
first Battery on the side of St. Martin's Gate, over against the Bastion of
Podocatero, with such diligence, that the work was finished in a Night's time;
the Besieged having scarce made any opposition. This Battery being distant
about three hundred paces from the Bastion, did not much damage either the
Walls, or the neighboring Houses; the Infidels raised three more; one against
St. George's Church, the other on a Prominency called St. Marguerite's Place;
and a third, on a rising Ground, termed Mandia; with which, they endeavored to
ruin those of the Besieged, and dismount their Cannon; but seeing this
Artillery advanced not much their Design, the Vizier made the Trench be carried
on to the Walls of the Ancient Town, and within an hundred and fifty paces to
the Counterscarp. He afterward built four Forts, opposite to so many Bastions,
called Podocatero, Avila, Constance, and Tripoli, from the Names of those who
took care of their Structure under the inspection of Savoriani. These Works
being soon finished, the Turks placed great Pieces of Ordnance on them, some of
which carried Bullets of sixty pound weight, which would in a short time grind
the Wall to Powder: But having fired continually for four days together, they
observed the Bullets entered only the Earth which filled the Thickness of the
Walls; wherefore they quitted these new Batteries. The Commanders of the Place,
who dared not to Sally out, endeavored to ruin with their Cannon the Enemies
Works, killing every day several of their Men. The Turks displeased at the
small effect of their Artillery, advanced their Trenches near enough to the
Counter-scarp, to shelter themselves from the continual Firings of the
Besieged. This Work contained several Angles, and the Earth thrown up on the
side of the Town, was a sufficient Defense to the Workmen: They wrought day and
night with an indefatigable Toil, without resting in the time of the greatest
Heat; so that in a small space they got to the Walls. They made a second deep
Trench, that was Cannon-proof against the Town; which was lined with with
Musketeers; who fired so thick, that the Besieged durst not appear on their
Ramparts; so that the Infidels lodged themselves in the Ditch without any
resistance. The Cavalry of the Garrison would have sallied out on the Turks, to
hinder these near Approaches, but they could never get leave of their Superiors.

The Siege grew every day worse for the Christians, the Garrison being
considerably weakened by the great number of Soldiers that were killed or
wounded. The Infidels gave 'em not a Moments Rest, attacking them in several
places at a time; having fresh Men continually to supply the places of the
tired or slain. They were already so well lodged in the Ditch, that they began
to undermine and pluck down the Walls, and there remained no way to hinder them
from entering the Town. In this Extremity, the Chief of the Garrison went to
Rocas and Dandoli, to whom they represented the deplorable state of the Place;
conjuring them to have pity on the Capital City of the Island, and not suffer
so many brave Men to be slain like Beasts, pent up within Walls: That if they
must perish, it might be with Arms in their hands; by which means, they should
not undergo an inglorious and languishing Death; which is commonly met with in
an obstinate Siege: That they might be permitted to charge the Barbarians.
whose Insolence grew every day insupportable: That true Valor showed it self
more by fighting with Swords in their Hands, than firing great or small Pieces
at a distance; seeing Fortune many times overthrew the Brave and Valiant in
this manner, by the hands of a paultry Fellow, during a Siege; and the Enemies
having made themselves Masters of the Outworks, they were near the last
extremity, so that they could not comprehend the Policy of keeping Peoples
Spirits evaporating between Walls; and which at the same time increased the
Courage of the Turks; and that in short, their only Safety consisted in making
a vigorous Sally, before the Garrison was wholly out of condition to sustain a
general Assault. These Remonstrances and Entreaties somewhat prevailed over the
Commanders; but though they were convinced of the necessity of a Sally, yet were
they hardly brought to yield to it; alleging, there remained only five hundred
Italian Soldiers, in whom lay all their Confidence, as not much trusting the
Freed-Men, who were altogether undisciplined; much less the Citizens, a great
part of which they had lost in the forty days Siege, as well by the excessive
heat, as the Enemies hands; who were so far from understanding the Trade of
War, that they could not tell how to carry their Arms. After long Contests, a
Sally was at length granted; and for this end, a thousand Foot were chosen, who
were to be sustained by the Epirot Cavalry. Those of the Ifle could not suffer
themselves to be reserved in an occasion which must decide the good or bad
Fortune of Nicosia; and therefore pressed Dandoli to permit them to join with
the Epirots; showing him what a great Affront 'twould be to young People, who
desired nothing more than to spend their Blood in the Honor and Defense of
their Country, to give this plain demonstration of mistrust of their Courage
and Fidelity. Dandoli, who was not easily brought to change his Mind, and
feared the Place would be in this manner left destitute, forbid any Horse to
stir, except those of the Epirots. The next Morning there were drawn out two
thousand Men; the Command of which was given to Caesar Pioveni; to whom was
joined Albert Scotto, and Gregory Panteus, together with Nicholas Gradenigo and
Zanet Dandoli, two young Noble Venetians. They were ordered to destroy the
Enemies Outworks, and if possible, to render useless their Cannon, as soon as
they had driven them out of their Trenches. Pioveni, having provided all things
necessary for this Exploit, gave Order to his Men to be ready about Noon at the
Town-Gate; because the Turks usually went te rest at that time. Although the
Design they had laid, was not well executed, by the Greeks Fault, who set on
the Avant-Guard before the Sign given, through the Envy of some Officers, who
were jealous lest their Commanders should get too much Honor by a happy
Success: Yet Pioveni at the Head of this Detachment, Marched out by a way which
lay private about the Ditches, and led to the Trenches. He arrived there
without any disturbance unperceived, and charged with so great Valor, that the
Turks surpised with this unlooked for Onset, before they could give notice
thereof to the Camp, believing the Christians to be more in number than they
were, fled before them as fast as they could. The Assailants killed several of
them, and became Masters of the Places where they lodged; and thinking they
were followed by their Horse, pursued them into their Camp, which they filled
with Disorder and Confusion. But Dandoli, whom perhaps God had appointed to be
a Minister of his wrath to the Cypriots; for the Ruin of their City, would
needs hinder the Epirots from passing out of the Town. Some Gentlemen highly
offended at his forbidding them to be of the Party with the Epirot-Horse, had
armed themselves like them, and mixed amongst them. John Falerio, a Noble
Venetian, who was to be their Leader, was known by his too great care of
concealing himself; and Dandoli, who stood at the Town-Gate, to see his Orders
observed, reprehended him too sharply for this his Disobedience; Falerio boldly
answered him, He thought himself obliged in this Occasion to hazard his Life
in the Republic 's Service: But Dandoli more enraged by this Reply, caused the
Gates to be shut, and commanded the Epirots to return. The Chief of the
Garrison entreated him to Sacrifice his Resentment to the need his Men had to
be supported; laying before him, how that these brave Foot-Souldiers would be
immediately cut in pieces before his Face, if some Horse were not suddenly sent
to their Succor: That they ought not to be thus abandoned for the Imprudence
of some rash young Heads; yet whose Fault was too great a desire to show their
Courage. But Dandoli, inflexible to their Reasons and Entreaties, answered in a
Fury, Let them perish rather than my Orders be disobeyed. And thus did this
mean Soul, transported by Pride, expose this generous Company, in whose Safety
consisted that of the whole State.

These valiant Men, having rendered useless the Cannon of both the Batteries,
thirsting after Glory and Revenge, pursued too far the flying Enemy. Mustapha
advertized of the Rout of his Men, sent out a Party of Horse to their Relief;
and they rallying at the sight of this Assistance, returned to the Combat with
greater vigor. The Christians, who thought themselves backed by the Epirots,
made a firm resistance, and both sides did their utmost. The Turks were
animated by the shame of having been driven from their Trenches, by an handful
of Christians, in the sight of so great an Army: and they, on the other hand,
encouraged by the assurance of the Assistance of the Epirots, flattered
themselves with the hopes of a certain Victory. But the Turkish Horse having
charged on every side their small Number, they were forced to take their Heels,
and yield to the Multitude. The Spahies, who pursued them, made a great
Slaughter of them: The Remainder which could not enter into the Town, the Gates
having been shut, for fear the Infidels should enter, lay all night in the
Ditches, and with much danger and difficulty gat entrance through the Breaches
already made in the Ramparts. The Turks lost fifteen hundred Men in this
Occasion, and the Christians about two hundred; amongst whom, is to be chiefly
remembered Caesar Pioveni, their Leader; who often looked toward the Town for
the Horse which were to relieve them; but seeing no appearance of Succor, he
threw himself desperately on the Enemies, and was overpowered by their Number.
Albert Scotto, and many others, who behaved themselves with the same
Generosity, incurred the same Fate. There had been obtained a signal Advantage
over the Enemy that day, and the Turks would not have been able to extricate
themselves out of their Disorder; had the Christian Cavalry come in to their
Assistance, at the same time the Trenches were cleared: The Terror was so great
in their Camp, that several there began to think of Flight. They since
confessed, That had this Advantage been closely followed, and their Artillery
made useless, they must have raised the Siege. Dandoli, to repair the Damage
which his Obstinacy had occasioned, became yet more intractable; swearing, he
would not henceforward suffer a Man to out of the Town at any ones Instance,
under pretense of charging the Infidels, or ruining their Works. The Turks
profited by this Shock, in taking greater Care of themselves, and doubling the
Guard over the Workmen, whom they relieved continually; and thus advanced their
Works with an incredible diligence. They had already beat down part of the
Ramparts, and the forepart of the Bastions; so that 'twas no hard matter to
ascend on the Breaches. The Besieged abandoning the Outworks, retrenched
themselves with a great Ditch, and repaired as well as they could withinside
the Ruins of their Bastions; and put themselves in a condition to fight on the
Walls. The Infidels doubled their Attacks; and the hope of certain Pillage,
rendered them indefatigable. Although the Christians killed them a great many
Men, yet were they weakened themselves by these means. The few Soldiers which
remained, had scarce any Arms in good order, nor Powder and other Ammunition;
and this Extremity began to discourage them about the Issue of the Siege: Yet
the hopes of the Christian Fleet, which was daily expected, bore up their
Spirits against their ill Fortune, and bad Conduct of their Commanders.
Mustapha caused several Letters to be shot into the Town, filled with
Threatenings and Promises; by which, he exhorted them to prevent their
approaching Ruin: But this Course procured him no Success, the Soldiers being
still resolute, in expectation of Assistance, which rendered them incompliable.

They wrote to Baglioni, to entreat him, if he could leave Famagusta, without
great prejudice to his Interest, and that of the State, to come to their
assistance. These Letters were written in Characters, lest they should be
intercepted, and there were great Rewards promised to him that would undertake
to carry them. The Ways were so diligently kept, that they fell into the
Enemies hands; the Persons that were entrusted with them, being led round about
the Walls, and massacred in the sight of the Besieged, to deter others from
accepting for the future, such a dangerous Commission. Baptista Scolomban, a
brave and daring Officer, who commanded two hundred Men in the Town, and was
perfectly acquainted with the Ways, was entreated by all the Garrison, to
expose himself for the common Safety, and carry a Letter to Famagusta.
Scolomban affected with the common Calamity, undertook this dangerous
Enterprise; and leaving the City by night, he arrived at Famagusta, by winding
and difficult Ways. He gave an Account to Baglioni, of the deplorable State of
the Nicosians; entreating his Pity, and that he would come and repair the
Damage, which had principally happened by the incapacity of the Commanders.
Baglioni could not leave his Post, much less ungarrison the Place in favor of
the Besieged: Yet, to satisfy, in some measure, those unhappy People, who
implored his Assistance, and lest it should be suspected, he was deterred by
the greatness of the danger, he resolved to throw himself into Nicosia; and to
keep this his Intent secret, supposing them of Famagusta would hinder his
Departure. Scolomban assured him, his Presence would re-animate the Inhabitants
and Soldiers, and his Orders would be executed with the greatest joy and
readiness imaginable. He well knew the small sufficiency of both Dandoli and
Rocas, and foresaw the loss of the Capital City, would make great way for that
of Famagusta: But this Design being discovered, his House was immediately
besieged by the Populacy; who resolved to retain him by force, if their
Entreaties could not prevail. Bragadin and Tipoli, who no more approved of this
his Resolution, showed him so plainly the ill Consequence, that he gave himself
up to their Reasons. Bragadin taking on him to speak in the Name of the Town;
gave Scolomban to understand the Kingdom would incur the Risk of being lost, by
weakening the Garrison of so important a Place, and taking thence so able and
necessary a Commander: That this was an exposing his Person to an inevitable
Danger, and in a manner, to deliver Famagusta into the Enemies Hands: That
should they consent to his Departure, 'twas not in their power to contain the
People and Garrison: That the Soldiers would desert the Place, in seeing
themselves bereaved of their General; and the Citizens, despairing of their
Safety in a Defense, would set open their Gates to the Infidels. Scolomban
returned with this Answer; and the Nicosians, expecting no longer any Succor
thence, sent to those who were retired on the Mountains; beseeching them to
choose out some of the ablest Persons amongst them, to come to their
Assistance; showing them the deplorable Condition whereinto they were reduced:
But their Messengers having been surpised, the Infidels loaded them with
Irons, and carried them about for a Spectacle to the Besieged; to inform them,
that they were forsaken on all hands, so that they had no other way but to
surrender.

The Vizier, finding his Promises and Threatenings ineffectual, and that his
best Soldiers. were carried away by Sickness, caused by the excessive Heats,
besides those he lost every day in the Attacks, resolved to make a general
Assault, before the Courage and Number of his Men were more diminished.
Providence seconded this Design; for receiving frequently News of the
Christian-Fleet's being kept back at Candia, by the contagious Distemper, and
how they had already lost above twenty thousand Men; and that the Venetians
could not soon enough remedy this Misfortune: He wrote to Piali, to send him a
Detachment of Janissaries, and other Infantry; assuring him, he need not fear
any danger on the Sea, seeing the Allies were so far from succouring the
Cypriots: That their chief Care was, to preserve themselves from the Plague:
That he had made a considerable Breach in the Walls of Nicosia; the taking of
which was certain, if he would share the Honor with him.

Hali came and joined him, at the Head of a great Body of Janissaries, filled up
with several Volunteers, drawn out by the hope of Pillage. Mustapha, being
recruited with these new Forces, appointed a general Assault to be made on the
Eighth of September, and prepared all things necessary with great Care, for
this important Expedition. He commanded his Officers to refresh their
Soldiers; to keep them in good Order, and exhort them to acquit themselves
well, by the remembrance of their past Actions: He showed, That they were at
the Vigil of finishing honorably this War, and being recompensed for their
Hardships and Labors: That they were to storm a Place, which could no longer
hold out against them; considering the condition whereunto their Cannon had
reduced its Walls; having moreover to do with People covered with Wounds, and
so greatly dismayed, that despairing of their own strength, they every day
implored the Assistance of their Neighbors, which assured them of the Victory,
provided they were not wanting in their Duty: That in becoming Masters of a
City of such consequence, they would possess the Riches of a whole Kingdom;
whose Treasures gathered during several Ages, should be equally divided amongst
them: That the Venetians, in fortifying Nicosia, showed plainly enough the
Importance and Worth of the Place.

The Soldiers being thus animated by great Encouragements and Promises from
their Officers, and the Army divided into four Bodies, they were ordered to
March at Break of Day toward the Town. These four Squadrons attacked at the
same time the four Bastions of the Place, before which the Besieged had raised
Forts. The Bassa of Caramania commanded that party which attacked that of
Podocatero; Musaferro, that of the Fort of Constance; and Hali and Mustapha
ascended at the same time on the Breaches of those of D'Avila and Tripoli, with
the Sound of Drums and Trumpets. The Besieged had no expert Commanders, and
labored besides under the want of many Necessaries; yet made an incredible
resistance. They were persuaded, that the Arrival of the Confedrates obliged
the Turks to this vigorous Assault; and if they were repulsed, they would
abandon the Siege, and betake 'emselves to their Vessels. This Belief doubled
their Courage, and kept them up with daily Expectations of bettering their
Fortune: They divided those Soldiers which remained, and dispersed them on the
Defense of the Breaches, and planted their Cannon in proper places, to divert
the approaching Storm. They brought on their Walls all sorts of Weapons and
artificial Fires; and in general, whatsoever might annoy the Assailants; whom
they received with that Resolution and Valor, that they drove them from off
their Ramparts; having first made a great Slaughter of them. Although the
Besieged lost fewer Men by far than the Infidels, yet were they more weakened
than they; for the Detachment from the Fleet, enabled the Besiegers to send
continually fresh Men, which relieved the wounded and weary; and the
Christians, on the contrary, sustained all these different Efforts, without a
Moment's Refreshment. These Onsets lasted long, and the Barbarians, who thought
to carry the Place at the first Assault, began to doubt of the Victory; and
grew less fierce at the sight of that Resistance, which they did not foresee.
The Besieged on the other hand, emboldened, by having made so brave a
Resistance, defended themselves with a mavelous Vigor and Constancy.
Mustapha, and the Generals of the Turkish Army, seeing their People thus
repulsed, edged them on by Reproaching them for not making themselves Masters
of a Place, in a manner levelled; and defended only by an ignorant and
undisciplined Handful of Men. These Invectives, together with the hope of
Booty; of which these Barbarians were remembered, made them begin again an
Attack, far more terrible than the former; but which also ended in a Repulse
from the Besieged, though more tired and weakened than ever. The Italians and
Cypriot-Gentry followed by their Vassals and Domestics, exhorted one another
to prevent by an honorable Death, the shameful Loss of their Lives and
Country. Those who defended the Bastion of Constance, attacked by the Bassa
Musaferro, overthrew the Infidels into the Ditch, with their Engines, planted
under certain little Places of Shelter, devised by an able Engineer, named
Susomini. The others behaved themselves as well at the Bulwarks of Avila and
Tripoli; and the Christians, puffed up with this Glorious Success, insulted
already over the Infidels, inviting them again to a Third Assault.

This Day might have wholly disheartened the Barbarians, and preserved Nicosia,
had not the Bassa of Caramania, who attacked the Bulwark of Podocatero, been
seconded by the ill Genius of the Place. Rocas, who defended this Bastion, and
whose obstinate Conceitedness held as long as the Siege, having repulsed the
Enemy, and seeing they returned not to the Charge again, came down into the
Town, followed by the Nobility and Soldiers, who guarded this Post, and left
it naked; which the Turks perceiving, attacked it again, and got on the top of
the Walls, and made themselves Masters of the inward Trenches; having first cut
several Christians in pieces. The Besieged, being reduced to their new
Fortifications, persist still in their resistance; but the Turks having gained
the Tops of the Walls, in great Multitudes, filled the Air with Shouts of Joy
and Victory, and possess themselves also of these Works. The Christians, and
especially the Freed-men, betake themselves to Flight: Several Gentlemen, and
some few Italian Soldiers, who had disengaged themselves from the Fury of the
Barbarians, would not dishonor their Birth, nor Country, by yielding; and
therefore resisted the Barbarians until their last Breath. Rocas, hearing the
Noise of this Disorder, and being sufficiently informed of the Occasion, by
those flying, ran in great diligence with such as he could hastily gather; but
seeing himself out of a possibility to encounter the Enemies, he placed himself
at the Head of his Company; and falling amongst them like a desperate Man, he
was stabbed several times, with Palacio, his Brethren, and others his near
Relations. The Barbarians misused his Body; exercising on it all the Cruelties
which Vulgar Ntaures are capable of.

The Conquerors, meeting no Resistance, tumultuously entered the Town; and
dividing into two Parties, Marched directly to the Bulwark of Constance; where
the Christians still held out, witb incredible Valor; where they came upon
their Backs: Those that so valorously resisted, knew nothing of the Defeat of
their Companions; but found themselves immediately invested by one of these
Parties, whom they knew by their Ensigns, and the confused Shouts and Noise of
the Soldiers; and Musaferro giving an Assault without, became Master of the
Wall. The Christians surrounded on each side, and knowing not on which hand to
turn, were all of them put to the Sword. The Forts of D'Avila and Tripoli
incurred the same Fate. Randochio got out from Nicosia by a false Door, with
the sad Remains of his Epirots, and sought his Safety by Flight. John Falerio,
who commanded a Troop of an hundred Horse, raised at the Charge of Francis
Caterini, Bishop of Baffo, resolving to sell his Life dear, came up, and
charged most desperately the Mahometans, killing all before him; but being
overwhelmed by the Multitude, he was overthrown, and lay amongst the dead,
covered with Wounds and Blood; Mustapha, having known him, gave him his Life,
and dismissed him, having first paid his Ransom. The Bishop of Nicosia, who,
during the whole Siege, had assisted the Soldiers and Inhabitants with his
Estate and Person, was killed in the mixed Multitude. The People still defended
themselves in the Streets and narrow Passages, without Officers to Head them,
or any kind of Military Skill, according as they were in any capacity of
Resistance: But the Infidels soon put to the Sword, and dispersed all those who
through Despair opposed their Cruelties; the Fury of these Barbarians sparing
neither Men, Women or Children.

Whatsoever a man may imagine that is horrible and deplorable, comes not near
the dismal condition of this unfortunate City, lately so sightly and
flourishing. All parts resounded with Shrieks and Groans. The Women of Quality
fled for Refuge into the Churches, prostrate at the feet of the Altars; with
doleful Cries imploring Heaven's Compassions. Some drew their Children with
them along the Streets; others, on their knees endeavored to soften by their
Prayers and Tears, the hardness of the Barbarians Hearts, and offered
themselves to their Swords, to atone for the Death of their innocent Families.
It Is reported, some threw themselves down off their Houses to avoid the
Brutality of the Infidels; and that others were so cruel, as to cut their own
Daughters Throats, for fear they should lose their Honor with their Liberty:
But there was one especially amongst the rest, whose Desperateness and Grief
requires a particular mention in this History.

This Woman, hearing by the Shouts, Shrieks, and other dreadful Noises,
wherewith the Town resounded, That the Infidels were become Masters of it, left
her House, to know what was become of her Husband, and three of her Children,
who had followed him to the Breaches: But seeing the Garrison routed, she
recovered her Lodging; where she soon heard they all four perished with their
Arms in their Hands, in using their utmost Endeavors to defend their Country.
This Relation depriving her of her Judgment and Reason, she enters into her
Chamber, where she beholds her young Son, who was a Child of perfect Beauty,
the only one left her, and which she loved with a tenderness not to be
expressed: This unfortunate Mother, having long held him in her Arms, tells him
in a Tone mixed with Despair and Compassion, Shall these inhumane Wretches
snatch thee out of my Arms, and make thee their Slave, abusing perhaps thy Body
too, because of thy Comeliness? In ending which Words, she stuck a Dagger into
his Throat, and afterward killed her self at three Strokes with the same
Weapon.

Mustapha, entered into the City, which was full of dead Bodies, and streaming
with Blood; where, being come to the Public Place, he made the Slaughter
cease; promising their Lives to such as laid down their Arms: Whereupon, the
Populacy rendered themselves on discretion. Dandoli, who had retired into the
Royal Palace, with several others, sent to desire Quarter of him, by a
principal Officer, named Constancio: But the Turks having, in the mean time,
broke open the Gates, and forced open the Door of that Apartment wherein he
retired, massacred him and all his Company. Podocatero defended himself to the
last, in the House of his Brother Count Tripoli, who was killed two days before
in an Assault: He made his Composition, and obtained for himself and those that
followed him, liberty of dwelling with their Wives and Children in the Town, by
paying great Ransoms, and delivering to Mustapha all the rich Furniture of this
Magnificent House: But this perfidious Turk broke his Word, and kept them all
Prisoners.

The Soldiers, distracted after Booty, filled the Town with Marks of their
Rapine and Brutishness. The Vizier, to show that Pity did not oblige him to
give Life to those who surrendered without Resistance, and that he only caused
Murdering to cease, that he might have the more Captives, made the old People
and Children to be set apart, and led into the Public Place; where having been
thrown one upon another, they were all of them most inhumanely burnt alive.
It Is thought there were above twenty thousand Persons put to the Sword after
the Town was taken; whose Death, although cruel, was envied of those who survived
them, only to bewail in Captivity the miserable Ruin of their Country. They
were seen some days after in the Fields, weak and languishing, fastened in
great Companies to long and heavy Chains, lying on the ground like so many
irrational Creatures. The Lamentations and Bewailings of the Women and
Children, were yet more irksom to the Husbands and others, than the loss of
their own Liberty; but they often saw themselves separated from each other,
without hope of ever meeting again; which made many pine away with Grief. The
Infidels carried off twenty thousand Captives from several parts of the Isle,
not reckoning those which they made in Nicosia, who were all sold into Syria
and Cilicia. Eight days was the City plundring, and transporting the Booty: But
a Courageous Cypriot-Woman snatched this Prey out of the hands of Mustapha. He
had laden the two greatest Vessels of the Ottoman Fleet with Plate and other
valuable Spoils; He also embarked on the same Vessels several of the chiefest
Gentry, comely Children, and beautiful Women, with which he intended to honor
his Return to Constantinople, and make a Present to the Grand Signior. Whilst
these Vessels were lading, which lay near one another, and staid only for a
good Wind, to set Sail; this generous Matron, preferring Death above a cruel
Servitude, descended into the Ships Hold, and courageously put Fire to the
Powder; the Flame whereof, communicating it self immediately to the other
Vessel, they were soon both consumed, with all their Lading; there escaping
only some Seamen who swam to Shore.

After the entire Desolation of Nicosia, the Cypriots who were withdrawn into
the Mountains, under the Conduct of Scipio Caraffa and Paul Synclitici, who had
often surprised and defeated the Infidels in the Fields; now by the Advice of
their Principals, sent to demand Composition, and surrendered themselves to the
Vizier, with assurance of their Lives.

There had been put a great Garrison of Italians and Freed-Men into Cerines;
which the Neighborhood of Cilicia rendered important; the taking of which, was
not over-easie, by reason of the difficulty in bringing Cannon. This Place had
been heretofore fortified, and made famous by the brave Resistance of Queen
Charlotte; whom James her Bastard-Brother, had therein long besieged: But John
Maria Mudacio, who was the Governor, dismayed at the Disaster of the Nicosians,
basely set open the Gates to the Bassa of Cilicia. Mustapha fortified the
Place, disarmed the Inhabitans, put Commanders of his own into Baffo, Limisso
and Salines, left a moderate Garrison in Nicosia; the Government of which, he
committed to Giaferro; and parted the Seventeenth Day of September with his
whole Army, to invest Famagusta. He had sent a Slave before, whom he commanded
to present to the Officers of the Place Dandoli's Head, without saying any
thing more; thinking to affright them by so terrible an Object, and oblige them
to a Surrender: But they showed little Fear at the Spectacle; and respecting
the Death of Dandoli, as an inconsiderable Loss in comparison of their Capital
City; of which this imprudent Governor was the Author: They buried his Head,
and prepared themselves to revenge the Death of their Companions. The Vizier
made his Naval Army advance at the same time as he drew near the Place, on the
Western side; thinking to dismay them, being invested both by Land and Sea. He
caused it to be summoned, and endeavored to persuade the Inhabitants 'twas
better for them to try his Mercy, than oppose his Arms; but these Promises and
Threats making no Impression on their Minds, buoyed up with confidence in the
Experience of their Governor, in the Strength of the Place, and its Garrison;
Mustapha contenting himself with this Trial of them, put his Troops into
Winter Quarters.

Thus did the Infidels advance their Conquests in this Campaign, whilst the
Confederate-Fleets, divided amongst themselves for Superiority, and too weak to
succor the Cypriots, made slow Preparations for their Deliverance. Their
Commanders having left Candia, the Seventeenth day of September, touched the
same night at a Place called The Red Castle, which lay in the mid way between
Candia and the Isle of Cyprus. Zani cast Anchor a little above the Town, and
Colonni stopped at Calmat, where Doria also came and cast Anchor, although he
affirmed this Road was dangerous. He put out to Sea at Midnight, without Notice
to Colonni beforehand, and sent him word at parting, that he foresaw a Storm
arising, and that he would sail toward Italy, if the Wind increased. This
Proceeding offending Colonni, confirmed the Venetians Suspicions; who loudly
complained of the Insincerity of this Genoese. Setting Sail the next Morn at
Break of Day, they were informed by Lewis Bembo, who was sent out to learn the
Enemies Proceedings, that Nicosia was taken, and all the rest of the Island,
excepting Famagusta, from the Relation of some Rhodians which he met in a
Vessel laden with part of the Booty of the Island. This sad News obliged Doria
to return, and join Colonni; with whom were already Zani, and the Venetian
Officers, to consult what they were to do in so sad an Occasion. Zani had
already held a Council; in which Palavicinus and Celso were not for going to
the Succor of Cyprus; and Canali, since the taking of Nicosia, was likewise of
the same Opinion. Venoccio, Quirini, and Duodi, who commanded the Galeasses,
and Troni, were for going directly to the Infidels, now grown careless, and
overcharged with Prisoners and Booty. Most of them which were Assembled in
Colonni's Galley, were for returning to Candia; and Zani also seemed to approve
of this Opinion by his Silence. Matters being in this state, 'twas concluded to
attack by the way the City of Chalcis in the Isle of Negropont, or some other
Place easy to be taken. The Noise and Confusion hindered a precise
Determination; wherefore each of them, according as his Fancy guided him,
weighed Anchor, and parted without Order. The Vessels and Galleys dispersed by
bad Weather, met not till they came to Candia; and the Tempest, by good
Fortune, threw the Generals on the Isle of Scarpanto. They met on Board of
Zani, where Doria declared to them, That finding he could do them no Service,
and the Inconveniency of the season might too long detain him, he was resolved
to conduct the King of Spain's Fleet into Sicily. Zani, fearing lest the
Infidels, hearing of their leaving Castle Rugio, or Red Castle, and their not
daring to attempt the Relief of Cyprus, should follow them as Fugitives;
earnestly entreated Doria not to forsake the Catholic King's Allies in so
great a Danger; assuring him, he might still retire at the Term prescribed.
Colonni prayed him in like manner, and showed him, his Departure would sensibly
offend the Venetians, and embroyl them with King Philip. But Doria remained
firm; replying, He need not be taught in what manner to manage the King of
Spain's Interests. Colonni answered, He knew well in what hands his Catholic
Majesty had put his Fleet. As to that, answered Doria, I shall make no Answer.
To which, replied Colonni, Were I ordered to obey any one, I should not behave
my self as you do; wherefore I think you ought to have a deferent form.
Whereunto Doria answered, That the King of Spain had not commanded him to obey
any Body, nor fight but under the Orders of the General which the Pope had
nominated. Then Colonni drew out the Letters he received from the King of
Spain, and read them openly; telling Doria, If he had any contrary to his, he
should show them for his Justisication. Doria refused to give an Account of his
Conduct and Extent of Power to any but his Sovereign, from whom he received it;
and leaving the Council, hoysted up Sail as soon as he came on Board his Galley:
Yet he thought it his Duty to salute the General of the Venetian Fleet, who was
expected at Candia; which having done, he brought his Galleys to Sicily; whence
he afterward immediately parted, accompanied only with two Galleys, going
directly to the King of Spain. His Obstinacy doubled the Venetians Suspicions;
who penetrating into the King of Spain's secret Designs, easily judged how he
intended to succor them; and the unkind Usage they found afterward, gave them
so great a Mistrust, that this Disunion occasioned all the Mischiefs which
happened to Christendom.

Colonni and Zani, having been surpised by a Tempest, reached the last to
Candia; being obliged to leave in their way the greatest part of their Ships,
which were not in so good Equipage to make much haste; some of which, not being
able to bear up against the ill Weather, were forced on shore. These two
Generals, not thinking themselves safe at Candia, as fearing the Infidels might
make after them; launched thence, to the Isle of Corfou, in great diligence;
leaving Palavicinus to wait for the rest of the Fleet, and to endeavor the
sending some Assistance to Famagusta. Quirini was ordered to guard the Coasts
of Candia, with twenty five Galleys; and the Vessels behind being come up to
Palavicinus, he joined the Fleet at Corfou. Had the Turks followed them, the
Christians would have been infallibly lost; but Piali was gone to Famagusta,
after the taking of Nicosia; thinking to hasten the Surrender of the Place,
dismayed by seeing it self attacked both by Sea and Land. He had Notice brought
him in the mean time, That the Christians came with full Sail to the Assistance
of Famagusta: Which News obliged him to land his Slaves and Booty; and this
unlading put all his Soldiers into Disorder. As Soon as he had re assured them,
he made out to Sea, and prepared for a Fight. Mustapha, on his side, kept his
Troops in breath, ready to engage, if need required: But they both a while
after learnt, the Christians were withdrawn to Candia: They triumphed at this
Retreat, as at a Signal Victory; uttering a thousand Shouts of Joy, and
conveying on Board again their Booty, they sailed for Rhodes. Piali endeavored
to pursue the Confederare-Army with an hundred chosen Galleys; but Heaven took
pity on the Christian-Fleet; there arising a contrary Wind, which blew them
into their Ports; and he sailed on the first fair Wind to Constantinaple.

It Is said, the Grand Signior gave him but a bad Reception, and reproached him
with a great deal of sharpness, that through his Fault the Christian-Fleet
escaped an entire Overthrow.

Colonni and Palavicinus left Zani in the Isle of Corfou, and gave themselves
over for lost in their Return from Candia. Colonni's Galley having gained the
Gulf of Catarro, by force of Oars, was smitten with a Blast of Lightning,
which burnt her entirely; the Men and Cannon being saved with much difficulty.
Colonni, going on Board another Galley, which was brought him from the lesser
Port of Hiron, as soon as the Sea grew calm, was set upon by another Storm, and
run on shore a little above Ragusia, yet without any loss of his Men. He past
over the Night under the shelter of a Rock, using the best Precaution he was
able; but had the Turks been informed of this Disaster, he had certainly
perished. He caused Horses to be brought from Ragusia, on which he parted the
next Morning, before Break of Day, and came to this Town at the same time
wherein Palavicinus, who was likewise surprised in the same Storm, arrived.
Palavicinus parted thence for Venice, and Col^nni for Rome; having tasted both
good and bad Fortune, and happily escaped both Shipwreck and Fire.

The Turkish Garrison of Castelnovo, a Place situated on the opposite Coast to
that of Cataro, seized, through the Carelessness of the Officers, on two
Venetian Galleys, which were left for the securing the Town, and Gulf of the
same Name. The Turks being become by this Advantage, Masters of the Gulf, set
out certain Vessels, with which they pillaged the Venetian Countrevs, and held
Cataro blocked up; so that they began to suffer under the want of Provisions.
The Republic sent four other Galleys, commanded by Hermolaus Tripolus, for the
preservation of her Allies; which repressed the Insolence of these Barbarians,
and brought again Plenty to Cataro: But the Plague being in three of these
Vessels, left for the Security of the Country, the Distemper raged so
violently, that it carried away most of the Soldiers and Seamen. A great
Ship, laden with Money, Clothes, and other Necessaries for the Fleet, having
been cast into the Gulf of Cataro, by a contrary Wind, found her self near
Castelnovo; the Cannon of the Place, having forced her to the other Shore, to
land her Men; the Turks perceiving there was no Fraud in the Fear she showed,
attacked her in four Barks; which they brought back laden with Booty. Two other
Galleys, commanded by Francis Prioli and Angelus Toriano, were ordered by their
General to get Knowledge of the Enemy. They fell on five Ottoman Galleys; which
Toriano no sooner perceived, but he ^^ed in all haste: But Prioli, seeing
himself too far engaged, to use the same Means, exhorted his Men to perish,
rather than surrender themselves, with their Arms in their hands, to the Mercy
of these Barbarians; wherefore, making all the Sail he could toward them, he
fell in amongst the thickest of them, and fighting like desperate People, was
himself slain, with most of his Men; but sold his loss at a dear Rate to the
Infidels. The Turkish Horse, at the same time, made great Inroads in Dalmatia,
and forced all the Countrey-people to retire to Places of Strength, having
wasted and spoiled all their Harvests. Had these Disgraces happened to the
Venetians at the beginning of the War, they might have comforted themselves by
the hopes they had in their Naval Forces; but seeing Nicosia already lost, and
the whole Island in a manner swallowed up, their Commanders constrained to quit
the Seas, and eighteen Galleys destroyed and taken in different and vexatious
Occasions; they were the more sensible of these Calamities, by having flattered
themselves with the Pope's and King of Spain's Assistance; whereby they
questioned not but to be able to drive the Barbarians from Cyprus, and defeat
them in a Naval Engagement. This Confidence gave occasion to a false Report,
which ran touching these pretended Advantages, of which they were so firmly
persuaded at Venice, that the Senate imparted this great News to Pius V. and
the rest of the Confederates; but they became afterward ashamed and sorrowful
for their fond Credulity.

The Venetians, disheartened by these Misfortunes, knew not where to betake
themselves, nor what to do. They saw a formidable Army, ready to enter on their
Country, and scarcely had any more Hope in the Spanish Assistance; whose
Slowness was no less suspected, than the Artifice of him who commanded their
Navy: All Italy being dismayed at the Christians Misfortunes, and the Progress
of so formidable an Enemy, reproached Doria with the secret Joy he felt from
the Perplexity and Weakening of the Venetian State: But they themselves were no
less blamed, for taking so little Care to preserve a Kingdom exceedingly
threatened; in not sending Forces sufficient, nor choosing a Governor capable
to oppose the Enterprises of an open Enemy. They were also blamed, for having
put the Command of their Fleet into the Hands of a Person, wholly unworthy this
great Trust; especially considering, this Navy was their only Confidence.
Complaints were made against the corrupt Dealings of those who were to furnish
the Army with Victuals and Ammunition; and the contagious Distemper, which
swept away so many Thousands, was attributed to the bad Provisions wherewith
the Victualers had supplied the Fleet. The Strangers which were engaged in the
Service of the Republic, murmured at the Pride of the Venetian Officers; who
used them with the same Disrespect, as if they had been their Slaves. 'Twas
publicly discoursed, That this Severity disgusted their Friends and Allies;
and that they would be constrained at length, sor want of Men, to recall such as
were banished, and change corporal Penalties into several Years Service in the
Wars; and to make their Criminals, Soldiers or Seamen, according to the
greatness of the Punishment they deserved. These Speeches being come to the
Ears of the Senate, they thought themselves bound to give a great Example of
their severe Justice; and make known to Europe, That whatsoever Power a Citizen
might be entrusted with, and Command he might have in the Armies, he is no less
accountable for his Behavior, and submitted to the Censure of the meanest
Subjects of the State: 'Twas resolved on then to set up a Tribunal against
those who had the last Year the chief Administration of Affairs committed to
them. There were three Commissioners appointed by the Senate, to examine the
Guilty, John Mocenigo, Federio Valeresio, and Nicholas Contareni, who dying
immediately after his Election, Gasper Raynerus was chosen into his Place. These
three Magistrates began with the General Zani; calling him to answer the
Matters laid to his Charge. But he being already instructed with the bad
Offices Fame had done him, and foreseeing the Storm ready to fall on his Head,
was no sooner at Corfou, but he supplicated the Senate to grant him his
Discharge, and send another in his Place. The Senate deliberated not a Moment
in choosing Sebastien Venieri in his stead; though he was not then at Venice; but
his Services spoke in his Favor, and all the World was willing to do him this
Right. He coming from gaining Supoto in Dalmatia, readily took on him the
Defense of the Isle of Cyprus (an Employ which no body dared to accept) although
his Age of Seventy Years might have been admitted as a just Plea, to excuse him
from so difficult and dangerous a Commission. He was always of opinion, since
the Loss of Nicosia, to carry all possible Succors to save the rest of the
Isle; arguing with such Earnestness and Vigor, as startled the young People.
Augustine Barbarigo, a Person to whose Wisdom and Experience several important
Affairs had been committed, was joined as a Partner to this Generous Commander;
with Order to command the Naval Army, in case Venieri should land to the
Succor of Cyprus. The new Commissioners sent an Officer with Barbarigo, for
Zani, to bring him Prisoner to Venice; thinking, such an Act of Justice would
terrify those who found themselves guilty; and show all Italy the Severity
with which were maintained the Republick's Laws. Zani was accused for suffering
the Soldiers to live irregularly, and without Discipline; to have preferred
his Countrymen in all Offices and Employs, and authorizing their Insolences
against the Confederates; to have abused his Authority in Matters of his own
particular Interest; and not to have upheld the Honor of his Dignity with the
Courage and Prudence necessary for a General; and which was worst of all, That
he had not followed the Senate's Orders, which required his Succouring of
Cyprus; and forced the two Providors to follow his Sentiment, although they were
of a contrary Opinion. John Legio, Provid^r of Dalmatia, was likewise
apprehended, at the Suit of Justiniani, deputed to take Cognizance of the
Affairs of this Province. Julius Savoriani also prosecuted Legio, and obtained
of the Triumvirs, that the Accused should be kept close Prisoner, during the
time Informations were to be brought against him. He was charged with passing
whole Days and Nights at Play and Debaucheries, and making himself by these
means, mean and contemptible to the Enemy; for having treated the Allies with
great Roughness, and not only diverting the public Stock to private Uses, but
exacting on the Inhabitants belonging to the Republick's Cities; for delivering
out Provisions at an excessive Rate, and furnishing the Army with Stuffs and
Clothes in such a manner, as savoured more of the Merchant, than Officer of
War; for having, through his Ignorance and Vanity, hindered Savoriani from
acting for the good of the Province; and causing, by his ill management,
several other Damages. The Public was startled to see two of their Principal
Magistrates lie in the Prisons at Venice; and 'twas verily thought they had
lost their Lives, had they been brought to Trial during the Heat of the New
Tribunal: But their Friends and Kindred raised up so many Difficulties in the
Proceedings against them, that the Commission of their Judges, which could not
hold above a Year, expired before they could be Sentenced. These Affairs waxing
soft with the Time, the Knowledge of them was remitted to the College of
Forty; where the Favor and Employes of the Accused, obtained both their
Absolutions, though there were too many Proofs against Legio. And thus did this
Inquisition, which appeared at first so rigorous and dreadful, occasion more
Fear than Hurt. Zani died in Prison with Shame and Grief, before his Sentence
was given. He was a Person better versed in Affairs at Court, than in Feats of
War. His Father, at his Death left him no Estate, so that he was forced to
shift for his Living: Voyaging into Syria, when he was very young, he served as
a Factor there; and after a long time, traffick'd for himself; and returned to
Venice, with so great an Estate, that he was ranked with the principal
Citizens. He afterward was admitted into the Management of public Affairs; by
which means, he procured so many Friends, that he was immedily employed in the
greatest Offices of the State. He was a Candidate in the last Election of a
Doge, with Mocenigo, who carried it from him, only by the Credit of his Family,
which was more powerful and numerous than that of Zani. He was afterward
chosen General of the Venetian-Fleet; an Office of absolute Authority out of
Venice; but he wanted both Courage and Wisdom to support the Honor and Weight
of this Burden.

The Pope, extremely afflicted, since Colonni's Return, with the Misery of
Christendom, applied himself more than ever, to find the Means of succouring
the Republic; and doubled his Entreaties with the King of Spain, to make him
enter into the League, which he had already projected. This Affair was long
agitated in the Senate; wherein such as were disgusted at the Proposals of a
second Alliance with Spain, by the Vexations the first had given them,
strengthened their Opinions with the last Words of one their principal
Senators. This Magistrate, Venerable by his great Age, was consulted lying on
his Deathbed, touching the Course to be taken when the War was first declared.
Tell, says he, the Senators from me, that they had best to comply with the
Grand Signior 's Will, and make Peace by any means with him; or if they are for
showing themselves brave, and righting their Cause by a War, let them make no
Alliance with the Spaniards; but begin by putting a strong Garrison into the
Isle of Cyprus, and hasten to meet the Infidels with their own Forces: It Is
certain the Pope will never abandon them; and that the King of Spain, to
acquire the Reputation of a Prince, zealous for his Religion, cannot lie idle,
and see them fight, but will be the more ready to come to our Assistance, by
how much he believes we can make a shift without him; and then the Senate,
being free from the Engagements of a Treaty, may take such Measures as best
please themselves.

Although this Discourse moved several of the Senate, yet the Generality were for
a contrary Resolution. They imagined a disadvantageous Peace with the Infidels,
would draw on them the Indignation and Hatred of all Christendom: And making
themselves thus contemptible to the Ministers of the Port, they wouldstart
continually new Pretenses, and at length demand whatsoever Places they yet held
in Greece. This Consideration, being strengthened by vehement Exhortations from
the Pope, made them conclude on a League.

The King of Spain's Council was no less perplexed on this Matter than the
Senate: Some of its Ministers were of Opinion not to enter into a League
against the Ottoman Empire; situated, as to their regard, at the other End of
the World: That 'twere better for them to preserve their own Conquests, than
attempt new ones in a Country, the Acquisition of which, cannot compensate the
Cost: That, if they were resolved to extend their Dominions, they had better
carry the War into Africa, whilst the Turks made it against the Venetians; and
at the same time chastise the Algierines, for pillaging their Subjects: That,
if the King of Spain enters into the League, he must furnish the Republic with
the greatest part of his Troops, without any expectation of Profit from so
considerable a Charge and Trouble: That, the Venetians inconstant in their
Resolutions, and ruined by the Charge of their Fleet, would basely forsake
their Confederates in the heat of the War, as they had already several times
done. They added, 'twas dangerous to send all their Naval Forces to the
furthest part of the Mediterranean, in a time when the Insurrection of the
Mores was not wholly quieted; and those of the Low Countries every day
increased; and that the Resentment of Germany, and the underhand Practices of
the French with the Prince of Orange, were equally to be feared. Thus did they
reason, whose Views reached no farther than Spain: But others, whose Politics
were larger, affirmed, That if the Republic fell for want of Support, under
the weight of the War, 'twould be infallibly carried next into Spain; and the
Port had already determined the execution of this Project: That, if the
Venetians were strong enough to repulse the Infidels, 'twas of absolute
necessity, for his Catholic Majesty to bear a part in this glorious Advantage;
and if the Republic should be constrained, by a Defeat, to accommodate her
self on shameful Conditions, the King of Spain would be reproached for
betraying Christendom, by refusing to enter into the League: That the Turks
could in a days time pass over from Epirus to Ottranto, and land in Italy more
Forces than could be brought against them, were the Venetians put out of a
Capacity to contribute to the common Defense: That France and Germany were not
to be feared in this present Conjuncture; those Princes not daring to undertake
against a Sovereign League with the Republic and Pope, who dispose of all
Italy; and for which, all Christian States have a Respect and Veneration: That
this was a fit Occasion, wherein to give Marks of a true Zeal for the Interest
of Religion: That there was no need of being at any great Charge, seeing his
Holiness permitted a Tax to be laid on the Clergy, which would furnish a Stock
sufficient to equip and keep up a good Fleet: And that, in fine, Whether the
Venetians would faithfully observe the Treaty, or make Peace on dishonorable
Conditions, his Catholic Majesty would be advantaged and honored by this
Confederacy. Although Philip had Piety enough to be sensible of these Reasons,
yet was he more swayed to favor the League, by the Fruit he hoped to reap from
this War, He caused the Pope's Nuncio to be sent for, and assured him, That
notwithstanding the Revolutions in his Dominions, which might fairly excuse him
from entering into the League, and equipping a Fleet for the Levant, he would
prefer the public, before his own private Interest, and joyfully second the
Pope's Intentions, as a Mark of the Respect he had for him. He sent at the same
time Orders to the Cardinals, Granvil and Pacheco; as likewise to his
Ambassador at Rome, to conclude the Treaty of Alliance with the Venetians, on
such Conditions as his Holiness would please to make.

The Venetian-Ambassador, having already received the same Power, the
Negotiation of the League began. The Pope committed the Management of this
Affair to six Cardinals; whom he caused, together with the Ambassadors of Spain
and Venice, to come before him, and made them a Discourse full of Sentiments,
proceeding from the Tenderness of a Father, afflicted with the Misfortunes of
his Children. He began, by showing them, The Anger of Heaven could not be
turned away, but by Fasting and Prayer, and Re-establishment of the Ancient
Discipline of the Church; and explained himself in such affectionate Terms, as
drew Tears from their Eyes. He afterward particularized all the Disorders of
the Church, and as their Chastisement, the fore mentioned Calamities, wherewith
Christendom was afflicted: And having praised the good Qualities of these
Prelates, of which this Assembly consisted, he exhorted both them, and the
Ambassadors, to endeavor with all Sincerity, the finishing of this important
Work; recommending to them, amongst other things, the Reunion of the
Confederates Affections, which he esteemed of far greater Importance in this
War, than the Conjunction of their Arms. He added, They could not too soon put
themselves into a Condition to retake the Isle of Cyprus; this Post being
necessary for the Execution of several Enterprises; and even for the Conquest
of Jerusalem, and other Places, Consecrated by the Blessed Presence of our
Savior, and Operation of the principal Mysteries of our Salvation. In fine,
this Venerable old Gentleman offered to go in Person in this Expedition,
without any regard to his Age and Infirmities, should this be deemed necessary
for the common Good. This Assembly, having rendered their most humble Thanks to
his Holiness, Cardinal Granvil desired the Conditions of the Treaty; which the
Pope promised to send them the next Morning. The Cardinals and Ambassadors,
having conferred a good while on the Means, whereby to repulse and attack the
Infidels, broke up in a perfect Intelligence.

This Treaty was very easy to be concluded in appearance; but at bottom was
full of Difficulties and Obstacles. That which suited well with the Venetian
Interest, disagreed with those of the Spaniards; who fearing the increase of
the Turk's Force in Greece and Illyria, yet more passionately wished the
diminution of the Venetian Power in Italy. They had in this respect, a less
Desire to invade, than to defend; and were rather for drawing the War out at
length, than ending it by a Victory. The Republic, on the contary, used all
their endeavors to make a speedy Decision of it; as fearing the exhausting of
their Treasure. The Allied Towns were wearied with sending Money and Seamen;
and the Fields, for want of Tillage, already lay waste. Such opposite Interests
produced every day such great Difficulties, that the Negotiation was several
times breaking off, had not the Pope, sometimes entreating one, and threatening
another, kept up the Confereences by his Patience and Constancy. When they came
to Agreement on any Articles, they fell out about other Incidents; and it was
determined, for avoiding the Consequences, to send continually Copies of the
Treaty to the King of Spain and Senate, and expect their Orders; and in the
mean time, publish the Conclusion of the League. The Spaniards dared not to
oppose this last Article, although they knew very well, that such a Report might
alarm the Infidels, and oblige them to make Peace on advantageous Conditions to
the Venetians.

The Senate, having examined the Articles of the Treaty, found some of them
prejudicial to their Interests, and blamed Soriani for not opposing with more
rigor the Spaniard's Pretentions: But because he was thought to lean too much
to the making of a League and War; they sent him John Sorantro, as an Adjutant;
who immediately arrived at Rome: He was a rough sort of a man, positive and
ignorant in Business; whose Carriage so sar displeased the Pope, that he had
like to have sent him out of Rome, had he not feared Soriani might suffer for
it; for whom his Holiness had a particular Esteem: And in effect, he was a
Person of great Prudence and singular Integrity, and well seen for a Venetian
in Matters of Religion, fit for the Employ he exercised, as well for his
Fidelity, as Experience. Sorantro was no sooner settled at Rome, but he grew
weary with the importunate Demands of Cardinal Granvil, and other Ministers of
that Faction. Soriani pretended himself indisposed, to excuse himself from
these Conferences; and this Affair grew so troublesome, that the Commissioners,
settled to regulate it, began to despair of ending it: Yet the Pope, discouraged
by no Difficulty, surmounted all these Obstacles, and accommodated all things,
but only one particular Article. The Spanlards pretended, the King, their
Master, should appoint the Generalissimo of the Confederate Army; forasmuch as
his Catholick-Majesty contributed chiefly to the Charge of the War; and the
Venetians would by no means yield to this. Pius V. was for Don John of
Austria's being revested with this Character, because he had the Honor to be
Philip the Second's Brother: But the Spaniards, who were resolved to exclude
Colonni from his Office, demanded, That Don John might be empowered to name a
Lieutenant General to command in his absence; designing to secure this second
Place to Doria, or else to Lewis Requiescens, Brother to Zuniga. The Venetians
had a horrid Repugnance to this; but seeing the Pope's Authority interposed,
they thought their Interests could not be better managed than in his Hands:
Whereupon Pius declared, Don John should command the Army, when there in
Person; but would hearken to no Proposition touching the choice of him, who was
to command in his absence; seeing this Right appertained to the Sovereign
Prelate. Granvil and Zuniga refused this Condition; saying, 'twas to be
communicated to the King, their Master. The Pope, who was very jealous of his
Authority, dispatched at the same time, a Courier into Spain: He wrote thereon
to Philip in Terms so pathetick and rational, that this Prince sent an Order to
his Ministers, to conclude the Treaty: And to show that he would be concerned
in the nomination of the Person which was to command the Fleet in Don John's
Absence, he proposed Mark Anthony Colonni, together with Requiescens and Doria;
and thus preserved the Pope's good Opinion.

This Prelate was so vigorous and firm in what he believed to be equitable,
especially when the Honor of the Sea was concerned, that he would not buckle
to the greatest Sovereign in Europe, to maintain its Interests. He thanked King
Philip for the Deference he paid him, and gave Don John the Title of
Generalissimo; and to Colonni, the same extent of Power in his Absence.
Philibert Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, was proposed to command the Christian Army;
which the Venetians much desired; and the Pope had no less an esteem of his
Capacity; but besides that, this Prince esteemed it of dangerous consequence to
leave his Estates, whence his Father had been driven, and of which he came now
from possessing himself. The Spaniards could not approve, that a Sovereign
Prince, whose Head was full of great Projects, should have committed to him
such a Power. They raised a new Difficulty on the Design they had on Africa;
maintaining, the League was not only made against the Turk, but against all the
Mohammedan People. The Cardinals assembled on this Affair, could not forbear
smiling at the Pretention, and showed the Spaniards, That the King of Persia
was so far from being considered as an Enemy, by reason of his Religion, that
he ought to be earnestly solicited to enter into the Confederacy: That the
Christian Princes would join themselves to little purpose, if the War were
carried any where but to Greece, and on the Grand Signior's Countries. The
Spaniards refused again to sign the Treaty, unless therein were comprehended
the Conquest of the Cities of Tripoly, Tunis, and Algier; alleging, That
without this Clause, the People would never be brought to consent to the
levying of those Taxes which were necessary for the Entertainment of their
Fleet. They would also have a Promise, the Infidels should not be atrack'd, but
the Christians ssiould keep themselves on the defensive part; foreseeing the
Ottoman Army would be far stronger than the Confederates; and the Venetians
granted this last Article, as having discovered the Meaning of these Demands.
The Pope being tired with the length of these Contests, sent Pompey Colonni
into Spain, a Person of large Abilities, charged with Packets and Instructions;
and who was moreover ordered to lay open to Philip, that his Ministers spoiled
the Fruit of his good Intentions by the aversion which they manifestly
discovered against the Republic. Colonni acquitted himself so well of his
Holiness's Orders, that the King of Spain ordered his Ambassador to pass over
all these Difficulties, and conclude the so often mentioned Treaty. 'Twas
commonly reported, the Pope acquainted this Prince with the Venetians treating
with the Port, making use of the Fame of this League to better their
Composition; which was true enough; for they had sent to Constantinople, and
secretly negotiated with the Prime Vizier.

In fine, all Matters being regulated, the Pope intended to solemnize, before
the Foreign Ambassadors, the Confederacy between the Sea, the King of Spain,
and the Venetians. He gave Notice of this to the Ministers of the Allies,
desiring them to meet him at the Vatican; where he celebrated Mass; having made
them first sign the Treaty. But before this, Cardinal Granvil being come,
together with the Spanish Ambassador, he rose up, and declared the King, his
Master, was not in a readiness to execute this Year what he promised in his
Name: That the Season was too far advanced to work at the Preparatives of a
Fleet: He afterward demanded, that the Venetians, who had several Vessels
ready to put to Sea, should furnish his Catholick-Majesty with them, they
receiving Soldiers from him, and Money for all the Charges of the Campaign.
'Twas agreed on in the first Conferences, That in expecting the Conclusion of
the Treaty, all possible Preparations should be made for the War, to prevent
the loss of Time: So that the Venetian Ministers, enraged at this unexpected
Remora, detesting a Return of this Nature, withdrew to confer together, and
brought Answer, They intended to advertise the Senate of the inexecution of the
Treaty. This Proceeding touched the Pope to the quick; and though he was prepared
to overcome by his Patience whatsoever might oppose this good Work, he lost all
respect for Cardinal Granvil, and drove him away from his Presence; having
first told him with great sharpness, That he saw he made it his Business to
ruin the Affairs of Christendom. He afterward comforted the Venetians, and
enjoined them to assure the Signiory from him, that he would so order the
Matter, that the King of Spain should religiously observe the Treaty.

As Soon as it was known at Venice, what passed at Rome,, Mosenigo, who was then
Doge, and the principal Magistrates, who had been ever of opinion to avert this
Storm by an Accommodation, fell outragiously on the Spaniards, calling them
Cheats, and perfidious People; and changed the Design of taking Arms, into that
of concluding a Peace; for which there happened a favorable Occasion: Mark
Antony Barbaro, their Ambassador at Constantinople, being confined to his
House, since the Declaration of War, was not strictly guarded; who, as soon as
he understood the loss of Nicosia, sought all Means to accommodate the
Republic with the Port, seeing no other Remedy to so vexatious a Disaster, nor
a better way to recover his Liberty. All the Turks trading in Venice, were
imprisoned, as soon as 'twas known there, how the Republick's Ambassador was
used at Constantinople. Amuti, an Envoy from the Grand Signior into France,
passing then through Venice, was also stopped, and more carefully kept than other
Prisoners. Barbaro, introducing himself into the Acquaintance of a Jewish
Physician, named Solomon, who had frequent Access to the Prime Vizier, by means
of his Profession; mentioned to him a Proposal of treating with this Minister,
touching the Exchange of Captives; and to try whether he was any ways
inclinable to a Peace. Solymon made this Attempt, not wholly without Success;
and entreated Mahomet to send some body, as from his part, to Venice, which he
willingly consented to; for he was none of the worst of the Venetian's Enemies.
This Envoy, being charged with Letters from Barbaro to the Senate, arrived just
at Venice, when the News came there of a fresh Refusal, which the Spaniards
made to put to Sea the next Spring. The Council of Ten, which consists only of
Magistrates, of a consummate Experience, and whose Authority absolutely decides
either War or Peace; would not communicate this Affair to the Senate. They
chose James Ragozzone, a prudent and active Person, who having long traded into
Turkey, knew well the Air and Manner of the Turkish Dealings, to go and
negotiate this Exchange; but with secret Instructions to conclude an
Accommodation, on the Conditions which Barbaro and he should judge least
incommodious to the Republic.

This Voyage disquieted Pius V. who mistrusted this Business to be a Cloak to a
real Negotiation of Peace. Alarmed by these Suspicions, he sent for Cardinal
Commendon, in whom he reposed an entire Confidence. His Holiness knew this
Prelate's Zeal to Religion, and that his Virtue and Sincerity were proof
against all Interests and Passion. The Pope entertained Commendon in the Garden
of the Vatican, with the deplorable State of the Christian's Affairs; sighing
unfeignedly at the Relation of the Misfortunes with which they were threatened;
and demanded of him, what means should be used to hinder the Venetians from an
hasty Accommodation with the Grand Signior: For no body, seeing the Indifferency
of the Ministers, which were to make the League, but would conclude it past
effect. Commendon exhorted his Holiness to try all ways to break off these
Practices, and counseled him to send Mark Antony Colonni to the Republic,
whose Dexterity and Earnestness might be more likely to prevail with the
Venetians to continue the War, by his losing the Lieutenancy in the
Christian-Army.

The Pope never showed so much Heat in all this important Affair, as he did in
putting in practice this good Advice: For as soon as Commendon had taken leave
of him, he sent for Colonni, and ordered him to go in person, to encourage the
Venetians, disheartended by the Disadvantages they received the last Year, and
disgusted by the disingenuous Dealings of the Spaniards. His Holiness showed
him, 'twas to be feared, lest the Mistrust they had of their Allies, and of
themselves, should force them on unjust Measures: He enjoined him to use all
his Industry to conclude the League, and vigorously set about it,
notwithstanding all the Difficulties, which appeared insurmountable; assuring
him, God would bless this Enterprise, and carry it on by ways incomprehensible
to humane Reason; all things being easy to those who put their Trust in him.
Colonni took Post for Venice; where he was received both in public and
private, with great Honor and Welcome; his new Dignity increasing the Esteem
and Respect the Venetians had for him: But the Chief Senators, who had always
an Aversion for the War, received him with great Coldness: Yet they knew
themselves obliged to honor him, and use some Compliance to a Person, whose
Merit rendered him dear to the Sovereign Prelate; and who moreover was to share
with Don John in the Conduct of the Army, and command it alone in this Prince's
Absence. Colonni, embellisht not his Harangue which he made in full Senate,
with the vain Ornaments of a fruitless Eloquence, but by easy and natural
Expressions, he endeavored to persuade his Auditors to embrace what was
necessary. He began by praising the Pope's ardent Zeal, whose Interest was no
other than the Preservation of the Republic; who was to be respected as the
only Sovereign that could keep the Spaniards in their Engagements, and chastise
them on the Breach of their Words: That his Holiness kept them in his
Dependence, by the permission granted (after several Refusals) to his Catholic
Majesty to levy an extraordinary Tenth part on the Revenue of the Clergy of his
Estates; which Money is to be only employed in assisting the Signiory: That he
designed the Church's whole Revenue to this purpose; and would besides supply
them with Soldiers, Victuals, and Ammunition: That they might load their Ships
with Grain in the Provinces of the March, and Romagna; and their Officers list
Soldiers on the Ecclesiastical State: That his Holiness was about sending, at
his own Charge, three thousand Foot into Dalmatia, for the securing the
Frontiers, till the Arrival of the Naval Army on the Coasts of the Morea: That
he granted them the last Tax, laid on the Clergy in their Dominions, which they
demanded; and that they might moreover expect from his Holiness, all the good
Offices the common Father of Christians is capable of; who finds himself no
less engaged, by the Duties of his Place, than the Affection he bears the
Republic: That he would leave no Means unattempted to engage the Emperor, and
the rest of the German Princes in the League: That he would also earuestly
solicit the Poles, who are so strong in Cavalry, and all other Christian
Potentates, to whom he would immediately send Legates: That the Spaniards, in
whose respect the Senators Minds were to be mollify'd, were in some sort
excusable; they not being chargeable for all the Faults in the last Armado:
That there was a Mistake in the King of Spain's Apprehensions of the Pope's
Intentions, and the Orders of his Catholic Majesty were not perhaps well
understood: That Philip the Second, does not refuse to execute the Treaty, but
requires Shipping, not having Galleys sufficient; nor them in so good a
Condition at this time, to put to Sea: That he obliges himself to re-imburse
all the Charge of the Equipage and Soldiery: So that at this rate, it will
cost him more than he is taxed with: Yet his Catholic Majesty has fourscore
Galleys in readiness, which he hoped to bring himself, if Don John hastened not
to conduct them, toward the End of May, at whatsoever place of Rendezvous
should be thought best: That besides this Fleet, the Pope would set out twelve
Galleys, the Republic of Genoa two, the Duke of Savoy and the Order of St.
John of Jerusalem, each of them four, which would follow the Church's Banner:
That they had their Galeasses, their Vessels of Lading, and more than an
hundred and fifty Galleys, Frigates, and Galliots, which they used in the last
Expedition: That the Christians never sent such an Armado against the Infidels
before; so that the Victory would be certain if they came to an Engagement; and
if the Barbarians, mistrusting their Strength, should yield them the Mastery of
the Seas, they might easily land at Nigrepont, or the Morea, and thus repair
the Loss of Nicosia: That the Fleet was to be commanded by three Generals, who
alone would hold the Council of War; wherein every thing should be regulated
without distinction, by a Plurality of Votes; to show by this Equality the
Expedition was common to the Christians: That neither of the Generals, not Don
John himself should prefer his Opinion before what the two others may judge the
more advantageous to the common Good; nor have power to carry the Fleet any
where without a just Occasion: That his Holiness would nominate him General of
the Church's Army, or some other more experienced Commander, who will show no
less Submission and Obedience to the Orders of the Sovereign Prelate, than
himself: That whosoever was to fill this Place, will always act in Consort
with the Commander of the Venetian-Army; and by this means overruled all
Debates and Undertakings: That Don John of Austria gave too great hopes, not to
answer whatsoever might be expected from a young Prince, whose Ambition is just
and regular; and that being desirous to merit the Reputation of a great
Captain, it is his Interest to begin his first Undertakings by a sage and
judicious Conduct: That all these things considered, he could not stifle his
Resentments at secret Negotiations, which have gotten Air; and that he was
willing to believe such grave Statesmen could not approve of such a Conduct:
But yet he thought himself obliged to advertise them of the Injury their
Honors suffered by such a Report; and that they would do well to make a
public Justification of their Innocence: For in fine, what can be more
infamous than to entreat Peace, and submit ones self to an Enemy, from whom a
man has received infinite Indignities, when he may generously defend his
Liberty, for which the meanest sort have dared to die? That the Sultan, looking
on them already as his Slaves, commanded them to yield him a Kingdom, which the
Signiory has been possessors of for above this hundred Years: That they would
do well to reflect, what would become of a City, so flourishing as Venice;
seeing in forsaking the Isle of Cyprus, they discovered likewise the Weakness
of their Capital City, and the small Strength of all Christendom: But he was
far from having such disadvantageous Opinions of a State, governed by such wise
and generous Persons; and therefore conjured them not to be wanting in so
favorable an Oocasion, of repairing the Injuries they had already suffered;
and that they ought to follow the Standard of the Sovereign Prelate, who
offered to march in Person, as their Leader; and if they neglected this
Occasion, they might, for all that any body knew, hazard the Liberty of their
own Persons: That Time was not to be spent in Deliberations, nor Answers
returned in doubtful and ambiguous Terms; the Season being far advanced; so
that all things considered, the Public would take the least Delay for a
Renunciation of the League; and that he could like better, they should see
themselves the Miseries they were threatened with, than that he should thus, or
in a fuller manner, describe them.

Colonni was as able at conducting an Army, as making an Oration. He was of a
mild Temper, very just and as greatly obliging; he usually spoke with as great
Ease as Eloquence, and had by a long Practice a perfect knowledge of Affairs;
which Qualities had gained him the Esteem and Kindness of the young Venetian
Nobility. He had likewise engaged them by several good Offices; and his
Prudence made no less Impression in the Minds of the Senators and other
Magistrates. He had drawn many of them already into the Interests of the
League, and mist not one Occasion in common Conversations, or in particular
Entertainments, of making them understand the necessity of it. The Council of
Ten, who did not at all approve of the Alliance, yet saw little forwardness of
a Peace. 'Twas highly important not to discontent the Pope; and Colonni's
Credit inclined the greatest part of the Senate to a Confederation. After this
particular Council had wearied themselves in fruitless Deliberations, for the
finding out ways to amuse his Holiness, surprise Colonni and the Senate, and
to entertain at the same time a secret Correspondence with the Port; Paul
Tipoli, one of the Ten, being of Opinion, they ought no longer to conceal an
Affair, whereon depended the Safety of the State, was was for opening it to the
Senate, and referring to them the uncertain Determination of a Peace or War.
This Magistrate thought it an unjust thing, that the Members of the same Body
should have no participation in their Motions; that some should make the
Secrets of the State a Mystery to others; and that the Council of Ten should
underhand endeavor a Peace, and at the same time delude the Senate, without
consulting them on the Means of carrying on the War. He represented to his
Colleagues, that if it were perilous to make known to so many People the State
of their Affairs, it was yet more dangerous to refer all to a small number of
Magistrates; and if the Secret was better kept by them, they met with this
Disadvantage, that Matters were not so well and fully discussed. To which was
offered the Accommodation made in the Year One thousand five hundred and thirty
nine, with the same Enemies, without the participation of the Senate. But
Tipoli reminded them, how greatly this Proceeding had offended the Senate; and
under what a grievous Odium the Authors of it lay from the People; so that they
would do well now to prevent the like, or a worse Consequence. The Matter being
submitted to the plurality of Votes, some aged Persons were excluded, whose
Minds being as much weakened as their Bodies, might have been troublesome to the
Assembly* Colonni, then seeing his Party the strongest, engaged Tipoli to
relate the Affair to the Senate. This Magistrate, being of great Credit in the
Assembly, was the first that disapproved of the secret Negotiation, and that
declared himself against the Peace: He immediately represented that in the
Deliberations of making an Accommodation with the Grand Signior, or concluding
against him a League with the Pope and King of Spain, the Republic was at
liberty to take what Party she pleased: That there is no body but will prefer a
certain Peace, not only to a dissicult and hazardous War, but also before the
probability of a glorious Victory: That any man might see they would exhaust
their Treasure, and disgust the Allied Towns, which supplied them with Seamen
and Slaves: That the Pope had more good Will than Power; and that the King of
Spain failed of his Word: But 'twas to be examined on the other hand, whether
it was less advantageous to them to enter into a League, and strengthen
themselves by that means, than to hearken to an Accommodation, which could not
be effected, but on the Sultan's own Terms: And whether a shameful Peace,
granted by an insolent Conqueror, might be expected to be lasting and sincere?
For if they were not satisfied in this Difficulty, to what purpose should they
continue a Negotiation, which would give them fresh occasion of Disquiet, and
draw on them the Pope's Indignation, and Contempt of the Christian Princes:
That such who were so greatly in Love with Ease, as to suffer all things, than
incur a War, would do well to reflect on the Motives, which not only Selim's
Predecessors had, who were Warlike Princes, but of Selim himself, wrapped up in
Softness, to violate their Oaths, and break Treaties so solemnly sworn:
Besides, the Pride of the Ottoman People, appeared plainly in the small Account
they made at the Port, of the Venetian Militia; the Disproportion of the Forces
of the Republic with those of the Grand Signior, and the small Confidence
which the Venetians had in the Succors of the Christian Princes.

That it then lay upon them to know, if after having answered so resolutely the
Turkish Envoy, they were rather for renouncing their Reputation, than be
affrighted at the first Noise of Arms, and meanly beg their Peace, or make a
generous Effort; and show these Barbarians, that the Republic, being sensible
of the Indignities offered her, wants neither Strength nor Courage; and can
bring, when she pleases, the Forces of other Christian States to her Assistance.

That it was time to undeceive the Infidels false Persuasion, of the Venetians
being terrified at the only mention of the Ottoman Name.

That if they now abandoned the Isle of Cyprus to Selim, he would demand that
of Candia, the Year following.

That supposing no Loss of their Reputation, by seeking a Peace, yet the Sultan
will be sure to impose on them his own Conditions: For, if before the Losses,
which the Republic had now suffered, he violated the Oaths, by declaring a War
against them; can it be expected, he will be more Religious, when being become
more insolent, by the Conquest of a new Kingdom, and satisfied in the Disunion
of Christians, he will invade all Italy?

That they had no Reason to rely any longer on the good Offices of the Prime
Vizier; seeing the Presents and Pensions he had already drawn from the
Signiory, could not empower him to avert this Tempest from falling on their
Heads; but on the contrary, would have surprised and deceived the Vigilance of
their Resident; persuading him, his Highness armed himself only for the
succouring the Mores of Grenado; and therefore they were bound in common
Prudence, not to trust any more an Enemy, that came just from betraying them:
And now this Minister, continuing his Perfidiousness, would by a feigned
Negotiation, amuse and abate their Courage, retard their Preparations, and
disturb their Confederacy, and surprise them again with a numerous Army.

That this Artifice would undoubtedly prove successful, if they delayed any
longer from joining with the Pope, and King of Spain.

That Mark Antony Colonni had clearly set before them, these Delays would be
certainly expounded to their Disadvantage.

That it was to be feared, Pius V. and King Philip, seeing their Preparations
broke off by Propositions of Peace, displeased at the small Account made of
their Assistance, would abandon them to their Fears and Confusions, and extend
their Resentments to the raising up vexatious Affairs to the Republic, on the
side of Germany and Italy; so that they would do well to consider the dreadful
Conditions to which they will be reduced, the Turks invading them; bereft of
Auxiliary Forces; their own being not in a Readiness to take the Field.

That their Maritine Countries could not resist the first Onset of their
Enemies.

That the Frontiers of Dalmatia must yield to the same Violence; and their
Fleet being far weaker than the Ottomans, wanted Ports to secure it self; being
so far from defending so many Christian Provinces, that she would be scarcely
able to save her self.

That the Turks might, if they were minded, come on full Sail to attack their
chief City; and then, what Confusion would there be? What Consternation amongst
the People and Citizens? What Despair amongst the Allied Towns, who could not
be reproached with Faint-heartedness nor Ingratitude; seeing themselves
forsaken, and constrained to receive Laws from the Conqueror? But what Shame
and Infamy will it not be to hear published throughout the World, That the
Question is the Disputing a Kingdom between the Grand Signior and the
Republic; but touching the Safety of the Venetians, forced to defend their
Liberties, and their Lives in the Capital City of their Country. And for to
complete these Miseries, the Christians would reproach them, as having drawn
down these Misfortunes on themselves; and the Infidels would vaunt their
subjecting them, by surprising their Credulity.

That it behooved them to prevent these Misfortunes; the Foresight of which,
struck him with Terror; there being only one Remedy; which was, to conclude the
League with all Expedition, and join the Confederates in the beginning of the
Spring, to find out the Enemy, and fight him.

That the King of Spain would set out Fourscore Galleys; to which will be
joined Twenty others, under the Banner of the Holy See.

That the Venetian-Army, being as numerous as the last Year, will be far better
supplied with Soldiers and Slaves.

That if the Senate was for punishing its Commanders for not giving Battle with
Sixty Auxiliary Sails, they must hold themselves assured of the Victory, seeing
this Assistance was almost doubled.

Tripoli, willing afterward to answer the Reasons grounded on the Insincerity
of the Spaniards, added, They would never have showed themselves so nice at
first, had they not intended to execute the Treaty.

That supposing, there were just Causes to suspect their Conduct, the Turks,
who were more interessed than the Spaniards, to break their Word, were far more
to be feared.

That if the King of Spain should fail in his Word, it would be then fit to
endeavor after Peace; and that it was of highest Consequence, to treat with
Arms in their Hands, to obtain advantageous Conditions, in case the Injustice
of any of their Allies, should force them to conclude it.

He was therefore of Opinion, they would do well, before all things, to send
back Colonni, to assure his Holiness, of the Republick's Obedience, and
constant Preparations for the executing of his Orders:

And that Ragazzoni and Barbaro should be enjoined at the same time, not to
reject wholly the Accommodation, in case they found the Prime Vizier disposed
to it; but give Advice to the Senate, of the present State of Affairs, and
agree to nothing, till the Senate's further Order; so that in this manner they
might conclude a Peace with the Port, if they were forsaken by their Allies,
without Offense either to God or Man; and vigorously retake what the Barbarians
had snatched from them, and curb for ever their Insolence, in case the
Confederates would act in Consort: And it being a thing dishonorable to
negotiate at the same time the League of Venice, and the Peace at
Constantinople; 'twas therefore of highest Consequence to manage these two
Expedients, and not ruin one by the other.

Tripoli's Harangue made Impression in all the Senators Minds, excepting some
of the ancientest; who had been of Opinion of sending Ragazzoni to negotiate
the Peace with the Prime Vizier.

These ancient Magistrates, seeing the League in a manner concluded, charged
Nicholas Ponti, one of the most considerable amongst them for his Age and
Eloquence, to answer Tripoli. Who began, by reckoning up all the ill Offices
which Cardinal Granvil and Doria had done to the Republic; comparing the
Malignity of their Proceedings and Discourses, to the Fury of the Ottomans; and
endeavored to persuade the Assembly, that it was contrary to all the Rules of
Prudence, and common Sense, to ground a Victory on the Assistance ofan Allied
Prince, whose Advantage lies rather in their Weakness, than Strength.

He afterward advised the Senate, in very urgent and Pathetick Terms, not to
hearken too much to those specious Reasons, wherewith they must be blinded; and
to beware above all, of Granvil, who under a Pretense of this pretended
Alliance, designed only the lessening them by a War.

That the Spaniards were an insolent sort of People, and more perfidious than
the Infidels themselves.

That Granvil, educated in the Politic Maxims of his Father, would sacrifice
all things to his Fortune, and the Favor of King Philip.

That this Monarch, under pretense of a League, would destroy the Republic;
and establish on its Ruins, his Dominion over all Italy.

That they were unwise, in assuring themselves against these Fears, by the
Sacredness of this Sovereign's Oaths; who consulted more his Interest, than
either Justice or Reason.

That they ought to terminate a War, under whose Weight their Capital City was
ready to faint.

That this Extremity would alone force them to make Peace, when they should
have to do with an Enemy less formidable.

That they needed some Years Rest, to take Breath; in expectation of a
favorable Conjuncture, to regain what they had lost.

That the Peace was certain, seeing the Turks would free themselves, by making
it, from the Disquiet which this Triple League gave them.

That Selim, in keeping the Ifle of Cyprus, was led rather by his Superstition,
than Ambition; having no other Design, than the building of a Mosque, and
enjoying afterward a profound Repose in the Seraglio.

That there was no Shame in desiring a Peace from an Enemy, the Fame of whose
Arms overspread the whole Universe.

That the Report of the Confederation, instead of softning him, would double
his Pride and Insolency.

That he would be harder to be dealt with, if the League could not be
concluded; and therefore he was of Opinion, they must amuse Colonni and the
Pope, by continuing the Negotiation (which might be easily done, without giving
them the least Suspicion) till they received News from Constantinople; where
the Treaty of Peace should be no sooner broke off, but they might sign the
Treaty of Alliance.

That this Course seemed to him best and surest; but the Suffrage of the whole
Assembly was to be expected; and withal to be remembered in their Deliberations,
'twas that there was never a more important Affair agitated in the Senate.

Notwithstanding this Discourse, the greatest part of the Senators bore down
the Credit of Nicholas P^nti, and the rest of the anc^ent Magistrates; and
their Propositions of Pea^e we^e wholly rejected.

The next Day, Colonni was introduced into the Senate; where, the Doge
declared, That the Signiory accepted the Confederacy with the Holy See, and
King of Spain.

Colonni, having applauded their Zeal, and confirmed what he had promised from
the Pope's Part, took Post, and arrived at Rome; where he was received with
great Expressions of Honor and Kindness from the Pope; having so dexterously
ended an Affair, the Success of which began to grow desperate.

His Holiness, being satisfied with the Resolution of the Venetians, assembled
the Consistory, the Twenty third of May, One Thousand five Hundred sixty and
seven: Where, having declared to them the Subject of their Meeting, which was
approved by all the Cardinals, he solemnly ratified the Treaty: Of which, these
are the principal Articles:

That there shall be a lasting and perpetual Union between the Sovereign
Prelate, the King of Spain, and the Republic of Venice.

That they shall continually make War against the Turk.

That they shall equip, for this effect, and at the common Charge, two hundred
Galleys, and one hundred other Vessels of Burden.

That they shall raise an Army of sixty Thousand Foot, as well Spaniards, as
Italians and Germans, together with four Thousand five hundred Horse.

That this Army shall meet every year in the Month of April, in the Morea.

That if either of the Confederates should be invaded, a considerable
Detachment should be sent to their Succor; yea, the whole Army, in case Need
required.

That the Ambassadors of the Allied Princes, residing at the Pope's Court,
should meet, by his Authority, in the beginning of the Spring, every Year, to
regulate among themselves the Preparations of War for the next Campaign.

That the Charge of the War shall be divided into six parts; three of which the
King of Spain shall furnish.

That the Holy See shall maintain twelve Galleys, equipped with all
Necessaries, with three thousand Foot, and two hundred and seventy Horse.

That the Sixth remaining Part of the Charge shall be furnished by his
Catholic Majesty and the Venetians; the Pope granting them, in consideration
of this, the levying of a considerable Tax from the Clergy in their Dominions.

That the Republic shall give the Pope twelve Galleys, if he demands them,
without his Holiness's being obliged to satisfy any Damage may happen to
them; but surrender them in the same Condition they shall return out of the War.

That each of the Allies shall contribute such things with which they most
abound, and an exact Account be kept, and Satisfaction made for them.

That the Venetians shall assist the King of Spain with fifty Galleys, if he
made any Enterprises on the Cities of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoly.

That his Catholic Majesty shall furnish the Venetians with a like Number, in
case they besieged any Places on the Coasts of the Adriatic Sea, on this side
the City of Piergo, anciently called Apollonia; yet on condition that their
Army to whom these Succors should be given, shall be stronger than the
Auxiliary Troops.

That if the Infidels invaded by Sea or Land any of the Church's Countries, the
Confederates should come immediately to her Assistance, with all their Strength.

That the Command of the Naval Army shall be divided between three Generals;
which are to meet on all Affairs wherein the common Cause is concerned. And,

That Don John, who is to be Generalissimo, shall punctually execute whatsoever
may be determined contrary to his Opinion, by the Sentiment of the two others.

That in his Absence, Marc Antony Colonni shall be entrusted with the same
Authority.

That neither of the Generals shall set up any other Standards than those which
the Sovereign Prelate shall send them, which shall be common to all the
Confederates.

That the Emperor, the King of France, and other Kings, and Christian Princes
shall enter (if they please) into the League, and that his Holiness shall send
Legates to them for that purpose.

That the Conquests shall be shared conformable to the Treaty of the Year 1537.
By which 'twas decreed, the Allies shall be to restored whatsoever belonged to
them, and the rest divided, according to the Charge each one was at, excepting
the Cities of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli; which should be wholly yielded to the
King of Spain.

That no Act of Hostility shall be committed in the City, nor Territories of
the Republic of Ragusa, unless his Holiness shall otherwise determine.

That the Pope shall be made Arbiter of whatsoever Differences may happen; and
neither of the Confederates make Peace with the Port, without the Advice and
Consent of the rest.

And thus at length was concluded this much desired League, when 'twas least
expected; by the Zeal and Constancy of Pius V. which surmounted all Obstacles,
that seemed to ruin the Success of it.

THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK.
THe Naval Army of the Holy See routed. Venieri fruitlesly attempts the taking
of Durazzo. The Cardinals Alexandrinus, and Commendon nominated Legates; the
First into Spain and Portugal; the Second to Germany and Poland. King Philip,
and Sebastian of Portugal's answers. An Embassy from the Venetians to the King
of Persia. Discourse of the King of France with Cardinal Alexandrinus.
Promotion of Cosmus de Medici's. The Emperor Maximilian long resists
Commendon's Reasonings, but at length promises to enter into the League.
Commendon disswades the King of Poland from Repudiating his Queen. Henry Duke
D'Anjou Elected King of Poland. Louchali and Caracossa Famous Corsaries. Pertah
burns Suda in Candia. Those of that Island Revolt. Design of the Infidels on
Cataro discovered. Bravery of the Inhabitants of Dulsingo. Admirable Courage of
the Women of Cursola. Complaint of the allied Cities against the Republic.
Venice Fortified. Situation of Famagusta. Besieged by Mustapha. The Turks
Defeated in an At^ack. Articles of Capitulation. The Christian Soldiers
Massacred contrary to the Conditions of the Treaty. Horrible and Cruel Usage of
Bragadin.

THE HISTORY OF THE WAR of CYPRVS.
The Third Book.
THE League was no sooner Signed, but the Pope used all Endeavors to cause the
Confederate Fleets to join in March on the Coasts of Greece. And to lose no
time by these Preparatives, he borrowed Twelve Galleys of Gosmus de Medicis's
ready equipt; for each of which he paid him Five Hundred Crowns a Month: To
which he also added Four others of Malta, and as many from the Duke of Savoy,
ordering Colonni to set Sail on the beginning of June, to increase the Venetian
Army, and oppose the Infidel's Designs, in expectation of the Spanish
Assistance, which was but slowly setting forward. His Holiness and the
Republic were agreed to go in search of the Enemy; and having found him, to
engage, immediately after the Conjunction of the Fleets: the Venetians being
greatly interessed to end this War in any sort: The Pope on the other hand
trusting to the Divine Assistance, and fearing the League would not last long,
was also for deciding the Quarrel by a Combat, expressly enjoining this to
Colonni at his departure.

Colonni having found the Fleet ready at Civita Vecchia, weighed Anchor the
Fifteenth day of June, and arrived in the Eighteenth, at the Port of Naples;
where he remained some days for the repairing the Galleys of Malta, and
afterward came and cast Anchor in Sicily, with 20 Vessels. The Coast
dangerous, by reason of the Infidels being already at Sea; he sent out two
Frigates on discovery, and ordered those who sat in the Watch-Towers on the
Coasts of Calabria, to give warning what Ships they espied, to be very careful
in their Observations; and put a Light in their Lanthorn, if they espied less
than Twenty Vessels; to put in Two, if Twenty Five; and thus increase the
Signals according to the number of which the Enemies Fleet consisted. Three
days after his departure from Naples, he was informed, approaching to Tropea,
that there appeared Seventy Sail, which were thought to be the Ottoman Navy. He
went himself next morning to discover them, and met by the way with Two (...)
Galleys, commanded by Manipieri, and (...). They informed him that Venieri was
at Sicily with the Fleet, designing to stay at Spartivento, in expectation of
the other Confederates. Colonni having touched at Messina, sent to entreat
Veneri to come there, as well to confer on their Affairs, as for that he might
there find all such things they needed. Colonni met him out of the Town with a
great Train of Attendants, and afterward they consulted together. They
resolved to stay for Don John, although they were certain he was yet in Spain.

Venieri had received in Candia orders to command the Venetian Fleet; whence
returning to Corfou, he thought himself obliged to Signalize this new Honor by
some Famous Action: In this regard he tacks about to Durazzo to besiege it,
although he wanted several things necessary to such an Enterprise. But having
found the Place in a better Condition, than he imagined, returned to Corfou,
where he received an account of the Conclusion of the League, and expected the
Assistance of the Ally's. His Fleet consisted of Sixty Vessels; when News came
to him that the Infidels appeared before Candia. Not finding the Road of Corfou
secure, he resolved to Sail into Sicily, as well to hasten the Spaniard, as to
hinder the Turkish Army from blocking up the Passage. He received in his way a
Command from the Senateto steer this Course, and was well pleased with himself
that he had prevented their orders. Colonni wrote to him at the same time from
Naples, to the same purpose. He sent out before Sancto, Francis Troni and
Daniel Molino, with three Galleys to cruise on the Adriatic Gulf. Sancto was
ordered to leave the two others in the midway, and make directly to Venice, to
inform such Vessels as were going to Corfou, to Sail to Sicily, and avoid by
this means the Ottoman Fleet. He likewise dispatched one Benedictus, Captain of
a Friggat, a Native of the Isle of Cyprus, to the Providors Quirino and Celsi
to hasten them away, without any delay, to the place of Rendezvous with the
sixty Galleys, of which he had left them the Command, with whom he joined some
time after Colonni arrived there.

Pius the Fifth, who was not wanting in any particular of his Duty, assembled
the Sacred College immediately, after the departure of his Fleet, and
nominated two Legates, to wit, Cardinal John Francis Commendon, and Michael
Bonelli Surnamed Alexandrinus, who was his Sisters Son, and brought up in the
order of St. Dominic. The College solicited for him a Cardinals Cap, as soon
as his Uncle was seated on the Throne. He was indeed a young Man, of small
experience, but of such a Virtuous Temper, as rendered him worthy of the Sacred
Purple. Commendon, though absent, was preferred before several of his
Competitors, who strove for that Honor. His Piety, Prudence and Zeal to the
Holy See, merited, without doubt, this Preference, and none in that time at his
Age acquired such an Esteem and Reputation in Nunciatures and Embassies. He had
negotiated with all the Sovereigns of Europe, under the Pontificats of the
three last Popes, especially with those of Germany and Poland. He had made
Friends amongst the Chief Persons of each Nation, and having applied himself to
the Learning, the Humors and Inclinations of those Princes, he had dexterously
insinuated himself into their Favor. He was sent to the Emperor Maximilian,
Sigismond Augustus King of Poland, whom the Pope Vehemently desired to enter
into League.

Cardinal Alexandrinus was dispatched to the Kings of Spain and Portugal, who
in his Passage to Spain, went through France, where he needed extraordinary
Circumspection in dealing with several Great Persons of different Interests. As
soon as he arrived in Spain, he passionately Solicited Philip the 2d. to
execute the Conditions of the League in good earnest. Showing him, that should
the Venetians grow in the least measure jealous of his Sincerity, they will
certainly turn their Thoughts on their own particular Interests, at the Cost of
his, and other Christian Princes: That a State which has no Inclination for
War, must naturally tend to the side of Peace. That his Catholic Majesty had
great Reasons to fear, lest the weight of the War should fall on Spain, by a
forced Compliance of the Venetians with the Conqueror: That the State of his
Affairs not permitting him to manage a matter of this Importance in Person, he
ought to send some Person to Rome of approved Wisdom and Integrity, with ample
Power of regulating all difficulties which may happen, on which dispatching to
him continually Couriers, much time is wasted by expecting his Orders, and
several favorable occasions lost to the Progress of the Christian Arms. That
all Sincere Endeavors must be used, That his Fleet and those who were to
command it, arrive precisely on the day and place appointed for the general
Rendezvous of the whole Army; That the Remora's had already cost great and
unnecessary Expenses, and withal entreated this Prince not to commit the whole
Care of this Expedition to the management of his Ministers, least perhaps they
abuse his Power and Trust.

Don Sebastian King of Portugal was a Young Ambitious Prince, who was easily
enflamed with a desire to do some Signal Service to Christendom in her
necessities. The Legate exhorted him to enter into the League, by representing
him how greatly he was obliged to declare himself against the Infidels, and
oppose their Progress in the East, to preserve the Conquests of his
Predecessors on the Coasts of Asia and Africa. He then likewise desired him to
send Ambassadors to the King of Persia, to make him take Arms against the
Turks, on supposal he would comply with this Request, on account of the
Alliance and Amity which the Relation of Neighborhood had long since
established between them. Tipoly had been already sent into Spain and Portugal,
to Solicit the same thing on the part of the Republic. The King of Spain
returned the like answer to the Legate which he had already made to Tipoly; That
he would never be wanting in what Christendom may justly expect from a King,
whose greatest Glory is the title of most Catholic, and absolutely devoted to
the Service of the Church.

Sebastian, whose Youthful Heat passionately desired a War with the Turk,
assured the Legate his Forces should not be wanting to so Holy an Enterprise,
but needing time to set out a Fleet in good order this Summer, he would not
fail to be in readiness against the next, and would in the mean time advise
with his Holiness whether 'twere better to make them direct their Course to
Greece, or conduct them himself on the Coasts of the Red Sea, to divert the
Ottoman Forces; That he intended to charge his Ambassador at Rome to follow
thereon whatsoever his Holiness should determine, and designed according to his
desire, to send to the King of Persia, although the Age and Sluggish Temper of
this Prince gave small hopes of any Assistance from him.

The Venetians sent at the beginning of the War Vincent Alexandri to Tammas
King of Persia, in quality of Ambassador, who having traversed Germany,
Poland, and Moldavia, embark't at Mount Gastro on the Euxin, for Sinope; where
landing, he traveled through Armenia, and several other Provinces dependant on
the Grand Seignior, and happily arrived at Tauris, then the Capital City of
Persia, by reason of his knowledge in the Turkish Tongue and Customs. He found
Tammas basking in softness, encircled with Women and Eunuchs, and returned to
Venice without any positive answer from this Effeminate Prince. Tammas,
although Son to the brave Ismael, an avowed Enemy to the Turks, and who by his
Valor had meritted the Title of Sophi, trembled at the bare mention of the
Ottoman Arms, and had caused Prince Ismael his Son, who was Heir as well of his
Grandfathers Virtue as Name, to be carefully guarded, lest he should by some
means or other engage him in a War against the Turks.

Cardinal Alexandrinus likewise negotiated by the Popes order, a Marriage
between Sebastian King of Portugal, and Margurita de Vallois the French Kings
Sister: This Alliance had been already proposed, but no Prayers and Entreaty
could make Sebastian change his aversion to Marriage. The Pope desired he would
embrace this offer, to hinder this Princess from espousing Henry King of Navar,
who was a Calvinist. Sebastian answered the Legate, who pressed him on this
Affair, that in Compliance with the Popes desires, he would espouse Marguerit,
without demanding of the King her Brother any other Conditions, than to break
off with the Grand Seignior, and enter into the League against the Common Enemy
of Christendom.

The Legate was ordered to pass over into France, in his return from Spain, to
exhort his most Christian Majesty to join himself to the Confederates, though the
Pope could not expect he would declare himself, against an Empire with which he
had made Peace: the Civil Wars which disturbed his Countries not permitting him
to make so considerable an Ally his Enemy; but he thought it might be taken
ill, if he was the only Christian Prince, whose Assistance the Holy See should
omit imploring; and at the same time drew a promise from him to undertake
nothing against the Spaniards, while their Forces were employed in the
Venetians Service, It Is thought the French could not rest quiet, and seeing
Spain without Troops and Defense, they would amuse the Calvinists by turning
the brunt of their Forces on that side. Gaspar de Coligny, Admiral of France, a
Person of great Courage and Conduct, saw this a favorable Conjuncture for the
executing those great Designs which he had projected against Spain. This King
answered according to the Formal Sayings of his Predecessors, That if the
Emperor and other Princes would enter into the League, he would also enter
therein, as well to testify the Esteem and Consideration he had for the Holy
Father, as to follow the Zeal and Piety of his Predecessors to the Church; That
he would not break the Peace which was lately confirmed by a new Alliance, his
Queen being Sister to the Catholic Kings: but as to the Marriage of Don
Sebastian King of Portugal, he was already engaged to give the Princess
Margurita to his Cousin, the King of Navarre. Cardinal Alexandrinus showed him
with great earnestness this Alliance would certainly tend to the Prejudice of
his Affairs, by countenancing a Party in his Kingdom which would certainly ruin
it. He told him moreover whatsoever might render him sensible, of the ill
consequences of such an Alliance. The King displeased at this Discourse, taking
Alexandrinus by the hand, pray, says he, assure your Uncle from me, That I give
my Sister to a Prince, whose Humor and Temper I so well know, that I can bring
him into the Bosom of the Church when I please; That my discontented Subjects
will be never the Stronger, for having him on their side, and I have only this
means left me to be revenged on them, for the deplorable condition wherein they
have laid my Kingdom.

Cardinal Alexandrinus returned with these answers from Charles and Philip,
well satisfied with the Honors which he received, both in France and Spain.

Cardinal Commendon was charged with a legation more tedious and laborious, by
the difficulty which detained him Two Years in Germany. The Pope had entrusted
him with the management of two Affairs, the first to use the utmost of his
Eloquence to engage the Emperor in the League; and the other, which was no less
delicate, concerned the Title of Great Duke of Tuscany, with which his Holiness
came from Honoring Cosmus de Medicis. After the Murder committed on the
Person of Duke Alexander, by his Cousin Laurence, the City of Florence, jealous
of her Liberty, imagining she could not maintain it, but under the Authority of
one Chief, chose Young Cosmus, who answered their expectations, and opened the
way to Great Enterprises. The first years of his Government were traversed by
some Malicious and Envious Spirits, who could not endure he should use the
Counsel of some particular Persons, and dispose of the Republics Treasure. The
Nobility had often retired from the City, displeased at his Conduct: they often
assembled without permission, and the Banishment wherewith this new Sovereign
had punished their Audaciousness, drew on him a Civil War. But his application
to dissipate all these Intrigues, annulled the design of the Malcontents, and
the different Conspiracies which he happily discovered, served only to
strengthen his Authority. Having vanquished the greatest part of the Rebels, he
banished the rest, or put them to Death; so that becoming Master of the rest of
the Citizens, by Favors and Presents, they preferred an Honorable Servitude,
and Riches acquired under the Peaceable Government of a Sovereign, before a
disadvantagious and imaginary Liberty.

The other allied Towns, wearyed with the Pride and Avarice of their
Magistrates, breathed likewise a Monarchial Government. Cosmus drew insensibly
on himself the whole Authority of the People and Senate, possessed himself with
the execution of the Laws, and left the Officers only Vain Titles and Names,
without either Force or Credit, quasht all the Liberties of the Florentines,
although Idolaters of Independency; and in fine, invested himself with the
Sovereignty.

The Exiles implored the Assistance of Peter Strozzi, one of their Patriots, a
Person Courageous and Enterprizing, hoping with the assistance of the French,
to re-establish themselves in their Country. But the good Fortune of Cosmus
disconcerted all their Projects. He beat Strozzi, drove him from Aetruria,
possessed himself of the City of Sienna, a place considerable for its Strength
and Riches, and finding his Reputation much increased by this Conquest, he
began to distinguish himself from the other Italian Princes. But Men's Ambition
generally increasing with their good Fortune, the Quality of Duke, which
Usurpers commonly take on them, flattering not sufficiently his Vanity, he
resolved to confirm by some Glorious Title, what he had gained by Force and
cunning. He endeavored to erect his new State into a Kingdom, thinking it
large enough to deserve that Title. He thereupon endeavored several times at
this Honor, and the Pope, who had ever refused it, at length granted him
something like it. He had wrought himself into the Affections of his Holiness,
by setting up Tribunals of Inquisition against Heretics, who already began to
^pread their Doctrins through Tuscany; and at length obtained of Pius V. in the
year 1570. the Title of Great Duke, which is not much Inferior to that of a
King. Coming to Rome with a Numerous and Magnificent Train, his Holiness sent
two Cardinals before him, received him with great Testimonies of Honor and
Affection, and publicly crowned him, during the Celebration of the Sacred
Mysteries. Maximilian, who pretended that Cosmus and his Estate depended on the
Empire, respected this Action as an Attempt against his Dignity, the Holy See
having no right to his Vassals. Cosmus de Medicis on the contrary, defended
himself from being a Feudatory to the Emperor; and thereupon Maximilian sent
Ambassadors to Rome, to blame the Pope for what he had done. This Contest was
like to prove of dangerous Consequence, and Commendon was ordered to find out
expedients. He discussed in presence of Maximilian the rights of the H. See,
and Empire; showing him that the Issue of this Quarrel might prove prejudicial
to him, in the present Conjuncture, and explained so clearly the Reasons of it,
as softened him in some measure, and engaged him to send one to Rome, to agree
on some Expedient which might suit the Interest of both Parties, yet without
violating the Popes Decree. This business might have been perfectly ended, had
not the Legate been obliged to pass over with all Speed into Poland, earnestly
to oppose the secret Design of that King, which was to put away his Wife,
Maximilian's Sister, and Espouse a Gentlewoman of an ordinary Family, with whom
he was extremely in Love.

The Venetians had already tried the Emperors Inclinations, by their
Ambassador James Sorancio, who having discovered the Sentiments of his
Imperial Majesty's Ministers, found them not at all inclinable to the League;
and when he proposed it to Maximilian, he replied, That when the Truce made
between him and Selim was expired, he would then consider the Conditions
offered by the Confederates; but whatsoever Instances Sorancio made him to know
these Conditions, the Emperor would never talk further about it. Although this
Prince was willing the War should last, yet he was fearful of entering into an
Affair, whose Success was doubtful. The Weakness of his Body rendering also his
mind less disposed to great Enterprises. Thinking himself unable to bear so
heavy a Burden, nor of sufficient Credit amongst the Princes of the Empire, who
are as much afraid of the Encroachments of their own Emperor, as of the
Invasion of the Turks. He likewise mistrusted the Constancy of the Venetians,
who perhaps would leave him engaged in the Heat of the War, exposed to the
common Enemies resentments; besides, being taught by his own experience, that
several Armies joined together, was but a Body of an ill Composition, whose
efforts, by reason of its disunion, could not atchieve any great Matters.

The King of Spain, whose Duty 'twas to draw him into the League, did all he
could underhand to hinder it; so that the movements of the Imperial Court were
mere Mysteries and Dissimulations. The Spanish Ambassador publicly solicited
Maximilian to engage in the League, assuring him of his Masters Concurrent
Assistance to the utmost of Power; so that the Emperor resolving to manage
himself after the best manner, that he might not disoblige the Pope nor
Republic, gave all outward Signs of his readiness to comply with the
Confederates. Affairs being in this disposition, when Commendon came to Vienna,
he gave Maximilian to understand his Charge was not so much to persuade him to
join with the Holy See, the King of Spain and the Venetians against the Ottoman
Empire, as to assure him, that if he would diligently Arm himself, he should
receive from the Sovereign Prelat, whatsoever a Dutiful Son can expect from the
Tenderness of an Indulgent Father: That the deplorable state of Christendom
called aloud for his earnest Assistance: That the Pope alarmed at the Miseries
of Europe, had hitherto used fruitless endeavors, to pacify the Quarrels, and
end the differences of Christian Princes; and at his coming to the Pontificat,
sent up Fervent Prayers to God for the defense of his Church, against its
greatest Enemy; That his Petitions would have been undoubtedly heard, had not
the Christians themselves labored at their own Destruction: That they were set
upon by a Prince, puffed up with Pride and Vain Glory, wallowing in Lust and
Idleness, yet designed no less than the Invasion of all Italy, having first
taken the Kingdom of Cyprus from the Venetians. Though the Pope was persuaded God
permitted this Barbarian to form these great Projects only to reunite
Christians, and remember them of their Duty; That the Victory was certain from
a due Preparation for War by united Forces; That his Imperial Majesty would be
more advantaged by the Defeat of the Musulmen, than any other Christian Prince;
That having the Honor of Precedence before all other Christian Princes, this
obliged him to a more singular forwardness, his Place Empowring him more
particularly to exhort Europe to a common Defense in case of a Vacant See; That
he would not trouble him with the remembrance of the losses which the Infidels
made his Father Ferdinand suffer, nor those he had under went himself. That the
Infidels setting on the Christian Princes, during their Disunion, found an
Infallible means to ruin them, one, after another; That all the Advantages
they obtained over them, sprang from their Mis-understandings; each of them
shutting his Eyes at another Misfortunes, found himself at last insensibly
overwhelmed in the Ruin of his Neighbor; That the Christian Princes had not
hitherto bin in a Capacity of attacking the Infidels both by Sea and Land; That
the Turks usually invaded Hungary, when they undertook nothing against the
Venetians, on the Mediterranean; and on the contrary, left Germany at rest,
when they invaded the Maritine Countries of the Republic: That if his Imperial
Majesty would join his Forces to the Confederates, as well for his own
Interest, as the Signiories, they might with such a considerable Army,
exterminate the Turkish Nation, or at least subdue its Pride, and curb its
continual encroachments; considering the Christian Fleet would consist of Two
Hundred and Fifty Galleys, and consequently will be far stronger than the
Turks, being Manned with Sixty Thousand Foot, and Five Thousand Horse; so that
the Emperor assisted by the Forces of Germany, might surprise the Enemy in
Hungary, lying open without defense, he might possess himself of it in one
Campaign, and extend his Conquest as far as Thrace, and strike Constantinople
with the Terror of his Arms; That the Confederates and all other Christian
Princes would favor this Enterprise; and the Poles, who are a Valiant People,
and so Strong in Horse, would espouse the common Cause at the Popes first
entreaty.

The Legate concluded his discourse with reminding the Emperor, that if he let
slip this favorable opportunity, which seemed to be offered by Heaven it self,
it must be thought the Divine Wrath has blinded the Eyes and hardened the Hearts
of the Christians.

The Emperor gave a fair hearing to Commendon's Discourse, but wanting Courage
and Prudence to declare himself for the League, he required further time for
Consideration, and then returned Answer in Writing. He acknowledged no Prince
more interess'd than himself in the Destruction of the Ottoman Empire; so that
he must passionately desire it, receiving such continual Alarms from their
Neighborhood, but he could not exercise any Act of Hostility, against so
Potent an Enemy, with whom he had lately made a Truce, the observation of which
was confirmed by Oath. That his being more exposed to the Injustice of these
Barbarians, he must be forced on other measures, than the rest of the
Confederates; and would therefore see first what the King of Poland would do,
and the other Christian Princes, who had not yet declared themselves.

The Legate answered, this Method was exactly contrary to that which ought to be
taken, inasmuch as those who were most molested, and ready to be swallowed up,
should show themselves an example to others, whose States being farther
distant, were least in danger. That if he any longer delayed to animate his
Subjects by a Speedy and Generous Example, he wouldrender indifferent the
greatest part of those who were wavering in their choice on what side to
incline; and when he shall solicit the Polanders, and other Neighboring
Princes in quality of a Legate, they will demand of him, how he found the
Emperor affected, and what Troops he had raised for that Design; should he
answer his Imperial Majesty intends to take his resolutions from theirs, 'twill
be easily perceived how fruitless his Embassy has been to him; That none of
the Northern Princes will take Arms, as long as they see the States of the
Empire look on unconcerned; It being also certain, when the Venetians shall see
themselves cut off from all hopes from the Empire, and sorced to decide the
Controversy by a Naval Combat, they will not sustain this Burden with the same
Resolution they showed at first; so that unless the Emperor gives some
Diversion to the Ottoman Forces on the side of Hungary, their Army will not be
able to hold out long against the Grand Signiors, but must lay aside all hopes,
and shamefully break that Alliance which serves as a Buckler to all
Christendom; and as to the Truce, he need not endeavor an answer to the
Scruples about that, seeing the Emperor himself had complained in several
Diets, that its Articles were not observed by the Infidels, who kept their Word
no longer than it held with their advantage, and broke their Oaths by
Incursions and Seizures of several places in Hungary; That his Character of
Legate obliged him to give an account to his Holiness of the Conferences held
with his Imperial Majesty, and therefore entreated him to consider how the Pope
and Venetians would be affected, when they knew his Answers, beseeching him
withal to take care lest he repented of his Indifferency, when the mischiefs
were past remedy.

Maximilian being full of Trouble and Restlesness, lest Commendon should send
advice, to Rome and Venice, of what past betwixt them, which would be a means
to cool the Zeal of the Confederates; demanded of him some days time to
deliberate, further on that Affair. The Perplexity wherein his waveringness
reduced him, the fear of engaging in a dangerous War, or occasion the breaking
the League, and the Instant Exhortations of the Legate, gave his mind no quiet
Night nor Day. He wrote the next morning betimes a Note to the Legate, who
imparted the same to the Author of this History, containing exactly these
Words. The Emperor Maximilian to Cardinal Commendon. I have not slept since the
Conference which you and I had Yesterday, so sensible am I of the Reasons you
offered me: the Affair we treated on, I know requires speedy Answer, and
therefore intend, with Gods Assistance, to come to such a resolution, as will
content his Holiness. But I entreat you by the Friendship betwixt us, not to
send as yet any positive Message to Rome, till we have had another meeting,
which I will endeavor shall be within two days at furthest. And therefore pray
think not this delay long.

He sent for the Legate three days after, and promised whatsoever his Holiness
could desire from him, but on condition the Allys would send him Troops to
prevent Surprises from the Turks, who might perhaps in their Resentments turn
their whole Force on him; in which case he must be assured of this Assistance,
before he could publicly declare himself in Favor of the League; and withal
must know with what number of Horse and Foot the Confederates could assist him.

Commendon answered him, he might assure himself of a considerable supply, and
regulate it according to his own mind. Whereunto, Maximilian said the
Confederates must consider what Detachments they could spare from their Army.
You will fall into your first unresolvedness (replied the Legate) if you stick
at so small a matter, and 'twill be thought you seek new Pretenses to avoid
engaging your self; for before the Allys can communicate this Affair to each
other, and the Result of their Deliberations be known, considering the
distances of the places, and length of time which such a Negotiation required,
more than half of the Year will be lost; and your Majesty, who knows better
than the Allys, what Forces you need, may obtain what you desire at the first
Proposal. The Emperor having awhile longer held out, on this Article rendered
himself to the Legates Reasons, and assured him, provided he were assisted with
Twenty Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse, one half of which should consist
of Germans, to join his Forces, he would attack the Turks in Hungary, and give
a great diversion to them on that side.

As soon as Commendon drew this Assurance from him, he gave advice thereof to
the Pope, by an express Courier, together with a full and particular account of
this Negotiation. He afterward went into Poland, not only to exhort Sigismond
to enter into the League, but to dissuade him from the unjust and violent
design of putting away his Wife.

The Legate speedily passed over Moravia, and Silesia, notwithstanding the rigor
of the Cold, and incommodiousness of the Snows of that Country. He found this
poor Prince besotted with the Love of this forementioned Woman, his mind being
so entirely possessed by this furious Passion, as left no room for thought of
business. He endeavored to conceal the Project of a Divorce, remitting the
execution of this Design, when the Legate should be gone. But Commendon by his
ingenious Carriage, had so greatly insinuated himself into the affections of
the Polanders, that he became acquainted with the whole Intrigue, and the
Methods laid by the King to effect this Separation. The Cardinal therefore made
a Discourse to him on the Excellency and Dignity of Marriage, the Holiness and
Indissolvibleness of the Conjugal Union amongst the Christians; and showed him
plainly he could not break his Vow to the Queen, without dishonouring himself,
and engaging in a Cruel War with the House of Austria.

The King appeared sufficiently convinced by the Cardinals Reasons; but his
Passion would no question have prevailed, had not the death of the Queen, which
immediately happened, prevented that grievious Scandal. For she seeing her self
slighted, and driven from her Husbands Bed, for the avoiding other affronts,
left Poland, under pretense of visiting her Relations. She staid a while at
Lintz, a City belonging to the Arch Duke her Brother, where she dyed with
Regret and Sorrow.

The King of Poland, being solicited to join himself with the Confederates,
remitted this Affair to the Diet, which was then held, to lay, by this means,
on this Honorable Assembly the shame he had to refuse the gratifying his
Holyness's just Desires. The Walaques, a People bordering on Poland, and
Tributary to the Sultan, had driven away their King and set up another in his
place, upheld by the consent and Assistance of the Grand Signior. Bogdan the
former King had recourse to the Polanders, who lending their Assistance to his
Re-establishment in the Throne, disobliged the Grand Signior, which affair gave
no small Disturbance to Sigismond; who was not for War, though the greatest part
of the Senate were. The chiefest of the Nobility, with whom Commendon was much
in favor, sought by Arms to increase and uphold their Credit, and therefore
zealously promoted his Demand. The business began to be in a fair way, when the
Kings Sickness put a stop to the Conclusion of it. For Sigismond having no
Children nor Heirs of his Name, the Senate and Great Lords laid aside all
affairs, the better to attend to the Future Election. Commendon also was not
behind hand in his Care about this matter, as fearing lest some Protestant
Prince, by great Sums of Money might prevail with the Senate, and People, to
choose him for their King. But Sigismond without any reason offered, than his
bare Will, dismissed the Diet, and caused himself to be carried to Chimieschi, a
Frontier Town of Lithuania, where his excessive Passion considerably increased
his Indisposition. He drove away his Physicians, placing his only Confidence in
an Old Witch, who promised to cure him by Virtue of her Enchantments. But he
dyed within a few days, and the Great People of the Kingdom not being any of
them able to pretend to the Election; engaged themselves in several Interests
to obtain by their Suffrages, his Favor who should be chosen King. The
Interregnum lasted a whole year, and the Estates assembled at Warsaw, Elected
in fine Henry Duke of Anjou, Brother to Charles IX. King of France; This
surprising Diversity of Affairs, long retained Cardinal Commendon in Poland.

Whilst the Christians lost time in Disputing each Article, the Ottoman Fleet
desolated the Island, and ravaged all the Coasts of the Venetian State. Hali
parted from Constantinople, in the beginning of the Spring, with fourscore
Galleys, and other Vessels laden with Provisions for the Turkish Army at
Cyprus, and fresh Men to fill up the places of those that dyed. He left
Arpagmat with Thirty Gallys, and other Vessels under the command of Mustapha;
who lay before Famagusta. He afterward set Sail with the remaing Forces for
the Isle of Rhodes, and passing by Candia, he came and cast Anchor at
Nigrepont, called heretofore the Isle of Euboe, where the Bassa Partau was
already arrived with all his Fleet. This Bassa supplied the place of Piali,
whom Selim retained at Constantinople, whether out of Displeasure, because he
had not defeated the Christians in the last Campaign, or did this out of
complacency to his Daughter, who could not so often suffer her Husbands absence.

Louchali and Caracossa Famous Pirates, came also and joined the Ottoman Army,
both of them Italians by Birth, the first a Native of Calabria, and the other
of the Marches of Anconia. They had been Slaves from their Youth, and procuring
their Liberty by renouncing their Christianity, became of great Consideration.
Louchali's Good Fortune had brought him to be Vice Roy of Algiers. His Squadron
consisted of Nine Gallys, and Thirty small Vessels. Caracossa Commanded Forty
Frigates and Brigantines, and the two Generals Hali and Perteau made great
reckoning on the Valor and Experience of these two Runagado's.

The Turkish Army consisted of two hundred Galleys, and an hundred other small
Vessels of different kinds. Having weighed Anchor from before Negrepont, this
Fleet fell on the little Island of Tines, belonging to the Republic, whose
Villages they plundered without daring to attack the chief Town, which was built
on a Rock of difficult access, and defended by a Valiant Venetian Gentleman,
named Paruta; who in Derision of the Enemies, showed them the Garrison on the
Walls of the Town.

Pertah at the same time hoysted up Sail for Candia, and drawing in the night
near the Shore to conceal his Course from the Sight of the Christians, he gat
into the Port of Suda, one of the most commodious of the Mediterranean. He
landed some men, which forced the Town, and Burnt it, and spread themselves
about the Country, where they made several Peasants Prisoners, and burnt many
Villages. But Michaeli, Chief Magistrate of ^anea, charged and repulsed these
Pillagers, with eight hundred Men, Commanded by Justiniani, a Noble Genoise,
who had by chance landed at that place, and which were seconded by some Troops
of the Militia of that Country.

Louchali Cruised with fifty Gallys, on the Coasts of the Northern parts of the
Isle, where he landed some men, who wasted the Country for a great Space;
chance favored the Valor and Diligence of him, who was sent out on this
Expedition. Retimo, a considerable Town, and well Peopled, but without
Garrison, and ill fortified, lay open to the least Insults. Barochi, Sacredo,
and Justiniani her Magistrates, on the rumor of the arrival of the Enemies at
Negrepont, were urgent with Marinus Caballo Providitor to send them at least
Five hundred Men, to encourage the Inhabitants, and defend themselves from
Surprise. But Caballo refused them, lest by this means he might weaken the
Garrison of Gandia, whereon depended the conservation of the rest of the
Island. Those of Retimo, whom the march of the Infidels filled with disquiet,
were seized with such a Trembling at the hearing of the Enemies being at Suda,
that taking care only of their Lives and Familys, they forsook the Town without
minding their Estates, and gained in great have the Mountains, and other places
of Retreat, it not being in the Magistrates Power to hinder them; who seeing
this, caused the Treasure to be cast into a Deep Well, and the Public
Registers exported out of the Town, and thus left it. Louchali drew near it
with a design of withdrawing at the least Resistance, intending only the
Alarming of the Inhabitants, but finding it forsaken, he gave the plundering of
it to his Soldiers, who being laden with Booty, burnt it, with whatsoever they
could not carry along with them. It Is said the Infidel caused what was taken
from an Old Woman, to be restored her, who was the only Person left in the
Place, and commanded her in a joke for all acknowledgements, to thank his
Countrymen for the Booty they had left his Army, and thus returned enriched to
his Fleet.

The Pillage of the Country and Desolation of Retimo, served for a Pretense to
the Revolt of some Peasants; who being discontented at the rigorous usage which
was showed them in the Imposition of the heavy Taxes on them, and forcing them
to serve the Venetian Gallys, were resolved to make advantage of the disorders
of the Isle, believing this a favorable conjuncture for the casting off the
Yoke which they long intended. And in Effect, had the Barbarians remained any
considerable time in Candia, and the malcontents declared themselves, the
Isle would have bin absolutely lost. These Peasants not being able any longer
to contain themselves, got together in great numbers, on occasion of a Priest
whom a young Gentleman had beaten. They thereon took Arms, broke into, and
plundered this Gentleman's House, and murdered him and his whole Family. Which
Action having increased their Boldness, they fell on the Nobility, and made a
great Slaughter of them, pillaged their Estates, and shared the Booty between
them, as if they had obtained the law^ul Possession of it by right of Arms.
They wrote at the same time to Perteau, entreating him to take them under his
Protection, but he who had the charge of carrying their Message, on his return
relating this Bassa's departure from Suda, the Remorse and fear of Punishment
dissipated this multitude, several of them returned into their Houses, and
others offered the Providitor to take a new Oath of Fidelity, desiring Pardon
for their Fault. Caballo was the more inclined to grant it, as apprehending the
Consequence of so dangerous an Emmotion. But when he understood the Enemies had
weighed Anchor, he sent a thousand Foot against these Rebels, under the command
of Peter Avogaro, to whom was joined Matthew Calergio, followed by a great
number of Friends and Domestic's. Avogaro disarmed these Mutinous People, and
made them Prisoners, several of which were condemned to dye, and more to the
Gallys.

The Turks at their departure from Suda, drew near a place called Turluro, to
alarm those of Canea, but were surprised by a Tempest wherein they lost Three
Gallys, and nine others had like to incurred the same Fate. They put off from
Candia to make a descent into Serigo, and wasted the Country round about,
without offering to attack the Town. They afterward steered their Course
toward Zant, where they also landed some Men; but Perteau seeing the
Inhabitants retired into the Castle, and bent on a Resolute Defense, discharged
his Choler on the Trees and Houses.

He cut down all the Vines with which this Isle is every where planted, and
burnt such a Prodigious quantity of Vessels, that the Inhabitants were at a
great loss where to bestow the next year their Wines. From Zant he came to
Cephalonia, the Territory of which is far more extensive and Fruitful. Where
the Barbarians made a great Multitude of Slaves, Drove away a prodigious number
of Cattle, and thence parted to Corfou. Lewis Gorgio, and Francis Cornelio, to
whom the care of this Isle was committed, had prevented Perteau, by a deligent
Preparation, on supposal they should be attackt. They caused all the Corn in
the Fields to be hastily transported into the City. so that that the Turks
finding nothing to Pillage, revenged themselves on the Trees with Fire and
Sword. The Venetian Soldiers not daring to set upon them in the open Field,
laid Ambushes for them, and killed several who were straying in search of
Plunder; The Commanders were informed by some Prisoners they took, that the
Bassa had no design of besieging their Town, being well fortified; and in
effect they soon set Sail for Supoto. The Venetians had possessed themselves of
this place at the beginning of the War with as great Dexterity as Valor; and
Manlio, by whose advice it was attacked, was entrusted with the care of keeping
it, when 'twas taken. The Italian Garrison being dismayed at the Arrival of so
formidable an Army, slipped out at a private Gate, and abandoned the place with
more Cowardice than the Turks had one before them, leaving their Commander to
the Mercy of a Cruel and Spightful Enemy: Yet Manlio defended himself with
those few Men that staid with him to the last Extremity, more edged by despair
than hope of being relieved, but at length was forced to yield the place, and
himself a Prisoner.

The War lasting all the Winter in Iliria, and Dalmatia, these Provinces were
overrun with the Enemies Troops at the beginning of the Spring; and the
Inhabitants of Zebenico who had no Mills about their Town, suffered great
Inconveniences for want of Flower. Hemolaus Tipoli, who commanded four Gallys
along this Coast, attacked, during the Night, an ancient place near Zebenico
called Scardona, kept by a Turkish Garrison, which held the Country in
Subjection. Hermolaus having taken and burnt this place, did thereby lay open a
way to those of Zebenico for the grinding their Corn. He held afterward four
of the Enemies Vessels, as it were, besieged, who retiring up the River of
Narante, set upon all the Barks which appeared in those parts. Tipoli having
given them Chase, they made to Shore, and landed a thousand Men, who
immediately opposed the Venetians approaches to their Vessels, but their Cannon
forced them to leave them, and Tipoli having taken out thence whatsoever was
valuable, burnt them. The Venetians at the same time met with an happy
opportunity, but the small Diligence and Vigor they used in effecting the
Enterprise, spoiled the Success of it.

There were some Persons sent privately by the Turks to Alexander Donati
Governor of Antivari, who were conducted out of the place by some Epirots,
that persuaded them by the way to deliver Scutari, a Town well fortified, and
the Capital of the Province. These Traitors agreed with Donati concerning the
recompense of this Service, and the means of accomplishing it. The greatness of
this Enterprise extremely flattering the Vanity of the Governor of Antivari,
he wrote of it to the Senate, not so much for the obtaining their order and
further Succors, as to make himself necessary. The Senate judging it expedient
to follow this advice, sent him eight hundred Men, commanded by Annibal
Emiliani of Forli, with order not to undertake any thing, without the
participation of Zachari Solomoni Magistrate of Cata^o. Donati vexed that he
must share the Honor of this Enterprise, obeyed with an ill will, and kept the
matter no longer as a Secret; so that the Turks having notice of it, punished
the Traitors with the greatest Severity, and more carefully guarded the place.
The Venetians hoping to subject all Epirus, ordered James Malateste to march to
Cataro with Four Thousand Foot. This place, besides the Plague with which it
was afflicted, had underwent all the Calamity of War, and the Infidels thought
to have surprised it by the Treason of a Sicilian Captain, who was to deliver
them a Gate, the keeping of which was committed to him. Salamoni discovered
this Plot, saved the Town, and caused the Sicilian to be strangled; who was
afterward hanged by one Foot, on the outside of the Walls. But the Designs on
Epirus met with very unfortunate success, and proved greatly dis-advantagious
to the State. The Infidels becoming Masters of a Village about two hundred
Paces from Kataro; Malateste wanting Experience, and not being able to smother
his Resentments, thought he was bound in Honor to drive the Enemies from a
Post, which was won in his Sight, and whose Neighborhood incommodated the
Town; and seeing no likelihood of attacking them that Day, he prepared himself
the next morning, and being informed of the place of their Retreat, he sent one
Party before him by Land, and himself went on board a Gally with a considerable
number of choice Men.

He made sure of a Rising Ground near the Bourg, in which they had passed over
the Night, and whence they dislodged at the first news of his March. Malateste
pillaged and burnt this Village, enraged that he had mist his blow. But the
Infidels, who sent at the same time for Assistance in all the Neighboring
Parts depending on the Grand Signior, speedily gathered a considerable Body,
charged Malateste from a higher part of the rising ground of which he had
possessed himself, rolled down great Stones on his Men, and overwhelmed them
in a Tempest of Darts and Arrows. This Surprise, together with the
disadvantagiousness of the place, having discomfited them, Malateste used his
utmost endeavors to make them keep some order, and opposing the Enemy alone
with too great boldness, had his Thigh broke with the blow of a Stone, and was
made Prisoner. The Turks carried him to Constantinople, where he could not
obtain his Liberty, till after two years Slavery, and then was released at the
Intercession of the King of France.

This Misfortune ruined the Affairs of the Venetians in Epirus, and the Turks
alarmed at the danger with which Scutari had been threatened, and Revolt of some
of the Neighboring People; sent a considerable Army of Horse and Foot under
the Command of Achomat, to keep this Province in its Duty. This Bassa drove the
Epirots out of the Field, who had taken part with the Republic; and forced
them, after several Combats, to shut themselves up in Dulcino; where Achomat
besieged them with his whole Army. He battered the place several days with his
Cannon; threw down the Walls, and gave diverse Assaults, whence his People were
continually repulsed by the vigorous resistance of the Besieged; who seconded
the Situation of the place. 'Twas a Scraggy Rock surrounded by the Sea, except
a space of Land, which serves for an Avenue, and which part was the most
strongly fortified. Caracossa having taken thirteen Galleys, approached
Dulcino, to acquaint the Inhabitants, that they were no less in danger from the
Sea than the Land. This threatening so dismayed them, that they had set open
their Gates to the Infidels, had not Tipoly and Soranio obliged Sciara and
Martinengo, Malateste's Successors, to get into the place, with a Reinforcement
of Five Hundred Men, which he had led to Cataro. Martinengo no sooner
understood the ill condition of the place, but sent word to the Senate, he
would leave it, if he were not succored in three days. Perteau, who left
Supoto, arrived hereupon with all the Ottoman Army; so that the Besieged having
no hope of Assistance, surrendered, on condition the Citizens should only take
an Oath of Fidelity to the Grand Signior, and the Garrison march out with their
Arms and Baggage. But this Treaty was executed according to the usual Faith of
these Barbarians: For Achomat taking it ill the place should be yielded to
Perteau, and not to him, who first besieged it; when he was entered, fell to
Plundring it. Perteau, who was no more exact to his Word, laid all the Soldiers
in Chains, excepting Martinengo, Venieri, Podestat of the Town, and some
Officers, whom he permitted to depart, having first taken away their Arms and
Equipage.

Dolcino being taken and sacked, the Barbarian's Fleet went to cast Anchor over
against Antivari; a City built on a rising ground, in the midst of a Plain
within Three Miles of the Sea, sufficiently fortified by its natural Situation,
as well as Walls. The Valor and good Disposition of the Inhabitants would have
defended the place better than its Garrison. But Emiliani and Donai, who were
to sustain the Siege, were so much at variance, that they made use of their
Authority to deliver it to the Conqueror; the Effects of whose Perfidiousness
was sufficiently felt by the People and Garrison. The Soldiers were put to the
Chain, and as many Citizens as were found retiring with their Goods (according
to the Articles of the Treaty) were taken and sold for Slaves. Perteau caused
the Archbishop of the place to be cruelly murdered, a Person, whose Singular
Piety cannot be sufficiently commended: He permitted the two Traitors to retire
where they pleased. But they bannisht, and secured themselves by a Voluntary
Exi^e from the Punishment due to so infamous an Action. The Bassa left a
moderate Garrison in the place at his departure, and rased the Castle of Pisani
down to the Ground. He dealt in like manner with the Town of Budua, which its
Inhabitants had deserted; and afterward returned to his former post, to retake
Cataro. He had sent an Epirot, taken Prisoner at Dulcino, whom he used as his
Kinsman (being both of of the same Country) to exhort the Governor to
Surrender. He was enjoined to assure him, that in case he yielded to his
desires, the Garrison should march out with their Baggage, and the Inhabitants
enjoy an entire freedom from all Impositions; but if they designed to hold out
a Siege, they should certainly be put to the Sword. Barbaro, for thus was this
Epirot Prisoner called, having offered his Proposals in the hearing of the
Citizens and Soldiers, Salomoni answered in the name of the Town, That the
Republic having committed to him the keeping of it, he would rather perish
together with all the Inhabitants, than fail in his duty. In the mean time
Perteau advanced up the Gulf of Cataro, thinking the Misfortune of Antivari
and Dulcino would dishearten the Catarians, and make them comply with his
Offers. But being informed of their Generous Answer, he imagined Barbaro had
ill acquitted himself of his charge, and therefore caused him to be laid in
Irons. The Fleet continued their Course, and cast Anchor under Castel-Novo, to
deliberate maturely on this important Enterprise. The Garrison of this last
mentioned place passionately desired the taking of Cataro, confidently
affirming the Siege could not be either long or difficult. But Perteau, who
mistrusted the Success, wisely considered he might set himself more back in
Selims favor, by a disappointment in his Design, than he could advance himself
in the accomplishing it; and therefore declared, his chief business was to find
out the Christian Fleet, and engage 'em: and as to the Siege, it must be
deferred till the next Spring.

Whilst the Turks remained in this Road, Louchali and Caracossa with part of
the Galleys, went to insult over the Venetian Islands. But Cursolari, which lay
most exposed to danger, was preserved by an Adventure worth admiring. Antony
Balbo its Governor, more faint hearted and timorous than a Woman, fled the
same Night the News came of the arrival of the Turkish Fleet, and was followed
immediately by the Men Inhabitants. Their Wives being left alone in the Town,
shut the Gates, and by the Counsel of a Priest, called Antonio Roscono (who had
endeavored to retain the Governor and Citizens) they put on the Clothes, and
took the Arms of their Husbands, mounted the Walls, and thus stood in the
posture of People, resolutely determined on a Courageous Defense. This
Stratagem was seconded by a Singular Accident; for one of these Women seeing
the Enemies Galleys drawing near the Walls, boldly put fire to one of these
Cannons, pointed by chance directly against the Fleet. The Shot was so
fortunate, that it struck down one of the Masts of their Galleys; and the
Infidels supposing the Garrison were very bold and numerous, retired without
landing a man.

The Senate was so pleased with this Action, that when after the War, the
Inhabitants of Cursolari, pressed by Scarcity, had recourse to their
Liberality; 'Twas answered, They had not so well served their Country nor the
State, to deserve such a Favor, and must present themselves in their Wives
Names, to whom they were indebted for their Safety. The Turks advanced as far
as the Isle of Lesina, where they landed, and Pillaged the Country; forced the
Town and burnt it; the Old People of it were murdered, with all others that
were not capable of Service, and the rest made Slaves. These Pirates rejoined
Perteau, who no sooner had set Sail, but he received orders from the Sultan to
besiege Cataro. But he returned answer to his Highness, That this Expedition
must necessarily be put off to a more commodious Season, and steered his Course
thereupon to Corfou. Where he landed in Person with Eight Thousand Foot and
Four Hundred Horse taken out of Epirus, and charging the Christians, who rashly
opposed his descent, he beat them, and made them retire into the Town. He
afterward made himself Master of the Suburbs, which he burnt, as if he
intended a formal Siege. But the Cannon from the Castle, which killed him
several People, forced him to retire. He caused the Fields to be wasted, the
Trees to be cut down, and returned to his Vessels without any advantage from so
great a Devastation. This Bassa being too well instructed of the ill Condition
of the Venetian Fleet, tarryed thirteeen days longer before Corfou, without
undertaking any thing further, in expectation of News from Constantinople, with
as great assurance, as if he had rode in the Turkish Ports; which was no small
Grief to the Christians, considering how easy this Barbarian might have been
attacked and routed, had their Fleets bin out with the same Diligence, and good
Agreement.

The Venetians Celebrated with great Joy, the Conclusion of the League, in the
presence of the Foreign Ministers. But if this Union increased the Courage and
Hopes of the Venetians, the main difficulty lay in raising of Money, to carry
on these great Preparations. After several Assemblies of the Senate, the Result
of their Debates was divided, touching the manner of exacting Contributions
from the associated Cities. Some were for levying a tenth part on all the
Fruits of the Country. Others, That every one should pay proportionably to the
quantity of Acres he held; which last advice was followed.

As soon as this Tax was published, the People were so greatly set against it,
that all Concourses, Fairs and Markets rung with Complaints. One Town exhorted
another not to suffer so grievous an Imposition, which would soon be followed
by others more intolerable. 'Twas every day spread about in all places, that
new ways were devised to impoverish the associated Cities; That these
Impositions had no President; That whatsoever the Earth produced was laden with
Tribute; That no Commodities were free; That Seamen were pressed from the
associated Towns, contrary to their Rights and Privileges; That so great a
number of them were raised, that the Fields lay wast, and such as remained
within, were overburdened with Taxes; That endeavors were used to render them
incapable of ever raising themselves from these Miseries, whilst the Chief
Magistrates lived in Luxury and Wantonness on what they had unjustly taken from
their poor Families; maintaining in this manner their Rapine and Avarice, under
a Pretense of a War, wherein only Venice was interested; That before the last
drop of Blood was drawn out of their Veins, the Senators would do well to open
their Coffers; That such a grievance was not to be endured, but openly and
universally protested against, by which means the Senate would be forced on
more moderate Counsels. Some of those who were most notorious for these
Complaints, were punished for their Insolency; but 'twas not judged fitting to
pass further, till the Deputy of each Town were heard. The Senate seeing the
City filled with these Deputies, ordered them to make their Remonstrances
apart. Their Harangues were all different, some affirmed an inhability to
contribute in any sort to new Impositions, having much ado to acquit themselves
of the old. Others requested some Diminution; but all in general rejected the
Decree. The Magistrates were strangely surprised at so precise and general a
Refusal. 'Twas impossible to make War without Money; and sufficient Supplies
could not be had without extraordinary Levies, and it highly concerned the
Senate's Authority not to revoke a Decree of that Nature. This Affair having
bin long agitated, 'twas thought necessary to incline to moderation, to prevent
any Sedition; and the discontented Towns putting themselves under the
Protection of some Neighboring Prince. The Senate having then annulled their
Decree; all the Deputies were ordered to be in the Palace; where they were
told, That the Decree they complained of was made by mere necessity, the Senate
being very sensible of its Rigor and Severity; That they had voluntarily
revoked it, being satisfied with their Zeal and Fidelity; That this
Condescension should oblige them to assist the Republic, according to their
utmost Power; That the State expected no less an acknowledgment for the fifty
years Peace which she had procured them; That 'twas fitting those amongst them,
whose Countries lay nearest the Sea Coasts, should contribute most, as being in
greatest danger; That 'twas absolutely necessary to provide for a great Army,
or resolve on yielding to the Infidels, and perhaps become Slaves and
Tributaries.

That Venice, wherein resides the Sovereign Authority, would contribute first;
the Magistrates freely submitting themselves to the Execution of their own
Laws; That if they considered the weight of the Burden they had to bear, they
must also consider the Enemy they had to deal with, who without any Provocation
on their parts, forced them against their Wills on these defensive
Preparations. This Discourse so appeased the Deputies Minds, that they
consented to a levy of Poll-Mony, amounting to more than three hundred Thousand
Crowns a Year whilst the War should last.

This Talk being over, Venice was vexed with another trouble worse than the
former. There were every day Reports spread of the Progress of the Barbarians
in the Mediterranean Islands, That having Pillaged Candia, Zant, and
Cephalonia, they would exercise the same Barbarity in other places, and come
with a formidable Army to attack the chief City. Although her Situation secured
her from a Surprizal, yet the slowness of the Spaniards, which hindered also the
other Confederates, obliged them to stand on their Guard. They feared lest the
Populacy, affrighted at the sight of the Infidels, and struck with some panick
terror, should forsake their usual Traffic, and leave the Town in disorder
and Confusion. The Magistrates to prevent so great a Mischief, resolved to
fortify themselves on the side of the Sea: for Venice is so Situated amongst
small Isles, and separated from the Continent by the Waters flowing in the
Mediterranean, that there is no going on Shore to her but in small Barks, whose
prodigious number fills the Channels, which pass through the midst of the
greatest Streets. Great Vessels can come near her only in one place, and
neither dare they enter without the guidance of some Skillful Pylot of the
Country, the continual agitation of the Waves making this Passage uncertain and
difficult. Two well built Castles form and defend the Entrance of the Port,
which is shut up by a great Iron Chain, fastened from one Fort to the other.
There came Three Galleys from Pola well Armed, which rode at Anchor before the
Port, and three great Vessels over against a place called Malamocque, in as
good a Condition as the Galeasses. The Continent was fortified with Trenches,
Forts, and Walls, which Works were defended by several great Pieces of Cannon,
drawn from the Magazins of the Arsenal; wherein were placed ten Thousand Foot,
raised in the Cities, obliged to furnish them with Militia, with what Horse
they could get besides. Julius Savorniani, in whose Ability the Senate put much
confidence, was sent for from Zara to take care of this Work, and named General
of this little Army. Vincient Morosini who was chosen Providitor, had
Co-adjutors, Lewis Grimani, Alexander Buono, Andrew Bernardi, Laurence
Sorancto, Mark Justinian, and Francis Michaeli. The Venetian's Application to
this new Work, made their Strength mistrusted, and in effect it might be said,
considering these Precautions, That the Infidels were already Masters of the
whole State, and that now they had only their Capital City left to preserve.

The restlessness of the Venetians was increased by the News of the taking of
Famagusta; and the Republic having from thence forward no other Support than
her Sea Forces, all her hopes lay in the Decision of a Combat. This News being
found false and without grounds, the City began to re-assure her self. But this
Report proved ominous, and presaged the Misery which soon after happened. Zani
had ordered Peter Troni the last Summer to load four Vessels at Candia with
Provisions and Soldiers, and carry them to Famagusta. Troni dyed in the mean
time, and Mark Antony Quirini was put in his place. Who fruitlesly spending the
time, till the end of the year in the Port of Candia, there was another Officer
chosen for the Conduct of this Enterprise, called also Quirini, and Surnamed
Stenta, who took as many Galleys, as he thought requisite for this Expedition.
He set Sail on the Thirteenth of January, and came within sight of Famagusta
after ten days setting out. The Enemy had left six Galleys near enough the
place to defend the Entrance of the Port from the Christian Vessels. Quirini,
who had twelve very well equipt, sent before the Vessels which were laden with
Ammunition and Provisions to draw the Infidels out to fight, and endeavored in
following them to conceal his course. The Turks no sooner saw them, but they
made out after them with full Sail. But the twelve Venetian Galleys, which
appeared immediately made them get to Land, where they dis-imbarked their
Cannon, and retrenched themselves on the Shore. Quirini, who pursued them, sunk
two of their Galleys, the four others escaping by means of the Night, whilst
Quirini was endeavoring to put his Succors into the Town. He went the next
morning in search of them, and fell on one of those great Vessels which the
Turks call Mahones, which set out from a part of Cilicia, carrying Clothes for
the Ottoman Army, and three hundred Janisaries, who did not surrender till
after a bloody Fight. Quirini moreover took a French Vessel, which the Turks
constrained to part from Alexandria to carry Ammunition to Cyprus. The
Governor of Damas was in this Vessel with two hundred Soldiers. He got out in
a small Boat to the Turkish Fleet; and his Men were put to the Chain. Quirini
entering Famagusta with such glorious Spoils, assured the Garrison of a more
considerable assistance than that which he then brought them, and thus returned
to Candia as happily as he set sorth.

Mustapha transported, during the Winter, fresh Troops into the Isle of Cyprus,
to fill up the places of the Dead and Wounded. And the Pillage of Nicosia, the
Noise of which was carried far and near, on purpose to stir up the Rapinous
Humor of these Barbarians, had brought over above Sixty Thousand Volunteers,
in hopes of Sacking Famagusta, which was held for the Storehouse of all the
Neighboring Ports, and imagined to be full of Riches. Mustapha renewed afresh
at the beginning of March his Preparations of this Siege. Bragadin and
Baglioni, who defended the place, labored without ceasing at the restablishing
of their Rampars, as soon as the the Enemy retired into Winter Quarters, and
employed this Season in fitting and preparing all things for a vigorous
Defense. But they chiefly applied themselves to persuade the Garrison to hold
out to the last, and dye like Faithful Subjects and true Christians. The good
Correspondency between these Commanders, and Obedience of the Soldiers (two
things necessary in a dangerous Conjuncture) had saved Famagusta, if the
baseness of those, whose duty was to succor it, had not abused and deceived
the hopes of the Besieged.

Mustapha drew near the place immediately after the taking of Nicosia, and told
his People, when he had considered the Situation and Fortifications of it, that
this Siege was far less difficult and dangerous than that he came now from
finishing. But mentioned nothing what he thought of the Commanders and
Garrison, whose Capacity and Courage he more feared, than their Walls and
Ditches. He sent three thousand Men, in his March toward Nicosia, to hinder
the Communication of the two places; of which Baglioni having notice, expected
them in Ambush, and charged them with that fierceness, that he scarcely
suffered one of them to escape. He moreover set upon their Rear Guard, when
they retired into their Quarters, of which more than five Hundred Men lay dead
upon the place; ruined their Works, and carried away one part of their Baggage.
These Valorous and Generous Actions, showed Mustapha that Famagusta would be
better defended than Nicosia; neither did he think this Conquest certain, as
long as the Venetians had one Port in the Isle; and his Preparations for the
Siege of Famagusta, intimated of what importance he thought the taking of it
was. The prodigious Army with which he was to attack it, seemed to encourage
him: But seeing the Fatigues of the Soldiers, during the Siege, and what an
abundance of Men 'twould cost him, he had endeavored to win the Inhabitants by
entreaties, and grievous threats. Sometimes he desired them to make their own
Terms of Composition; otherwhiles threatened them with a Desolation, like that
of Nicosia. But both his Offers and Threatenings were rejected. He sent then
Podocatero and John Susomini, to persuade them to surrender. They were enjoined
to assure them, that he was really interessed in their Fortune; and that they
ought to seek their safety in his promises and Faithfulness. But these sayings
were of no Force with the Besieged. Susomini was detained by Force in the Town,
because of his great Skill in Fortifications; and Podocatero o'rewhelmed with
Sorrow, by returning with such a disagreeable Answer to the Visir, was sent
back for fear of the ill usage of his Wife and Children, who were kept in the
Camp as Hostages. The piteous Condition in which he appeared at Famagusta,
lively affected all those who knew him in his Flourishing Condition. He was
clothed in a ba^^ Slaves Suit, which scarcely covered half his Body; His Head
was tied about with a Dirty Linen Cloth, besmeared with Blood; his Beard full
of Nastiness, his Hair hanging clotted and unkembed, and his pale and meager
Visage rendered him scarce known to his Friends, who remembered the Neatness and
Gallantry of his Person, and the Magnificence of his House.

Mustapha finding this Endeavor vain, revenged himself on this poor Gentleman,
causing his Head to be cut off in the sight of his whole Army, his Wife and
Children being present, who were dragged in Irons to assist at this Spectacle;
and this Barbarian thence forward had recourse only to Force and Violence.

Famagusta is situated on that side which faces Syria, the Sea washing the Feet
of its Walls. The Rocks that reach from a little Promontory, which is at the
right hand of the Town, form a Port very sure and large. Two Shelfs of Sand
arise behind these Rocks, the one which joins the Citadel, and touches the Sea
Shore, serves for a Ditch, and so closes the entrance of the Port, that
scarcely can the Vessels find a Passage. This Channel is defended by a Castle,
built on the other side, which answers the Citadel. The Town contains about two
Miles in Circuit, she is surrounded by a deep Ditch, and Stone Walls, fortified
by several Towers, built after the ancient Manner, more for Show than Defense,
whose Materials are easily beat down by the Cannon. The Venetians had raised
some Works after the modern use, according as the time and place allowed them.

The Visir having encamped his Army, began his Lines of Circumvallation,
opening at the same time a Trench by forty Thousand Workmen, defended by as
many in Arms. He afterward raised his Batteries in very advantageous Places.
The Besieged every day sallyed out with incredible Valor, and killed great
numbers of the Enemy. They stole out in small Companies, and tarryed not for
the orders of their Commanders to attack their Trenches. But whatsoever
advantages they gained, they lost still more than the Besiegers, proportionably
to their Forces. Three hundred Men, most Greeks, armed with Sword and Buckler,
according to the manner of their Country, having made a Sally, were charged by
the Turks in a place dis-advantagious to them, where they suffered themselves
to be imprudently surpised. They left Fifty of their Company dead behind them,
and the rest being grievously wounded, were beaten back into the Town. Since
that time the Generals forbad, on great Penalties, all Persons to go out of the
Town without leave. The Batteries of the Besiegers being higher than the Walls
of the City, no body could safely walk the Streets, nor abide in their Houses.
But seeing their Cannon did not such execution as they expected, they set up
another Battery against the Walls of the place, and made therein a considerable
Breach. Yet dared they not to hazard an Assault, but advanced as far as the
Counterscarp, and endeavored to fill up the Ditch to the Top of the Breach, to
ascend more easily thereon. They threw Night and Day great quantities of Earth
on the Ruins of the Wall; and for fear it might be removed by the Besieged,
who had already attempted it, they lined the Counterscarp with Musketeers, who
continually fired on the Breach; so that the Christians not daring to appear in
this place, could not hinder the descent into the Ditch. The Barbarians filled
it up to the Rampart; covering it on the right and left with Babbins and Sacks
of Wool till 'twas Musket Proof. They attempted an Assault by this Breach,
which would have succeeded with them, had not the Besieged, who burnt their
Sacks and Faggots, driven them from this Post, with the loss of many of their
Men.

The Turks discouraged, neither by the greatness of the danger, nor yet by the
Difficulties or Fatigues, re-took the Ditch, and repaired again the ruined
Works. They set Miners here and in many other places. The Besieged listening to
them, heard the noise of them under ground, and made some Counter-Mines. But
there was one sprung on the side toward the Sea, where 'twas least mistrusted,
that with a terrible Noise overthrew a Tower, and part of a Wall, which buried
many Soldiers in its Ruin. Presently after the blowing up this Mine, the
Besiegers, who were in readiness, made an Assault on this Breach with great
Shouts, and the place had bin lost, if those who guarded that Quarter, and were
unprovided, had been capable of Fear. They bore this Shock, maugre their
Surprise, with an Heroic Courage and Valor: so that the Commanders getting
leisure to draw Forces together, the Enemies were vigorously beaten back.
Baglioni falling upon them with a handful of picked Men, tumbled them down into
the Ditch. Their Officers, reproaching them for being beaten off with so small
a numher, from the Breach of a place half won, made them return five times to
the Assault, but were always received with the same Vigor, and in fine, forced
to a disorderly Retreat, being sorely Wounded. The Besieged, to prevent such
another Attack, raised up a new Wall with Forts upon the Houses which were
demolished, for to make Retrenchments, in case the Enemies should gain the
outworks. The Besiegers sprung a great Mine at the Gate, called d'Limisso,
which blew up many Men, and effected such a Breach as might be easily ascended.
The Infidels, animated by Honor, the Recompense, their Commanders promised
them, and hopes of a Rich Prey, fell desperately on this Breach, rending the
Air with their Shouts, and marching over the Ruins of the Wall, on the Bodies
of the slain and wounded. At the same time, and with the same Vigor they
attackt the other Breach, thus to divide and weaken the Christian Garrison. The
Fight held for Six hours together in both these places without a moments
Respite: and if the Men that defended the place, showed this day the height of
Valor, the Women also testified more than could be expected from the Weakness
of their Sex; for not contented to carry Arms and Ammunition to the Soldiers,
they ventured into the greatest Dangers, throwing down Stones and Scalding
Water on the Turks, who were exceedingly disturbed by it. The Bishop of the
City, a Dominican, was on a Bastion near the Gate of Limisso, with a Cross in
his Hand, and going with a mavelous Courage in the most perilous places,
animated his People by his Zeal and Example. Mustapha, vexed at the loss of so
many Men, and disappointment in so many Attempts, resolved to increase his
Batteries, to make wider Breaches, and thereon sounded a Retreat. Yet did he
not suffer the Besieged to rest, but harast them Night and Day, that he might
tire them out with continual Labors; as soon as the Batteries were ready, they
fired so fast, that the Besieged counted in one day five Thousand Bullets from
their Enemies greatest Pieces. Neither the old nor new Wall could resist this
Fury, nor the Besieged repair their Ruins, being hindered by such Showrs of
Musket Shot. The offering at this Work, was to expose themselves to certain
Death. The Christians being no longer able to defend this Bastion, dug a Mine
under it, to be sprung, as soon as the Enemy should become Masters of it. The
Visir caused the Town to be assaulted at the same time by all his Army in four
different places; and the Venetians being tired and wounded, could hardly
undergo these Attacks. Yet did they encounter the Infidels with more Courage
than Strength. The Dispute at Limisso was the most obstinate, because Mustapha
encouraged his Men by his own Example, and the Christians were forced to
abandon this Post, Some of the Barbarians, who were mixed with them in the heat
of the Fight, entered the Town; when Baglioni percieving the danger, so
seasonably, set Fire to the Mine, that above Three Thousand Turks, who thought
themselves sure of the place, were blown up with the Bastion into the Air. The
effect of this Mine was so Violent, that it filled the Neighboring places with
Ruins and Dead Bodies. Near an hundred Christian Soldiers, amongst which were
some Officers, that could not retreat time enough, unfortunately perished
together with the Turks. The General dispirited at so many Repulses, began to
distrust the taking of a place so bravely defended. He had already lost the
third part of his Army. He feared, that the ill Success of this Siege would
eclipse his Glory of taking Nicosia, and bring him into Disgrace with the
Sultan. These Reflections strangely disquieting him, made him severe with his
Men; He sometimes upbraided them for suffering themselves to be repulsed from
the Breaches of a dismantled place, into which they might have easily entered.
He otherwhiles incited them by great Promises to use their utmost endeavors
for preventing the Relief expected in Famagusta, which would cause them to
begin their Works anew. Having let them rest four days, he ordered his Officers
with sound of Drum and Trumpet to a fresh Assault of the late Breaches. Himself
at the Head of his best Troops, fell in with incredible Valor on that of
Limisso, which the Ruins of the Bastion had rendered very easy to be defended.
Lewis Martiningo bravely withstood this first Effort, with such Men as he could
draw together; but not being able to hold out against a second Charge, more
furious than the first, Baglioni, though slenderly accompanied, coming seasonably
by the Gate, fell on the Turks, disordered them, and having killed a great
many, put the rest to Flight. They were received in all other places with the
same resolution, being forced to leave the Walls, and retreat into their Camp
with considerable loss.

Famagusta, so frequently assaulted, bore these violent Efforts, some of which
held four and twenty Hours together, and the Besieged, joining Prudence with
their Valor, encountered the Attempt, and brake the measures of the Barbarians.
Hicronimo Magio, a Native of Anglaria, a Town in Tuscany, an excellent
Ingineer, was in the place, who invented certain new Mines and Fireworks, with
which he greatly endamaged the Enemy. He levelled his Cannon so exactly, that
he dismounted eighteen of the Besiegers Pieces, by shooting right into their
Mouths, and in an instant shattered and overthrew the Works, on which they had
spent much time and labor. Baglioni, Bragadin and Tipoli having appointed the
Officers of the Garrison every one his Post, continually visited them, giving
all necessary orders, exhorting and encouraging the Soldiers, and combating in
Person with the Enemy in the greatest Dangers. They eat and lay in the Towers
of the Ramparts, not to be out of sight of their Men. The Christians, who
thought it a point of Honor to keep their Posts, outbraved Death, by showing
as great a Contempt of Life, as Love for Honor. They stood before the Cannons
Mouths as if their Bodies had been Walls, and his place who was carried off,
was immediately supplied by another. Neither were the Inhabitants wanting in
their Duty, the young People being amongst all Attacks, spared not themselves
in any danger. The Ancient People, the Women and Children were serviceable to
their Power. Some tended the Works, and received the Soldiers Command with a
wonderful readyness. The Ancient Women led on, and encouraged by the
Ecclesiastics, brought Victuals and other Necessaries to the main Guards, and
Posts furthest advanced. A Great Storehouse was raised, into which every
particular Person had put in what his House yielded; and lest Money should be
wanting during the Siege, new was Coined of Brass, with the Arms of the
Republic, whereon was put a Price, the value of which was to be paid in Silver
as soon as the War should be ended. 'Twas judged that Famagusta might have been
saved, had the Venetians sent any considerable Succors. The Valor and good
Conduct of the Commanders, the Courage of the Garrison, and Firmness of the
Citizens, who held out four Months against the vigorous Attempts of a numerous
and formidable Army, resolved to dye with Arms in their Hands, and who
destroyed Sixty Thousand Barbarians, would have certainly made them raise the
Siege, had the Republic seconded these brave and generous Resolutions.

Hierom Ragazoni, Bishop of Famagusta, having been entreated by Bragadin and
Baglioni to go and demand Succor of the Senate; slipped out in the Night through
the Enemies Sentinels, past over into Candia, and got to Venice. He showed the
Magistrates the piteous state of the Town, and spared neither Prayers nor Tears
to move them to Compassion. The two Commanders had already made known this
Extremity to the Republic, and that it was impossible to hold out longer,
unless they were speedily supplied with new Troops and Ammunition. Bragadin
o'rewhelmed with Despair, yet complained pathetically to see himself thus
forsaken, recommending his Children to the Senate, whom he comforted in his
Letters, and exhorted to be ever true to their Religion and Country according
to his Example. Which Letters being read in Full Senate, set all the Kindred of
Bragadin on weeping. But this afflicted Family found more Compassion than
Assistance from these Magistrates. Genevre Salviati, Baglionies Wife, whose
Spirit was enflamed by the Grief to see her Husband in such danger, could not
refrain from breaking out into Reproaches. She every where published, That if
the Republic forsook a Person so greatly devoted to their Service in such a
pressing Extremity, they must not expect hence forward that any Man will adhere
to their Party. Having held this Discourse before the Chiefest of the City; she
afterward went and importuned the Senate, and forced them by her Clamours to
meet and consult on a Remedy; but 'twas no where to be found. All the Troops
were embarkt on the Fleet, on design of a general Engagement: They knew not on
whom to cast their Eyes, and no body offered himself to execute so perilous an
Enterprise. Genevre, who had not only the Courage of a Man, but of a generous
Soldier, importuned an order from them of conducting these Succors, alleging
her Sex was not to be minded, seeing a Woman's love to her Husband would
transport her beyond all Dangers. Her restlesness making her afraid of the
Senate's tedious Deliberations, she sent to Perusia, where Baglioni's Family
was of great Consideration, secretly to raise Men, and draw together his
Friends and Dependants, being resolved in her own Person, and at her own
Expense, to conduct a Succor to Famagusta, in case the Senate came not to
speedy determination. In fine, to lessen her Discontent, 'twas agreed, there
should be sent to Bragadin 700 Foot which were designed for the Navy, with
Orders to Honorius Scotto their Colonel to convey them thither. At the same
time Orders were given to make ready two Vessels, for the carrying all manner
of Refreshments, the Command of which was given to Nicholas Donati. At his
departure he was advised to be careful of his way, and steer toward Candia,
there to learn News of the Enemy: These Succors were long in preparing, that
Genevre had no less difficulty to hasten them away, than to obtain them: and
for the completing her Despair, the Senate forbad her making use of this
opportunity of going to her Husband. Donati was no diligenter in his Voyage,
than in his setting forth: and yet the Fame of this mean Supply might have
preserved Famagusta, and this relief might have arrived time enough, had he
instead of going on Shore at Crete, only coasted the Isle toward the South, to
avoid meeting with the Infidels. But he unfortunately put in at Candia, that he
might be more particularly instructed in his way, and confer with the orher
Officers of the Venetian Fleet about it. The Providitor Caballo staying him on
several pretenses, made him lose the opportunity of executing so generous a
design. It Is true, he was not the most to blame, Caballo's Avarice, and
Quirini's Spleen being the principal causes of his stay. Caballo desired to
make advantage of the Provisions, Donati was carrying to Famagusta; and Quirini
was glad of this occasion to revenge himself of the Senate's Ingratitude, in
not acknowledging the Service, he had done by his former Succouring the same
place. The other Officers in vain remonstrated to him the necessity of saving a
place of that Consequence, nor was it to any purpose to represent, that such
gallant Men well deserved to be relieved, and this second Attempt would crown
his former Action. We must (answered he furiously) make the Senate feel the
want of such Men as we, learn to recompense those Citizens who serve them
Faithfully in their Armies, and no longer bestow all their Favors to support
the Ambitious humor of those who take their ease at home. It Is said, That
Quirini, advanced from extreme Poverty to great Wealth, was thereby become less
active, loving more to enjoy what he had gotten, than gain Reputation. But
during these Disputes, he received orders from Venieri to repair immediately to
Sicily, so that setting Sail, and leaving Donati disabled to conduct his
Succors, the Besieged, continually pressed by Fire and Sword, tired out with
numerous Inventions and Stratagems, assaulted by the Enemies Cannon, as well by
Sea as Land; their Galleys having approached the Walls to reduce them to
despair, held out yet longer, resolved to defend themselves to the last, in
hopes of being soon relieved.

Tho the Famagustians had by four Months Siege lost the greatest part of their
Garrison, there remaining but eight hundred Italians, wearyed out and wounded,
yet were they not discouraged, till they had spent their Powder and other
Provisions. All the Stores were exhausted, and the Famine was so great, that
they had several days fed on Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cats, and such like
Creatures, so that Toil and Hunger had quite exhausted their Spirits. The
Commanders, who never before would hearken to any Proposals of yielding, began
to be touched with the Miseries of the Inhabitants. These poor People told
Bragadin, That having given so many Marks of their Courage and Fidelity, in
hopes of being succored; they must think of surrendering on honorable
Conditions; before the Enemy became instructed of the deplorable State, to
which they were reduced; That some care must be taken to preserve the Remains
of a place, whose Zeal and Faithfulness the Republic had sufficiently
experienced: That a longer and more obstinate Resistan^^ was not to be
affected; lest they should draw on themselves a Disaster, like that of Nicosia;
That they should be yet worse treated then the Nicosians, having held out
longer; That he would consider how cruelly the Barbarians might use the
Christians when taken Prisoners, having so often felt their Valor; and whether
he could consent to the Sack of the Town, and the delivering up himself with
the Wives and Children of so many gallant Citizens, who had suffered all the
Extremities of War, in the Service of the State and their Country. Such
pressing reasons persuaded in fine, Bragadin and Baglioni; The latter taking
Heaven to Witness, that it was not he who rendered the Town, but the Senate gave
up him to the Enemy. On the First of August, there was by general consent a
White Flag set upon the Walls, to let the Besiegers understand they were
inclinable to a Treaty. There was at the same time a Cessation of Arms,
Deputies were sent, and Hostages given on both sides. Hercules Martinengo and
Matthew Colcio, sent to treat with Mustapha, were received by his Son, who
conducted them into the Camp in great State. The Turkish Envoys were at their
entrance into the Town treated by the Governors with like Honor.

After many Conferences, Famagusta was at last delivered up on these
Conditions; The Inhabitants were to be suffered fully and quietly to enjoy
their Estates, with Liberty of Conscience, and the free exercise of their
Religion. The Garrison was to go forth with Flying Colors, Arms and Baggage.
The Commanders were to take with them five Pieces of Cannon, such as they
pleased out of the place; and three Horses of State taken from the Infidels.
They were to be supplied with Vessels to transport them into Candia; with a
Squadron of Galleys for their Convoy. Mustapha was too well informed of what
past in the Town, to be ignorant of their Extremity: but he feared, he
increasing the Christians Courage should drive them to Despair, by refusing the
Conditions, and was willing to spare the rest of his Army. But if he accepted
the Capitulation, 'twas on design to falsify his Word, and by cruel
Punnishments to avenge himself on them, for the time and Men he had lost. The
next day, the better to conceal his Treachery, he kindly presented the
Christians with all sorts of Refreshments. The greatest part of the Garrison
and of the Baggage was already on board the Vessels to transport them, when
Bragadin, coming forth of the Town, sent to request Mustapha, he would put in
some of his Men, to preserve the Inhabitants from ill usage. The Desire met
with a kind Reception from the Visir, who appointed when Bragadin should come
to him. He went accompanied by Baglioni, Tiepoli, Lewis and Hector Martinengo,
with several other Officers, and attended by near Two Hundred Musketeers.
Mustapha, on pretense of doing them Honor, made the Troops about his Tent
stand to their Arms. He, and the Chief of his Company were brought in, and had
Seats given them with great Ceremony. The Visir at first spoke to them very
kindly, enquiring concerning many particulars of the Siege, and commending
their Courage and Constancy, with a Flattery the more perfidious, in that he
was going to cut their Throats. As they were taking their leave, he spoke to
Bragadin, to send him the Prisoners, taken during the Siege. Bragadin extremely
surprised, answered him he knew not of any Prisoners to return him: and
thereupon this Barbarian, who was prepared for it, putting on Astonishment,
cried out furiously, That they were then murdered during the Truce, and at the
same time caused all these Christians to be seized on, and put in Irons. 'Twas
in vain for them to exclaim against the Breach of the Articles; They were
dragged out of his Tent, and cruelly slain in his Sight.

The Unfortunate Bragadin, was saved from this slaughter, to satiate the
Tyrants Rage, by undergoing the greatest Torments. Mustapha, desiring to make
him suffer more than one Death, set thrice his Scimitar to his Throat; which
this Illustrious Christian still undauntedly beheld. Having cut off his Nose
and his Ears, they threw him with Irons on his Legs into a hole, whence the
Executioners drew him on the following days, to make him carry Earth in a
Basket. They made him bow down with this heavy Burden, and kiss the ground
every time he past before Mustapha, who was setting Men at work to repair the
Fortifications of Famagusta. He was afterward put on Board the Fleet, where he
suffered several other Indignities. They tied him to one of the Yards of the
Gally, to make the Deformity of his Visage more public. He was drawn into the
Market place, and being hung up by the Heels, was flead alive. The Cruelty of
this Torment, drew not from him so much as a Sigh, or the least word that
savored of Meanness and Dejection; and this Hero surrendered his Soul to God,
reproaching his Enemies with their Perfidiousness and Barbarity. His Skin
seasoned with Vinegar and Salt, Mustapha caused to be stuffed with Hay, and
fastened on the Top of his Cabin for a Spectacle to the Coasts of Egypt and
Syria. 'Twas put into the Arsenal of Constantinople, whence the Children of
this generous Martyr redeemed it, and preserved it as the most Glorious Trophy
of their Family. The Fury of Mustapha being appeased by this Barbarous
Execution, he gave the rest of the Garrison their Lives, but chained them to
the Oar. Thus Famagusta, as valiantly defended, as 'twas obstinately attackt,
followed the mournful Destiny of the unhappy Isle of Cyprus.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK.
THe Arrival of Don John of Austria at Genoa. Great deliberation amongst the
General Officers, on the different Designs of the Confederates. Great
Mis-understandings in the Christian Army, the ill Consequences of which are
prevented by Colonni. Advice of Perteau, touching the Battle* Mutual Error of
the two Enemies Fleets. Order of Battle of both. Discourse of the Osficers to
the Soldiers. Warlike Exploits of the Christian Slaves. Victory on their side.
Hali killed on his own Vessel. Perteau saves himself in a small Boat. Number of
the slain, of the Prisoners and Turkish Galleys taken and sunk. Famous Action
of the two Brothers of the House of Cornaro. The Providitor Barbarigo killed in
the Fight. Venieri and Don John's Disagreement. This Misunderstanding spoils
the Fruit of the Victory. Public rejoicing at Venice. Colonni received at Rome
as a Conqueror. Venieri besieges Leucada without Success. Complaints carried
to the Senate of his Conduct. He is removed from his Office at the Popes
Request. James Forscarini succeeds him. Consternation in Constantinople.
Disgrace of Perteau. Pius V. falls Sick. His Death and Elogium.

THE HISTORY OF THE WAR of CYPRVS.
The Fourth Book.
WHILST the Barbarians finished the Conquest of the Isle of Cyprus, Colonni and
Venieri, who expected in Sicily Don John of Austria, beheld with grief the
Desolation of Dalmatia. Venieri, advancing too far with his Fleet for the
taking in of Provisions at Tropia, was surprised by a Tempest, in which he lost
Seven Galleys, that were dashed in pieces against the Rocks near the Shore; and
for to complete this Misfortune, the Fire took the Powder of the Galleys,
commanded by Francis Griti. These Disgraces joined to the Losses, which the
Venetians suffered in the last Campaign, afflicted them the more, by how much
they placed all their hopes in the Naval Forces. The Pope, who grew impatient
at the slowness of the Spaniards, continually dispatched Couriers to King
Philip, complaining at their letting slip the best part of the Season, without
drawing any advantage from all these great Preparations of War. All Europe was
attentive to the motions of the Spaniards. But whether 'twas an effect of the
Gravity of the Nation, or that Philip designed the Republick's Ruin; his small
have to second the Sovereign Prelate's Intentions, gave cause to mistrust his
Sincerity. Although the time wherein his Fleet was to arrive in Italy was
expired, and the Season already far spent, 'twas not yet well known, what was
to be expected on that hand, and the Conduct of Don John gave great Suspicions
to the Republic. This young Prince, whose Army was ready to part, busied
himself in fitting up his Equipage, by the Magnificence of which he pretended
to draw admiration from all other Countries. Besides, this pitiful reason,
Maximilian's two eldest Sons, whom the Empress their Mother caused to be
brought up near Philip the 2d. their Uncle, waited the occasion of this Fleet,
to pass over into Italy. One of these Princes fell sick, and was a good while
before he recovered, so that the Galleys could not leave the Port of
Barcelolona; and the Venetians murmured against this delay, so prejudicial to
the Affairs of Christendom; and caused by reasons of such small moment. In
fine, Pius V. sharply affirming, the interests of Religion, were betrayed, by
abandoning the Confederates; the Spaniards ashamed at these Reproaches, set
Sail, and arrived at Genoa, toward the end of July, by afavourable Wind; Don
John landed, and dispatched at the same time Plegio, one of his Gentlemen, to
give notice to the Pope of his arrival in Italy, and assure him he would, by
his future diligence, make amends for the time he had lost. Yet he tarryed some
days at Genoa, during which Doria, who entertained him in his Palace, treated
him with whatsoever the Magnificence and abundance of the Country yielded.
Antony Tiepoli, who was going Ambassador into Spain, was ordered to wait on
him at Genoa, to compliment him in the name of the Senate, and entreat his
immediate departure, for the Relief of those unhappy People, that wanted his
Assistance. He dismissed some German Lords, who were to go to Miland by Land;
sent to Naples one part of his Fleet, under the Command of the Marquis of St.
Cruce, to make ready all things there for his Reception, and some days after
took the same Course. Cardinal Granvil, who lately succeeded Riberio, in the
Government of the City and Kingdom of Naples, presented him with a Standart,
which he had received from the Pope. Don John parted immediately afterward,
and came on the 17th. day of August to Messina. Colonni and Venieri went out to
meet him with all their Galleys. They showed, to oblige him to use greater
Diligence in his passage to Greece, the engagement of the Treaty of Alliance,
and disadvantages of the Venetians, for want of his Assistance.

Paul Odescalchi, a Prelate of a singular Virtue, was dispatched to him from his
Holiness, to join his Exhortations and Entreaties to the Venetian's
Remonstrances.

Don John excused his stay, by laying it on the Preparations of the King of
Spains Armado; and complained of certain Discourses, stuffed with Outrages and
Lies; by which 'twas endeavored to persuade the Public, that his Catholic
Majesty and he, were not willing to engage the Infidels, whatsoever occasion
might offer it self of receiving, or bidding Defiance. He afterward returned
the Pope and Republic thanks for their Esteem and Confidence in him,
notwithstanding his Youth and inexperience, assuring them he would be wanting
in nothing, his Honor required, for the defense of their Interests. But this
was a very different Strain from that which was used in the Council which was
given him. It was composed of Spaniards, of Doria, Landriani Governor of
Sicily, Sforza Count of St. Flora, Ascanius Corneo, and Gabriel Cerbellon.
Requiescens, in whom resided the greatest Authority, during this Expedition,
showed, that laying aside all Punctilio's of Honor, they ought to avoid the
engaging the Turkish Fleet; That the Venetian's Interests were quite different
from the King of Spains; That the Republic still dismayed with the danger she
had run, and despairing of making with the Sultan any reasonable accommodation,
was for playing a desperate Game, and hazzarding all; whereas his Catholic
Majesty, who was led neither by Necessity nor Despair, could not endanger a
Fleet, whose Conservation was to be reckoned of equal value with Victory; and
that Don John ought more to prize the Honor, he had of being the King of
Spains Brother, than the Command of the Confederates Army. The Italian Captains
knew that Requiescens had his Masters Secret, and therefore they hearkened to
him with as much respect, as if he had been the King that spoke: They only
answered, 'twas to be feared lest the Venetians, trusting no longer to the
Assistance of their Allies, should clap up a shameful Peace, which might
sharpen the Pope against Philip of Spain. Yet 'twas determined to go as far as
Greece, as if 'twas designed to carry the War thither; and having amused the
Venetians during the whole Summer, they should then return and lay up their
Galleys in the Ports. Quirini and Canali, Providitors to the Venetian Army,
brought Sixty Galleys from Candia to Messina, persuaded the Spaniards were in
earnest. Doria and the rest of the Fleet being come thither likewise, the
Council was called, in which 'twas resolved to sail toward the Morea, Colonni
and Venieri having desired it with great Entreaties. A review was made of the
three Fleets, and because the Venetians had more Vessels than they needed, and
there being a want of them in the King of Spains Fleet, Soldiers were offered
in exchange on his part, which were accepted by the Venetians, so that four
Thousand Italians were embark't on the Republics Galleys at the Spaniards cost
for whose Maintenance and Support they laded great store of Provisions.

All these things being thus prepared for a departure, the Generals, Officers
and Soldiers went on board, having first devoutly received the Sacred Host, and
set Sail the fourteenth day of September, by the favor of a fair Wind. They
carried along with them the Vows and Benedictions of all the People of Sicily,
and other Neighboring Countries, who came down in great Concourses to Messina,
to see the most numerous Navy which the Christians ever set forth; who made the
Port and Coasts ring with Shouts of Joy. The Flower of the Italian Nobility was
in this Fleet, several of them having signalized themselves by Valorous
Actions, as Sforza Count of St. Flora, Andrew Doria, Ascaneus Corneo, Pompey
Colonni, Paul Ursin and Latin his Brother, Gabriel Cerbellon, Paul Sforza,
Honorius Cajetan, Vincent Vitelli, and several others of the best Families in
the Kingdom of Naples, Augustine Barbarigo, Mark Quirini, Antony Canali and Paul
Duodi, Noble Venetians. There were also Spaniards of a distinct merit; namely,
Lewis Requiescens, Chief of the Council to Don John of Austria, Alvar^z Basano,
Marquis of St. Cruce, John of Cordovia, and several other Gentlemen of Note.
But those who held the first Rank by their Birth, were Francis Maria of Rovere,
and Alexander Farnese; the first, Son to Duke Urbin; the second, to the Duke of
Parma; and Paul Jourdan, chief of the Illustrious Family of the Ursins, and
Son-in-Law to Cosmus de Medicis Great Duke of Tuscany. Pius V. sent also
Michael Bonelli his Kinsman, Brother to Cardinal Alexandrinus, to serve his
first Apprentiship under such great Captains. All these Young Lords, attended
by a great number of Domestics, zealous for the Honor of their Religion, had
embarkt themselves in the quality of Volunteers. Although Don John of Austria
won the public Affections by his Youth, his Martial Air and Good Mein, yet the
Generality of People could not but fear the Success of an Affair, whereon
depended the Welfare of Christendom, which needed a Commander of great Courage
and Experience. The Naval Army consisted of two hundred and ten Galleys, each
of which carried an hundred and fifty Soldiers, armed with Muskets, Swords, and
kind of Half Pikes, of twenty eight great Ships of Burden, Vessels which having
only Sayls, move not with that speed, as the Galleys do. These were laden with
Men, with all kind of Arms, Machins of War, and commanded by Caesar d' Avalois,
a Neapolitan Gentleman. There were besides six Galeasses, which were floating
Castles, carrying Guns of the greatest Size, and which Fear neither the Attacks
of the Enemies, nor the violence of the Waves.

This numerous Fleet, having weighed Anchor from the Port of Messina, at Sun
rising, after four hours Sail, came to the Prementory of St. John; where she
r^de the remaining part of the day and the night following, to take in Fresh
Water, and other Necessaries. The next Morning she used no greater diligence,
the Spaniards still busying themselves in these kind Employs, and spending much
time therein. Venieri, who suspected these Amusements, showed a great deal of
Impatience; Don John having sent him word, he took in fresh Water, that he
might not be obliged to stop any more in his course; he, in an angry manner
returned him answer, That his Fleet had bin stored with all things necessary
fifteen days ago; That time was not to be thus consumed, seeing Autumn drew
near; That 'twas a shame they had not yet undertaken any thing, against the
Infidels, who were still Masters of the Seas; That he believed him too jealous
of his Honor to avoid occasions of obtaining it; but he feared his Council
were not led by such generous Sentiments: This Young Prince awakened by so bold
an Answer, made a little more have, and came to Corfou, after ten days
Navigation; in which he often met with contrary Winds. Paul Ursin, being sent
out before the Fleet, informed the Generals, that the Infidels had lately
retired from before this Ifle, having done what mischief they could in it; and
that departing from the Gulf of Lara, on the fourteenth of September, they had
sailed to Lepanto.

The Christian Fleet rode three days before Corfou, to refresh themselves, and
expect some Vessels, which were behind. Having provided themselves with all
necessaries, and taken in more Artillery; the Council Assembled to deliberate,
on what was needful to be undertaken. The Spaniards and Italians, whereof
consisted Don John's Council, prepossessed with the secret Intentions of the
King of Spain, were far from being in the Venetians Sentiments. Yet they did
not openly declare themselves, but appearing uncertain, between both sides,
they were for determining themselves, according to the exigency of Affairs,
with respect to time, place, and all other Circumstances, resolving on nothing
but what might be agreeable to his Catholic Majesty. They were wholly against
the Confederates advancing toward Greece, alleging, this would be to expose
the Army to Winds and Tempests, usual in Autumn, on those Coasts; That they
might besiege Supoto, Margariti, or Castle Novo, the taking of which places
would be followed by the Conquest of all Epirus; That when the Sea became
boisterous, each might retire, into their Ports, to return on the next Spring,
more early, to make amends for this years loss. Venieri understood well enough,
that the Spaniards sought out Pretenses, to let the Summer slip, and return
into Sicily, toward the midst of Autumn, as if they had Religiously observed
their Engagement, though they had not struck a stroke. This ancient Commander
showed, to the end he might the longer retain them, that the Peasants of Candia
were revolted; That the whole Isle was in a terrrible Consternation, so that
'twas to be feared, lest the Mahometans should make advantage of these
Intestine Orders. That 'twas their Duty to hinder the Attempts, which might be
made that way; it being unreasonable, the Republic should set out every year a
Fleet, without making any Profit for so great an Expense; and that he doubted
not but the Barbarians Presumption would accept a Combat. Colonni, more sixth to
the Interests of the Pope, than Phillip the Second's, penetrated into the
Spanish Intentions, and was for neither of these opinions. He maintained the
Sedition of Candia was appeased, so that this Country needed no Succors; That
the taking of Supoto or Marguriti, was an Enterprise unworthy such an
Illustrious Armado; That 'twas shameful to them, to have layn in the Ports of
Sicily, whilst the Turks ravaged the Isle of Corfou, not weighing Anchor till
the departure of the Ottoman Fleet: Such a piteous Conduct as this, frustrating
the expectations of all Christendom, would prove as disadvantagious to them, as
Honorable and Profitable to the Infidels; That they came not surely with such
Preparations to behold the Republics States, filled with Murders, Rapines and
Devastations; That he was, in fine, for going directly to the Enemies, to draw
them to an Engagement; according to the orders he had received from the Pope,
to whom the King of Spain and the Venetians had committed the Sovereign Power
of this Expedition; That their Fleet wearyed, and spent with Labor, and
continual Courses in the last Campaign, could not hold out against the
Christians, which was in its full Vigor and Prime; That some Spies, reported
the Bassa's of the Sea, had detached several Galleys, imagining the Christians
would not attempt any thing at the end of a Campaign; That should Fear, keep
the Barbarians blockt up in their Ports, the advantage of curbing their
Insolence, and encouraging the Christians, would at least redound hence. That
the Tempests of Autumn were needless Terrors, and mere Chimera's, seeing there
was time enough remaining, for the effectual execution of what they came out,
and that in all cases, there were good Ports, and safe Retreats against the
Violence of the Seas.

Colonni, having thus spoke in the Council of War, advertised Don John and the
Spaniards in private, not to discourage the Venetians, and thwart them in their
way, lest they forced them on desperate Councils; disadvantagious to the rest
of the Confederats; That the loss of Cyprus, and the Pillage of their other
Islands, the Vastations of Inland Countries, and several of their Galleys,
which were sunk or lost; so greatly dispirited them, that unless they were
effectually assisted elsewhere, they would certainly conclude a Peace, with the
Conquerours, on shameful Conditions for themselves, and indeed, dishonorable
to all Christendom. That 'twas true, the King of Spain hazarded more, and
gained less than the Venetians in a Combat; But the King of Spains Honor, was
as much concerned, as the Venetians Safety.

The Opinion which the Spaniards had, that the Ottoman Fleet would avoid
meeting them, made them enter into Colonni's Sentiment. The Chief Officers were
the more persuaded of this, by a Bark arriving from Zant, which brought News,
that Sixty Turkish Sail had steered their Course toward Modon. The greatest
part of the Officers extremely rejoiced at this News, prepared to follow them,
and disposed their Men to fight, although they expected to find the Enemy in a
posture of defense. The Fleet having set Sail, the first of October, were
driven by a violent Wind, which obliged them to drop Anchor, and ride before
Gomenize two days. Don John, and the two other Generals, made an exact view of
all their Troops, in expectation of a more particular account, of the Turkish
Fleet.

Giles d'Andrade a Spaniard, who was sent together with Cantareni, and
Malipieri, each on his Gally, to discover the number, and posture of the Enemy;
reported, they had seen Sixty Sail, making toward the Levant, without knowing
precisely, their Course; and that their Generals, with the rest of their Fleet,
lay near the City of Lepanto; That they had received no news of the Christian
Fleet; That they wanted Seamen and Soldiers, and the Officers were employed in
this leisure time, in filling up vacant Places; and that 'twas thought they
came to besiege the City of Zant. This Relation increased the desire which the
Christians had of fighting them; and Don John showed in appearance great joy at
so favorable an occasion; and treated the Venetians with more Sweetness and
Confidence.

The Confederate Army had scarcely began to Sail, when a Dissension arose,
which had like to have proved of fatal Consequence. The Venetians, had embarkt
on their Galleys, some Companies which Don John had given them in Sicily. An
Officer, named Mutio, a Native of Cortonne, was ordered on board a Frigate of
Candia, commanded by Andrew Calergio; who treated this Captain with great
Insolency, and contempt. Calergio prayed him several times, to live more
civilly with him; but this fair proceeding, gaining nothing on the Spirit of
this brutish Person; Calergio complained of him to Venieri; acquainting him,
that he could not be Master of his Frigate. Venieri sent for Mutio, to chide
him; but he derided this Order, and answered, he knew no other General but Don
John. The Guards of the Standart, were at the same time dispacht, to seize on
his Person. These Officers, in the Republick's Navies, carry the Generals
Orders; and it is a Capital Crime, not to yield Obedience to them. Venieri had
agreed with Don John, that in case the Soldiers, which were Strangers, deserved
Punishment, they were to be seized on; but this Prince should judge them
himself, to show the Respect, they were willing to pay to his Quality of
Generalissimo, and for the greater Authority of these kind of judgments.
Mutio, did not only defend himself from being seized on, by these Persons; but
causing his Men to take their Arms, he charged the Guard of the Standart so
furiously, that one was killed, and the rest forced to depart the Vessel,
grievously wounded; using a thousand outrageous, and unmannerly expressions
against Venieri. This Insolence, capable to provoke the most Peaceful, and
Moderate Temper; so lively touched this Old Commander; that he caused this
Rebel, to be seized with three of his Accomplices, and hanged them all four,
without any further Trial, at the Yards end, of his Gally; notwithstanding the
entreaties of Paul Sforza, in whose Regiment Mutio was a Captain; and without
giving advice of it to Don John. This Prince, nettled at so violent and hasty
execution, assembled his Council, to seek means of Revenge, for an affront, of
which he was the more sensible, by his secret hatred of the Venetians. Some
Spaniards, too fierce and open Enemies to Venieri, and the Republic, would
have him punished in the same manner, and with this same have, he had used in
the behalf of these four Persons; affirming the outrage, could not be otherwise
revenged, which he had offered the Supreme Authority; and that the death of the
guilty Person, was the only Vengeance which would cost least Blood. Don John
would have willingly followed this severe Counsel, had not Colonni speedily
showed him, there was more Malignity, than Prudence, in taking so cangerous a
Party. This Wise Commander, having exactly informed himself about Mutio's
Execution; and the manner, after which the Spaniards, pretended to draw their
satisfaction; went directly to Don John, at Midnight; this Affair requiring an
extreme Diligence. He found him in a furious Passion, and threatening to leave
to Posterity, such a Terrible Example, that should for ever put a stop to such
Irregular Attempts. Colonni entered immediately into his resentment; found
Venieri's Action worthy of Punishment, and more rash and injudicious, than had
bin yet represented: He afterward used all his Rhetoric and Prayers, to
mitigate his Cholor; by showing him an Affair as this was, must not be
undertaken, in the first Motions of Passion. All the World will acknowledge,
says he, that Venieri deserves Death; but howsoever, it does not follow, you
are obliged to dispatch him, without examining the Consequences of it. You must
first fight the Venetians, if you be resolved to follow the violent Counsels,
which are offered you, to the prejudice of the common Cause. The Republick's
Fleet, consisting of Fifty Galleys, will defend him; without examining, whether
he has right or wrong; yours being less numerous, you ought to mistrust the
event of so Bloody a Contest. But supposing, you conquer them, what Comfort
will you reap thereby, in reducing by this means, the Affairs of Christendom
into the most deplorable Estate imaginable. Will you suffer so good Beginnings,
which promise you Immortal Honor, to terminate in such a sad and miserable
end? Will you renounce the Esteem of so many Princes, and the Love of their
People, which will on this Action, change into Hatred and Curses? Enter a
little into your self, let your Reason exercise it self, and know that in
overcoming your Passion, you will acquire as great Glory, as subduing one of
the Infidels Countries. Consult not your Power, nor the greatness of the
affront offered you, but consider the present State of Affairs; and be
persuaded, you will be esteemed the Wisest Prince in Europe, when being able to
obtain satisfaction to your just Passion, you sacrifice your resentment, to the
Interests of Christendom.

Don John yielded to these Reasons, on condition Venieri should never present
himself before him. He hated him before this Affair happened, for so seldom
making his Court to him, and not demeaning himself according to certain
Punctilio's of Respect, and servile Complacencies, which please the Spanish
Pride. He was a true Tarpolian, that understood his business, but could not
screw himself into all the cringing and flattering shapes of Courtiers; and
therefore past for a rude sort of a Man. Colonni went afterward to Barbarigo,
who, although he had not the Title of General, was never the less considerable
in the Venetian Army; and whom the Senate had chosen to repair by his Prudence
and Gentleness, the Faults which Venieri might possibly commit. This Prudent
Magistrate thanked Colonni for the Service he came now from rendering the
Republic, and assembled at the same time the Council. All People were of
advice, that Venieri should not be present with Don John of Austria, lest some
new Action should divide the Confederates, and make them fail of the occasion
of giving Battle; and that Barbarigo should supply his place, in the General's
Conferences. Withal my heart, answered Venieri briskly; but I for my part too
pretend, that young Man, and all of his Humor and Council, forbear coming into
my sight. This Affair having bin happily ended, by the address and care of
Colonni, the Fleet continued its course, and ranged it self into order of
Battle, for fear of surprizal; and to the end every one might quit and return
to his Post according to the several occurrences without disorder and
Confusion. This disposal having somewhat retarded the Fleet, she arrived not
till the next morning at Cephalonia, were she cast Anchor two days in the
Alexandrine Port, to learn News of the Mahometans. Venieri received Letters in
arriving from Caballo, dated from Candia, which gave him advice of the
surrender of Famagusta, and the Cruelty of Mustapha, who had inhumanly
massacred Baglioni, with the Valiant Soldiers of the place, and barbarously put
to Death Bragadin, against the right of Nations, and the public Faith. All the
Soldiers, gnashing their Teeth, at the relation of this Barbarity, urgently
demanded, to be led to revenge the death of these generous Christians; and
interrupt the exultations, wherewith their Executioners were filled, at the
surrender of so considerable a place.

The Turks, having cast Anchor at Lepanto, understood that the Christians, in
their departure from Corfou, came upon them with Full Sail. They were hardly
brought to believe this, as not comprehending whence this new Courage should
come to them. They had so long bin in possession of the Seas, without the least
disturbance, and were so prejudiced in their opinion, concerning the pitiful
condition of the Christian Fleet, that they could not imagine them Courageous
enough, to challenge them to an Engagement. Their Generals, whom this report
had strangely alarmed, immediately coming from their astonishment, sent
forthwith Barks into all the Ports of this Gulf, to bring them Seamen and
Soldiers. They were much perplexed what to do. Perteau was by no means for
hazarding a Battle, and an advantage which they possessed without striking a
Stroke: but the Grand Signior having laid on him a contrary order, and he
making himself responsable, for the event of this in-excution, he was for
knowing the opinion of the Chief Officers, before he declared his own. The
Wisest amongst them could see no likelihood of Success, in accepting the
defiances of the Christian Fleet, confident in their Strength and Bravery; yet
Selim would be displeased, and enraged perhaps, at this their wary Precaution.

Hali, whose Age and Temper did not suit with such a Prudent Conduct, and
seconded by those who aspired after bold Attempts, complained of the Affront
offered the Musulmen, by deliberating whether the Christians were to be
engaged, who offered them what they ever passionately desired. We must, said
he, be as mean Sprited as those People, whom we have so often beaten, both at
Sea and Land, to balance a moment, in going to receive them, having been in
search of them on the Coasts of Sicily, they not daring to appear. It seems, as
if 'twere we, who have bin chased, though during the whole Campaign, we have won
Cities from 'em, ravaged their Fields, and sunk and taken several of their
Vessels, with an Army always Victorious, and seconded by the good Fortune of
our Invincible Monarch; yet we hesitate, we tremble, and would color over our
Cowardice, with a chimerical and false Prudence. And if the Enemies become
Masters of the Entrance of this Gulf, we shall keep our selves like Women,
shut up in our Ports, exposed to the Scorn and Laughter of the Christians, who
according to the Rules of War, will not fail to besiege some Maritime place, to
draw us to a Combat. Shall we suffer the Tributary Cities to be laid Wast and
taken, without succoring them? What will Europe, attentive to the event of this
War, think of us? Shall we suffer (having so often defeated the Christians) it
to be be reported throughout the World, That the Republic of Venice, has made
us at length abandon the Mediterranean and Archipelago. God and his Holy
Prophet preserve us from so great Infamy, and grant that the Sultan, who
represents the Divinity on Earth, be not informed of our irresolvedness. If we
be not ashamed to renounce the Advantages which we come from obtaining, let us
not at least dishonor the Victorys of the Ottoman Princes on the Christians,
and fall into such a meanness, as may sully their Memory, as well as the
Glorious Reign of Selim. Have we forgotten, that Piali lost the Command of this
Fleet, for having omitted to pursue the Enemies, although he put himself in a
posture to do it, and became culpable, only by the Winds Fault? A Sovereign so
jealous of the Reputation of his Arms, will blush at our Waveringness, and
punish us for it, as we deserve. For, in fine, we ought only to deliberate how
to spare our Soldiers Blood, and not doubt of Combating and Vanquishing our
Enemies.

This Discourse moved those that were of a contrary advice, and Perteau himself
was drawn thereby to prefer, what seemed honorable, before what was safe and
profitable. They were told, that the Christian Fleet had already gotten above
the Isle of Cephalonia, they therefore sent the Corsary Caracossa, Famous for
his Valor and Skill, to learn more particular, and certain news. He took a
Skiff, and drew so near the Cbristians, under the favor of a dark Night, that
he could tell every Vessel: He found not their Fleet so strong, as 'twas
imagined; and returned sull of joy, to assure the Bassa's, that the Enemies
Forces consisted only of an hundred and ten Sail. It Is true, he could discover
no more, and that the rest of the Galleys and other Vessels lay at Anchor in
different Roads. The Turks flattering themselves already with a Victory,
immediately weighed Anchor, to cut the Christians short in their passage, whom
they imagined too weak, to dare to expect them. Two Hundred Galleys, and near
Sixty and Ten Frigates, and other Vessels, composed the Ottoman Fleet, therein
comprehending the Sixty Sail, which were discovered making toward Modon, and
which rejoined them in the Night, unknown to the Christians. The Barbarians
believing there were but an hundred and ten Galleys in the Confederate Fleet,
came in search of it, with great Confidence and Triumph.

The Christians parted from the Port Alexandrine the same day, being the Second
of October, and ordered themselves in the Gulf of Lepanto, as if the hour of
Combat had bin agreed upon by them and the Enemy. Yet they despaired of
fighting them, and expected only the advantage of daring them to it. The two
Fleets, thus deceived, found themselves engaged, by a fatal necessity, to enter
into Combat, notwithstanding the foresight of the Generals. The Barbarians, who
had, during the Night, got a little beyond the Gulf, cast Anchor at Galengo,
and ours, who advanced further, cast Anchor between Petala and the Cursolary
Islands. The two Fleets quitted their Posts by break of day, the next morning,
without each others knowledge; and the Christians, more minding their
Preparations for a Fight, than their Course, ranged themselves in order of
Battle, and divided their whole Force into four Squadrons. The Right Wing,
which reached toward the Sea, consisted of Fifty Four Galleys, and was
commanded by John Andrew Doria. Augustine Barbarigo was at the Head of the Left
Wing, with a like number of Galleys. Don John of Austria commanded the main
Body, consisting of Sixty one Vessels, having on each hand of him Colonni and
Venieri. The Duke of Urbin's Son, joined the Captain Gally of the Church, being
on board that of the Duke of Savoy; and Alexander Parma, that of the Venetians
on the Admiral of the Republic of Genoa. Peter Justiniani, who commanded the
Galleys of Maltha, and Paul Jourdan, were at the two ends of this Line. The
Marquis of St. Cruce commanded a reserved body of Sixty Sail, to help those who
had most need. John de Cardone preceded the whole Army, with a Squadron of
eight Vessels, to make discoveries. He was ordered to be at no greater distance
from the Fleet, than four hours Sail, to send notice to the Generalissimo, as
soon as ever he saw the Infidels, and immediately return and re-joyn the Army.
The Six Venetian Galleasses made a kind of a vantguard, on design to disconcert
the Enemy, by the Fire of their Artillery, which carried very far. The
Confederates Vessels were separated, for fear they should take in the Fight
particular Resolutions; and 'twas decreed they should mix, that they might
share the Danger and Honor, and mutually animate each other to combat well,
and engage the strongest to help the weak. The same Vessels were difpersed and
sent away, of which there were a prodigious number, to remove all hope from the
Soldiers of saving themselves otherwise, than by defending their Galleys.
Although the Vessels of Burden were well equipt and defended by good Soldiers
and Artillery, yet 'twas not thought fitting they should enter into the
engagement, lest they might not be able to follow the rest of the Fleet, in
case the Wind changed, or they wanted it.

The Two Fleets were separated by the Cursolaries, at Sun Rising, so that one
could not discover the other. Ours having still continued their Course, were
ap-perceived by the Infidels, who appeared also some time after in the same
order of Battle, excepting their not having a reserved Body, and that their
Line, by consequence being of greater extent than ours, was according to their
Custom, drawn up in form of an Half Moon. Hali, as being chief Bassa of the
Sea, was in the midst of the Army, on board the Admiral, directly opposite to
Don John's. Perteau was on one side of him in another Gally. Louchali and
Syroch, who commanded the two Wings, faced Doria and Barbarigo. They were no
further distant than ten miles from one another, when Don John observing their
Course, gave the sign to Fight, by setting up the Standart, sent to him at
Naples from his Holiness; The Adorable Image of Jesus Christ on the Cross,
curiously wrought on this Banner, was no sooner displayed, but the the whole
Army saluted it with shouts of Joy. Some bethought themselves of advertizing
this Young Prince not to expose himself too confidently, in hopes of Victory,
to the hazard of a Battle, the advantage of which could bring no profit to the
King of Spain, but whose loss would lay open to the Barbarians a way into
Italy. But an Advice given so late, and impertinently, was not so much as
hearkened to; and Don John commanded the Soldiers should be refreshed with meat,
and afterward made to take Arms, and all things else prepared for a Fight. The
Officers, to whom was committed this care, had the leisure of doing this
without Precipitation, and Disorder, whilst Don John, followed by Requiescens
and Cardone, went in a Shallop from one Gally to another, to exhort the
Soldiers to behave themselves like Christians. He judged of the brave
disposition of the Navy, by the public Acclamations; and as soon as he came on
board the Admiral, on design to harangue his People, he looked up to the
Standart, and entreated of God with Profound Humility, to grant his Protection
to the Christians, by casting Fear and Dread into the minds of the Enemies of
his Holy Name. Then all the Officers gave at the same time a sign for Prayers,
and the whole Army on their Knees devoutly adored the Sacred Image of Jesus
Christ. 'Twas a Spectacle admirable enough, to see such a prodigious number of
Soldiers armed to fight, and breathing nothing but Slaughter, to prostrate
themselves in a moment; some looking toward Heaven, others having their Eyes
fixed on Crucifixes, and all in the posture of Suppliants, fervently praying for
the Pardon of their Sins, and for the Grace to vanquish these Barbarians. This
Countenance might make some suspect, that seized with Fear and Dread, they had
no other hopes but in the extrordinary assistance of Heaven; had not the Valor
and Courage they showed in this Rencounter, sufficiently justified their
Humility and Devotion.

These Sacred Solemnities being over, the Captains represented to their Men,
That they were at length, come to that happy day, in which the Christians might
take Vengeance for the Outrages they had received from the Infidels; and for
ever deliver themselves from the rigorous Yoke they would lay upon them; or
open by a Glorious Death, the way to Paradise, and Crown themselves to all
Eternity; whereas their Enemies must expect the infinite Pains of Hell, if they
lost their Lives in the Fight; That God by his Mercy promised them in this
World Riches, Pleasures and Honors, if they survived this perilous occasion;
and Riches of a different Price, if they lost their Lives; That they ought to
remember the impatient and earnest expectation, which all Europe had showed for
the union of the Christian Princes; and with what Horror they detested their
Mis-understandings and Divisions; That they saw themselves at present at the
utmost of their wishes; That their Army was filled with the bravest and most
Illustrious Youth of Christendom; That they were now in a Condition, to
testify to their Countrymen, as well as the Infidels, that it has not been
hitherto through the want of Courage or Prudence they have been worsted, seeing
their particular Mis-understandings have been the only cause, That the
Barbarians had ever made their Profit of these Divisions; and that now God by
his Grace, had given the Sovereign Prelat, and the rest of the Confederates, a
Spirit of Peace and Concord, who would also give them Strength and Courage
against the Profaners of his Name; That the Turks puffed up with Pride at their
advantages in the last Campaign, disdainfully offered a Combat, when they might
end the War by keeping themselves peaceably in their Ports; That God struck
them with so great Blindness, on purpose to deliver them to the just
Resentments of the Christians, resolved on a strenuous Attack, confident of
Victory, and animated to revenge the Death of their Brethren, on their cruel
Murderers; That this numerous Fleet, wanting Soldiers and Seamen, was now
falling a Prey into the hands of those, whom she thought to terrify by the
multitude of their Vessels; That they were interessed to fight, not only for
the sake of a Victory, but to save what they esteemed most dear and precious;
That the Liberty of all Italy, was in their hands, with the Honor and Lives of
their Wives and Children, and that they themselves would be taken and sold, if
their Valor made not all these Disgraces fall on the Heads of their Enemies.

In the mean time the two Fleets drew near to one another, and that of the
Turks was driven by a favorable Wind, but which fell a little before the Fight
began, as if Fortune would make all advantages equal, by preparing a great
Calm, on so remarkable a day. But it blew a little afterward in favor of the
Christians, and carried the smoke of their Artillery into the Faces of the
Ottoman Army; so that this Change was looked on as a kind of Miracle, and an
assistance sent from Heaven. The Priests, amongst whom were some Religious
Capucins, exhorted the Soldiers with Crucifixes in their Hands, assuring them
the Change of the Wind was an infallible mark of protection of the God of
Hosts, whose Ensigns they ought to follow with Confidence. The Soldiers
animated by these Discourses, went to fight with as great Contempt of Death as
hopes of Victory, (strong Motives to awaken Strength and Valor.) The
Mahometans having seen our Fleet make up to them above the Cursolary Islands,
were strangely astonished at it. They were immediately surprised at so bold a
March. But when they perceived the prodigious number of Vessels, which they did
not suspect, they felt themselves struck with a terrible Terror. Perteau,
amongst the rest, began to bewayl his Misfortune, and was sorry he had engaged
himself in so great danger, for the humouring of young rash Heads. But 'twas no
longer time to muse on any other Remedy, than the necessity of making a
strenuous Resistance, or perishing. When the two Fleets drew near at the
distance of a Mile, Hali fired one of his greatest Pieces, to have the Honor
of beginning the Action; and Don John at the same time answered him in like
manner from his Gally. The Turks ren^ing also the Air with Shouts, accompanied
with the noise of Drums and Trumpets, and other Warlike Instruments, made up
directly to the six Galeasses, who were advanced, and ranged two by two before
the Fleet. The terrible Fire from these Floating Castles, put a stop to the
course of the Infidels, and made them slacken their pace. Some of their Vessels
driven out of their order by the first Discharge, quitted their Ranks, and
entangled themselves with those which were to supply their places, so that both
of them remained exposed to the Christians Cannon. Had this Avantguard been
less distant from the Body of the Battle, and we charged the Barbarians on this
first Disorder, there might have been obtained a great and speedy Victory. But
the Galleys being obliged to march in a Front, advanced but slowly, and left
too great a distance between them and the Galeasses. As soon as the two Armies
were within Cannon Shot, both Fleets fired so fast, that the obscurity of the
Air, caused by a thick Cloud, increased the Horror, which so dreadful a noise
made in all parts. The Officers and Soldiers, surrounded with Darkness,
confusedly mixed, and threatened with the same danger, could no longer
distinguish one another. Some Turkish Galleys, who would have gotten betwixt
the Galeasses, having drawn too near the Land, to attack them in the Flank,
fell into a grievous disorder, so that Barbarigo, who commanded the Left Wing,
first charged them, and drove them violently toward the Shore. Siroch, who
commanded the Enemies Right Wing, was pent up between a Promontory called
Molesegno and the Cursolarys, and saw himself set upon by our Galleys on the
side of the full Sea. But some of his Galleys having made a vigorous attempt to
cut through our Right Wing, charged the Venetians with the greatest Valor
imaginable. This Effort of theirs would have endangered the Christian Galleys,
had not some of the Enemies Frigates, dismayed at the first Attack, began to fly
toward the Land. The two Fleets had as yet only fired their great Pieces, with
which the Christians were better stored than the Turks, and whose use they knew
better than they. They had amongst others, certain Pieces of a new Invention,
whose surprising effect much contributed to the gaining of the Victory. These
were a kind of Mortar Pieces, which falling into the Turkish Vessels, made a
horrible Slaughter. The Christians, after several Broad Sides, continued the
Fight with Musket Shot; the Turks answering them with Darts and Arrows. But
these kind of Arms are generally laid by, as being of no great Effect. It Is
true, a Man cannot use a Musket with that readiness; but then on the other
hand, they do greater execution. Ours had sheltered themselves by thick Planks
on the side of their Galleys, which served for a kind of Wall, which received
the Enemies Shot, and behind which they threw several artificial Fires. Besides
they were most of them armed with Head and Back Pieces; whereas the Infidels,
on the contrary, presented themselves naked. But that which contributed most to
their Defeat was, Don John publishing a little before their Fight, by the
advice of the two other Generals, that liberty should be given to all the
Slaves, condemned for their Crimes to the Galleys, if they obtained the
Victory. The Captains at the same time set them loose, giving them Arms, to
deserve, by courageous Endeavors, the recompense which was now promised them.
Some from the hopes of deliverance from their Slavery, others breathing
Pillage, according to their natural Inclination to Theft, leapt into the
Enemies Galleys, through Swords and Darts, with a Valor, so determined, that
Don John made good his Word to them. But if this Expedient was advantageous, it
proved also very prejudicial, for by this means the Galleys were not in a
capacity to pursue the vanquished. The Infidels, who bethought themselves of
promising as much to their Slaves, did not draw thence the same advantage.
Their Galleys being full of Christians, so ill handled, that they looked upon
their Death as the lightest of their Miseries. But these people became as
furious as Wild Beasts escaped out of their Dens, where they had bin long shut
up, seized on the Arms of those who had bin killed at the same Instant, and on
whatsoever came to their Hands; and being far more animated by Revenge, than
hopes of Liberty, massacred their Patrons and Officers; so that several Turkish
Galleys were lost by the Fury and Rage of these desperate People. The Fight was
then very earnest on all hands, and the Vessels of the two Fleets mixed
together, boarding one another without distinction, those that came next to
them. Both good and bad Fortune presided in their turns in these several
Rencounters. Some Galleys avoiding Boardings by their Lightness and swiftness,
and Skill of their Pylots, made up to others unequal to 'em in number, but far
stronger in Soldiers and Equipage. Others, who could not dis-engage themselves,
fought with excessive Courage, and with an obstinacy without Example. One
Squadron kept fighting against another; a little distant, two other Vessels
were singly engaged; some Galleys were hooked and chained to others by their
Grapling Irons, and so pierced with Cannon Shot, that the Water rushed into
them in prodigious quantities. Two Turkish Vessels pursued one Christian: Two
Christians further off chased a Turkish Gally. A Confederate Vessel was
surrounded by several Mohammedan Friggats. Here you might see a Gally bereaved
of her Oars; another so shattered, that she was sinking. One yielding to the
Strongest, another escaping from the Hands of those who thought themselves
Masters of it. Some sought to fly, others to vanquish; and the Heroic Exploits
of the Combetants had already colored the Seas with red, and filled the
Vessels with Blood and Slaughter. Don John engaged particularly Haly's Gally.
Venieri and Colonni fought each of them on their side with incredible Valor:
Each of the Admirals were Attended with some Galleys, which supplied 'em with
Men, to fill up the places of the Dead and Wounded. Their presence increased
the Courage of their Soldiers, who put forth their whole Strength to deserve
their Esteem. The Turks showed at the beginning of the Engagement great
Contempt of the Christians, and respected them as base spirited People, whom
they had always beaten, and dared not expect them. But their Zeal for their
Altars, together with the necessity of Vanquishing, rendered them so fierce and
terrible, that the Barbarians were dismayed at the Fury with which they came to
the Charge. The Mohammedan Armies are only to be feared in the first onset; and
their Vigor abates, when the first Effort is sustained. And in effect, they
defended themselves as People wearyed and tired out at the end of the day; and
our Men, who perceived this, were the strongest, and attackt them with the more
hope and vigor. The Fight continued for three hours with an equal advantage,
the Victory inclining to neither side. But the Left Wing, who were first
engaged, began to drive all before them; several Friggats making hastily
toward the Shore. Barbarigo, seconded by Quirini and Canali, sunk Siroch's
Gally, who was killed, defending himself like a Lion. His Death was attended
with that Consternation usual at the loss of a great Officer; and the Galleys
which he commanded, vigorously attackt by the Republics, fled toward the
Coasts. The Turks, who advanced near the Land, for the safety of their Lives
and Liberties, drew after them their whole Fleet, and were the cause of its
entire Defeat. The Conduct of their Commanders was certainly much to be blamed;
for those who understand Maritime Affairs, say, they should have kept out as
far as they could at Sea, that their numerous Fleet might have the more room,
and to make their Soldiers lose sight of Land, who had an Eye to the Shore, as
their place of Refuge. The good News of the Victory spreading it self amongst
the Confederates Fleet, came to the Ears of Don John of Austria, who had been
long engaged with the Turkish Admiral Haly, without losing or winning any
Advantage; Yet the Infidels began to slacken their Courage; when the Joy which
this News brought to Don John, was interrupted by the Jealousy he had
conceived against the Venetians, who first made the Victory appear on their
sides and carried away from him this Honor. This Sentiment increasing the
Spaniards Valor, they fired more fiercely on the Admiral. Hali fell down dead
with a Musket Shot, in encouraging his People by his example, to bear up
against this vigorous Attack. The Spaniards immediately boarded his Gally,
taking down his Standart, and became Masters of his Vessel. Don John at the
same time made them cry Victory, to encourage the rest of his Men, and terrify
the Barbarians. 'Twas no longer then a Fight, but a cruel Massacre of the
Turks, who suffered their Throats to be cut without resistance. Doria and
Louchali, the two Famousest Captains of their Age, set one against another, and
excited by equal Emulation, had both the same Design as soon as they saw the
two Fleets engaged, which was to get out to Sea, and come and charge behind,
and in the Flanks. But Doria having not Vessels enough to make a Front, equal
to that of the Infidels, gained the Sea with all his Galleys. Eight of the
Republics Friggats, whose Captains mistrusted his sincerty, and imagined he
was shifting for himself, according to the event of the day, stood still with
their Oars lifted up; and five others, who knew not the occasion of this stop,
stood also still, according to their example, between the Squadron of Doria and
the Body of the Fleet. Louchali perceiving his measures broken by Doria's
dexterous Foresight, invested these Galleys as they lay still without motion.
The Venetians, though unequal in number, defended themselves with admirable
Valor, and were all worsted and put to the Sword. Louchali remained Masters of
their Vessels, and revenged Doria by this Advantage, from the suspicions
entertained of his Conduct. He was for going afterward to set upon the great
Body of the Fleet; but he found the brave Peter Justiniani in his way, who
seconded by the Knights of Malta, with two of their Galleys, had already sunk
down three of the Turks, and narrowly pursued a Third. He was environed from
all parts, and lost all his Men. A Turkish Officer, by whom he was happily
known, having leapt into his Gally, was so generous, as to save his Life; but
he was at the same time succored, and re-taken with his Gally from the
Infidels; so that this Officer being become his Prisoner, begged quarter of him
on his Knees, and obtained both his Liberty and Life at his Intercession. In
the mean time Louchali came with the Fierceness of a Conqueror, to sustain the
main brunt of the Battle. But Doria, thinking it at last, time to share in the
Victory, which was already gained, abandoned his distant Post, and struck in
with his whole Right Wing amongst the Barbarians, who began to turn their
Backs. The Marquis of St. Cruce commanding the reserved Body, pursued them with
the same vigor, as soon as the smoke would permit him to see what was to be
done. Louchali, who only set himself to watch advantages, and had not fought
regularly, understanding the Death of Haly, and seeing no Flag on his Gally,
doubted no longer of his Defeat. He clapped on all his Sail and fled, followed by
Thirty Galleys, as soon as he perceived Doria and the Marquis of St. Cruce
endeavoring to come on him. The rest of his Vessels were taken or sunk. And
from that time the vanquished ceased from all resistance. Some Turkish Vessels
were run on Shore; and Perteau, without being known, escaped in a small Boat
through the Christian Galleys. Paul Ursin seized on his Gally by a particular
Accident. He came from taking the first Vessel he had boarded, when he was
obliged by a false Alarm to quit his Prize and Post, to succor Don John, whom
he believed to be in great danger. But having been disabus'd by the Rout of the
Infidels, he met with Perteau's Gally, which was endeavoring to save her self
by force of Oars, cleared her Decks, and made himself Master of her. That which
carried Haly's two Sons, and which kept on side the Admiral, ran against
Colonni's Gally with such violence, that she made her quit her Rank; but was
her self so plied with the Cannon, by two of our Friggats, from which she
endeavored to escape, that these two young Lords were taken Prisoners, with
their Vessel and Equipage. Colonni set on the Turkish Admiral with as great
Boldness and Courage, as if his Gally had never been damnified, and took a
Brigantine, which attack't him in the Flank, all whose Soldiers he put to the
Sword. Ramagsio Sequani, a Commander of the order of Malta, well experienced in
the Seas, signalized himself in this occasion by as great Valor as Prudence.
General Venieri, who went continually from one end of his Gally to the other,
often exposed himself to eminent dangers, with his Sword and Buckler. He
earnestly wished to encounter some Infidel, and make him fall under his Blows;
and neither of the Generals showed in the heat of the Fight more Courage and
Stout heartedness than this Old Commander.

The Infidels lost thirty thousand Men in this Engagement, the Bloudyest they
ever felt since the Establishment of the Ottoman Empire. Five Thousand were
taken Prisoners* amongst whom were Haly's Two Sons. Their Father was for giving
them the sight of the Flight and rout of the Allys, which he thought
unquestionable; to inspire them with the same Contempt and Disdain against the
Christians which he had: and make them learn Military Experience at the
Christians cost; but had he never so little mistrusted his ill fortune, he
would have left them in the Town of Lepanto, or permitted them to be Spectators
only of the Fight at a distance on the Shore. The Conquerors made themselves
Masters of an Hundred and Thirty Turkish Galleys; Fourscore and Ten, or
thereabouts were run on Ground, sunk or burnt. But the Liberty which Twenty
Thousand Christian Slaves of different Nations recovered, gave as much Joy to
the Confederates, as the loss of these Galleys. The Booty was no less
considerable; for besides the Pillage of the Isles, the Barbarians had moreover
laden themselves with that of several Merchants Vessels, which they had taken
on the Seas. The Booty was shared amongst the Soldiers, excepting the
Prisoners, the Galleys, and Artillery. This was without doubt a Signal Victory,
and the greatest which has been won from them on the Seas this six Ages. This
Battle was fought in the same Gulf, and almost in the same place, where Caesar
Augustus defeated Marc Antony and Cleopatra; and whatsoever Elogiums Ancient
Authors have made on this Victory, it is hard to know which of the Two was most
Famous. The First carried it by the number of Vessels, the Fame and
Magnificence of the Preparations, and the great Concourse of several Nations.
But this surpassed in the good Condition of its Galleys, the length of its
Action, and the Courage and Obstinacy of the Combatants. Marc Antony's Flight
immediately put his Enemy in possession of the Victory; and Don John disputed
it a long time before he could obtain it, and lost more Men, though he drew not
so great Advantage by it as the Emperor, Augustus. The Christians lost eight
thousand of the Stoutest Men in their Fleet. Twenty Captains of the Venetian
Galleys lost their Lives, most of them being of the Ancientest Families in the
Republic; amongst whom we may reckon the Three Brethren, Grandchildren to
Lewis Cornaro Surnamed the Sober. Louchali had attackt their Gally, and their
Governor, who seized on a Skiff, to get two of them away from the Danger,
could never obtain of them their Consent to forsake the Third, who could not
follow them by reason of his Wounds. They dyed with their Arms in their hands
near the place where their Brother lay expiring, and signalized at the same
time their Fidelity and Tenderness. Several other considerable People were also
lost, and especially on board the Generals Galleys, who were most fiercely
engaged, amongst whom is not to be forgotten Fabian Gratiani, a Young Gentleman
of great Courage and Hopes, who was killed by a Musket shot in the Head, and
fell dead at Colonni's Feet. The Author of this History supposes the Reader
will give him the liberty of rendering this Testimony of Love to the memory of a
Brother, who deserved a more happy destiny. But Barbarigo was alone as much
regretted as all the others together. He had broke the Enemies Right Wing, and
animated his Men to pursue them. But exposing himself too desperately, he was
struck into the Eye with an Arrow, with which he dyed soon after, in the Arms
of his dear Friends. He asked in dying news how the day went, and of the State
of the Christian Fleet; and having understood the Barbarians were utterly
defeated, he lifted up his hands to Heaven, and surrendered up his Soul in
Peace, making Signs, that he dyed content, after so glorious an Advantage. He
was worthy, without doubt, of the greatest Honor, for by his Prudent Conduct
the Confederates were brought to fight the Turk; and he behaved himself in the
whole Action with incredible Valor and Courage. He gave the first charge, and
first routed the Enemy. But the Immortal Glory which he now enjoys, is a far
greater Recompense than the Praises and Honors which could be given him on
Earth.

Don John of Austria, after Haly's Death, and the taking of his Gally, attended
by Venieri and Colonni, and several others, who had no longer any Enemy to
encounter, went on completing their Victory, wheresoever they found any still
resisting. The Fight lasted from five in the Morning till the close of the
Evening. The Darkness of the Night, and the Sea, which began to grow
troublesome, obliged the Conquerours to retire with the Captive Galleys, into
the Neighboring Ports. Such as were wounded were carefully looked after. The
next Day and Night were spent in rejoicing and Thanksgiving to God. Don John
forgot his Animosity, embraced Venieri with great Testimonies of Friendship,
and told him in most obling terms, how much he admired the youthful Valor
which he showed in so great Age. But this new Friendship lasted not long.

'Twas resolved the next morning by a general Consent, to pursue the
vanquished, and not give them the leisure of coming to themselves. Don John
being grown more enterprising since this great Victory, designed to leave the
Sick and Wounded at Corfou, with whatsoever was cumbersom in the Fleet; to take
an hundred and twenty Galleys, to equip them with the Spoils of others, and
besiege the Town of Lepanto. The Consternation of the Barbarians made him
believe the place would surrender as soon as it saw his Ensigns. He designed
afterward to encourage the Greeks to an Insurrection, whom the defeat of the
Turks had animated to a Revolt, and expected only some small Assistance to
declare themselves. This Project was well contrived, and the most advantageous
the Confederates could form in this War. But Venieri's troublesome humor
unhappily broke all the measures of it. 'Twas decreed that the Generals should
dispatch the next morning all together Couriers to Pius V. to give him notice
of the Victory obtained of the Barbarians, which his Holiness should afterward
impart to all the Christian Princes; and that John Baptista Contareni, who was
going to Venice, should transport the Couriers as far as Otrante. Venieri, who
was for this opinion, afterward considered the Senate would receive so great
News too late, and thought it would be well taken from him, should they have an
account before the Pope. Humphry Justiniani came to him by chance, as he rolled
this design in his Head. He was a young Officer, very enterprizing, and ready
to put in execution immediately whatsoever orders were committed to him Venieri
no sooner saw him, but he found his desires sharpened with a new edge, and
demanded of him whether his Gally was in a condition to part for Venice, and he
in a humor to make this Voyage. Justiniani answered him, he was ready to
receive his Commands; whereupon Venieri put his dispatches into his hands. This
Officer at the same time went on board his Gally, and hoysted Sail. Don Jobn
took this Affair far more haniously than it deserved, and his spite passed so
far, that he revenged himself on the common Cause, by giving over his design on
the Town of Lepanto, and that of raising Commotions in the Morea, for tacking
immediately about, he struck out to Sea, to arrive at Corfou. All the Fleet
were not over much troubled at this change of design; for as well the general
as particular Officers, and Venieri himself, were more desirous to return home,
to show the Spoils taken from the Barbarians, to their Countrymen, and relate
to them the part which each of them had in the Victory, than to continue the
War; and this impatience made them lose all the Fruit of so Glorious an
Undertaking. Yet it being shameful to remain idle in the midst of a Victory,
'twas proposed to attack, by the way, the Isle of Leucade, at present called
St. Maure, after the Name of its Principal Church; and Prosper Colonni, a
valiant young Captain, was ordered to go before, and view the place. Venieri
secretly traversed this Project, hoping to carry the place alone, without the
help of the Confederates. He sent, for this effect, orders to young Colonni,
who received the Republics Pay, to dissuade Don John from this enterprise, by
setting before him the difficulty of it, as well for its numerous Garrison, as
the Situation and Strength of the place. There needed no more to drive off
People from an Attempt, when they were fo earnestly bent to return home. As
soon as the Fleet were disburthened at Corfou, the Galleys and Artillery gained
from the Infidels, were divided between the Generals, each of them having a
proportionable Share, according to the charge they had been at. They came
afterward to the dividing of the Prisoners; but Don John pretended every tenth
Man belonged to him, on account of his quality of General: 'twas agreed to
refer the Arbitrage of that Controversy to the Pope, who ordered the most
considerable of them should be brought to Rome, to exchange them for Christian
Slaves, and the rest equally divided between Don John and the other two
Generals. This Holy Prelate was struck with Horror at the Proposition, which
the Venetians made him, of cutting the Throats of these Wretches; for fear,
said they, that when they be redeemed, they use the Christians with greater
Barbarity. But Pius V. on the contrary secured them in convenient places of
confinement, and endeavored to win them to the Christian Religion by ways of
gentleness and good usage. Colonni would not suffer Don John to part from
Corfou, till he had consented Venieri should come to salu^e him. This young
Prince received the old Captain with a smiling Counten^nce, and clapping him on
the Shoulder with his hand, told him betwix jest and earnest, he abounded
mightily in his own Sense, and was too ready and active for a Man of his years.
They afterward went both of them to Messina, whence Colonni parted for Rome,
and Don John to Winter at Palerma, where People came from all parts to
congratulate him on the Advantages he had obtained.

Justiniani charged with Packets from his General, made such good have, that he
arrived the ninth day at Venice. He saluted, according to usual custom, the
Castles which defended the entrance of the Port, with all his Guns. This noise
immediately drew down along the Banks of the great Channel, infinite numbers of
People, inquisitive to hear some news of the Fleet. At the same time a Friggat
was perceived set forth with Turkish Colors, the end of which hung into the
Sea, at which sight the Inhabitants conceived great hopes, and filled the Air
with Shouts of Joy. Justiniani drawing near the place of St. Marc, made signs
with his hand that the Christians had won a signal Victory.

He put off his long Robe, to march the more easily, and immediately landing,
went strait to the Doge's Palace through this numerous Crowd. He told
Moceningo, who advanced to embrace him, That the Confederates had engaged the
Infidels near the Cursolaries; That the Turkish Fleet had been not only
defeated, but wholly ruined, and gave him an account of the number of the
Galleys they had taken and sunk. The Doge, without putting on his habit of
Ceremony, went immediately to give God Thanks for this Victory in the
Patriarchal Church, the news of which was soon spread over the Town. The
Citizens left their Houses, the Artists shut up their Shops, and all the Town
ran to the public place. The widest Streets were so crowded, that several
Senators could not get room to pass to the Church. Justiniani read in the
presence of the Doge and the Senate, Venieri's Letters, made them a particular
relation of the Fight; and received order to give a formal account of it to the
People. He spoke aloud, That the Turks were routed; That all the Vessels which
the Sea had not swallowed up, were in the Conquerours Possession; That there
were slain Thirty Thousand Barbarians; That their Admiral Haly was killed, and
his Gally taken; That Perteau escaped in a Skiff, accompanied only with a
Slave; That Siroch, Caracossa, and several other considerable Officers had lost
their Lives; That the two Sons of Hali, together with Mahomet Bassa of
Negrepont, were taken Prisoners, with other Persons of Quality, and that the
advantage obtained was above what they could either expect or wish. He
afterward exhorted them to go and give thanks to Heaven, and entreat with
fervent Prayers, they may never do any thing unworthy so great a Benefit. Then
the public Joy filling all parts of the City; People embraced, as they met,
though unknown to each other, with Tears in their Eyes, comparing their present
State with the Alarms and Fears which put them not long before on fortifying
the Capital City against the Surprises of the Victorious Enemy. They could not
consider without trembling, that they were lost beyond repair, had their Naval
Army been routed; and the remembrance of their dangers and past sufferings,
made their Joy the greater. Some of the Senators endeavored to get through the
Crowd to the Doge's Palace, others made toward the Churches, and afterward
imparted their Joy to their Wives and Children. Justiniani was surrounded with
an infinite number of People, some embraced him, others took him hold by the
hand, and all were for hearing from his Mouth the relation of this memorable
Action. The Crowd having carried him to his House, so closely stopped up all
Passages to it, that his Mother, who came from the Church, could not come near
the Door, and had like to have retired with the displeasure of not seeing her
Son, had not her Tears and entreaties at length obtained way. Justiniani was
accompanied for several days, and followed along the Streets with the same
Crowd as at the first day of his Arrival. He carried the Mobile along with him
wheresoever he went, so that to see his Train, a man would think him to be the
Head of some Seditious Party. Never any Noble Venetian received so much Honor
from all kind of Persons in the Republic. He was of so advantageous a Stature,
that he was taller by the Head than all those that surrounded him, and knew to
express himself so freely, that he won the Hearts of all his Fellow Citizens by
his Eloquence. After the first Transports of the public Joy, the Magistrates
sent immediately expresses to their Ambassadors, especially at Rome and
Madrid, to give them notice of this important News. The Senate assembled the
next morning to order a day of public Thanksgiving in all Churches of the
City, and especially that of St. Justin, whose Festival is kept on the Sixth of
October. Gusman de Silva, the King of Spains Ambassador, who was also a
Priest, Celebrated Mass therein, from whose hand the Doge and Principal
Officers of the State communicated. 'Twas ordered by a solemn Decree, that for
a remembrance of this Victory, the People should cease from all kinds of Labor
on that day of the year for ever, and that the Doge, accompanied by the Senate
and People, should assist at a Solemn Mass, in the same Church of St. Justin.
The private Joy succeeded to the public, and lasted several days. The
Festivals were solemnized with Justs, Wrestlings, and several other Spectacles,
which the several Corporations of Artificers presented, in Emulation one of
another. Only Barbarigo was bewailed in the midst of this rejoicing; and
Praises and Commendations of their Valor was given to several other Venetians,
who perished in the Engagement instead of Tears. Their Families did not so much
as go into Mourning, for fear of lessening the public Joy by Testimonies of
private Grief.

The Pope, who since the departure of the Confederate Fleet, had incessantly
made Vows and Prayers for the happy Success of the Christians Arms, expected
every day news with an Impatiency worthy of his Zeal. The Venetian Ambassador
came in fine to him, with an account of what past; of the entire defeat of the
Turks, and loss of their Galleys. This good Pope, animated with a new Fervor,
went directly to the Chapel to return God Thanks, and remained long fixed on
his Knees like a Statue. He imparted his joy to the Cardinals, who were then
all in the Vatican, telling them, that the Bounty of Heaven was greater than he
could wish or hope for. He afterward gave order to make ready, against the
next morning, the great Altar in St. Peter's Church, to Celebrate there himself
the Holy Mysteries, in the Presence of all those who were to assist at these
Sacred Ceremonies. The whole City followed his Holynesses Devout Example; and
the other Churches were filled with Offerings and Prayers. A Thousand Blessings
were given to Pius V. and 'twas publicly declared, that the Christians owed
their Victory to the Tears he every day shed in the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
In the mean while Colonni was ready to arrive at Rome, where the Pope was for
making him a Reception agreeable to his Character, and the Service he came from
rendering the Church. The Spaniards traversed this Design, showing this would be
an Affront to Don John of Austria, to pay the General of the Holy See such
Honors, as were only due to him alone. But the Pope deriding their Proud
Oppositions, consulted no body but himself, touching the manner of receiving
this Prudent Commander, to whom he had entrusted the Conduct of his Naval
Forces. The Spaniards extremely offended, forbad all those of their Nation, and
who were their Creatures, from going to attend Colonni, and also to stand where
they might behold his passage on the day of his public Entrance. Such a
disdainful proceeding increased the desire, which the Italians had of giving
him an Honorable Reception. There were chosen Six Thousand Men amongst the
Citizens, who were ranged under several Ensigns, and went in good order out of
the Town. The Magistrates in their Robes followed on Horseback this Infantry,
accompanied by the Flower of the Nobility. The Pope hereunto added three
Companies of his Guard. His Major-Dome in the midst of his Officers, and
several Cardinals, concluded the Cavalcade. The Captives immediately preceded
Colonni, mounted on a Spanish Jennet. He rode to the Capitol, according to the
custom of Ancient Romans, and came back through the chief Streets of the City
to the Palace of the Vatican. His Holiness received him in Constanstine's Hall,
in the presence of several Cardinals. He made a Speech to his Praise, and at
the same time, for a Token of his Liberality, presented him with Sixty Thousand
Crowns of Gold. He gave also a Rich Abbey in the Town of Bonevent to his Son
Ascanius, with a promise of a Cardinals Hat, as soon as he should be of Age to
be received into the Sacred College.

Venieri finding himself alone at the Head of the Naval Army, bestowed on
himself the entire Honor of the Victory. The Praises he continually received,
and which he shared to no body, softened that rough Humor which he showed in
his bad Fortune, and blasted the Fruit which might have been gathered from the
Consternation of the Enemy. He flattered himself at first, that nothing could
be hence forward too hard for him. He resolves to pursue Louchali, into his own
Ports; to possess himself of the Maritime places of the Morea, and in his own
Fancy seemed to threaten Constantinople. But his slowness and unresolvedness
ruined these vast Projects. The Providitor, Phillip Bragadin, an expert Seaman,
came and joined him with fifteen Galleys the next morning, after the fight at
Lepanto. He instantly entreated him to let him have fifty Sail, to go in search
of the rest of the Ottoman Fleet, promising him to make great advantage from
the disorder of the vanquished, without running into any Hazard. Venieri
approved of his design, and commended his Zeal. But he deferred the execution
of it, to have no Rival in the Honor, he so much thirsted after; and whilst
the Surgeons had him in Hand for the curing of a slight hurt in his right
Thigh, he would never permit any matter to be undertaken. This jealousy was
very prejudicial to the Republics Affairs; for had the Victorious Navy only
showed it self along the Coasts of Greece, they of the Morea, who sighed after
nothing more than Liberty, would have thrown off the Infidels Yoke; and the
Christians might have drawn marvelous advantages from the Weakness and
Astonishment of the Turks. Venieri applied himself chiefly to the design of
possessing himself of Leucade; at the persuasion of some ignorant Officers, who
represented to him, That the place would be easily taken. He had hindered Don
John from besieging it, that he might conquer it alone. But James Sorancio, who
succeeded Barbarigo, was not at all of his opinion. He asked him, whether he
seriously considered the difficulty of this Enterprise; and whether he
pretended, with the Republics single Forces, to possess himself of a place,
which all the Confederates Navy, though animated by their late Victory, could
not master. He added, that supposing no urgenter occasions, they ought not, in
so doubtful a matter, to hazard the Honor they came now from obtaining; That
they ought to attack places further distant; That they might besiege Leucade
when they pleased; and that the Neighborhood of the Isle of Corfou would
always furnish them with the means of doing it; That they ought to make a
better use of so favorable a Conjuncture, by sailing toward Lepanto, to fire
the Vessels which had saved themselves in this Port, destitute in a manner of
both Soldiers and Seamen; That afterward they might advance toward the Morea,
where the Greeks being retained only by Fear, would no sooner see their
Ensigns, but would range themselves under them, and take up Arms against the
Mahometans; That afterward they might steer their course along the Hellespont,
and if they could not force their passage by the Dardanellos, they might at
least alarm Constantinople; that their greatest advantage in this War lay in
showing the World, That the Grand Signior, having no more Sea Forces, kept
himself shut up in his Seraglio, whilst the Venetian Fleet threatened the
Capital City of his Empire; That having made themselves thus Masters of the
Sea, they might ravage all the Coasts thereabouts, and carry away whatsoever
was to be transported to Constantinople, from Alexandria, and other Ports of
Egypt, for the reparation of the Turkish Fleet; That they might burn the
Materials laid up on the Seacoasts for the building of the new Galleys; That
they might wast the Isles, and carry off Slaves for their own Galleys, and by
this means, at the same time deprive the Infidels of the means of repairing the
loss of their Seamen or Slaves; and that this was the only way to end the War,
for to incapacitate the Enemy to set out a new Fleet the next Spring.
Sorancio's reasons were approved by the most part of those that were of the
Council of War; but Venieri's Heart was too much set upon the enterprise of
Leucade, to change his mind in that matter.

There were embarkt then two Thousand, and three Hundred Greeks, with an
Hundred and Fifty Epirot Horse, on eight and forty Galleys, for this rash
enterprise. The Isle of Leucade is situated between Cephalonia and the Province
of Caramania, being separated only by a small Channel, over which there is
built a Bridge to succor it, in case of need, more commodiously from the Land.
The Turks who thought the Venetians fully satisfied with their Victory, and
being disarmed at Corfou, did not expect they would undertake any thing at the
end of a Campaign; and although they had caused to come several Troops of both
Horse and Foot for the defense of the Isle of Leucade, yet they redoubled the
Garrison of the place, at the first news of the Venetians defigns, who having
made a descent, would needs raise up a Battery of six Pieces of Cannon; but the
Infidels falling with great fury from all parts upon them, Venieri was the
first that despaired of effecting what he came for. He took Fifty Horse to view
the place; but the Turks sallyed out in greater numbers, and so vigorously
encountered him, that he left several of his Men dead behind him; the rest
flying toward their Galleys in Confusion: Venieri himself had like to have
been taken Prisoner. This danger made him open his Eyes, and quit this Siege.
As soon as he had re-imbarkt his Cannon, he sent Sorancio, with six and thirty
Galleys, to winter in Candia, and in his own passage to Corfou he lost a
Friggat by the way; and thus this Famous Fight produced no other Fruit but the
re-taking of Supoto, and the Castle of Margariti; whence the Turks fled, as
soon as Paul Jourdain appeared near the Walls at the Head of Four Thousand Men.
He rased it to the ground. Several Captains of the Venetian Galleys publicly
complained of Venieri's Conduct, and accused him of obscuring the Brightness of
the late Victory by his slowness and imprudence.

The People of Venice have no part in the Government of the State; and the
Sovereign Authority resides wholly in the Body of the Nobility. This Body is
divided into two considerable Factions (a division which often happens in great
Cities) but their hatred and resentment do only show themselves in the pursuit
of the great Officers in the State. Each Party forms its Plots and Cabals to
exclude one another. But it is forbid by Law to carry on these Intrigues with
any kind of open show, under Penalty of being treated as Disturbers of the
public Peace. There are reckoned at Venice above twenty ancient Noble
Families, distinguished by the Rank their Ancestors have held, who respect the
other Gentry with Contempt, and as Persons newly raised to what they are. These
last hate as much the others, as they dis-esteem them, and their number being
the greatest, they often times sufficiently revenge themselves on the others
Pride; and their mutual Enmities are the more violent, by being forced to keep
them locked up in their Breasts. Venieri was of a good Family, but opposite to
the Faction of the Ancient Ones. James Sorancio, one of the Providitors of the
Naval Army, was nobly born, and a Person very ambitious, who enjoyed a great
Estate, and lived with greater Splendor than is usual with People of quality
at Venice. He was of opinion, that if Venieri was called home, he should ^e put
in his place; and in this regard, wrote in cruel terms against him. He set him
forth in his Letters to the Senate, as a Man, whose good Fortune had made him
insolent. He accused him for his sluggishness in the enjoyment of a Victory in
which he had no share, it being rather the Work of Heaven than that of Men, and
spoiled all the Fruit of it by his softness and indifferency. He affirmed that
Venieri had not engaged at all with the Infidels, but to make amends, was ready
to fall foul on the Confederates; That his unseasonable severity had like to
have ruined the Republic; and that had not Barbarigo opposed his violent
humor, the Mahometans had not been defeated; That 'twas well for him and the
Republic, that his Avarice had not put him on extending too far his Authority;
That Don John had forbad his coming into his presence; and that it was
impossible to fight advantagiously under the command of a Leader so greatly
enraged against the Republick's General; That instead of dexterously gaining
the favor of a young Prince, environed with a Spanish Council, he had drawn
his hatred by his Obstinacy, the effects of which could not be too soon
remedyed. These things were at first only discoursed of amongst some of the
ancient Nobility; but they were soon after spread about the whole Town. Bernard
Tipoly ventured to propose the calling home of Venieri, under pretense of
easing him of the Fatigues and Cares of his Office in favor of his great Age,
by which means the Republic might prevent the Affront of re-calling him at the
pursuit of the Pope and King of Spain. The Senate was the more enraged at this
proposition, that Tipoly's Brother sent lately Ambassador to Rome, a Person
indeed of great Merit, and much esteemed at Venice, was a little suspected to
aim at the Generalship, or at least the employ of Providitor, if Sorancio, who
was older than he, filled the first place; so that they both acted in consort
against Venieri, although with different Motives. The Friends of this last
exclaimed against so terrible a process, and complained that they made use of
Calumnies and Impostures to oppress an Officer, whose Services deserved another
Recompense. The Senator Soriani having met Tipoli, began to ask him, whether he
could show more malice and ill will, if Venieri, defeated by the Infidels, had
been convicted of engaging the Turks unadvisedly. The Republic will not punish
a Citizen for keeping up the Honor of his Character against the Encroachments
of a young rash Prince; and you do not well to conceal (says he) the secret
Envy you bear his Virtues, under the false shows of a great Zeal for the
public good. The Senate was angry at Tipoly's Remonstrances, which showed with
what Craft and Malignity he endeavored to uphold the interest of his Faction,
and his Brothers Pretensions. It Is certain he had well enough devined what
would happen in the Sequel. For Don John declared a while after, he would quit
the Command of the Fleet, if Venieri was not displaced. The Spanish Minis^^rs
gave the Pope to understand that this Old Commander was of an insupportable
Humor; and Colonni, who was for making himself agreeable to Don John,
confirmed what the Spaniards had said against him. Pius V. who applied himself
continually to remove such Obstacles which might hinder the common good, wrote
to the Senate to appoint another Commander. He granted that Don John, as well
as Venieri, were to blame; but he was for complying in some measure with the
extreme aversion this Prince had for this Old Officer; and that the Republic
being more interessed in this War, should be the more willing to abate some of
her Rights; That the Division of the Commanders would ruin the progress of
their Arms; and that they ought before all things to remember the vexatious
Mis-understandings of the last Campaign, which sprang only from light occasions.

These Remonstrances lively touched the Senate, who were otherwise interessed
than Venieri, in this Affair. 'Twas a shame to expel a Magistrate from the
chief employ in the Republic, to satisfy the passion of a Stranger. After
several Deliberations, during which, much was said against the Pride of Don
John, they were forced to buckle, and yield to the desires of Pius V. But they
had no regard in their choice of a new Officer, either to Sorancio or Tipoli;
and as a Punnishment to them both, for their Ambitious Pretentions, there was a
General chosen out of the opposite Faction; who was James Foscarini, a Person
of a bold and enterprizing Spirit, but had never went through the Offices,
which successively carry a Noble Venetian to the general Command of the Naval
Army. Venieri was left in Dalmatia, with orders to watch over the Countries of
the Adriatic Gulf; and to lessen his Disgrace, the Senate confirmed to him
the Title of Providitor General, and enjoined Foscarini to obey him when they
should meet together. This Person lived long, as it were, forgotten by Fortune,
but she raised him at last in his Old Age, when he began neither to hope or
mistrust her Favors. He had conserved much Health with all the Fire of his
Youth, by a long habit of Labor and Abstinence. He spent his first years
without any employ, and betook himself to the Bar, where he pleaded for Money
with more Diligence and Honesty, than Knowledge and Eloquence; although it be a
thing very rare for a Noble Venetian to meddle with this Profession, unless
forced to it by the bad condition of his Affairs. He quitted the Employ of
Advocate, to betake himsef to public Offices, as soon as he saw himself
encouraged to enter therein, and executed them with more Integrity than Fame.
His inclination for Arms made him pass amongst his Fellow Citizens for an
excellent Captain, although he understood nothing in Warlike Affairs. His brisk
and fiery Temper engaged him in many Quarrels, as well on his own, as his
Friends account, whence he always came off with advantage. His natural
Fierceness, which his Age could not moderate, was not abated either by the
Power or Honor of the Employs, he obtained in his Elder Years. He sought for
the Command of the Troops, designed for the Succor of the Isle of Cyprus,
though his Age might justly have excused him; and 'twas this Earnestness
procured him the general Command of the Fleet, when Zani received order to come
and give account at Venice of his ill administration. Venieri, besides the
Esteem his Family was already in, had gained himself so great Honor by this
Victory of Lepanto, that, after Moceningo's Death, he was, by consent of all
the Electors, on the very first day of their meeting, nominated Doge. This
Magistrate is respected in Venice, as a Sovereign in his Dominions; but his
Power is limited, and depends on that of the Seigniory.

The Infidels commonly disguise the State of their Affairs by spreading abroad
Reports, which either increase their Advantages, or diminish their Losses. But
they could not at this time hinder the true News of their Defeat, from being
universally known at Constantinople. The Inhabitants were struck with as great
a Consternation, as if the Christians were entering their Gates. And (the like
of which was never seen before) the Seraglio was no less alarmed than the Town,
by the Lamentations and Tears of one of Selims Sisters, who bewailed the loss
of her Husband, and the Captivity of her two Sons. 'Twas for several days
feared, that the Victorious Fleet would come with Full Sail, and attack the
Imperial Seat: wherefore the Grand Vizier, to prevent Surprise and Insults,
augmented the Garrison of the Dardanels. The People were so disturbed, that, to
keep them within bounds, they were fain to issue out very severe Orders. Selim
was then at Adrianople, busied about the Mosque and Kervansarai. He returned
thence with speed, at the first News of the Tumults in the City, for fear it
should be yielded to the Conquerors. The ignorant Multitude were so terrifyed,
that the greatest part of them gave the choicest of their Goods to be kept by
the Christians, whom yet they treated with the highest Contempt, and as knight 'em,
whether they might at least be permitted the free exercise of their Religion in
paying Tribute. The Grand Signiors Arrival calmed these Storms, and kept the
People in their duty by the sole Fear of Punishment. Thus was Venice revenged
of the Alarms given her by the Menaces of an Insolent Conqueror; and the
Fright at Constantinople was so much the greater, in that the Infidels thought
themselves secure of the Victory. This Turn is a great Example of the
Inconstancy of Humane Affairs, and how little Confidence ought to be placed in
Fortune's Favors, which become so much the bitterer, the less we expect to see
our selves deprived of them. The Grand Signior removed Perteau from his Employ,
confiscated his Estate, and with difficulty leaving him his Life, banished him
from Constantinople. He thought by this Chastisement to cast the shame of his
Defeat on one of his Generals ill Conduct, and so to save his Armies Credit.
Louchali, who was escaped with about Thirty Galleys, and some Christian
Vessels, he had taken in the beginning of the Fight, was Honored for this
little Advantage, and returned Triumphantly to Constantinople. The Grand
Seignior highly extolled his Valor, presented him with a Magnificent Vest, and
made him Bassa of the Sea in the room of the unfortunate Haly. The Pope
Passionately desired the Return of this Renegado to the Christian Religion, and
would have proposed to him by some able Mediators, not only the Pardon of his
Apostasy, but also the giving him a Town in Sovereignty, within the Realm of
Naples, which was his Native Country, on condition he would deliver up the
Fleet to Don John. Cardinal Alexandrini had in his Holynesses Name much pressed
the King of Spain to that purpose. Philip the Second approved this Design,
admired the Zeal of Pius the Fifth, and promised to second it to the utmost of
his Ability; but he did not exactly keep his Word; and the Popes Death,
happening a little after, was highly prejudicial to the Affairs of Christendom.

The Musulmans, having a little recovered their Spirits, drew Troops out of the
inland places, to strengthen their Garrisons on the Sea Coasts, fearing, that
the Christians, become Masters of the Archipelago, might make use of this
Advantage. But the Spies, they had sent to learn News, brought them Word, that
Don John, satisfied with gaining a Battle, was gone to disarm in Sicily; That
the Venetians, incapable to make the best of their good Fortune, only amused
themselves about taking half-ruin'd Castles in Epirus; and that Venieri, having
ill succeeded in an Enterprise, was gone to Winter at Corfou. The Ministers of
the Divan, re-assured by this Report, set close to the repairing of their
Fleet, seeing this to be the only means to preserve the Glory of the Ottoman
Name, and secure their Coasts. It was besides of extreme importance to them, to
let all Europe see, that the Grand Signior was powerful enough, not only to
repair its Ruins, but also to put to Sea the next Spring a much more formidable
Fleet. Louchali, engaged by his own Employ to support his Masters Glory, with
his utmost Endeavors advanced the Preparatives of this Design. He sent for
Four and Twenty Galleys, left to secure the Isle of Cyprus, which had not been
in the Fight at Lepanto; he diligently drew together all those, that had
escaped from the Conquerours, and provided them of new Furniture. He made use
of the old Hulls of Vessels, found in the Harbors or Ports. The Bassa's had
Order to build the greatest number they could, in all places of their
Governments, appointed for such Works: so that Louchali surprised the Divan by
the speed, with which he made ready Two Hundred Galleys. This Effort made Selim
conceive a great Opinion of his Power; and with this Fleet ill equipped, the
Turks pretended to revenge themselves of their last Defeat.

The happy Success of the Confederates Arms could not make the Generals forget
their particular Quarrels. The Report of the late Fight, already spread over
all Europe, warmed Christendom, and made it with reason expect a a Series of
Victories. But the Hatred and Jealousy of the Sovereigns, disappointed so
great an Expectation. Though there seemed to be a great Accord and Union
between the Spaniards and the Venetians, yet they loved one another less, than
they hated the Infidels, and their Victory had doubled their Aversion. The
Spaniards treated the Venetians with as much Contempt as Pride. They published,
that the others had contributed little to the gaining of the Battle, and that
the whole was in a manner due to their Troops and Galleys. The Venetians, who
could not suffer these insolent Discourses, boasted their Gallant Actions,
saying, that their Army both began the Fight, and determined the Victory. They
moreover complained of the Spaniards Malice, who had let some of the Republics
Galleys be taken, when they might easily have succored them. Amongst others
they accused Doria of Treachery, reproaching him with having placed himself at
such a distance, that several Christian Friggats thinking he fled, had
tumultuously followed him, with not having so much as made one Shot; with
having carried away, and pillaged the Vessels, taken from the Infidels, instead
of pursuing Louchali, who retreated in Disorder; and with having behaved
himself on the Day of the Fight, more like a Pyrate than a General.

The Venetians in the beginning of the Winter sent Paul Tipoli to Rome, to
assist Sorancio in the Negotiations touching the League. Requiescens was
employed upon the same Affair, with the Ambassadors of the Catholic King. The
Pope often discoursed him in private, gave him several Marks of his good will,
and distinguished him from other Foreign Ministers, because he was Governor of
Milanese. The President du Ferrier, Ambassador from France to his Holiness, a
sensible and punctual Man, found fault with this Preference, and complained
with so much earnestness of the Affront done the King his Master, whose
Ministers had always been more Honored than the King of Spains, that
Requiescens fearing, this Contest might unseasonably cause a War between France
and Spain, retired to his Government. Philips and the Republics Ambassadors
had every day some new Disputes in the Presence of the Pope and Cardinals,
assembled to Regulate them touching the Preparatives for the next Campaign, and
agreed not upon any Articles without his Holynesses Interposition. The
Venetians desired that an account might be taken of the Expense, they had been
already at; pretended, that they were much more Money out, than they were
obliged to by the Treaty; and demanded to be re-imburst. The Pope, all whose
Cares were employed upon this Holy Expedition, feared the too exact Charge of
the Venetians, and the too subtle Discharge of the Spaniards; and to hinder
their Contests about the past, from prejudicing the present Affairs, forbad the
examining any of them, till they had agreed, with what number of Troops, and on
what part of the Mohammedan Countries the War should be carried on in the
Spring. As soon as they had submitted to his Holynesses Sentiment, the
Venetians proposed, that Greece should be attackt by all the Confederate Land
and Sea Forces. These Troops together made a Body of Fifty Thousand Foot, and
Four Thousand Five Hundred Horse, not counting the Militia of the Fleet,
consisting of Two Hundred Galleys, and an Hundred Vessels of Burden, laden with
Victuals and Ammunition. The Emperor was thereupon to be furnished with the
Troops, which Cardinal Commendon had promised him, to engage him in the League,
and put him in condition to attack Hungary. And in case Maximilian was not sure
to put himself in the Field, the Army must take the way of Macedonia, through
the Provinces of Illyrium and Epirus, for to enter into the Enemies Country.
The Turks were too much weakened to resist such great Efforts; and 'twas hoped,
they might be driven out of Europe; Repose restored to Italy for ever, and all
Christendom secured. The Spaniards continued obstinate in their first opinion
of keeping on the Defensive, endeavoring by that means to ruin the Venetian
Fleet, and make advantage of the War, by carrying it on the Coasts of Africa.
Not daring openly to maintain this Proposition for Fear of drawing on
themselves the public Hatred, and knowing, that the Emperor would keep a
Neutrality, they pretended, there could not any attempt be made on the Sea
Coasts, unless he attackt Hungary, a great Diversion on that side being
necessary, to hinder the Turks upon the Mediterranean from sending speedy
Relief to any Maritime place the Christians should assault; without which their
Efforts would not only be useless, but also dangerous; That it was therefore
(added they) more fit in expecting the Emperors Declaration to keep two Hundred
Galleys in good Condition, and ready to act and surprise the Enemy according to
the occurrence of Affairs, and to rid themselves of the trouble of the Vessels
of Equipage, whose attendance the ablest Sea-Officers had always slighted; That
with an Hundred and Fifty Soldiers on each Gally, they might in a moment land
Thirty Thousand Men, attack and take many strong places, before the Enemy could
have time to relieve them; That they should no more expect Resolutions from
Rome, where neither the Condition of Affairs, nor situation of Places was
known; but that all should be left to the Prudence and Fidelity of the
Generals, by making them absolute Masters of the whole Fleet. They represented
farther, that in respect to the Generalissimo, the Fleet should assemble in
Sicily, this Isle being moreover able abundantly to furnish all Provisions,
necessary for so numerous an Army.

It seemed, that it should be referred to the Generals Determinations; and the
Spaniards, who believed that Colonni would assert the King their Masters
Interest, doubted not, but that, if the Fleet had its Randezvous in Sicily,
they might soon pass over from the Morea to the Coasts of Mauritania. The
Venetians formally opposing it with consent of the Cardinals Commissaries, the
Spaniards explained themselves more openly, remonstrating, that 'twas unjust to
have Respect only to the Interests of the Venetians, and that the King their
Master, who contributed most to the Expenses of the War, should have no part of
the Profit; That all his Coasts were exposed to be plundered by the Corsairs, as
if his Catholic Majesty had not any Vessels at Sea, or that it cost him
nothing toward the maintaining the Confederate Fleet; That if the Ports of
Africa were once cleansed of these Thieves, who had no other Retreat, Spain
would, in acknowledgement of so great a Benefit, make new Efforts to assist the
Holy League; That Italy was not much less exposed to the Incursions of these
Pirates, than Spain; That this Enterprise was neither long nor difficult, there
being no Garrison in Algier, the best of their Ports, which would yield, as
soon as the Christian Army should appear; That they would incontinently after
repass into Greece, to employ the rest of the Campaign in other Conquests,
which the Report of taking this important Place would already have prepared;
That they would in the mean time resolve nothing on their own Head, and that
they were ready to refer themselves to the Prudence of their Generals, who
would know how to take their Measures on the present State of Affairs. Paul
Tipoli, Ambassador of the Republic, afterward took up the Discourse, and
answered, That it was in vain to deliberate on things already decided: That the
Fleets were obliged by the Treaty to meet every Year in the beginning of the
Spring at Corfou, to go and attack the Enemies in Greece; That it was no longer
to be talked of leaving to the Generals Discretion, what had been regulated by
all the Confederates, and that 'twas contrary to good Sense and Reason to
change such just Measures; That they ought not to amuse themselves about making
Shots out of reach at an Enemy, when they might give them Mortal Wounds: But
suppose, continued he, that in clearing the Coasts of Africa from Pirates, you
restore Repose to Spain and Italy by entirely securing the Maritime Places;
What Benefit will you get by it, if you give the Infidels time to put forth a
new Fleet to Sea, and see your selves once again exposed to the Perils, from
which you were but just now miraculously delivered? You will then no longer
have to deal with the pitiful Boats of Thieves, whose Surprises to avoid is
sufficient; but you will see the Coast of Sicily and Italy covered with the
Enemies Vessels, under the Shelter of which the Corsairs will in less time be
re-settled in Africa, than you will have been in driving them thence. When the
whole Body is assaulted by some great Distemper, we neglect curing the remoter
Parts, and apply Remedies to the places where the Malady is more dangerous and
pressing. What will the taking of Algier, with the Defeat of the Corsairs,
signify to the Reputation of our Arms, and the decisive Point of the War,
which is the Question, if we must necessarily attack the Enemy in the Heart of
his Dominions. For in fine, whether we ravage Greece, or hinder the
Re-establishment of the Ottoman Fleet, we shall make our selves, without
fighting, Masters of Africa; whereas at present we cannot invade it without
abundance of danger and Expense. We shall have to do with such, as have from
their Infancy been bred up to War, and that will defend themselves like Madmen
and Desperado's; nor shall we find there, as in Greece, People exasperated by
the Rigor of their Government, and wholly ready to declare for us: But if we
must not expect any Success, unless the Emperor enter into the League, as the
Spanish Ministers aver; will he approve of turning War on the Coast of
Mauritania, when we should, by attacking the Enemy in the Archipelago, divide
the Ottoman Forces, which without this Diversion, will all fall upon him in
Hungary? This Prince is undoubtedly too clear-sighted to sign the Treaty of
Union, as soon as he shall judge, by the Attempt upon Africa, that the
Spaniards abandon the public Interest, to mind only that of the King their
Master. Tipoli, in fine, concluded upon the forming two Armies, one by Sea, and
the other by Land, of all the Confederate Troops, and vigorously pressing the
Enemies, before they were recovered of their Consternation.

These Disputes took them up two Months without coming to any Agreement: but
the Parties referring themselves to the Pope, he in this manner regulated all
these Differences. He ordered, that the Fleets should repair to Corfou about
the latter end of March, with all sorts of Ammunition and Equipage; That the
Venetians should add Three Galeasses to Six others, which were already in their
Navy; and that Greece should be invaded on the side, which the Commanders
should think fittest; that the Holy See and the King of Spain should send the
same number of Vessels, as in the last Camapign; That there should be embarkt
only Two and Thirty Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; That there should
stay at Otranto Twelve Thousand new-raised Men, ready to pass over upon the
first Order from the Generals; That there should be Thirty Pieces of Canon with
Powder and Ball, enough for each Piece to make a Thousand Shot; That there
should be Twenty Thousand Muskets, Thirty Thousand Swords, Fifteen Thousand
Partisans, Two Thousand Lances, and Five Hundred Iron Coats, with all sorts of
Utensils and Instruments necessary for such an Army. The Pope did not only
solicit the Emperor to join with the Princes of the League; he sent also at
the same time two Prelates, Antonio Salviati and Paulo Odescalchi, to the
Princes of Italy, inviting them to contribute every one according to his
Ability toward the defraying so Holy an Enterprise: They all promised to
second his Holynesses Zeal. Gulielmo de Conzaga, Duke of Mantua offered Two
Hundred Horse and a Thousand Foot; the Duke of Parma engaged to send as many;
and the Duke of Urbin (whose Power was much inferior to that of those two
Princes) promised only a Regiment of Horse, composed of Two Hundred choice Men;
the Republic of Lucca, which had not any Troops, taxt themselves at six
Thousand Crowns of Gold a Year; the Genoueses answered, that they had lent the
King of Spain Four Galleys for this Expedition, and that their Militia was
embarked on his Catholic Majesty's Fleet. Philibert Duke of Savoy, offered Two
Thousand Foot, and Four Hundred Horse, but at the same time he besought the
Pope to consider, that he had much more need for them for the securing of his
own State, than against the Turks, being threatened by Gaspar Coligny, who had
put himself at the Head of the French Protestants. The Duke of Savoy had reason
to distrust so Potent and brave a Man. He had newly, without the Dukes consent,
married a Gentlewoman, born his Subject, of one of the best Houses of Savoy,
exceeding Rich, Lady of many great Castles, and who, for the sake of this
Marriage, had renounced the Romish Religion. Cosmo de Medicis gave five Hundred
Horse, and Six Thousand Foot, on condition that the Emperor, and the other
Confederate Princes, should grant him the Title of Great Duke of Tuscany.
Alfonsa Duke of Ferrara offered his Holiness as many Troops as he should ask
^im, without determining the Number; but the Jealousy, given him by the
Elevation of Medicis, with whom he had long been disputing about Precedence and
Power, and the Offers of this Redoubtable Rival, obliged him to make a Journey
to the Emperor, to oppose the settling this new Title. The Pope, who feared the
Duke of Ferrara would divert Maximilian from entering into the League, lost all
the good opinion he had of him, and gave apparent Signs of his Indignation
against this Prince.

The Cares and Authority of Pius the Fifth having surmounted the greatest
Difficulties, and regulated all things betwixt the Allies, the Christians might
Rationally promise themselves a Glorious Success in the next Campaign; and
Colonni, having given all Orders necessary for his Departure, was setting forth
for his Post, when Heaven, more than ever incen^ed against our Crimes,
chastised us for them by the Death of Pius the Fifth, which happened a few days
after. He felt himself at first assaulted by Pains, of which, neither himself,
nor Physicians could Divine the Cause. He had no great opinion of their
Prescriptions, being persuaded, that all the secret Physic consisted in
abstaining from things p^ejudicial to Health, and in a simple and frugal manner
of living. Hence he had but one Physician, who had a long time been his
Servant. These sharp and continual Pains gave the Physicians to understand,
that he had a Stone in his Bladder. But he could not be brought to use the
Remedies necessary for his Cure, bcause they too much offended his Modesty, and
himself judged, that his Distemper was incurable by the Redoubling of his
Pains. He would not then hear of any Affairs, but his Salvation, and applied
himself, sick as he was, to continual exercise of Devotion. He undertook to
visit on Foot, the Seven Churches, maugre the Prayers and Tears of his Nephews.
He employed but a day and an half in this Holy Pilgrimage, though he stayed a
considerable time at Prayers in every Church; but he returned so tired, that
the Physicians believed, this violent exercise, joined to the cruel pains he
suffered, and to the Authority he used till his death, would shorten the days
of this Holy Man. He dyed to the great Unhappyness of all Christendom, but to
his own Repose and Glory, on the first of May. He was a Personage, comparable
to the first Vicars of Jesus Christ, for the Innocence and Holiness of his
manners, the firmness of his Faith, the Ardor of his Zeal for Religion, and who
merited no less than those, whose Memory the Church Solemnly Celebrates.

He was born in the Year 1504. near the Town Alexandria, in a Village called le
Bois. His Birth and Fortune were mean enough, though some Authors, to flatter
him, have written, that he was descended of the Ancient and Noble Family of the
Ghislieri of Bononia. He was from his Childhood educated in the order of the
Dominicans, of which he took the Habit, and lived to the Age of Fifty Years in
the most Religious Observation of St. Dominicks Rule. This Uniformity of
Conduct gained him the esteem of a perfect Religious. It Is said, he never had
any Office in the Order, and that he was only chosen to govern some Houses in
quality of Prior, which Employs he for no other reason accepted, but he might
not disobey his Superiors. Cardinal Caraffa having been named Sovereign
Inquisitor, heard of his Merit. He sent him to Bergamo, to order the Process
against certain Heretics. For besides his extraordinary Piety, he was very
Learned in the Holy Scripture, and in Divinity, which he had a long time taught
in his Order with the Title of Doctor. Cardinal Caraffa, well satisfied with
his Activeness and Fidelity, which were of proof against Solicitations and
Menaces, sent for him back to Rome, where his Service was very useful to him in
the same Functions. This Cardinal, being after Julius the Third, and Marcellus
the Second, who both reigned but a very little while, advanced to the Churches
Throne under the Name of Paul the Fourth, gave the Bishopric of Nepi to
Michael Ghislieri (so was he called amongst the Dominicans) and Two Years after
honored him with the Sacred Purple, though Cardinal Charles Caraffa his
Holynesses Nephew, opposed his Promotion. He afterward made him chief of the
Inquisition, giving him far greater Power than any, who had before him filled
that place, and extolled his Capacity in the presence of all the Cardinals. He
made himself many Enemies by Honorably asserting the Interests of Religion,
but was nevertheless chosen Pope the Fifth day of January, Anno 1566. Those,
who seemed the most contrary to his Election, were the first to give him their
Voices. He showed so much indifference therein, that, when according to Custom,
they came to ask him, whether he consented to what the Conclave had done in his
behalf, he for some time doubted, whether he should accept it, and received the
Tiara with as much Moderation, as he had testified little desire to obtain it.
In the mean time this Man, full of Humility, without Estate, without Birth, and
without Favor, supported only by his Innocence, and the uprightness of his
Intentions, manifested no less Greatness of Soul, than Zeal and Devotion. At
his Entrance into the Pontificat, he set about restoring the Discipline, which
had been long corrupted. A Work undoubtedly Laborious, but which he Gloriously
accomplished, by being himself the first in diligently observing his own
Ordinances, and severely punishing the obstinate and Refractory. By proposing
Recompenses only to those, who endeavored their amendment; the Court of Rome
was in so short a time purged of all the Vices which dishonored it, that 'twas
scarce credible he alone should have performed, what several of his
Predecessors never durst attempt. The Respect and Veneration that was had for
him, prevented his Orders, and every one amended his Manners, through the Sole
Fear of displeasing him. The Corruption was grown so great in the whole
Ecclesiastical State, that Wisdom and Modesty rendered Men contemptible, and
nothing made them valued but Libertinism. But Pius the Fifth took such good
order therein, that Virtue regained the place, whence Vice had driven her. The
Banditi were become so formidable by their Assassinates and Robberies, that the
Towns themselves were not safe from their Insults. This Holy Pope caused these
Thieves to be punished with so much Severity, that his Subjects enjoyed a Calm
and Repose, the like of which had not yet been seen in any State of Italy. He
had so little Ambition to advance his Family, that 'twas only at the Instant
Request of the Sacred College, that he gave the Hat to his Nephew Michael
Bonelli, his Sisters Son, who had also taken the Habit of St. Dominick, though
he loved him tenderly, as being a Person of great Wit and Virtue. He took from
him the Office of Treasurer of the Church, worth ten Thousand Crowns a Year,
some time after he had given him it, and sold it, to Cardinal Cornaro for Four
Hundred Thousand Franks, which were employed in Equipping the Fleet of the Holy
See. His Nephew willingly parted with it, offering him also, whatever was left
him of his Benefits, for so Holy an use as that. He entertained a young
Bononian, that was his Kinsman, named Paulo Ghislieri, who had a great
inclination to the Wars, and could not have failed of succeeding in it. But the
Pope understanding that he had an habit of Lying, would not see him, but
banished him from Rome, with Prohibition of ever returning thither, whatever
Intercess^^n the Princes and Cardinals made in his be^alf. By so admi^able a
Conduct ^e merited the Esteem of all the Christian Princes, though no Pope of a
long time had so little Condescendence for them, or more vigorously opposed all
their Enterprises against the Honor or Interest of the Holy See. He rejected
the Counsels of those able Politicians, who pretended to govern the Church
according to the Wisdom of the World, and said, that the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST
ought to be ignorant of State-tricks, and to demand of GOD alone Strength,
necessary for the supporting this Burden. This sole Confidence gave him such an
Authority, that he alone engaged the King of Spain, and the Venetians in the
League, and gave the Form and Motion to this long and difficult Work.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH BOOK.
HUgh Buoncompagno chosen Pope under the Name of Gregory the Thirteenth. His
Birth and Fortune. Designs of Gaspar de Coligni Admiral of France. Condition of
the two Fleets. Louchali's great Ability. Unwillingness of the two Generals to
Fight. Each of them slips an Opportunity of gaining the Victory. The Turks shut
up in an Harbor. The Christians will attack them. Don John carries back the
Spanish Fleet into Sicily. The Venetians Complaint against him. It Is ref^rr^d
to the Council of Ten to treat secretly a Peace. The Turks make themselves
Masters of a little Place and Fort. The Republics Complaints to the Pope.
Great Contests at Rome about augmenting the Navy. The Pope grants Don John the
Liberty of Haly's Son. This Prince sends him back to his Mother without any
Ransom. A witty Saying of the Bassa of Negrepont Prisoner at Rome. The Pope
exhorts the French King to enter into the League. Reasons of the Power and
Greatness of the Realm of France. Causes of its last Misfortunes. Peace and
Alliance between France and Spain. Henry's lamentable Death. Jealousy between
Catherine de Medicis and the Cardinal of Lorrain. Conspiracy of Amboise. Death
of Francis the Second, King of Navarre declared Regent during the Minority of
Charles the Ninth. Duke of Guise assassinated before Orleance. Battle of St.
Denis. Anne de Momerency, Constable of France, mortally wonded. Battle of
Jarnac. Prince of Conde slain after the Fight. Conduct of Admiral Coligni.
Cardinal Ursin Legate in France. Conditions on which the Emperor will enter into
the League. Peace concluded at Constantinople between the Grand Seignior and
the Venetians. Copy of the Treaty sent to Venice. All the Christian States
offended at this Agreement. The King of Spain receives the News of it with a
great deal of Moderation. The Pope drives from his Presence the Venetian
Ambassador, who came to tell him of it. The Venetians are in danger of their
Lives at Rome. The Popes Discourse, in his Anger, to the Cardinals. His
Holynesses Decree against the Venetians. Tipoli's Address to pacify the Pope.
Nicholas Ponti extraordinary Ambassador from the Republic to Rome. He
reconciles the Republic with Gregory the Thirteenth.

THE HISTORY OF THE WAR of CYPRVS.
The Fifth Book.
THE Popes Sickness, followed by his Death, interrupted the Course of Affairs;
and stayed Colonni at Rome, though all things were ready for his departure. The
Castles and other Lordships he held in the Ecclesiastical State, too much
interessed him in the next Election, to let him absent himself during the
holding of the Conclave. But the Cardinals, sending for him to the Consistory,
told him, he must not abandon the common Cause in the present Conjuncture, and
obliged him to go and join the Fleet. They gave him Money out of the Churches
Treasury, to pay the Troops of the Holy See; and having taken his Leave of the
Sacred College, recommending to them his Interests, he went immediately to
Civita Vecchia, where he found another occasion of delay. The Great Duke of
Tuscany, not yet knowing how matters would go touching the Election, made a
Difficulty of furnishing out the Twelve Galleys, the deceased Pope had already
hired of him. Cardinal Ferdinando de Medicis, his Son, seeing the other
Cardinals highly disgusted at this Refusal, cast the Blame on his Fathers
Officers, and undertook for the Performance of the Treaty, made with Pius the
Fifth, which was no sooner satisfied, but Colonni, setting sail, took his
course for Naples, thence to pass into Sicily.

The Cardinals, having (during the nine days destined to that Ceremony) paid
their last Duties to the departed Pope, entered into the Conclave on the 11th.
of May; and the next day, notwithstanding the Powerful Competition of Cardinal
Farnese, who pretended to the Pontificat, they, at the solicitation of Cardinal
Altemps, chose Hugh Buoncompagno, who took the Name of Gregory the Thirteenth.
He was born at Bononia, of a very mean Family: his Father, whose Fortune was no
greater than his Birth, left nevertheless a great Estate, which he got by his
Industry and Frugality. When Charles the Fifth received at Bononia the Imperial
Crown from the Hands of Clement the Seventh, this Man, who had gotten into
Trade, made so considerable an advantage of abundance of Wares, which the
Concourse of Strangers, drawn thither by the Pomp of this Ceremony, had made
dear, that he was in a condition to build Stately Houses in a Quarter of the
Town, called The Street of Hell. He caused all his Children to be carefully
brought up in Learning, and engaged his Son Hugh in the Study of the Civil Law,
in which he made so great a Progress, that having taken his Degree of Doctor,
he for several years taught publicly in the University of Bononia. Being above
Forty years of Age when he lost his Father, he went soon after to Rome, hoping
to get there both Wealth and Reputation, by following the Profession of the
Bar. He there administered some public Employs with so great Probity, and such
exact Justice, that he successively enjoyed almost all the Chief Offices of the
Town. He passed several Years without rising to any great Height; but his good
Fortune, in fine, declaring it self, he advanced much faster in his latter
days, and was at the Age of Threescore and Ten mounted upon the Papal Throne.
He was more indebted for his exaltation to the Esteem, he had acquired, of
being an Upright Man, and a great Justiciary, than to Favor or Intrigue. He was
naturally sullen, and slow of Speech: but he knew so well how to make advantage
of these Defects, that his Silence was taken for a Mark of singular Prudence,
and his Sullenness for an admirable Strength of Wit.

Colonni, having by the way learnt the Election of the new Pope, hasted back to
Rome, to Congratulate his Holiness, who, having given him his Orders, sent him
again to the Fleet. Don John had passed all the Winter in Feasting and Jollity;
and this Young Prince, much more sensible of the Luster, than of the Benefit of
his Victory, had prepared for the Expedition in Africa, not doubting, but the
Spaniards might engage the Pope and the Venetians in it, by persuading them, it
would not take up much time. But having received Advice, that it had been
resolved at Rome to attack the Infidels in Greece, he departed with all his
Fleet from Palermo, and came before Messina: He sent some Vessels of Burden to
Corfou; and making a show of no small Impatience at Colonni's stay, without
whom he could not go against the Enemies, he would oblige Leonardo Contareni
(who was sent to him from the Republic, with order to stay there, and see the
Navy set forth) to go and assure the Senate, that he would weigh Anchor, as
soon as ever Colonni, whom he daily expected, should have joined him with the
Popes Fleet. Colonni being, in fine, arrived, the Venetians, under pretense of
showing greater Honor to Don John, or to hasten his Departure, sent from
Corfou into Sicily Five and Twenty Galleys, commanded by James Sorancio, to
meet him, and represented to him, that his delay was highly prejudicial to the
Good of the Common Cause, and his own Glory. Don John, one while showing an
extreme Desire to second the Republics Intentions, and other whiles excusing
himself upon some Preparatives, that were yet wanting to the Fleet. Sorancio in
vain redoubled his Instances; for Don John had a secret order from the King of
Spain, not to make War upon the Infidels this year, but to keep his Fleet along
the Coasts of Sicily. This he had imparted to Colonni, desiring him to favor
his Catholic Majesty's Designs, and amuse the Venetians. Sorancio, whom a long
experience had rendered very quick-sighted, discovered this Mystery through all
these Disguises, and gave notice to his Holiness, who complaining of it to the
Spanish Ambassador; that Minister presented to him a Letter from the King his
Master, in which Philip the Second represented to the Pope, that all France was
in Arms. That the Admiral de Coligni, Head of the Protestants in that Kingdom,
had got the chief place in the Young Kings Favor; that he had procured a
League Offensive and Defensive between France and England; That the Admiral
solicited the Flemings to a Rovolt; and made, at his own charge, great Levies
in Germany: And that his Catholic Majesty was persuaded that the Admiral
abused the French Kings Weakness, and set all manner of Engines at Work, to
cause Insurrections in the Neighboring States, for no other end, than with the
greater Facility to attack his: That his Holiness ought not to be displeased at
the Kings calling back his Fleet for his own particular security; besides that,
it concerned all Christendom, as much as himself, to oppose the aggrandizing of
so Pernicious a Sect. It Is manifest, the Admiral had used all his Endeavors
with Charles the Ninth, to induce him to declare War against Philip; having
often represented in the Council, that there never could be so favorable an
Opportunity, and that all things promised an advantageous Success.

In the mean time the King of Spain's Letters to his Holiness put the whole
Court of Rome in a rage; and the Venetians filled all Europe with Complaints
and Murmurings, saying, that the Spaniards not only abandoned Christendom, but
delivered it up to the Infidels; That the Discontents and Divisions of France
were only Pretense, to make the Republic lose the Benefit of the Victory of
Lepanto, by giving the Barbarians Leisure to set forth a new Navy. The French,
that were at Rome, used the same Language. The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the
Ambassador du Ferrier styled these Reports an Imposture and Calumny, publicly
declaring, that the Spaniards endeavored dexterously to cast their
Perfidiousness on the French. Some believed, that Philip the Second intended by
this manner of proceeding, to try the Popes Patience, with a Design to attempt
greater matters, in case he found him of an easy and Flexible Temper. But
Gregory, without examining, whether the Spaniards Excuse were true or false,
dispatched away two Prelates, Salviati and Ormanet, the latter into Spain, the
former into France, to prevent the War, that was ready to break forth between
these two Crowns. Salviati, being arrived at Paris, writ him word, that he
found no appearance of Division in that Kingdom, and that the King and his
Ministers laughed at the Spaniards absurd Pretenses for deserting their Allies.
The Pope in the mean time could not suffer so open a Violation of the League in
the beginning of his Pontificat. His Predecessor had granted the King of Spain
the raising of about an hundred Thousand Crowns a year on his Clergy, on
condition to maintain Threescore Galleys against the Infidels, and of this his
Holiness demanded the Performance. The Spanish Ministers answered him, they had
no orders about it; and Address being made on his behalf to Don John, he
offered Twenty Galleys, in case the Cardinal Granvelle and the Spanish
Ambassador would consent to it. These two Ministers, consulting of this
Affair, were of opinion, that instead of the Threescore Galleys, demanded by
the Pope, there should be only Two and Twenty granted to the Venetians, on the
one side, for fear of rendering them too strong, and on the other, to enable
them to support and continue the War.

They were delivered to Colonni, who immediately went with those of the Holy
See, and some of the Republics, to join the rest of the Venetian Fleet at
Corfou. The King of Spain and his Subjects were become odious to all the other
Nations of Europe, for having so shamefully gone back from the League, and
abandoned the Common Cause, as well as that of the Venetians. Philip, having
received Advice thereof from several parts, and amongst the rest from Don John
of Austria, re-call'd the natural Inclination, he had for his Honor, and the
advancement of Religion, and sent Orders to Don John, to pass with all his
Forces into Greece, and to behave himself in this War with all the Valor and
Fidelity he expected from his Obedience. Don John had no sooner received this
Order, but he writ to Colonni: But this Letter having been differently
reported, the Original falling into the Author of this History's Hands, he
thought it his Duty to set it down here in its very Words.

Don John of Austria to Marco Antonia Colonni.
HIs Catholic Majesty having recovered Valenciennes, and driven thence the
French, who still continue Masters of Mons and Haynault; the Perplexity of his
Affairs in the Low Countries not hindering him to satisfy his other Obligations,
has commanded me, that leaving all things else, I should with the whole
Confederate Army carry the War into the Morea. I am extremely pleased with
imparting to you such Agreeable News, upon which, I am sure, you will take good
Measures. I am of opinion to let the Greeks know, that we shall soon be upon
their Coasts, to maintain them in their purpose of declaring for us: in the
mean time attempt nothing of Consequence without me, only hinder the Isles from
being plundered, and stay for me, to the end we may all together make a greater
Effort. I write to the Marquess of St. Cross, and send him Word, that, in what
place soever he receives my Orders, he incessantly repair with what Vessels he
has to Corfou, where I shall no sooner arrive, but we will begin the War. I
desire you to keep the Soldiers in Discipline, and above all things, to prevent
the breaking forth of any Quarrels between the Spaniards and Italians, nothing
more troubling me, than to see these two Nations at difference. I will set Sail
at the first Arrival of the Vessels. Communicate this News to the Venetians, to
whom I have not leisure to write. I believe, you will take my Word for the good
Faith and sincere Intentions of the Catholic King.


Colonni received this Letter in the way between Corfou and Cephalonia, and
having read it, called a Council. The Venetians, still fearing some
disappointment from the Spaniards, gave little Credit to this News, and were of
opinion to keep on their way, remonstrating, that the State of Affairs imposed
on them a necessity of continuing this Navigation alone, if their Allies either
stopped or turned back: and in effect Don John having recommended to them the
confirming the Greeks in their Intentions to revolt, and the securing the
Republics Frontiers, 'twas impossible to do either the one or the other, if
the Fleet returned to Corfou; wherefore Colonni, and Andrada, Commander of the
Spanish Ships, were of the same Mind with the Venetians. Being then arrived at
Cephalonia and Zant, they re-assured their Allies against the Fright, the Turks
Fleet had given them, and sent discreet Persons to the Greeks, inhabiting the
Mountains of Morea, to renew the Intelligence, and stir them up afresh to
Rebellion. Steering toward Cythera, now called Cerigo, they met Leoni and
Soriano, Captains of the Venetian Galleys, who were ordered to go upon
Discovery. These Two Officers told them, that the Enemy was not far off, riding
at Anchor under the Walls of Malvasia, which is the ancient Epidaurus of the
Greeks; That their Fleet was composed of above Two Hundred Galleys, and many
other Vessels; but that, though this was the greatest Navy they ever had at
Sea, neither their Hulls nor Furniture was any way comparable to the
Christians, and that there was great likelihood, they would not expose
themselves to a Fight. The Confederates Fleet consisted of an Hundred and Forty
Galleys, Six Galeasses, and one and Twenty great Vessels, fitted for War,
though laden with Victuals and Ammunition. The General resolved the next day to
seek out the Infidels, and draw them to a Battle: But Colonni altered this
Resolution, fearing, that if the Turks continued in their Post, the Retreat of
the Great Vessels might become dangerous, this sort of Ships not being very
sure in Fight: for, though they are wonderful with the Wind, they become
useless, and even cumbersom, during the Calm, and it would be difficult to row
them back at the sight of the Enemies Fleet: so that 'twas not thought fit to
hazard a Battle, being Weaker in Galleys than the Infidels, and having need of
these Vessels to cover their Wings. The next day they got toward the East part
of the Isle, and the Fleet drew up in Battalia near certain Rocks called
Dragonares, over against the Promontory of Malea, as if they really designed to
engage the Enemy: the Galeasses were on the Right Wing, and the Ships of Burden
on the Left, to the end they might come to them with the Favor of the Wind, in
case it blew from the South. The Turks far exceeded the Christians in the
number of their Galleys, but were much inferior to them in Mariners, Rowers,
and Soldiers, since the Battle of Lepanto; so that their Shipping was not (...)
serviceable. This Weakness obliged Louchali only to show his Fleet, and
carefully to avoid coming to Blows: he feared being dishonored, and giving the
Christians occasion to glory, by standing too much upon his Guard: And 'twas an
Advantage great enough for him to keep the Sea, and his Enemies in Breath. He
no sooner understood, that the Christian Fleet was in Battalia near the
Dragonares, but he set Sail, to make a show of fearing nothing; and leaving the
Promontory of Malea, he coasted the Land on the right hand of this Promontory,
as if he neither distrusted the Enemies Forces, nor the ill Condition of his
own. The Wind blowing hard enough from the South, to work the Great Ships, they
went with full Sail against the Enemies, who were making toward the West,
believing that they Fled; and they would undoubtedly have engaged in Fight, had
not the Wind fallen of a sudden. Louchali, seeing the Christians left Wing naked,
turned his Prows that way; but Colonni speedily detacht the Frigates, which had
already secured the Ships of Burden. The Two Fleets stood a long time facing
each other within Cannon Shot, yet without making any Attack. The Christians
feared being enclosed, if they left their Galleys and bigger Ships; and
Louchali, who perceived this Precaution, made the greater semblance of
Fierceness and Readiness to Fight. In fine, the Turks, seeing the Night
approach, discharged all their Cannon, and retreated under the Shelter of the
Smoke. The Christians co^^^nued in Battalia till the next day, when (...) went
to Cerigo without any Order or Discipline, on pretense of taking in Fresh
Water. The Negligence of the Officers was so great, that the most part of the
Galleys put in where they pleased, not only in several parts of the Isle, but
even in the Ports of the Continent, without obeying any Command. But they were
chastised for it by a terrible Alarm; for not knowing, what Course the Ottoman
Fleet had taken, word was brought them, that they were within eight Miles,
advancing toward them. They got aboard their Vessels in an hurry, smitten with
all the Terror, such a Surprise could cause. Colonni at the same time sent to
gather in all the dispersed Galleys, and having given the Signal of Battle,
lancht speedily forth into the Deep with Threescore Sail, putting the rest in
Battalia as fast as they came up to the Fleet. Those that were most remote,
gave little Credit to the Orders and Signals, which they unwillingly and very
slowly obeyed. However, though they were thoroughly persuaded that Louchali
would have defeated them, had he took Advantage of this Disorder; and though
the neglect of Discipline be very destructive to an Army, yet was there no
example made of the Offenders, Colonni and Andrada not daring to punish them,
because there were some Spanish Gentlemen amongst them.

The Infidels, veering toward the West, left the Christian Fleet, not yet
recovered of the Fright, into which they were put by the hazard they had run;
and 'twas believed, they were then going to plunder the Islands and Frontiers
of the Republic, there being then nothing to hinder them. Ours, to prevent
such an Affront, immediately determined to follow them. For this purpose
Colonni chose out the best and swiftest of his Galleys; and taking Equipage and
Soldiers out of the others, he would have sent them into Candy with the rest of
the Fleet, with a Resolution to fall on the Enemies, who were beyond Zant, or
else to stay there for Don John, in case he were not yet arrived, and with him
to pursue the Mis-believers; or, if it should be thought more convenient, to
attack some Place in Peloponesus, being then in Condition to attempt great
matters. The Spanish General was of the same Opinion; but the Venetians having
debated this design amongst themselves, disapproved the execution of it, though
for Reasons weak enough, on which Foscarini had grounded his Sentiment. They
instantly desired Colonni to change this last Resolution, and return to his
former. Colonni granted them this Favor, for which Sorantio in full Council
thanked him in Terms, repleat with Praises. The Reasons, alleged by the
Venetians, were, that having neither Galeasses, nor great Vessels, they were
neither in Condition to Retreat, nor defend themselves, if they should meet
with the Enemy; but in truth they feared, lest Don John and his Council, might
find some new Subterfuge, to make them lose again this Campaign.

The Christians, weighing Anchor in the Night, perceived by break of Day the
Ottoman Fleet. Louchali, who was as well informed of their Motions, as if he
had been prefent at their Debates, made all the advantage of this Knowledge
that could be expected from a great Captain. Finding himself too weak to hazard
a Battle, he aimed only to keep them in continual Alarm, coasting always near
them, and presenting himself sometimes in their Front, sometimes in the Rear,
incessantly watching to lay hold of any Advantages, that might be given him by
the Generals want of Experience or Disunion, by the Disobedience of the
Inferior Officers, or by the Accidents of Wind and Sea. He rode before the
Promontory of Toenarus, commonly called Metapan; and the Christians not daring
with their heavy Vessels to keep the Chanel, the Barbarian made toward them on
the Coast: Our Fleet drew in Battalia in the same order, that is, with the
Galleys between the Galeasses and great Ships, the Infidels also ranking
themselves as at first. In the mean time the two Fleets descried afar off a
Vessel coming with full Sail: 'twas a Venetian Ship, having aboard it a
considerable quantity of Money for payment of the Soldiers, and laden besides
with Powder and other Ammunition for Candy. This Vessel mistaking the Infidels
for the Christians, made directly to them, and some of their Galleys were
already advanced to invest it. Ours, perceiving its Error, sent Quirini with
the Five swiftest Galleys of their Fleet, to prevent the Enemies, and secure
this Vessel. Quirini, having boarded her, took out the Money, and received
Germanico and Mario Savorniani, two Noble Venetians, that had taken this
opportunity of coming to the Fleet. The Ship securely took her way for Candy;
and Quirini returned, Louchali not daring to make to him, for fear of being
forced to accept a Battle. In the mean time the Fleets by little and little
approacht each other, the Infidels extending their Front to a great Length.
Ours where fain to do the like, lest the Enemy might fall upon their Flank or
Rear; their heavy Vessels being always on the Wings, according to their first
order. The Left Wing of the Turks, trusting to their Swifness and Lightness,
and contemning the sluggishness of the Christians heavy Vessels, advanced a
little too forward on our Right. The Galeasses and Ships gave them so warm a
Reception, that they were glad to retreat in Disorder. Sorancio, who commanded
this Wing, animated hereby; made a sign to the other Galleys to fall upon these
Fugitives, and himself with incredible swiftness pursued them. Angelo Soriano
so vigorously followed them, that falling into their Squadron, he in such a
manner attackt one of their Vessels, as he was like to make himself Master of
her The Christians had undoubtedly gained this day a signal Victory, had their
whole Right Wing charged at the same time as the Barbarians began to fly; but
except five Vessels which followed Sorantio, not one seconded his Bravery.
Colonni, transported by the Ardor and Alacrity of the Soldiers, who already set
forth shouts of Victory, advanced with the body of his Fleet, not considering
he left the two Wings behind him. Foscarini, who was in the Head, cried out
loud enough to be heard by every one, That we ought to give them Battle; That
the Infidels were in Disorder; and that Heaven declared in Favor of the Common
Cause; but if the Enemies Disorder drew Colonni after them, the Reflection,
which followed this first Motion, cast him into a strange Perplexity. He knew
not, whether he should go on, or return to his first Post; nor was he less
disturbed by the hope of Victory, than by the fear of being defeated. He
remembered, how displeasing the Honors, he received at Rome, at his return from
the last Campaign, were to Don John of Austria, and what ill Offices the
Spaniards had done him with the King their Master; so that having no longer the
same Protection, he had under the precedent Pontificat, he was ruined with
Philip the Second, though he should have gained the Victory; Don John having
forbidden him to make any Attempt without him. These were the true reasons
which hindered Colonni from attacking the Enemies, though he alleged for his
excuse, that their Retreat was but a Stratagem to divide the Christian Fleet,
by drawing after them the Galleys alone, which would have been defeated without
the help of the greater Vessels. In the mean time Sorantio, complaining that he
had been abandoned by his, had re-gained his Post, seeing the Infidels
recovered, and making a semblance to charge him. Louchali wondered not at the
routing of his Left Wing, and their being pursued by ours; he threatened his
People with Death, if they returned not to the Fight, and ordered the Officers
to re-settle this Disorder, during a little Relaxation, which the Christians
gave them, foreseeing, that he should himself be engaged by the Fugitives, if
the Christians knew how to make use of their Advantage; he bethought himself of
a Stratagem, which demonstrated him to have the Genius of an able Seaman; he
caused his Admiral Ship to be insensibly towed backward, though still facing
the Christian Fleet, which was already at no small distance from the greater
Vessels. Canale, who commanded the Left Wing, of which many Ships were but in a
bad Condition, could not make so much have as the rest of the Fleet; and the
Enemies, on the contrary, recovered of their Fright, sailed in good order.
'Twas now the Christians turn to be in very great Consternation, and smitten
with a sudden Terror, which presaged some Disgrace, they kept silence, as if
they were on the point of being defeated. Many of the Galleys left their first
Rank, for to fight only in the Rear, where the Danger would not be so great, so
that the Front was become very thin. Colonni, to remedy this Disorder, took a
Skiff, and passing round the Fleet, employed his Authority, joined with Reasons
and Requests, to make these Galleys return to their first Station: he told
their Officers, that they had to do only with the same Enemies, of whom they
had killed above Thirty Thousand Men in the last Battle, and taken almost an
equal number of Prisoners, though they were then commanded by excellent
Generals, their Army being also complete, and full of Confidence and Pride;
That they were now Headed by a pitiful Slave, fit only to lead Thieves to a
Robbery; That his Fleet was Tumultuously Assembled, and his Soldiers but
Novices; That they need only to return to their Post, and the Infidels would be
necessitated to fly, to avoid being a second time discomfited. Colonni
endeavored by these Discourses to re-assure those that were most alarmed, and
recall their Courages. But the Distrust Louchali had of his Forces, hindered his
benefiting by this Consternation; and seeking no other advantage, but not to be
beaten, he gave Canale leisure to get up with the great Vessels to the Fleet,
whose Arrival made the Christians take Heart again. Thus these Two Generals, as
expert as they were, committed each of them a Fault, which they could never
repair.

The Two Fleets, having a long time menaced each other within the reach of
Cannon Shot, retired about Sunset with mutual Reproaches. The Infidels, who
went first away, recovered Metapan, and the Christian Fleet returned to Cerigo.
Sorancio publicly complained against the Officers of the Right Wing, whose
Disobedience, he pretended, had plucked the Victory out of his Hands, and
demanded, they might be prosecuted. Foscarini at his Request informed against
them; but the Friends and Credit of the Accused stopped these Prosecutions. This
Impunity encouraged the Soldiers Insolence, and the Generals rendered themselves
culpable by their Neglect of Discipline, without which there is no Assurance of
any Success in War, as the Republic but too often experimented in this.

The Christians, by the Favor of a seasonable Wind, sailed from Cerigo to
Zant. Colonni, thinking to meet Don John there, and go afterward against the
Enemies, found only the Marquess of St. Cross arrived, whom this Prince had
sent with Orders to the Fleet, to come and attend him there. They were well
pleased with their having prevented this Command, and flattering themselves,
that they should soon seehim, sent back the same Marquess to beseech him to
hasten his Departure. Colonni had in the mean time, some days before, sent away
a Spanish Officer, named Pedro Pardo, to inform himself of the Place, where the
Enemies were, of the number of their Vessels, of their Strength, and ^o go and
give Don John an Account of what he should have learnt, and give him a
particular Relation of all that had passed between the two Fleets. Pardo having
in his Course heard near a certain Isle, a great Noise of Cannon, which lasted
a long time, doubted not, but the Fleets were engaged. Being persuaded that
ours was much much Weaker than the Ottoman, and that Discipline was not well
observed in it, he so strongly fancyed our being defeated, that having affirmed
it to Bazano, whom he first met with, he made the same Report to Don John of
Austria, who was then at Corfou. This Prince immediately prepared to gather up
the Remains of the Christian Fleet, taking with him for this Expedition a
certain number of chosen Galleys; but being ready to set Sail, he received News
quite contrary to what Pardo had told him, and understood that the Fleet
attended him at Zant. He changed his Design, and sent Colonni Word, to come and
meet him at Cephalonia, for that he would part from Corfou, as soon as he
should have re-fitted the Vessels he had disarmed. They looked upon themselves
obliged by Respect, to go with the whole Fleet as far as Cephalonia to meet
him, not doubting his being already there: but a contrary Wind arising, when he
was in sight of the Isle, had driven him back to Corfou. The too great
Credulity of the Venetians upon uncertain Reports, made them commit a Fault of
the utmost Importance. They left their Heavy Vessels at Zant, without any Guard
of Galleys, believing the Enemy far from them: there was Advice given them on a
sudden, that the Turkish Fleet was seen near the Isle, and that there were
Fires lighted in the Citadel, to give them notice of it; and in effect there
was a great likelihood, that Loucali observed their March, and cruis'd
thereabout to surprise them. The Venetians, despairing to succor their
Vessels, sent away Friggats in have to burn them, for fear they should fall
into the Infidels Hands: but this Order having been fortunately neglected, they
understood that the Barbarians were not on the Coast of Zant; and these
Vessels, condemned to the Flames, were thus miraculously preserved.

Don John, being returned to Corfou, sent for the whole Fleet thither, as the
most commodious Place for taking Resolutions. The Venetians murmured at all the
Courses they were made to take. They had been made to come from Cerigo to Zant,
from Zant to Cephalonia, and then to Corfou, so that their Rowers were even
spent with incessantly towing the great Vessels, and they justly complained of
the continual Delays that intervened, to make them lose the Benefit of this
Campaign.

Colonni also testified his resentment of it with so much the more Vehemence,
in that he was published to be the Cause, and was moreover informed, that Don
John, offended at his not having stayed for him at Corfou, had said, that
Colonni, ambitious of the Honor to command, had forgot to obey, and had,
during this whole War, shown a far greater Inclination for the Venetians, than
for the King of Spain. Colonni, incensed by these Discourses, and being no
longer able to suffer the insupportable Pride of this Young Prince (who, having
no greater Authority in the Council of War than the other Two Generals, would
nevertheless, though absent from the Fleet, have it steer according to his
Caprichio, and sent his Orders to his Colleagues, as if they were inferior
Officers) advised the Venetians, who were no less displeased than himself, to
seek some other Expedients for the security of their Affairs, and no longer to
rely on the Assistance of the Spaniards.

The Fleet, drawn up in Battalia, received Don John with the Discharge of all
their Cannon: but there were not any Vessels sent to meet him; nor did any of
his, contrary to the common Practice, return the Venetians Salutation. He
nevertheless received civilly enough the Officers that came aboard him; but
appeared so highly offended with Colonni, that, though he let him enjoy all the
Honors due to his Office, he long refu^ed him a private Conference, in which
he pretended to justify himself, and would not so much as suffer his Cousin
Pompey Colonni, who ordinarily entered into the Privy Council with (...), to
come there any more. Colonni for his p^rt talked a little too freely, and no^
content with excusing himself, he cast upon this Prince almost all the
Failings, of which he had been suspected; he offered also to leave the Fleet,
and return into Italy; but Don John, fearing, lest this Retreat might draw an
Envy upon himself, pacifyed Colonni by new Protestations of Amity, and promised
him to live from henceforth with him, as he had formerly done. The Venetians
and Don John had also a Dispute, which Colonni by his Prudence terminated. Don
John offered them Spanish Soldiers to fill up their Companies, and told them,
he would not proceed in the War, unless they were complete. The Venetians, who
had already experienced the ill effect of this Mixture, absolutely refused to
receive any Strangers amongst them, so that this affair was like to produce bad
Consequences, had not Colonni found out an expedient, by giving some of his
Soldiers to the Venetians, and taking those of Don John of Austria.

The Venetians alleging, that the Island of Corfou, already much incommoded by
the Incursions of the Infidels, would be entirely exhausted, if the Confederate
Army stayed any longer there; a Council assembled, where it was resolved to set
Sail. The Fleet, departing on the Second of September, arrived not at
Cephalonia till after eight days Sail, the Venetians being very impatient at
this slow manner of proceeding. Going thence toward Zant, Don John learnt by
his Spies, that the Turkish Fleet was riding before Navarin, not so much in
condition to attack the Christians, as to defend themselves This place is
situated on the Bay of Lepanto, and is very considerable through the
Commodiousness of its Harbor. The Generals were of opinion to sail thither,
with a Design to fight, if the Enemy would accept the Challenge, or else to
block them up there. Those, who knew the Situation of the Port, assured them,
that the Castle, placed on a rising Ground to defend it, could not much
damnifie the Vessels, lying before it in the open Sea. A Review was taken of
the Fleet, the great Vessels left at Zant, and the Galleys advanced as far as
the Isles of the Strophades, which are in the midway between Zant and Navarin,
where they passed the Night, to conceal their coming from the Enemy. Their
Resolution was, to go as far as the Isle of Sapienza, not above three Miles
from Modon, and stop that Passage, lest the Turks should go and shelter
themselves in the Port of this last place. Had this Design, which was so well
laid, been regularly executed, they would, without striking a Blow, have made
themselves Masters of above Threescore and Ten Galleys that were at Navarin;
but the Christians, not being diligent enough, neglected the placing themselves
in the Post, necessary for the Success of this Affair, being the next day after
Sunrise but over against Protheno, but Ten Miles from Navarin; so that the
Infidels, perceiving them, had time enough to get into the Port of Modon. The
Blame was laid upon the Admirals Pylot, who, to excuse this ill Conduct, said,
that he thought himself obliged to slacken his Sayls, during the Night, for
fear of running a ground. But whether the Fault were in the Pylot, or whether
Heaven was still angry with the Christians, it is evident, that the Confederates
missed an opportunity of gaining a complete Victory over the Barbarians. The
Christians perceiving, that the Enemies hasted away with Sail and Oar, Colonni
proposed to Don John, the sending a Detachment of Galleys to fall upon their
Rear, and offered to command this Detachment himself. This Design was approved,
and Six and Twenty Galleys given him for the execution of it: but he was scarce
got half his way with great hopes of a Glorious Success, when he received
Orders to come and join the Fleet. Don John, to justify this sudden Change,
told the Officers, that the Infidels made a show of coming to charge him, and
that 'twas necessary all their Forces should be together, for fear of a
Surprise. The most clear-sighted were persuaded that Colonni's Enemies, jealous
of his Reputation, had done him this ill Office. He went nevertheless
afterward to view the Barbarians, having with him but one Gally more, and
offered to attack two of their Galleys, which lagg'd behind the rest of the
Fleet; but these two being assisted by Six others, the Christians sent out Ten,
which Louchali no sooner perceived, but he advanced with the greatest part of
his Fleet, and escaped the Affront, they were like to receive, before Don John
could bring up his to oppose them. Colonni retreated in good order; and there
was in this Rencounter a second opportunity lost of gaining a great Advantage;
for if Don John had made Head against the Enemy, they would rather have
abandoned their eight Galleys, than have fought, so weak as they were; but the
sluggishness of the Confederates facilitated their Retreat into the Port of
Modon, where they were secure. Don John drew up in Battalia, and presented
himself before the Mouth of the Harbor. He a long time defied them with
Injuries and Reproaches, and about Evening retired in the same order. Louchali,
that he might not be convinced of shunning the Fight, came forth out of the
Port of Modon, and drew up under the Walls of the place. Don John returned at
the same time, and sounded to Battle. The Turk, trusting more to the Walls of
the place, than to his Shipping, durst not come too far off, nor ours approach
too near them; so that having a long time shot at each other, the Enemies
returned into their Harbor, leaving the Christians Masters of the Sea. The
next day Don John returned in the same order to the same place; but none of the
Turkish Ships appearing, the Christians set Sail, with the Honor of having
forced the Ottoman Pride to yield them the Sea, and went to take in fresh Water
at Coron, a place of the Continent, not very far off. Louchali landed Four
Thousand Foot to drive them thence; but Paul Sforza, whom Don John had put
ashore with a considerable Detachment, so vigorously charged this Foot, which
already incommoded our Men, that having slain two hundred of them, he put the
rest to Flight. The Christians on the Two next days again offered the Infidels
Battle; and Louchali was content with putting himself a second time in Battalia
under the Ramparts of Modon.

The Christian Fleet putting in at the Isle of Sapienza, the most experienced
Captains were of Opinion, to get an exact Understanding of the State, the Town
and Port of Modon were then in. Don John highly approved of this Design, went
aboard Colonni's Gally, attended by Foscarini, and some other Officers, to go
and take a view of it himself. Having sufficiently obsered the Strength and
Weakness of the place, he resolved to attack the Enemies there, and for this
purpose sent for the Great Vessels from Zant, to shelter the Galleys from the
Fire of the Town: there were two Bottoms joined together, and covered with
great Planks, on which they Built a Fort, and filled it with Earth, for the
better securing the Galleys. Don John was of opinion, that the Infidels,
frighted with this Stupendous Machin, would leave their Vessels, and fly
ashore; and without doubt this Project would have succeeded, had the Execution
of it been more speedy. But while the Squadron was expected from Zant, and the
new Building went slowly on, Don John advanced to Navarin, either with an
Intentention to surprise the Place (though the Venetians told him, the taking
of it would be of little Importance to them) or because he thought he might
more easily take in Water there, through the Commodiousness of the River. The
Enemies, who had already seized the Avenues of it, were ill treated by our
Canon; and Sforza, at the Head of Five Thousand Men, driving them back into the
Town, favored the Christians Watring. Alexander Farnese attempted to besiege
Navarin by order from Don John, who gave him Six Thousand Men with some Pieces
of Canon, already put in Battery. But the place was immedily relieved by so
great a number of Turks, flocking thither from all parts, the Christians got
with all speed to their Ships, being glad to be quit with the loss of their
Cannon. The Design also of setting upon the Turkish Fleet in their Harbor, for
which all things were ready, was given over by Don John, the Venetians, alarmed
by the Uncertainty of the Success, not caring to press him any further on it.
They afterward deliberated on the besieging Modon, but 'twas not thought fit
to attempt any thing more, the Turks keeping themselves close, and the
Spaniaras testifying a desire to end the Campaign toward the middle of Autumn.

Their Impatience to return, made them about the midst of October represent to
Don John, that he had long enough served the Republic, and that he ought now
to think of returning toward Sicily; and this Prince, who was no less
impatient than they to leave the Morea, acquainted the Venetians, that he had
spent his Provisions, having scarce enough left to carry him into Italy, where
he was resolved to put the Fleet into Winter Quarters. He promised them to come
the next year much earlier, and far better provided, and endeavored to
persuade them, that they ought to be contented with the Progress of this
Campaign, and that 'twas no small Honor for them to have forced the infidels
to keep close within their Ports, and to have held them, as it were, besieged
there. The Venetians, more troubled, than surprised, at this Discourse, and not
able to comprehend that Don John, having made them wait for him all the Summer,
should come from so plentiful a Country as Sicily, with not above Fifteen days
Provision, earnestly besought him not to leave the Fleet in the very Moment,
that seemed to give the Confederates the greatest hopes of entirely defeating
the Infidels, and rendering the Christian Name formidable in all the
Mediterranean Sea; representing to him withal, that 'twould be very shameful
for them to separate, without having done any considerable Exploit; That the
Vessels of the Ottoman Fleet, agitated by the South Wind, which blew violently
at that time of the Year, and to which the Harbor of Modon was exposed, would
of necessity fall foul one upon another, or that their whole Army, which,
having exhausted all the Neighboring places, began to be in want of
Provisions, must either preserve themselves from Famine by Flight, or yield
without Fighting; That they would oblige themselves to furnish him with
whatever he wanted; That they daily expected Boats from Sicily, laden with
Corn; That several also were coming to them from Venice; and that by delaying a
little his Departure, he would return home crowned with Glory and Honor, would
do the Republic a Service, the Memory whereof they should eternally conserve.
Having spoken in this manner to the Prince, they complained fiercely to the
Principal Officers, that the Victory was plucked out of their Hands, and that
the Common Cause was purposely betrayed, to hinder them from recovering their
Losses; That when they might vanquish without any danger either from the Sea,
or the Enemy, they would retire upon pretense of wanting Provisions, and let an
Army escape out of their Hands, which was too weak to make a Defense, and too
numerous, by the Auxiliaries they had drawn from all the Inland Places, to
subsist long there. These just Complaints stayed Don John two days longer: He
would not provoke the Venetians, for fear they should renounce the League; but
this little delay being expired, he went aboard Foscarini's Gally, accompanied
only by Colonni, where by Caresses and fair Pretenses of Amity, he got him at
last to consent to his Departure. Colonni also pressed him to yield willingly
to this insuperable Necessity; and Don John promised him, that, if he met the
Sicilian Convoy, or that any attempt were made on the Coasts of the Adriatic
Gulf, he would come speedily and re-joyn them. He immediately set Sail, and
came with the Wind in his Poop to Anchor at the Port of Gomeniza, over against
the Isle of Corfou. The Prince of Suessa, and Giovanni Andrea Doria, who came
to meet him with Fourteen Galleys, boarded him at the same time; they were of
opinion to stay some days there; but Don John, who feared the Popes ordering
him to pass the Winter in Greece, would not hearken to it; and in effect the
Venetians had secretly solicited Gregory about it, persuading him, that 'twas
the only way to draw any Advantage from this War. Antonio Tipoli, whom the
Republic sent into Spain after the Victory of Lepanto, had represented also to
King Philip, that nothing so much hindered the Progress of the Christian Fleets,
as their being so late before they joined; but this Prince had rejected that
Expedient, not being willing the Fleet, which was the Security of so many
Realms, should Winter in places so remote, and be exposed to the Injuries of so
Tempestuous a Season.

Don John, not to be worse than his Word, offered the Venetians Four Thousand
Men to attack some places on the Coasts, and still kept on his way; but they
refused these Re-inforcements, fearing, lest the Antipathy between the two
Nations should rather prejudice than advantage their Affairs.

Don John determined to go into Spain presently after his Arrival in Sicily;
but the Venetians, foreseeing, that the farther he went, the later he would
return in the Spring, besought the Pope to stay him in Italy. The Pope sent him
Order so to do by Claudio de Conzaga, a young Lord, whose Wit and Address
obliged the Prince to give his Holiness this Mark of his Obedience. Colonni, by
the Consent of Gregory and the Republic, went into Spain, to incite the King
in their Names to redouble his Zeal for the Defense of Christendom. The
greatest part of his Ministers were not overmuch inclined to it: some were
tired with the Length of the War, made in so remote a Country; and others
apprehended, lest Don John should become too Powerful by the command of so
considerable an Army. But Philip, thinking 'twould tend to his Disgrace, to put
any Obstacle to the Success of an Enterprise, managed by the Sovereign Prelat
for the Glory of the Christian Name, answered Colonni favorably, and they
began at Rome to enter into Debate about the Preparatives for the next Campaign.

Louchali, who despaired of saving his Fleet, and looked upon himself as
irrecoveraby lost, whether he staid in his Post, fought or fled, had assembled
the intimatest of his Friends; and not knowing which would be most dangerous
for him, to fall into the Hands of the Christians, or to appear before Selim,
was already thinking of making his escape into Africa: but the Retreat of the
Confederates to Corfou having left him the Sea open, he found himself, contrary
to all apperaance, dis-engaged from so cruel a Perplexity, and returned
Triumphant to Constantinople. A strange Metamorphosis! When the murmuring of
the Troops he had sent for to his assistance from the furthest part of
Macedonia, reproching him to his Face, with having impudently hazarded the
Grand Seigniors Galleys, had reduced him to the utmost Despondence, the
Christians Stupidity on a sudden changes his ill Fortune: and this Bassa, who
was ready to go and hide himself in the Deserts of Africa, presents himself
before the Sultan like a Conqueror, dissipates all the disadvantagious
Reports, spread abroad against his Conduct, receives Encomiums and Caresses
from the Grand Seignior for having protected a Fleet, weakened and discouraged
by the last Defeat, though he had always coasted the Enemies, who, desparing of
ever being able to force them to Fight, were at last compelled to abandon
Greece, without making any considerable Attempt. The Barbarians, still amused
at the Battle of Lepanto, thought they had gotten a Glorious Advantage, in that
they were not again beaten, but had sustained the Presence of a Victorious Army
with unequal Forces. This Joy of theirs was so much the more grievous to the
Christians, in that a few days before a Soldier of their Fleet, going in great
have to Rome, told them, that the Confederates, having worsted the Infidels in
a great Sea Fight before Navarin, were Masters of the Sea, and the People of
the Morea had made an Insurrection. The Report of a man, who affirmed, That he
was himself in the Battle, was easily credited; and the Rumor of this false
news redoubled the Confederates Confusion. The Impostor, who had invented this
Tale, only to get some Money from the Pope, suddenly disappeared, and we learnt
afterward the certainty of Don John's return into Sicily.

The Venetians, maugre the Distrust they had of the Spaniards, and all the
public and private Discommodities they suffered by the War, had so far
confided in their Maritime Forces, as to flatter themselves, they should this
Campaign drive the Infidels out of the Sea, and open themselves a Passage into
Greece. But seeing all their Endeavors frustrated, and the Republic on the one
side exposed to the Fury of the Barbarians, and on the other, menaced by the
Spaniards, who in their Thoughts swallowed up their Towns upon the Continent,
found themselves in a very perplexed Condition. The Ancient Magistrates, who
from the very beginning had no great Inclination either to the War or League,
said, There was no longer any Relying on the Assistance of such Allies; That
'twas now evident, the Spaniards had no desire to oppose the Infidels, but were
even sorry for the Victory of Lepanto; That it not having been then in their
Power to resist the Ordinances of Heaven, they had done, what in them lay, to
hinder the Venetians from enjoying the Benefit of it; That they, for this
purpose, raised a Thousand Difficulties about Trifles; That they had for no
other reason lingered out so much Time in Preparations, as not to be ready to
set out till the very end of Summer, but to ruin their just and reasonable
Designs; That they had given Ear to ridiculous Projects, during the Execution
of which, the Republic was hindered from securing their Islands by their own
Forces from the Incursions of the Barbarians; That having exahusted their whole
Store of shuffling Tricks and Artifices, they alleged the pretended Troubles
of France; That afterward, on pretense of some considerable Enterprise, they
had made most of their Galleys come from the furthest parts of Greece to
Corfou, which Voyage had taken up more time than the War it self; That having
stayed a few days, to make a show, as if they desired to fight, they had let
the Ottoman Fleet escape, though 'twere much weaker than their own, and might
easily have been defeated by their keeping their Post; That the loss of Cyprus,
the Ravaging of their Islands, the Taking of their Towns in Epire, and the
Ruining of Dalmatia, whose Fields and Villages were all laid wast, even within
reach of Cannon-Shot from their fortified Towns, were all Effects of the
Spaniards Perfidiousness, who had neither set out in time, nor faithfully
performed any one Article of the Treaty; That having many Galleys un-employed
in their Ports, they had borrowed of the Republic; That Giovanni Andrea Doria,
left in Sicily with Fourteen Vessels, could scarce find in his Heart to set
forth time enough to meet Don John, as he was returning into Winter Quarters.
Then one of the Principal of them, taking up the Discourse, said, And what? Do
you not see, that our Fleet, our Generals, and all our Authority are subjected
to the Spanish Tyranny? and that Don John bas by little and little made himself
absolute Master of the Sovereign Power? That Colonni, who has hitherto opposed
King Philip's Intention, now declares for him, letting himself be drawn by
Considerations of Interest, of which he was not formerly susceptible. That our
General himself, under pretense of showing some Respect to the Prince's
Quality, lets go his Authority, suffering it to be usurpt by too much
Condescendence; so that this Ambitious young Man decides Sovereignty, and
believes himself above the Laws and Conditions of the Treaty of Alliance; he
ordains, he commands, without communicating with his Colleagues; he rewards, he
punishes, whom he pleases, and as he thinks good: And he, who could not suffer
Venieri's chastising according to the Laws of War, three Rebels, that deserved
Death, exercises his unjust Authority over the Confederates, without advising
or consulting with any one. Our Gratifying his Spleen by re-calling Venieri is
the Cause, that none dare contradict his Sentiments. In vain did the Generals
and the whole Fleet beseech him not to wast all the Summer in fruitless and
superfluous running to and fro, he constrained them nevertheless to come and
join him at Corfou, without giving them any of the Honors, which a Naval Army
is wont on such occasions to receive; as if such a Concourse of Troops had
assembled, and met together in that place, only to acknowledge him, and to give
him alone all sort of Honor and Obedience.

These Discourses, held amongst the Ancientest of the State in Derogation to
the League, the funest Consequences of which they detested, came to the
College of Ten. This Tribunal has Right to decide absolutely in matters of
Peace and War. The Magistrates, which compose it, being secretly assembled,
began with deploring the Death of the deceased Pope, whose Vigor and Authority
kept in some sort the Spaniards to their Duty: and were more sensible of their
Loss in that Sovereign Prelate, because they saw not the like firmness in his
Successor. They then reckoned up all their Damages and other Disgraces; they
looked into the inability of the City to contribute any longer to the excessive
Expenses of the War; they considered the People of the Continent, as not in
Condition to continue the Payment of their Taxes, as appeared by the daily
Complaints they made to the Senate against the Rigor of these Exactions; and
that, to augment the Misfortune, the Interruption of Commerce had considerably
diminisht both the public Revenues, and private Men's Estates: That the great
numbers of Mariners, they had within these Three Years made use of, had so
unfurnisht the Countries of Laborers, that the Land in many places remained
untilled; That the Excursions of the Infidels, even to the very Gates of the
Towns in Dalmatia, hindered the bringing thither of Convoys, and famished their
Garrisons and Inhabitants; That the Inland Parts of their Islands, so often
ravaged, suffered the same scarcity; That there was no having of Corn from the
Neighboring Countries to feed such a Multitude, without paying very great
Custom; and yet this People with their Land and Sea-Forces must have a
Subsistence; That they were daily seeking for Remedies to those great
Mischiefs, but could not find any; That though they should have Constancy and
Courage enough to surmount them, and should want neither Money, Victuals, nor
Ammunition, yet would it be impossible for them to draw any Advantage thence,
as long as the Spaniards should delay their setting forth till the beginning of
Autumn, and if, to excuse themselves from attacking the Enemy, they should
still allege the secret designs of the French Hugonots, with several other
groundless Pretenses, through which 'twas plainly to be seen, they had no other
Aim, but to spin out the War in favor of the Infidels, and by this new
Stratagem to weaken the Commonwealth; That they had unwillingly contributed to
the only Victory, gotten over the Turks; and that, in fine, the Republic could
not forget, what their Ambassador with the King of Spain had written to them
on the Subject of this Victory, of which Philip had no sooner received the
news, but he complained to his Ministers of Don John's Disobedience, whom he had
expressly forbidden to fight, and hazard his Fleet; so that one of his
Favorites, taking thence occasion to praise the Severity of that Roman, who
caused the Head of his own Son, though a Conqueror, to be smitten off, for
having fought against his Orders, councelled him to renew so terrible an
Example; That Doria had gained the Catholic Kings Favor by declaring against
the Senates Interest; Colonni on the contrary having utterly lost his good
opinion, for being willing to promote it.

Nicholas Ponti, one of the Council of Ten, then assuming the Discourse, said,
To what purpose do we tire our selves with continual Complaints, which show
nothing but our Weakness and want of Understanding, in delivering our selves
now, more than ever, to Traitors, that have so osten abused us? Why are we
transported against People, who wisely know how to make advantage of our
simplicity, and far better understand their Interest, than we do ours? And in
effect, since the defeating of the Ottomans will not any way be particularly
beneficial to them, they aim, by prolonging the War, to ruin our State, whose
overgreat Potency puts an Obstacle to their designs of invading Italy. If the
Turks are vanquished, we confirm the Extent of our Sovereignty; the King of
Spain, who gains nothing by this Victory, would on the contrary lose much by
the Defeat of the Confederates Army. Understanding this, they have nourisht the
War, feeding us with vain hopes, to strengthen themselves against us: And do
you not think, Gentlemen, 'twould be much more advantageous for us to imitate
this Conduct, than condemn it? They Will willingly suffer us to style them
perjured and perfidious, provided they attain their Ends, and profit by our
Reproaches and Injuries: For Good Faith, Religion, and Zeal to advance the
Glory of the Christian Name, are all Specious and Magnificent Words, which they
no longer esteem, than they may favor their Ambition. Having more than once
tried to our cost the Inequality of our Strength against the Turks, we now
experiment the little Confidence we can put in the Assistance of our Allies.
The Infidels, weakened by the Loss of a numerous Fleet, and scarce daring to
appear before us, have had the Confidence to enter the Port of Constantinople
in Triumph, for having escaped being a second time beaten. What must we expect,
when they shall return the next Spring with new Forces? In the mean time we are
enfeebled, and reduced to the deplorable Estate, in which the Spaniards desire
us, to make themselves Masters of Italy. Are we become insensible to these
Evils, and neglecting what is essential and useful, shall we let our selves
still be seduced by false Appearances, and continue a Prey to the Artifices of
this Faithless Nation? Shall we never get out of this shameful Lethargy, and
open our Eyes, to see our Misfortunes and Disgraces? It Is much more easy for
us by a dexterous Management to shelter our selves against the Ottoman Power,
than to avoid the Ambushes laid for us by the Spaniards.

These Reasons made the Council of Ten resolve to attempt the Accommodation
with the Port, not being able to promise themselves any Advantage by continuing
so incommodious a War. They did not impart this Deliberation to the Senate, for
fear of making it too public, trusting the Secret with none but Marco Antonio
Barbaro, who was detained Prisoner at Constantinople: They charged him to
under-feel the Grand Vizier, and conclude a Peace upon reasonable Conditions;
and in the mean time they consulted with the rest of the Magistrates about the
Subsistence of the Troops for the next Campaign.

The Venetians had good Garrisons in the Towns of Dalmatia: but the Infidels,
possessing the Country, very much incommoded them by hindering them from
Provisions. They seized of a Tower on the Mouth of the River Salone, which was
delivered up to them by him, to whom Baglioni had entrusted the keeping of it;
and by a like Treachery they made themselves Masters of a little Castle,
bearing the Name of a Rock, on which it was built, whence they much molested
the Town of Spalatro. These Traitors were punished according to the greatness
of their Crimes. The Principals were strangled, and then hung up by one Foot,
(a fit Punishment for such Offenders) and their Accomplices were sent aboard
the Galleys. In the mean time the Venetians solicited a Turk, to whom they
offered great Rewards, to engage him in the same Treachery, of which they had
just made so rigorous an Example. This Infidel, testifying to them some desire
of becoming a Christian, promised to surrender up Clissa into their Hands, and
effectively kept his Word. This Town is the best fortified in all Dalmatia,
full of Inhabitants, and on the Possession of which depended that of many
Neighboring Places. The Turks had heretofore taken it from the Hungarians, and
were very vigilant in keeping it: the Plague, which then raged there, having
driven away almost all the Garrison, the Traitor made use of so favorable an
Opportunity to accomplish his Design: the Execution whereof was committed to
Hector Troni, who marching in the middle of the day at the Head of 1500. Foot
to the Gate, which by Agreement was to be opened, entered the Town, and made
himself Master of it, with the slaughter of a few Soldiers that resisted. The
War would have been ended on that side, had Troni known how to keep his
Conquest. But thinking, that he rather went to plunder, than to take Clissa, he
went out of it, laden with Spoil, excusing his not staying any longer there, by
his not being strong enough to defend it against the Infidels, who would not
fail to come speedily, and besiege it. The Senate being highly displeased at
this Cowardice, Troni was recalled to Venice, and imprisoned; but his Credit
and Friends appeased the Magistrates Wrath, as is usually done, when any Noble
Venetian is questioned.

The Turks, re-taking Clissa, derided the Venetians miserable Conduct, with
stinging Railery counselling them, to renounce the Art of War, and to apply
themselves for the future only to Traffic, Lawsuits, and State Intrigues.
They afterward plundered the Country with several small Bodies of Horse, who,
approaching the very Gates of the Town, held by the Segniory, carried Terror
and Dread on all sides. They aimed particularly at Cataro, because by driving
the Venetians out of that Town, they were assured of all Epire. This place is
situated in the bottom of the Gulf, called by the Ancients, Rizonicus, there
being no coming thither from Venice but by Sea. The Turks, who had the Fort of
Castelnovo on the left hand of the Gulf, to make themselves Masters of the
Passage, built, where the Gulf was narrowest, a Fort, defended by a Rampart,
and deep Ditch, on which they raised a Battery of Eighteen Pieces of Canon.
This Fort commanded the other side of the Gulf, so that it prohibited the
entrance of any Venetian Vessels. The Catarians soon felt the Inconvenience of
this new Work, and seeing themselves at the point of being starved, sent to
give them notice at Venice of their Extremity. The Venetians, exceedingly
concerning themselves for all places on the Adriatic Gulf, took speedy care
for the Relief of this; and Venieri being already returned to Venice, Orders
were sent to Giacomo Sorancio, that he should part immediately from Corfou with
Twenty Galleys, to relieve Cataro. He obeyed without delay, and Fortune
seconded his Fidelity; for the Bassa of Epire, seeing no Enemies in Condition
to attempt any thing, was gone to the remotest Frontiers of the Province, with
what Troops he had, excepting Two Hundred Men, appointed for the Guard of this
Fort. Sorancio landed Four Thousand, and after a gallant Defense, made by the
Garrison, who were all put to the Sword, took the Fort, which he eased, having
first carried away the Canon; and thus the Catarians, being delivered,
recovered the Liberty of the Sea. This Vigorous Action was performed in the
year 1572.

After the Return of Don John of Austria with his Fleet into Sicily, the
Venetians made very great Complaints against the Spaniards, beseeching him to
oblige all the Consederates to labor unanimously for the Defense of
Christendom, and to support the Interest of the Common-Cause with more Vigor,
than they had hitherto shown. They at the same time represented to his
Holiness, that 'twas in vain to agree upon the Condition of a Treaty, and
confirm it afterward by Solemn Oaths, if instead of punctually executing it,
every one should, either as his Caprichio, or Interest might incline him,
presume to explain it to his own Advantage; That 'twas expressly agreed, the
Fleets should be ready to sail into Greece at the beginning of every Spring,
and yet the Confederates were scarce by the end of the Summer got to the
Enemies, in order to fight; that having only showed the Infidels the number of
their Vessels, they retired, without daring to attempt any thing; That but by
staying a little longer at Sea, they might easily have ruined the Ottoman
Fleet, and driven the Barbarians out of the Mediterranean; That Don John usurpt
to himself all the Authority, contrary to an Article of the League, which
shares it equally betwixt the Three Generals; That not content with having the
sole Decision of Matters, when he commanded in Person, he pretended also to
have the same Obedience paid to his Orders in his absence; That these
Contraventions were insupportable, and that the Republic was in fine weary of
bearing them. They had private Conferences with Gregory, at which they enlarged
upon every one of these Grievances. In the first Assembly of the Cardinals and
Ministers, held by the Pope, touching the Affairs of the League, Paulo Tipoli
insisted very much on the Expedition into the Morea; he demanded, that they
should set forth much earlier, than they had done the two last Campaigns, and
that an hundred new Galleys should be added to the Fleet; and in effect there
was very great appearance, the Turks would the next Summer be exceeding strong,
considering the news they received of the Preparations making at Constantinople
for the setting forth a very great Fleet: besides that, 'twas a piece of Policy
in the Venetians to spread abroad these Reports, as being advantageous to them,
whether they would conclude a Peace, or carry on a War. Tipoli proposed
further, that an hundred Sail should be chosen out of all the Christian Fleet,
to go, as soon as the Sea should be Navigable, and ravage the Grand Seigniors
Territories, take as many Slaves as they could, and at the same time secure the
Venetian Isles from the like Insult; That a new Adress should be made to the
Emperor, and whatever he should desire, promised him, to engage him in the
League; That Application should be also made to the Kings of France and
Portugal; That Ambassadors should be sent to the great Duke of Muscovy, and the
King of Persia, the Polonians being then busied about a new King: In fine, that
all Potentates, and all Christian Nations, should be incited to take Arms
against their Common Enemy. All these things were granted Tipoli; and 'twas
resolved, that the Confederate Princes should be requested to give their Agents
sufficient Power, to the end the Consulations might not be delayed. The
Cardinals afterward proposed, that the Confederates should by the same Treaty,
engage to have all the same Friends and the same Enemies. The Spaniards, who
found their Advantage in this new Article, willingly accepted it; but the
Venetian Ambassador absolutely rejected it, saying, That the Republic would
not enter into any new Engagements; and that this would put back many, who had
promised to sign the League. Tipoli, seeing them propose Innovations, demanded,
that the common Expenses of the War should be examined. His Holiness had been
long importuned about it; but discouraged by the Subtilty of the Spaniards, and
the over exact Reckoning of the Venetians, had still put off so difficult an
Account. The Venetians affirmed, that they were near Three Milions of Livers
aforehand, and pretended to be re-imburst, what they were out above the share,
they were obliged to; the Spaniards asserting the contrary, the Pope could not
moderate the difference, because it was to be begun by making an Estimate of
all the Venetians had furnished out from the beginning of the War. However 'twas
apparent through these Difficulties, that the Republic had expended more than
his Contribution. The Pope ordered, that, till their accounts could be more
exactly stated, the King of Spain should pay the Venetians Threescore and Two
Thousand Crowns of Gold for the Corn, they had procured of the Neapolitan
Merchants, amounting to that Sum; and this expedient quieted for a time this
Contention. Then they treated about the Management of the next Campaign. The
Spaniards, who always endeavored to carry the War into Africa, requested, that
the Rendezvous of the Fleet might be appoinred at Otranto: but Tipoli opposed
it, representing, how urgent a necessity there was of preventing, at the
beginning of the Spring, the Infidels Attempts, who would attack the Islands,
and amongst the rest Gandy, if the Chirstians were not strong enough to hinder
them The Spaniards insisted no farther on it, and 'twas agreed that the
Confederate Fleet should be composed of three hundred Galleys, and meet at
Corfou. The Spaniards then proposed, that the Venetians, who were nearer the
Rendezvous, and much better provided of Galleys, than the rest of the Allies,
should set forth some for the King of Spain, which his Catholic Majesty should
at his own charge maintain: But on the Republics behalf 'twas answered, that
'twas not just, they, who were scarce able to bear their own part of the
Burden, should be loaded with another; That so Potent a Prince, as the King of
Spain, who was Master of so many Coasts, Maritime Places, and Ports, could not
but have supernumerary Vessels; and that not having yet reimburst the
Venetians, what they had advanced, 'twas not reasonable for him to engage them
in new Expenses. And to prevent the Spaniards making any farther Reply, they
said, the Catholic King ought not to reckon in the number of his Galleys, the
Four, that were set forth by the State of Genoa, nor as many more added by the
Knights of Malta, since they came Voluntarily to the Assistance of Christendom.
They seemed to make the same Reproach to the Pope, in Respect of those, sent by
the Duke of Savoy and Tuscany, that were incorporated into the Fleet of the
Holy See. The particular of all these Debates would not deserve a place in this
History, were it not to show the Spaniards Insolence and Pride, who, desiring
to have the Advantage in every thing, declared, that this Expedition having
been undertaken only in favor of the Venetians, the King their Master was no
further concerned in it, than as having granted them his Protection. The
Venetians in the mean time pleased themselves with framing Difficulties on the
smallest matters, purposely to tire out the Pope, and all those that meddled in
this Negotiation. But there arose a new Dispute of far greater Consequence. An
Augmentation of the Galleys had been accorded, because of the prodigious
Preparations, making at Constantinople; but the time, when they were to meet on
the Coasts of Greece, was not agreed on. The Venetians desired they might be
ready to fight by the Month of March, affirming, that the Success of this
Campaign depended on their extreme Diligence. The Spaniards, on the contrary,
required the whole Month of June, to put their Fleet in Condition. Every one
murmured against them at Venice, when Tipoli gave the Senate advice of this
unjust and dangerous Proposition. But the Council of Ten secretly rejoiced at
it, because of the Leisure given them by it to learn from their Ambassador at
the Port, what hopes there was of Peace, and take a Resolutition, suitable to
the State of their Fortune. They acquainted Tipoli with their secret
Negotiations at Constantinople, giving him order to conclude nothing at Rome,
to make no Relaxation of the Time, by which the Fleets were required to set
forth, and even to refuse the Augmentation of the Galleys, he had himself
solicited. At his declaring himself in the Assembly about this matter, every
one mistrusted some Intelligence between the Port and the Commonwealth: These
Suspicions very much cooled their Negotiations, and matters were extreme slowly
treated on at Rome. The Council of Ten no sooner understood, that Tipoli had,
in Obedience to their Orders, perplexed the Affairs, but they commended this
Ministers Dexterity, as having, by his Address, put them in the best Condition
they could desire; but one amongst them, rising up, said, Have a care,
Gentlemen, of alienating the Confederates Minds, and breaking with them, before
you know what to expect from the Port, and on what Conditions they will grant
you Peace. This Discourse obliged the Council to enter into new Deliberations,
and fearing to see themselves exposed on every side by being disappointed of a
Peace, and at the same time breaking the League, they sent Orders to Tipoli to
regulate the Conditions, on which he had shown himself so difficult.

These Contests having taken up all the Winter, the Pope, in fine, by his
Authority ordained, that his Fleet and the King of Spains should meet at
Messina by the end of March, whence they should immediately depart to join the
Venetians at Corfou; That they should all sail together into Greece, fight the
Infidels, if they met them by the way, and attempt whatever their Generals
should judge necessary and advantageous for the Common Cause; That the Fleet
should be composed of Three Hundred Galleys, Forty Vessels, and as many
Galeasses as the Republic could set forth; That the Army should consist of
Threescore Thousand Men; That Every Gally should carry at least an Hundred and
Fifty Soldiers; That they should have Four Thousand Five Hundred Horses, for
fear the Enemy should attack any of the Confederates by Land; That no new Delay
should be granted for the Departure of the Fleets; That the Generals should set
Sail on the day appointed, with what Vessels they should have ready; and that
the rest should follow, as soon as they should be in Condition to quit the
Ports; and that other things should be ordered, as they were in the last
Campaign. The Venetians obtained farther of his Holiness, That none of the
Allies might withdraw his Forces from the Christian Army, should even his own
Territories be attackt by some declared Enemy. All Differences being thus
regulated, Tipoli pressed the Assembly for the speedy setting forth Three
hundred Galleys, to pillage the Ottoman Islands, and secure the Republics. The
Spaniards, not daring to oppose it, because the Pope approved it, answered,
that they must Adress themselves to Don John, to whom the King of Spain had
probably sent Orders about it.

There was at the same time a Proposal made to Gregory about exchanging of
Prisoners. There were sent to Rome some considerable Turks, taken at the Battle
of Lepanto, whose Throats would have been cut in Prison, had the Venetians been
hearkened to at first: but Pius the Fifth abhorring such Inhumanity, they
thought best to ransom with them several Christian Officers, who had lost their
Liberty in their Service, for fear lest, after the Conclusion of the Peace, the
Pope should refuse to put them into their Hands. There was amongst them two
Sons of Haly by a Sister of Selim's, one of which dyed at Rome: The Mother
requested the other of Don John by such moving Letters, accompanied with such
Magnificent Presents, that he yielded to her Importunities; her Daughter also,
who passed for one of the Fairest Persons in the World, writ to this Prince in
Terms so full of Tenderness, that he esteemed it an Honor and Pleasure to
himself, to solicit her Brothers Liberty with the Pope, who granting his
Desire, he sent him back to Constantinople, having first treated him like the
Grand Seignior's Nephew. But his Holiness thought not fit to give the rest
their Liberty so soon. One of the Principal amongst them was Mahomet Bassa of
Negro Ponte, a Man, whose disposition was no way rude and barbarous, and who
perfectly understood the Manners and Customs of the Europeans: He spoke Italian
reasonably well; and some Romans, who had been at Lepanto, took delight in
discoursing with him about the Battle: He told them, that two things
principally gained the Christians the Day: to wit, their great number of
Musketeers, whose Arms were much better in a Fight than their Darts or Arrows;
and the Boards set upon the sides of their Galleys, in manner of Parapets, with
which their Soldiers being sheltered, fired on the Enemy with far greater
Assurance: but he hoped, we should not for the future have this Advantage over
them, since the Experiment had cost 'em dear enough. One speaking to him of the
Victory at Lepanto, as of a Loss to the Grand Seignior, far exceeding what he
got by the Conquest of Cyprus: He smilingly answered, You have shaved our
Beard, and the Hair will grow again: But the Venetians will never re-join to
the Body of their State the Part, which we have cut off. Colonni, visiting the
Prisoners, taken in this Battle, commanded his Officers and Soldiers to treat
them courteously; and then turning to Mahomet, said, Learn of us to practice
Hamanity, you, who so barbarously and cruelly treat our Christian Prisoners. To
which Mahomet made him this witty Answer: Your Excellency will be pleased to
pardon our Ignorance, since we have been hitherto only used to take Prisoners,
not having yet been such our selves in the Christians School. The Pope in the
mean time solicited the Crowns to join their Arms to those of the Confederates;
and the Cardinal of Lorrain, who came to Rome to assist at the last Conclave,
had given Gregory Hopes that the Alliance between France and the Grand Seignior
might be broken. This Cardinals Esteem amongst the French having given him an
entire Knowledge of that Kingdoms Affairs, and the Kings true Sentiments; His
Holiness, on such good assurance, believed, he might successfully endeavor
this Disunion: He writ about it to Charles the Ninth, who answered him, He
should willingly enter into the League; but the great Revolutions which had
happened in his Kingdom, permitted him not to join with the Confederates.

France broken, and shattered into different Factions, was exposed to the
Plunder of the Germans, and the Invasions of her other Neighbors. The Lorrain
Princes, and other Principal Persons in the Court, retired into the Country,
being neither able to suffer the Imperious Humor of the Queen, nor submit
themselves to the King of Navarre. But these Princes, being a little after
reconciled with Annas de Mommorency, Constable of France, drew the King of
Navarre into their Party, by giving him new hopes of recovering his Kingdom;
and of diminishing the overgreat Authority of Queen Catherine, and ruining the
Projects of the Prince of Conde, they entered Paris, guarded by their Friends
and Creatures, and drove all those of the opposite Faction from Court. Thus
France, becoming the Stage of a Civil War, saw more Blood shed in most of her
Towns, than in the Famousest Sieges and Battles of the last Age. They no longer
amused themselves with Disputes and Controversies, the divided Families
deciding Questions of Religion by the Sword. The first Battle was fought near
the Town of Dreux, the Kings Army being commanded by the Constable and the Duke
of Guise, and the other by the Prince of Conde and the Admiral de Coligni. The
Success was equal on both sides, the Prince of Conde and the Constable being
boht taken Prisoners. The Duke of Guise laid Siege to Orleans, and pressed it
so close, that it was upon the point of yielding, when a Villain came to the
Camp, and watching an opportunity for the execution of his Design, he slew this
Prince with a Shot from a Carbine, as he was returning from visiting the Works,
attended only by Three Horsemen. The Duke of Guise's Death was extremely
prejudicial to France: besides his Military Perfections, which rendered this
Duke the greatest Captain in the Kingdom, he had gained the Peoples Hearts by
such a Charming Sweetness, such admirable Liberality and Sincerity, and such
Courteous and Familiar Behavior, that one could not forbear loving him. His
Death almost ruined the Fortune of his House. A Peace was afterward concluded,
but 'twas only to give both Parties leisure to make Preparation for beginning
the War afresh. The Prince of Conde, freed out of Prison, made great Levies in
Germany, and soon got a new Army on Foot. He endeavored to surprise and carry
away the King, as he was returning from Meaux to Paris: but a Battalion of Six
Thousand Switzers, which guarded the Court in its March, and repulsed several
Attacks by the way, ruined this Audacious Design. Some time after the
Constable, displeased with his Nephews, whom he accused of Ingratitude and
Revolt, gave them Battle in the Plain of St. Denis, routed them, and raised the
Siege from before Paris. The Constable, who was near Fourscore years old,
received a Mortal Wound in his Reins by a Pistol Shot, as he was in the midst
of the Fight, charging the Enemies with a Vigor, worthy his Name and his
Office. The Hugonots though vanquished, made Peace on what Terms they pleased,
the Queen being obliged to accept them, as frighted with the great Number of
Foreign and Domestic Forces, that filled the Kingdom. This Second
Accommodation was also but a Cessation of Arms, the War breaking forth again
with more Fury than before. The Hugonots lost a Third Battle at Jarnac, gained
by the Duke of Anjou, who commanded the King his Bothers Army, where the Prince
of Conde was slain upon the Place.

Gaspar de Coligny was a Gentleman of a good Family, but much more considerable
by that of his Mother, who was Sister to the Constable de Mommorency. His
Uncle, whom because of his singular Merit King Henry the Second honored with
his Favor, had procured him the Office of Admiral, one of the first of the
Crown. Coligny had served under him, during the Reigns of Francis the First,
and Henry the Second, with no little Reputation. He had been employed in
several Important Negotiations, by which he had acquired a perfect
Understanding of Affairs. He was a Man of a through Experience, but close, full
of Address, naturally Eloquent, and no less a Statesman than a Soldier, though
far more cautious, than adventurous. In the Year 1522. France being almost
ruined, there was a new Agreement made.

The Admiral at the same time negotiated a Marriage between the Princess
Margaret, the Kings Sister, and Henry King of Navarre. Anthony, his Father,
dyed some years before of a Wound, received at the Siege of Roan. The Admiral
came to Paris to assist at the Marriage, followed by so great a number of
Gentlemen and Vassals, that the King himself could scarce have found so
Magnificent a Train. He was received with extraordinary Testimonies of
Confidence and Friendship: He had often private Conferences with the King; in
which, 'twas known, they treated of making War upon Flanders; and this, we have
since understood, obliged Philip the Second to stay in Italy, for fear of some
Surprise from the French.

In the mean time there was a Rumor (whether grounded on Reallity, or invented
by the Queen, who was laying a Snare for the Admiral, as her Enemies would have
it) that the People, he had without any Order or Permission, brought to Paris,
under pretense of being present at the King of Navarre's Marriage, conspired
against the Royal Family. The Queen, whether the better to conceal her Design,
or really fearing some secret Plot, caused the Guards of the Louvre to be
doubled. Whilst these things ware doing, the Admiral, returning from the King
to his own House, was wounded in the Right hand by a Shot from an Arquebush,
which was, by some People, said to have been done by the Procurement of the
Queen, or the Duke of Guise.

The Duke of Guise was accused, because the House in which the Assassin had
planted himself, belonged to one of his Creatures, who had some time before
left it empty, to prevent the discovery of this Action. These Suspicions were
strengthened by the irreconcilable Hatred there was between the Prince and the
Admiral; and though the King had made them both promise him to keep quiet till
his Majesty's Return to Paris; there was yet great likelihood that the Duke of
Guise attempted to destroy him.

Those that suspected the Queen, said, the Admirals Fortune and Authority
created a Jealousy in this Princess; That she began to fear a Man she had
raised too high; That she despaired of re-setling Quiet in the State, during
the Life of so redoubted an Enemy; and that beside the miserable Condition of
the Kingdom, the Murders, Battles and Perils her self and Children had been
exposed to, all which she laid to his Charge; she yet fu^ther mortally hated
him, because of the shameful Discourses, with which he blemished her Honor;
That since she could neither punish him by Law no^ Force, he had recourse to
Stratagem; That she was as skilful in these sort of Intrigues as he could be;
That she had drawn him and the chief of his Party to Paris, on the occasion of
her Daughters Marriage, the more securely to destroy him; That he had been
lured to Court by the Project of the Low-Gountry War, and the fair shows of
Confidence and Esteem; That she had consequently pressed the young Duke of
Guise to revenge on him his Fathers Murder, to which this Prince was too much
inclined, having only refused to do it for fear of displeasing the King, and
losing the Friendship of the Nobility, who would after this Action have looked
upon him, as a Man without Honor or Faith; That the Queen had eased him of
this Scruple, by representing to him, that he would do a signal Service to the
State in exterminating its most formidable Enemy; That 'twas the greatest Sign
of Fidelity he could show the King; And, in fine, that the Duke of Guise
engaged not in it, till he had first got an Order, written and signed by the
Princesses own Hands.

But whether it was the Queen, or the Duke of Guise, or neither of them that
were the Authors of this Enterprise, the Admiral was no sooner carried into his
House, but the Hugonots ran thither in Crowds, filling the Town with Complaints
and Murmurs. They had the Confidence to accuse the King, as well as the Duke,
publishing, that none 'durst have committed such an Attempt without his
Majesty's Protection; and yet the Queen had so carefully concealed it from him,
that he knew nothing of it, till News was brought him of the Accident befaln
the Admiral. He went presently with the Queen to see him, testifying his
Displeasure and Sorrow, and promising to make an exact Enquiry into it, and
severely to punish this Assassination. He left also his Guards about his House,
as well for the Honor, as Security of his Person: but understanding at his
Return to the Louvre, that the Hugonots suspected him to be privy to it, and
accordingly were so impudent as to threaten him, he fell into a terrible
Transport, which the Queen Mother, who absolutely Governed him, diligently
fomented; taking hold of this favorable Moment to make him resolve on a
sudden Extirpation of his Rebellious Subjects, and ridding himself of an
Enemy, so much the more dangerous, in that he was irreconcilable.

They were persuaded at Court, that, as soon as the Hugonot-Lords were
departed, they would begin a new Rebellion, much more Bloody than any of the
former, and would call in Strangers to their Assistance. The Admiral himself
could not forbear letting slip some little Menaces, when the King, comforting
him about his Wound, told him, It was not dangerous: I care not, answered he
coldly, for losing the use of a hand: for, provided I keep my Head, I hope, all
will go well. It was said by some, that the King held afterward a Council with
the Queen, and some of their intimatest Confidents, in which 'twas resolved no
longer to endure these Insolences, but forthwith to dispatch the Hugonots, and
commit the executing of it to the Duke of Guise; and that the King, not to
awaken their Distrust, sent him out of Paris on pretense of some Discontent;
but he returned, according to Agreement, the One and Twentieth of August at
Night, accompanied by the Duke of Angouleme, the Kings natural Brother, glad of
the opportunity of serving his Master, and also to Revenge himself without fear
of Punishment.

But there went at the same time a Report, that the Admirals Friends, assembled
in his House, had taken very wicked and detestable Resolutions, he having
himself, by a very pathetical Discourse incited them to rise up in Arms; That
being all animated by the same Fury, they cried out to go immediately to attack
the Louvre, and destroy the King, the Princes his Brothers, and the King of
Navarre, whose Death they had resolved, though he were of their own Religion,
because the Admiral feared his Wit and Courage. But whilst he loses time in
being too curious to take his Measures, he delivers himself up to his ill
Fortune; and the King, informed of his Practices, hastens the Punishment of the
Rebellion. Some endeavored to make it be believed, that this Conspiracy was a
Story, invented by the Queen Mother, who foreseeing the Horror, the destruction
of the Hugonots would cause, endeavored by these Calumnious Reports to
mitigate the Peoples Indignation. However it was, the Duke of Guise about one
of the Clock in the Morning forced open the Admirals House. A young German
Gentleman, who had been bred a Page with the Dukes Father, and was ambitious of
the Honor to give him the first Blow, entered his Chamber. The Admiral, rising
out of his Bed, conjured him to have Respect to his old Age and his
Infirmities, and grant him his Life. But the German, reproaching him with
Treason and Apostasy, mortally wounded him, and caused him to be thrown out at
Window to the Duke of Guise, who guarded the entrance into the House. It Is
said, Coligny fell down as dead, but hearing the Duke of Guise calling to have
him thrown out, he made some resistance against those that went to take him up,
and cast him forth into the Street, desiring them to let him dye in quiet;
whereupon they dispatched him. The Rabble, vomiting out a Thousand Curses
against him, dragged him for some time in the Dirt; they tore him asunder, and
filled the Town with pieces of his Body. A young Parisian cut off his Head, and
carried it on a long Pole into all the Public Places, and the Trunk of his
Body was hung up by the Feet on the common Gallows.

Thus ended Gaspar de Coligni, Admiral of France, who was raised to so great a
Fortune, that his Court was no less than the King's. He made himself redoubted
by France and Spain, and though he made not War upon King Philip, he created
him Trouble enough by stirring up the Low Countries and Germany, and underhand
protecting the Prince of Orange: He often imposed on the King his Master a
Necessity of making Peace and War; but what renders his Memory most durable,
is, that having been twice taken Prisoner by the Spaniards, and lost three
Battles, he still kept the same Authority with his Party, and never showed more
Courage and Constancy, than in the midst of his greatest Disgraces: yet it is
certain, he was rather a cunning, than a valiant Captain, very skilful in
choosing his Post, but distrustful of the Fortune of War in Battles, and not
engaging himself, but in the last Extremity.

The Count de la Rochefoucault, Teligny, Pardaillan, Clermont, d' Amboise, and
several other Hugonots of Quality were slain the same Night. Mongommery was for
some time pursued by the Duke of Guise, who eagerly sought to kill him; but he
fled into England at the first Report of the Admiral's Death.

The Hugonots had so highly incensed the People, that it was impossible to
moderate their Fury, till they had made a very great and lamentable Slaughter.

The Emperor gave always Hopes, that he would sign the Treaty of Alliance,
though he had a very great Repugnance to make War upon the Infidels: he could
not resolve to break the Pea^e with them, though their Faithlesness rendered it
uncertain and ill assured. But he desired also not to discontent the Pope nor
the Venetians. That, which held them thus in suspense, was the Passion, he had
to get the Prince Ernestus, his Son, chosen King of Poland, Sigismund Augustus,
the deceased King, having left no Heirs. Maximilian considered this Crown, as
an Acquisition, that would much augment his Power. The Polonians were then at
Peace with the Port; but there was need of great Sums to purchase the Principal
Electors Suffrages; so that the Money and Favor of the French prevailing above
the Authority of the House of Austria, the Duke of Anjou was preferred before
the Emperors Son. In the mean time Maximilian treated still with the Pope,
showing the greater earnestness, the surer he was not to take up Arms. The
Confederates, resolved to refuse him nothing, that they might draw him in, and
all Germany, granted him Five Thousand Foot more than the Troops he had asked
of Cardinal Commendon. John Delphini, Bishop of Torcello, the Pope's Nuncio,
with his Imperial Majesty, had agreed, That there should be given Five and
Twenty Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Five Hundred Horse, on condition, that
Maximilian should bring into the Field as great an Army as the Succor of the
Confederates amounted to. The Auxiliary Troops were to stay in his Service Six
Months in the Year, to enter into Winter Quarters with his Army in such Posts,
as were most commodious, and advantageous for the Progress of the German
Affairs, and this Treaty to continue, as long as the War should last; the
Emperor desired farther, that, whoever of the Confederates should break the
League, should be looked upon as an Enemy, and that the Pope should with all
requisite Solemnities issue out the greater Excommunication against him; but
this last Article was refused him, and in lieu thereof 'twas agreed, That for
the Payment of the Confederate Troops, destined to his Service, Money should be
sent every Three Months to Ausbourg, for which the Richest Merchants of the
Town should be security. The Emperor, on these Conditions, engaged this Year to
make War on Hungary, with a design to keep up the League; but he was determined
to find daily new Pretenses not to enter into the Field, excusing himself
sometimes on the Tediousness of Assemblies and Diets, and sometimes on the
difficulty of raising Soldiers and Money out of the Sovereign Estates of
Germany. As soon as Gregory understood the Conclusion of the Treaty with the
Emperor, he sent for the Venetian Ambassador, to whom he imparted this
agreeable News, giving him Order to assure the Senate of it. The King of
Portugal had promised to send his Fleet this Year into Greece; and the Pope, to
encourage the Venetians, made Preparations to augment that of the Holy See.
These fair Hopes, which, the Venetians well knew, would come to nothing, served
only to make his Holiness take more heinously the Republics Agreement with the
Port.

The Spring was now far advanced, and the Venetians vehemently importuned the
Pope and the King of Spain to send their Fleets immediately to Corfou, when
Tipoli received advice from the Senate, that the Peace was concluded at
Constantinople. Barbaro had no sooner received Power to treat with the Grand
Vizier, but he applied himself seriously to it. He knew, 'twas the Intention of
the College of Ten, whose Favor by this means he should gain: He also knew
the Weakness of the Commonwealth, and that he should at the same time recover
his own Liberty. The French Ambassador at the Port concerned himself much in
this Affair by Order from the King his Master, and fervently solicited Mahomet
about it: but these good Offices served only to render this Minister more
difficult, because he would not share the Honor or Profit of this Negotiation
with any one. Barbaro, perceiving it, pretended to be sick, and asked leave for
Solomon, the same Jewish Physician, he had already made use of, to come to him.
Solomon was no sooner entered the Chamber, where he was kept, but Marco Antonio
making him Presents and Promises, conjured him to do his Endeavor, to procure
an end to his Imprisonment, and Repose to his Country, letting him understand,
that 'twould be no less to his Advantage than his Honor, if he brought it to
pass. The Jew, leaving Barbaro, went to the Grand Vizier, whom the difficulty
of setting forth a new Fleet rendered much more tractable: He sounded him, to
find how he was inclined to an Accommodation, and afterward proposed it to him.
Mahomet at first entered into a particular Debate upon the Articles of Peace,
demanding, that the Republic should give the Grand Seignior the Isle of
Corfou, the Towns of Cataro and Budua, and fhould pay him all the Charges of
the War. Barbaro answered with a great deal of Constancy, that the Republic
would part with nothing of what they possessed before the War, that they would
restore Supoto, and only in respect make Selim a Present of Threescore Thousand
Crowns in Gold, who should also cause the Lands, which the Turks had taken in
Dalmatia, to be restored. The Grand Vizier receded from the Demand of Corfou,
but insisted on the Surrender of Cataro and Budua, saying, that Peace was not
to be mentioned but on these Conditions, and threatening Soloman to have him
strangled, if he did not oblige the Venetian to yield him these two Places. And
what? added he with a fierce and angry Countenance, The Venetians, to obtain a
Peace, granted Solomon the strong fortified Towns of Nauplia and Malvafia, with
all they had in Peloponnesus: and do they now make a Scruple of yielding the
Grand Seignior Two: One weak and half-ruin'd, and the other dispeopled by the
Spoil, the Plague has made in it? To bring the Venetian Ambassador to his Bow,
he spread a Report, That the Musulman Fleet should be composed of three Hundred
Galleys, and as many small Vessels, and that the Ottoman Emperors had never as
yet set forth so numerous and formidable an one; That the Grand Seignior,
assisted by his Forces of Asia and Europe, would come in Person, and cover the
Earth and Sea with Soldiers and Vessels. But Antonio, who knew the Pride of
these Barbarians, feared not so much these ridiculous Menaces, as he did the
Weakness and Necessities of the Commonwealth.

After many goings to and fro, and a very long discussion, the Grand Vizier,
who had certain Information of what was resolved on at Rome for the next
Campaign, feared to break the Negotiation, and re-imbark himself in a much more
troublesome War, than that, which it was in his Power to end; so that becoming
much more reasonable, he agreed on a Peace with Barbaro on these Conditions:
That the Venetians should restore Supoto, with all the Canon they had taken in
that place; That the Inhabitants, who would not stay there, should have liberty
to depart, and take with them their Movables and other Goods; That the Grand
Seignior and the Commonwealth should retain the places, of which they were then
in possession; That the Ancient Limits of the two States should be
reestablished, and that every one should re-enter into the Lands of the
Continent, he enjoyed before the War; That the Venetians should pay fifteen
hundred Crowns a year Tribute for the Isle of Zant, though they had till that
time paid but five Hundred; That they should give the Grand Seignior Three
hundred and fifty Thousand Crowns in ready Money, and Threescore Thousand to
his first Minister for his Negotiation; 'Twas added, that the Merchants on both
sides should be set at Liberty, and their Effects restored; That an Estimate
should be made of such as were no longer found in specie, and that in other
things the Treaty concluded with Solomon should be executed. Barbaro presenting
Selim this, to ratify it by Oath, the Sultan, beholding him with a threatening
Look, said nothing to him, but that he would exactly observe these Conditions,
provided the Venetians failed not in their Respect to him, and gave no Council
nor Assistance to his Enemies. Barbaro immediately dispatched his Son to Venice
with a Copy of this Treaty. The Young Man, who knew of what Importance this
Affair was, with which he was charged, made such speed, that he was but Twenty
days in going from Constantinople to Venice, which was more than ever any
Courier did before him. He went in his Turkish habit to the Doge's Palace,
where the Council of Ten was then happily assembled. These Magistrates, having
read his Dispatches, were of Opinion, that he should not appear all the rest of
that day, and that his Arrival should be concealed, till the Senate was
acquainted with the Conclusion of the Peace. They foresaw, that such surprising
News would cause a very great Rumor and Commotion in the Town. The Council of
Ten declared the next day in full Senate the urgent Reasons that had forced
them to an Accommodation with the Port, and procured the Peace to be ratified,
which was at the same time published. One would have thought this News should
have given no little Joy to People, bred up in Repose, and endebted for their
Greatness to the Exercises and Arts, which are cultivated in Peace. In the mean
time the People of Venice, though disquieted by new Preparations for War,
incommoded by the Interruption of their Trade, and loaded with extraordinary
Impositions, were for some days in such a Consternation (so little do the
Multitude understand their own Interest) that, to see the Dejection and Sorrow
of the Inhabitants, you would have imagined the City to be threatened with utter
Desolation. The People of the other Confederate Estates, who saw not the
Commonwealths pressing Motives, conceived such an Odium against them, that
their Subjects, nay their very Ambassadors (whose Character is respected
amongst the most Barbarous Nations) were not safe amongst them. The Emperor,
whose slowness and delays were partly the cause of this Agreement,
reproachfully asked Giovanni Corario, the Republics Ambassador, What the
Breakers of the Public Faith merited; and this Minister did very Wisely to
keep himself for some days shut up in his Palace at Vienna, and not expose
himself to the Fury of the Vulgar, who were then ready to offer all manner of
Outrage to those, they called Venetians. But soon after Maximilian,
understanding that the King of Spain received this news with Indifference
enough, treated Corario, who had threatened him to retire to Venice, and set the
Republic at difference with him, as civilly as before. When the Venetian
Ambassador had told Philip the Second, That his Masters had been forced by
their Inability to put an end to the War, this Prince answered him calmly
enough, That he engaged in the League only at his Holynesses Request; That he
believed the Senate wise enough not to do any thing without mature
Deliberation; That 'twas sufficient for him to have shown all Europe; that he
had undertaken and carried on this Affair with as much Zeal as Constancy; and
in fine, that 'twas just to yield to the Sentiments of the Parties that were
chiefly concerned.

Tiepoli received about Noon this News by an express Courier, and went
immediately to acquaint his Holiness with it, who was gone to take the Air at
Frescati, in the Vineyard of Cardinal Altemps. The Pope asked him, smiling,
What Good News he had to tell him: To which this Minister answered very
seriously, That he came to communicate to his Holiness the Conclusion of a
Peace between the Commonwealth and the Grand Seignior. The Pope, strangely
surprised, interrupted Tipoli, forbad him to say any more, and commanded him to
be gone. The Ambassador humby did his utmost to pacify Gregory's Displeasure;
but he would hear neither his Reasons nor his Prayers, and passing into another
Chamber, enjoined him to return immediately. Tipoli, fearing lest the People of
Rome, or the Soldiers, who passed continually to go and embark at Naples, might
offer him some Violence, assembled his Friends in his Palace. He met several of
these Soldiers on his way, as he returned to Rome, who would have done him a
Mischief, had they distrusted that he came from confirming the Reports of
Peace, which were already spread about the Town. One of his Domestics, a
Native of Padua, being behind his back, when he opened his Pacquets, cast his
Eyes on the Letter, which gave advice of the Peace, and no sooner saw his
Master on his way for Frescati, but he went to acquaint Cardinal Cornaro with
the news. The Pope, perplexed and troubled, returned at Night to Rome, and gave
order for the Sacred College to assemble on the morrow. His Holinesses sudden
Return made this Matter very public, and the Romans were so incensed at it,
that if any one would have Headed the People, the Venetian Ambassador would
have been attack't in his Palace, against the Doors and Windows of which the
ruder sort began already to throw Stones. The Venetians were publicly styled
forsworn Traitors, some of them were outrag'd, and their very Name was for
several days abhorred at Rome. The King of Spain's Ministers, who had the
greatest Reason to be displeased, showed nevertheless far more Moderation than
the Popes Subjects. His Holiness, desiring to blacken the Venetians, and render
them still more culpable, represented in full Consistory, that, when the
Emperor was at his Request, in fine, about to declare War against the Infidels;
when the King of Portugal had assured him by his Ambassadors, that he would
enter into the League; when he hoped on certain Conditions to break the
Alliance between France and the Port; when, to complete their Felicity, he had
certain Advice, that the new King of Persia, the declared Enemy of the
Ottomans, was setting on Foot a great Army, to invade Turkey; and when the
Christians had conceived the greatest Hopes Imaginable to break their Chains,
and exterminate their common Adversary: the Vene^ians had overthrown all these
great Designs by perfidiously making a shameful Peace with these Barbarians. He
then inveighed very much against them, treating them as perjured Traitors, and
revoking all the Graces, his Predecessors had granted them in consideration of
this War. He even enjoined them to restore the Money they had levied on certain
Benifices, to which they immediately paid an exact Obedience. He forbad all the
Subjects of the Holy See to engage without his Leave in the Service of the
Repulick, shut up the Granaries of Puglia and Marca di. Ancona, and did them
several other Displeasures, which, though apparently very grievous, were much
less terrible, than what the Senate expected from the public Indignation, and
the Wrath of a Sovereign Prelate, who might strike them with all the Thunders
of Excommunication.

The Venetian Ambassador, who saw that Gregory affected to appear much severer
than he naturally was, feared, lest in the first motions of his Choler, he
might carry things to the utmost Extremities; but his Holiness breaking forth
only in Reproaches and Menaces he procured the Venetian Cardinals to intercede
with him. They besought him to consider, that the Destruction of the
Commonwealth would be no less prejudicial to the Holy See, than the
aggrandising of a Foreign Power, which already threatened all its Neighbors:
that their Ruin would be fatal to all Italy, and draw with it that of the
Ecclesiastical State. Tipoli observed, that these Reasons had already made some
Impression on the Popes Mind. He did his endeavor to obtain an Audience; but
Gregory still refused to give him any, telling those that solicited it, He
would not receive the excuses of the Venetians but in the presence of the
Sacred College, and other Witnesses of the Treaty, which they had so basely
violated. In the mean time his Anger by little and little abated, and Tipoli
knowing that he used a great deal of Violence on himself to pass for an
inflexible Man, proposed to the Senate the sending an extraordinary Ambassador
to Rome, not doubting but so unusual a Proceeding, might find some favor with
him. The Senate approved of this Expedient, and Nicholas Ponti, who was
Fourscore years of Age, was chosen for this Embassy. He departed immediately,
and arrived sooner at Rome, than his Old Age seemed to permit him. He found the
Pope resolute not to give him Audience any where but in the Consistory. In the
mean time some of the Principal Cardinals obtained of the Pope, that he should
be received in the same manner as the other Ambassadors were. Ponti with a
great deal of Clearness and Eloquence laid open the Reasons and Motives which
obliged the Republic to make their Accommodation with Selim. Gregory heard him
quietly, and appeared so much the more satisfied with his Discourse, as he
flattered himself at the sight of this venerable Old Man, who was Ten years
older than His Holiness, That he might live yet several years; and this
agreeable Thought contributed not a little to the Satisfaction, which the
Venetians received in this Audience. The Pope complained only of their making a
Peace without acquainting him with their Intention, and dismissed the
Ambassador with Testimonies of a perfect Reconciliation. Ponti visited all the
Cardinals apart, confirming to them what he had said in public to his
Holiness, and leaving Tipoli in the Functions of his Employ, returned to Venice
to give an account of the happy Success of his Voyage.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ABraham, his Descent. p. 47. Sent in quality of an Ambassador to Venice. ibid.
He enters Venice. 52. Acangii, what they are. 94.

Achomat made Governor of Epire. 184. He envies Perteau the Honor of the
Surrender of Dulcino. ibid. His Drunkenness. 16.

Actium, its War compared with that of Cyprus. 5.

Egyptians, Masters of Cyprus. 251.

Aiton, King of Armenia. 6.

Albert Scotto, who he was. 96. Killed 99.

Alexander Farnese, the Duke of Parma's Son, slain, and by whom. 160.

Alexander Donati, through his Ambition, loses the opportunity of taking
Scutari. 180, 181. He voluntarily goes into Exile, and why. 184.

Alexandrinus the Cardinal sent Legate to Spain and Portugal. 155. His Speech
to King Philip. ibid. His Exhortation to Don Sebastian, King of Portugal. 156.
He goes to France, 158. His return to Rome, and his reception, 160.

Alvarez Basano, General of the Neapolitan Galleys, 69.

Amaury, made King of Cyprus by the Pope, 6.

D'Amboise the Admiral slain, 357.

Amurah, Seilim's Son's Character, 20.

Amuti, Ambassador from the Grand Seignier to France, stopped by the Venetians,
137.

Andimes, a Region in Cyprus, 2.

Andrew Doria, 65. He differs with Mark Antony Colonni, Pompey Colonni, and
Alvarez Basano, about succouring Cyprus, 69. Suspected by the Venetians, 71. He
rivals Colonni, 72. Falls out with him, 115, 116. Carries his Galleys to
Sicily, and goes himself for Spain, 116. His Skill in Sea Affairs, 147. He
contends for Honor with Louchali, ibid.

Angelus Soriano, 119. His Valor, 312.

Antivari delivered to the Turks, 184.

Antonio Roscono, his Stratagem to prevent the taking Cursolari, 186.

Antony Canali, 66. He is for going to succor Cyprus, 67.

Arabians, fall from the Turks, 44.

Ascaneus Corneo, a Counselor of the House of Austria, 218.

Astor Baglioni, Commander of a Garrison, 74. Governor of Famagusta, 77. His
Courage, 79. Nicosia desires his Assistance, 100. Not suffered to depart from
Famagusta, 101. Kills 3000 Turks, 195. Blows up 3000 at the Siege of Famagusta,
102. Makes a Sally out upon the Turks, and worsts them, taking a Standard, 203.
His Death, 211.

Augustine Barbarigo, joint Commander of the Navy with Sebastian Venieri, 123.
Slain, and how. 252. His dying Words, ibid. He was the first that charged, and
the first that routed the Enemy, 253.

Augustus, King of Poland, seeks for a Divorce, 171. Reproved by Cardinal
Commendon, ibid. The Queen dies, 172. The King dies, ibid. and 173. Henry Duke
of Anjou, Brother to Charles the 9th. King of France, 173.

B
Baglioni, his Valor and Conduct at the Siege of Famagusta, 202. Killed, how,
and by whom, 211.

Bajazet, Soliman's Son, betrayed by the King of Persia, is killed by his
Father, 15, 16.

Baptista Scolumban, his Character, 101.

Bassa of Caramonia, 104.

Bernard Tipoly persuades the calling home Venieri, 268. Checked for it, 269.

Bonrici, who, 47.

Budua demolished by Perteau, 185.

C
Caesar D'Avelois, Commander of the Ships of Burden, 221.

Caesar Pioveni, 96. Surprises the Turks, ibid. Killed, 99.

Candia, the principal Town in the Isle of that name, 71.

Captains Speeches to their Soldiers before the Fight, 239. Their Valor and
Conduct, 245.

Caracossa, a famous Pyrate, 174. He covertly in the night views the Christian
Fleet. 234.

Carpasso, a Region of Cyprus. 2.

Catarians not willing to yield to Perteau's proposal, 185. Two Galleys taken
from them by the Turks, 119. The Town beset by them, ibid. Like to have been
betrayed, 181. The Traitors punishment, ibid. Cataro besieged, and by whom,
338. Relieved by Giacomo Sorantio, 339.

Catharina, Mother of Francis, King of France, 249. Queen Regent of France,
350. Assisted by her Admiral, 351. Her Arts to kill him, 352.

Catherine Cornelia, Queen of Cyprus, 10. Leaves the Kingdom to the Venetians,
11. She dies, and where. ibid.

Cerigo, anciently called Cythera. 178.

Cerines, a Region of Cyprus. 2. and 112. Delivered to the Turks, and by whom.
113.

Christian Fleet reviewed. 219. Sails for Greece. 220. The Names of the
Commanders. ibid. They arrive at Corfou. 222. The number of their Ships,
Strength and Provision. 221. Drawn up in order of Battle. 235. The Commanders
Conduct in War. 236. Small Ships put out from the rest of the Fleet to prevent
the Soldiers running away. ibid. Their devotion before Battle. 238. Preparation
for a new Fleet. 285. Its Number. ibid. and 306. The Turks decline a Fight with
the Christians, 321, 322. They enter the Turks Port. ibid. The Turks Fleet
approaches Cyprus. 92. The Christian Fleet recruited. 343. A Decree of the Pope
concerning the Fleet. 345. The Turk puts his Men ashore at Cyprus. 93. The
numerousness of his Fleet. ibid The good management of the Venetian Fleet. 50.
A Contagion happens in it. 60. The mutual mistake of the Christian and Turkish
Fleet. 235.

Claudio De Gonzaga. 327.

Clissa betrayed to the Venetians. 337. Foolishly deserted by them. ibid.

Commendon Cardinal John Francis opposes Granvil in behalf of the Venetians. 62.

The Pope by his advice sends Colonni to their Assistance, 139. He is sent
Legate into Poland and Germany. 154. His Speech to Maximilian. 164, 165, 166,
167. The Emperor's Answer. 167.

Conde taken Prisoner. 349. Set at Liberty. 350. The Duke of Guise his
Adversary. ibid. He takes up Arms against the King. ibid. Routed. ibid. Taken.
ibid. Killed. ibid.

Constantinople affrighted at the succefs of the Christians. 272. Cyprus in
possession of the Turks. 5.

Cornelii, their Resoluteness in a Sea Fight. 252.

Courage or Constancy, which most proper to the Turks. 246.

Cosmus de Medicis his great Fortune, 160. Why called Great Duke. 162.
Maximilian offended at it. ibid. Why he granted his Assistance against the
Turks. 286. A Contest between him and Alphonso, Duke of Ferrara, about
precedence. ibid.

Cretensians, their Sedition, and what followed. 177.

Crusso, a Region of Cyprus. 2.

Cursolari wonderfully preserved by Women, and how. 186.

Cyprus, its Situation 1. thought to be separated from the Continent. ibid.
It Is Cities, Towns, and Dimensions. 2. Its numerous Inhabitants. ibid. Its
Antiquity. ibid. Its Fertility, their Habit of Body and Delights. 3. Looseness
of their Women. ibid. Its Barrenness and Plenty. ibid. No Rain in it for
Seventeen Years. 4. What things it abounds with. ibid. The unwholsomness of its
Air. 5. Its Governors. ibid. and 6. In the possession of the Venetians. 6.
Several Attempts of revolting from the Venetians. 73. Wholly in the power of
the Turks, 212. A bold attempt of a Cypriot Woman. 8. A Courageous Act of a
Woman of Nicosia. 111, 112. Another horrible Act of a Matron of Nicosia. 109,
110. The Noble Men of Cyprus, desirous to fight the Turks, are hindered by
Dandoli. 95. They attempt to go out privately. 97. Cypriots forbid to breed up
Mules. 4. Cyprus Tributary to Egypt. 10.

Cythera, now Cerigo. 306.

D
Dandoli, Podestat of Nicosia. 74. His Ignorance in Arms. 85. Born for the
Ruin of Nicosia. 97. Angry. ibid. Killed at the taking of Nicosia. 98.
Mustapha sends his Head to terrify the Governors of Famagusta. 113.

Decemviri consult together for the good of the Republic of Venice. 332. They
send Marco Antonio Barbaro to Constantinople to treat a Peace, where he is
detained. 336. A wise Counsel. 345.

Decree o^ the Pope about the Navy. 345.

Discipline neglected in the Navy, causes a great destruction in it. 308.

Discords among the Christians give opportunity to the Infidels. 34.

A Dissuasive of the Spaniards from entering into a League with the Venetians.
127. The Pope commits it to Six Cardinals. 129. Laws made by the Pope. 155,
156. A difference decided amongst the Confederates. 342. Conditions of a League
with the Emperor Maximilian. 169, 170.

Dragonares, Rocks over against the Promontory of Malea. 307.

Durazzo, in vain besieged by Venieri. 153.

Dulcino, its Strength. 183. Vigorously assaulted by the Turks: They surrender.
ibid.

E
Epirots Horse worst Syroc. 83. They alone are intended to sally out of
Nicosia. 95. Yet retained by Dandoli, and why. 97.

Eugenius Sinclitici, Count de Rocas. 75. He badly performs his Embassy. ibid.
and 76. Through his default Nicosia is taken by the Turks. 106, 107. Killed,
and when. 107. His body mangled by the Conquerors. ibid.

F
Fabian Gratiani slain in a Sea Fight. 252.

Famagusta, its Merchandise. 7. Taken by the Genoese. 9. Taken from them, and
by whom. 10. Those of Famagusta disagree with the Nicosians. 76. Its Situation.
197. Besieged by Mustapha, ibid. A rash Sally of the Greeks and Venetians. 198.
The Enemies Works hinder their Sallying out. ibid. The Turks gain the Ditch
199. Driven back by the besieged's Fire. ibid. They undermine the City. ibid.
Six times beat out of the breaches they had made. 200. The Besieged build a
double Wall. ibid. The Valor of their Women. ibid. The Courage of the Bishop
of the place. 201. Stormed for several days together by the Besiegers. ibid.
The number of their Shot in one day. ibid. Baglioni, by setting fire to a mine,
blows up above 3000 Turks. 202. Mustapha vexed hereat, exhorts his Soldiers to
be more resolute. ibid. The diligence and watchfulness of the Besieged. 203,
204. Disappointed of a supply from the Venetians. 206, 207. A Famine amongst
them. 208. Discourse about delivering up the City. 211. The manner of
Bragadin's Death. 212. The Christians thereby animated to fight. 231.

Ferrara's Duke, the Great Duke of Tuscany's Rival. 286. 287. He goes into
Germany. ibid.

Fenicia, its port repaired by Selim. 29.

Filebert, Duke of Savoy, one of the Confederates. 286. Why not made General of
the Army. 134.

Flavius Cardinal Vrsin sent Ambassador into France. 249.

France, its Power whence. 348. The French Kings Answer to Cardinal
Alexandrine, exciting him to enter the League. 159. His judgment of Henry King
of Navarre. ibid. Angry that the Spanish Ambassador at Rome should find more
favor than his. 277.

Francis Barbaro a Messenger of Peace to the Venetians. 364.

Francis Contareni, Bishop of Baffo, 108.

Francis, the French King, Successor to King Henry. 349. A Conspiracy against
him. ibid. Dies. ibid.

Francis, Duke of Guise, slain. 350. His Encomium. ibid.

Francis Maria of Rovere, Son of Duke Vrbin, who. 220.

Francis Prioli. 11, 119. His Valor and Death. 120.

Francis Troni conducts Abrahim to Venice. 51.

Francomates, who. 2.

G
Gabriel Cerbellon, Councellor of Germany, 218.

Galeasses, what they are. 50. They first charge the En^my. 242.

Gaspar de Coligny, Admiral of the Protestants in France. 159. Marries a Wife,
a Subject of the Duke of Savoy's. 286. Thought to have a design upon Savoy.
ibid. He breeds a Discord between the two Kings. 301. Kills the Duke of Guise
by his Emissaries. 350. His Character, 351. The Queen seeks his Death. 353. She
commits the doing of it to the young Duke of Guise, ibid. and 354. He instructs
his Party how to kill the King and others. 355. Himself killed, and thrown out
at a Window. 356. His Encomium. 357. The names of those that were killed with
him. ibid.

Genevre Salviati, Baglioni's Wife, her Love and Courage. 205. Sends to Perusia
to raise men in her Husbands Defense. 206.

Gengirus, his own executioner. 15.

Genoeses placed after the Venetians by Petrin. 9. They contend with the
Venetians about Priority. ibid. Conspire against the King, but being detected,
are all killed. ibid. They make War with the Cypriots. ibid. They make
themselves Masters of Famagusta. ibid. They assist the Spaniard with Four
Galleys. 286.

Granvil Cardinal, his Birth and Character. 61. He says the Venetians ought
not to be assisted. 62. Contradicted by Cardinal Commendon. 62, 63. He hinders
the League. 134. He incurs the Pope's Displeasure. 136. He is Governor of
Naples. 217. A Thanksgiving for the Victory of the Venetian Navy. 260.

Greeks, two, Fugitives from Nicosia, persuade Mustapha to besiege it. 87.

Gregory Panteus. 96.

Gregory XIII. made Pope. 298. His Birth and bypast Life. ibid. Endeavors to
bring the French King into a League with the Confederates. 348. Angry with the
Venetians for making peace with the Turks. 366. Inveighs against them in the
Consistory. ibid. and 349. His Decree against them. 369. Appeased by the
Venetian Ambassadors. ibid.

Gulielmus de Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, assists against the Turks. 286.

Guidobaldus, Duke of Vrbin, offers to assist in the War against the Turks. 286.

Guises Adversaries to the Prince of Conde. 350.

Guise, employed by the King and Queen to kill the Admiral of France. 352.

Guy de Lufignan, dispossessed of his Crown, purchases Cyprus. 6. His Family.
ibid.

H
Hali, Admiral of the Turks. 86. Destroys several Islands belonging to the
Venetians. 231. His Exhortation to an Engagement with the Confederates. 232.
His Death. 247 His two Sons; one whereof dyed at Rome; the other was begged of
Don John by his Mother. 347.

Hector Martinengo, slain upon the Rendition of Famagusta. 211.

Hector Podocatero, sent Ambassador by Mustapha to Famagusta. 196. His ill
Treatment. ibid. Mustapha kills him. 197.

Hector Troni, cast in Prison for deserting Clissa, and let go* 337.

Henry of France, His League and Affinity with Philip of Spain. 349.

Henry, Brother to the French King, made King of Poland. 359.

Henry, King of Navarre, a Hugonot. 158. His mildness. 159.

Hermolaus Tipoli, who. 50, 119. He burns the City Scardo^a. 180. Takes some
Ships. ibid.

Hierom Grimani, his last Words concerning the League. 126.

Hierom de Martinengo, sent to succor the Cypriots. 43. Savorniani's Rival.
ibid. Dies. 81.

Hierom Ragazoni, Bishop of Famagusta, sent to ask Aid of the Venetians. 205.

Hierom Venieri, Podestat of Dulcino, deprived of his Armor by the Turks. 184.

Hierom Zani, General of the Navy. 50.

Honorius Cajetan, a Commander in the Confederate Army. 220.

Hugo, the King of Apulia's Son, King of Cyprus. 6.

Hugonots in France, a 349. ad finem.

Humphrey Justiniani, sent to Venice with the news of the Sea Fight. 255. His
Entrance into the City, and Relation of the Victory. 257.

I
James Celsi. 66.

James Fosca^ini, deposed from his Generalship at Sea, 269

James Malateste, being too ve^turesom, taken by the Turks. 181. After two
years Slavery released. 182.

James Nores, Count de Tripoli, Rocas's Rival. 76.

James Ragazone, sent to treat of a peace at Constantinople. 137.

James Sorantio, sent Ambassador to the Emp^ror Maximilian. 163. He is of
opinion that the Siege of Leucade ought not to be undertaken. 264. Complains
bitterly of Ve^ieri. 268. He raises the Siege of Cataro. 339.

(...), vindicates Venieri. 269.

Janissaries in the War of Cyprus. 86.

Jews Vagrants. 25. Their place of abode. ibid. Driven out of Spain. 26. They
withdraw themselves into Portugal. ibid. They lose their Liberty. ibid. Driven
out of Portugal. ibid. They feign themselves Christians. ibid.

Imissa, a Region of Cyprus. 2.

Don John of Austria. 132. Made Generalissimo of the whole Army by the Pope.
133. Goes over to Genoa. 217. His Counselors. 218. He gives the Sign to fall
upon the Turks Fleet. 237. He encourages his Soldiers. ibid. Angry with
Venieri. 255. His stay in Sicily. 300. A Copy of his Letter to Colonni. 304,
305. Determines to return for Sicily. 324. The Venetians court him to stay, but
in vain. 325. Sets Sail from Greece. 326. Accused to the King for having
engaged the Turks contrary to his order 334.

John Falerio, who. 97. Taken by the Infidels, is killed. 108.

John Legio, Providor of Dalmatia, last in prison at Venice. 123.

John Sorantio sent to Rome, and why. 131. Ungrateful to Pope Pius. 132.

John Susomini, a prudent man. 78.

Isaac Comnenus, loses Cyprus to Richard King of England. 6.

Ismael, King of Persia, overcome by Selim, Soliman's Father. 32.

Ismael Tammas, the King of Persia's Son, why imprisoned by his Father. 158.

Italian Princes, their inclination to War. 285.

Julius Sav^rniani, enters Nicosia with a handful of Men. 12, 13, 14. He takes
care for the preservation of Dalmatia. 48. The Venetians put great Confidence
in him. 192.

L.
Landriani, Governor of Sicily, Counselor of Germany. 218.

Latin Vrsin, one of the Heroes in the Confederate Army. 220.

Lauredon, Doge of Venice, his Death. 55.

Laurence Tipoli, Podestat of Famagusta. 74.

Legates from Venice to Spain. 334.

Leiparus yields it self to the Infidels: Burnt by the Nicosians, and why. 90.

Lesina burnt by the Turks. 187.

Letters treating of a Peace sent to Rome. 364. etc.

Letters of the Confederates intercepted by the Enemies. 100.

Leucade, its Situation. 265. In vain attempted by Venieri. 266.

Lewis Mocenigo, Doge of Venice. 56.

Lewis Requiescens, Governor of Milanese. 277.

Lewis, Son to the Duke of Savoy, King of Cyprus. 10. Driven out by the
Mamalucks, ibid,

Liberty granted the Slaves, if they obtained the Victory. 243. Their outrages
upon the Turks Galleys. 244.

Limisso, a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Louchali, an Arch-Pyrate. 174. His Actions in Crete. 175, 176. He quits the
Inhabitants of Rhetimo with negligence. 176. His skill in Sea Affairs. 247. His
Counsel in the War at Sea, carp'd at by Doria. ibid. He flies. 248. Succeeds
Hali. 274. He prepares a new Fleet. ibid. Consults upon the news of the Arrival
of the Christians. 307. His wonderful Sagacity. 310. His Warlike Courage. 313.
Returns joyful to the Turks, after having avoided the danger he was in. 328.

Lucas Michaeli, chief Magistrate of Canea, repulses the Turks. 175.

Lucenses offer Money to carry on the War with the Turks. 35.

M
Mahomet, after Solyman's Death, takes Sigeth. 19. Wonderfully conceals
Solyman's Death. ibid. His Craft and Power. ibid. He endeavors the Ruin of
Mustapha and Piali. 24. Endeavors to turn the War from Venice. 35. Persuades
to a War with Spain. 36. Which is ill resented by the Grand Seignior. 42, 43.
His Arts to deceive the Venetians. 43. Requires Cyprus of the Venetian
Ambassador. 45. Letters concerning the same. 52, 53. He is made Bassa of
Negropout. 347. Taken in a Sea Fight and carried to Rome. ibid. His opinion of
the Victory. ibid. A witty saying of his. 348.

Malvasia, which the Ancients called the Epidaurus of Greece. 306.

Mamalucks having taken Janus, King of the Cypriots, carry him into Egypt. 11.

Manolio Marmorio. 57. Taken at the Siege of Supoto. 179.

Margariti, the King of France's Sister, betrothed to Henry K. of Navarre. 159.

Margariti, a City of Epirus. 49.

Mark Antony Barbaro, Ambassador from the Republic of Constantinople. 44.
Puts the Venetians in mind of fortifying Cyprus. ibid. His Letters intercepted
by the Turks. ibid. Saves his Son from eminent Slavery. 47. His Wife presents
Abrahim with a Silk Vest. 54. Offers The change of Prisoners with Mahomet. 138.
The Decemviri desire him to treat of a Peace. 336. Makes a League with the
Turks. 360.

Mark Antony Bragadin, chief Commander in Famagusta. 74. He courageously
defends it. 203. His Letters to the Senate, and his Sons. ibid. The Barbarity
of the Turks toward him. 211, 212. The nature of his Death. 212. His skin
stuffed with Straw. ibid.

Mark Antony Colonni, General of the Popes Galleys. 64. Pope Pius the Fifth's
Favorite. ibid. Gets in favor with the Venetians. ibid. Austria of equal
power with the Holy See, if not kept under. 133. Sent by the Pope to Venice
139. His Speech to the Venetians. ibid. and seqq. His Valor. 144. Having
discharged his duty, he returns to Rome. 155. He strikes Sail to join the
Venetians. 151. His opinion concerning the carrying on the War. 224. His secret
Counsels to the Germans and Spaniards. 225. He composes a difference between
the two Dukes. 228, 229. His Words to appease Don John. 229. His Feats in the
Naval Fight. 249, 250. Honored at his return by the Pope and the people of
Rome. 262. Liberally rewarded, and Honorably dealt with are he and his Son.
ibid. After the Popes Death he Sails for Naples. 298. His Counsel to hinder the
Depopulation of the Venetians. 309. Why omitted. 310. Why he abstained from the
War. 313. His Exhortation of the Cowardly. 315. He supposes Don John to be
angry with him. 317. He goes into Spain, 327.

Mark Cato sent from Rome to take possession of Cyprus. 5. Brings the Treasure
thereof to Rome. ibid.

Mark Quirini. 59. He requites the Senate for their Ingratitude for his former
Services. 207. He sails for Sicily. 208.

Mark Quirini, Surnamed Stenta, goes to succor Famagusta. 193. He sinks two
Turkish Galleys, and takes another. ibid.

Marrani, what they are. 27.

Massota. a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Maximilian, angry at the Title of Great given to the Duke of Tuscany. 162,
163. Commendon pacifies him. ib. Not willing to enter into the League. ibid.
More cunning than valorous. 164 His Answer to Commendon. 167. His ^etter to him
169. A Consultation about a War with the Turks. 170. The Conditions of the
League with him. 171. His Indignation because the Venetians had made War with
the Turks. 265.

Mesarea, a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Miches, a Jew, Mustapha's Confident. 25. He persuades Selim to invade Cyprus.
27, 28. Selim in a debauch calls him King of Cyprus. Thought to have set on
fire the Arsenal of Venice. 50.

M^don, its Port. 320.

Mongommery, Master of the Horse. 357. A great Religioso. 349. Overcomes the
Protestants in France. 350. Killed. ibid.

Moors, their Strength and number in Spain. 37. Their usage there. ibid.

Mufti, the Turkish Priests. 36.

Mustafero. 108.

Mustapha, Selim's Sycophant. 19. By his Valor Selim overcomes Bajazet. ibid.
Is offended at Mahomet. 23. Mahomet cunningly contrives his Death. 24. He
speaks for himseld, and what followed. ibid. He persuades the Grand Seignior to
an Expedition against Cyprus. 31, 41. Prime Commander of the Land Forces 86. He
determines first to besiege Nicosia. 89. His Letter to the Cypriots. ibid.
Besieges Nicosia. 92. The Wells thereabouts being poisoned, he causes new ones
to be dug. ibid. He makes a general Assault. 103. His eagerness in it. ibid.
Takes the City. 108. His Cruelty on the Inhabitants. 111. Goes to besiege
Famagusta. 113. He consults how to do it. 194. Persuades the Inhabitants to a
Surrender. 196. His dubiousness of the Event. 202. His Arts to hearten the
Soldiers. ibid. His Perfidy. 210, 211. Raises a notorious Calumny, contrary to
the Treaty, the better to kill the Christians. 212.

N
Naval Fight; It Is beginning. 241. Heat of the Contest. 242. Its various
changes and Fortune. 242, 243. The beginning of the Victory. 246. The
Consummation of it. 249, 250. The number of the Turks slain and taken
Prisoners. 250. Ships taken, burnt and sunk; Christian Slaves redeemed; the
Soldiers suffered to plunder. ibid. and 251. Loss on the Christians side. 251,
252. What passed after the Victory. 266.

Navarin, a City. 319. Farnese intends to besiege it, but in vain. 324.

Nicholas Ponti's Speech to the Senate, preferring Peace before War, ab 152. ad
158. His Speech upon the making the Peace. 334. Being sent to Rome he appeases
Pope Gregory's Anger toward the Venetians. 349.

Nicholas Donati, sent to succor Famagusta. 206. The fatalness of his delay.
208.

Nicholas Gradenigo. 96.

Nicosia, a City of Cyprus. 12. A dispute between it and Famagusta about the
transportation of Grain. 76, 77. Besieged. 91. Hotly assaulted. 104. Taken.
108. The miserable treatment of the Captives. ibid. 111. The number of the
slain. 111. The Fame of this great Booty draws abundance of Turks to the War
with the Cypriots. 194.

O
Octavi^ Farnese, Duke of Parma, assists in the War against the Turks. 286.

Opportunity neglected by the Christians of overcoming their Enemies. 320.

Ottomans, their Parsimony. 16.

P
Paphia, or Baffo, a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Paul Jourdan Vrsin, one in the Confederate Army. 220 His Valor in the Sea
Fight. 249.

Paul Sforza, a principal Man in the Army. 220.

Paul Tipoli, one of the Decemviri, puts the Senate upon treating of a Peace,
and the Alterations thereupon. 144. He dissuades from Peace. 145. Affects to be
Admiral of the Sea. 268. Sent Joint Ambassador with Sorantio to Pope Pius V.
277. His Speech concerning the War with Greece. 283. Hated by Pope Gregory, and
why. 368. Rome's Envy against him and the Venetians. 369. His means to appease
the Pope. 369, 370.

Paul Vrsin, one of the Heroes in the Confederate Army 220. He takes and ruins
the Castle of Margariti. 266.

Peace concluded upon by the Venetians with the Turks. 363.

How it was taken by their Confeder s. 365. etc.

Pendengia, a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Perteau Piali strangled. 174. His perfidy at the Surrender of Dulcino. 184. He
in vain sollicites the Catarians to a Surrender. 185. He infests Corfou. 187.
His opinion about avoiding a Battle with the Christians. 232. He doubts the
event before the Battle begins. 241. Being overcome, he makes his escape. 249.
Banished from Constantinople by the Grand Seignior. 273.

Peter Justiniani, and the Knights of Malta, their Valor in the Sea Fight.
248. He is taken Prisoner, but released. ibid.

Peter, King of Cyprus, his Character. 7. Conquers Alexandria. ibid. Goes to
Rome to the Pope. ibid. Makes War on the Cypriots. ibid. Killed by the Artifice
of a bold Woman. 8.

Peter Fregosa. 9. He makes himself Master of Famagusta, and how. ibid.

Pedro Pardo sets on foot a false Report, That the Christian Fleet was
vanquished. 316.

Peter Strozzi worsted by Cosmus de Medicis. 161.

Philip the Second his Answer to the Popes Legate about entering into the War.
127. Another to Cardinal Alexandrine. 156. His Letters to Gregory XIII. ibid.
Receives the News of the Peace made with the Turks indifferently. 265.

Philip Bragadin desirous to pursue the frighted Turks by Sea, is refused it by
Venieri. 263.

Piali, a Foundling. 18. Selim's Son-in-Law. ibid. Mahomet's Enemy. 23.
Deprived of his Dignity, but re-inve^ted with it. ibid. Admiral of the Sea and
Navy. 86. He designs first to besiege Famagusta. 88. Chid by the Grand
Seignior. 118. His Successor, who. 174.

Pius the V. Pope, gives the Venetians leave to transport Corn from Anconia.
51. Averse to the Venetians at the beginning of his Pontificate. 61. Helps the
Venetians in the War. 64. Instigates the King of Spain to a War. 65. Endeavors
to join him in a League. 126. Consults his Cardinals and Legates upon the same.
129. Is very earnest in the business. 131. Sends Philip threatening Letters upon
it. 132. Sends M. Antony Colonni to aid the Venetians. 139. Commands Articles
of a League to be drawn. 154. etc. Hires some Galleys of Don John. 151. Why he
desired Margaret, the King of France's Sister, to be given in Marriage to
Sebastian, King of Portugal. 158. Gives God Thanks for the Victory of the Navy.
260. Commands Colonni to be honorably entertained at his return. 261. His
Munificence toward him and his Son Ascanius. 262. Venetians counsel him to
remove Venieri. 269, 270. Gives a reason for the carrying on the War. 285.
Falls sick. 287. What he thought his best Physic ibid. His Holy Death, and
Elogium 281. His Family and his Works. 288, 289. He gives the King of Spain
power to levy a Fine upon the Clergy. 303.

Pisani rased by the Turks. 184, 185.

Plague rages in the Venetian Fleet. 60.

Podocatero besieged. 92.

Pompey Colonni, 69. The Pope sends him into Spain. 137.

Popes Navy pursues the Enemy, and why. 152.

Prey divided after the Victory by Sea, and why. 256.

Prosper Colonni. 257.

Protheno, an Island. 320.

Ptolemy, King of Egypt, Lord of Cyprus, kills himself. 5.

Publius Clodius taken by Pirates. 5. Let go free. ibid. He made Cyprus a
Province of the Roman Empire. ibid.

R
Ramagasio Sequani, Knight of Malta, his Skill and Valor in Sea Affairs. 250.

Requiescens his Opinion about the War with the Turks. 218.

Rhetimo in great danger of being besieged, 175.

Richard, King of England, takes Cyprus by Force. 6.

Rocas Count, Governor of Cyprus in the Kings absence. 7. Takes upon him the
King's power. ibid. Accused; acquitted. ibid. Through his fault the Turks get
upon the Walls of Nicosia. 106. His Death. ibid. and 107. The Turks insult over
him, being dead. ibid.

Rome, its gratitude and thankfulness for the news of their Navy's Victory. 262.

S
Salt, the Staple Commodity of Cyprus. 4.

Solomon, a Jewish Doctor, sent to mediate a Peace between the Venetians and
Turks. 265.

Sapienza, an Island. 320.

Sasines, a Region in Cyprus. 2.

Sciara Martinengo, Providor of Cataro. 183. Being stripped of his Arms at the
taking of Dulcino, he is let go. 184.

Scutari's being taken omitted by the Venetians. 180.

Sebastian, King of Poland, his Answer to Cardinal Alexandrine concerning the
League. 157. His Piety and Religion. 158.

Sebastian Venieri takes Supoto. 58. Succeeds Zani in his Admiralship. 122. He
in vain attempts the taking of Durazzo. 153. Loses seven Ships. ibid. He
Advises Don John to make have. 222. Advised to avoid a meeting with Don John.
230. His Valor in the Sea Fight. 250. Gets in favor with Don John. 253. He is
against a wholesome advice, and vexes Don John again. 255. Made Friends by
Colonni. 256. His vain Counsel after the Victory. 263. He in vain attempts to
take Leucade. 266. Admiral of the Navy displaced. 270. Commanded for his Honor
to have a care of the Adriatic Gulf. 271. His Fortune and Life. ibid.

Sedition in the Navy. 226.

Selim, Solyman's Son and Heir of the Empire. 16. Governor of Adrianople and
Cilicia. ibid. His ill manners. ib. His Drunkenness. ibid. His Intemperance in
all sorts of pleasure. ibid. Contemned by the Soldiers. 20. A Favourer of the
Jews. ibid. He commands Mustapha to be beheaded. 23. Why he designed to invade
Cyprus. 51. His Inconstancy. 35. Offended with Mahomet. 43. His Letter to the
Venetians requiring the rendition of Cyprus. 52.

Sforza Pallavicinus, Captain General of the Land Forces. 59. Admitted one of
Zani's Counsel. 66. His opinion about not engaging the Enemies. 80.

Sforza, Count of St. Flora, Counselor of Don John. 218.

Sinam, Bassa of Egypt. 23. He accuses Mustapha. ibid. Siroc sent before into
Cyprus with Twenty Five Ships. 92, 93.

Solomon takes ill Cyprus being set upon by the Turks. 14. His Sons. 15. He
commands Mustapha his eldest Son to be killed. ibid. Besieges Belgrade, takes
Rhodes, and very much incommodes the Venetians. 32. He threatens them. 33.

Soriani, the Venetian Ambassador loved by Pope Pius. 132. His praise. ibid.

Strophades. 320.

Suda burnt by Perteau. 155.

Supoto taken by the Confederates. 57. The Turks re-take it. 179. Taken again
by the Christians. 266. Restored to the Turks again. 362.

Swedish Prince. 326.

Salviati Bishop, goes Legate from the Pope into France. 302.

School master makes himself head of the Cypriots. 73.

Spaniards disgusted at the Popes preferring Colonni before Don John. 261. They
aim to turn their Arms upon Africa, 280. Their Councels in War, 282. Their
Delays give cause to suspect their Fidelity, 217. Their Opinion of the
reasonableness of the War, 223. Dissension between them and the Venetians, 276.
Spaniards generally hated, 303.

Ships of Burden not to be trusted to. 306. A Ship sent to succor the
Christians wonderfully prevented from being seized by the Turks. 311.

T
Taenarus, a Promontory, now Metapan. 310.

Tammas, King of Persia, his manner of Life. 157.

Temple Knights bought Cyprus, 6. Sold it again, ibid.

Triumviri created at Venice. 122. They put Zani in Chains, 124.

Turks by an Invasion receive a great overthrow of the Nicosians, 98. They act
more warily, 99. Take several of our Ships. 119. The chief of them being taken,
are brought to Rome, and Christianly treated by the Pope, 256. They repair
their Fleet, 274. Obtain several places in Dalmatia, 336. Their Infidelity,
110. The Works, Progressions and Havoc made at the Siege of Famagusta, 198.
The num^er of the slain there, 204. The number of the Soldiers set on shore at
Cyprus, and their provisions for War, 85, 86. The whole Turkish Fleet its
number, 174, 175. They contemn the Christians, 232. A quick reparation of their
Fleet, 274. (...) number and strength, 306. They hinder the succouring of
Dalmatia, 336. Their Mosques, 30. Their Hospitals adjoining them, ibid. and 31.
How built, 31.

V
Venice, a false report brought thither about Cyprus, its being freed from
danger. 120. Of the taking of Famagusta, 192. Their Arsenal burnt, 38. The
damage it did, ibid. Their suspicion of the Author of it, 39, 40. Venetians
afraid of the Turkish Fleet, 191. Triumviri created. 122. A general joy at the
News of their Naval Victory, 257. Public Thanks therefore. 260. Cyprus
bestowed on them by Queen Catharine, 11. Their Answer to Selim's Ambassador,
requiring Cyprus, 53. The Pope assists them in carrying on the War, 63. They
make their Slaves free for the use of the War, 84. The ill provision of their
Fleet, 121. They consult about a Peace, 136, 137. Accuse Doria of Treachery,
276. They desire the Fleet might Winter in the Ports of Greece, 326. A great
fear at Rome, lest they should make War with the Turks. 344. Their Counsel in
carrying on the War. 130. The reason of the Fleets removing, 154. An Embassy
to the King of Persia, 157. Their Answer to the Ambassadors sent from the
Cursolaries, 187. A twofold reason for the Coinage of Money to carry on the
War, 188. Their Navy suffers upon the account of the suspicion of Doria, 248. A
Consultation about kiling the Turkish Captives, 256. The nature of a Republic.
267. A Speech for the detaining Don John, lest he should leave them, 325. Some
Janglings among the Head of the Army. ibid. and 326. Complaints made to the
Pope and others, 339. Discourse about a Peace, 330, A rash Counsel, 340. Some
Alterations with the King of Spain, 343. One Oration of one of the chief
Spaniards, 331. A Decree of the Senate about entering into the League, 154. Two
Opinions among the Patritii, or Noblemen of Venice, 267. They complain of the
new Taxes, 188, 189. Ambassadors sent to them thereupon, ibid. A Tribute
gathered of them every year for the carrying on of the War, 191. Their
Ambassador at Constantinople, 136. Turks imprisoned by them during the War.
ibid. and 137.

Victory of the Navy, its beginning, 246.

Vincent Alexandri sent by the Venetians to Tammas King of Persia, 157.

Vincent Vitelli, a Christian Hero, 220.

Visconti, a Region of Cyprus, 2.

Vscots, who, 52, 53.

W
Walaques expel Bogdan their King, 172.

Want of Money now supplied at the Siege of Famagust^, 204.

Warlike Inventions for a Naval Fight, 243.

Wells poisoned by the Cypriots, 92.

Wind wonderfully favors the Christian Fleet, 240.

Wine of Cyprus its Excellence and Abundance, 4.

Women's Authority in France. 349.

Z
Zachary Sal^moni his Valor and Fidelity, 185.

Zanetius Dandoli, 97.

Zani, Admiral of the Sea and Navy. 50. Wisely desires one to be sent in his
place, 122. Imprisoned, 123. Crimes objected against him. ibid.

FINIS.

