Great and Good NEWS BOTH FROM Scotland and Ireland; Being a Faithful and
Particular Account of a late Terrible Engagement BETWIXT Major General KIRK,
AND THE Duke of Berwick, and Colonel Sarsfield: AS ALSO, A True Relation of a
late Horrid and Popish Conspiracy, Discovered, against Their Present Majesty's
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Licensed according to Order.

March 14. 1690.
A Vessel lately come from Ireland to Plymouth, informs us of a very hot
Dispute, occasioned by the Policy of Colonel Kirk, between a party of the
Irish Rebels, which was as follows:

Colonel Kirk hearing that Coll. Scansfield, by the Order of his Master K.
James, had removed his Quarters from Dublin to Dundalk, with about Fourteen
Hundred Foot and Horse under his Command; within Eight Miles of which Colonel
Kirk lay with Six Hundred Horse and a Regiment of Foot, consisting of a
Thousand Men, who studied this Stratagem to bring the silly Irish liable to his
Mercy.

He draws out a Party of Four Hundred Horse and Four Hundred Foot, and Orders a
small parcel of Dragoons to drive before him about Thirty Head of Oxen: In this
posture he advances toward Dundalk, till he came (about Evening) within Three
Miles of the place, where he covered his Party in a convenient Wood, and
Ordered the Cattle to be drove that Night about a Mile further, and there leave
them. Having proceeded thus far in order to his design, the Soldiers refreshed
themselves and their Horses with Provisions they had brought along with them,
till the next morning by break of day, Colonel Kirk Commanded out some Spies
to give him notice of any Motion that the Irish should make out of Dundbalk. By
this time the Cattle had stragled into some good Pastures, and (as their custom
is) upon break of day, the Oxen began to Roar one to another, which immediately
Alarmed the Irish in Dundalk with much Joy, who had for a long time lay'n
under great want of Provisions. News was immediately carried to Colonel
Sarcsfield in the Town, that they heard, and could likewise discern from the
Forts, some Cattle that lay within a Mile and a half of the Town; and desired
him that he would Command out a Party to go and secure them with all
expedition, lest they should be prevented by some of the English Forces: Upon
which, Colonel Sarcsfield drew out a Party of about Three Hundred Horse and
Two Hundred Foot, which he led himself upon this Enterprise. He was no sooner
got without side the Town, but the Spies gave Notice to Colonel Kirk, who was
glad his Design began to work so answerable to his hope^ and expectation: He
then drew his Men into good Order, and Marched them with all possible silence,
through the Wood, which led to the back-part of another, before which Wood the
Cattle were Grazing: Under this Cover they were very conveniently placed from
the sight of the Enemy, who within an hour and an half were advanced to the
Cattle: upon which Colonel Kirk drew up his Men in order to Engage them upon
the right side of the Wood, which lay between them and Dundalk; and as the
Irish returned with the Cattle, they fell upon them unawares; the surprise of
which put them into such Disorder, that they could not reduce themselves into
any posture of Defense, but made their Opposition so confusedly, that the
English made a great Slaughter amongst them, and put them to flight in a
moment, pursuing of them almost to the Gate of the Town, Killing in all, about
3 Hundred and odd, and taking about Threescore Prisoners; with an
inconsiderable loss on our side, saving one Captain, who is very much lamented.
With this Success in his Stratagem, Colonel Kirk returned (...), bringing the
Cattle along with him, all but two which were accidentally Killed by Chain-Shot
in the Skirmish.

The Thoughts of His Majesty's coming to Ireland, has so animated the hearts
of the English Forces, that the Soldiers daily toss up their Caps, crying, God
Save King William, and send him safe to Ireland.

WE have an Account from Scotland, that several persons disaffected to that
Government, who were Heretors to the late Lord Dundee, to promote and support
the declining Interest of the Late King James, have made it their Business to
apply themselves to those Gentry in Scotland, who they thought inclinable to
their own Party, to Engage them in a Bond of Association, to Aid and Assist,
and make Contributary Supplies to keep up the Rebellion in the High-lands, and
assist Colonel Canon, who is the Chief Commander amongst the High-landers.
This Design had not been long in Agitation e're Sir Thomas Levenston had some
Intimation of it, who Commands a Regiment of Dr^oons at Inverness, who having
some Notice of a particular day the Associates intended a meeting, at the Lord
Olyphant's House in Bamf, to Consult a further Management of their Affairs,
sent 100 of his Men under the Command of Captain Hoy, giving them order to
Surround the House to prevent any Escapes, and some to enter and secure what
Gentlemen they found in the Caball within door: According to their Orders they
proceeded, and Marched to the Lord Olyphant's House with such Secrecy, that
they encompassed it before any could make their Escape, and entering the House
found 12 Gentlemen which were Strangers, besides those of the Family, which
they immediately Secured, and making: further search into the Closet, found the
Original Bond of Association, with the Names of 400 Persons, who had Signed it,
some Clens and Men of Desperate Fortunes, whose Necessities as much as
Disloyalty has excited them to Rebellion; the Papers were immediately sent to
the Privy Council, and from thence transmitted to His Majesty, upon which
Discovery the Privy Council, have sent out Parties to Apprehend those who have
Signed the Association: The Intention of these Associates were to stand by King
James with their Lives and Fortunes; and make it the utmost of their Endeavor
to Re-Establish him in the Throne of Scotland; in order to which they were to
make all the Force that possibly they could by next June, at which time they
were to Join with Colonel Cannon, and the rest of the Rebels now in Lochaber,
and furnish them with Victuals and all necessary provisions.

The Lord Oliphant and the rest of the Conspirators that were taken, were sent
under a strong Guard to Aberden, where they remain Close Prisoners, so that we
hope by Gods providence to Discover and Confound all Conspiracies and Evil
Devices hatched by Restless persons, to undermine him, who the Almighty through
his Special providence has made our King, to his own Glory, and our Comfort.

FINIS.
London, Printed for W. Patridge, in Fleet Street.


