CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Second CANON In the BOOK Entitled Constitutions and
Canons Ecclesiastical, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXC^

CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Second Canon, etc.
SO various and sickle are the Circumstances of Life, and so short and full of
Encumbrances is it at the best, that it were not worth while to be Man, had he
not a God to serve, who could reward him with future Happiness; and God having
made this Life a state of Probationership, wherein Man is upon his good
Behavior, and according to his Demeanor here shall either be recompensed with
Eternal Bliss after this painful Life ended, o^ fall into endless Misery: Upon
this account Religion becomes more dear to him than all the things of this
World put together: For what shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and
lose his Soul? But then Religion being the Worship of God according to his
Will; that it may be our Guide to Heaven, it must not be sought for in our
Fancies, but from his Revelations and Discoveries; we shall deceive our selves,
and cheat our selves out of our precious Souls, if we will make a Religion by
starting new Notions, and setting up Novelties; ou^ Business is to find out the
good Old way, and walk in it, deny our selves, and to dread and abominate the
running a whoring after our own Inventions, and firmly to adhere to the
Religion our Blessed Savior has left us, in which alone Salvation is to be
obtained: And therefore, though not only the smoothest Deceivers, but an Angel
from Heaven should teach us any other way, we ought not only to turn the deaf
Ear upon their Persuasions, but account them accursed. Now the Substance of
what our Savior taught, his Apostles and Evangelists wrote; but by reason of
the distance of Time, the different Customs of Countries, the ignorance of the
Occasions, whereupon many things were wrote or spoken, and diverse like Matters;
in cafe of difficulty it seems to be the surest way to have recourse to those
Apostolical Persons, and their Successors treading in their Steps, and to those
first planted Churches, who, by reason of their nearness to the Apostles times
had the best opportunity to understand their meaning, and also b^ing
continu^lly under such severe Persecutions or Expectations of them, that they
had no other hopes or comfort but Heaven, could not with any reason be thought
to have any temptation or itch either to be insincere in themselves, or
unfaithful to others: And in the great Degenera^y of the present Christian
World I think I may be bold to say, that, relation being had to her
Constitutions, no Church in the Universe came nearer to the Primitive Pattern
than the Church of England, which has made her both the Envy and the Mark of
all sorts of Sects and Parties; but this though it might and did cause her much
trouble, yet by rendering her more wary and industrious, more careful of her
Constitutions, and more watchful over her Members, perhaps did rather
contribute to her Preservation than Destruction; in all likelihood not all
their Malice could have prevailed against her, had not Vipers within her eat
out her Bowels, or ^he by turning her Hand against her self become a Felo de
se; and to this the present fatal Schism has well near brought it: The proud
swelling Swearers have carried away the greatest part of her Members, and
whilst they hug themselves in their (...) and Wickedness, are become the Scorn
and Derision of the meanest Sectaries and wildest Fanatics: And as for those
who have retained their Integrity, and with whom the true Authority remains,
the haughty Schismatics insolently reproach them, as too few to bear the
weight of so great a Cause; and indeed in the Eye of Humane Reason it could not
be thought that they could long hold out against so many, who thirst for their
Blood, were not their Cause God's Cause, who can support them not withstanding
the violence of any Arm of Flesh, and doubtless will, if they be not wanting to
their own part. But after all, perhaps the boasting Apostates may deceive
themselves in the fewness of their number: For though the Clergy to the Eternal
Shame of the Deserters be not exceeding numerous, yet they are pious, learned
and stout; and their Adherents, as they are more, than their Adversaries could
wish or are aware of, so are they steady, devout and sober; and Men now begin
so generally to see through the Mask, that they daily more incline to the one,
and become more averse to the other: Neither are there wanting multitudes of
sober Men abroad, who are highly concerned for their Case, as may in part
appear by a Letter out of another Kingdom, which has occasioned the ensuing
Discourse, the Contents whereof (so far as concerns this Matter) are Verbatim
as follows.

SIR,
I Confess my self very much a Stranger to the Constitution and Policy of the
Church of England; I humbly crave Pardon therefore, if this Line is useless; if
it proves useful, I have my Reward.

I have seen some of those excellent Books, which have been lately written in
defense of the present Separation from the complying Church of England. I am
fully satisfied, that it is defended on very firm Grounds: Yet one Topic there
is, which I have not observed made use of; it is this:

The second of those which are commonly called the Canons of the Church of
England, declares all those excommunicated ipso facto, who do not own the
King's Authority, etc.

By King, That Person is to be understood, (according to the undo^b^^d
P^inciples of the Church of England) who is possessed of the ^hrone according to
the Civi^ Constitution of the English Hereditary Monarchy: Whosoever disowns
his Authority, etc. by the Canon incurs the Sentence of Excommunication ipso
facto.

Excommunication ipso facto, or latae sent^ntiae, (as they call it,) must ne^^s
import at least, That the Church of England declares those to be none of her
Communion, who publicly, notoriously, and obst mately disown such a King's
Authority: Such ought to be deemed and treated as Excommunicates, without
farther judicial Process or Sentence. The Nature of ipso facto Excommunication
cannot bear less, as is evident to all who know any thing of the Canon Law, by
which that is made the proper difference betwixt Excommunicatio latae and
ferendae Sententiae.

From these Grounds it seems to me to follow pretty naturally, That King James
has either quite lost his Right, or the Compliers, the Jurors, the
Revolutionists, (if I may so call them) are not, cannot be the Church of
England; so that the main of the Controversy hangs much on this Dilemma:
Either King James has lost his Right, or he has not; if he has, and King
William 's Right is good, the Non Jurors or Anti Revolutionists are
excommunicated ipso facto by the Canon, and may be charged with the horrid
Guilt of Schism: But if he has not lost his Right, then the Jurors, the
Revolutionists are excommunicated ipso facto by the Canon; by consequence they
cannot be the Church of England, they have incurred her Censures, are cut off
from her Communion, her sound Members ought not to communicate with them: And
the Anti-Revolutionists, how few soever, are the only Church of England I have
stated this Reasoning but very briefly, you may easily examine it more fully;
and if it holds, I have my purpose: For when it is enquired into and found
solid, it may deserve its proper place in some Book or other, that may after
this be written on the Controversy. Besides, it may be useful for obvia^ing
that popular Plea against the Separation, That the Original Question is only of
Civil Co^cern, and ought not to affect the Interests of the Church: For from
these Grounds it appears, that in the Opinion of the Church of England, which
made the Canons, it was of such concern, as to have the highest Censures of the
Church interested in it, and to be made a fundamental term of her Communion. If
after it is examined by Men of better Judgment, and better skilled in the
concerns of the Church of England, it shall, etc.


The Canon, to which the Author of the Letter resers.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the King's Majesty has not the same
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical that the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews,
and Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church, or impeach in any part his
Regal Supremacy in the said Causes restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of
the Realm therein established: Let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not
restored but only by the Archbishop after his Repentance, and public
Revocation of those his wicked Errors.

Before I come to explain the intent and force of this Canon, I think it
convenient to set down a Position in the first Canon, which all Persons having
^ure of Souls, and all other Preachers and Readers of Divinity are obliged to
the uttermost of their Wit, Knowledge and Learning, purely and sincerely,
(without any Color or Dissimulation) to teach, manifest, open and declare four
times every Year at the least. And whether this has been done, or, if done,
with what Sincerity by the greatest part, let the World judge by their present
and late Actings. And it may be farther observed, that this Position is
levelled as well against all Civil as Ecclesiastical Foreign Powers, as may
appear not only from the Words in it, but from our Laws and Statutes, (which
shall hereafter be produced,) which this was designed to strengthen and
confirm, That the Spiritual Sword might afford what assistance it could to the
Secular, and both Powers concur to secure the Lawful Supreme Governor, upon
whose Safety and Welfare the Well-being of both so much depended.

The Position in the first Canon.
That all Usurped and Foreign Power (forasmuch as the same has no
establishment nor ground by the Law of God) is for most just Causes taken away
and abolished; and that therefore no manner of Obedience, or Subj^ction within
his Majesty's Realms and Dominions is due unto any such Foreign Power: But that
the King's Power within his Realms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and all
other his Dominions and Countries, is the highest Power under God, to whom all
Men, as well Inhabitants, as born within the same, do by God's Laws owe most
Loyalty and Obedience, before and above all other Powers and Potentates in Earth.

I do not deny, but that the Usurpations of the Court of Rome were the ^ccasion
of laying down this Position; but then though the occasions of Laws or Canons
are particular, yet the Law or Canon it self is general against all Mischiefs
whatsoever of the like kind. If the occasion of the first Law against Murder
had been the cutting a Man's Throat, no State what^oe^^^ would be so weak as to
make a Law only against cutting of Throats, and leave bloody Men free to use
all other ways; but their Law would be ^ade general to prevent the killing any
Man either with Knife, Sword, Pistol, (...), or any other way or means
whatsoever; otherwise at this rate we must have a particular Law for every
particular Fact: It were a ridiculous thing to make a Fence against the
Encroachments and Usurpations of the ^oman Court, and to leave open a wide Gap
for all others to enter in at pleasure. For though we may justly have
particular Apprehensions of the Al^-assuming Man at Rome, yet we have the same
reason against all Usurpat^^ns, as being equally pernicious to us from what
Quarter soever they ^^me.

But that we may come nearer to the Business, both this Position and (...)
forecited Canon are equally acknowledged by both Parties engaged in (...)
present Controversy; both Non-Jurors and Jurors assert themselves to (...) the
Church of England, and lay claim to the Canon as a Canon of their Church; if
therefore the Canon be violated, there can be no Cotroversie betwixt either
Party, but that the Penalty mentioned in the Canon belongs to the Violators; so
that if either Party appear guilty, the Penalty must be fixed by consent. Now
for both Parties to get quit of it is impossible; this Thunderbolt must
unavoidably fall upon the one or the other: For i^ King James be our true and
lawful Sovereign, then the Regal Authority is his; and consequently the
Supremacy, which is the choicest and top Branch of that Authority; and if so,
then the Jurors, who not only deny King James's Supremacy, but have to their
Power divested him of all Authority, must inevitably stand excommunicated ipso
facto by virtue of this Canon, the force of which themselves acknowledge. On the
other hand, it is not to be doubted but the Jurors will not be wanting to
themselves in charging the Non-Jurors with the same Guilt, for not worshipping
the Idol which they have set up, and which has been more chargeable than ever
was Nebuchadnezzar's Golden Image. Now the Mighty Dr. Sherlock tells us, That
we cannot have two Kings at once; and though I am not satisfied, that the
Doctor's Proposition is universally true, (for David caused Solomon to be
anointed and proclaimed King in his Lifetime without divesting himself, and
the like did our King Henry II. to his no small Trouble;) yet in this Case
where the two Titles clash and mutually destroy each other, so that if the
former be Rightful King, the latter must be an Usurper; if the latter have
acquired a Right, the former must have lost his; there it is most certain that
we cannot have two Kings at once. Now for their New-fashion'd King, they may
take the best care of him they can; that which lies on us is to prove the Right
in King James, which even Dr. Sherlock acknowledges; and that very thing makes
his de facto King to be but another Name for an Usurper: For a bare de facto
King is no more a King, than a Possessor malae sidei is the true Proprietor of
an Estate, which he has unlawfully and unjustly thrust himself into. Now the
Right being supposed, the Powers and Authorities are inseparably annexed to it,
though by prevailing Wickedness, or other Means, the Exercise may for a time be
suspended; and then the denying or opposing this Authority does incur the
Censure of this Canon. Now that King James is our Lawful Rightful King has
been clearly proved by so many learned Pens, that I may well spare my pains;
and therefore shall take notice of it only as it were in transitu, and so far
forth as is needful to make for the directing the Censure of this Canon, and
explaining it.

Several Pleas are set up by our Adversaries, to prove that King James has
lost or some way or other quitted his Title; but as most of their Pleas fall
foul upon each other, and as destroying one another cannot be all true, so
neither dare they tell us which they will stand to; that which deserves to come
in the Van is the Plea of a just Conquest, which swallows up not only the Title
of the King, but the Rights of all the Subjects; and this no doubt will make a
brave Deliverance from Slavery: I cannot tell whether this way of arguing be
more base or bold; yet herein amongst others have engaged themselves the Welsh
Prophet, the Scotch Apostle, and (lest the Mount^banks should want their Zany)
the Bishopsgate-street Doctor, who whilst he thought himself fallen under
Disgrace with his Master, and neglected, began to bellow, What! two Kings, two
Archbishops? etc. but see how great is the Policy in understanding the
Proverb, da off am ^erbero: For no sooner was an Offer made of a good fat
Prebend, but the Fowl not only came to the Lure, but Ingratitude undertook to
rake into poor martyred Mr. Ashton s Ashes, and answer his dying Speech: But it
seems to be much safer meddling with the Dead than the Living; for though he
has been somewhat roughly handled for this by the Author of the Loyal Martyr,
yet ever since he has been as mute as a Fish. But after all there is no
Answerer like a thing called a Parliament; they do it effectually, as Dr.
Burnet to his great Mortisication now very well knows: And though this be
indeed only argamentum ad hominem; yet it is enough for me here, because our
Adversaries must acqui^sce in it: For they who own a Government* must not,
ought not to set that Government upon such grounds, as the Government it self
not only disowns but condemns: And so Farewell Conquest.

The next celebrated Argument is a Jumble of Desertion and Abdication: But
this, if it were true, would not do their work. For he that deserts or
abdicates, deserts and abdicates for himself; the Rights of others are saved,
it lies not in his Power to give them away: So that if it could be supposed,
that King James had abdicated or deserted, yet that would give William and Mary
no Right, unless they had it elsewhere; for upon such Abdication or Desertion,
our Constitutions had immediately set the Crown upon the Head of the next Heir:
And there is one before them, against whose innocence nothing can be pretended;
and it is the height of Impudence to blast such Innocence with the Name of an
Imposture, and never offer the least proof of it, though they have been so
often provoked and dared to it. If therefore King James had really and truly
abdicated or deserted, then the Prince of Wales at that instant had become our
King. Now they deny the Authority of the Son, as well as of the Father; and
therefore either the one way or the other must be entangled in this Censure.
But after all, the Assertion it self is a notorious shameless Falsehood: For a
Desertion in this case must be altogether voluntary, and so voluntary, that
there ought nor in reason to be thought, that there was at that time so much as
animus revertendi; nay let it be never so voluntary, yet an Author of their
own, (who thinks himself no small Babe, and was no idle Promoter of the
Revolution,) will not allow it to be good in Law, unless an Huy and Cry be sent
after him, and forty days notice being given, he refuse to return. But how will
this agree with his Proposal to the City by the Bishop of Winchester? With his
Letter from Rochest^r? With his Letter to the Convention? (...) landing in
Ireland, and using all Endeavors to regain his Right, (...) betrayed and
beaten back by his faithless Subjects? And with the (...) the aid of his
Friends, and the claiming his Right, and calling upon his Subjects to return to
their Allegiance, and come in to his Assistance: Wh^^ they can prove that
claiming is renouncing, and that the utmost (...) a Man can use to regain his
Right is the real and absolute quitti^g of (...) then they may prove this to be
Desertion: Certainly these Men never knew what blushing was. As for Abdication
in this place it must be understood actively, as a Man is said abdicare se
Magistratu; but that requires a formal Renunciation or Resignation: But why is
it not produced? Or rather, Why have not these Men, who stick at nothing,
forged one in all this time? Though it will be very difficult to impose upon
Men with a counterseit Resignation of a Man, who apparently all along has so
strongly and constantly claimed: But I need not insist on this any longer,
because the very Arguments which consute Desertion, destroy Abdication; of
which any may read enough to their Satisfaction in Des^^tion discussed, and
many other learned Tracts handling that Subject.

There is another Mong^el Plea set up by the de facto Men; I know not well what
to call it, nor to what Topic to refer it. These Men without any regard to
Conscience, Faith, or common Honesty, are for securing their Worldly
Enjoyments, and making their present Markets; and they boldly tell you that you
are bound in all things to obey the King in Possession. But what if a King in
Possession should prove a Contradiction in terminis? When a Person is in
Possession of a Throne without Right, and in opposition to a just Right, all
the World has hitherto accounted such an one an Usurper, not a King; but with
these Men, all the World before them were Fools: For if they say true, there
can be no such thing as an Usurper. But this is the least evil of this
perfidious Notion: For it turns the World into a bloody Theater, makes every
thing a Prize to every Man, who by sighting, scrambling, cheating, or any other
means can get Possession of it; destroys the nature of Right and Wrong;
resolves all Right into Possession; and renders all Laws both Divine and Humane
so far as relates to Property) unnecessary, useless, and insignificant.

But I may very well spare any farther pains in this particular; because of
late their much admired Juli^n Johnson, though he is pleased so liberally to
make a Sacrifice of the Doctrine of the Cross, yet has very pleasantly, and
indeed soundly consuted the whole Crowd of all his Brethrens Arguments; and
thereby to their great grief bereaved them of all their Topics, wherewith they
were used to blaspheme God in the Pulpits on their Mock-Thanksgiving-Days. Nor
does his Performance seem any way displeasing even to the Government it self:
For though his Book was presented openly at the Parliament-Door, yet it not
only stands uncensured, but is thought to have been the great occasion, that
the Salisbury Dictator's Book was doomed to be burnt by the hands of the common
Hangman. But to make some amends for this triumphant Squander he has set up a
Plea of his own; and indeed to do him justice, he has bid the fairest to set
the present Government upon some bottom, if it could be possibly set on any:
For if he could make it appear, that the late Proceedings were warranted by our
Constitutions, he would speak more to the purpose than all that has been said
hitherto; but I doubt not but to make it appear, that our Constitutions utterly
overthrow his Plea.

Now this knocking Argument, which will suffer nothing to stand before it, is
only Abdication still; but then it is indeed a Passive Abdication, wherein the
Person abdicated is a Sufferer, and is abdicated not by his own ^ct, but by
another, who has a certain Right in him, and Superiority over him; as a Father
is said abdicare Filium. He seems inclinable rather to call it Abrogation, than
Abdication; a Word which seems harsh with respect to Persons, though proper as
to Laws; and yet in the Verb is sometimes used in that Sense by later
Historians; but abdicare properly respects Persons. However to his purpose he
tells us, That the People of England did actually abrogate or dethrone King
James the Second for Misgovernment, and promoted the Prince of Orange in his
stead. By the People I suppose he means not the dissusive Body, but their
Representatives; for as the former seems impracticable, so it is evident that
the Feat was done by what they called a Convention; and afterward ratified by
what they call a Parliament But herein he and his Masters cannot agree; sor
they put it upon an Active Abdication, which Julian seems by no means willing
to allow: For they say expressly, That King James abdicated the Government, and
that thereby the Throne became vacant. So that all they pretend to is to supply
a Vacancy, (whether there can be any such thing by our Constitutions in our
Government, I do not here dispute,) and provide a Remedy against a grand
defect, when there was no King in Israel; and in that very place, where he
cites the Word abdicate in Tully, it is taken in an Active Sense: For after
they had driven away their Kings, the highest share of the Regal Power was
conferred on the Consuls; and when Mark Anthony offered a Crown to Caesar, if
he did not expressly, yet he effectually renounced his Consulship: For had
Caesar accepted it, he could no longer have been the Consul of a popular State,
but must thenceforth have acted by Authority srom Caesar, or not at all: So
that this would have been no Forseiture, but a real giving up his Power. But
contrary her^to Mr Johnson sairly makes King James tenacious enough of his
Authority, and tells us, that the People abrogated and dethroned him; a Power
which the Convention knew not of, nor did so much as pretend to: they had done
wisely, if they had consulted this Learned Man to understand their own Power,
before they had gone about their work. For though he contradicts them, yet he
makes them much greater than they were aware of; and has not only set the
Subjects above the Sovereign, but has advanced the House of Commons into the
place of the Almighty God of Heaven, giving them Power to pull down and set up
Kings, as they shall (...) and convenient.

But I hope we are not so bound to follow Mr. Johnson with an (...) Faith, but
that we may examine upon what Grounds he has given Subjects such a Paramount
Authority over their Sovereign: And for this he urges in the first place, a
Message to King Richard the Second, then at El^ham, wherein his Parliament
averrs, that in the case there mentioned, it is lawful for them ipsum Regem de
regali solio abrogare, and propinquiorem aliquem de stirpe regia loco ejus in
Regni solio sublimare: And for this Power in the same Message they plead only
an unknown Statute, and the infamous Precedent, and Larbarous usage of Edward
the Second. Had not Discontent and Anger blinded them, they would have been
ashamed of their Precedent; and for their Statute, neither they nor any other
have transmitted it to us: So that it seems they durst not trust any with the
examination of it. But, if he please, to make amends for that Defect, I will
recommend to Mr. Johnson's second Thoughts a known Statute in the Reign of the
same King Richard the Second; wherein it is judged High Treason for any Person
to compass the King's Death, to d^pose him, or make War against him within the
Realm, or to render up his Homage, 21 Ric. 2. Where we shall find his Statute I
know not; but this is to be found in our Statute Book, and in the same King's
Reign, against whom he sets up a contrary Plea: If no Subject can render up his
Homage, (which by the way I take to be much the same with Dr. Burnet's
transferring his Allegiance, wherein of late he has had too many Followers,)
nor raise War against his Prince, nor depose him, without being condemned by
the Law for a Traitor; I would fain know how he will reconcile his unknown
Statute to this known one.

We are hard put to our Shifts when we are forced to run eight hundred Years
backwards for a piece of a Sentence that may seem to look favorably on our
Cause; And what good at last will King Alfred's Style do him, Dei Gratia and
Benevolemia West-Saxonicae Gentis? I confess he has a hard Task, and bad Game
to play, who, through the Artifices of designing Knaves, labors under the ill
Opinion and hard Thoughts of his Subjects; and it was a singular Happiness to
King Alfred, that he had the Good Will and the very Hearts of his People: But
though King Alfred for his Piety, Justice, and Bravery, might stand for an
eternal Pattern to all Kings that come after him; yet no Person that ever sat
on the Saxon or English Throne ever acted with a freer or fuller Power than he
did, as will plainly appear to any that read his History: Nor indeed was it
possible for him to have done those great Things which he did, had he been
shackled with those Fetters which our Demigogues endeavor now to hang upon
Kings, with pretense indeed to curb their Extravagancies, and restrain their
exorbitant Power, but with a real design to drive out all Kings, and introduce
a Democracy. nicknamed a Commonwealth, the most unquiet, troublesome, and
most arbitrary and tyrannical of all Governments.

But to what purpose is all this Stuff? Are we to judge of our Constitutions by
the blind Tale of a little Historian, or the contradictory Saying of an old
Moth-eaten Lawyer, who wrote in di^^icult Times, trod upon Thorns, and was
under a kind of Necessity to write so, as that he might avoid the Rage of the
several incensed Parties? What a woeful Condition are the People of England in,
if they must look five, six, seven, or eight hundred Years downward for what
they are to do now, and to learn wherein and how far they are to obey their
King? Such Things fall in few Hands, and are read by fewer, and perhaps well
considered by fewest of all. Will Mr. Johnson have the present State of Affairs
redu^ed to what was so long since? Or will he be content that his Almighty
House of Commons should be l^id aside, because there was no such House at the
time from whence he se^cheth several of his Authorities, or at least not such a
House as is now under the pr^sent Constitutions? And therefore I must beg his
Pardon, if in this case I little regard his far-fetched Stories, and am bold to
tell him, that we are not to be ruled or guided by odd Remnants of Antiquity in
this matter, but by our present Constitution; and if he can make that agree
with his Old Stories, he will go near to carry the Cause; but if he cannot,
then both he and all the Revolutionists will stand for ever condemned by it.

Now I know not how to come to the knowledge of our Constitutions better than by
our Laws; and then for a Protestant Kingdom, it may be convenient to look so
high as the first establishment of Religion under that odd Title, and to
compare and view the agreement of our Laws all along from the first entrance
of the Protestant Religion to the very time of King James's pretended
A^dication. And here, if I go so high as Henry the 8th, (...) I think I need go
no farther than Queen Elizabeth, and so trace Things to our own Time, we shall
thence learn the present Obligations we lay under, when this Revolution came
upon us.

I am not willing to create a Quarrel, whether Henry the 8th were Papist or
Protestant; I will freely give the Papists my share in him: For he that so
^obb'd the Churches, that many Parishes have not Revenues to find a Minister
Bread; and burnt Protestants because they would not become Papists; I think is
much fitter for them, than for us: But be he what he will, I cannot find that
either he or his Parliament owned Mr. Johnson's Doctrine. In the ^^th of his
Reign, cap. 12. you will find it thus Enacted. Where by diverse sundry old
Authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed,
That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the
World, governed by one ^upream Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a Body Politic, compact of
all sorts and degrees of People, divided in Terms, and by Names of Spirituality
and Temporality, been bound^n and owen to bear, next to God, a natural and
humble Obedience. Here a Parliament declares him (...), subjects him to none
but God* and in the next following Words gives him plenary, whole, and entire
Power, Pre-eminence, Authority, Prerogative and Jurisdiction. And this they
declare to be no new thing but to be taught by old Histories and Chronicles*
whose authentickness they vouch. Now one would think that such authentic
Histories, and such Vouchers, should make a better Authority th^n Mr. Johnson's
Knighton. But it is so well known what Authority Henry the 8th challenged, and
was owned by his Subjects, that I need not insis^ upon it: Had our Author come
abroad then with his new Inventions, he himself perhaps would have found little
better usage than Dr. Burnet's Pastoral Letter.

As for King Edward the Sixth, we do not find that he any ways departed from
the Authority his Father left him; but though a Prince of great Hopes, and
pious Inclinations, yet by the Seducements of some ill Persons about him,
entered farther upon the Ecclesiastical Authority than ever his Father did; how
justly I leave others to judge, I cannot commend it. And then for Queen Mary,
all Dignities, Prerogative Royal, Power, Pre-eminence, Privileges,
Authorities, and Jurisdictions, are as fully, wholly, absolutely, and entirely
invested in her, as in her Father, or any her Predecessors, by the Statute 1
Mariae, Par. Sec. Cap. 1.

To avoid tediousness, I shall only touch upon such Statutes as speak home to
this purpose; and now we come to that which all sorts of Persons, except
Papists, as with one Month style the best Reign: I mean the admired times of
Queen Elizabeth, in the first Year of whose Reign the Oath of Supremacy was
enacted, or rather revived, in which amongst others are these two things
asserted; 1st. That the Queen's Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other her Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal. 2dly. That no
Foreign Prince, Person, I relate, State or Potentate, has, or ^ught to have
any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual, within this Realm. By the first her own Subject's Hands are tied
up; by the second the Usurpations of Foreignes are excluded. She could not be
Supreme, much less only Supreme, if any Men or body of Men in her own Dominions
had a Superior Power to depose her; and it being not only their Duty, but they
also farther obliged by Oath to assist and desend her in this Supremacy, and
this Oath and Statute being transmitted in force to all her Successors, any
attempt by them to the contrary must necessarily be invalid and unlawsul: And
those who have a mind to know the Penalties which the Law insticts on Offenders
in this kind, may at their leisure read them in the same Statute.

Let us now des^^^d from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to that of King James the
First; and in the Act of Rec^gr^tion, Anno 1. Jac. 1. cap. 1. after a long,
dutiful, and humble Pr^^mble, it is thus said: We (being bounden thereunto both
by the Laws of God and Man,) do recognize and acknowledge, (and thereby express
our unspeakable Joys,) That immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of
Elizabeth, late Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England,
and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to
your most excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and
sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm, as is aforesaid: And that by the
Goodness of God Almighty, and lawful Right of Descent, under one Imperial
Crown, your Majesty is of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, the most potent and mighty King, and by God's Goodness more able
to protect and govern us your Loving Subjects in all Peace and Plenty, than any
of your noble Progenitors; and thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do
submit, and oblige our Selves, our Heirs, and Posterities for ever, until the
last drop of our Blood be spent: And do beseech your Majesty to accept the
same, as the First Fruits in this High Court of Parliament, of our Loyalty and
Faith to your Majesty, and your Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever. Which if
your Majesty shall be pleased (as an Argument of your gracious Acceptance) to
adorn with your Majesty's Royal Assent, (without which it can neither be
complete and perfect, nor remain to all Posterity, according to our most humble
Desires, as a Memorial of your Princely and tender Affection toward us;) we
shall add this also to the rest of your Majesty's unspeakable and inestimable
Benefits. Here they plainly acknowledge these two things; 1st. That the Crown
descends by Proximity of Blood, and that immediately, even before any Ceremony
of Coronation or otherwise; so that there can be no Inter-regnum or Vacancy of
the Throne: And accordingly it is a Maxim in Law, that Rex non moritur. 2dly.
That the assent of the King, is that which gives the Life, Being, and Vigor to
Laws, without which they are of no force. Now how the late Proceedings which
were directly against both these can be valid, ought to be made very clear, at
least it ought to be better proved than by the capricious Opinion of one single
private Person against a full and lawful Parliament.

In the Third Year of the same King James was Enacted the Oath, commonly called
the Oath of Allegiance, (not but that the same thing was practiced before,
though not in the same Words;) which may be tendered to any above the Age of
eighteen; which restraining the Subject not only from deposing, but from
offering the least violence or harm to the King, and obliging all Subjects so
faithfully to assist their King against both Domestic Traitors and Foreign
Usurpers; and being so directly contrary to, and utterly inconsistent with Mr.
Johnson's Doctrine, I think fit to insert it here at large.

I A B do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my
Conscience, before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King James is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other. His Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any Violence or Hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects, within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my Heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the ^ope or hi^ Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subject^ from their Obedience. I
will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to ^he uttermost of my Power, against all
Conspiracies and Contempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose, and make
known, unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons, and Traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against him, or any of them.

I do farther swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
Impious, and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of thi^ Oath or any part
thereof; which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me: And do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to
these express Words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common Sense
and Understanding of the same Words, without any Equivocation, or Mental
Evasion, or Secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true Faith of a
Christian: So help me God.

If foolish wicked Men did not make their Reservations, and endeavor to put
Tricks even upon God, whom they call to be a Witness of the Truth of what they
swear, and an Avenger if they swear falsely, there would need nothing more to
co^^in Subjects in their Loyalty: But still to improve this matter farther, 7
Jac. 1. cap. 6. an Act tells us, That this Oath tends only to the Declaration
^f such Duty, as every true and well-affected Subject, not only by Bond of
Allegiance, but also by the Commandment of Almighty God, ought to bear to his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors. So that though this Act obliges all Persons
of the Age of eighteen Years, upon pain of incurring a Praemun^^^, to take this
Oath if tendered; yet it gives us to understand that it is only a super added
Obligation to secure our law^ul Prince, and keep the Subject to his Duty; and
that though the Oath be not taken, yet the natural Allegiance of every Subject
binds him to the same thing: And though it was principally, yet not only made
with relation to the Bishop of Rome, but to all others, as expressing that
Allegiance which obliges Subjects to stand by their Prince against all his
Opposers, Enemies, and Underminers whatsoever. I do not know that any Foreign
Powers, (the Pope excepted,) so much as pretend to a Right to depose lawful
Princes; nor did even the Prince of Orange, when he came over, pretend to any
such Power by his Declaration; and it seems to me to be no better than an
impudent Contradiction, when Men acknowledge that no Foreign Power can depose a
lawful Prince, to say, that his own Subjects, who by the Laws of God and Man
owe him Allegiance, and are bound with the utmost hazard of their Lives to
defend him, may do it. And it see us to me worth Observation, that Dr.
Stillingfleet in his Preface to the Jesuit's Loyalty, proves, that the Pope
deposes Princes upon Commonwealth Princip^es: Now I would willingly know upon
what Principle the Doctor has joined with the Revolutionists in deposing his
Prince. If he joins with Mr. Johnson in his Argument, it is Commonwealth all
over; if he take up with the other Arguments of his Brethren, Julian has
fairly ^iss'd them out of Doors. I did once think that Men who raved against
the Evasions, Equivocations, Mental Reservations, Dispensations, and other
deceitful Arts and Tricks of the Jesuits, had been Men of Plain dealing,
Simplicity and Integrity; But since I have discovered, that those very Men, who
made the deposing Power their Bell-wether Argument against the Papists, were at
that same time busy in contriving how to depose their own lawful Prince: I
have been prone to think, that if you should take a Latitudinarian Protestant,
and a Jesuit, and put them both in a Bag, and shake them well together, it
would be hard to determine, whether he that came out first or last was the
greatest Knave.

After the deplorable Consusions, Divisions, Wars, Devastations, and
Oppressions, (they are the Words of the Act,) wherewith these Kingdoms were
harassed in the former Rebellion, (the Wickedness of which no Man would have
thought could have been exceeded, had he not seen this,) the People, j^ded with
their own Folly and Villainy, and seeing no and of the Rapine, Madness and
Cruelty of their Oppressors, call Home their Lawful Sovereign King Charles the
Second: And in the 12th Year of his Reign, (but of his actual governing the
first,) an Act passed, wherein his undoubted Hereditary, Sovereign and Regal
Authority was acknowledged; a perpetual Thanksgiving for his Restoration
ordered to be annually and publicly kept: All Ministers are thereby bound to
celebrate it, and to give God Thanks, and publicly declare the extraordinary
Mercies, Blessings and Deliverances received; all People are bound on that Day
to repair to some Church or Chapel, where the Service appointed may be had;
all Ministers to give notice of it the Lord's Day before; and upon the Day to
read the Act pablickly and distinctly to the People: And this is again
confirmed the 13th Car. 2. cap. 11. Certainly no Man that had a Grain of
Honesty could think that any People could be guilty of such fulsome Hypocrisy,
and such downright mocking of God, as to keep a public Thanksgiving for the
restoring one Brother to his Right, and at the same time to plead the
lawfulness of driving away and keeping out the other Brother by force of Arms,
when the Right and Title of both Brothers was exactly the same. By what
Authority do they call the other Rebels, when they do the same thing? Or is it
a wicked thing in Presbyterians and Independents to depose Kings, but lawful
and commendable in Latitudinarians?

But if forty Parliaments had laid their Heads together to secure their
Sovereign from any Violence or Harm against any Man, Men, or body of Men
whatsoever of his own Subjects, or most effectually to confute Mr. Johnson's
Argument; I cannot imagine how they could do it in more apt, proper and full
terms, than is done by the Act 12 Car. 2. cap. 30. wherein it is declared, That
by the undoubted and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of
this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People
collectively or representatively, nor any other Persons whatsoever, ever had,
have, has, or ought to have, any Coercive Power over the Persons of the Kings
of this Realm. Here plainly by a full and free Parliament, and by universal
consent, all sorts and all bodies of Men are restrained from using any Violence
to their King; and this not only at present enacted, but declared to be so by
the undoubted and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. If this be true, Bracton
must be mistaken; Or shall we esteem his Authority above that of the High Court
of Parliament? Or what shall become of his respectuetur ad Magnam Curiam, when
that very Court in this case denies it? And that too upon this very account,
that the undoubted and fundamental Laws are against it.

There are many other Statutes which seem to be pursuant of this; as 13 Car. 2.
cap. 1. where that Opinion is condemned, That both Houses of Parliament, or
either of them, have a Legislative Power without the King; by which alone all
the Acts of the Convention are overthrown, and all the pretended Authorities
thereupon founded. Hence in the same Act they proceed to condemn the
Proceedings in the former Rebellion, declaring, That the Oath usually called
the Solemn League and Covenant, was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed
upon the Subjects of this Realm against the fundamental Laws and Liberties of
this Kingdom; and that all Orders and Ordinances, and pretended Orders and
Ordinances, of both or either Houses of Parliament, for imposing of Oaths,
Covenants or Engagements, levying of Taxes, or raising of Forces and Arms, to
which the Royal Assent, either in Person or by Commission, was not expressly had
or given, were in their first creation and making, and still are, and so shall
be taken to be, null and void to all intents and purposes whatsoever. Now, (as
if they had had a Spirit of Prophecy,) this Act seems to be more strongly
levelled against the Convention than the long Parliament; for the long
Parliament were called by the King's Writ, and by his assent to a Bill were
continued till they should dissolve themselves; but the Convention was a
Mushroom, sprung up of it self, and remaining without root or foundation: They
were so far from having any color of Law to warrant them, that when they had
traitorously driven away their King with Lies, Noise, and Threats; they met
contrary to all Law, at the invitation of a Stranger, their King's Enemy,
against whom they ought to have defended him; and therefore were Traitors in
that very Act: The long Parliament indeed boldly assumed the whole Authority to
themselves, but withal they seemed not before hand to be destitute of a very
considerable Legal Authority; but the Convention as they had no manner of
Authority in that case, so they pretend to give the Supreme Authority to one,
who as a Stranger had less Authority than themselves: But neither could they
give what they never had, nor he receive from them what they had not to give;
and therefore this Act as strongly makes null and void all the Oaths, Acts,
Orders, Ordinances and Proceedings whatsoever of the present Government, as
they call themselves, as it did the Solemn League and Covenant, and other the
proceedings of the Rump Parliament, and Oliv^r the First.

13 Car. 2. cap. 6. There is an Act, wherein it is declared, That within all
his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole Supreme Government, Command, and
Disposition of the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and Land, and of all Forts
and places of Strength, is, and by the Laws of England ever was, the undoubted
Right of his Majesty, and his Royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England;
and that both or either of the Houses of Parliament cannot, nor ought to
pretend to the same; nor can, nor lawfully may, raise or levy any War,
offensive or defensive, against his Majesty, his Heirs or lawful Successors,
etc. And in the same Act the grounds of contrary proceedings they call
Rebellious Principles; the Governments set up against the lawful King, they
style usurped Governments; and the effect of such doings they say was almost
the Ruin and Destruction of this Kingdom. But what was wanting then, we have
just cause to fear will be made up now; we are within a little of leaving out
the almost, and are upon the very brink of utter Ruin and Destruction. Now if
the sole Supreme Government was in King James, and the whole power and
disposition of the Militia, and all Forts and places of Strength, were
undoubtedly his Right, and no War offensive or defensive may be raised against
him; then all those places were wrongfully taken from him, and all the present
Rebellions Proceedings and Usurpations are as void as the former.

It were no hard matter to heap up many other Statutes to this purpose, but I
think these sufficient; for this was the Constitution when King Charles the
Second died, this was the state of the Government when King James the Second
his lawful Successor entered upon it; and all these Acts were in their full
force when he was driven away; and they assert, maintain, keep up and secure
his Right and Supreme Power, as well against his own Subjects as Foreigners:
And therefore the Supremacy, Authority and Right being still his, as all
proceedings against him are null in Law, and condemned by it; so all Persons
thus unlawfully divesting him of that his rightful Supremacy and Authority,
have incurred the Centure of the fore cited Canon made pursuant to these
Constitutions, and must be adjudged to stand ipso facto excommunicate.

I am not insensible, that by a certain side-wind an Objection may be here
brought in, which both Prerogative and Commonwealth-men have (as it served
their Turn) insisted on, That the Statute Law is super-induced, and to be in
force according to the tenor of the old preceding Laws and Customs of England,
and if repugnant to them void; if obscure and doubtful, to be explained by
them. And I am informed that the Paltry, (I should have said the Poultrey)
Doctor, in his private Pleas in making Converts, or rather Perverts, does
farther alledg, That the Statute Law is utterly insignisicant in it self, and
that we are wholly to be guided by antecedent Laws and Customs. Whether he
means by this to warrantize Rebellion by the worst of Precedents, or would have
all swallowed up in the Prerogative, I cannot tell; for he is as much for
William, as he was against King James; so tempting a thing is even the bare
hopes of a Bishopric. But against this I desire these few things may be
considered: 1st. I humbly request this bold Doctor, or any of his Accomplices, to
tell me in plain English, Whether the august Court of Parliament, which is
brought together with so much Charge, appears in such State, and is styled the
highest Court in the Kingdom, sits in all that Formality and Solemnity only to
devise New-Nothings, or to make Rattles and Baubles for Fools and Children? For
if his Objection be true, I see not what they do more; but must be the meerest
piece of Pageantry that ever was. 2dly. It is observable that this Argument, if
not first trump'd up, yet was most warmly managed in the time of King Charles
the First, when the matter of the Petition of Right was under debate; and
though they threw Dust in one another's Eyes, and amused the Kingdom with sine
Harangues about old blind antecedent Laws, which no Body knew what to make of;
yet when they come to pen the Statutes, they fairly leave them all to shift for
themselves, and found it wholly upon preceding Statutes, as any Man may there
see to his satisfaction, 3 Car. 1. in initio. 3dly. That the forecited
Statutes are so far from expressing any thing obscurely or doubtfully, that
they are as intelligible, plain and easy, as if they had been written with a
Beam of the Sun. Lastly, (and which indeed is most considerable) all, or most,
and the most pertinent of the forementioned Statutes, are not merely
constitutive, but declaratory, not barely telling us what for the future should
be Law, but informing us what by the old antecedent Laws were the undoubted
Rights of the Crown, and rule of Succession; and indeed I can discover but two
ways whereby the Crown can succeed according to our Constitutions, viz. either
b^ Proximity of Blo^d in a lineal Succession, or by the last Will and Testament
of the present right^ul Prince in Possession, ratified in Parliament; both
which are mentioned in the Act of Settlement, 35 Hen. 8. and made a rule of
Succession for ever, 1 Eliz. cap. 3. neither of which will do our Adversaries
any Service: And thus I think I have given as fair and full an answer to Mr,
Johnson as he has done to the rest of his Brethren; and the Obstacles being
now removed may justly proceed to the Canon, which decl^res all such Persons as
deny the Supremacy of their lawful King to be excommunicate ipso facto: As to
which I shall consider these several particulars; First, That this Canon is no
Novelty, but pursuant to, and taking pattern from other Canons of the Church of
Christ, made all along for the security of Princes. Secondly, What is meant by
Excommunication ipso facto. Thirdly, What is the State and Condition of Persons
excommunicate. Fourthly, What ought to be the Behavior of other Christians
toward such as stand ^xcommunicate. Lastly, the particular restraint here
laid, as to reconciling such Persons who are censured by this Canon.

As to the first, Christianity, which not only teaches, but obliges us to do
good for evil, took care of the Supremacy of the Supreme Powers, even when they
were Persecutors; but when Kings and Queens became Nursing Fathers and Nursing
Mothers, and took the Church into their Protection, defending the Persons not
only as Subjects but Christians, and backing the Canons and Censures of the
Church with Civil Laws and Penalties; from th^nce the Church became bound not
only in Duty but in Gratitude to contribute all she could to the protection of
that lawful Government, which protected her; and to render the Civil Laws and
Penalties more aweful and effectual, did farther enforce them (as occasion
required, but especially for the security of lawful Princes,) with the Threats
and Terrors of Divine Vengeance, which by Authority, committed to her by God,
she had power to denounce against such Offenders. The Doctrine of Obedience to
lawful Powers, has been a part of Christianity from its very first entrance
into the World, even then when it was the greatest Sufferer under them. Thus
our Blessed Savior teaches the Seditious Jews, Mat. 22. 21. Render unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods.
Thus his Apostle St. Paul to the Romans, 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject unto
the Higher Powers. To Titus, 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates. And St. Peter, as if he had a
mind to confirm the very terms of our Canon, and contradict his pretended
Successor the Pope, gives this Charge, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, etc. 1 Pet. 2.
13. The loose Answers which have been devised to take off the force of these
Scriptures, and encourage eternal Confusions, have been of late so shamefully
bassled by many learned Pens, that I need not concern my self farther with
them; only I think it fit they should know what Penalty God's Word has
assigned to Offenders in this kind, which being no less than Damnation, I
cannot but as a Christian wish them Repentance, that if possible they may
escape it; though I cannot without deploring their Condition think of the
Observation, That Rebellion in this is as the Sin of Witchcraft, that both Sins
do so bewitch Men, and carry away their very Hearts and Souls, that they
rarely, if ever, think on Repentance on this side Hell; and then I fear it will
stand them in little stead, notwithstanding the comfortable Doctrine which
their new High Priest has broached, for the benefit of the damned, and to
encourage the Living to run the hazard of Damnation.

If I should examine how the Church in succeeding Times trod in these steps of
our Savior, and his Apostles, it would be a tedious work; and therefore I
shall only subjoin some few Citations as a Specimen: And I hope I shall be
pardoned if I take the liberty to translate, since I write only for the
Instruction of the Ignorant, not for the Information of those who are wiser
than my self. And in that early Collection of Canons, commonly known by the
name of the Apostle's Canons, we find this, (...), etc. If any Man, against
Right, do Wrong to the King or Governor, let him be severely punished; if he
be a Clergy man, let him be deposed; if a Lay man, let him be excommunicated,
Can. 84.

In the Fourth Council of Toledo, we find both a neat Preamble and smart Canon
to this purpose; thus, Multarum quippe gentium -- tanta extat perfidia, etc. So
false (say they) and perfidious are the Minds of many Men, that they will not
keep that Faith which by Oath they have promised to their King, but whilst with
their Mouths they profess to swear, in their Hearts retain Treachery; for they
swear Fidelity to their Kings, but break their Oaths, not regarding the
Judgment of God denounced (Jer. 7. 8, etc.) against those who swear by the Name
of the Lord falsely. What hope can such have in War with their Enemies? What
other Nations will trust such in Peace? What League at this rate can hold them?
What Pledge or Assurance can they give, that they will keep their Faith with
their Enemies, when they break that Faith which they have sworn to their own
Kings? Then follows the Canon. Whosoever henceforth, either of us, any of the
Spanish People, by any Machination or Contrivance, shall violate that Oath of
Fidelity, which he has sworn for the Safety of his Country, the State of the
Gothic Nation, or the Security of his Prince, or shall murder his King, or
divest him of his Authority, or by Tyrannical Presumption shall usurp the
Throne, let him be Anathema in the sight of the Holy Ghost, and the Martyrs of
Christ; and let him be ejected out of the Catholic Church, which he has
profaned by his Perjury; and let him be debarred from all Christian Communion;
nor let him have any share with the Righteous, but let him be condemned to
eternal Punishment with the Devil and his Angels. And then the whole Clergy and
People give their Consent in these Words: Whosoever shall go contrary to this
Decree, let him be Anathema Maranatha, i. e. let him receive Sentence of
Damnation at the Coming of our Lord Jesus, and both he and his Associates have
their Portion with Judas Iscariot. Amen. Certainly Christians had no light
Opinion of the Sins of Rebellion and Usurpation, when they denounce such a
dreadful Sentence against it; and I think Christianity is still the same it
ever was, however the Professors of it may be altered.

In the Seventh Council of Toledo, cap. 1. we have a Constitution to our
purpose in these Words; Sed and quia plerosque Clericos tantae levitatis
interdum pravitatis praesumptive ita elevat, etc. But because many Clergymen
are so pussed up with Vanity and Wickedness, that unmindful of the gravity of
their Order, and their Faith promised by Oath, they through a rash Levity
consent to the setting up another King, their lawful King being living, it is
sit that such licentiousness should be altogether taken away, and utterly
extirpated out of our Communion: So that if any Layman within the bounds of
the Country of the Goths shall ambi^iously attempt the Crown, and shall
receive any favor or assistance from Clergym^n, and by success^ul Wickedness
shall prevail in his ambitious Attempt; from the time that any Bishop or
Clergyman of what Order soever shall have involved himself in such Crime, it
(...) him to remain excommunicate for ever. (I think here is ipso facto
Excommunication with a Witness.) But if by the prevailing Wickedness of that
Prince, with whom ^e unjustly agreed, the Bishop shall not be able actually to
suspend him from Communion; yet if he over live the said Prince, whosoever
shall admit him to Communion (unless at the very Hour of Death, and upon
sufficient proof of his true Repentance,) let that Person be liable to the
aforesaid Sentence. Here you may see that the Church would not suffer even
prosperous Villainy to rescue Offenders out of her Hands, but obliged her
Members upon the s^ver^st Penalty, upon all Opportunities to make them know
themselves. What Le^i^y may for several reasons be used sometimes, in such
cases, belongs not to me to determine; only, if any think they may be concerned
herein, I wish they may so think as seriously to repent, that they may find
both God's and his Church's Mercy.

From the Concilium Calcuthense, I shall cite only part of a Canon, though the
whole is pertinent enough. Let no Man dare to be privy to the murder of a King,
because he i^ the Lord's Anoint^d; and if any Man join in such Wickedness, if
he be a Bishop or any of the Sacerd^tal Order, let him be degraded, and removed
from the Clergy as Judas was from the Apostolic Order; and whoever else shall
be consenting to such a Sacrilegious Fact, he shall perish under the ^ternal
bond of an Anathema, and coupled with the Traitor Judas shall be burnt in
everlasting Fire; as it is written, not only they who do, but those who
consent to the doing such Things shall not escape the Judgment of God. It is
not long since, that a wise and pious Prince was barbarously murdered amongst
us by his own Subjects; and though his Son by the Mercy of God made his escape,
yet there are many who thi^st for his Blood, which in the estimation of God is
the same thing. To this I will here add part of a Canon of another of our own
Councils, (Vid. Lind. l. 5. sol. 248. b.) Auctoritate Dei Patris, etc. By the
Authority of God the Father, etc. -- we excommunicate all those, who
injurious^y disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of our Lord the King; and those
who labor unjustly to detain the Rights of our Lord the King. This is a Canon
made amongst our selves, and the Book is the great Director of our
Ecclesiasti^^l Co^^ts at this Day; and if the Rights of a King be not only
detained, but wholly swallow^d up by some at this time, we must never believe
matter of Fact more; and as for the Cur^e, let them take it to whom it belongs.
Indeed, while the Authority of God was reverenced in the Censures of the
Church, Kings were very desirous that the Churches protected by them should
contribute to the Security of the Royal Authority, by a d^nunciation of
Spiritual Judgments on such as should any ways be injurious to it: Thus at the
Request of K. Edward, a Constitution was made to this purpose, by John
Stra^ford Archbishop of Canterbury; as is to be seen, Lind. fol. 254 b. But a
very ^emarka^le Instance in this kind the Concilium Engilhelmense, under Lewis
the 4th, affords us, C^n. 1. De hinc ex Sessionis suae loco s^ sub^^gens, etc.
Then the Glorious King Lewis rising from his Seat, -- made a most (...)
Complaint, viz. That ^e was stripped of his Royal Power by a certain Prince
called Hugo; whose just Grief and Complaint we Holy Fathers (i. e. the Bishops
there assembled) cond^^ing, being joined together in the Unity of Spirit, have
made thereupon this Decree: Let no Man henceforth in ^ade the Kingly Power, nor
deal treacherously therewith; for we have decreed by putting in execution the
Council of Toledo, That H^go the Invader, and Ravisher of the Kingdom of K.
Lewi^, shall be smitten with the Sword of Excommunication, unless by an
appointed Time he com^ to the Council, and repent of so soul a Fact, and make
satisfaction. Had this Complaint been made to St. Asaph or Dr. Burnet, They
would have told poor Lewis that Hugo had conquered him, that he had lost all
his Right, and so long as he lived must only be called the late King Lewis;
that for their parts they were bound to swear Allegi^n^^ to Hugo, and to assist
him to the uttermost against Lewis: But contrary-wise these Bishops own the
Cause of the distressed Prince, and decree the Usurper excommunicate, if he
restore not his ill-gotten Goods: Now whom shall we believe? For either this
Council or some Bishops now living must be in the wrong.

The Case of Ludovi^us Plus has too much Assinity with ours; for his own
Children rose up against him; and a parcel of St. Asaphs, Burn^ts, ^owlers, and
such other Godly and Loyal Prelates met together, and made up that which is
called Synodus Compendiensis, and by the Learned Baluzius justly styled Synodus
Praedatoria; these join with the Rebellious Children against the Father, and
formally strip him of his Authority in order to his being imprisoned by his Son
Lotharius: But against these Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mogunce, then
living, a Man of greater Reputation and Authority than a thousand such false
Loon^, stoutly opposes himself; and with the Courage and Fidelity of a
Christian Bishop condemns the Fact, and writes a Tract on purpose, De
reverentia Filiorum erga Patres, and subdi^^rum erga Reges, which I think may
be worth any honest Man's reading. Much such another Case was that of the
Emperor Henry the 4th, but the more abominable for this, that that whole Scene
of Wickedness was managed by Gregory the 7th, otherwise called Pope Hildebrand,
but more deservedly Pope Firebrand; who the better to color over the matter
excommunicates the Emperor, and absolves his Subjects from their Allegiance;
but the Bishop of Liege being too Honest and Loyal to think himself so
discharged of his Oath of Fealty, continued faithful to the Emperor; for which
the Pope darts his Thunderbolts against both him and his Adherents,
notwithstanding which his Clergy continue firm to him, justify their
Proceedings from the Obligation of their Oaths, and the Commandments of God,
and look upon his Excommunication as merely brutum ful-men, and of no Force. It
would be too tedious to heap up what might be brought of this kind from
Examples, Canons, and declared Judgment of Holy Fathers: From all which it is
plain, that the pious consci^ntious Clergy ever thought themselves in Duty
bound, not only to adhere to their lawful Prince against all Usurpers and
Rebels, but to censure those that did otherwise, which was sufficient to induce
our Church to compose this Canon, and justify her in so doing, and ought to
strike a terro^^ in all those who incurr the Censure of it; which that they may
be the more aware of, I shall now proceed further to explain it in the other
Particulars.

The next Thing we have to do is to enquire after the meaning of an
Excommunication ipso facto; where by the way take notice, that this sort of
Excommunication is never denounced but against Crimes of more than an ordinary
Size; either against such as are of themselves of so very ill Name, that being
once known there needs not the canvassing of a Judge to induce any Persons to
condemn them; or else of such pernicious and fatal Consequence that they ought
not to be allowed the least encouragement, or so much as any sorbearance; by
which you may easily perceive how heinous a Fault it is adjudged in the sense
of the Chapter of England, for any Person to m^im the Authority of his King, or
dismantle him of it, she having denounced no less than an Excommunication ipso
facto against it: And indeed, what Laws, or what Authority shall be able to
restrain those Men, who shall dare to make an Attempt upon the Sovereign
Authority, which is the Guardian of the Laws, and Security of the State? Before
Wickedness can grow rank enough for such a desperate Experiment, it must have
broke through and shook off the dread of all Laws, and become not only regardless
of the Duties of Civility and common Honesty, but to be not so much as moved
with the sense of the Public Good and Safety: Now what hopes can any Man
cherish of such Men? And how miserable must that Government be which is ravished
into such hands? But to return to our Business, Excommunication ipso facto is
where the Discussion and definitive Sentence of the Judge is neither requisite
or necessary as to the Offender; but the Fact being committed, the
Excommunication immediately takes place, and the Law in a great measure
executes it self: So that Excommunication ipso facto is Excommunication ab ipso
jure, sive sententiae a jure latae, and is so called in Contradistinction to
Excommunication ab Homine sive Judice, where the definitive Sentence must be
waited for and pronounced, before the Excommunication can take effect.

From what has been said it is evident, that the guilty Person in this Case is
immediately in the state of Excommunication; so that he ought not to thrust
himself into the Communion of the Chapter it being a thing which belongs not to
him, and to which he has no Right, and from which he can receive no Benefit;
but ought to put himself into the state of a Penitent, to bewail his Fault, and
make what Satisfaction he is able, and to endeavor his Reconciliation to the
Church upon such Terms and Conditions, as the proper Judge in that case shall
think fit for that end and purpose, of which a true and hearty Repentance, so
far as Man can discern, is always one. But then whether all Persons are bound
to treat this Person as an Excommunicate, is another Question. Indeed if he (as
he ought) confess his Fault, declare his Condition and bewail it, there can be
no doubt, but that others, though they may pity him, yet ought to treat him as
an Excommunicate, till he be restored by due course; but then it too often
happens, that the Fact is hid and secret; or, if the Fact be known, yet the
Criminal is not; or, if both Fact and Criminal be known, yet it may not be
known, or but to few, that there is any Canon or Law, which ipso facto puts
such a Person under Excommunication; yea, after all, though Fact, Criminal, and
Canon be known, yet it may be a doubtful and controverted case, whether the
Crime be within the Verge and Censure of such Canon. Now, in such a case, I
humbly conceive, that no Man is strictly bound to treat such a Person as an
Excommunicate, until a declaratory Sentence of a proper Judge have passed on
the thing, though a definitive one be needless; that is, that the Judge having
true notice of the Crime, do declare, that it is the same, against which the
Canon pronounces an Excommunication ipso facto; and this published, shall be
sufficient to oblige others to treat the Person so declared against as under a
state of Excommunication: But then again, there are Cases wherein so much as a
declaratory Sentence is needless, and Persons may be bound to look on the
Criminals as Excommunicates, without any such Sentence; as when the Fact,
Criminals, and Canon passing Sentence thereon, are notoriously known; in such
case the Church requires all persons without more ado to take notice of the
Offenders, and to treat them as persons under the Sentence of the Canon, though
the Judge has given no Sentence in the case, and commends them for so doing,
though in other cases it allows them not the Judgment. This Mr. Hody doubtless
would have told us, if it had been for his turn; but thanks to more fair and
ingenuous Persons, the Canon now speaks plain for itself, (...), etc. But if
any shall separate themselves from Communion with their Superior for any
Heresy condemned by the H. Synods and Fathers, he publicly preaching the same
Heresy to the People, and teaching it barefaced in the Church, such shall not
only be free from Canonical Censure for separating from Communion with the
Bishop so called before synodical Condemnation, but they shall be thought
worthy of the Honor that is due to the Orthodox; because they have not
condemned a Bishop, but a false Bishop, and a false Teacher, and have not
divided the Unity of the Church by Schism, but have studiously endeavored to
preserve the Church from Schisms and Divisions. Thus in cases manifest and
notorious Christians followed the Censure of precedent Canons, without staying
for particular Sentence; the only Question then is, whether there be such
notoriety in our particular case? And truly I think that there scarce ever
appeared in the World a more notorious and manifest case; the Matter of Fact is
evident to all, there being scarce a Child of five years old in the Kingdom who
does not know how the Authority of K. James is trampled on, despised, and
denied, if he be not taught to do it himself; and as for the Persons, they are
as well known, the Laymen glorying in it in all places, and the Clergy roaring
it out before whole Congregations; and then the Canon which censures them as
excommunicate ipso facto for so doing, is or ought to be as well known; for it
is commanded with the rest once every year to be read in all Churches, which I
think is fair notice; and if they will not take it, affected Ignorance will
rather aggravate than excuse their Fault; from all which it is plain, that
these Offenders ought to be treated as excommunicate ipso facto upon the
Authority of the Canon without waiting for the declaratory Sentence of a living
Judge.

Having considered the nature of an Excommunication ipso facto, I shall next
enquire into the state and condition of an excommunicated Person, which is very
sad and dreadful as to any Man; but when it falls to be a Clergyman's Lot, it
makes fatal Work: For, 1. It divests him of the Power of Exercising any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and if nevertheless he will take upon him to
exercise it, it renders all his Acts invalid and null: And I think it will be
worth some Men's pains to enquire whether this may not affect all the
Ecclesiastical Courts in England; for I doubt it will not be sufficient to say,
that many things are done in those Courts which were committed to them by the
Civil Power, as things that seemed most fitting to be done by Ecclesiastical
Persons, though they might be done by others; for though this tacitly
acknowledges a Nu^ity or what proceeds from their Spiritual Authority, yet I
see not what Service it can do them as to what is entrusted to them by Secular
Authority; for if it were entrusted in them as Ecclesiastical Persons, and as
Ecclesiastical Persons they st^nd excommunicate, I cannot see how they continue
capable of exercising such Ecc^esiastical Jurisdiction: But let those Persons
look after that who have or shall have any Suits there, or have occasion to
prove any Wills wherein they are int^^est^d, or the like; for if ever things
should come to Rights again, (which I hope is no hurt to wish,) if such Matters
were not confirmed by a lawful Authority, perhaps some who at present are proud
of their Rebellion, and the Effects of it, may live to curse the time that ever
the Mob made Kings, or a Dutch man Archbishops. 2. Excommunication renders a
Clergyman, so long as he continues in that state, un^apable of any
Ecclesiastical Benesice or Promotion; and if he attempt to take any, all means
used to conser it upon him become ineffectual; a Presentation of such a one
cannot be accepted; or if it be, his Institution is void. They may chew the Cud
upon this who have accepted any Preferments under these Schismatical Bishops,
for the obtaining of which they have taken Oaths, whereby they denied their
lawful King, and consequently then incurred an Excommunication ipso facto. 3.
It makes the whole Administration of his Ministerial Office ineffectual: You
can expect no Return of Prayers made with him with whom you ought not to
communicate; the B. Sacrament consers no Benesit received from his Hands; he
cannot authoritatively bless the People of God who is himself under a Curse,
and excluded from being a part of them. And here I think all those who have
joined themselves to such Persons, to be highly concerned to lay their Hands on
their Hearts, and consider well what they have done in communicating with them
hitherto, and whether they can think it safe to continue therein; for in
communicating with them as they are Schismatics, they make themselves
Schismatics, and in communicating with them as they are Excommunicates, not
only all their Labor is lost, but they get a Curse instead of a Blessing.

The matter were not altogether so bad, if this Censure extended only to
Clergymen; but that a thorough Provision might be made to secure the Subject in
Obedience, it spares none; and therefore I shall consider how Excommunication
affects Persons in general, whether Laymen or Clergymen: 1st. Then, no
excommunicated Person ought to be sussered to be present at the Service of the
Church; and if the Minister who officiates, can no other ways get rid of him,
he ought rather to break off and desist, than to susser such a Person to join
in Communion with his Flock. It Is indeed true, that he may be allowed to be
present, when the Sermon is made, as supposed to make for his Information or
Conviction; but even then he ought not to be intermingled with others, but to
stand alone, and plainly distinguished from the rest of the Congregation: But
to the Prayers such Persons never were nor ought to be admitted. 2dly. Every
excommunicated Person is especially debarred from being a Partaker of the
Lord's Supper; and anciently if any Priest did administer the Sacrament to such
an one b^^ore he was Canonically reconciled to the Church, (which originally
was done by the Bishop, or by Authority deputed from him,) he himself became
liable to be deposed, and no longer entrusted in the Ministry. 3dly. Whoso^ver
stands excommunicated, (non ^rrante clave,) he is dismembered and cut off from
the Church, and consequently deprived of those Supplies and Succors which the
M^^bers receive by being united together in one Body, and by means thereof to
Christ their Head; they are like Branches cut off from the Vine, there is no
way or means left whereby any gracious Succors can be conveyed unto them,
unless there be a Reinsition, and they be received and grafted in again. 4ly.
Every excommunicate Person is under a heavy Curse; the Devil has a peculiar
Power over him; so that his Condition is very deplorable and desperate, whils^
he remains under that Sentence: Hence the Scripture styles it a delivering unto
Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and 1 Timothy 1. 20. and Tertullian calls it summum futuri
Judicii Praejudicium, the highest Presumption of what shall be his Sentence in
the day of Judgment. God will rati^ie in Heaven the Sentence of his Church on
Earth, when she proceeds against Offenders in vindication of his Laws and
Ordinances. That Saying of our Savior to his Apostles is enough to strike any
Man with Horror, who justly incurrs the Censure of the Officers of the Church,
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat.
18. 18. 5ly. An excommunicated Person is or ought to be debarred from most of
the Benesits and Comforts of civil Conversation; he is like a blown Dear, every
one in the Herd, even for his own Safety, will push him from him; or like a Man
that has the Plague, every one that would escape the Infection avoids him: But
of this more presently, in its due place.

The State and Condition of a Person under the Sentence of Excommunication
being thus briefly explained, I think it may be sufficiently dreadful to any
who have any sense of Christianity, or apprehensions of the Wrath of God; and
if this be the state of the Revolutionists, they have no great cause to brag of
their Bargain; and if others did carry themselves toward them, as they ought
to do toward Men in such a State, I am apt to think they would quickly hang
their Heads, and, if their Hearts were not as hardened as Pharaoh's, very Shame
would work in them remorse, and bring them to Repentance: But though I have
little hopes of this, both Priests and People being so generally infected; yet
to discharge my own part, I shall proceed in my Method before propounded, and
shall now examine what ought to be the Behavior and Carriage of other persons
toward a person that is under Excommunication; and 1. All persons ought to
stand upon their Guard against him, and not only keep him from the public
Service, and drive him out of their Churches, as a Profaner of their Communion,
and one who has no Right to it, and as one who is infectious and injurious to
them, and makes their Communion ineffectual; but farther they ought to take
care that they join not in any private Devotions with him, nor admit him to
Prayers with them, though in their own Houses: I do not say but they may pray
for, instruct, admonish, and endeavor what they can to reclaim such a one; but
they must not pray with him, nor join in any other Act of Christian Communion
with him. Procul ite profani, was proclaimed at the Celebration of the Heathen
Mysteries; and do not the Christian Mysteries deserve much more Reverence and
Aw^? Ought we not as nigh as we can to have a care that we admit none of his
Enemies, none that have notoriously provoked him, and not attoned their Crime,
when we perform those Acts and Offices wherein we have Access to, and Communion
with the great God of Heaven and Earth? I confess, that particular Persons
ought not to take upon them by their own Authority to exclude any from
Communion; but i^ they know any person to be guilty of a notorious Crime, or
live in a scandalous Way, they ought to complain to proper Judges; but when the
Church has passed her Consure upon them, they have a kind of Cain's Brand, and
are marked out for all Men to avoid; it is our B. Savior's own Direction to us
concerning every such person, that he be unto us as a Heathen Man, and a
Publican, Mat. 18. 17. and such, though they had been Emperors, the primitive
Christians were so far from admitting to their Communion, that they would not
so much as allow them to be bare Spectators; not only the Honor, but the very
Being of the Church cannot be long upheld, if People will admit a mingle of
such persons in divine Offices; and therefore heretofore if the Church Censures
were not taken notice of, she excommunicated those who received her
Excommunicates; and till her Discipline can be revived, her Doctrine cannot be
secured. I desire all those seriously to consider this, who slock to the Parish
Churches, where they not only join in Communion with Excommunicate^, but the
very persons, who perform all the Ministerial Offices, lie under the censure of
Excommunication by virtue of the forecited Canon; what mad Men would turn their
very Prayers, their Sacraments, and all their Christian Offices into sin? For
thus they do, who take this course; no^ do I value their upbraiding me with
their numbers, for certainly we had never been forewarned, not to run with a
multitude to do evil, if numbers could excuse us. Christ calls his Flock
little, and I had rather be of it, when at the least, than of the Devil's
monstrous Herd, even then when he boasted of a power to dispose of all the
Kingdoms of the World.

The very nature of Christian Religion requires that the excommunicated Party
be excluded from Christian Communion; but then farther, that they might make
such weary of their sin, and shame them out of it, they would not afford them
the benefit of civil conversation, Charity advising them by that means, if
possible, to pull them out of the fire. Hence St. Paul bids us Note such a Man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, (2 Thessalonians. 3, 14.) Upon
this account Christians were wont, as far as possible, to avoid all
conversation with such; they would not willingly live with them under the same
Roof, they would not eat with them at the same Table, and indeed the Scripture
requires no less, charging us with such an one, no not to eat, (1 Cor. 5, 11.)
they would not promiscuously use with them even those things which made for
Health, as St. John would not wash with Cerinthus in the same Bath. They would
not give them the common Complement or Salutation in the street; they would
have no Traffic or Commerce with them, and many other things, which both for
memory and warning sake, are briefly comprehended in this odd ^erse. Os, Orare,
Vale, Communio, Mensa negato.

And as their behavior was thus toward them living, so if they persevered in
their sin, they refased to allow them Christian Burial when dead. And indeed he
that will obstin^tely persist in his evil course, and regard neither the
Admonition, nor the Censures of the Church to his very death, deserves no
better than the Burial of an Ass.

But that I may not seem to encourage Christians to outrun their Duty, I must
not only acquaint them with what they may withold from such, but also what they
may or ought to allow them; Excomm^^catiion does by no means dissolve relative
Duties, as that between Parent^ and Children, Husband and Wife, King and
Subjects; but these Duties ought to be paid, if possible, more care^ully than
ever, that no offense be given to the excommunicate person, nor a^y
encouregement to continue in his sin, but rather all lawful means used to win
and draw him off from it; if Contracts or Bargains have been made with him,
they must be performed; if Debts be owing to him, they must be paid; if either
his or others Spiritual or even Temporal good may be signally advanced by a
cautious temporary converse with him, it ought not to be neglected, for no
Man's lying under Excommunication, can warrant another to be either unjust or
uncharitable. So likewise necessities of life, as Meat, Drink, Raiment, and the
like, either for himself or his Family, ought to be sold him for his Money; or
otherwise ministered to him, if through extreme poverty he be not able to buy;
nor can I see reason to condemn him who has any commerce with an excommunicate
person, if he be ignorant of his Crime, or the Law that condemns it under that
penalty. The Duties and Allowances in this case have been generally comprised
in much such a Verse as the former.

Vtile, lex, Humilis, Res ignorata, necesse.
In short, whatsoever Duties we owe them, must be duly paid; and in case of
necessity, so far as the necessity constrains, civil Con^ersation or Traffic
may be allowed, but then even these things must be done with mourning over
them, letting them see that you do not countenance their sin, and using all
honest and sitting mean, to convince and reclaim them; but then no pretended
necessity can excuse you in such a compliance, as to join with them in the Acts
o^ Christian Worship and Communion; ^or let the case be never so hard, there
can be no necessity of sinning; and such commu^icating will be a very great sin
on many accou^ts, as admitting them to those Office and Ordinances, where^n
they ought to have no share, as entitling them to those Benefits and Blessing,
to which they have no right, as being a downright contempt of the Authority of
God's Church, and consequently the ready means to destroy all Order and
Discipline, and thereby to introduce Confusion, and in the end to ove^throw and
utterly root out the Church it self.

As the Sentence is dreadful and heavy in this case upon the guilty Persons, so
their Condition is still the worse upon the score of the difficulty they lie
under of being reconciled: For the Canon says peremptorily, that no such
Person shall be restored but only by the Arch^bishop after his Repentance and
public Revocation of those his wicked Errors. Here are a gradation of
Difficulties, all which they must pass through* and even those Men who love the
Sin commonly hate the Shame, and will use all the shuffling Tricks imaginable
to shift it off, though it naturally follow them; but here they are obliged to
give God the Glory, and take the Shame to themselves; they must not only repent
but recant; and this must be done openly and solemnly, that the World may see,
and take warning to avoid the same Wickedness: This is no small piece of
Mortification to proud rebe^lious Spirits, who for the most part (as we see by
sad Experience) will rather choose to run the haz^rd of their eternal Damnation,
than to seem to lessen their Esteem and R^putation by acknowledging their
Errors or Crimes; and yet when all this is done there is a Difficulty sti^l
remaining: For they cannot be restored but only by the Archbishop. So great a
care has our Church taken that Christians might be good Subjects, and so
highly did she think her self concerned what in her lay to make them so; she
did not think it her Business only to stand still and look on, and cry it was a
matter merely of Civil Concern, whilst Subjects rose up in Rebellion, and
dethroned, or so much as opposed or denied the true Rights and Authority of
their lawful King; but to show her deep Sense how scandalously the Christian
Religion was injured hereby, she not only severely censures such Offenders, but
also clogs their Restoration with great Difficulties, and makes it a reserved
Case.

I am not ignorant that the Bishop of Rome, who grasps at and claims no less
than all, has made Reservations, till he has reserved away in a manner the
whole Authority of all the Bishops in his Communion; but the best things may be
abused, or usurped upon: For in the first Ages of the Church we find Cases
reserved, but then it was by Canons made in Council, where it was thought
necessary for the benefit of the Church to restrain the exercise of
Jurisdiction of single Bishops in some special Case; hence it was decreed that
(...), nothing of moment should be done without the Bishop of the Prime See,
whom we now call a Metropolitan or Archbishop; and herein our Church has trod
in the Steps of the Primitive Fathers: For she leaves the Bishops their just
Authority, and yet reserves some matters of more universal Influence and
concern to the Metropolitan; and that she has done it in this and some other
cases perhaps there are weighty Reasons: As, 1st. To preserve and secure the
Discipline of the Church in matters of great importance and public concern;
Favor, Affection, Interest, or Importunity of Friends, might perhaps be apt to
sway sometimes with the particular Bishop, either to overlook the thing, or too
easily to reconcile the Persons; whereas the Metropolitan is less obnoxious to
such Motives: Besides if he should neglect to do his part, the Suffragan Bishop
would have just cause to complain, and desire the exercise of his Jurisdiction
in that particular to be restored, if the other answer not the end of the
Reservation; and thus they are made a mutual Spur to and Watch upon each other.
2dly. For more public Satisfaction, the Crime may be notorious, and the
Offense given to a whole Nation, or more; and if the Person should be
reconciled by his Ordinary, it might be known to few, and consequently the
Scandal remain; but being done by the Metropolitan it must necessarily be more
notorious; the Party's Repentance will be more public, and a more ample
Satisfaction made for the Dishonor done to the Laws of God and his Church.
3dly. For a particular Brand upon the Crime, and to testify the Judgment of
the Church as to her high detestation of it: For every one must think that she
has a singular Abhorrence of that Crime which she declares she will not
forgive but upon such severe conditions. 4thly. For the more effectual
punishing and reclaiming the Offender; he is by this means more surely held,
and his Trouble and Pains much greater to get out of the Snare he has run
into: He must be more thoroughly mortified before he will submit to such open
Penance and Recantation; and when it is over, its very being so well known will
in all probability be a means to prevent his relapsing. Lastly, The more
powerfully to deter others, that they may not dare to run in that Wickedness
which intangles Men with such great Difficulties, and brings them to such open
Shame. Now as big and scornfully as our Adversaries look upon us, I think I
have proved that these are the Circumstances they are under; and having done my
endeavor to convince them of their Sin and Danger, I know not what I can now
do more or better for them, than to pray to God to give them Repentance; they
have not only brought a Flourishing Church into a most miserable condition, but
have razed the very Foundations and set her on no Bottom; she is not only lest
at the discretion of the Secular Power, but prostituted to the frantic Will
and Humor of every Usurper; which is little better than putting God's Church
under the Devil's Protection. The Breach of Promises and Oaths, the renouncing
our natural Allegiance and Canonical Obedience are made no Sins, if the
adhering to them should chance to bring us under any Inconvenience: And thus
the Doctrine of the Cross so particularly entailed on Christianity is huff'd
and scoffed out of Doors. Men may join with the Devil to delude themselves and
others, but certainly God will visit for such Sins as these, and sooner or
later make such Sinners know themselves: May God in Mercy give them a sight and
sense of their Sins, that they may repent and return, and God's Judgments
averted, and our Breaches healed; though I abominate the Crimes, yet I have no
ill will to their Persons, and wish them reconciled; but as for the methodus
reconciliandi I leave it to my Superiors, the proper Judges, who doubtless will
faithfully assist and advise their Metropolitan how the Canon may be satisfied.
And provided that some sort of Reparation were made for the Dishonor done to
God and his Church, and the Wrongs done to the Lawful King; I should very
readily acquiesce in almost any Terms, and rejoice to see an end o^ the sad
Thoughts of Heart caused by the Divisions of Reuben.

I had here concluded, but that as I was penning these few Considerations News
was brought me, that, after so long consulting and caballing,
Stillingfleet-Hody was come abroad, laying about him like Goliath, knocking down
no less than 6 or 7 at once, and making bolder Challenges than ever did that
mighty Philistine: I did think my self as to my present Subject out of his
reach, but not knowing what a Madman, who lays about him at all Adventures,
might hit upon; I procured the Book: Now though his Principles well improved will
vindicate any Villainy, or destroy any thing honest or true, yet not finding my
present Subject particularly affected; I shall dismiss him and his Book with
only some few Observations, which may serve a little to stay honest Men's
Stomachs till they can have a full Meal. The Jackdaw in the Fable set out with
the Peacock's Plumes did never strut and bristle at half the rate as does this
Vainglorious Fellow; and if every Bird should seize his own Feather, he might
be left as naked and ridiculous as was his Emblem. The very Title is insolent
and amazing: For what honest or modest Man would discourse and set up for S^es
Vacant by an unjust or uncanonical Deprivation? For if the Deprivation be
uncanonical, the Persons are not by Canon deprived; if it be unjust, the Law
(and I hope there may be some Law left, though we have so little benefit of it,)
affords every Man a Remedy against Injustice, and will help him to recover his
right against it; and the very Plea which the Law assigns in this case, is
Ecclesia plena, just opposite to his Vacancy: But right or wrong, if it be done
by a Power irresistible, there must be a Submission. Now I would know what he
means by irresistible; for properly speaking perhaps only God is so; but if by
it he means a Power by any wicked means, and in any wicked courses become
Superior to us and able to crush us, I think that then his new Notion will
warrant us to comply with the Devil, if God in Judgment should let him loose
upon us. The Proposition, which is the Key of his whole Book, and which he
calls a certain and self-evident Maxim, is, That whatsoever is necessary for
the present Peace and Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to be made use of,
provided it is not in it self sinful, and the ill Consequences which may
possibly attend it, are either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least
not so lik^ly to happen, as the Evils w^ endeavor to avoid. Now this, though in
other Words, is the main Principle which the Author of the Unreasonableness of
the New Separation founds his Discourse upon, by which any Man may guess at the
Genius that runs through the whole Book: It is somewhat bold to call that a
certain and self-evident Maxim, which depends upon so many Contingencies and
Possibilities, and that also in such cases wherein Men for worldly Interest or
carnal Security are too prone to judge amiss. But to pass by several Exceptions
that might be made against it, he knows, that we deny not, but that Bishops in
several cases may (I do not say are always bound) recede from their own Right
for the real good of the Church; but then we say there are Cases, wherein they
ought not to give it up for a pretended Peace or Good; and whether the present
be not one of those Cases is the Dispute: To this purpose he ought to have
proved much more clearly than he any where has, That Canonical Bishops are
bound not only to quit their Churches, and give up the whole disposal of
Church Affairs to a Lay Usurper, but to renounce their natural Allegiance, and
violate their Oaths, whenever they fall under an unjust Force* and farther to
make it self-evident, that Perjury and Rebellion are matters in themselves not
sin^ul. For all the Pretenses, how specious soever, which are set up to take
off the Obligations which we lie under, either as Subjects or Christians, are
mere Shams and Impostures: For we are under no necessity, no irresistible
Force, nay not any Force at all, except that of our own Wickedness,
Vndutifulness, and Rebellion; the very return to our Ob^dience would be our
Deliverance, our Duty would infallibly save us, and put an end to all these
Miseries and Confusions, unless such a senseless Imagination could possess Men's
Brains, that a little shrivled Thing with a crooked Nose could be too strong
for all England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging:
They will never say any thing to the purpose in the present Case, till they
prove that Men may plea^ their own Sins in their Justification, and that having
engaged themselves in wicked Courses, they are thereby authorized to go on, and
do worse. As to the incomparable Vindicator, he in a Bravado tells us That he
shall answer all that he has said, or ever will be able to say, etc. chap. 4.
page 41. One would suspect that this Man had a mind to invade the Prerogative
of God Almighty, and pretend to Omniscience; Did ever any Man, though endued with
a Spirit of Prophecy, pretend to know all that ever another will be able to
say? For his own sake he ought to have used more Modesty toward a Person, who
has as much Learning and an hundred times more Honesty and Goodness than he and
all his Consederates. But he tells us, that his Eye is particularly on the
Learned Vindi^ator; and to him I am willing to leave him: For though he may
justly glory in so great an Adversary, as being too great an honor to him; yet
I make no question, but that all he will gain thereby will be to necessitate
that Learned Person to expose him to open Shame.

I should wrong these few Considerations, if I should farther wander after a
Treatise, in the contriving of which more Persons have been concerned than Mr.
Hody's Name has Le^ters; and if Persons will not suffer themselves to be
suddenly carried away with vain Boast, and super-fine Sophistry, I doubt not
but e're long they will see that this Swaggering Wadhamite has to do with Men
that will not fl^nch, as h^ving a Cause so good, that they are neither afraid
nor ashamed to maintain: In the mean time, retaining my form^r Principles, I
have added another Foot for the Cause to stan^ upon, which if it prove good,
they must be cast, notwithstanding whatever Mr. Hody or any other has hitherto
pl^aded in their behalf, and I think it the more pinching, in that they are
obliged to acquit themselves against the Church of England and her Canons,
which have cast them out; and till the can get off, in that State I leave them,
with the same Prayer commonly used for Men that have the ^lague, The Lord have
Mercy upon them.

FINIS.

