Great and Glorious News FROM IRELAND.
Being a Full and Particular Account, of a most Terrible and Bloody Fight,
which was on Wednesday last, June 2d. Between the Royal Army, Commanded by His
Majesty, King William; and the whole French and Irish Army, Commanded by the
Late King James, which happened on a Plain About Nine Miles from Dublin; with the
Killing of the Dukes of Berwick, and Tyrconnel, and Six Thousand more of the
Enemy on the Spot; and the Taking of Seven Thousand Prisoners. With the Manner
of King William' Taking the City of Dublin.

THE Irish having Planted two small Pieces at the Pass of the River Boyne,
played very briskly upon our Men, killed five or six of them; and of the Shot
unhappily Grazed on King William's Shoulder, tearing his Clothes, -- c. A
particular Account of which, I suppose, you have heard already.

By Seven of the Clock in the Evening, we raised a Battery against the Enemies,
and continue to ply briskly on them, till it grew dark; during which, we
dismounted one of their Guns: By the next Morning, our Main Body were come up,
and were drawn up into several Wings, by the General Officers, and by Eight of
the Clock, (thanks be to God) His Majesty mounted His Horse; after which, He
gave Order to Count Schonberg, with some Squadrons of Horse, to Foad the River,
which they did forthwith.

The Irish Horse and Dragoons, which were on the other side of the River,
disputed the Pass for some time; but the Body of our Horse notwithstanding,
forced their way, after which the Irish Horse ran, leaving the Foot to the
Mercy of our Forces, who fell in with them pell-mell, some of which made one
Shot, but the greater number threw down their Arms without Firing, most of
which were either Killed or taken Prisoners; with their Artiliary and other
Plunder very considerable. A Dissenter which came into our Crmp, gives an
Account, that one Shot made from our Battery (before mentioned) went through
King James his own Tent, and Killed Seven Men.

The Irish Horse and Dragoons, with what Foot escaped, ran to their main Body
near Dunshauglin, who were there Posted on advantageous Ground, by the late
King James, and his Generals, the Dukes of Tyrconnel and Berwick, Brigadier
Hamilton, and two French Generals, resolving there to stay 'till our Army came
up and Fight them. Our whole Army having passed the River on Wednesday Morning,
His Majesty, King William, accompanied with the Prince of Denmark, the Dukes of
Schonberg and Ormond, and several other General Officers, Advanced with His
whole Army toward the Enemy, and between Ten and Eleven in the Morning, our
Advance Guards discovered the Enemy drawn up in Battalia, between Dunshauglin
and Curdiff, about nine Miles from Dublin.

Our Army made their regular Approaches toward the Enemy, the King in Person,
accompanied with the Prince of Denmark, Commanded the main Body, and about
Twelve of the Clock the Fight began, which the Enemy Maitained for some time
very briskly; but after about three Hours, they having lost many of the Great
Officers, and most of the French, in the Left Wing, being cut off, their Horse
gave way; which, our Army perceiving, pressed on them with so great Fury, that
in a little time they broke their Ranks; for which they immediately Fled,
taking their way toward the County of Kildare, leaving the Foot to the Mercy
of our Army, who pursued the Victory with great Slaughter, killing between Six
and Seven Thousand of the Enemy, and taking great Numbers Prisoners.

Amongst other great Officers that were Slain, were found the Dukes of Berwick
and Tyrconnel, and the Lord Dungan; and among the Prisoners was Brigadier
General Richard Hamilton, and other great Officers.

Care being taken to secure the Prissoners, and Night coming on, our Army
stayed to refresh themselves, and the next Morning advanced toward Dublin,
where they arrived the same Evening, finding no opposition; King James having a
little before drawn out of that City all his Forces to join his Army at Navan,
except Six Hundred, who hearing of the Defeat of their Forces, and the approach
of our Army, ran toward the County of Wicklow, doing before hand what other
Mischief that little time would permit.

London, Printed for William-Brown, in Little Britain


