THE Prisoners Uindication WITH A Sober Expostulation AND REPREHENSION OF
Persecutors.

By John Gratton.

What mean ye, that ye beat my People to pieces, and grind the faces of the
Poor, says the LORD God of Hosts?

Isa. 3. 15. Lord, how long shall the Wicked Triumph? How long shall they utter
and speak hard things? They break in pieces thy People, O Lord, and afflict thy
Heritage; they slay the Widow and the Stranger, and murder the Fatherless,

Psalm. 94. 3, 4, 5, 6. LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the
Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1683.

To all Persecutors, both by Words and Actions.
A few words for the clearing of my self, and the Truth I profess in real Love;
from him that seeks the good of all Mankind in general, having real Love to
all, especially the Household of Faith, who are redeemed to God, out of the
Uncleanness of the World, who are in Scorn called Quakers.

UPon the 16th day of the 6th Month, (called August) 1680. I being at
Backewell about my trading (it being a Fair) was by two or three Bailiffs
arrested, by virtue of a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not coming to the
Parish Church (so called) and not appearing at the Spiritual Court, though I
had appeared several times, and had offered to the Parish Priest, that if he
could make it appear, that I was in an Error, by clear Scripture, I would take
him for my Friend; And further, That if he could make it appear from clear
Scripture, that it was my duty in the sight of God, to come to the Parish
Church and conform to them, that I would do it; but did not find it his
business to seek to inform me at that time, or any other, being not so
charitable as to bid me come another time and he would discourse with me: But
being after this never cited to the Court again, was upon the day aforesaid
taken and sent to Darby Goal (a very strange way to convince me of any Error,
if I be in any) where I remain a Prisoner.

After I was sent to Prison, many false charges were flung after me, to render
me and Truth odious to the Country People, who were ready to wonder why they
should send such a peaceable man to Prison; and I was by my Persecutors so
highly accused to be An Heretic, A Factious Fellow, The Ringleader of a
Factious People, yea, a Blasphemer, an Enemy to Caesar, and a dangerous Fellow,
and a Spreader of dangerous Principles, and what not? and all to make the
People think hardly of me, and believe, if they could, against their Belief,
that I was some dangerous man, insomuch, that they said, I was not fit to live,
especially not fit to be loose in a Country; for by keeping me in Prison, they
had hopes to scatter the rest: At the hearing of these strange and malicious
false Calumnies, I was not a little grieved, not for my self, but others, who I
heard, were ready to think hardly of me, because such Reports had gained some
Credit with some, that were thought both wise and sober; they believed them,
because others believed them; those others believed them, because my
Persecutors (who are looked upon by most to be spiritual men) reported them
amongst these Black-mouthed uncharitable men. I could not have one to come at
me to show me my reported sad Condition, but in Prison I must lie, come what
will come of Wife and Children; so that then my Wife went, with two Friends
more, to the Archdeacon, (so called) and showed him the unreasonableness of my
suffering, and the need of my liberty; but his words were great Charges, as
aforesaid, though he never discoursed me about Religion in his life; its true,
he also said, That he would come to me, and discourse me, and if I was in the
right, and he in the wrong, I should come out of Prison, and he would go in for
me; but he yet fails to make his words good; And I do declare to all that may
see these Lines, that if I cannot make it appear, that he is wrong and I right,
I then will be content to stay where I am; only I would be judged by
unprejudiced men to the Truth, and such as are not partial, nor make no outward
Gain of the Scriptures: Many others have desired my Enlargement, some by
Letters, and some have gone in Person, but all fails, except I will conform,
and pay the Charges they have been at in laying me in Prison; which thing I
cannot, or dare not do; For, First, I believe I ought not to conform to the
Worship that now by the Priests of this Nation is maintained by their preaching
and practice; I do not mean by their Purses; for both they and it cost the
People dear. 2dly, I believe, that though it be after the way which they call
Heresy, yet that the Worship I now own, is the true Worship of God, and do
find by good and great experience, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who
is a Spirit does approve and own it so to be; for the Worship I own and believe
is the true Worship of God, is that spoken of in John 4. 23, 24. They that
Worship God aright, worship and serve him in Spirit and in Truth; and says our
Savior, The Father seeks such to worship him. 3dly, Seeing our Lord Christ
Jesus, did set up, appoint and command this Worship, therefore I believe I
ought not to leave it, and run to another Worship, that is no where commanded,
either by Christ, or any of his Apostles, thinking thereby to save my Estate,
and to live at liberty in the World, and enjoy those natural Rights and
Privileges I am freeborn Heir to, which I see the Drunkard, Swearer, Curser
and Proud Wicked Person is not deprived of, though he be so Wicked. Lastly,
Seeing I do those things I believe I ought to do, and have not given any just
occasion of Offense, or done wrong to any man, therefore can I not own my self
in a fault, and give Moneys for a Pardon to them, that while they are pardoning
others, are therein committing the highest Sins they can approach unto; for if
I have sinned it is against God, and to him I look for Mercy; but in this I am
not by him accused or judged as a sinner, but owned and justified by him, and
can say, Its God that justifies me, who shall condemn me? Now should I come to
my Persecutors, and own my self an Offender, and buy their Absolution, and
conform to their invented Ceremonies, then should I by so doing give God's
Spirit and my own Heart and Conscience the Lie; from which I hope without
offense I may take liberty to say, Good Lord preserve me.

But seeing I must have no better treatment from my Persecutors than a Prison,
which indeed has always been the way of argument that the false Prophets in
all Ages have taken, with things of the like Nature, as Fines, Whips, Lions
Dens, Firey Furnaces, Faggots, and such like. I desire they will be pleased to
suffer me to treat them a little with a few Arguments, which are in my mind,
and when I have done, I shall leave them to do, as it shall please God to
suffer them, as to me, and desire they may consider and consult their own
profit Eternally, and not forget, that ever long both them and I must appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, to give an Account of the deeds done in the
Body, whether they be good or evil.

And first, I enquire of you, that persecute me and others, whether, if it was
so, as you say falsely it is, That I was a Heretic, a factious Fellow, etc.
what command, precept or example you have from Christ or his Apostles, to lay
me in Prison, seeing I am a peaceable man, and just in my dealing, and pays to
Caesar his Due, as many that know me will witness? But instead of a command for
Persecution, does not our Lord Christ prohibit it several times? It may be you
will say, Its no Persecution that is done in this kind to an erroneous Person,
etc. Though may be, for all that he is so called by you, who call Light
Darkness, and Darkness Light, is a true Christian, and Servant of Jesus Christ,
but by his Persecutors adjudged to be otherwise, and said, and thought to be
that he is not, which indeed is my case at present; Yet I say again, does not
Christ prohibit all manner of Violence, Cruelty, Imposition, and the like, when
he bids his Followers, to love their Enemies, not Persecute their Friends; and
whatsoever they would that men should do unto them, to do so unto men, saying,
This is the Law and the Prophets; and said, With what measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again? Is this obeying Christ's command, in laying men
in Prison? For you would not be so done unto for your faithless Faith, and
worthless Worship; and though you profess to love God, yet while you in Works
deny him, I shall not much heed your Profession; for he is a true lover of him
that keeps his Commandments, it will be so found one day, when those that
pretended to Preach and Prophecy in his Name, and in his Name cast out Devils,
shall be bidden, depart from him, workers of Iniquity: And if those that preach
in his Name, and prophecy in his Name, and in his Name cast out Devils, be
sent away from him, because they, for all that, were workers of Iniquity, what
do you think will be the Portion of those that come in the Name of Man, and
Preach and Prophecy in Man's Name, and by Man's Authority only are held up;
and instead of casting Devils out, tell People, They must live in Sin all the
days of their Lives, and make People content to let the Devil keep the House,
hurry them on into Iniquity, Transgression and Sin all the days of their
Lives; and for all this, tell those very People, that they are Christians, and
though they do those things they ought not, and leave undone those things they
ought, and are miserable Offenders, in whom there is no Health; yet while they
put into the Priest's Mouth, are owned as a dear Brother and Sister, and so
called when they are buried by him, though may be they have killed themselves
by a drunken-bout: Oh! how dreadful will the end of these things be! Its a
grief to my Spirit to think of it.

But farther, did not Christ command that both Tares and Wheat should grow
together? And does not these two Words, Wheat and Tares comprehend all mankind?
What can you make for your Practices here? If I be a Tare, you should let me
alone till the day of the Harvest; For what have thou to do, says the Apostle,
with another man's Servant, to his own Master he stands or falls. And Christ
Jesus showed a Reason also, why he would have men to let them alone, and both
grow together; For, says he, lest while you pluck up the Tares, ye root out
the Wheat also: Which clearly shows that men may be mistaken, especially those
that have not an infallible Spirit; for its the Spirit of God that is
infallible, which searches and makes all things manifest, even the deep things
of God. And we have had sufficient experience, that under pretense of plucking
up the Tares, which is contrary to Christ's command, the Devil has labored
with all his Might, to root the Wheat out of the World; and though Christ
says, He came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them, yet the Devil came
to kill and destroy men's Lives, not to save them: But we find Christ rebuked
his Disciples, when they would have had Fire from Heaven, and told them, They
knew not what Spirit they were of; My Kingdom is not of this World: He did not
come to be Lord and King in an outward manner, and make men yield to him by
outward force, for if so, then would his Servants fight; but he came to set up
his Kingdom within in the Hearts of men; so that it was promised by the Lord,
that he would give him for a Covenant to the People, and would create new
Hearts in them, and write his Law in them, and put his fear in their inward
parts, and be their God. So when Christ came, he said to them, The Kingdom of
Heaven is within you; and said the Prophet, He shall sit as a refiners Fire,
and fullers Soap, to purify the Heart, that it may offer an Offering in
Righteousness. Its true, the Apostles in their weakness, forbad those that they
found casting out Devils in his Name, because they did not follow him; but did
Christ approve of it? nay, he rebuked them, saying, He that gathers with me,
scatters not: He that is not against me, is for me. Methinks this might be
taken notice of by you Priests, that persecute me and others; you have seen
some of your drunken Hearers become very sober men, after they have come to
hear the Quakers (as you call us) preach; some of your Swearers, Cursing,
Proud, Profane Hearers become very Careful Livers, both in Words and Deeds;
And what! does this grieve you? Methinks you should think such men as these,
that prevail so upon Peoples Hearts to be good men, men of your side, if you be
for God, and should, like Christ, who you call your Lord and Master, rather
rebuke such as forbid us, than forbid us your selves; and when like Peter and
John, we dare not but speak the things we hear and see, and are commanded, not
then to take us and put us in Prison; and so stop up the Mouths of them God
has opened, and be angry with them, though they do what they do freely, and
look for no part of your great Revenues neither: Remember, you do not desire to
be so done by; and also its worth your notice taking, that those our Savior
Christ whipped out of the Temple, were Buyers and Sellers: What would you think,
if such must be whipped out of your Steeple Houses now, and such only be admitted
to Preach as would do it freely in them? But though he did whip such out, as
aforesaid, yet we never read that he whipped any in; or that if any would not
come to that place, that then he imprisoned them, or fined them, or the like;
no, he was a Shepherd, tender and loving unto them; if one went astray, his way
to fetch them in has been, and is ever by his gentle calls unto them, and
reproving, rebuking and checking of them in their Hearts by his Spirit, and
following of them with his righteous Judgments in their inward man: So that for
want of true peace with God, many have returned again to him, who shows them
wherein they offend, and when they return, there is more Joy in Heaven over one
Sinner that repents, than ninety nine Just Persons that need no Repentance.
Just Persons, [mark that] these are none of your Church of miserable Offenders:
But let me ask you, Is not Faith the gift of God? And that which is not of
Faith is Sin, is it not? If so, then I ask, what you had gained if you could
make a man choose rather to conform to your Worship, (yours I call it) contrary
to his Faith and Conscience, than lose his enjoyments of Wife, Children,
Liberty and Estate, any more then a Hypocrite, one that seemed to be that he is
not? nay, may I not say any better than a plain Heretic; for I take him to be
a Heretic that is condemned of himself, that allows himself to do that he
condemns himself for. And truly, this way of persecuting men for their Faith
and Conscience, is the only way to bring them to become Hypocrites and
Heretics, and is the way such men have gone in, to hold up their Idolatry and
Superstition in all Ages, witness Baals Prophets; and the old Serpent knows it
well enough; therefore it was said in the Revelations, That the Devil should
cast some of you into Prison: Some of whom? some of the Servants and faithful
Witnesses of Jesus, who would not, could not worship the Beast. But further,
suppose I wanted Faith and a right understanding of the things that belong to
my everlasting Peace, do you think that a Prison will be a means to bring me
into the true Faith? Can the Prison Walls rectify my understanding, or give me
Faith and Wisdom? Did ever Christ command the use of a Prison or Fine, or any
thing of that nature, to men that would not hear him, nor believe him? What
ground have you for this? show us your Foundation for these Actions, and bring
Command, Precept or Example for them from Christ or his Servants, and then I
shall think better of you; but if not, let me tell you, one Day you may find
your portion to be what the Prophet said, Woe to him that spoils, and is not
spoiled. Therefore I could gladly desire, even in pity to your own Souls, that
you would consider your doings; not that I am so much grieved for my own
suffering for Truth's sake, no, though my poor Wife and Children are near and
dear to me, yet blessed be the Lord, I have Faith in God concerning them, and
believe he will take care for them and me too, and can trust the Lord upon all
accounts, blessed be his Name forever; though it is hard, and will be so found
one Day to you, that part me from them, to be stripped from them for my obedience
to God, and laid in Prison, and by you reported to be one of the worst of men:
Oh! this has been the old way and manner of Old the Serpent and his
Instruments have taken with the Servants of Jesus Christ, witness Paul's
Accusers and Persecutors; We, said they, have found this Man a pestilent
Fellow, a mover of Sedition, a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazareans, etc.
And the great Rabbis of those days, the Scribes, Phrisees, High Priests and
Rulers, that persecuted our great Lord and Master Jesus Christ, accused him to
be an Enemy to Caesar, a Blasphemer, and a Deceiver, etc.

And you that are my Persecutors, are you not much like these men aforesaid,
who persecuted Christ and his Apostles, and cried to the Rulers for help, in
your proceedings against me? And though some of you never saw me as I know of,
and none of you ever came to discourse me, or see wherein I was mistaken, as to
my Faith and Principles; yet you can fling it out, That I am a dangerous
Person, and a Deceiver, and runs up and down the Country to delude People: Oh!
these your Lies and False Charges will one day be remembered, except you Repent,
which I desire you may. And as I said before, consider your doings, and see who
you run parallel with; you are but Men, you may be mistaken, seeing you are not
led by an infallible Spirit, and therefore cannot be sure your selves are in
the right; but you go by conjectures, and rest upon the Judgment of ancient
Fathers, reverend Divines, Heathen Authors, or your own Conceivings, or the
like, and are uncertain, and leave the People unsatisfied, and so manifest your
selves to be such as are not sent with the Lord's Message, received from God
himself, as by all your uncertain beating the Air is manifest to every one
whose Eyes the Lord has opened: So that here is great danger, if I should
leave Christ the true Light and teacher of men, who now appears by his pure
Spirit in my Heart, and shows me the things that do belong to my Peace, and
follow you, that I should then be led to act both in Principle and Practice,
and do those things I ought not, and leave undone those things I ought to do;
and then I could not escape being a miserable Sinner and Offender, in whom
there is no health. Now suppose I should, contrary to my Faith and Knowledge,
come to you, and live and dye in Error, for fear of being here kept in Prison,
and brought to Poverty in the World, which, blessed be the Lord, I value not in
comparison of my Peace with him, the God of Peace, and think to plead with God,
and say, I did what I did in submission to man's Will, who said, they were the
Ministers of Christ, and was forced to it by the chief Priests of our Country,
and must either submit to their Wills, or lie in Prison, my Goods spoiled, my
Wife and Children impoverished; so that I did what I did only to save my
Estate, and have my Liberty, etc. or else I would not have done it, for it was
against my Faith and Conscience, and because of the fear of Man: Will this
excuse me? If not, then I ask you, Can you excuse me to God, and assure me of
it, that if I will conform to your Worship, and give you Moneys for a Pardon of
my true obedience to God in disobedience to you? For so indeed the case lies;
if not, that you cannot excuse me, if you should or could force me to sin
against God, then why should not I, who am a peaceable man, and wrongs no man,
but loves all men, have my liberty to live, as I dare dye? Seeing I must answer
for my self, and stand or fall to my own Master, what have you to do to judge
me, who am the Lord's Servant? And if not, must stand or fall to him I serve:
Or how dare you smite your fellow Servants, and fling them in Prison that have
done you no wrong, nor owe you nothing but love, when he that put in his fellow
Servant in Prison, that owed him a hundred Pence, was so severly judged of his
Lord, who had forgiven him a greater Debt? And has taught to use those words in
Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
And would you not have God answer your own desires? Consider these things, and
learn to do as you would be done unto; for with the same measure you mete, it
shall be measured unto you again: And remember what our Savior lays down as
great offenses at the last day to those on the left Hand, Go you Cursed into
everlasting Torment with the Devil and his Angels; Or, Depart from me, ye
workers of Iniquity, I know you not; for I was an hungry, and you gave me no
Meat; thirsty, and you gave me no Drink; Naked, and you clothed me not; Sick,
and in Prison, and you visited me not. And when they answered, When saw we thee
an hungry, thirsty, naked, etc. and did not minister unto thee? He told them,
Inasmuch as you did it not to one of the least of these that believe in me, you
did it not to me. By which its clear, he takes that which is done to his
Followers as done to himself; for indeed it is for his sake, who teaches us to
live Righteously, Soberly and Godlily in this present evil world; and because
we obey him, and keep his Commands, therefore are we hated of all men for his
Name's sake; but the Wicked are not thus treated by you, the Swearer, Liar,
Drunkard, Proud Person, etc. are set at Liberty, and in these days the men in
Fashion: But if it be so great an offense not to visit the Servants of Christ,
when in distress; what will it be to those that lays them in Prison, and keep
them there, which is a means to bring them into Nakedness, Hunger, Thirst and
Sickness? Was it not said, That it was better a Millstone was hanged about his
Nick, and he cast into the Sea, that offended one of those little Ones that
believed in Christ, than he should have done so? If so, then what will his
portion be that not only offends them, but persecutes them, imprisons them,
spoils their Goods, belyes and slanders their Person, and misrepresents them to
the World, takes the Righteousness of the Righteous from him, and strips him
from dear Wife and Children, and causes them to suffer also; though its said,
Cursed is he that parts Man and Wife. Oh! what excuse can you make at the last
day for these things! How unlike are you to him, that is good to all men, and
laid down his Life a ransom for all, and does cause his Sun to shine upon all,
and his Rain to descend upon all, and his Grace that brings Salvation appears
in all, and strives with all. And this also you might consider, that it has
never been the practice of any Prophet or Apostle, or Servant of Jesus Christ,
to persecute any man for Conscience sake, or for his Faith; but on the
contrary, it has ever been the practice of the false Prophets, that run on in
the way of Balaam, for Gifts and Rewards, greedy Dogs that can never have
enough, blind Guides, that love Darkness, and hate the Light, Serpents that
have perfect Enmity against the Children of God; and so are Enemies to Christ
Jesus, Babylon's Merchants, who come in the Power of the Beast, these in all
Ages persecute the Lambs followers, and hate the appearance of him, wherever
it is; so that the Apostle says, He that is Born after the Flesh, persecutes
him that is Born after the Spirit: Even so it is now, and has been in all Ages
ever since Cain's time, who slew his Brother Abel, because Abel's Works were
righteous, and his own were evil: So Cain was the first Persecutor, and the
Lord was displeased with, and avenged the Blood of Abel upon him in
Righteousness.

Now I might mention many after Cain, that were Persecutors, as the Sodomites,
who said concerning Lot, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs
be a Judge; because he entertained the Angels of the Lord, they pressed sore
upon him; but the Lord delivered him, whose Righteous Soul was grieved with the
filthy Conversation of the wicked Sodomites, and brought down his Righteous
Judgments upon their heads in a dreadful manner: And the Egyptians, who
refused to let Israel have liberty to go and serve the Lord, persecuted them
very sore; but the Lord wrought their Deliverance, and rendered unto Pharaoh
and his People according to their deeds, as you may read at large in Exodus.
Likewise Iezabel that persecuted them that would not worship Baal, God Almighty
brought down his heavy Judgments upon her, and the false Prophets of Baal that
fed at her Table. Remember Proud Haman that was full of Indignation against
Mordecai, because he stood not up nor moved for him; and how hot he was in his
mind to have Mordecai and all the Jews young and old, destroyed and killed in
one day, charging them to the King, (to whom they were very good Subjects, as
appeared by Mordecai, who discovered the Treason of two of the King's
Chamberlains, Keepers of the Door, who sought to lay hands on the King) That
there were a certain People scattered and dispersed among the People in all the
Provines of his Kingdom; and their Laws, says he, are diverse from all People,
neither keep they the King's Laws; therefore it is not, says he, for the Kings
Profit to suffer them; though we do not hear, but they were all peaceable, and
hurt no man, only in matters of Worship and Conscience they differed from the
People of the Land, that could bow to proud Haman, who dug a Pit for
another, and fell into it himself, and was taken in the Net which he spread for
others; glory unto God forever, whose Eyes are over the Righteous, and his Ears
open to their Prayers.

Remember it was Pashur, the son of Imer the Priest, that smote Jeremiah the
Prophet, and put him in the Stocks, Ier. 20. 12. For what? for obeying the
Lord. Also, in chap. 26. when he spoke the Word of the Lord in the hearing of
the Priests, and of the Prophets and People, then the Priests and the Prophets
and all the People took him, saying, Thou shall shurely dye; and the Priests
and Prophets spoke unto the Princes, and to all the People, saying, This man is
worthy to dye, for he has prophesied against this City: What Priests and
Prophets were these? Such as could flatter, dissemble and lie, and turn to any
thing the people fancied to make themselves rich; see chap. 5. 26. etc. These
were they that lay in wait, that set Snares and Traps, and catched men, whose
Houses were full of deceit, therefore they are become great and waxen rich;
they are waxen fat, they shine, they overpass the deeds of the Wicked, they
judge not the Cause of the Fatherless, yet they prosper; and the Right of the
Needy do they not judge; but the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their Means, and my People love to have it so; and what will you
do in the end? Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my
Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? A wonderful and a horrible thing is
committed in the Land, etc. the false Prophets, and the great rich fat Priests
bear rule, etc. yea, from the least of them, even to the greatest of them,
every one is given to Covetousness; and from the Prophet, even to the Priest,
every one deals falsely: They have healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my
people slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no peace, Ier. 13. 14. and
8. 10, 11. And because Jeremiah prophesied truly to them what the Lord
commanded, he was put in Prison, chap. 32. 2. and 37. 5. and 38. 6. yea, into a
Dungeon, where his feet stuck fast in the Mire, but the Lord preserved him, and
wrought his deliverance. And shall I forget to mention Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, who would not obey the Kings Law concerning Worship, whom God
preserved in the hot firey Furnace, but those that cast them in were slain with
the flame: Likewise Daniel, who ceased not to pray, and give thanks before his
God three times a day, when the King had given out a Law to the contrary, and
the Lord delivered him out of the Lions Den, and those that accused him and
informed against him were cast into the Lions Den, with their Wives and
Children, and the Lions had Mastery over them, and brake all their Bones in
pieces, or ever they came at the bottom of the Den. So its clear through all the
old Testament, that the words of the Apostle are true, He that is born after
the flesh always persecuted him that was born after the Spirit; and so it is
still; for John Baptist and our Savior had no better entertainment than the
Prophets had had before them; for as Christ tells us by way of Parable in
Matthew* 21. When the Lord had sent his Servants to those Husbandmen, unto whom
he let out his Vineyard, and they beat some, killed some, and stoned some; last
of all he sent his Son, and him they took and slew also; and to this day are
the Highpriests and Rulers slaying, crucifying and murdering the holy One and
the Just, in his Apostles and Servants, in whom he appears, telling the World,
This Light within, which shines in the Hearts and Consciences of men, is a
Deceiver, a Delusion of Satan, a dark Lathorne, and what not? though it is only
this that discovers the thoughts and intents of the heart, and makes all things
manifest of what sort it is; so that the Apostle says, This is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, but men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their deeds are evil; for every one that does evil hates
the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved; but
he that does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God. This is very clear, Light and Darkness cannot
agree; so that it has ever been the works of Darkness that the Light has
condemned, and judged and made manifest to be Evil; and therefore the old
Serpent brings his false Accusations of the Light, and calls it Deceit, etc.
and is the Deceiver himself, and yet will not abide to hear Truth spoken of
himself; no more will his Children who are acted by him, and in whose hearts he
reigns, and fills them full of Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Hatred and Malice,
Cruelty and Filthiness; so out of their Hearts proceed these things; and they
cry to the Rulers for help against those that preach the Gospel boldly and
freely; as they did by Stephen, (so they are doing still, or would do, had they
power) when they gnashed on him with their Teeth, cast him out of the City, and
stoned him, having charged him falsely, That he spoke Blasphemous words, etc.
These have their blind Readiness to run them Errands, to whom they give power to
take them bound that are walkers i^ the Light, whether they be men or women;
These command the ignorant and unlearned men (as Peter and John were) that
preach boldly in the Name of Jesus, That they preach no more in that Name: But
we must obey God rather than Man, and cannot but speak the things that we have
seen and heard. Now when the Apostles could not but preach the things they had
heard and seen, and continued in the Power of God, working mightily, to the
healing of the sick, and such as were vexed with unclean Spirits, then the high
Priest, and those that were with him, were filled with Indignation, and laid
their hands on the Apostles, and put them into the common Prison; but the Lord
brought them out, and sent them into the Temple early on the next morning,
where they taught as the Lord commanded them; and there went an Informer to the
high Priest, the Captain of the Temple, and the chief Priests, and told them,
That the men they had put in Prison, were standing in the Temple, and teaching
the People; then went the Captain with the Officers, and brought Peter and John
before the Council, and the high Priest said, Did not we straightly command you,
that you should not teach in this Name, etc? Then Peter and the other Apostle
answered, We ought to obey God rather than man, Acts 5. (read it.) How like
those Priests and Officers are these in our days? And how plainly walk these in
the steps of those, and practice the like things against those that walk in the
Spirit and Practice of the Apostles? And how clear is it, that in all Ages it
was those that were born after the flesh, that persecuted those that were born
after the spirit? to whom its given, not only to believe, but to suffer for his
sake; not to persecute any for his sake, no, nor for reflecting him neither;
but its evident the Persecutors are such as seek to please men, not God; this
is clear from Herod, who after he had killed John the Baptist, grew more vile,
and stretched out his hands to vex certain of the Church, after Christ was
mightily manifested in his Apostles; and he killed James, the Brother of John,
with the Sword; and because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to
take Peter, and apprehended him, and put him in Prison, but the Lord sent his
Angel, and delivered him out of Prison, and from the hands of proud Herod, whom
the Angel of the Lord smote, and he gave up the ghost, and was eaten of Worms,
because he gave not God the glory. This also is clear from Pilate, who knew
(its said) That for Envy they had delivered him; yet its also said by Mark,
That Pilate being willing to content the People, released unto them Barabbas,
and delivered Jesus, (when he had scourged him) to be Crucified. Paul also met
with the same Spirit, when the Jews saw him in the Temple at Jerusalem, and
stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him, and cried out, This is the
man that teaches all men every where against the People, and the Law, and this
place; and they went about to kill him, but he was delivered out of their hands
by Lysias the chief Captain, and sent him to Felix, where he was accused by
Tertullus, (the high Priest Ananias being present) To be a pestilent Fellow,
and a mover of Sedition amongst all the Jews throughout the World, and a
Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazareans, and that he had gone about to profane
the Temple: Paul makes his defense before Felix, and Felix perceived the
matter, discoursed Paul afterward, and the Power of God reaching him, he
trembled, yet was so bent for to get Monyes; for its said, he hoped that Money
would have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him, sent for him the
oftener and communed with him; yet when Festus came into Felix 's Room, Felix
willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound: Festus being come into
the Province, the high Priest and the chief of the Jews informed him against
Paul. After that Paul was brought before the Judgment Seat, where the Jews laid
many and grievous Complaints against Paul, which they could not prove, Paul
answered for himself; but Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered,
Paul, will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged? for that the Jews
desired, and thought to lay wait in the way to kill him; but Paul appealed to
Caesar, and afterward declared before Agrippa, and Bernice his Wife, and
Festus, How he had been a Persecutor of the Church himself, and went to
Damascus with Authority and Commission from the chief Priests; and how the Lord
met with him by the way, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks, etc. See here how hot in their
spirits these professing Jews were, and in their blind zeal how cruel they were
in their hearts, and how the Rulers looked more at their own Interest, to keep
in favor with the people, than to do justly to them who were maliciously and
falsely accused to them; and how clear is it that they have always been a
Generation of Cain's Children, that quenched the Spirit of God, and set at
naught all his counsel, which persecuted them that were born of it, and lived
in it, and were never Persecutors of any for Conscience sake? So that
persecution is an evident sign of perdition, wherever it appears, and
suffering for Christ an evident sign of salvation, and that of God; and
therefore many have taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and rejoiced
they were thought worthy to suffer for his sake; and though they have walked
about in Goat Skins and Sheepskins, and have been destitute, afflicted and
tormented, yet its said, The World was not worthy of them; and they plainly
declare, That they seek a better Country, a City that has a Foundation, whose
Builder and Maker is God: And though they go through great Tribulation, yet
they have their Robes wished, and made white in the Blood of the Lamb, and
follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, having an Eye to him that is
invisible, and respect to the recompense of Reward; for the Lord takes that
which is done to them as done to himself, and therefore said he, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?

Oh! that you would consider these things, you that can cry to the Rulers for
help against those that cannot hurt you, and Persecute them that are your
greatest Friends, and all men's: Cease your Cruelties, and yield Obedience to
the commands of him, who is Lord of all, and has bidden you do as you would be
done by, and commanded you to love all men, and do good to all men, and to hurt
no man, injure no man, defraud no man, etc. For we read not of any that were
Servants of Jesus Christ, that ever persecuted any for Conscience sake; for
Conscience is God's Throne in man, and he only has power over it, and it is no
less than usurpation to offer to impose upon it. You pretend to be Protestants,
and that that Name first came up by protesting against Imposition; and what, is
it now to be practiced? They condemned it, and so does God and good Men through
all Ages. And it is hard that men cannot live under the Government, except they
submit their Consciences to every Edict, and ask you what Religion they must be
of; though its well known, we are peaceable men, and also sober, just,
neighbourly and friendly as any men in the Nation; neither do we make spoil of
the Creation, either in Meat, Drink or Apparel: And so, why shall not we have
liberty to live as we dare dye? Truly it is very Unchristian dealing, either to
compel us to believe against our Belief, or else to Imprison us and spoil our
Goods for practicing what we believe, when it is not in the least contrary to
the moral Law of God: Methinks you might afford us better entertainment; the
Apostle exhorts to entertain Strangers; for so did the good men of Old, and so
entertained Angels unawares sometimes. And what, shall I say you do not know
us, who you in scorn call Quakers? for if you did, I hope you would not
persecute us; and though you do not know us, yet as Strangers you might afford
us better entertainment than you do; all we desire of you, is but Liberty to
serve our God according to his mind, without being Persecuted for it. Remember
what Edom did of Old, they refused to let Israel pass quietly through their
Land, on the King's Highway, though they would have eaten their own Bread, and
not have been injurous to any man; Edom refused to let his Brother Israel go.
And is not this like our case? We eat no man's Bread for naught; we covet no
man's Silver, Gold or Apparel; we injure no man, hurt no man, defraud no man; we
love all men, and do good to all men; and all we desire, is to pass quietly
through the World unto the Kingdom of Promise: And we heartily desire you did
know us, and then you would know your selves better; and however, one day you
will know us, and be ashamed that your entertainment of the true Servants of
Jesus Christ, has been Fines, spoiling of Goods, Imprisonments, Beatings,
Stonings, false Accusations, Slanders and Lies, calling us Cheats, Heretics,
false Prophets, and what not? this is, and has been our entertainment amongst
you, and is mine at this day in Prison, because I cannot, dare not play
Hypocrite, and go contrary to my Faith: But you will say, may be, That my Faith
is not true Faith, but I believe an Error. I answer; you cannot prove your
Charges against us from clear Scripture, which says, That it is not only given
unto us to believe, but also to suffer for his sake we believe in: But it no
where says, its given us also to make others suffer that do not believe. And
suppose I did want a right understanding and true Faith, (I say again) do you
think that a Prison will help me? Can a Prison give Faith? Can Prison Walls
rectify men's Understandings? Lay aside these Carnal Crutches, and bring
Spiritual Weapons; Truth is sufficient to plead its own cause; and Faith is the
gift of God: Its only base Cain's salfe Worship that forces: He that will not
worship the Beast, or receive his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, must be
killed, or no man must Buy or Sell with him at least: So Error and Enmity, Envy
and Cruelty always go together; but the Truth is received for its own worth;
and its the manner and nature of true Faith to work by Love; pure Religion and
true, is loving God above all, and our Neighbors as our selves; and in this
love we should visit the Fatherless and Widows, and not make Widows and
Fatherless (in a sense) by casting the Father and Husband in Prison; this is
not to keep unspotted from the World; For its said, the World should hate us,
(who are true followers of Christ) and persecute us, and excommunicate us out
of their Synagogues, and say all manner of Evil falsely against us; yea, our
Savior tells us, They shall bring us before Kings and Rulers for a Testimony
against them: But Christ Jesus no where bids his Disciples excommunicate those
out of their places of Worship that would not believe, nor bring them before
Kings and Rulers, or cry to Rulers for to put them in Prison, Fine them, and
spoil their Goods; Its true, he bids them shake the Dust off their Feet for a
testimony against them that would not receive their Testimonies; but when they
would have had Fire from Heaven to have destroyed those that did not receive
him, Christ rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit you are
of; the Son of man is not come to destroy men's Lives, but to save them: Its
true, he tells them, The Rulers of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them,
and their great Ones exercise authority upon them; But, says Christ, it shall
not be so amongst you, etc. Remember what he compared the angry Scribes and
Pharisees to, who took offense at both John Baptist and himself, and indeed
almost all that God sent amongst them; says he, They are like unto Children
sitting in the Marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, We have
Piped unto you, and you have not Dan^ed; we have Mourned unto you, and you have
not Lamented, etc. And is not this like you? who are still so Childish to be
angry with us, because we do not Dance after your Pipe, nor Lament after your
Mourning; Why will you not do as you would be done by? You would not take it
well to be forced to Conform to us, would you? Then I ask you, why will you not
be Merciful, (as Christ commands you) As your Father (says he) is Merciful,
who is kind (says he) to the Unthankful, and to the Evil? Let your Fruits
declare you to be Branches of the true Vine, and Children of God: Have you
forgot what is said of the man that fell among Thieves, as he went from
Jerusalem to Jericho? the Thieves stripped him, and wounded him, and left him
half dead; now the Priest passed by, and the Levite looked on him also, passed
by and left him; but the good Samaritan took pity on him when he came by, and
bound up his Wounds, poured in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own Beast, and
brought him to an Inn, and took care of him; And (says Christ) go thou and do
likewise. Alack! how many lie wounded in Sin and Iniquity, and naked of all
that is good! And must none take pity of them? What! though it be a man of
another City or Society, if he has Oil and Wine, and will lend a Hand of Help,
and do good to the Wounded, and help the Naked to a Garment, why should you be
offended? It was ill in the Priest and Levite, that would not help him
themselves, and showed a churlish, idle, easeful, selfish Spirit in them, that
care not what comes of men, so they can eat the Fat, and clothe themselves with
the Fleece, and live at ease: But it would have been much worse in them if they
would neither a helped him themselves, nor suffer another to help him; but if
he did, take him and cast him in Prison, spoil his Goods, or put him to Death.
And Christ says, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, for ye shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering, to go in: Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites* for ye devour Widows Houses, (yes, in our days, leaves her not a
Cow to give her Milk, nor a Bed to lie on) And for a pretense (says he) make
long Prayers; therefore you shall receive the greater Condemnation: Woe unto you
blind Guides, who lay heavy Burdens, and grievous to born upon men, but will
not touch them with one of your Fingers: But (says Christ) they walk in long
Robes, love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief places in the
Synagogues, and Greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Rabbi,
Master; But (says he to his Disciples) be not ye called Master, for one is
your Master, even Christ, and all you are Brethren. But perhaps you may say, We
are not your Brethren. Well, suppose we were not, you ought to love us, if we
were your Enemies; But if we be not your Brethren, why do you take Tithes from
us? For it was never known that the Children of Israel took Tithes of any, but
only their Brethren; see Heb. 7. 5. However, you ought to do all things in
Charity; for the Wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God: Its said,
Mercy rejoices against Judgment; for he shall have Judgment without Mercy that
has showed no Mercy; for if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your hearts,
glory not, you are no better than Unbelievers; therefore Lie not against the
Truth: For, says the Apostle, this Wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish: For where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion,
and every evil work; but the Wisdom that is from above, is pure, peaceable,
gentle and easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
Partiality, and without Hypocrisy; and the Fruits of Righteousness is sown in
peace in them that make Peace. But say you, I am a sower or mover of Sedition.
So said the Jews by Paul; but they accused him falsely, and so do you me; for I
fear God, and love all men, and herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and Men, and as much as in me lies,
endeavor to live peaceable with all men; and do know assuredly that I seduce
no man, for the Lord has given me in his endless Mercy an understanding to
know him that is true: And the true Light that enlightens every man that comes
into the World, does not lead us to seduce any, but reproves and condemns
Seducers and Sedition, and makes all things manifest of what sort it is. But if
I did, or any of us did move Sedition, then it would be seen by our Fruits,
Lives and Conversations, and we should not have that presence of God with us,
which we have; and besides, you would do well to show us wherein; (as the
Apostle did them of Old) and show us our Errors, which are not to be found in a
Prison, nor indeed in us, who believe and walk in the Light, and are Children
of it. But perhaps you may say, We walk disorderly. Suppose we do, what then?
If you will take the Apostles advice, you should withdraw from us; and if we
observed not, or obeyed not the Gospel Order, do as the Apostle bids you; For
(says he) if any man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that man, and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; Yet count him not as an
Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. [But not one Word of a Prison or Fine.]
No, (says he elsewhere) the Servant of the Lord must be gentle unto all men,
apt to teach, patient; in Meekness in structing those that oppose themselves,
if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of the
Truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who
are taken Captive by him at his Will: Oh, that you would take notice of this
great piece of Advice! And further concerning those that have a form of
Godliness, but deny the Power thereof, from such turn away, says he. And so,
you would show your dislike of such, and disown them to be none of you; but
alas! where is the Power of Godliness to be seen, if not in the sober, honest
Quaker, as you call us? who dare not speak his own Words, nor do his own Will,
but lays down all to follow the Lamb, in true Obedience to what he requires and
commands, though for the same they suffer the loss of all outward things: And
truly it is seen fulfilled, that he that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer Persecution; and he that departs from Iniquity makes himself a Prey. But
the end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and of a good
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned; And says he thus, Warn them that are Unruly,
Comfort the Feebleminded; Support the Weak; be Patient toward all men; see
that none render Evil for Evil unto any man, but ever follow that which is
good, both amongst your selves, and to all men: And then what follows? Rejoice
evermore: And truly so they might with good cause, if this counsel were
observed: Pray without ceasing, (says he that spoke in Charity) In every thing
give Thanks, for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you; quench
not the Spirit, despise not Prophesying; prove all things, hold fast that which
is good; abstain from all appearance of Evil. Oh, what tender Counsel this is!
And what need have we to take notice of it here in England! Nay, he tells you
elsewhere, Though he speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, and a tinckling Simbal. And though I
have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and
though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity,
I am nothing; and though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor; and though I
give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing:
Charity suffers long, and is kind; does not make men suffer long, for that is
unkind. And truly the Apostle is so full in this matter, that all Profession or
Religion without Charity, is nothing worth; Charity, says he, envieth not,
bears all things: Compare but this with Peter's words; Add (says he) to your
Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance
Patience, to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to
Brotherly-Kindness Charity; if these things be in you, and abound, they make
you that you shall neither be Barren nor Unfruitful in the Knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ; but he that lacks these things, is Blind, and cannot see
afar off.

And now, if you would judge the Tree by its Fruits, what can you find of these
things in Persecution? And if you believe Scripture, methinks you may see the
very current of it runs continually against Persecution, Violence, Oppression,
Cruelty, Uncharitableness, and the like.

Perhaps you may say, Its not worthy to be called Persecution that is done to a
Heretic.

Let me Answer you once more; Suppose you, that the Scripture is to be taken
notice of, and the Precepts therein to be minded? then see what it says; A man
that is a Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject, knowing that
him that is such, is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself. So here
he must be admonished to obey what he knows; for if he did not sin knowingly,
he would not condemn himself: But if he persist and reject Counsel, then reject
him, disown him, and have no Society with him, etc. [But not one word of
putting him in Prison, Fine him, or spoil his Goods.]

But though I thus speak, be it known to you, I am no Heretic, (as you have
been pleased to call me) for I am not in the least condemned of my self for
what I do, in things relating to Faith and Worship; no, God is my witness, I do
what I do in Obedience to him, and do know him to justify me, and comfort me
in my Bonds for the same; and it is a light matter to be judged at man's day;
yet I for Truths sake, was free to clear my self of your false Charges.

But perhaps you may still say, If I be no Heretic, I am one that causes
Divisions and Offenses contrary to your Doctrine.

Well, suppose I be; nay, suppose I was one that caused Divisions and Offenses
contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, yet see what must be done to such;
Why, says the Apostle, I beseech you Brethren, mark them that cause Divisions
and Offenses, contrary to our Doctrine, which ye have learned, and avoid them.
Avoid them, what is that? All flee their Company: But let me tell you, we are
none of this sort, for we cause no Divisions from the Truth; it is our travail
and labor in the Lord, that men may be truly joined unto the Truth, and live
in it; and its those that serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
Bellys, who by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple;
but these goods Words and fair Speeches the People must pay them well for too,
else they must not have them: But for good Works and fair Conversations, those
are not to be found amongst the BELLY-SERVERS.

But may I not here venture to say by the People called Quakers, as Paul did by
the Romans, Your obedience is come abroad unto all Men; yea, and I believe God
will bruise Satan under our Feet shortly, though he be suffered to cast some of
us into Prison now, for the trial of our Faith, and accuse us falsely of many
things, as he did Job, and makes Lies his Refuge, yet his time is short; and
God, even our God, will over all Exalt his own Name and Truth, to the Joy of
all the Upright-hearted.

Written in Derby Goal in the Year 1682. where I yet remain a Prisoner. JOHN
GRATTON.

Matthew. 10. 7. Go Preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand.
Luke 10. 10, 11. But into whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you not,
go your ways into the Streets of the same, and say, Even the Dust of your City
which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you; notwithstanding, be ye
assured of this, that the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
THE END.

