THE Great Concern and Zeal OF A LOYAL PEOPLE FOR A GOOD KING'S PRESERVATION In
the HAZARDS of WAR.

And the Duty of such a People opened and enforced, In one of our MONTHLY-FASTS
in a Country Parish.

By the Minister thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

To all that sincerely fear God, and honor King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
THE Word of Authority to us, is, To your Prayers; as the Word of a Commander
to his Soldiers, To your Arms. The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal but
Spiritual, Mighty through God, to the pulling down of the strong Holds of
Satan; not only in the Hearts of Unbelievers, and Enemies of the Gospel,
battering, yea, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts
it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought
to the Obedience of Christ, (2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) but the same spiritual Weapons
are mighty against all the visible Armies, and Strongholds of the Devil, under
the Command of his Vice-Royes, the declared Enemies of the true Church of
Christ, yea, and of Mankind also, according to the extent of their Power. What
mighty things are recorded to be done by One of those Weapons of our Warfare,
mighty through God, in sensible Weakness, and Self-distrust? And what shall I
more say? For the Time will fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of
Sampson, and of Jephtha, of David also and Samuel, and of the Prophets, who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, etc. Heb. 11.32, 33. Take notice, how the
Prophets, Men of Peace, are enrolled among the Men of War. And no wonder that
when Victories and Conquests, even over Kingdoms, are attributed to Faith, that
then the Prophets should have an eminent place among the greatest Men of
greatest Name. And this Power of Faith is not lost, but wants Exercise, for
this is the Victory which overcomes the World, even your Faith, 1 John 5.4, 5.
And that which overcomes the World, and that mighty evil Spirit in it, can
subdue a Kingdom at any time, when God pleases, and the time of its
destruction is come. This Faith is exercised in Prayer; and by Prayer, winning,
and engaging the mighty God of Jacob, the Lord of Hosts, to be on our side: Our
Enemies cannot stand before us; they shall fall and perish, the strong shall be
as Tow. One Man shall chase a thousand, and two ten thousand, Deuteronomy. 32.30. Jos.
23.10.

The Church of God is both beautiful and formidable, Cant. 6.4. Terrible as an
Army with Banners. Her Majesty and Stateliness is set forth, as an Army with
Banners; and her exceeding great Power in her Faith, and Prayers. Believers, in
regard of the Power of their Faith, are more terrible than Armies, says
Excellent Mr. Durham. If one Jacob as a Prince prevailed, and by his Strength
had Power with God, Hos. 12.3, 4. What cannot many do, that weep and make
Supplications? What cannot an Army of Believers do? What cannot an Army do,
that by an united Faith, with Sighs and Weeping, take Heaven by violence?
Faithless, spiritless, faint, formal Prayers, put into rank and file, and
displayed in the finest Eloquence, do no Service at all, such Prayers do but
beat the Air. That same Language in which God speaks to us, is the most proper
for us to pray to God; that Word by which God works Faith in us, is that
which best suiteth the Prayer of plain-hearted Faith.

It is an Observation of Eminent Mr. Charnock, which deserves to be engraven on
our Hearts. When God would do any mighty Work in the World, he stirs up his
People to pray for it; and their Prayers by his own appointment have a mighty
influence upon the Government of the World: for when they come before him in
behalf of his Church in general, he does indulge them a greater Liberty and
Boldness, and as it were a kind of Authority over him, than upon other
occasions of their own. Isa. 45.11. Thus says the Lord, The Holy One of
Israel, and his Maker, Ask of me things to come concerning my Sons, and the
Work of my Hands command ye me. God would be more positively, Treat. of Provid.
p. 71. Fol.
confidently, and familiarly dealt with about the Concerns of his Sons, though
they were things to come to pass in after-Ages -- Rev. 8.3, 4. The great
Changes in the World, are an Answer to those Prayers which are offered unto God.

Holy Brethren! The Work of God has been very great in some eminent part of
the World, in some Countries and Kingdoms; and the Prayers of the Faithful have
prevailed much: But was there ever at any one time so great a Work as is now a
doing in our Days? Are not the great Affairs of the Sons of God in all
Protestant Churches, I say in all Protestant Churches, drawing near to a
Determination? The Issue of this War is like to be the Rise or Fall, not only
of many in Israel, but of all the Israel of God, confederate in the true
Religion of Jesus Christ. O then, is not this the time for us to be of one
Heart and Soul, deeply humbled, sincerely mourning, crying and sighing for the
Abominations that are yet in our Jerusalem, Cities and Countries weeping and
making Supplication, and with the most reverent and awful Adoration, make us
bold with the Highest Majesty of the Holy One, the Savior, in a time of
trouble, as he allows us, Monsieur Jurieu fulfilling of Prophecies, and
others.
Even to command him concerning his Sons, and the time to come, which many of
his Servants wait for; and say, as Luther, Fiat voluntas mea, Let my Will be
done.

Holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling; Give me leave to engage you
to be more abundant in the fervent Prayers of Faith, and of true Penitent,
reformed in Heart and Life. Consider how much of this great Work lies upon you
at this time. Who can tell what your Prayers may do, under God, by his
appointment. The Proclamation for these Fasts reaches to the Realm of England,
the Dominion of Wales, Town of Berwick upon Tweed. O that all from sixteen to
sixty in these Bounds were fit for Prayer; to bear Arms, these spiritual Arms!
O then, how might we hope, that even she that tarrieth at Home, and is fervent
in her Closet, may divide the Spoils, of the greater Spoiler, of all he can lay
hands on. But O, how weak are we? how divided? how unprepared? What Help can we
look for from them that are disaffected to the King and Queen, and troubled at
this glorious Revolution? How do they murmur that God should do what seems
him good, for his Peoples Good! How many are there that do not as much as
appear to Fast! How many are for the Liturgy of James (not the Apostle's which
has been reputed spurious by many of our most Learned Divines and Bishops,
but) the Apostate's! How many, half, yea half-quarter observers of those Holy
and solemn Days! How like are these to old Bottles! How many of those who seem
well affected to the Government, are grossly ignorant, sensual and profane,
unreformed, unrefined from their Lees! What can these do? What ill-favored,
irreverent, what cold and dead, what broken Work do many make! so that we have
cause to fear the Divine abhorrence of our Fasting. How far may a Man ride
before he can see one Sinner, whose Heart and Life is reformed according to the
Word of God, after our many monthly Days of Fasting? If a Poll could be taken
of them that are for, or against, or are wary Neuters, whether ever God and
Christ, or their Enemies, should be found in the best side? All must be
excluded from voting right, who do not lift up holy Hands to God in Prayer; so
that from the Land's End, even to the Town of Berwick, we can make no more than
a Gideon's Army. But yet I hope there are enough to make an Army, too strong for
all the Enemies of our Faith, Religion, Peace and Government. Be therefore of
good Courage, wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen your Heart, all ye that
hope in the Lord.

Encourage our selves in the Lord our God, were our Extremities greater and
more than they are. And consider,

1. Is not God on our Side? O let us humbly wrestle with his Majesty to rise
for his own Glory, for David's sake, for Jerusalem's sake! what will our
Enemies, the Heathen say?

2. Has not God prevented us with his Loving Kindness? Did we by our Prayers
call in our Deliverer? Did not God put it into his Heart before we knew of it?
Have we not seen when we fasted and prayed, it went well with us? for the
Honor of God, for the Honor of his Ordinance, for Prayer's-sake (despised,
blasphemed Prayers-sake) I was glad to hear it was the poor praying People of
Ireland that saved Londonderry, that made the Men of Inniskillin more than
Men, and not our Gallant Dammees and Hectors. Pray on to the last Breath; pray
to the last drop of Tears. Give not up so great and so good a Cause for lost,
it is all in the Hand of God, our God, trust him.

3. Pray on: there are more for us than there be against us: Is not God for us?
Are not Angels for us? Do not the Souls under the Altar solicit God, and cry,
How long, Lord, Holy and True, Rev. 6.10.
do thou not avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? I beseech you
observe this, that they who are our Enemies now, are they who have shed the
Blood of the Saints. We are sure that God will avenge the Blood of his
Servants, and hear the Prayers of his Saints in Heaven, and on Earth. The Lord
never denied to hear their Prayers, he has only delayed. Andit was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their
Fellow Servants also, and their Brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled. Some have written, and others believe this late, is the
last Persecution of the Churches in France at least: and if so, that the Number
of them that should be Killed, is fulfilled; then we shall shortly sing, as
Jehosaphat and the People did, For his Mercy endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. 20.21.

4. Pray, believing in him to whom you pray, and knowing against whom you pray;
Is he not a bloody merciless Persecutor, who can set him out in his Garments
died in Blood? and has not God, said, He has ordained his Arrows against the
Persecutors? plead that with God, Psalm. 7.13.

5. Who do we pray for? Are they not God's own People, the Apple of his Eye? or
has God not one small R^^nant left? Remember the Prayer of Nehemiah; Now these
are thy Servants, and thy People, whom thou have redeemed with thy great Power,
and by thy strong Hand. Nehem. 1.4, to 10.

6. Argue from the very Strength and Greatness of our Enemy. O say our Men of
Reason and Thoughts, (Men like the cowardly Spies of the Land of Canaan, who
discouraged the People) How powerful is France! How Great that King! How wise
his Counsel! How mighty are his Armies! How strong at Sea! How well
disciplined! what an Advantage has he, who is one in united Councils,
beforehand with his Enemies in the time of Year, whereas the Confederates are
slow in Resolutions and Preparations? He Will hold them in play, he will tire them
out! And what will not this Great Man do! Yea, Are these things true? is this
the sense of Men, wise Men, most Men! Be it so. Yet for all this, h^^l he the
Army of Zera the Ethiopian; Let us cry to the Lord as Asa did. 2 Chronicles. 14.9.
Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that
have no Power; Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we
go against this multitude; thou art the Lord our God, let not Men prevail
against Thee. Let us wait upon God, and take an Argument from the strength of
our Enemies, Psalm. 59.9. Because of his Strength, let us wait on thee; for God
is my Defense.

We have a God hearing Prayer to pray unto; we have a good Cause; all is in
Danger; we have great Encouragements; O let us say, He has delivered, and we
trust be will not only deliver, but prosper. O then let us pray for a praying
Heart! And pray every Day, without ceasing. And that first for our King and
Queen, that they may have the whole Armor of God to put on, the Testimony of a
good Conscience, that in the Vprightness of their Hearts they do all they do,
that they may never fall into the slippery and pernicious Steps of evil Kings.
Let us pray for them, that they may inherit an Everlasting Kingdom, that
endeavor to make ours so happy. Many do labor to fright us more with the
King's Successes, than with the return of their idolized Image; as if he would
be as absolute, as high for Prerogatives as any of his Predecessors. What
Confusions he will make, say others, in the best Church in the World; and much
more. Whereas the great fear is, that he will do more for God than most of his
Predecessors. Men are mightily afraid of losing their Pluralities, their
Ceremonies, their Sins. Let us pray for the preservation of our Lamps, the free
Progress of the Gospel, the Advancement of Religion and Godliness into High
Places, for a painful Preaching, exemplary Ministry, for the saving and
sanctifying Protestant Churches, for healing of Breaches; in a word, for Grace,
Mercy, Peace. And when we have prayed, to the pouring out of our Hearts, let us
not trust to our Prayers beyond God's Promises, but stay our selves upon the
Rock of our Salvation: To whom be Might and Dominion for ever. Salvation to our
God. Hallelujah.

The Great Concern and Zeal of a Loyal People for a Good Warlike KING, etc.
2 Samuel 21.15, 16, 17. Moreover, the Philistines had yet War again with Israel,
and David went down, and his Servants with him, and fought against the
Philistines; and David waxed faint. And Ishbi-benob, which was of the Sons of
the Giant, (the weight of whose Spear weighed three hundred Shekels of Brass in
weight) he being girded with a new Sword, thought to have slain David. But
Abishai the Son of Zeruiah succored him, and smote the Philistine, and killed
him. Then the Men of David swear unto him, saying, Thou shall go no more out
with us to battle, that thou quench not the Light of Israel.


THese words are a very remarkable plece of Story, which is complete in it
self, and therefore I need not look upon what goes before it in this Chapter. I
crave your earnest attention to the Matter I intend to handle for your
Instruction this part of the Day, and have but patience till I come to the
Application, then I hope you will see, that what I shall deliver to you, will
be very suitable to the Work and Duty of this Day; and not only so, but will
direct you what to do every Day, till God shall turn our Fasts into
Thanksgivings. The true Reason of my choosing this Text, and that upon this
Solemn Day, which requires an extraordinary seriousness, with the Application
of the whole strength of our Hearts, and exercise of every Grace, is not at all
to flatter, much less to idolize our King and Queen, which would be the worst
of Services to them, and to our selves, by provoking God to quench the Light of
Israel; but really to show you as plainly, and as convincingly as I can, how
deeply our Hearts should be affected with our own Condition, how earnest we
should be with God to preserve our Supreme Governors, and especially our King
in the Labors and Dangers of this War; and how we should behave our selves
under all those Circumstances under which the Sovereign and overruling
Providence of the infinitely Wife and Almighty God has subjected us. And I was
moved to these Considerations, which I shall commend to you, by the great
Thoughts of Heart which possess many honest, religious, and tender Persons.
Why, say they, will our King hazard his Person in this War, who is in danger,
not only from the Craft and Malice of the open Enemy in the Field, but
Treachery even in his Camp? Why will the Parliament and the Kingdom let him?
What will become of us, if we should be so unhappy as to lose Him, in this
unsettled and distracted State, when there are so many secret Discontents, and
such open Talk? Beloved, we cannot be too much concerned for the Safety of
their Sacred Persons, the Peace of these Kingdoms, and the Preservation of our
Religion both at Home and Abroad. The Glory of God, the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus, and the Salvation of our Souls, by the Means of Grace, are as much
concerned in the Success of this War, as ever at any time to any People. This
War is not a War for outward Peace and Liberty, nor for Glory and Renown, for
Riches and Trade, or any other temporal End or Interest only, but for the true
Interest of the Kingdom of God among us, and of the Protestant People of God in
all Nations where they are, or soon will be in danger, if God does not show
himself to be on our Side. There are many Interests of many Princes and People
in this one Bottom, and all united in one King, and submitted to his Conduct
under God: If these should be divided, we should be weakened and fail; but if he
should miscarry, we must needs sink for a time, and many Countries suffer
Shipwreck; and then not only the Estates, Liberties, Properties, Bodies, and
Lives, but precious Souls, and the Ark of God would fall into the Power of the
Cruel. The Philistines would soon overrun our Land; and they who seem to wish
for their coming, would feel the Miseries of their coming, as soon as they who
fast and pray with all sincerity to keep them out, and be less able to endure
them. If the Light of our Israel should be quenched, O how tempestuous would it
be round about! What a Day would it be of Gloominess and thick Darkness! O, far
be it from those who desire that Evil Day ever to see it come! may they all go
to their Graves in peace, before that Inundation of Woes and Miseries break
down our Banks. It Is true, we have more to lose now at once than ever our
Forefathers had; and therefore when we consider our Sins, we have more cause to
fear than ever. But let this comfort and encourage us to offer up strong
Prayers and Cries to the God of Heaven, to God our Savior, that the Glory of
God's Truth, Mercy and Grace, being so specially and imminently concerned in
this War, that his Wisdom and Power will the more sincerely appear for the
preservation of Israel, and the Light of Israel. Call up Faith and Hope to put
forth all their strength into those Prayers which go not out of feigned Lips. O
for a strong Faith at the head of our Godly Sorrows and Humiliation for Sin
this Day! O for the Assistance of the mighty Spirit of Prayer, and Supplication
to send up, yea, to carry our fervent Prayers to Heaven. Is the Spirit of God
departed from his praying, wrestling Jacobs in England, and gone to our Enemies
Hearts? Is God, is the Ark of God in their Camp? Has not God prepared his
Arrows against the Persecutors? What inhumane Persecutions are the greatest of
them guilty of! But as my Thoughts run on this String of Hope, I am checked by
the sight of the great and many Sins of these Kingdoms, for which God might
bring us under the Sword of our Enemies; and even deliver up the Ark, the
Church, into their hands. O that every Congregation were weeping and mourning
before the Lord this Day, and casting away our Iniquities! O that this Day were
a Day of confessing and forsaking those Sins for which God might justly hide
his Face from us! O that we were exercising of Revenge upon our selves for all
our Abominations! O that we were sighing and crying for all the Abominations
done in the midst of our Jerusalem! and that all in their Places would become
zealous for the Glory of God, resolving every one to mortify his own Sins,
disarming the Traitors against God, Church and State, in his own Heart, and
setting themselves against Sin in others, that God may be reconciled to us, and
entreated for the Kingdom! But yet, as bad as we are, are we not God's People?
Are there not some Fifties among us, for whose sake God will spare us? But not
to insist upon such Arguments for Hope, let us build upon one, it is a strong
and a standing Argument, by inverting the Word of God, and humbly turning it
upon him, Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O House of
Israel, but for my holy Name's sake. -- Not for your sakes, do I this, says
the Lord God, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own
ways, O House of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.22, 32. When we have least to say, and have
no Reasons to plead taken from our selves, we have most to say, and the most
prevailing Argument to urge by Faith, taken from the free Mercy of God, and the
Glory of his great Name. O let us take Courage, and come boldly to the Throne
of Grace, and say, Psalm. 6.4. Jer. 14.7.
Save us for thy Mercies sake. O Lord, though our Iniquities testify against
us, do thou it for thy Name's sake, for our backslidings are many, we have
sinned against thee. O Lord, hear, O Lord, forgive, O Lord, hearken and do,
defer not, Dan. 9.19.
for thine own sake, O my God, for the City and People that are called by thy
Name. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give Glory, for thy
Mercy, Psalm. 115.1, 2.
and for thy Truth's sake. Wherefore should the Heathen say, (the French and
Irish, the Philistines, the Enemies of the Lord that have so reproached him,
that have destroyed all his Tabernacles in the Land say,) Where is now their
God? Such an Encouragement as this may quicken us to a lively Attention to the
Word of God, and put Life into our Prayers, when most dejected under the sense
of our Sins. And so now I come to the Words.

1. In this part of sacred Story, we read of another War between a proud, Zech.
9.6.
unquiet, idolatrous, superstitious People, and David, ver. 5. The Philistines
had been often destroyed and conquered by the Sword of David, and yet they
begin another War with David, as the Phrase does intimate; And the Philistines
had yet War again with Israel; as if they began it, and provoked Israel unto
it: We read not what the particular Cause of the War was, it might be from
inveterate Hatred, from Contrariety of Religion; for the Philistines, like our
Papists, had their Images in the Battle of Baal Perazim; and as their Images
could not help them, so neither could they save their Images; 2 Samuel 5.21.
or it might be Impatience of Revenge that might stir them up, and they thought
themselves strong enough to overcome and overrun Israel; or they might promise
to themselves the Life of David, having a self-confident vainglorious Giant,
Ishbi-benob, who might brag as well as think of killing David. It is a
righteous Judgment of God upon the inveterate Enemies of his People, which they
see not, that they will not be quiet in their Possessions, but after many
Overthrows they will be making Wars against them.

2. And David went down, and his Servants with him, and fought against the
Philistines; it seems to be a defensive as well as a lawful War, to go down
against the Philistines, and not to stay for their coming into the Land of
Israel: they were the beginners of the War, and David does wisely choose the
Seat of the War, which might be most convenient, the further off from home, and
the nearer the Enemies Country the better. An experienced valiant King will
neither refuse nor delay to fight against the Enemies of God's People, and his
Kingdom, when there is just Cause and Provocation given.

3. And David waxed faint; he grow in Years, and was much decayed in Strength,
or tired and weakened with the Wars. This Circumstance affords us many
Observations. 1. The Wars and Troubles in a King's Reign, are no Sign or
Indication of, and should create no Suspicions in any Men, of the Weakness or
Badness of his Title to the Kingdom. Never had King a better or a clearer Title
to a Kingdom than David had, appointed and designed of God, elected and made by
the People, and anointed: Nay, the Malice of the Philistines boiled and
swelled, and broke out into an open Attempt and War against David, when they
heard he was anointed; 2 Samuel 5.17. But when the Philistines heard that they
had anointed David King over Israel, all the Philistines came to seek David: --
And spread themselves in the Valley of Rephaim, v. 18. Is David anointed? has
he taken the Kingdom upon him? then before he is settled in his Throne, we will
seek him. This Policy was equal to the Malice, while the Government was young
and tender, as some here said of ours, and the Factions of the Kingdom not
inwardly healed: but the Providence of God turned this to David's Glory, by
giving him the Victory, they and their Images fell into his Hands, ver. 20, 21.
When God designs a King, and gives him a Throne, they who rise against him,
rise and war against God himself; and let that King acknowledge God and seek
him, as David did, and all his Enemies shall not prevail against him, but fall
and perish. David had a good Title, but a troublesome Reign. 2. A good King
when he takes a Kingdom, takes it not for the Glory and Ease of it, but for the
Glory of God, and Good of his Kingdom, with all the Labors and Dangers of a
War. 3. The true Interest, Peace and Happiness of a Kingdom, is the Concernment
of a good King. The Philistines had a great spite against David's Person in
the former Design and War, but now they hated Israel, which were the People of
God, and professed the true Religion, and now David is as much engaged to go
out in Person against the Philistines. 4. A faithful and a valiant King will
endure the great Toil and Weariness of a War, even to Faintness. 5. That even a
David, a Servant of God, will find it a hard and hazardous Work to fight his
Enemies. 6. A good and valiant King will expose his own Person, and tire
himself in Battle, and yet not fly nor leave the Field; David waxed faint, but
yet stands his ground. 7. The best and stoutest King must feel his own
Infirmities, that he may know that he conquereth not by his own Strength. 8.
That though a good King shall prevail, yet first he may be brought very low and
faint. The greatest Champion will faint in time; and oftentimes a Cause and
People may be brought very low before a Conquest. The Power of God will be seen
in humane Weakness, and give him hot and fainting work, that his glorious Power
may bring forth Victory and Peace.

4. Ver. 16. And Ishbi-benob, etc. How exact an account have we here given us
of this great Enemy of David? By his Name, a very notorious and noted Man, his
Descent and Family, which was of the Sons of the Giant; his great Strength, his
dangerous Weapon, The Weight of whose Spear weighed three hundred Shekels of
Brass in Weight; About nine Pound six Ounces Haver depoise, Clark's Annot.
About half as big as Goliah's, 1 Samuel 17.7. but according to others a great
deal more.
and by his particular Preparation for Mischief to David's Person, being girded
with a new ^word: Sword is not in the Original Text, but supplied for
Explication, as contained in the word girded, Girded with a new --, somewhat
extraordinary, and fitted for his purpose to kill David. The judicious Peter
Martyr does conjecture, that he might be girded about in sign of his being made
some Officer in the Army, and that he must do some great Action and meritorious
Exploit, which became the greatness of his Family, and Strength, and the
Dignity of his Place. This Story is brought in to illustrate the Danger and
Deliverance of David, and to set forth the Providence of God in great Straits
and Dangers, and to make God's People, and their Enemies also know, that let
them have all the Advantages they can desire, yet they shall not prevail
against David and against Israel. Let us not go over so large a Text without
making some Observations.

(1.) You read David's great Inequality and Disadvantage: though when he was
young he killed G^liah; but now David waxed faint: In respect of Strength and
stature, what was David to him? but now here is David at a Disadvantage, he
waxed faint. There may be sometimes great Disproportions between the Servants
of God, and the Enemies of God: The Servants of God may in Appearance be much
the weaker.

(2.) The Assailant was a Man of note among the Philistines, a Man of Name, as
Goliath was, from whom some great Action might be expected: The Enemies of God
and his People may be furnished with Men extraordinarily fitted, prepared, and
resolved, Men picked out for Designs and Attempts, pernicious to the People of
God. Here was a great Man, a noted Man, a Man of great Strength and Stature, of
desperate Designs, for he thought of killing David; and yet when many Wagers
might be laid on the Philistines Head and Party, it was so probable, if not
sure, that such a Hand must needs prevail against David, yet David comes off
safe, and his mortal Enemy falls and perishes; the Giant had an Opportunity to
attempt, and never was David in a worse case to make his Defense, and yet the
Design failed. Such Men as these are not to be trusted to, if we had an Army of
them on our side, nor to be feared; See Mr. Jo. Mackenzie's Narrat. of the
Siege of Londonderry, p. 2. col. 1. The new levied Soldiers were to be all
near six Foot high, formidable for their Bulk, whatever they were for their
Courage.
though all our Enemies were such, God can defeat them all. Men cannot perform
what Men would have them, or hope from them. How curious were our Enemies, the
Philistines, in the choice of Regiments of great Stature and Strength? what
confidence was put in them? and yet they proved but like Babes and Lubbars.

(3.) This Ishbi-benob was girded with a new Sword, that is, as some
conjecture, he was newly made some great Officer, from his being girded, a Mark
of Honor; others, that his new Sword was a newly invented Weapon for his turn;
and others think it might be a new Sword, not used before, the Edg of it was
first to be tried upon David's Pers^^ How proud might this Man be of his Name,
his Stature, his Strength, his Command, and his Sword? How often might he fancy
David's Head upon his Sword's Point, See the Narrative of the French Joy for
the Death of King William in the Battle of Boyn.
and his Body at his Feet, and yet his Weapon shall not prosper against Good
King David. Our Enemies the Philistines, have changed the way of fighting,
invented new Instruments of War to make themselves the more formidable; how may
their ambitious, vainglorious Ishbi-benobs boast what they will do with David?
kill him, and then drag him in the Streets and Dunghils, and yet David is
preserved: Men and Weapons are alike vain and ineffectual, when God is a Shield
to David and to Israel.

(4.) This Ishbi-benob had David almost in his Power and within his reach, for
Abishai succcoured David, who waxed faint. Hence learn, the Enemy of David may
be prepared to kill, may have a great Advantage over him, being weak and faint,
and he had as fair and open Opportunity to make him think he had him as sure as
if he were in his Hand; and yet David escapes the Villain, tho a Giant. David
was, and our David may be in great Danger, and nigh to Death, and yet
preserved: Great Dangers make great Deliverances, and the Deliverance is as
sure in great Danger, as in common and less. How near was David many a time to
be cut off, yet he was delivered from the Hand of Saul, and all his Enemies; so
we pray and trust that God will be a Shield and a Succourer of our David in all
his Wars.

(5.) He thought to have slain David, or he spoke, as the word signifies, of
killing David; perhaps by thinking of killing the King, he was ambitious to
have the Glory of winning the Field, and routing Israel, perhaps to avenge the
Philistines so often beaten and destroyed by David; his Spite and Aim was at
David, not to take him, not to maim and hurt him, but outright to kill him:
David had been successful, and done great Services for Israel, and for that the
Philistines might hate him, and have particular Designs upon him. A victorious
and a good King is hateful to Philistines. The greater Blessing a good King is
to the Israel and Church of God, the more aimed at: but when his Dangers are
greatest, God is nearest for his Salvation. David was aimed at, and he could
not choose but know it, for they sought him once before in particular, yet
David's Courage, Religion, Conscience, and Care of Israel, 2 Samuel ^.13.
did oblige him to go down to the Battle. David is faint, and when faint, the
Enemy laid at him to have sped him, and yet David is preserved. It is
extraordinary when God suiteth the Spirit of a King to his Charge and Dangers;
and that King who turns not his back upon God's Cause, Religion, and People,
may humbly expect that God will not turn his back upon him in his greatest
Dangers, but watch over him, and preserve him. The King's wearing the Crown of
England, makes the Philistines aim the more at his Head: His Greatness and
Valor do multiply his Perils; but God who made him great for this Work, is
mighty to save him.

5. In ver. 17. we have these Remarkables. 1. A famous Act of Abishai the Son
of Zeruiah who succored David, and he smote the Philistine, and killed him. 2.
The Zeal and great Concern of the People for their King; Then the Men of David
swear unto him, saying, Thou shall go no more out with us to Battle. 3. The
Reason for that Resolution and Zeal; That thou quench not the Light of Israel;
that our Light and Glory may not be put out with thy Life, who art the Light of
Israel. 4. David's Permission of that Oath and Resolution of the People, and
his Acquiescence in that Act for his own and their Preservation and Comfort.

In the first of these we have many things to observe.

1st. Abishai the Son of Zeruiah; he was a valiant Man, and David's Sister's
Son. Whence observe, It is under God and next to a Guard of Angels, 1 Chronicles
2.16.
a great Security for a King to have a Confident, and approved valiant, trusty
Friend at hand, in time and place of Danger; such a Man was Abishai. How
Abishai come now to be so near David's Person, we do not know: whether he was
there by Command as in his Place, or whether brought thither by the Providence
of the Lord of Battle, there he was at hand for this eminent Service. Whence we
will observe; 1. It is the Providence of God over David to place a valiant
loyal Friend to succor him in great Weakness and great Danger: So let us in
all our David's Danger, pray that God, Exodus 15.3.
who is called a Man of War, and the Lord of Hosts, would place an Abishai near
his Person to succor him in time of need. 2. It is a great Duty and Praise of
a valiant loyal Captain, as Abishai was, to take care of the Person of a good
and valiant King, and interpose between him and Death or Harm. 3. Abishai's
care and business was not to carry David out of the Field, and to leave it with
him, the great Si^n of Affection and Loyalty in many a Coward; but he stood by
fainting David to succor him in the Encounter, and to win the Day. This is
true Fidelity both to the King and Israel also. 4. Whoever the Person be who
defends David in a time of Danger, deserves to be remembered and honored for
it; and it is an Honor to his Person and to his House. Here David's Second is
named, Abishai, and his Family noted, Abishai the Son of Zeruiah, both
remembered and honored by this sacred Penman: and the Service is not only done
to a King's Person, but to the King's Kingdom. 5. Nay further, not only Men,
but God himself takes notice of, and rewards with Honor, that Person, or more,
that succor David when he is faint in fighting the Lord's Battles. And this
should be a great Encouragement to all that are in chief Place, or near the
Person of our King, to expose themselves to sight for the King's Preservation:
It is an Honor to their Name, an obliging Service to the King and Israel also;
and they may do it with Success upon the Enemy, and Safety to themselves: and
what can be more to embolden and inspirit a Person to engage an Enemy? 6. The
most valiant and stoutest King may stand in need of Succor, and it is no
dishonor to the greatest King to accept the Service; for he must know and
acknowledge he cannot always hold out, nor conquer all with his own Hands. 7.
That such as come in to succor a King in time of Danger, should not hinder,
nor be slack, nor make as though he did, but do his work effectually: Abishai
did not make a show, but effectually succored him; this is a sign of Courage,
Skill and Fidelity. The Lord that provided one to succor David at a hard push,
deliver our King from treacherous Standers by and Cowards. This must be one of
our Petitions for him, that either God would bind up the Hands of every
villainous Ishbi-benob, or send him some one or more to succor him, as he did
David.

2. Abishai smote the Philistine, and killed him. The Son of the Giant was
over-tall, and too big for any ordinary Man to deal with; yet as big as he was,
here is one that fears him not, but strikes, and strikes home too, he smote and
killed him: The Action is roundly expressed, he smote the Philistine and killed
him. He was not long about him, but made short work with him; he smote him and
killed him. The Courage of Abishai, and his Skill and Vigor appear in the
Stroke. But could Abishai come within his reach? Could not the Giant fence, and
keep him off at Sword's point, and Arm's length? No, he could not it seems: he
had bulk enough; a great mass of Flesh might hang upon his great Bones; he
might have neither true Courage nor Skill, but lay at catch to take David at an
advantage of Weakness, and act the Coward's part. But now David is not
deserted, but succored; Abishai strikes once for all, and kills him. Look upon
both these in their contrary Sides: The Son of the Giant is for the Philistines
against Israel, really against God, and against his Church: Abishai is David's
Officer and Servant, a Commander under him, as he was under God. From
Particulars we must not conclude Universals. But God permits his Enemies now
what he permitted then; yea, they have not only many Men of great bulk and
stature in one Kingdom, but like the Horses of Egypt, they are Flesh and not
Spirit; and in another, not raw and fleshy Bodies without Courage, but
disciplined Armies and Veteranes: And they want not for new Swords, not for any
Inventions and Furniture, for all Occasions: suppose some excel in Bulk, in
Flesh and Bones, and yet want Skill and Courage for a noble and honorable
Attempt; suppose others be Men expert in War, who excel in Skill, but want true
Courage; suppose they exceed in Number, and are more than we are, but are such
as will not stand; shall we then only venture, and reckon according to Sense
and Reason? This is unworthy of the People of the mighty and living God, who
should look by Faith upon him, and upon David though weak, yet in the Hand of
God; and thus we ought to do. Then let us make such Observations as these, to
encourage our Faith and Hopes, waiting upon God by Prayer. 1. There are none so
great, so strong, so big in the Enemies Army, but God can find out Men to fetch
them down. The Philistines had an Ishbi-benob, and David had an Abishai on his
side, who proved too hard for him. 2. When the Enemies of David exceed in
Stature, Strength and Arms, it makes them but the more bold to venture and
design what will prove to their own Destruction. The Philistines were appointed
for destruction; and when they thought themselves fit for War, they were fit
for Destruction. They made many Wars against David, and before David appeared,
but never had success, but when the Sins of Israel were ripe for Punishment.
Our Enemies are as like them as if they were descended from them; how
Philistine-like did they use Sampson? The Inhumanities of our Enemies are a
reproach to Nature, of which they have as little, as they have of Grace and
true Religion. Our Enemies are given to burn and make desolate; they cannot
rest from troubling David, raising War after War: and what but Bitterness in
the latter end, is, and will be the Fruit of their Wars and Commotions? Their
very Giants are for the Slaughter; because every Battle against them is the
Lord's, therefore they cannot stand. 3. A great, a bold, a daring Enemy of
David, is as soon killed as the weakest; what could be sooner done? And Abishai
smote the Philistine and killed him; and what became of his strong and his
mighty Arm, or his new Sword then? 4. The Enemies of God, and his David, may
imagine and design greatest mischief to him, but are so far from being able to
execute and perform their Counsels and Designs, that they perish in the attempt
to execute them. 5. The Servants of God and the King should not fear a
Philistine, tho he were an armed Giant, in the defense of the King and Israel:
let him smite, and kill at once. 6. It is a Duty, and a necessary part of
Wisdom to know when, and whom the Servants of God must smite and spare, or
smite and kill: Abishai was ready at it, and David was not so faint but he
might have bad him forbear to kill, if it had not been his Duty. There is a
great difference to be made between some Enemies and others. 7. The Instruments
of God's Judgments upon his Enemies, do quickly and effectually execute his
Pleasure upon them; Abishai smote and killed him. 8. How dreadful is it for any
Man to be an Enemy to God, and his People Israel? It must needs be a torment to
be disappointed of his Aim, had David only escaped his and been preserved, and
he escaped and fled? To lose the pleasure of his Enmity against him, to lose
the honor of such a Fact, and the prey and reward of his Service; but not only
to fail, but to perish, and go down to Hell in a moment, what Horror attends
his Breath going out of his Nostrils! What a tormenting Disappointment was it
to miss of David, and die in a doing Enterprise?

2dly. Another thing in the Words is the zealous Action and Behavior of the
People, and the use they made of the King's Deliverance: Then the Men of David
swear unto him, saying, Thou shall go no more with us to Battle. They had in
another case withstood the King's Declaration to them of going in person with
his Army into the Field against Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.3.
There they did more than humbly dissuade the King from going; they did
resolutely gainsay the King's Declaration; but the People answered; Thou shall
not go forth; and gave their reason for it: But here they carry their
Resolution higher; they swore unto the King, thou shall go no more to Battle,
etc. What would some of our late Asserters and Promoters of the Absolute Power
of Kings have said of this Case? The Persons were all David's Subjects, and yet
they swear unto the King; they swear unto the King without asking his leave or
license; they swear unto the King, not to bind themselves to their Duty to him,
but to bind him, and to bind him absolutely, without limitation or restriction,
Thou shall go no more out with us to Battle. Tho their Concernment for the King
and Kingdom's Preservation and Welfare was good, yet thus it would have been
interpreted. 1. To restrain the King from going out to Battle any more. 2. And
for them to swear that he should not go, was to exercise an Act of Superiority
and Usurpation over the King's Power and Liberty. 3. And tho the End and
Intention was good to preserve the King's Life, and the Light of Israel, yet
was it not doing ill that good might come of it? 4. Was it not ill done of
David the King to suffer such an Oath to be made, and an emboldning of Subjects
to combine and to swear, obtaining this, to have what they list at any time?
Was it not a defect in David's Government, to suffer this, and to be imposed
upon? I shall not enter into Enquiries on this Subject; but it is necessary to
say something to the matter. The Judgment of Peter Martyr, a Reformer of great
Learning, Judgment and Sincerity, is much to be valued: Says be, Comment. in 2 Samuel 21.17.
The Men of Israel did piously think, that the King should not be exposed to
danger. As the Members are willing to be endangered for the Head, so it is the
duty of good Subjects to take care of the Safety of their Princes --. And,
says he, it is not unbecoming Kings, In chap. 18
sometimes to yield to the honest Counsels of their Subjects. --

That which is obvious will keep us from falling into Briars in the dark. 1. It
is certain that David was a Sovereign King in his Kingdom. 2. His Government
was by God's Institution and Appointment. 3. King and People were so united for
the most part, that they agreed in one common Design and End, the Public Good,
here called the Light of Israel. The People did highly and justly honor and
esteem the King, 2 Samuel 18.3.
and the King did sincerely regard their Prosperity and Happiness. 4. The
People were not a Generation of brutish Animals, nor so despised; they know
wherein the Happiness of their Kingdom did consist, and made bold to do more
than petition, they gainsaid the King's Will, in conscience of his and the
common Safety. 5. The King did not oppose his Will against their Safety, and
free Resolutions neither; but understanding their Will, he condescended to it;
and without disputing Prerogative, did acquiesce and yield. 6. The People did
highly value the King's Life above their own; they would continue in their
Loyalty to the King and Kingdom, and undergo the Hazards of War in their
Persons, and go to War, but provided for his Safety, and the Safety of the
Kingdom in his. 7. The Peoples Sense of public Dangers and public Safety, and
their expressing and declaring that Sense, is not inconsistent with their
strictest Duty, nor highest Honor toward a Sovereign King of God's own
Designation: And Self-denial for public Benefit is no derogation from
sovereign Power. 8. The nature of their Oath was high and strict, as if they
had power so far to dispose of the King's Person, as to bind him for his and
the Kingdom's undoubted Good and Welfare: they swear unto the King, that he
should go no more out with them to Battle; but they add their Reason, That thou
quench not the Light of Israel. So much of the Peoples Act.

3dly. The reason of their Oath to the King contains very excellent matter,
which being duly applied, will be a means to continue to us the Light of our
Israel.

1. A good, holy, righteous King and Governor is given of God in Mercy to a
People, to be to them a great, public Blessing. As the Sun is a Light to the
World, so is a good King to a Kingdom. And this is the difference between a
King of God's Donation and Appointment, and a King by a judicial Permission, to
a dissatisfied, discontented People. The desire of all Israel was after a King,
1 Samuel ^.20. and 8.5, 19.
and they had one granted them; but what he proved, need not here be repeated;
but as bad as he was, he was true to the common Interest of the Kingdom,
against the Enemies thereof, and went not about to subject it to foreign
Powers. When he was rejected, God provided him a King, 1 Samuel 16.1.
as he told Samuel; and he whom God provided in Mercy, was a Light to Israel:
God's Favor did shine upon Israel, through David their King. God has as full
a right to reject a King in our days as ever he had, and to provide a King; and
that King whom God provides, a wise People will highly esteem: and God may
justly be displeased at those, who are not pleased with what God provides. Do
not they forget God's unlimited Sovereignty over all the Kingdoms of the World,
who assert the absolute Power of Kings in their own Dominions, to set up and
cast down, without respect to Justice or Mercy? But the God of the whole Earth
has in Justice driven away one, and brought in another: Greatest Mercy! and
shall we murmur at our Mercy?

2. That as a good King is an eminent, shining public Blessing, like the Light
of the Sun; so it is the duty and wisdom of a People to esteem and honor him,
as the great Gift of God: So the Men of Israel did behold David as the Light of
Israel; they knew what a public Benefit they received from him: they remembered
the evil Days of Saul, 2 Samuel 1.19, etc.
(out of which David in his Lamentation for him picked the best) in comparison
of which the Days of David were like Light compared to Darkness and Tempest.
But when a People shall be weary of Light, or murmur against it, or be
dissatisfied with it, and shall wish for Darkness, Hail and Thunder, Blasting
and Mildew, they sin against their Temporal State, as they do against their
Spiritual, by loving Darkness rather than Light; and without any fanciful
Allusion, but in real Truth, they hate the Light because their Deeds are evil,
and lest they should be reproved, and be obliged to be reformed.

3. The Happiness of a Kingdom does much depend upon the Life and Preservation
of a good King; Lest thou quench the Light of Israel; not only the Light and
Glory of his own Family, and the House of David, but the Light of Israel; that
the Light of Israel, and not of Judah or Bethlehem only, or any part of Israel,
but all Israel: Their Light of Prosperity, Peace and Glory, was bound up in the
Bundle of his Life.

4. A People that are sensible of their Happiness, and the Benefit of the
Preservation of a good King, will do all they can to preserve it. The Men of
Israel were sensible of the Advantage and Blessing of a good King, and foresaw
the loss that would befall them by his Death. They valued him highly, and yet
really below his worth when they said, 2 Samuel 18.3, 4.
He was worth ten thousand of them; it had been a greater loss to have lost
David, than ten thousand of the People. They value him according to his Worth,
when they admire and honor him as the very Light of Israel, and therefore they
do with all humility and earnestness, oblige him to keep out of the reach of
the Enemies Sword; they will fight if he will keep himself safe at Home; we
will go out to Battle, but thou shall not go with us.

5. Yet observe the reach of the Argument and Reason, That thou quench not the
Light of Israel. A good King, being a great and public Blessing to his
Kingdom, should not expose himself to unnecessary Dangers, but take care to
preserve himself, for the Kingdom's sake and Benefit. A clear Evidence that
good Kings are not their own but their Kingdom's. The Argument is drawn from
his own Safety and Danger, and from their loyal Affection to him; but the
Argument reaches further, to the common and public Danger, if he hazard
himself, and the common and public Benefit of Israel, of the whole Kingdom;
that thou quench not thine own Light, but ours also. The Light of a King is for
the Kingdom's Good.

6. A King is, and a good King will reckon himself to be as much for his
People, the Public and Universal Good, as the People can be for him. Here they
intimate, that they will go to Battle when there is cause, and more they cannot
venture, more they cannot do than serve the King with their Estates and Lives;
but then, if he be as the Light of Israel, he should take care of himself, with
respect to them and their Benefit. His Light is their Light, and he should be
as careful of theirs as of his own. When it is well with the one, it is well
with the other.

7. Yet again, mark the words, they do not say, That the Light of Israel be not
quenched, but, That thou quench not the Light of Israel. This Reason grows out
of the Sides of the former, that a King receiving his Authority and Gifts from
God, under God, for his Peoples Profit and Welfare, should employ all his
Abilities for their Prosperity, he should communicate and send forth all his
Abilities and Powers, (as the Sun diffuseth his Influences upon inferior
Bodies) to make his People happy in him: So on the contrary, he should be
exceeding tender of doing any thing that should be to their detriment; and
especially that he by going to Battle, should die, that he quench not their
Light; it would be his own Act, that would be fatal to himself and them.

4thly. The last Particular in the Verse is, the King's Acquiescence and tacit
Concession and Permission of their Oath taken out of sincere Loyalty and
Affection to the King's Preservation, and their own in him. In God's Kingdom,
and in a godly King's Reign, the People might lawfully, and without rebuke,
loyally admonish the King of the common Danger, and more than petition, even
swear, that he should not go forth to Battle, that the Light of Israel be not
quenched. David was a Wise, Holy, Religious, and Heroic Prince; a King of long
Experience and great Valor; it was hard for him to refrain from a Battle,
although he fainted: But does the Public Happiness, Glory and Prosperity, depend
upon it? Does it so much concern the Public? Do the Men of Israel remonstrate,
entreat, and swear also? then he takes himself to be obliged to condescend and
acquiesce. I am persuaded this Doctrine was true in those ancient and purest
Times. This was not a Surprise upon David, or a Thing inconsiderately
condescended to, but what he yielded to once before in Absalom's Rebellion.
After that David had commanded and ordered his Army into three Bodies, under
three Generals, and given them Orders, he declared he would go forth with them:
2 Samuel 18.3, 4.
And the King said unto the People, I will surely go forth with you my self
also. But the People answered, Thou shall not go forth: for if we flee away,
they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us:
but thou art worth ten thousand of us; therefore it is better that thou succor
us out of the City. And the King said unto them, What seems you best, I will
do. Here was secret Policy, and sound Reason, on both Sides. David had still a
tender Affection, if not a secret Fondness for Absalom. O how did his
Affections open toward him! He gave Charge to his three Generals, in the
hearing of all the People, Deal gently for my sake with the young Man, even
with Absalom: Every Word has an Argument to oblige them to deal gently with
Absalom. O how bitterly did he take on for his Death; O Absalom, my Son, my
Son; would God I had died for thee: He loved him better than his Life; but in
being ruled by his Peoples plain Advice, he showed he loved Israel better than
Absalom. And the Reason which lay concealed was, that he might take care to
save Absalom alive. He said he would go, but gave no Reason for his Resolution;
it was sufficient for him to declare his Resolution, I will surely go forth
with you my self also, as he was wont to do.

On the Peoples part, there was great Reason and Policy not pleasing to the
King, for they had an Eye upon Absalom, and to put an End to the Rebellion, by
putting an End to his Life if he fell into their Hands. The apparent Reasons
were built upon good Principles: And if David did smell their secret Reasons
against Absalom, his self-denial for the Peoples Content was exceeding
exemplary. If any say, that it was weakly done of David, to grant so much to
the People against his own Will; take notice, that this did not proceed from
David's weakness and oversight; it was not from Error in Government, for David
was under no eclipse of Understanding, for he was able to dispose and order his
Affairs; he took a Muster of his Army, and set Captains of Thousands, C. 18.1,
2.
and Captains of Hundreds over them; and David sent forth a third part of his
Army under Joab, and a third part of his Army under the hand of Abishai the Son
of Zeruiah, Joab 's Brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the
Gittite. As he could Marshal an Army, so it seems he could hearken to Reason;
and according to Reason; comply with the Desires of his People, in the fullest
terms of Respect to their Counsel; What seems you best, I will do. The Will
of both Parties was pleasing to God, Tam enim David quam populus ista in re non
sua quaerebat, etc. Vnde apparet non esse indecorum ut Reges aliquando bonestis
subditorum Consiliis pareant. In 1 Samuel 18.
says the Judicious Peter Martyr, for it proceeded from Love: the King and the
People sought not their own private Things, or factious Designs; the Soldiers
did not resist their King out of Impudence, but Reverence and Love. Happy is
the Kingdom, when King and People aim at the same Public Good, and jointly
move upon Principles of mutual Affection and Safety: And when both are
sincerely One in their Designs and Aims, and have a mutual Confidence in one
another. When Kings can do all themselves in War and Peace, then let them be
absolute; but till then, the Reasons of a People, for the King's Honor and
Safety, and Peace of the Kingdom, by putting an End to Wars and quietting
Insurrections, are not to be despised, but approved of by the wisest and the
greatest Kings; and People should be so wise and dutiful as to offer nothing
but what should carry Weight and Conviction, that they do really wish well to
their King; and it becomes the Wisdom and Goodness of a King to be overcome by
the Reasons of their People. Public Reason should prevail against private
Affection in public Persons. As David was overruled, without usurpation of
the People upon his Sovereignty, at that time, so now, though the People swore
to him that he should not go forth to Battle for fear of being killed, to the
Nation's loss, so he did not reject them, nor show himself displeased with
them. He did not misunderstand them, nor check and threaten them; he did not
send forth his Proclamation or Declaration against them, or confine and
imprison the Heads of them. They spoke their Love, and he saw it; though they
swear he should not go out and endanger Himself and the State, he did not make
them an Example by Punishment or Revenge for meddling with his Prerogative. His
Inclinations were toward the Wars, and his Valor was not extinct, though his
Strength abated; and yet he would not insist upon his own Sovereign Power, nor
take a high Action to restrain it, to be an encroachment upon it. Sincere
Loyalty will make a People bold for their Prince's safety. Wise Kings love to
see the Love and Loyalty of their People, and will rather unhend their own
Inclinations, than break with their honest wellmeaning Subjects.

I will conclude with this one Observation; He was a wise and holy King, worthy
the Imitation of the greatest, who was for the Kingdom's Good, ruled against
his own Inclination. It was then when Salus publica, the public Safety, was
the supreme Law. It was when People thought the King to be themselves, and when
the King thought the People to be himself: The People thought, save the King,
and we save our selves; and when he thought, I will save my self, to save the
People: It was when a People understood their own Good, and sought it with one
Consent, and when the King consented to it, when one Light was the Light of
both.

I have gone over the Words, and made too many Observations to be discoursed on.

I desire now further, that you would more particularly observe two Points.

I. A good King is the Light of a Kingdom.

II. A People should be sensible of the great Blessing of a good King, and
should be much concerned, and very zealous for his and their own Preservation.

I. A good King is the Light of a Kingdom.

1. A Light, that is, the Glory and Cause of Prosperity to a Kingdom, so is the
Light of Heaven to the World: Light is the Glory of the Creation, and the
firstborn, the Excellency and Dignity of the Creatures: How do the benign
Influences of the Light make the Earth to flourish? How prosperous was Israel
under the Light of David! The Dread and Horror of the Night is driven away at
the Appearance of the Light; the Beasts of Prey run to their Dens, the Terror
and Devourers of the People of God are forced to hide their Heads: Persecutors
are afraid to devour or molest the little Flock: the Works of Darkness and of
the Night dare not with an impudent Faoe be published; Chambring and
Wantonness, Romans 13.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.4, 6.
Rioting and Drunkenness, nor Strife and Envy. The Light of a holy Magistrate
gives no Countenance to shameful Practices. The Majesty and Glory of God shines
in the Light of a blessed King: and as God is Light, so he who is the Image of
that Light, shines for the Glory of God, and God shines for the Glory of his
People: The Light of the Wicked shall be put out, and the Spark of his Fire
shall not shine. The Light shall be dark in his Tabernacle, and his Candle
shall be put out with him, Job. 18.5, 6. i. e. his Honor and Glory shall be
put out; his Prosperity shall fade away and die.

2. A good King is a good sign that God will not destroy the Kingdom; 2 Kings
8.19. Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah, for David his Servant's sake, as he
promised him to give him always a Light, and to his Children: therefore God
would not destroy Judah, because he had promised David to give him a Light,
that is, a Successor in his Throne, to give Light to his People: therefore the
giving of that Light, was a Preservation to Judah from Destruction. When God
was provoked by Solomon, who threatened him for his Idolatry and Breach of
Covenant, to rend the Kingdom from him, and give it unto his Servant; he was
pleased to add, Howbeit I will not do it in thy Days for David thy Father's
sake, but I will rend it out of the Hand of thy Son: He would not for David's
sake, to whom God promised a Lampalways; 1 Kings 15.4. Nevertheless, for David
's sake did the Lord his God give him a Lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his Son,
and to establish Jerusalem.

3. A good King is Light to a Kingdom, as he is a cause of Joy and Gladness to
a Kingdom. A bad King may cause carnal and profane Joy to the Wicked, but then
he is the Cause and Grief and Trouble to them that fear God We are not to call
that Light which makes the Wicked to rejoice in their Wickedness, and to glory
in their Shame: but then we have a Light when the Righteous rejoice: Whon the
Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice; but when the Wicked bears
Rule, the People mourn, Prove. 29.2. Light is borrowed to express Joy and
Gladness: Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the upright in
Heart, Psalm. 97.11. Then had the Jews Light and Gladness, and Joy and Honor,
Esther 8.16. What a Constellation of Blessings, what Clusters of Mercies, and
all in the Flower, arise and spring up in a Land, when such a Light is set up
in the Firmament of a Kingdom, in the Orb of Sovereignty!

4. A good King is the Light and Glory of a Kingdom, the Light of a People,
when he does restore, set up, resorm and maintain Religion in his Kingdom; such
a King was David, such a Blessing was he to Israel. When the Ark of God was
taken, the miserable sorrowful Wife of Phineas called her Child's Name Ichabod,
because the Glory was departed from Israel: and she said, The Glory is departed
from Israel; for the Ark of God is taken, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Surely Salvation is
nigh them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our Land, Psalm. 85.9. Christ
is called, A Light to the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel, Luke
2.32. Therefore then it is that Glory dwells in the Land, when the Glory of
Christ shines in his Worship, Ordinances, and People: The Glory and Liberty of
the Gospel in its Ministry, Ordinances, and Profession of its Truth and Beauty
of Holiness, does exalt a Nation, advances it in great Honor; and then Glory
does not come as a Traveller to see a Country, or a wayfaring Man that tarrieth
for a Night, but dwells in a Land: when Religion, pure and undesiled, is
entertained with Reverence and Honor in the King's Court, in the Houses of
Nobles, and has a free Passage throughout a Nation, and is delivered from
unreasonable Men: A religious King is then the Light of Israel; when the Lights
of the World are set up, kept burning, brought from under Bushels, and set upon
the Table, when good Men may be as good as they will, and the wicked may not be
as vile and bad as they would be.

5. A good King is a Light to a Kingdom when he reigns in Righteousness.
David's Prayer for Solomon was, Psalm. 72.2.
Give the King thy Judgments, and thy Righteousness to the King's Son: This was
his Prayer for him who was a Lamp which God promised to raise up in his place:
and when a King does reign in Righteousness, then he imitates and represents
the Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus the King, the Scepter of whose Kingdom is
a Scepter of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.
who arises with healing in his Wings. The God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me, He that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. Now mark what a just King, a religious King, that rules in the Fear of
the Lord, shall be: And he shall be as the Light of the Morning, when the Sun
rises, even a Morning without Clouds, as the tender Grass springs out of the
Earth by clear shining after Rain; i. e. he shall be a great Blessing, a great
Comfort and Cause of rejoicing to the People of God. A King that reigns in
Righteousness may yet further be compared to the Light, as he does by himself,
by his righteous Laws declare and enact what is just and right, that by the
Light of his Laws People may see the Light of the Rule, and the Path of
Righteousness; that by his wise, learned and upright Judges (not to serve the
Designs, Will, and sinful Pleasure of the King, with a Commission during
Pleasure, to take away the Lives of innocent Men, to countenance false
Witnesses, perplex or threaten the True, disannul Charters, and the like)
Righteousness may run down like a mighty stream: When these do distribute
Justice between the King and his People, and Subject and Subject; when the
Righteous will not be sold for a pair of Shoes; when Righteousness is
administered without Partiality, then the King will find the Benefit and Comfort
of his own Light, for Righteousness and Judgment will be the Stability or
Establishment of his Throne; For by Righteousness the Throne is established,
Prove. 16.12.

6. The King is a Light to Israel, as David was for the Security and Protection
received from him: The Sun and Shield are well joined for the Comfort and
Protection of God's People, Psalm. 84.11. The Shields of the Earth belong unto
the Lord; Psalm. 47.7.
Kings and Magistrates are those Shields, and they are Nursing-Fathers and
Nursing-Mothers; they are like a Pillar of Fire for the Direction and
Protection of Israel. Hezekiah in the Type of Jesus Christ, was foretold, that
he should be a King to reign in Righteousness, and the Princes under him should
rule in Judgment; when it was so, it follows, that he should be a
hiding place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest; a hiding place and
Covert from the Wind and Tempest raised by the Devil and his Angels, to trouble
and unsettle the Nation's Peace and Order, and to keep off the Wind and
Tempest, Persecution and Tribulation, which blow and beat upon the Church of
God; such a Light was David to Israel. A Man may follow his Trade, travel, and
be commonly very safe, if he walk by Day, for Daylight is a Defense unto him.

In these Instances you have heard the Benefit of a good King, as he is the
Light of a Kingdom. Now, hearken a little further, and you shall see what cause
a People have to honor and study the Happiness of such a King, and their own
in him.

1. As the Light is immediately from God, so is a holy, religious, wise and
valiant King, as David was, a peculiar Creature of that glorious Maker, (and
not a mere humane Creature, as all that are constituted by Men) and a peculiar
Blessing and Treasure to a People: that Fitness for Government which is in him,
the placing of him in his Throne, the removing of him from one part of his
Sphere to another, is a Remove made by the special Providence of God. God alone
does make the Light, prepares and qualifies a King for Government; and the more
of Providence appears, the greater is the Mercy to a People.

2. As the Light is above the Earth, for the benefit of things below him, so is
a King placed in a Degree of Sublimity above his Israel, but altogether for
Israel's Good. A King is above, but for his Subjects. And as the Light of
Heaven is placed in Heaven, for the good of Creatures underneath; so are Kings
placed by God in high Places, that their Virtues may descend upon their
Inferiors.

3. As the Light shines from above, and sends and spreads forth its Powers and
Influences afar off to all the Corners of the Earth; so a good King does not
restrain, but takes Pleasure in communicating his Goodness to all the parts of
his Dominions: He has his Vehicles, Means and Instruments, to convey the
Stores of Gifts and Abilities for Good, which God has enriched him with. All
People that do not forfeit, should be the better for him, and so all his
Subjects should know how much the better they are for him; the Riches of a
King's Abilities are beyond all the Riches we entrust him with for our Peace
and Safety.

4. But notwithstanding these great Advantages the King had of doing Good, and
the People received from his diffusive Goodness, yet he is liable to Mortality;
the Light of Israel may be quenched: he is a Light, but such a Light as may be
put out and quenched.

As Israel was, so all People should be sensible of the public Blessing and
Good received from a King who is as the Light of Israel, and should be much
concerned and zealous for his Preservation as their own.

1. You cannot but feel by reading the Words, the true sense which the Men of
Israel had of their Happiness in David, he was a great Light to them,
communicating and streaming down the Effects of his Light upon them: They
remembered the Night out of which they came, the Trouble and Confusion, the
Dangers and Injuries, the Dishonours and Confusions which kept them in fears so
long; they considered the happy change in Affairs, what a new Face the Light
had given; and not a Face of Affairs only, but a strong Constitution of the
Body of Israel, and they foresaw what a Night would follow upon his Fall.

2. They were much concerned and zealous for his Preservation; he had escaped
the Dangers of many Battles, and so might do again; his Strength failed, but he
was able for Conduct; he was near to be slain by a resolute, masty, desperate
Giant, who thought to kill him, but he was succored seasonably, and with
Success; and if ever h^ should come out to Battle again, they would all be
ready to defend his Person. Why might not he as long as he was able to endure
the Fatigue with any Spirit, go out to Battle? Would not his Conduct and his
Presence direct and animate them, and so further the War toward a prosperous
Issue? None of these Suggestions, nor many more could abate their Care, nothing
but this, to keep himself safe in Jerusalem the City of the Lord of Hosts.

3. They were so much concerned and so zealous for his Preservation, as if all
Israel should fall with him, if he should fall in Battle; That thou quench not
the Light of Israel; as if all the Light of Israel did shine from him, and were
all of it comprehended in him, as the Lamp that gave Light to all the Branches:
As if the Sun should be put out, the Moon and Stars would be extinguished. If
the Pillars of a State or Kingdom fall, the Kingdom must needs come down, and
fall to Ruin and Confusion: but if the Supporter of these Pillars fall, the
Pillars must fall, and all that stand upon them, and are supported by them:
Now, said David, The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I
bear up the Pillars of it, Psalm. 75.3. The Earth, that is Judea, and all the
Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, are unlinked, the Land lies waste, and like
a Wilderness, and the Inhabitants thereof are unbound and untied; they are
jealous and afraid of one another, being dissolved into Factions and Parties;
some Pillars there are, Psalm. 11.3.
and I bear them up. If the Foundations be destroyed, (if Towns, Magistrates,
and Government, and Order be destroyed) what shall the Righteous do? they shall
be made a Prey? What can we that are but few in Number, and weak in Power, do?
What can we do if the Foundations be destroyed, till the Foundations of
Religion, Righteousness and Peace are laid? Blessed David was like the Light in
Heaven on high, and like the Foundation beneath, that bears up the Pillars
which bear the House. If the Light be quenched, there follows Darkness and all
the Confusions and Miseries of Darkness; if the Foundations be dissolved, what
but Ruin? Woe then to the Land, if its Light and Glory pass away, as of
Necessity it will, if thou put out the Light of Israel. All stands and all
falls together; for if David be the Foundation, and Israel the House, if the
Foundation fall, the House will tumble, and of a well-ordered Fabric, it will
tumble into Heaps. David and Israel, the Glory of all Lands, are but one united
Light; and he is the Sun in the Firmament; if he be quenched, our Glory will
depart. Thus were they concerned for themselves in David their King: And how
could any People in the World express more care and zeal toward him, than they
did in so few words? 1. They unanimously consent to prevail with him to keep
himself as choicely as might be, as you would keep in a Lamp or Light growing
low in the Socket of expiring Age. 2. They swear to him that he shall not go
out to Battle. 3. They tell him there will be no need of his going, for they
will go to Battle, as willingly as if he were with them. 4. Surely David who
had been their Light, would not be accessory to, or guilty of so great a
Mischief, as to put out their Light; they presume upon it that he would not do
such an Act: Would he be such an Enemy unto them now, as to turn their Day into
Night? Surely no; therefore they oblige him not to expose himself; for if Evil
should befall him, Evil would befall them, and they should impute it to him: it
would be the worst of Acts, and it would be his own: he felt the Zeal of a
loyal People, which melted him into a compliance with their Desires.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. This is not a Day to dissemble, nor slatter God nor Man. I shall speak
nothing in the Use, but according to the Truth, in the Doctrines raised from
this Text: I shall speak because I do believe, and nothing but what I believe:
I speak my Judgment and my Conscience, and therefore I will speak freely and
boldly: I would not be deceived nor misinformed my self, nor would I mislead
you into any Error, nor now forbear to instruct you in Duty, in a great Duty,
in a needful time.

Was David a Light to Israel? Did Israel account him so? Were they tender of
him? Were they concerned and zealous for him, as the greatest Blessing of their
Age and Nation? O what cause have we to bless God for that singular Blessing
God has bestowed upon us of these Nations in our King and Queen, who are both
but one great resplendent Light of our Israel.

Give me leave to speak freely, for your Profit and Information. 1. As they are
both Lights. 2. As they are both joined in one Light. 3. As they are both our
Light, the Light of Israel.

1. As they are both Light, and as they are both one Light; one in concord of
Judgment and Affection, one in consort of Government. Are they not both Light
by Illumination in the same Faith and Religion? Are they not Light for Wisdom
and Knowledge, able to direct and order the great and manifold Affairs of
Government, both Military and Civil? Are they not Light, by the conspicuity of
their eminent Qualities and Example? Are they not Light, diffusing the blessed
Influences of their Royal Goodness and Authority to all the Corners of their
Dominions? Who but obstinate Rebels, or sullen Malcontents, will not
acknowledge this? And was more Clemency ever showed toward open Rebels, or
offered and declared to Murmurers, than by our gracious King and Queen? Let
disaffected Persons speak like Men of Sense and Reason, much more like Men of
Conscience, and they must by speaking Truth reprove their own Murmuring and
Discontents. Are they not Lights, who have set up Stars and Angels, burning
Lights in the Church, and restored them to light, who for many years were under
Clouds, and the lowering Aspect of the Rulers of the Kingdom, and given them
liberty to take their several Candlesticks, to give out their Light, and spend
their Oil? Is it not by their Light, that Popish and Antichristian Darkness,
and thick Darkness is fled away, or constrained to keep up close, not in Holes
and Caverns of the Earth, nor into Prisons and Dungeons indeed, but into
Coverts and Shelters? How is Westminster Hall enlightened by learned and able
Judges, excellent in opening and deciding Cases and Controversies, clearing and
summing up Evidences, pronouncing righteous Judgment, even to the conviction of
the obstinate and deeply-engaged Enemies of our Peace, Mr. Ashton in his Trial.
that their Proceedings were fair and equal? What Iniquity was to be found in
the Seats of Judgment before, is yet felt by all Conditions in the Land, and
above all by the best of Men: What a Set was there of Judges, Juries, and
Evidences for the Designs of Kings! What Discoveries have been made of the
Secrets, Plots and Contrivances, hatched in Cabals, and hidden Counsels of our
Confederate Enemies, for the Ruin of Church and State, by the appearing of this
great Light! By this Light we see the Paths of our Destroyers, and the
stupendous Providence of God in countermining their pernicious Endeavors. By
this Light we know where we were bought and sold; and whither some of us were
gone, and others going. The Apostle speaks of the nature and benefit of Light;
Whatsoever makes manifest, is Light, Ephesians. 5.15. It is from this Light we
have such full discoveries of the secret Counsels of Conspirators; and by this
Light we have the things that belong to our Peace laid open to our Election,
and the way of Peace pointed out, if we have but Wisdom and Hearts to walk
therein. What a Light and Joy did their Ascent into the Throne (God making them
way to it) bring to the Oppressed in these Kingdoms, and to our persecuted
Brethren from abroad? It was the springing of their Light, that gave cause to
the Reformed Churches to sing, The Winter is past, or passing away, that the
Rain is over and gone. O what a cold Winter was it in Ireland, and France, and
the Valleys, in Scotland, and to them who by a Christian Sympathy felt their
Cold! How hungry and cold, naked and miserable were our persecuted Brethren,
that were driven from their Houses, stripped naked, without as much as the
shortest or thinnest covering of their Nakedness, (cruel Impudence of the most
inhumane degenerate part of Mankind, worse than Brutes, as bad as Devils could
make them, or desire them to be! See the History of the Persecution in France,
Savoy and Orange: And Mous. Jurieu's Letters.
) How miserable a Sight was it to see Death sit upon their Faces, and worse
than Death about them, their worse than barbarous Heathenish Enemies? How
miserable was their Bondage under them? worse than Egypt; for in Egypt the
People of God had Fleshpots and Onions; such as the Earth did yield, such they
did eat: But these persecuted Fellow Members of the same Body had scarce
Morsels of Bread knodden with dirty Water, Dirt and Gravel, to keep them from
utter starving, when not any of this impenitent, stupid, carnal Generation, who
live after the Flesh, and mind the things of the Flesh, felt the Cold, the
Nakedness, and pinching Bitterness of that Winter. Our Protestant Brethren of
France, Savoy, Ireland and Scotland, do rejoice in this Light, to feel so much
of the Winter past over, as they have done; and to see so much of the Rain (the
Tribulation that beats upon the House, and tries whether it be built on the
Rock or the Sand) blown over and gone. It is because of this Light that the
Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the
Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Cantic. 2.11, 12.
O that the blindest and perversest among us had Eyes to see this great Light,
that now shines upon our Land! It Is true indeed, our Lights come short of
Omniscience; all things are not naked and bare unto them, they cannot see in
secret, and know not what is in Man, as our Savior did, when he did not commit
himself to them who came in unto him. They are as far from Infallibility as
they are from Popery; the Darkness and the Light are not alike to them; they
know not the secret Practices of Men, who love Golden Days, who are Buyers and
Sellers of Places of Trust, and who are so false in their Dealings, that their
Bribers cannot have their Bargains. All Men of Understanding and Business
observe and talk of these things where they may. There are Caterpillars and
Locusts so thick in our Air, that they darken the Glory of our Light, and leave
an ill Savor behind them. But though our Lights are not perfect Lights and
omniscient, yet let us adore and praise the Lord for giving them so much of all
Royal Qualifications, and for giving them to us to be a Light, as it is this
day. And there are two Blessings of singular Consideration to us, as a matter
of Praise that they are so, and a matter of Prayer that they may continue so.
1. Each one is a Light to Israel. And, 2. Both are united in one Light. 3. And
both are ours.

1. That our King is a great Light, and so was from the morning of his
appearance in the World. He is a Lamp in the illustrious House of Orange, See
Bishop Burnet's Letter from Nimiguen.
whose here ick Poogenitors embraced, professed, and maintained the Light of
the glorious Gospel shining forth in the Reformation; and none of them were
ashamed or afraid to own it. It is glorious to be a Light from his early
appearance to be a Prince: Had he been a Woe to the Land by being a Child. or
Debauched, or Cowardly, Fear, and Interest, and Example had spoiled him from
ever being a Light to any Nation: He knew his Religion, and kept it, when to
change Religions was so much in fashion: He knew his temporal Rights and
Interest, and recovered them, and has sacrificed them, as he did himself, to
the Interest of the Protestant Churches, whose declining and almost-ruined
State would have made many Princes afraid to put forth a hand to preserve them.
And his appearance for the almost-ruined falling Reformed Churches, was so much
the more admirable, when there was no Queen Elizabeth on the Throne of England
to second and assist him and them; and a devouring Prince breathing out
Destruction and Slaughter so near him; a Prince that is called Great, truly so,
from the great Miseries he has brought even upon his own Kingdom, to make all
others so, that by the Judgment of God fall into his Hand: Yet the poverty and
weakness of Protestant Churches, and the Mightiness of a King, who is like Hell
and the Grave, and the Assistance and Opportunities he had to perfect his Work
from England, could not make our Light mussie himself in a Cloud, and sometimes
look out to the Waters of a Flo^d drowning the World in Miseries, and breaking
the Ark of the Protestant Churches in pieces, and himself at ease, making all
dishonorable Conditions to save himself from Labor and Hazard. O what cause
have we to adore the al-wise Providence and Grace of God, that wrought Truth
upon his Heart, inspired his Head with great Thoughts, and his great Soul with
the most vigorous Spirit of Fortitude and Zeal, admirably tempered with
Calmness and Peaceableness; and after he had been exercised, and given great
proofs of his Royal Accomplishments, to give such a Prince to us, at that time
one of the unhappiest People in the World, and next door to our being the most
miserable If his Enemies had but a serious desire of being happy, they would
choose to be his Subjects; and if his Subjects had but wisdom and grace to
acknowledge that Goodness, Mercy and Power of God, who set him over us, with as
clear a manifestation of Mercy to us, as of Justice in making the Throne vacant
for him, they would never hang off, and suspend the Acts of their most cheerful
Obedience, to embolden our Enemies to attempt what we pray they may never
perform. He is a King rarely prepared and accomplished for Peace or War; by his
Sword to force to make it, and by his Wisdom and Justice to keep it: In him
there is an immediate Passage from the Fountain of Light; and those Rays which
are scattered in other great Men, are united in him: He is a Light to deliver
and save from Destruction, (a Deliverer is a sweeter Name than a Conqueror.).
To be a Savior, is to be like God, not in Power only to save but in Mercy and
Goodness; a Name that is to be a Memorial, to admonish a People of past
Miseries, and restored Mercies, and obliges a People to Gratitude and
Obedience. -- And according to thy manifold Mercies thou gave them Saviors,
Nehem. 9.27.
who saved them out of the Hand of their Enemies. Other Nations have had but
one Light commonly in an Age; but God has bestowed upon us two at once, as
knowing our need of more than one, and to show these Nations plainly, that he
has not at all dealt with us after our Sins, for then our present Day, and
Noonday-Light had been as dark as the darkest Mist, terrifying Tempest, darker
than the darkest Night, even as dark as Hell. The Creator of the World made two
great Lights, the one to rule by Day, the other by Night; but both our Lights
appeared and shone upon us out of a Chaos of confused Matter in the Nation,
which were not like the Epicurean Atoms, the matter of the World, which
affecting one another at first meeting, made a Marriage, and begat a World of
Creatures; no, in our Chaos there was so much of Hatred and Disaffection, so
much of mutual Fear and Suspicion, that we had fallen one upon another, as Men
in their Drink and Madness sight in the dark. We are more and better united,
(tho, alas, far from being all of one piece, as a Staff of Beauty in their
Majesty's Hands) than we should have been (unless common Suffering had made us
more one) by the approach of our Light, the Peace and the Union we have by the
means of our supreme Rulers. But as God has made nothing in vain, so he has
not given us two Lights at once, but because one cannot be abroad and at home
at once. God has wonderfully provided for us; he has taught us by experience
that two are better than one. Let no Man affirm that a Woman may not be born
for Civil Rule and Government: we have been happy now two years in the Queen's
Government; and happier we had been, if all Men had done their Parts in
Counsels and Arms, as she did, by unwearied Diligence, Courage and Patience:
That the Queen should be a Light also, and sit to rule the Day of our Mercies,
is indeed no less than a Wonder: she is a Light, were she not a Queen; but she
is a Queen, and therefore the greater Light: She is an illustrious Light, for
Knowledge in the Truth, not in the Notion and Argument, in opposition to Error,
but in the Practice, wherein the Power lies. She is a Light for Wisdom,
piercing into the Mysteries of State, and the difficult parts of her Office.
She is made for the Rule of a Palace, for the Retirement of a Closet, for
exemplary Reverence in the Worship and House of God: She is a glorious Beam of
Majesty in her Person; she shines as she moves; she is made for a Throne, and
long may she sit upon it. She is a diffusive Light, as she is a joint Cause of
the true Light of the Gospel, and the Laws of Holiness and Righteousness. All
People may be as holy, and as righteous as they can desire; and if they are
not, it is their own fault, they have no Discouragement but Encouragement from
above. She is a great Light, See her gracious Answ. to the Address of the
Dissenting Ministers.
even to a Zeal, in her own Way, and is to be an Example of Moderation toward
others; Her Light shines before Men, that others seeing her good Works may
glorify God. Thus each one is a singular Light. But yet further what is the
greater Mercy.

2. They both make one Light. Through God's infinite Mercy to themselves and
us, that they are so much one; they are one Blood, one Flesh, and what is more,
of one Heart and one Soul. What a Light are both in one to their whole
Dominion, to all their Subjects! It is a vulgar, but a great Observation, When
had we a King and Queen of one Religion, and both of ours? We have known the
lamentable effects and issues of contrary Religions, and of one and the same
Religion, in our former Kings and Queens. The Light of the one never did
convince or convert the other of Darkness; The Articles of Marriage between Pr.
Charles, and the Infanta, and the Queen the Daughter of France.
nay, the Light was so bound sometimes, as not to endeavor to work upon the
Darkness, but the Night had power to tempt the Light, and then was one Hour and
Power of Darkness: and from that time to this most blessed Conjunction of both
our Lights in one, the Darkness overcame the true Light. O the Calamities and
Confusions, Convulsions and Breaches, which followed after the prevailing Power
of Darkness! The Darkness brought forth Thunder and Lightning, and rained
Blood; it brought forth Wars and Fires; it cooled the zeal of many, and made
the Nation too hot for others. O what Matter is this for a Fast, to make
Prayers and Supplications, to deprecate those great Evils! And the noisome
Vapors of that Darkness make us a sickly, diseased People to this time. O that
the diseased distempered People of these Nations would come to our Light! O
that God would prosper our Light, to bring us to a better Constitution and
State of a Body united and compacted together! Do not we see the excellency of
our Light in respect of Union? Do not both walk in the same Spirit? O what a
Mercy is that to us, and to other Nations confederate with us! By this we have
a Concord in Counsels, we are delivered from the Plague of Jesuitical Agitators
and Satanical Dividers. Court-Faction have no countenance, nor Whisperers
secret Audience; and innumerable other Mischiefs are prevented: for now the
Devil has less to do in Court, and has fewer Pupils to instruct in
mischievous Arts and Practices, between King and Queen, Court and Court. The
dividing of the King and Queen in Interests, in Affection according to that
Interest, the dividing of Counsels to promote those different Interests, and
these to be managed by contrary Factions and Parties, and for these to love the
one and hate the other, should be as dreadful, as if the Stars divided the
Heavens into two Fields, and sought one against another. This is one of the
Mercies of this great Revolution, that our Lights are so entirely one; and that
the Constitution of the Government is made so strong, that our Dividers cannot
divide, but they must break and dissolve: many would have it otherwise; but God
wrought such a Temper in the Spirit of the Queen, as to submit the Precedence
given her by Nature, for the public Benefit. And that the Memories of both be
blessed for ever; and whatever Breaches remain unhealed among a sinful People,
many of whom know not the things of their own Peace, O Lord, shine into the
Hearts of these two great Lights, that they may reign as one.

3. And yet the Matter grows higher still; These two illustrious Lamps made one
Light, are both the Light of Israel. The Light of David's Life, as I noted
before, was the Light of Israel. David was to Israel, as Israel was to himself;
and Israel was to David, as David was to himself. The Light of David was their
Light; That thou quench not the Light of Israel. So is our David ours. And
without flattery, which I abhor, especially on a solemn Day of Confession and
Humiliation, but to convince you of your Mercy and Duty, I speak to you these
Words of Truth and Soberness. What clearer Evidence can any People have, whose
Reasons are not perverted against Sense, to be in the untoward Party of
Murmurers and Complainers, than our David has given us of his appearance,
coming forth, and goings on, but for Israel, for our Israel, and for the
scattered Tribes of Israel, scattered by Persecutors into many Nations? What
has he done, in all he has done, for himself? What has he not done, that
could be done for us?

Obj. O but Murmurers and Papists, and their old dear Friends, say, He sought
the Throne, and is come unto it by Usurpation.

Ans. This is such an Imagination as could never enter into the Heart of Man
that believes a Providence, and that all the Actions of Princes, as well as
other Men, are subject to it; and that Kings and Princes cannot do, and have
what they will. How many apparent Hazards by Sea and Land did he necessarily
foresee, and every step might present him with Death, which was enough to
quench the Spark of Ambition, and deter him from an Usurpation? It would have
been the most irrational Project that could ever come into a wise Man's Head,
and visibly improbable, if not impossible, as I would undertake to demonstrate,
if time would give leave. God sent him in as a Deliverer of Israel, in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and so he was acknowledged, even by them who will not swear
Fidelity to him now, their only King by Law and Right. But if I might ask those
Men these few Questions, what could they say? 1. What has he asked for
himself? what has he employed for, or spent upon himself, since his happy
Arrival? Has he got half what one half Year's Revenue by Hearths would have
brought him in? Was there ever a Freeholder in the Kingdom, before he restored
them? Nay, to silence some of these Malcontents, Do not they, some of them,
to discourage the Nation, and encourage Enemies, give out, that he will not be
able to manage the War for want of Money, and for the vast Debt that is upon
the Nation? So then, this was a hopeful Project to invade the Throne, to want
what he never wanted before, viz. Money. If the Throne was ambitiously sought,
why did he not, and why does he not sit at Ease upon it? Or why does he not
make Peace with France, and do as his Predecessors did? Or why might not he
work upon the Counsels of France to send away the late King, as the Usurpers
formerly did, when both the late Kings were Princes in Exile? Why may not
English Money work as much in France now, as French Money does work in England?
Or why does he not stay at home to reak and revenge himself on some of the
Murmurers at home? Why does he not feed the Debauched with Money and Favors,
and give them an Example of Vanities, Sports, Pleasures, and make more
Floodgates of Wickedness and Vice, than were opened before? If he would but
enrich some, as he might at cheaper rates, than one Expedition, and sacrifice
himself wholly to their Service, who call themselves The Church, and run into
their Methods, he might enjoy the sweet of his Usurpation, (as they call it)
and not bring in Popery neither. There are far easier Methods to enjoy a sinful
Rest, to eat the Marrow and Fatness of a Kingdom, than by the restless Pains of
a Warrior.

To say no more upon this Head, I conclude with mine own Belief, when I
consider the Footsteps of Divine Providence, his righteous Judgment upon the
former Powers, and his placing their Majesty's in supreme Authority, and their
great Endeavors and Fitness for the Service of God in this Age, and what has
been done, I admire the Mercy of our Deliverance, and look upon our
instrumental National Saviors, to be the Ministers of God to us for good; and
I do believe that God has entrusted the King with the Government of these
Nations, that he might have the greater Power for further Service, and greater
than what is yet done: I fear the Impenitence, and retaining the Abominations
of many Years past, more than all the Armies of our Enemies.

O let not our Sins provoke God to darken our Light, and to leave us under
those Judgments we have long deserved! O that we had Hearts affected with our
Mercies, Deliverances, and Duties! O that such Lights had no malignant Stars
near their Persons, and in all their Trusts! I have said, what has the King
sought for himself? but O what great things has he done for us in a little
time? O how much more might he have done, had there not been many Obstructions
among our selves? O let us argue our selves into a due Sensibleness, that we
may be thankful, and contribute all our Endeavors in our several places for
the true Prosperity of our Israel.

Use 2. It is a particular, and considering our State and Circumstances then
and now, a wonderful Mercy of God, to bring into England such a Light and Lamp,
whose Beams put such a Vigor and Spirit of Life into the almost-quenched Hopes
of Deliverance in Ireland and Scotland, as well as England (which was in the
best Condition of the three, and the best of the three) brought nigh to the
sides of the Pit of Destruction; who could hope for any Good but what was
brought to us over the Heads and tops of Mountains of Opposition? besides them,
who can make fair Weather in any Alterations, and serve the worst as well as
best of Governments, for Honor, Power and Profit? How many were among us, that
did not know whether it were best to be saved or lost? Sleep in a whole Skin in
the Night of Popery, or live like free Men and Christians under the Light of
Liberty and Religion, until they saw the Powers of Darkness dissolved, and the
Light coming on prosperously by the Favor of an irresistible Providence? The
Mercy is, it is Light, not Fire, Light, not Lightning; it is Light with an
admirable temper of Heat, not a scorching Sun. It is a moderate, kind,
beneficent, growing Light; it does leisurely exalt and spend the noisome
Vapors, Fustiness, Damps and ill Scents of a House before infected: But as
great a Blessing as it is, it is but a Lamp, and will go out, if it should not
be put out and quenched: O what a dark confounded House would it be if the Lamp
should be quenched! If it be a Lamp, and but a Lamp, what should the Family do?

1. All the Servants of God should bless and praise the Lord who afforded us a
Light: O bless the mighty and merciful Hand of Providence which brought us a
Light in the Night of Confusions and Fears! The Enemies of God dwelt in the
House before, their Hearts were turned away from Truth, Righteousness, Peace,
and Love to their Household, even to Children, as well as all Ranks and Degrees
of Officers and Servants: They had the Art of making Promises which they never
kept; and gave an Indulgence to such as they always hated, and could not love
without a miraculous Alteration of Nature: Lay them first asleep in their
Bosom, and then strangle them when they were asleep, if they had had but so
much time for it: and instead of preserving good Government, they brought in
Thieves and Cutthroats: Nothing could have made these run away and hide in all
haste, but the springing in of Light, and setting up a Lamp attended with
strong Guards of resolute Men, against whom they thought it would be but Folly
to fight. This was the mighty Work of God, and a merciful Deliverance!

2. Let us love the Light, and show that we love it, by contributing all we can
to make it shine the brighter, and glorify God the more, by saving others, as
we our selves were saved.

3. Let us interpose between him and them that hate him, that we may preserve
him: There are secret and open Haters of him, Conspirators that conspire to
blow him out, Neutrals that will neither blow him out nor keep him in; and here
is another sort of them who wished him in, and when he was in, wished him out;
that promise Peace and Duty, but will not swear to be true and loyal, or if
they swear, it is with a Proviso that this new Oath consists with their former
to another King: We must labor to tie these up some other way, and preserve
our Light from them. And there are open Enemies by Sea and Land, Armies of
Philistines, and armed Ishbi-benobs, that would put out our Light. The more
these do hate him, let us love him the more, and let their Hatred of him and us
be one reason to increase our Love to him: His open and secret Enemies are all
our Enemies; let us count them so, and for the rest we ought to beware of them;
and if their Consciences are so tied up by their mistaken Oaths, add two Bands
more upon them, one upon their Tongues, and another upon their Hands.

4. Let us make the uttermost Benefit we can of the Light, while it shines upon
us. What would many wise and good Men have given for such a King and Queen? and
for the Opportunity but of some one Parliament as we have had? We thankfully
acknowledge the Settlement of their Royal Majesty's in the Throne, and the
Succession of the Crown, and the Liberties of the People: We gratefully
acknowledge the Wisdom and Clemency of God in their Majesty's choice of great
Men of Temper for the Candle-sticks of their Sees: We hope these will not think
their Eyes so full of sight as to use others as if they had none, but must
resign their Consciences to their Conduct, and drive them by force if they will
not follow. We hope and pray, that as one Light has brought forth more, so all
these Lights will find out and show us the true Path of Church-Peace and
Concord. Let us hope that that Observation may not be a Proverb any more in
Israel, That Bishops always hindered the Progress of the Reformation. As God
made way for their Majesty's Coming to the Throne of the Kingdom by a Vacancy,
so he has made way for their coming to their Thrones in their Churches. How
many Vacancies has God made by Death? and how many Vacancies have others made
by themselves? And will they do nothing for God, more than they who have always
done too little one way, and too much another? Enough has been said and
written to file off the Asperity and Roughness of the temper of their
Predecessors: and every Succession exceeded the former in Impositions, for
which they pleaded Obedience more from the Supremacy of our Kings, and
Obedience to the Laws, than the Nature of the things themselves, or their
Expediency: but we have seen gracious Offers from our supreme Governors at a
temper, therefore we fear no Obstruction from them, and they have seen who they
were that opposed it, and have retarded it, and know how they stand affected.
And surely now once again we may hope that they will not love their Enemies and
hate their Friends: God has made way for it, and the best in the Nation expect
it. Walk in the Light while you have the Light, said Christ; take the
Opportunity while you have it. In our Prayers for our Monthly-Fasts, we do
acknowledge there are Dregs in the Reformed Churches, which we pray God to purge
away: Are not we one of those Reformed Churches? and are these Dregs only in
Foreign Churches, and none in ours? O see them, and purge them out while we
have Light to help us!

5. Are our Lights but Lamps that may be quenched, or if not quenched by
Violence, will go out of Course? then this is one reason of the Mutability of
the best State of a Kingdom; and therefore good Kings do mightily oblige their
Subjects and Posterity also. When they spend their Days and Abilities in a
holy, religious, righteous, active and diligent course of Government; when they
lay out themselves continually from a Principle of sincere Love to God and his
Glory, and their Peoples Happiness; for they know not how soon their Light may
be quenched, and then they are for ever laid aside, and can do no good to
themselves nor their Subjects.

6. May our Lights be quenched? O then, when Kings prepare for War and Battle,
how piously should they prepare for Death, and bless God for Life when they
come off with it. They who carry their Lives in their Hands, who fear not the
Face of an Enemy, not of an Ishbi-benob, should therefore fear God, who can
kill the Body and the Soul, and cast both into Hell: O fear him! It will be an
everlasting Shame and Dishonor to fall under the Power of Death, as an Enemy
to God. When they carry the Weapons of War, how careful should they be to put
on the whole Armor of God! What wise King will engage in a War, and make no
Preparation for it, that designs not to conquer? What inexcusable Rashness and
Madness is it for a King that is wise and valiant in the Eyes of Man, to be
unprovided for the last Enemy? True, he shall be destroyed; but by whom?
Christ, and he who does savingly believe in him: And Death destroys all that
are not the living Members of Christ, that are not saved by Grace; and with
what Shame and Contempt shall they rise out of their Graves (which vain Men
call a Bed of Honor, though they come to it by dishonouring God) that died in
their Sin, and not in Christ or in the Faith, as Abraham and the Patriarchs
did? Heb. 11.13, etc.

7. May the Lamps of Israel be quenched? O then, as truly as we love and honor
them, let us not idolize them, nor think of them above what we ought to think!
Cursed is the Man that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose
Heart departs from the Lord, i. e. by trusting in Man, and making the Flesh
his Arm, that is, his Confidence and Strength, Jer. 17.5. This is the way to
bring a Curse upon our selves, and Death upon the Arm we trust upon: It was a
Presage of an approaching Death to that great Deliverer, that died in his
Glory, Gustavus King of Sweden; he thought God would e're long take him away,
because the People did overvalue and deify him.

I beseech you, let us pray and study for a true Christian Temper of Spirit
toward the Lord of Hosts our King, and the Cause of God.

1. Let us assuredly look upon our King as a great Instrument in the Hand of
the Lord of Hosts. 2. The number of his Years are with God. 3. His Work is
measured out to him by God. 4. Our Light sprang out of great Obscurity and from
very small Beginnings; See Bishop Burnet's Let. from Nimiguen.
it was a great sign of following Successes, and that he was singled out for
great Actions, when he was not afraid to encounter the most potent King of his
Age, growing greater daily by Successes, and in his full Strength, when the
Condition of the States was desperate and irrecoverable, if the then young
Prince of Orange had but despaired also: but even then he gave a check to that
overgrowing Oppressor, and is, by the great Power of God being with him, grown
to be formidable to him; and may the Sound of his Name, by the Terror of the
Almighty, make his Sleep to depart from him, and his Heart tremble, when he
thinks and consulteth what to do. 5. What would we have God to do for us, that
he has not done, or is not ready to do? Some considering, true hearted, wise
Observers, have faithfully declared what they thought to be the cause of many
Miscarriages in England and Ireland by Sea and Land; and in particular, since
our Monthly-Fasts were laid down and intermitted, God has not gone on to do us
good, though he has not utterly departed from us. But though our Sins have
withheld good things from us, we are in a better State both at home and
abroad, than we were when God sent us a Deliverer. There is a Generation among
us, who have cast off the Fear of God, a profane, carnal, sensual, debauched
Multitude, that have always opposed the great and only Redeemer Christ, and his
Interest in the Nation, that care no more for the real Prosperity of the
Kingdom, than for the turning up of a Dye, high or low, when they throw for
nothing, so that they may have but enough to maintain their ungodly, fleshly,
and worldly Lusts. These are not for the Pope, but yet they are for Antichrist
and the Devil, for the Kingdom of Darkness and Irreligion: These are they whose
God is their Belly, whose Glory is in their Shame, Enemies to the Cross of
Christ: And to these we must add another Party (though in other things far
different from them, and better Men) who plead an Obligation of Conscience for
Disloyalty, and these do animate and propagate the other (though perhaps not
directly) who are disaffected to Godliness and the Government. Nay, the worst
of Men do not only harden themselves in their Disloyalty, and proceed on to
trouble Israel, or hinder our Settlement, by having the Consciences of some
upon their side, but they have set up a new Title against our Government, and
that is the Church of England: The Church of England against England; the
Church of England against the Kingdom of England. Is Christ divided? Is the
Church divided? The Church of England we know, but who are ye? -- And yet let
me show you one other cause of the Slowness of our Motions toward Settlement
and Peace, and raising up of the Tabernacle of God, and the shining forth of
the Beauty of Holiness. There are loyal Persons to the Government, who are not
refined from the Impurities of the former Reigns. Thousands in the Land that
run into Profaneness and Licentiousness out of Cowardice, and to avoid some
Nicknames given out to disgrace real Godliness; and being accustomed to
Licentiousness, out of Fear. And in compliance with most ungodly Rulers, have
brought such a Custom upon themselves, that either they are Temporizers with
the worst of Men, or sin out of choice and love. Some of these would, if they
could, overthrow the Chariot, others lay Impediments in its way, and these last
are like Scotches in our Wheels: But our Hope is in God; he rules in Jacob,
and has given out such Manifestations of his Goodness, that be it known to us,
he does not do what he does for our sakes, but what is more effectual, for his
own Name sake: O then, not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Name give Glory,
for thy Mercy and thy Truth's sake, Psalm. 115.1. When God sets his Wheel a
going, it shall go against all Oppositions; sometimes it goes visibly at a
great rate, sometimes more insensibly; and when we see not the Motions of it,
it goes whither the Spirit was to go, Ezekiel. 2.12. Man may lose Time and
Opportunities, but the Spirit of God never lost, and never will lose time. 6.
The Work of this Generation is God's in an eminent manner, and he will carry it
on till all be finished; but he tieth not himself to Means and Instruments,
therefore so should not we. The Work of God has been and is a Work for
Generations; and no one Man is ordained to do all, but many Instruments have
their several parts. None is immortal, none invulnerable, or impenetrable. Let
us therefore believe with confidence that this War is God's, and it is the Hand
of God, and our King is one of the greatest Instruments that God has used; he
came up like Queen Elizabeth, when the Kingdom was weak, like a Gustavus
Adolphus. Let us see God in him, follow God, and wait upon him, and be careful
of him, and by strong Faith, humble Confidence, fervent Prayers, trust him
under the Shadow of the Almighty.

Object. But how can we rejoice and take comfort in Him as the Light of Israel,
seeing he adventures his Royal Person in very dangerous Voyages and Battles? As
it would be the greatest Grief of our Souls to be deprived of him, so our
Hearts are in daily fear of Evil befalling to him: What would become of us in
our divided and discontented State, if our Light should be quenched?

Answ. 1. You should consider that this bright illustrious Lamp is not given to
us alone; I cannot but adore the safe and hasty dispatch which God Alwise and
Almighty made of the mighty Affair of these Kingdoms? How soon did the King of
Heaven and Earth pull down one, and set up another? How soon did God make an
end of one King's Reign, and begin another's? The King that then was in Arms, a
powerful well-prepared and trained Army, almost, if not above double the number
to those our King brought in, and yet not as much as the stop of one Day's
march or diversion given, by fighting one Battle! He had time enough for
leisurely and orderly Marches, without any cause of Precipitation, or losing
time by committing Errors. What a good Providence was this! Things shall be
easy when God does save; it shall be as easy as to bid an Army in array to
stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord; and as soon as to say, 2 Chronicles.
20.17. Neh. 9.27.
To morrow ye shall go out against them, for the Lord will be with you. So when
the Lord does raise a Savior to his People, he will be with him; and when he
is with him, he makes way for him. Had our King conquered by winning many
Battles, and after he had beaten a great Army, been constrained to spend much
time in long Debates; how miserable had this Kingdom been by Fears and
Factions! And to what Necessities had foreign Nations been pressed? Ireland
certainly lost, Scotland confounded, if not ruined. But he who rules over all,
was pleased to save us, and settle us with great expedition, that his Servant
David might go forth against the Philistines. What Treacheries with
Obstructions were used to hinder him from saving Ireland in time, may be with
trouble remembered; that some People who appeared forward to embrace
Deliverance, withdrew their Help, as if they had repented of doing any thing to
make themselves happy, and save others from utter Ruin. How many wished the
King might not go to Ireland in Person, that the Loss of Ireland might be
imputed to him? And others were for his going, that he might never return
again, or in his Absence our Enemies might make work in England. Some honest
Hearts wished he would not go, being afraid of Commotions in his Absence, and
Danger to his Person: Others prayed for his going, and when gone, for his
Prosperity and safe Return; and we have rejoiced for both, out with some
trembling, for God rebuked us.

2. Beside the Interests of many Nations united in him, he is led into the best
way and method of securing and saving us at home, by going to meet the great
Enemy abroad; and if God be with him there, we shall reap the Benefit of it
here. Balthazaris Ayala, De jure Off. bell. l. 4. c. 2.
It has been variously adjudged by great Commanders, whether it is better to
keep at home, and receive Enemies from abroad, and repel them; or carry the War
abroad into the Enemies Countries: But certainly the Reasons and Circumstances
of this War, well known to our wise King, persuade it is best where it is. God
has provided for us a wise, watchful, courageous Queen, in full Authority to
govern and watch over us at home, who is worthy to be trusted under God. There
are more Princes engaged in this War beside the King, and other Dominions
concerned: and if God do but break that Devourer at home, and deal with him, as
God rewarded Adonibezek, it will keep him from ravaging abroad, as he has
done: Hunt him down, he will be glad to hide in his own Den. Nothing is more to
be feared than a Composition with him; for being faithless, he will no longer
keep Conditions of Peace, than he can gather Strength to break them.

3. You say, you would not have him venture his Person. I say, let us express
all the loyal and truly-Christian Care we can, and all the true Zeal we can for
his Preservation; but let us consider, that it has been the manner and use of
the greatest Kings, and the best of Commanders, to go to the Wars, and command
in Battles: Not to speak of the famous Conquerors of the World, was there such
a Man in the World as Abraham was? Genesis 14.13, 14, 15, 16.
And this holy Abraham goes in the Head of his armed Men in Person, and leaves
not the charge of them to his Confederates: How like a Soldier did he command
and marshal his Men; and he was not a Spectator, but an Actor in the Fight.
What a Man was Joshua, who had the Name and Spirit of a Savior: he went, and
did not take care to send to the Battles of the Mighty. The same might be
enlarged in David, even to a declining Age; and of other Kings.

4. A King may be as safe in a Camp as in his Court; read Psalm. 3.5. I laid me
down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. Ver. 6. I will not be
afraid of ten thousands of People, that have set themselves against me round
about. Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God, etc. Psalm. 27.3, 4, 5. But then
remember, these Men were strong in Faith, and much in Prayer.

Not to exceed in length; Let us who are sensible of the great Favor of God
toward us in our King and Queen, be upon our Duties, which are two. 1. Trust.
2. Prayer.

1. Trust God with all our Heart. Look upon our Lamps as subject to Mortality,
to fainting, to be quenched, but let us look to the God of Israel, above the
sading Light of Israel: Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the Ends
of the Earth: for I am God, and none else. Kings cannot save themselves, but it
is God who gives Salvation to Kings, Psalm. 144.10. Salvation belongs to the
Lord, Psalm. 3.8. Psalm. 44.6. Psalm. 33.16 2 Chronicles. 14, 11.
And a King that trusts in the Lord, will not trust to his Bow, etc. to the
greatest Numbers of Men, nor Preparations for War. He was a King and a Prophet
that dehorteth us from trusting in Princes, Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5.

2. Trust the Lord of Hosts with our King and Queen. As we are to cast all our
private Burdens upon the Lord, and to commit our private Ways, Affairs, and
Concernments, to the Lord; so let us cast the great Concernment of the Kingdom,
and all the People of God in the Kingdom. The King trusts in the Lord, Psalm.
21.7. O let us trust also in the Lord, and trust our Light to his gracious,
watchful, and mighty Providence.

O that we could trust the mighty God of Jacob with his Church and People, when
as low and weak as Jacob; when he is called Jacob, Jacob is low and weak: Now
is the time for right trusting in God. And the more Trust and Confidence we
place in the King and Queen, and the more we exceed in love to them, the more
cause have we to have a right Trust in God.

(1.) Trust the King as far as a King is to be trusted, with our Armies, with
our Purses, with our national Interests abroad and at home; and the more our
disaffected Back-friends have contemned him, let us honor and trust him the
more. But when we have trusted much to his Wisdom, Integrity, Valor, Conduct
and Experience, let us not make an Idol of him; let us not forget God, nor
forget that he it is that teaches his Hands to war, and his Fingers to fight.

(2.) Trust God in this Cause and War, as if we had no King to trust to, for we
must trust God alone: Only the Lord be with thee, as he was with Moses, Jos.
1.17. He only is my Rock and my Salvation; he is my Defense, I shall not be
greatly moved. My Soul wait thou only upon God: for my Expectation is from him.
He only is my Rock and my Salvation: I shall not be moved. In God is my
Salvation and my Glory: the Rock of my Strength, and my Refuge is in God. Trust
in him at all times, ye People -- Surely Men of low degree are Vanity; and Men
of high degree are a Lie, Psalm. 62.2, 5, etc. It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118.9. All Nations compassed me
about, but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them, verse. 10.

(3.) Trust not in Means with the least neglect of God, yet use God's Means in
trusting God. Trust God in the use of Means, above Means; trust not God without
Means, when Means may be had of God's appointment. Set your selves in array,
but then stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.17. David
would not trust in his Bow, but he would make use of his Bow. Though the Means
be but as Rams-horns, and the tumbling of Barley-loaves, yet do as God would
have us. Presumption is no Trust.

(4.) Trust God with giving, supplying, renewing, disposing and prospering
Means, but do not limit God to any one Way, or Time, or Person. Mordecai was a
Wonder; he was confident that God would deliver the Jews, he made use of Hester
as a proper, as a very proper Instrument to work upon the King; but his Trust
was not limited to her; but if she failed, Deliverance shall come from another
place, Hester 4.14. No King in England, without dishonor to any, was so like
to carry on the Work of God, and to do the Service of his Church, as our
present King is; he has done much already. Was ever King so trusted by so many
Princes? Who was so engaged, being so provoked by the Enemy, so prepared with
depth of Thoughts and Privacy, with Industry beyond Strength; or encouraged by
Deliverances as He? Yet still let us not limit the most High God; and the more
we trust God, the more we love our King. O long may this Lamp burn and shine;
but he can no longer give Light to Israel, than the God of Israel goes before
him, and bears him up in his Hand.

(5.) Trust God in all Dangers, to preserve him and succor him in case of
fainting. God has succored him by one of his Nobles, in a former Battle
against France. Let us pray and trust, that Help shall not be far from him when
Dangers are nigh.

O let all that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: Now let our Eyes be toward
the Lord, and trust him over all; trust him, I say, again, with our Light and
Lamp. And O that we could trust God, not with a humane Trust, as far as we see
great Armies, and early Successes, but trust God with the Trust of humble,
penitent, believing, sincere, praying Hearts.

The 2d Duty is Prayer; and this is one part of the whole Armor of God,
without which who can expect to be saved? Great and many were David's
Extremities, and therefore we find so many of his Prayers and Thanksgivings for
their Success. They who pray most and best, are God's best Servants, and the
King's truest Subjects. O let us pray by Faith, with Hope, with Contrition,
Humiliation, Sincerity, Fervency, Continuance and Perseverance, by the Spirit,
in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, to the Lord of Hosts, to God mighty
in Battle. When David spoke of the peaceable and prosperous Reign of Solomon,
he says, Psalm. 72.15
and for him shall Prayer be made continually. O all you that can pray, pray
heartily, pray daily, pray abundantly. Prayer has been most profanely derided
in this Age: But if we would have God do what we will, let us believe and pray
according to the Will of God: Let not a day pass over you, without effectual
Prayers for God's Glory in the prosperity of the Gospel, and redeeming Israel
out of all his Troubles. And that God would guide, assist, preserve and prosper
our King and Queen, and strengthen them by his Spirit in the inner Man, take
these following Considerations to satisfy and encourage your Hearts.

1. The King must go to these Wars: It is not Vanity to see the young Men play
before him, as Abner said to Joab, 2 Samuel 2.14. Hest. 4.14.
no, but necessity. A necessity in respect of Duty and Obedience to God, who
has prepared and called him to it. He is obliged to assist in a Common Cause
against a Common Destroyer of Countries and Cities. And who knows but he is
come to the Kingdom for such a Time, for such a Service as this? He does not
only add Strength by his Armies, but puts Life into the Armies of other Princes
as well as his own. There is the same Necessity for our King to go forth to
Battle, as it was for David's going when he went; it may be so, that there may
not be hereafter a like Necessity, as there was not when the Men of David
obliged him not to go; for then he was much disabled, and there were many
others fit for the Service that were forward to go, Men fit to be trusted,
Wendeline Doctrine. Politicae. lib. 2. c. 42. and Ayala. l. 2. c. 2. Sect. 19.
Men that were true to the Happiness of Israel. And as Caesar was wont to say,
Not go; but, Come along. So many other great Captains have not only been
present, but performed the parts of Soldiers as well as Generals. But the
greatest Valor must do this with great Caution, and remember he is a General,
and not a Commander, posted to maintain his assigned Ground, lest he become a
Mark for an Ishbi-benob; or give cause to an Enemy to say as he did, who killed
the most renowned King of Sweden, That is the true Bird; and so shot him dead.
Let us not forget to ask of God, always to govern the King's great Mind, and
guide him with his Eye.

2. Here is sufficient Encouragement for us all, not to be faint-hearted and
dismayed, but to pray with an awful humble Confidence and Expectation, that God
will favor this Righteous Cause.

For, 1. this War is a lawful War, and that gives us encouragement to seek God
for the Success of it, and our good King's Prosperity and Preservation. The
Lawfulness of this War will appear in all the Causes of a lawful War, if you,

1. Consider our Selves. 2. Our Enemies. 3. Our Allies.

1. If you consider our Selves. It is lawful, because undertaken by Supreme
Authority; by the King, and Consent of the Parliament. The King has just cause
to maintain his own just Title to the Crown and Government of these Kingdoms:
And it is the Peoples Duty to serve him in the Wars according to their utmost
Ability; as Judah did adhere to David, 2 Samuel 2.4.
whom they received, and anointed him to be their King. You know that I have
not made State-Matters the Subject of my Preaching; but now it is necessary to
say something to inform you in what I believe is true, and then engage and
persuade you to your Duties. The King's Title and Right to the Crown is
scrupled by some, who own him as King de facto in Possession; these do seem
rather to temporize, than to obey upon a full Principle of Obedience, and speak
not fully to the Point, and the Case of the King and Queen: And others refuse
to swear Allegiance to them, though settled upon the Throne by a free
Convention of Peers and People; and their Title ratified by a Parliament, and
acknowledged by all Princes and States abroad, except One who would have the
Kingdom for himself if he could. Which of all the Heads of the several Families
and Lines of our English Kings could show a better Title, or near so good, than
our King and Queen, antecedent to their Coronation? But since it should be held
undoubted, and therefore this War is lawful, if it were for nothing but to
maintain his just Title against his Enemies. The Reasons which Abner, and the
Men of Israel gave for their submission, were good to prove David's Title; and
every one of them might be applied to prove our Sovereign's Title, see 2 Samuel
3.12, 17, 18. Chap. 5.2, 3. And though God has not spoken by audible Words to
them, You shall feed my People Israel, and thou shall be Captain over Israel;
he has spoken aloud by convincing Providence.

2. It is lawful if you respect our Enemies. The French have declared War
against us, attempted an Invasion. Do not we know him too well to let him in?
If we resist him, who shall be our King? He that has saved us, and does still
endeavor it? or he, who when he had declined, and refused to satisfy the just
Petitions of his Subjects, and contrary to Law, and his Duty, went about to
change our Government; and not daring to meet a Free Parliament, ventured his
Cause to the determination of God, by the Sword, and lost it, in that Court of
Judgment, and deserted the Government and Kingdom, and withdrew to an open
Enemy's Country, and has made use of that Enemy's Power against us; and fled
another Kingdom since, to that same Enemy's Country again? The Israelites, yea,
Abner himself, 2 Samuel 3.18. Chap. 5.2.
thought David was the rightful King, who had gone in and out before the
People, and had saved them from all their Enemies. It is a lawful War for us to
defend our selves against an open Enemy.

3. The War of France against us, is an unlawful War; suppose it were, as we
clearly see it is not, with a pure respect to the late King; but if it were, it
would be our Duty to resist him. 1. He was no lawful King of England, according
to the Law of England, The lawful King of England, is Supreme in his Dominions,
in opposition to all Foreign Jurisdictions or Power; out he subjected himself
to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and therefore lost it, and ceased to be the King of
England. 2. There is no Allegiance due to any other, according to Law, but to a
Protestant King, whom we swear to defend in opposition to the Usurpation of the
Bishop of Rome. But the King was a professed Papist, and owned that
Jurisdiction, against which we swore; Therefore, etc. 3. He is no King
according to our Laws, and therefore an Usurper and Tyrant, that does not swear
to maintain our Laws. He that shall endeavor to bring in Popery, forbidden by
Law, and to root out the Religion established by Law, does not rule by Law;
Therefore, etc. That he did en^eavour to do so, let us cousult, his Letter
written and sent to the Pope from Dublin, now printed at the end of the Lord
Preston's Trial; Nov. 26. 1689.
Most Holy Father, etc. The only Source of all these Rebellions against us is,
that we embraced the Catholic Faith; and do nor disown, but to spread the
same, not only in our three Kingdoms, but over all the dispersed Colonies of
our Subjects in America, was our determination. What greater Evidence of his
Designs and Endeavors to bring in Popery, contrary to our Laws, than this? He
was King only in Possession: He had been their Expectant, and did actually
succeed, and had quiet Possession by God's Permission and the Kingdom's
Peaceableness, till he went about to dissolve the very Foundations of the
Government. And our present lawful King, then a Free Prince, and no Subject of
England, See Grot. de jure Belli, l. 2. c. 24. And the R. R. Bp. of St. Asaph
's Discourse.
came to deliver us, and preserve our Laws and Liberties, which was a lawful
Act. His Invasion was a lawful Act, and had it produced a War, it had been a
lawful War, against a King that had fallen from his legal Kingly Supremacy, by
his own Fault and Act.

4. This War is a lawful War, in respect of our Confederates, though some of
them are of a differing Religion from us. Many of them, as well as our King,
have received great Injuries from him, and been oppressed by him; and all have
cause more than to suspect him of destructive Designs by his growing Power, to
make a Prey of Neighboring Nations. This might easily be proved lawful by the
Example of Abraham, Genesis 14. of David rescuing Keilah, 1 Samuel 23. and made a
prosperous War upon Hadarezar, 1 Chronicles. 18.3.

5. The miserably oppressed Subjects of France cry for Assistance to save them
perishing, and restore their just legal Liberties, and Protestant Princes may
be moved to engage on the behalf of the Persecuted Protestants, whose Liberties
and Religion were established by Edicts and Compacts.

6. Our gracious Sovereign is engaged in this War by the most honorable
Engagement that could induce and oblige a King to undertake a War, the Conduct
of the Confederates Armies entrusted with him.

Now what remains, but that we all engage our Hearts to God, and heartily
concern our selves for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person, under the safe
Conduct of God and his Angels? An Army of praying servent Souls, may do great
Service in this Public Cause. Pray and cry daily and mightily with God:
Wrestle with God in his own Power; and when God is with us, no Man can prevail
against us.

Two Words more must be added to quicken us:

1. The Apprehensions of the dreadful Consequences of the Extinction of the
Lamp of Israel at Home, which visibly appears to every considering Mind. Our
Enemies, the Murmurers at Home, are now weak, but would soon lift up their
Horns on high, and a Spirit of Persecution enter into them, and this quickly
enraged by the Power of a King, who has made himself odious to humane Nature
for it. But we hope his Day is coming.

2. Consider the now languishing expiring Weakness of Protestant Churches and
Countries Abroad. And both put together, did ever so many Interests meet in one
Person, of Nations, and of so many Kinds, both Civil and Religious, as depend,
under God, upon our King's Preservation? O then let us trust, and pray without
ceasing for him.

And so, God save the King.

