Great and Bloody Dems, FROM Turnham-Green, OR A RELATION Of a sharp Encounter,
Between the Earl of Pembrook, and his Company, with the Constable and VVatch
belonging to the Parish of Chiswick on the 18 Instant.
In which Conflict one Mr. Smeethe a Gentleman, and one Mr. Halfpenny a
Constable of the said Parish were mortally Wounded, of which Wounds the
former within a short time after died and the latters Recovry dispaired of; as
also of his Lordships being knocked down, and taken Prisoner by Mr. Smeethe
aforesaid, after he had Received his Deaths Wound; with several other
remarkable Circumstances that happened in and after the Dispute.

SO much does Barbarous Inhumanity abound in this most wicked Age, that
Outrages grows frequent, that no man is affured of his safety, Cruelties, being
Acted for Diversion and Murders made a sport of, to please the Fancies of such
Desperadoes as in their high flown Bravery, would make or at least show
themselves dreadful to the World by being died in Blood of Innocents and
bedewing of the Earth with Widows and Orphans Tears; but sure it is Heavens
Indignation will not he silent ever, but wrath Divine break forth in fearful
Ruin on the Guilty Heads of such who take delight to injure and destroy their
Fellow Creatures, whom God has stamped with the same Image, and endued with
Souls Rational, and perhaps superior in worth, unto those whose Envy their
goodness has provoked to destroy them; how many Murders have of late
Allarrumed this affrighted Land and Bloodsheds, as well in this great
Metropolis, as in its Suburbs, and diverse other places. How many have fell by
wicked impious hands, when they least suspected Death, without giving the least
provocations; and not only so, but daily Affronts are thrown in the Face of
Authority by such whom naught but bailful mischiefs please; whom steaming
slaughter only can delight, whilst Violences are their Daily Exercise, for such
Iniquities the Land Mourns, against such it was that the Souls under the Altar
cried aloud to their Eternal Maker, How long O Lord God, Holy, Just and
Righteous will it be e're thou avenge us on those that dwell upon the Earth;
and as the Prophet again complains, their hands are full of Violence, for
certain it is no Crime cries louder before the Throne of the just God of all
the Earth for Vengeance then causelessly shedding Man's Blood and defacing the
Image of himself that he has Created to serve him, but that Persons nobly Born,
and of high Extract should disgrace and disparage the Name of true Nobility by
such degenerate Barbarities, is much more to be admired since all Heroic Souls
(and such should espeeially lodge in noble Breasts) naturally have an antipathy
against unmanly Actions, detesting horrid Murders and Assaults most foul,
still giving Respect to such whose Offices and places by the institution of the
Laws demand no less, but much more against Night-Revelling, and grand
Debaucheries, the which too many of this Age are prone unto as may more
particularly be observed in this last exploit, which now must be the Subject of
our Narration, the which is related in its horrid Circumstances as follows.
Phillip Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery, with several other of his Retinue,
having been abroad at Dinner at a person of Qualities on Wednesday being the
18th of this instant August 1680. where drinking till it was late, and then as
it is said being somewhat High flown with Wine, they returned homewards in a
Hackney-Coach, till at last crossing over Turnham-Green, they were stopped by
the Watch belonging to the Parish of Chiswick, the Constable of the said Watch
being then with one Mr. Smeethe a Gentleman belonging to the Court, and one Mr.
Halfpenny another Constable of the said Parish, who just came from London with
the former Constable, and went to drink at the Cock and Half Moon, who upon
notice of a Coach being stopped, came out of the House, and coming close up to
the side of it, demanded who the persons were, and whether they were designed,
not knowing it to be my Lord of Pembrook, nor that they had such dangerous
persons to deal withal; but being sharply answered, they made the like Return,
whereupon, as it is creditably related, his Lordship opening the other side of
the Coach, came out and whilst the Parties beforementioned were talking to the
rest, not dreaming of such a Fate, he came upon them unawares, and with his
Sword run Smeethe first into the Belly quite through, the Weapon passing out,
and then wheeling about, made at Halfpenny, and with a pass run him quite
through the Body, in on one side, and out of the other; and afterward through
the Rist, so furious was he to Destruction bent; and had done greater Mischief,
had nor Mr. Smeethe feeling himself wounded, cried out I will not be thus
killed like a Dog, and thereupon caught a Staff out of one of the Watchmens
hands, he having none before, and with the same Knocked his Lordship down, who
then began to cry for Quarter, upon which his Servants came and fell upon him
to save him from Blows, which Smeethe seeing, said, My Lord you have given me
my Deaths-wound, and I could kill you now, having you thus at my Mercy, if I
pleased, but that I scorn so foul and base a Deed and thereupon seized him as
his Prisoner, whilst the rest of his Retinue which were about six in number
were obliged to submit; several of the Watchmen having broke their Staves in
defending themselves and making a stout Resistance, after his Lordship was
taken he was by the Order of the Constable of the Watch conveyed to the Cock
and Half Moon, strongly Guarded, for upon the Brunt of the Skirmish all the
people in the Green were Allarumed, where they after he was dilarm'd put him
into a Chamber and the Constable went in and discoursed with his Lordship of
the heinousness of the Affront and Violence he had done to the Kings Watch, at
which he seemed little concerned.

During the Uproar and Tumult, a person of Quallity as it is said came by, who
understanding what the Cause of it was, and how his Lordship was taken, went to
visit him, and after a long Conference with the Constable of the Watch, his
Lordship was suffered to depart unknown to most of the Company; they being
given to understand that he was Asleep, and that none must disturb him, etc.
This exploit was done about twelve of the Clock in the Evening, and after his
Lordship was let go, which was about one, it is said he made all speed for
London, he being gone the Wounded men were looked after, and Chirurgions
immediately sent for, who no sooner came, but found the Wounds to be Mortal,
one viz. Halfpenney having bled so excessively that he fainted away; and the
other, viz. Smeethe in a short time afterward died, he being a Man of a
considerable Estate, and so stout that it is believed, had be not been
surprised at unawares, and unarmed as he was, none could have wronged him
either with Sword or Staff; and a person so far from offering an abuse to any,
that he abhorred the Company of such as he knew to be Guilty of the same Mr.
Halfpenny being carried home, the Chirurgions upon sight of his Wound durst not
Venture to search the Wound to any deepness, for fear that his Lungs should be
pierced, or some other his of Vital parts; so that they despair of his ever
Reconvering, and look every day that he will die; there was likewise a third
person hurt, viz. a poor Fellow who was lately discharged from a Farmers
Service of that place, but his Wounds were but slight. On Friday the Crovvner
and his J^ry sat upon the deceased; but could not agree in giving in their
Verdict.

FINIS.
Printed by D. M. 1680.


