THE Great Case OF TOLERATION Stated, And endeavored to be resolved in order
to Public Security and Peace.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed and Sold, by Andrew Swole at the Three Keys, in
Nags-Head-Court, in Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit, 1688.

THE Great Case OF TOLERATION Stated, And endeavored to be resolved, in order
to public Security and Peace.
Three things are to be considered on this Subject, First, Whether Toleration
be consistant with the very nature and design of Christian Religion? Secondly,
Whether it be reconcilable to the best Rules of Government and Policy?
Thirdly, Whether it stands with our safety in the present Conjuncture and
posture of Affirs?


And if all these can be made good in the Affirmative, I know not what can be
more desired, and why it is not seasonable to be Established and made
Perpetual.

TO the first Point, If there is some reallity mixed with so much profession and
talk of Religion as is now in the World; If there is indeed a design of Gods
Glory, and the Pleas of Conscience are not fictitious and pretended; let Man
but consider the nature of his Government over the World, which is to be
glorified in afree and voluntary Obedience of his Rational Creatures, and such
is to be pure, not forced, and nothing besides his own Command an inducement to
it. How does he disclaim it by the Prophet, Isa. 29.13. When their Fear toward
me is taught by the Precepts of Men. How well this place agrees with that
Compulsion to the Sacrament, or such a Communion, let any one judge that will
not pervert the mind of Scripture, and the nature of true Obedience. Chrisostom
brings us an Argument why Men should be persuaded, Cited by Dr Hammon, of
Deathbed Repenance, Sect. 35.
not forced, to Reformation of any Fault or Error, because God rewards not
those that upon necessity abstain from Evil, but only those that voluntary do
it. If a Man's Servant would not do such a thing barely upon his own Masters
Command, but another Person must first compel him, and then he does it; What
honor will it be to him, or will he care for such Service? Does God want the
aid of Man to make others Obedient unto him, surely not, nay it cannot be done
by outward Violence; one hereby may be brought like a Beast to the Sacrifice,
but still there is nothing of the subjection of the Mind. God values not
hypocritical Services or a mere external submission, he may be as well
glorified in having Bullocks or Goats, for they become subject unto the utmost,
even to Death; but if Man who can give, if he requires, an Offering of a free
Heart, which is only in his own power, not to be exerted by any human
Authority, for this cannot reach so far, and if it could, yet it coming from
that would not be accepted: I might multiply many Texts, but what would they
all signify? for there is a common custom through the proud and disdainful
Ignorance, but yet Cunning of Men, to slight over what they cannot Answer, they
are so presumptuous as to put off all means from the Word of the all-wise God
for Foolish and Canting, which make against their own corrupt doings, though
themselves will make use of them to maintain their own Interest and Humor
against a different Persuasion; to such all these kind of Arguments signify
nothing, and truly no more need to be added, seeing so many are brought to this
purpose by Dr. Tailor, in his Liberty of Prophecy, that even all those that
have the Reputation for so much Learning and Reason cannot give a perfect and
satisfactory Answer to them, they have been and are now challenged to do it,
for the Opponant is worthy their contending with, and it would be for their
secular Advantage to keep up the Grandeur and State of their Communion, and
also their own Honor, and undoubtedly it had been done long since if possible;
but that excellent Author argees so conclusively from Scripture, Reason,
Primitive Authority, as is a demonstration it was the very Truth he contended
for, which he made further clear.

Some object That of Church Censures in the Primitive Times; but there was a
great and manifest diversity between them, and what was lately used amongst us;
for they were inflected on gross Heretics, and they are only so on whom the
Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.10, 11. And besides for scandalous Sins, the Incestuous
Person, Adulterers, Drunkards, and such like, and not for little Errors or
difference in Judgment, as just the contrary has been used among us, that even
it was a shame for Men to act such Severities toward Men, likewise much less
should Christians; every one that has but the common goodness and resentment
of human Nature must abhor them; they did most stir up, whose duty it was in
meekness to instruct Opposers, and hereby they gave occasion to indifferent and
considering Persons to think (though they might have waved this) as if they
wanted Arguments to convince, for there is also ratio ultima Cleri, who should
teach Mercifulness, Love, Forbarance, Meekness, they did practice the contrary,
as if what so many do make their Craft, was in danger to be set at naught, as
they had run so far from the Practice and Experience of former times, whether
that of Ezekiel 34.4. (The Diseased have ye not Strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was Sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye
sought that which was lost; but with Force and with Cruelty have ye ruled them)
has not been fulfilled in these latter Days, let any one seriously reflect,
and the true cause of all our Divisions, Sects and Parties may not be learned
from what is said in this Chapter.

There might be many other things urged, but they have been already in Books,
and there is no need of further Printing, where its granted by all
unprejudiced, uninterested Men, by those who (...) discern any thing of
themselves, and are not led by the Nose by them who meet for their Pride and
Profit more then for the Truths sake, as may be considered, because they will
not comply with what they seem to teach, with obedience to the Truth, that they
who are appointed Officers of Christ's Kingdom, will not consent it should be so
as he himself has ordained it, he could have commanded twelve Legions of
Angels, planted his Religion as the Imposter Mahomet did by the Sword, but he
used none but that of his Mouth, no more did any of the first Founders thereof,
and the same Word is conveyed down to us, which is able to keep the Fear and
Worship of God in the Hearts of Men, (if managed aright) without aid from the
civil Authority. Where the Rulers were Heathen, and set against him, he did
make good his Dominion over Men by Miracles, and an extrordinary Power and
Assistance, but now they are Christian, they are to give God the things that
are Gods, a permission only that his Word and Truth be freely, and without
molestation made known unto Men. The Divine Will and Pleasure should instantly
silence all other Reasons, and in a Christian Country all should comply
therewith out of respect to him, without any further need of Argument, if
People were indeed willing and obedient unto him, as he who at this present
knows the Secrets of all Hearts, will one day judge and manifest them; yet in
this degenerate Condition of the World, or Apostasy from God, notwithstanding
all their seeming to Honor him with their Lips, the Devotion and Obedience
they pretend to give him, yet this is the most inconsiderable Argument, and
has the least effect upon Men, and therefore we are to descend to the other.
The first Consideration is from future and invisible things, yet the certainty
and greatness of them would take away this prejudice, for they also will be
present and before us; for every Day the Gate of Death opens unto them, and
single Persons enter in, and the most Healthful and Lustiest of us all haste to
it; but seeing what is now seen and done does most affect, therefore Peace and
Safety, Convenience and Interest came in, and is to be suspected will
principally determine the Case; and so the second Question is somewhat to be
discussed.

Whether Toleration be reconcilable to the best Rules of Government.

The end of which is Peace, that every one may live quietly and have his own,
be Loyal and Obedient unto the King, Loving and Kind to one another; now it is
strange that Religion, which relies wholly upon Man's Obedience unto God, as he
has the same from all the Created Beeings of the World, which keeps them all
in order; so to Man, who is fitly called the little World, there being the like
necessity to maintain Peace on Earth, and good will toward Men, as to keep up
the whole course of Nature, yet this should be turned into Rebellion,
Disobedience and Confusion. We learn hereby what is the difference of things in
their own Nature, and in their Corruption. Think ye I come to send Peace on the
Earth, I tell ye nay, but the Sword, said the Author of our Profession, and it
has been found true; for as all his Laws and Precepts are most excellently
contrived, as to the first, so upon the abuse and non-complyance with them, the
contrary effect has followed. Who has seen worse Subjects then the Religious?
and yet it cannot be denied but the Gospel as strictly injoyns Loyalty, as any
other Duty whatsoever, and tends very much to the Benefit and Welfare of the
Commonwealth. What can be the reason of all this, but only the Hypocrisy of
some, and Ignorance of others? some who made this a bare pretense, and other
silly Persons who were beguiled with it. That of Acts 4.19. has been in every
ones Mouth, but then the Established Laws of those Countries were against the
Christian Religion in general: When the Governors became Christians, then
sprang up Divisions and Errors, and then they began to take unto, and maintain
one side, the differing Parties still thought themselves in the right, and the
aforesaid place applicable to them also, and have hence taken occasion to
behave themselves after the same manner as St Peter did: Others taking
Advantage of their simplicity and real meaning, using them as Instruments to
carry on their ambiti^^^ Designs and secular Interests; thus the Fire kindled
and came forth into a Flame; I cannot so clearly express my self, and it would
be tedious to run over the exact particular manner, but let any Impartial and
Prudent Person examine this one thing, and consider it thoroughly, Whether
constraint in matters of Religion has not occasioned all the Disloyalty,
wherein this was made the least pretext, or made any noise, not only in the
four last Raigns in this Nation, but in all Christendom, and those several Ages
since Christ and his Apostles were upon the Earth, how it occasioned those
Persecutions and Cruelties even toward them and their Followers, and after
when it came likewise to be Established in Countries, (as Heathenism and
Jewdaism were before) then (as before noted) Divisions did arise and increase,
and the Secular Authority descending, and interesting it self as to them,
hereby became Trouble, and Insecure either by secret Plots and Conspiraces, or
if strong enough, the open Seditions of those that smaried under it; Flesh and
Blood are apt to be Mutionous, thinking it better to resist then be tamely
Beaten, but when mistaken Conscience and deluded Zeal do further stir up, then
it is much more so: At this time the crafty Politians came in, who were acted
by Ambition and Interest, and did first lead along, and then became Leaders of
the Faction. Now these had wanted a Pretext, and the other had not so much as
had an Erroneous Principle to have gone by, had it not been for their aforesaid
Compulsion. In truth the actings of both are Sinful and Unchristian, in the one
designed Hypocrisy, in the other it was Ignorance of that certain Duty of
passive Obedience and Suffering for Conscience sake, rather then speaking Evil,
and much less then, to lift up the Hand against the Lords Anointed; but as long
as Covetousness and Pride did instigate the first, and when a sly Temptation
did offer it self to the latter for avoiding the Cross, by those means which
were disputable, and did not appear to them directly unlawful, the Devil who
acts at the bottom of all human Affairs, can raise a fair appearance to excuse
from outward Pain and Inconveniences; the illusions of the Spirit of Error, and
the Reasonings of the Carnal Man prompt them any way to save themselves from
the Storm; one may thus trace out all the Factions and Rebellions that ever
were, wherein Religion did make any noise, or was the least concerned, C^ss^nte
causa, cessat effectus.

Here some will cry, But this will be the way to let (...) Heresy, Error, and
a thousand Inconveniences; but the Civil Magistrate is not so imediately
concerned as to them; indeed himself is but a Potsherd of the Eartn, though of
the greatest size, and consequently has the same relation to that God with
whom we have all to do, and therefore in general is obliged to keep up the
Worship and Fear of God, and the right Faith contained in the Scriptures (if he
would leave all things as they are there, and with the Muscovites forbid all
Disputes) however that the Fundamentals be thought no more then comprised in
the Apostles Creed, and what were judged by the four first Councils as
absolutely necessary to Salvation; if he permit nothing to them of holy Life,
and his own Government, but there is a distinct order of Men to convince
Herericks and detest Error, the Weapons of whose Warfare ought to be Spiritual
and not Carnal, Truth is strong and will prevail, for the Fundamentals here
mentioned we are assured, but for all under them, or what may be immagined to
be deduced from them, for that infinite number of Consequences and Questions
among us, we know not what is Heresy or Error; it is not sufficient alone,
when some have got the established Laws of their Country on their side, to call
others Herericks and Erroneous, which is sonner done then proved, and here too
often happens, according to the old Proverb, The greatest Fool, etc. For
though I do for my part believe the Church of England comes as near to the
Primitive Pattern as any now in being, and that her Constitutions are good and
true, except some disputable Points which cannot be otherwise, when they come
down to such particular Deprivations, as some may be seen in the Thirty nine
Articles, yet if a false and corrupted Church should get the upper Hand, it
would be an hard case if the bare forwardness and confidence of them should
damm all others to Hell, but that not being in their Power is only Brutum
fulmen; but what is worse, Oppress them here on Earth, who will not likewise be
carried away with their Corruption, and so really involve themselves into that
wherein they did only frighten and abuse them, for those Controversies and
Questions were a fooling, they are rather the Skirts and Borders then the
Substance of Religion; and it will be sad and riged to tie and confine
Salvation unto any of them: What or who shall determine between the right and
wrong? The Scriptures would do it even now, if sincerely considered without
Pride and Worldly end; however the Son of God is to judge out of them of every
Man's Work; and were it not better to think the Truth. and follow his
Directions, to go on peaceably now we are in the way to the same place which we
all aim at and in some measure to begin that here, that is to be our Happiness
hereafter, though all ignorant Zeal and Animosity cannot be laid aside, yet
good Men in this Life should have that precious Disposition wherein their
Spirits are to be made perfect, and all those things to be done away which
render Conversation unpleasant in the World, but seeing this is not to be had,
what ever bickering there may be among fellow Subjects, which is also wished it
might be hindered as much as possible, is but as the Squabbling of Children
amongst themselves, and the Father of our Country might take his effectual care
to keep his Authority over them, and yet be safe by letting them alone with
their little Wranglings; he may be pleased to lash them into Peace and
Quietness, but if he should side with any this would turn the rest against him.
That vain Jangling, and many of those Questions in Religion now agitated
amongst us, if compared with the weightier matters of the Law, do not deserve a
better comparison then this, and for what Differences seem more material, why
may they not still remain in that Liberty God has left them? One Man's Opinion
may vary from another, as he does in Complexion and Stature, and still they are
equally Men; one may Worship God after this manner, another after that, as long
as God is Worshipped and Served he may be Glorified every way, for he has
prescribed no exact manner or form in his Word, only expressing himself against
the Sacrifice of false hypocritical and outward Devotion, when separated from
the inward and spiritual. His appointed means are allowed, that all may be
saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth: Indeed there is so little of the
very Heart and Substance of Religion in those distinguishing Characters of
Communion among us, that why may it not be also applied, that in every Sect and
Party, He that serves God and works Righteousness is accepted with him, for
to this alone do the Promises belong, without any mention of such a National
Church or Congregation, the Kings Authority is subordinate and dependant on the
Divine, he does excellently discharge his Obligation by restoring unto God the
imediate Dominion over the Souls of Men; as it is the best Policy, for every
one of what ever Condition in this present Life to be faithful unto God, so for
him who is his best among Men, in that he lays the best Foundation for the
Security and Happiness of his Government. In those Countries where Toleration
is allowed, they have none, or very rarely Rebellions or Seditions, this manner
of Policy some States have taken, for they are the most unsafe kind of
Goverments, but by this way have made it most Secure, so that the Deduction is
obvious, if what is in it self insecured be yet preserved this way, much more
would that excellent, and in it self safe. Form of Monarchy, be the more firmly
Established.

As to the last Question, Whether it stands with our Safety in refererence to
the present Conjunction and Posture of Affairs? I do not pretend to understand
the intregues and Secrets of State; but if things are so indeed, as they are
represented outwardly, if his Majesty may be believed (as my Chari^y does
incline me so to do) who has made so many Protestations, and in the most
solemn manner as can be well expressed, that he has no further Design then
what is mentioned in his Gracious Declaration, that all things shall be
continually observed as there specified, then there can be no such Danger as is
surmised, and some People are so forward to instill into the Minds of his
Subjects, fears of Popery and alteration of Government is the general
Whispering of those who have called the like in others, not many Years since,
The Vice of Faction and Sedition, by the most subtle kind of Persuasion,
(objecting to all those Folly and want of foresight who are not of the same
Mind) they mightily get them over to their Opinion, raising more terrible
Presages and Apprehensions then is ground for them. It has been observed of an
Order of Men, that going out of their Professions, and meddling with matters of
State, have done more Mischief, and caused more Disturbance to Countries, then
of all Callings or Trades besides, whether it holds true at this Day, let any
one judge; all goes under the Name of Conscience, but upon the strict scrutiny,
it will appear Pride and Interest bares the greatest sway; if these were good
Men, as all would be thought so, and it is hoped and believed many are, then
themselves are not for being Lords over Gods Heritage; they will not stand so
much for wordly Pride or Grandeur, which is contrary to their spiritual
Vocation, and they Condemn others for beyond Sea: If they believe in him whose
Ministers (they say) they are, and will take their Lot with him whose Kingdom
is not of this World, then they will not stand up so stiffly for Temporal
Jurisdiction and Command; but as it is most remarkable they should Live well
and handsomely as other Men, and as the Necessity and Merit of the Function is
beyend any whatsoever, in respect of the good it does unto Men, in Gods Name,
as some little requital thereof, let them still enjoy the already Established,
or greater Maintenance; for my part I do sincerely wish it were much better,
and more equally disposed for the encouragement of good and honest Men, and
therefore if they have all the further assurance that possibly can be given,
that they still have their Church Possessions and Rights, and so it shall be as
to Abbey Lands, which are vested in the Gentry, and other Lay Men; if all the
Care and Caution which can be thought of, as to this matter; if this be made as
sure to them as Magna Charta, and Men have of their other Estates and
Liberties; if they have all the Satisfaction and Assurance that may be any ways
proposed or found out, this would be the best Expedient to end those Fears and
Jealousies, to allay the thoughts of Heat. If that which is already the
Principal and Established Religion of this Country, be still confirmed and
ratified so to be: If all Churches and happels, or Public or Consecrated
Places be for the service of that only, and none be suffered besides to enter
into them; if to prevent Confusion and Disorder it be so provided, that one
Communion does not interfere with or molest the other; if that they keep within
themselves, and use not the least outward Violence, nothing to be permitted
beyond fair Argument and Persuasion, that all Truth may stand on equal ground
and advantage, I know not why they should be against it, who have the most on
their side, and the ablest Champions to defend it: I would in no wise be
thought to prescribe to my Superiors, but with the greatest Humility and
Submission beg leave to offer thus much, that some Expedients they may find
out, for the firm and happy Establishment of things: When reasonable Proposals
are laid before any, and not accepted, it is a sign there is somewhat further
in it then one sees, or is aware of; if there is no design but what is visible
on all hands, if the end be sincere and good, the common means of Safety are
near and obvious.

In Page 5. Line 32. Read and whither. p. 8. l. 9. r. Politions.


