GREAT And Good NEWS to the CHURCH OF ENGLAND: Being the Exact NUMBERS of
CHURCHMEN, DISSENTERS, And ROMANS, In ENGLAND And WALES;
As they were given to the Late King JAMES, on the 3d day of May, 1688. From an
Authentic Calculation; Wherein it appears, That the Churchmen are more in
Number than Romans and Dissenters 2354727, ( Viz.) Protestants 179 to One
Roman, Protestants 23 to One Dissenter, Protestants more than Both 102 to One.

Also is presented to the World the 7 Bishops SPEECH to King JAMES, and His
Answer to the said Speech. With choice Observations upon the Bishops Commitment
to the Tower; And also upon their Deliverance out of the Prison, Worthy the
Remark of all Good Christians. Provinces Protestants, Romans, Dissenters.
Canterbury, 2123362. 11878. 93153. York, 0353890. 01978. 15525. Total of Each.
-- 2477261. 13856. 108678.

Protestants 179 to One Roman: Protestants 23 to One Non-Con. Protestants more
than Both Romans and Non-cons, 2354727, which is 102 to One.

The Seven Bishops Speech to King JAMES on May 8 th, 1688. Concerning Reading
the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, in Churches.

May it please Your Majesty, We are not Averse to the Reading Your MAJESTY's
Declaration for Liberty of CONSCIENCE for want of due Tenderness toward
DISSENTERS; In relation to whom, We shall be willing to come to such a Temper,
as shall be thought fit, when the Matter shall come to be Considered and
Settled ^^ Parliament and Convocation, The Declaration, being Founded upon such
a Dispensing Power, as may at Pleasure set aside all Laws Ecclesiastical and
Civil, Appears to Us Illegal; and did so to the Parliaments in 1662, and 72:
And it is a Point of such Great Consequence, That We cannot so far make Our
selves a Party to it as the Reading of it in the Church in the Time of Divine
Service.

King JAMES's Answer. I Have heard of This before, But could not Believe it,
You look like Trumpeters of Rebellion; You aim at my Prerogative, But I will
not lose one Branch of it; Take your Course, and I will take Mine; My Commands
shall be Obeyed, Deny it at your Perils.

Note, Here follows Four most Remarkable Providence, Worthy the Consideration
of every true Son of the Church of England, which import that God Almighty of
His infinite Wisdom and Goodness has frequently given his People peculiar
Tokens to distinguish Good from Evil; more especially in disposing Matters so
Agreeable to the Lessons, Epistles, and Colects for these following Days which
have been Attended with such Extraordinary Circumstances:
That on the 30th of January, when King Charles I. of Blessed Memory, was
Murdered, the Lesson appointed by the Church to be Read on that Fatal Day, is
the 27th Chapter of St. Matthew.
WHen the morning was come, all the Chief Priests, and Elders of the people
took counsel against JESUS to put him to death:

2. And when they had bound him, they lead him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the Governor.

3. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and elders, and so on.

That it was on the 8th day of June, That the Bishops were Committed to the
Tower; immediately they went to Evening Service to the Chapel. The Second
Lesson for the Day, Appointed by the Church, is the 6th Chapter of the 11
Epistle to the Corinthians.
WE then as workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain.

2. [For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I saccoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time: behold, now
is the day of salvation.]

3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed:

4. But in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much
Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses,

5. In Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in
Fastings,

6. By Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy
Ghost, by Love unfeigned,

7. By the Word of Truth by the Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness,
on the right hand, and on the left,

8. By Honor and dishonor, by evil Report and good Report: as deceivers, and
yet true:

9. As unknown, and yet well known: as dying, and behold, we live, as chastned,
and not killed:

10. At sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making many rich: as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, etc.

That it was upon the 29th of June, St. Peter's Day, that they were Delivered;
They went immediately to White Hall Chapel, the same Morning, to Return
Thanks, Where the Epistle for the Day was Read, in the 12th Chap. of the Acts,
from Verse the 1st. to the 12th.
NOW about that time, Herod the King stretched forth his hands to vex certain
of the Church.

2. And he killed James the Brother of John with the Sword.

3. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further, to take Peter
also, [Then were the days of unlevened bread]

4. And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to
four Quaternions of Soldiers to keep him, intending after Easter to bring him
forth to the People.

5. Peter therefore was kept in Prison: but Prayer was made without ceasing of
the Church unto God for him.

6. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was
sleeping between two Soldiers, bound with two chains, and the Keepers before
the door kept the Prison.

7. And behold, the Angel of the LORD came upon him, and a light shined in the
Prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up
quickly: and his chains fell off from his hands.

8. And the Angel said unto him. Gird they self and bind on thy Sandals: and so
he did. And he said unto him, Cast thy Garment about thee, and follow me.

9. And he went out, and followed him, and wist not that it was true which was
done by the Angel: but thought he saw a Vision.

10. When they were past the first, and the second Ward, they came unto the
Iron-gate that leads unto the City, which opened to them of his own accord,
and they went out, and passed on through one street, and forthwith the Angel
departed from him.

11. And when Peter was come to himself, he said, now I know of a surety, that
the LORD has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod,
and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.

12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the
Mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together,
praying.

Observe the Colect for the foresaid Day.

When Oliver the Usurper died, which was on the 3 of September, 1658. The
Lesson appointed by the Church for that Day, is the 14th Chapter of Isaiah,
from Verse 5. to 21.
THE LORD has broken the staff of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers.

6. HE who smote the People in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the
Nations in Anger, is persecuted, and none hinders.

7. The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing.

8. Yea the sir-trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon, saying. Since
thou are laid down, no seller is come up against us.

9. Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it
stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth, it has
raised up from their Thrones all the Kings of the Nations.

10. All they shall speak, and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we?
Art thou become like unto us?

11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the
worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? How art
thou cut down to the ground, who did weaken the Nations?

13. For thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt
my Throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the Mount of the
Congregation, in the sides of the North.

14. I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most
high.

15. Yet thou shall be brought down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit.

16. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee,
saying, Is this the Man that made the Earth to tremble, that did shake Kingdoms?

17. That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the Cities thereof,
that opened not the House of his Prisoners?

18. All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in Glory, every one in
his own house.

19. But thou art cast out of thy Grave like an abominable Branch: and as the
raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to
the stones of the pit, as a Carcass trodden under feet.

20. Thou shall not be joined with them in Burial, because thou have destroyed
thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.

21. Prepare slaughter for his Children, for the Iniquity of their Fathers,
that they do not rise nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with
Cities.

portrait portrait
GOD Preserve the CHURCH of ENGLAND, May No Sword Formed against It Ever
Prosper, GOD save the KING. AMEN.
LONDON Printed by David (...) in (...)


