AN APPEAL TO ALL True Englishmen, (If there be any such left,) Or, A CRY for
BREAD.
THE Philosopher having invited some curious Wits, and perhaps no dull Palats*
to an Entertainment; when the Table was spread, and plentifully furnished with
variety of excellent Dishes, and the Guess set; instead of falling on* and
eating (as was expected) they all sat gazing on one another, no Man offering to
touch any thing: At which, the Master of the Feast amazed, looks about to see
if he could discover what should be the Reason that his Guests did not mind
their Meat, and instantly he perceived that there was no Bread on the Board. A
greater Error than perhaps some may think it; for the most delicious Viands
without Bread are not savory* or at least will not be long so. Let other
Dainties be what they will, Bread is the standing Dish: With those we may
please our Palats, but without that we cannot Live. So that the Proverb has
only done it Justice, in telling us, That Bread is the Staff of Life: And that
Country is most highly esteemed which can best secure its Inhabitants from the
want of it.

Now our own Dear Country of England has been thought to yield to none for
Fruitfulness in Corn, and consequently for fullness of Bread. Of old it, and
Sicily, were accounted the Roman Granaries; though now it is quite another
thing, and every way for the better: For considering how much the Art and
Industry of the Husbandman at this time of the day excels those of former
times, and how much the Ground is cleared from Roughs, Woods, Forests, Fens,
and such kind of unprofitable or useless Places, as anciently eat up a great
part of the Island, it may now be modestly judged to be capable of producing
Four times the Quantity of Grain which it did in Roman Times; though then it
was thought that it might vye with any other Place in the World. And I have
heard some Men, who neither wanted Parts nor Experience, strenuously argue, and
with seeming sound Reason conclude, That since the Improvement in the Northern
and Western Parts, it is impossible that there should ever be any thing like a
Famine in England, supposing Corn were not half a Crop, which rarely happens.

These Things being so plain, we might perhaps think our selves the happiest
People under the Sun, if we could fill our Bellies with Reasons; but I never
knew an hungry Stomach surfeit with Arguments: A piece of Bread and Cheese is
more worth to such a one than all the fine Talk in the World; and in spite of
all that has or can be said, we find even in this fruitful Country such a
Famine of Bread coming upon us, as is likely to pinch the Rich and starve the
Poor. And what shall we do in this Case? Shall we believe those who tell us,
that we cannot want in such a Country as this? I fear our gnawing Stomachs will
not suffe^ our Understandings to be gulled in a Matter of this Nature. What
then? Shall we lie down, and dye? Shall we, like a Parcel of Sots and Fools,
tamely sink under the Malady, and pine away the miserable Remainder of our Days
without further Care? Or shall we try, if there be any Remedy? Certainly those
Men have lost both their Wits and Senses too, who would not use their utmost
Endeavors to prevent such a general Mischief as this. Now if we will seriously,
and to any purpose, seek after a Remedy, we must first make Enquiry after the
true Cause of our want; for if we can take away that, our old Plenty will
return.

Well Countrymen! shall we send Hui and Cry after the Cause of this Mischief
and Misery? Any Man will say there is little need of that: For if it were
possible to find out so mere a Cockney as never saw a Field of Corn in his
Life; yet if you should ask him what might be the Reason of want of Bread, he
would presently tell you want of Corn; and would say, That he were a most
impudent Fellow who should affirm, that there could be any want of Bread in a
Country, which at the same time afforded plenty of Corn* And yet such a Paradox
as this I must maintain, if I will speak truth; and show you the true Reason of
your present want of Bread, which is daily like to be greater. Indeed if the
Earth had played the Stepmother, and proved unkind to us, it would then have
concerned us to have sent abroad, and furnished our selves from other Countries
which have to spa^e, as has been the Practice and Prudence of some of our
Neighbors, especially France of late, whose Policy it were better to imitate
than starve. But that is not the Case; if we might enjoy* our own, we need
trouble no Body else. For I dare boldly affirm, That for Twenty Years last
past, there has scarce been a better general Crop of Bread-Corn, than was this
Year, and the last. As for the last Year, what I say will be easily granted;
yea, I verily believe, that it produced enough to furnish us for that Year, and
this too, if an honest Use had been made of it. As for this Year, I find many
possessed with another Opinion, which I cannot but admire; for I have had
Occasion to view the Corn in several Counties: And in spite of any Dutchman
alive, will pretend to some Understanding of it; and I every where found
Bread-Corn a good Crap; nay, Wheat to the Eye seemed to outdo that of the last
Year. And though I do not think it to be really altogether so good, yet is it a
Crop not to be complained of, and under which we need know no want. And though
a Thousand New-fashion'd, Sham, Dutch Transubstantiation Arguments were brought
against this, yet they shall never persuade me out of my Senses. I will
therefore lay this down for a certain Conclusion; That the Reason of our
Scarcity is not from the Products of the Earth, or for Want of a Crop.

You will say then, what is the Reason? If you please, Countrymen, we will
first examine those Reasons that pass for current, and then see if we can find
out the true one. Some think, that it may contribute something to our Scarcity,
That in many Places they are not able to manage their Harvest, and want Hands
to get in their Corn. This, I confess, is a very deplorable Thing; and, if
true, makes the Matter much worse. For if we already want Hands to get our
Corn, by reason that those who used to assist in that Matter are gone for
Soldiers, or knocked of the Head; in a while it will be in danger to come to this
pass, That we shall want Hands to till and sow the Ground, and so we shall have
no Corn at all. But however, this cannot be the Reason of our present Scarcity:
For want of Hands may be a Reason for a more tedious Harvest, or may let Corn
receive some Damage; but this, if by chance it make it something worse, yet it
makes it nothing less: It may abate of the Pleasantness, but brings no want to
our Door. And the very same thing may be said as to unseasonable Weather in
many Places; and therefore I shall give that Objection no further answer.

But to be short, The great Cry, and generally received Opinion is, That there
has been such a general Blast, as has destroyed or spoiled the Corn; That it
is full of Choler, or black Ears; and that other Ears are light, yea often
quite Empty. And thus we are striving to make that the Hand of God, which is
the Fruits of our own Folly. It were just with him to deal thus with so wicked
a Nation; but he has not done so you* And it were the height of Ingratitude to
charge him as plaguing us with Famine, when he blesses us with Plenty. I do
not say, there is no Blast; some little Foundation there has been for this
Complaint, which has been strangely spread and improved by those who are the
real Cause of our Evils; and then being entertained by silly frightful People,
who if they hear of a Blast, verily believe all the Corn to be spoiled, it got
greater Credit. And no doubt ^^u^ it has been encouraged by the Farmer, with a
Design to advance his Market. But this I say, and I make no doubt plainly to
prove it, That the Blast is not the Cause of the present Scarcity, and Dearness
of Corn. To this end, I shall consider the utmost that in all likelihood it can
affect us. I grant, that the Blast has been very busy, especially in some
Places, as near the Seacoast, and in those Countries, which rarely change
their Seed, where there is always some Blast, more or less: Yea, considering
the backwardness of the Year, I am apt to think there may be a great deal of
small Grain, especially in chalky Land, where the Clevel is always less than in
Clay, mixed, or chiselly Earth. Yea further, suppose that the Corn were no where
altogether so bold as it was the last Year; yet, for all this, we might have
had Corn enough, and good, cheap. For though the Yeomen of Kent (whose Country
is very subject to Blast, for which particular Reasons might be given) make
great Complaint; and their Outcry, by reason of their Neighborhood, does much
affect the Citizens, yet in many Places the Blast is very inconsiderable. And I
have seen, this very Year, many and large Fields of Corn free from black Ears,
though not from some light Ears; and I never knew any crop of Corn altogether
free. This ought also to be observed, That Wheat was thicker on the Ground this
Year than the last; (which all allow to be a great Crop) and if more Straws,
consequently there must be more Ears of Corn: So that if we should suppose the
Blast to have destroyed every Third Ear of Corn (which I believe it has not
done the Tenth) there would have been a sufficient Crop to have supplied the
Lan^, without making Corn dear. And then if we reckon upon the old Stock which
remained, or ought to have remained, from the last Years Plenty, we might as
reasonably have expected to have seen Wheat sold now at 3 s. or 3 s. 6 d. a
Bushel* or (as some call it) a Strike, as in former Years.

By this time I expect some should grow Testy, and say, If this be not the
Reason* what is? For nothing can be more plain ^^an that Corn is Dear, and
continues Rising, to the endangering of many Thousands of Poor, perishing for
want. Now I could give as plain a Reason for it, if an honest Englishman might
speak with safety; for we are now under Dutch Comptrollers, and as nothing must
be done, so nothing must be said, that may be offensive to the Hogen Mogens:
However I will out with it; and if my Countrymen will not See, they may be
Blind, til they are Starved: For I can do no more for them, than to tell them
the plain Truth. and to speak all in a Word, it is a DVTCH BLAST that makes
this Scarcity, and will make it greater. Those dear Friends of ours, for whom
we have spent our Blood, and our Estates, (I am unwilling to say damned our
Souls too) that we might raise and keep them at this Height, now carry away our
Corn at that rate, That if Joseph's Granaries were among us, they would make a
Dearth, if they are suffered to go on. Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Ships going out
together from one Port of ours, laden with Corn, are not worth our taking
Notice of; but as they have drove this Trade very briskly of late, and continue
so to do, so it is not one Port alone which they Ply: But that if possible you
may be sensible, that these Horse-leeches would suck you very last drop of
Blood; I will lay a kind of Scheme before you, together with the Arts by which
our Corn is drawn from us.

Our Northern Seas, from whence we only cross to Holland, and they to us, are
now the safest of all others, by reason that no Enemy can come thither. but
either about Scotland, or by the Downs; and so will be in continual Danger of
falling into the Mouths of the English or Dutch Men of War; which makes the
Privateers and Pirates have little Kindness for that Road: So that our
Corn-carriers have a safe and quick Passage to and from all our Ports on that
Coast, even from the South-foreland to Tinmouth-haven, and further, if there be
any thing to be had for them. And this Range takes in upon our Seacoast these
Counties, Kent, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Lincoln, York and Durham: And in in
these Counties these Ports, Dover, Sandwich, Margate, Colchester, Harwich,
Yarmouth, Boston, Hull, Newcastle, and above a Hundred other Places; where they
may either put in; or with their Boats fetch off Corn to their Ships: And to
all these Ports they have already well plied, and tolerably well drained them.
But lest you should imagine that this only affects these maritine Counties, I
will demonstrate to you how, by this means, they draw the Corn from all Parts,
even out of the very Heart of the Country. For where there are navigable Rivers
Corn will most certainly run after the Price, and travel to Sea; if more be bid
for it there, than on Land. And the Farmer (let who will starve) by Hook or by
Crook, by Night or by Day, will convey it away, if the Market please him: And
so our Corn shall go as far as the River reaches, or they will carry it to it.
For Instance; Suppose the Corn Vessels come into Boston-deep, with a Design to
take in Lading at Boston, or Lynn, and other Places thereabout, here fall into
the Sea (amongst others) Three Rivers navigable a very considerable way up into
the Country: The Welland, navigable up as far as Stamford, a Town bordering
upon Three Counties, Lincoln, Northampton, and Rutland. 2. The Nine, running
through Lincolnshire, continues navigable beyond Peterborough in
Northamplonshire. And 3dly, The ^use, which cutting through Norfolk, and the
Isle of Ely, skirting Cambridgeshire, takes in the Cham, which is navigable up
to Cambridge; and then passing on to St. Ives, and Hantingdon, and so onward
into the very Bowels of the Country; in all, affects Si^ Counties; though I
cannot justly say how far navigable. Next. if you please, we will convey our
Corn Vessels to Hull, where they have been so often already, that by this time
hey may know the way themselves: This stands upon the Humber, which is a
confluence of Rivers, into which (not to name any other) runs the Trent; which
passing through part of Yorkshire continues his current through Lincolnshire,
and Nottinghamshire, and by Leicestershire, traveling through some of our best
Corn Countries into the very heart of the Kingdom, and is navigable within Six
Miles of Darby. But not to trouble you with many others, I think the Thames
ought not to be forgotten; which one way brings up the ^rain of Kent and Essex,
and the other way carries down and drains away (...) Stores of Harfordshire,
Middlesex, Surry, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire: And here, in and
about the City, our dearly beloved Darling Dutchmen are continually playing
their Do^-tricks. Sometimes they traffic for our Corn with open Face; and when
that becomes notorious, and grows distastful, then they deal underhand; and so
many Guineas are given to a Factor to buy so many Thousand Quarters of Wheat in
his own Name; or to a Brower to buy so many Thousand Quarters of Male: And this
is no sooner privately, or under a color delivered, but it is as speedily
conveyed away: For a Jugler cannot play his Tricks more nimbly, than these
Whipsters. Now from all these Parts, which I have mentioned, they have already
carried vast Quantities of Corn; so that it is not possible their Trade should
hold there long, unless they would leave us nothing at all; and then when they
are forced to go a little further a Field, along the Channel lie several
Counties fruitful in Corn; as Suffex, Hampshire, Dorset, and Devonshire: And
then, if you come about into the Channel of Bristol, the Severn will bring Corn
to you out of the very middle of England; for touching upon Herefordshire, and
running through Glocestershire, Worcestershire and Shropshire* in takes in also
the Avon, which is navigable as far as Stratford, within Six Miles of Warwick;
which, with Coventry, are styled our Vrbes Mediterraneoe. It is further to be
observed, That there is scarce any Part of England, which is good Corn Land,
but it is within Two days Journey of some navigable River: Now to fetch in that
Land which the Water of it self will not, they have this Trick; they, or their
Agents, go to the Farmer's House, and agree with him for so many Loads of Corn
to be delivered at a certain Place, perhaps Twenty or Thirty Miles distant,
where they can send it away by Water, or have easy Conveyances. Thus where the
River will not lead them to the Corn, they bring the Corn to the River; and
thus these ingenious Rogues will not leave a Mouse-hole unferretted, out of
which they will not fetch our Corn: And if they be suffered to hold on this
Trade, for any thing I know, the Rich as well as the Poor may in a short time
be glad to leap at a Crust.

Whatever the crying Sins or villainous Contrivances of Men may effect,
doubtless the Creator, who is a God of Goodness. never originally designed one
Nation to undo another. But such are the Variety of Products, and withal the
particular Necessities of particular Countries, that it should seem God
designed to oblige them to help and succor each other. If therefore the Dutch
were in want of Corn, it were good Reason that we should help them, so as not
to hurt our selves: But even then, it were no Reason that we should starve our
selves to make them abound; and they would deserve never to find help at need,
who should attempt or but desire such a Thing: Yet this, and worse, do these
infatiable Sooterkins now endeavor to bring to pass. They do not fetch away
our Corn for any Want, but with design to complete our Ruin: They are not
without Three or Four years Provisions beforehand; and when they have advanced
it to that Rate, that Thousands amongst us must Perish, because they cannot
reach the price, then perhaps they may be so Charitable as to sell us some of
our own Corn again. This, no prudent Nation under Heaven would offer to any
People, whom they did not think so altogether Insensible, that the deepest
Injuries could not move them; but in the Dutch, it is insufferable and
unpardonable as to us: For we all along supported them in their lowest
Condition; we held up their Heads, when they could not swim; we raised them to
a State, or else they had sink in their Bogs: And (...) as soon as they were
able, they flew in our Faces. Nevertheless in all Streights we still upheld
them; and at this very time* our Men fight their Battles, our Money pays their
Charges, our Fleet it unreasonably hazarded for their Safety; we suffer them to
engross our Trade; they Hector and Domineer in our Country; they buy the
Estates of our impoverished Gentry, and Dutch Pages are made English Nobles.
Nay, even the Flower of the Crown-Revenues is given to a base-born Fellow; as
if he who came young, with his Pack at his Back to the Loo, to beg a Service,
were shortly to the made Prince of Wales: And yet all this will not do, unless
they may s^^ ^p our Mouths, or (which is worse) cause us miserably to languish*
away for want of Bread, whilst our Country affords Plenty. Thus we have
nourished a Monster to devour us; and have so long, and so egregiously played
the Fool, that we are not the Pity, but the Scorn of all Nations.

I have thus, in short, laid before you the plain Reason; and true Cause of
this growing Scarcity; the Remedy is not my Province, nor in my Power, though I
could wish it were, for my Countries sake: But to quicken you to seek for a
Remedy in time, before it be too late; as I have showed you the Cause, so I
will briefly touch upon what in likelihood may be the Effects and Tendencies of
this destructive (and yet connived at) Practice. First, Our Country will be
filled with the lamentable doleful Cries of famishing Persons: Those, whose
Modesty will not suffer them to beg, nor their Consciences to steal, must the
soonest languish into their Graves; and so the best must perish first. Others,
who will not endure to want, if it can be any ways supplied, will fall to
pilfering and stealing; and so will be driven to this sad Choice, either to be
hanged or starved: And this very Thing will fill the Country with Violence, and
Peoples Hearts with Horror and Fear; when a Man cannot go to Bed, but with an
Apprehension that his House or Barns will be broke open before Morning and
perhaps their Throats cut in their Beds to Boot. Others, endeavoring to
prolong a wearisome Life, will fall to Begging: And those who are once
habituated to that Trade scarce ever leave it; so that if they chance to
survive the Famine, they will stock our Country with an idle unprofitable sort
of Cattle, good for nothing, but consume the Fruits of the Earth: And when
Things are brought to this pass, the Richest will be but in an ill Condition.
But in the next Place, pardon me if I do believe that one Design of these Dutch
Practices is, That they may sport themselves with our Miseries: For those, who
have observed their Ingratitude and insolent Humor, and have read or heard of
their unparalled Barbarities and Cruelties all over the World, must
acknowledge them to be a People who are not pleased with any thing so much, as
the Miseries of others; and then most of all, when it is by their own
Procurement. They are Proud of, and Glory in such Practices. Another Design of
theirs, I think to be, to serve their Turns of our Men, and to thin our
Country, in hopes in time to be absolute Masters of it: For when Men want both
Bread, and Money to buy it, and have little hopes of Relief by begging, and are
unwilling to be hanged for stealing, they will be very free to become Soldiers;
especially if it be but for this Privilege, That if you will not give the
Soldier Bread, he takes it: This serves the Turn for a while; but then on a
sudden they are commanded into Flanders, where they are put upon all desperate
Attempts, till their few Brains are knocked out, and there is an end of them; it
is but sending hither for more Recruits, till the Kingdom is so dispeopled,
that they may quietly enter upon, and take possession of it, without any
Disturbance. But not to trouble you any further, I cannot but think their main
Design to be, to see what they can bring us to; and whether we be already
fitted, or can be fitted, to make Dutch^ Slaves. For those who have suffered
their Men, their Money, their Trade, to be taken away; and after this, will
suffer the Bread to be taken out of their Mouths, and be content to starve
quietly; doubtless these Men will suffer any thing: And so they may, if they
please; For who shall hinder them from starving who have a mind to it? Or who
shall pity them if they do starve, who have Bread enough, and are able to keep
it, and yet tamely suffer others to carry it away from them? I think such
senseless Sots before were never heard of: But if this will hold, farewell the
Fortune of England.

If I were a Person of any considerable Interest or Authority in the
Government, I would suggest to them this one Consideration: Those, who are best
affected to the Government, will own, That some Things not very Commendable
have been done, which yet have been justified by the Pleas of Necessity, the
Inclination of the People, or public Good. Now I am sure there cannot be many
Things more necessary than the maintaining Life; and if the Peoples Inclination
should not lead them to have Bread, and to have it as cheap as may be
reasonably expected, I should think them Ten times madder than they are: And I
believe none will question, but that Plenty is more for the public Good than
Famine. So that without any Sham, or Pretenses, here is a real and plain
Necessity that our Corn be stopped, or we otherwise provided for; and over and
above, the Thing is Just, Commendable, and Popular, and withal may be easily
done; which, one would think, should invite some of our Great Seven to engage
in it. It has also been observable, in all Governments whatsoever, That want
of Bread has made the People become Mutinous, Troublesome, and sometimes very
Dangerous; so that the Provision mentioned is not only honest, but prudent and
safe. And therefore, I hope, that upon due Consideration such care will be
taken, that at least we may keep what Corn is left: But if after all no Course
be taken, and after mature Consultation it shall be thought more necessary to
starve than relieve the People, I shall leave it to others to enquire into the
Mystery; for it is such Reason of State, as I can neither understand, nor
approve; and such as I believe no mortal ever before heard of. But I know not
what heavier or more dreadful Judgment can befall us, than for Englishmen to
become their own Executioners.

Quos Deus vult perdere, dementat prius.
FINIS.

