THE Great Bastard, PROTECTOR OF THE Little One. Done out of French. And for
which a Proclamation, with a Reward of 5000 Lewedores, to discover the Author,
was Published.

Reprinted at Cologne, 1691.

THE Great Bastard, Protector of the Little One, etc.

THE Great Bastard, Protector of the Little One, etc.
WE find in Holy Writ, that, in the Jewish Law, it was expressly provided by the
supreme Legislator, That a Bastard should not enter into the Congregation of
the Lord, even to the tenth Generation: But it seems the unhappy Kingdom of
Franc allows the Bastard himself, not only to enter into the Congregation, but
to settle himself upon the Throne, and to bear it higher than all the
preceding Kings before him, with had a better Right to do it, as being the
Offspring of Kings, and not the Sons of the People, the proper Term the Roman
Law gives to Bastards. We have heard of the Salick Law, in force in that
Kingdom, for a great many Ages, by which the Crown of France cannot fall from
the Sword to the Distaff; but ill the blessed Days of our August Monarch, we
never had the Happiness to be acquainted with a Law or Custom, by which that
was in the Power of a Queen of France, to provide us an Heir to the Crown,
without the Concurrence of her Husband, and to impose upon us for our King, a
Brat of another Man's making All the Reign of our Invincible Monarch, has been
a constant Series of Wonders; but among them all, this is none of the least,
That he who was, in the Opinion of all the World, the Son of a private
Gentleman, from his Birth till the end of the Prince of Conde 's Wars, has had
the good Fortune to be ever since no less than the Son of Lewis the Thirteenth.
After this, let no Body call in question the commonly supposed Fable of the
Transmutation of Iphis from a Woman to a Man, since to be translated from a
Bastard to a Son lawfully begotten, is equally as difficult.

Among a great many other Quarrels, I have with the English Nation, this is
one, That they are a People too nice in believing Miracles; and their
Haughtiness is such, as they scorn, forsooth, to believe Impossibilities; for
albeit, they, and all the rest of the World about them, are firmly persuaded,
that the little Babble Prince of Wales was never of Queen Marys bearing, much
less of King James's begetting; yet if these Infidels had been as well mannerly
credulous as we in France have been, of the wonderful Transmutation of our
Lowis le Grand, they needed not have made all this Noise about the little
Impostor-Infant, but might have comforted themselves in the hopes, that he, who
was a Spurious Prince of Wales to Day, might some Years hence, by a new French
way of Transubstantiation, become a lawfully begotten King of England. But the
Mischief of all, is, these stiff-necked Heretics, ever since they fell off
from the Communion of the Holy Church, make bold to call in question all our
Miracles; and such a one as this would be, I am afraid they would stick at,
among others.

Good God! how happy had it been for France, yea, for a great part of the
World, that the French had been as great Infidels, upon th point of Miracles,
as the Heretic English! and that our Lowis the Fourteenth had been hurled out
of France when but Dauphin of Viennois, as the little mock Prince of Wales has
been out of England. when scarce well handled into the Light! What dismal
Tragedies has our French Impostor caused in Christendom! how many Cities laid
in Ashes, Countries ruined, Families extinguished, and millions of Lives
sacrificed to the Vanity and Ambition of a Bastard!

The Hugonots of France, of all People in the World, have most reason to be
ashamed of their Conduct, with Relation to this ungrate Monster, in the time of
his Minority, and of the Prince of Conde's Wars: And these People, who disown a
thousand things in the Catholic Religion, merely upon the account of their
being, in their Opinion, irreconcilable to Reason, did strangely contradict,
not only common Fame, but even Reason it self, in being brought to think, that
it was possible, that Lowis the Fourteenth should be the true Son of Lowis the
Thirteenth, after near half a Jubilee of Years past in Marriage betwixt him and
Ann of Austria, his Queen, without the least hope of Issue, with all the
concurring Signs of a natural Impotency upon his side. But these Gentlemen have
paid dear enough for their Opinions, and have had sufficient time and occasion
to read their past Folly, in their present Affliction, and to call to mind,
with Regret, their unaccountable Madness in assisting him to re-ascend the
Throne of France, whom almost the whole Nation, the Princes of the Blood, and
the Parliament of Paris, had combined together, to tumble down, and had
cetainly done it, if the Hugonots had not turned the Scale. These poor Hugonots
have had so many sad Occasions since to repent their Fault, that I confess it is
scarce generous to upbraid the Miserable with the Follies they cannot now
amend, and which had brought upon them so many Misfortunes. And yet I must beg
leave to tell them. That as their Zeal to Lewis the Fourteenth's unjust
Interest, was the original Cause, in my Opinion, of Heaven's thus afflicting
them by his Hands; so it was indeed the true Motive that induced this Ungrate
to ruin them. For thus it was, that he and his Jesuitick Cabal reasoned among
themselves; If the Hugonots, in the late Prince of Conde's Wars, when the Crown
was at Stake, were able to turn the Balance, and to draw Victory and Success
to the side they espoused, which at that time was ours: By the same Parity of
Reason, If the same Hugonots shall at any time hereafter be induced to join
against us, and to take our Enemies; part, they will without all doubt turn the
Scale on the other side, and prove as dangerous Enemies as formerly they were
Friends; and thence, by a Diabolical way of Reasoning, it was concluded, that
it was the true Interest of the Crown, that the Hugonots should be utterly
destroyed.

By the way, I must though contrary to my Inclination, do a piece of Justice to
Lowis the Fourteenth, in vindicating him from a common Aspersion cast upon him
by the Hugonots, and it is this: Over and above the foulest Ingratitude
imaginable, (in which Charge I heartily agree with them) he is chargeable with
a to them, they will needs load him to the boor, with no less than Perjury and
Breach of Faith, in not observing the famous Edict of Nants, which was granted
to them by King Henry the Fourth, and declared by him to be in all time coming,
an irrevocable and fundamental Constitution of the State; which Edict, say
they, Lewis the Fourteenth swore at his Coronation inviolably to observe. I
confess this is a heavy charge; but to speak no worse of the Devil than he
deserves, in my Opinion our Lewis le Grand is not chargeable upon that Scove,
as not being bound to tho Observance of that Edict, even though having sworn it:
If we shall consider, that by the express words of the Edict it self, King
Henry obliges himself and his lawful Successors only, that is, those who shall
succeed to the Crow of France in a lawful Descent of Royal Blood. Now, I think
no Man will say, That by this Clause of the Edict, an extraneous Person, such
as our Interloper Lewis the Fourteenth is, can be included; and therefore, as
having none of the Royal Blood of France in his Veins, he cannot be justly
charged with Perjury or Breach of Faith, in not observing one Edict, which was
declared and meant to oblige only the lawful Successors of King Henry the
Fourth.

Here I cannot but relate a Discourse I had once with one of the Fathers of the
Capucian Order; the very day after the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, and
which may serve to answer one Objection naturally arising from what I have said
upon this Head. All Paris was filled with the Noise of his Affair, and in every
corner, both Papist and Protestant was reasoning upon it; among the rest, the
good Capucin and I would needs turn both Statesmen and Casuists on the
Subject. We lost, betwixt us, all the Arguments we could fall upon, to
vindicate, if possible, the King's so apparently unjust Action; and in the end
we came to reason how far the King was obliged to the Observance of the Edict
of Nants, upon the account of his not being indeed the lawful Successor of
Henry the Fourth, the Granter of it. But, said I, Father, though I should agree,
that the King is not obliged by that Edict at first, for the Reason we have
named, yet his Posterior Swearing to observe it, makes him as liable to the
Observance of it, as if he were really the true Successor of Henry the Fourth,
and of the Royal Blood of France. To this the Capucin returned me a very satis
factory Answer: Sir, says he, it seems you are but little acquainted with the
Casuistick Doctrine and Principles of the Jesuits, and have not the Happiness
to be acquainted with Father le Chese, the King's Confessor, so well as I; and
therefore I Will tell you one Evasion, a Wit, like his, will soon find out to
remove all needless Scruples from the King's Mind, arising, from his Swearing
the Edict of Nants, and it is this: The words of the Oath, which the King did
take at his Coronation, was these; And seeing this Edict was declared by King
Henry the Fourth, our Grandfather of glorious Memory, to be irrevocable, and
that his lawful Successors, the succeeding Kings of France, should swear the
same at their Coronation, therefore we do hereby promise and swear faithfully
and inviolably to observe the said Edict all the days of our Lifetime. Now,
these being the very words of the King's Oath, (continues the Capucin) how
proper and easy was it for the Revered Father le Chese to tell him, Sir, you
are not at all obliged by this Oath, because it leans upon, and contains in its
very Bosom a Supposition, upon the removal of which, the whole Oath it self
does necessarily fall, viz. Your Majesty's being the Grandchild of Henry the
Fourth, which neither you your self, nor no Body else does believe: So that if
your Majesty has sworn an Oath, wherein there is an express Supposition that
you are the Grandchild of Henry the Fourth, which you are not, the Oath it
self, as leaning on that false Supposition, must necessarily fall with it, and
becomes in it self void. I hope you are wiser, (concludes the Capucin to me)
but to think that Father le Chese might use all this Freedom with his ignorant
bigoted Pupil, enslaved to his Direction, especially that he is acquainted
with all the Villainies of his Life, and in particular with his criminal
Privacies with the Dauphiness. Thus far the Capucin's Discourse and mine, and I
must say, upon Reflection, I cannot devine an Evasion which Father le Chese
could have fallen upon more plausible, to persuade his enslaved Pupil to revoke
the Edict of Nants, than this the Capucin hinted at.

But I know the Reader will tell me, What means all this puther upon a mere
Supposition, that Lowis le Grand is a Bastard, without making it appear, or
proving that he is so? I acknowledge, that of all the Tasks one ever ventured
upon, that of proving a Man to be a Bastard is the hardest; for when a Woman
designs to bring another than her Husband to her Bed, she uses not to order
such and such Persons to stand by, that they may bear Testimony of her Crime:
And though some Women may come the length of Inadvertence or Impudence, in being
too open in their Amors, yet when they have to do with a Gallant that is
concerned in Honor, and obliged by his Character to be more reserved in his
Pleasures, it is not be be imagined but she will be taught to play her part, if
not chastely, yet cautiously. All the World knows, that the Cardinals of
Richelew and Mazarin were capable of keeping their own Secrets; and yet it is to
be regrated, that their Amors with our invincible Monarch's Mother were hard
enough to be concealed, so many are the Spies about the Courts of Princes.

That Ann of Austria found a way to provide an Heir to Lowis the Thirteenth,
without putting him to the Pains of getting it himself, will appear clearly
enough, if we take a view of all the Circumstance that meet in this Affair,
which all taken together, leaves us no room to doubt of that Queens Concern for
perpetuating her Husband's Memory at any Cost.

Common Fame was ever looked upon as a great Presumption of the Truth of a
thing, especially if joined to other concurring Circumstances: and never did
that prating Goddess extend her Voice louder, than in proclaiming to the World
the Spurious Birth of our August Monarch. Time was when she did not whisper it
in Corners, but expressed it in public Pictures, Plays, Farces, and what not?
Modesty will not allow me to mention the baudy Shapes of those two sorts of
Bread, called to this day, the Queens Bread, and the Cardinal's Bread, sold
through Paris, and in most Places of France; so that at that time one could
scarce sit down to eat, but he was put in mind of the Queens and the Cardinal's
Amors. It were in vain to enumerate the thousand part of the Satyrs and
Rasquils on this Subject, for a great many Years; each Pen out-vying one
another, in the Glory of propagating to Posterity the Love-Passions of these
two mighty Cardinal Ministers of State; let this one upon Cardinal Richelew,
affixt on his Palace, serve for all: What means the ungrate French to hate
The only true Support of State?
What greater Favor could there be
Show to the King, Queen, State, all three,
That to provide, by his unwearied Care,
The King a Son, the Queen a Husband, and the State an Heir?
Impotency is not of those Imperfections a Man is most unwilling to take with,
being that which un-mans him, and renders him the Scorn of his own, and the
Abhorrence of the other Sex: It can only be proved by Presumptions; and these
are for the most part reducible, either to his Indifference for the fair Sex in
general, or for his own Wife in particular; the Weakness of his Constitution,
or his co-habiting with a Woman of a sound Body and proportioned Age for a
considerable time, without having any Issue by her. All these Presumptions, and
some more than perhaps Decency will allow me to name, will be found in Lowis
the Thirteenth, the supposed Father of our August Monarch.

I think there can be no greater Proof of a Man's Indifference for the fair Sex
in general, or his own Wife in particular, than when a Man, in the Heat of his
Youth, has a Right, by Marriage, to the Bed of a beautiful and young Princess,
has her constantly in his View, and in his Power, and yet at the same time can,
for some Years together, abstain from those Embraces which Marriage has not
only made lawful, but a Duty: And this unwonted Coldness in Youth is the more
to be jealoused, that, previous to the Marriage, the Man did express an eager
Impatience to enjoy his young Bride; for the subsequent Coldness and Abstinence
does clearly insinuate a Consciousness of his being mistaken of himself, and
that upon Trial he has found his Power not answerable to his Will.

Of all this, we have a pretty clear Instance in Lowis the Thirteenth: Upon his
being Married by Proxy to Anna of Austria, Infanta of Spain, afterward Mother
to our invincible Monarch, he expressed the greatest Eagerness to enjoy her,
and having gone the length of Bordeaux to meet her, his Desires vented
themselves in the following Letter, sent her some few days before her Arrival:
Madam,
SInce I cannot, according to my longing Desire, find my self near you at your
Entry into my Kingdom, to put you in Possession of the Power I have, and of
that entire Affection I have in my Breast to love and serve you; I send you
Luyenes, one of the most trustiest of my Servants, to Salute you in my Name,
and to tell you, that you are expected by me with the greatest Impatience, to
offer unto you MY SELF: I pray therefore receive him favorably, and believe
what he shall tell you, Madam, from your most dear Friend and Servant,

LOWIS.


The Strain of this Letter seems to be warm enough, and the word Offer of
himself, is pretty expressive, as coming from a young Bridegroom to a young and
beautiful Bride. Now, who would have dreamed but this Skirmishing by Letters
should have produced a fixed Battle at meeting? But, alas! our Youngster having
Bedded his Queen but for the space of two hours, rises up from his Nuptial-bed,
too late conscious to himself of his Unfitness for the Sports of Venus: And
albeit he was in his Queens Company every day for four Years thereafter, his
false Desires never led him once again, during all that time, to try a second
Rencounter: Yea, it was expected by every Body he should never have ventured to
Bed the Queen again, if his Favorite Luyenes had not trickt him into it the
very Night of his Sisters Marriage with the Prince of Piedmont; for Luyenes
finding the King in a good jolly Humor, and talking more wantonly than
ordinary, he grasps him out of his Bed in his Arms, and throwing a Nightgown
about him, brings him unexpectedly into the Queens Bed. It was indeed
pretended, that the Reason of this four Years Abstinence was for fear the
Marriage Bed might hinder the King's Growth, and enervate his Strength; And yet
it is hard to believe, that such a politic Consideration could prevail with a
Man that had any boiling Blood in his Veins; but every Body will be apt, at the
first dash, to draw this Consequence from it, that there was more in it of a
Winter-Chilness than usually suits with Youth.

From the beginning of the Year 1619; to 1638, King Lowis the Thirteenth
continued to Cohabit with his Queen, and often in his Melancholy Fits, to which
he was naturally subject, he would complain to his Confidents, That he knew
certainly the Queen would have no Children to him. Upon which fell out a
remarkable Passage, that serves mightily to unriddle some difficulties in this
Affair; one day at Fountainbleau, the time of his Brother Monsieur's Wars
against him, being in a sullen Fit, he began to regrate to some few about him,
his Misfortune of not having Children of his own Body, which he said was the
cause of Monsieur's Insolence against him, and of his Power with the People, as
being presumptive Heir of the Crown. Hereupon some of them began to tell him,
That for Reasons of State, it was very fit to procure a Divorce from the Queen,
and that perhaps another Wife might bring him Children to Heir the Crown of
France, and put Monsieur beside the Cushion. But Luyenes, who knew the Kings
Infirmity best, taking him aside, told him with his usual freedom, Sire, Unless
you resolve to ruin your self for good and all, let there never be the least
mention made in time coming of a Divorce from the Queen, for if any such thing
shall come to her Ears, she will be sure to lay the blame of her Barrenness
upon your Majesty, and this every Body will believe, and which will render
Monsieur's Pretensions insupportable. And indeed it was from this
Consideration, that the motion of a Divorce was ever afterward laid aside,
least the Queen should be provoked to tell out the Truth, and thereby
Monsieur's Interest elevated a pin higher than suited with the Kings safety.

There is another great presumption of ones Impotency, when a Man evinces
himself to be indifferent, not only for his own Wife, but for the whole fair
Sex in general, Lowis the Thirteenth gave ample proofs of this sort of Virtue,
if it be one, having been never seen to cast one single warm glance at any of
the Beauties of the Court and never heard to utter one Expression that could be
interpreted Amorous.

Of this indifference of his for the fair Sex, there is one pretty instance, in
an Expression he had to Monsieur his Brother, upon the occasion of his Marrying
the Duke of Lorrain's Daughter, against the King's Will; Monsieur having told
him, by way of excuse, that he chus'd rather to Marry at any rate, then to Live
in Whoredom, and one of the two he said his Constitution obliged him to.
Brother, replies the King, You and I it seems are of different tempers, for I
could Live all my Life without either of them. Here was a modest, though untimous
confession of his Indifference, if not Impotency, and indeed Monsieur was not
wanting to improve it in his Circular Letters, he wrote to his Partisans, a few
Months after, upon his retiring to Brussels.

There is another Story much of the same nature, that passed betwixt the King
and his Favorite Luyenes, about the Divorce from the Queen, when it was first
talked of: Luyenes told him, That the only way to stop the Queens Mouth in the
matter of the Divorce, was for the King to give an evidence, that her
Barrenness was not from his fault, by trying to get Children by some other
Woman; and hereupon he mentioned one of the Handsomest Ladies about Court, as a
fit Mistress for him. The King answered coldly, Mais je vous assure Luyenes, je
ne song pas a tells chooses: But I assure you, says he, Luyenes, I do not
think upon these things. And so the Discourse was dropped.

I shall only name one other instance more of the King's indifference for the
fair Sex, because it was so public, and had so much of Raillery in it: The
King being one day playing at Cards with Mademoselle Ramboulet, it happened
that the King alleged upon her, she had dropped a Card on design, saying, he
would have it, be where it will; the Lady finding she was discovered, slipped the
Card into her Breast, saying, Sir, I am assured you will not take it out here:
Which was true, for the King gave over any further search, when he see the Card
was in her Bosom.

A great many attributed this indifference of the King's for his own Lady, and
all other Women, to the weakness of his Constitution, and indeed he was of the
tenderest and sickliest imaginable, being from his Birth weak in his Limbs, and
Asthmatick to his Dying day. The Duke of Espernon rallying one day with the
King's Physician, told him, he was afraid the King might over heat himself in
the Embraces of a Young and Beautiful Queen. The Physician nodding his Head,
answered him, It must be a great heat that will thaw his Majesty's Ice.

But though Lowis the Thirteenth had been a just Admirer of his own Queen, and of
the fair Sex in general, and had neither been branded with Impotency, nor known
to be of a weakly Constitution, what a wonderful thing was it, that what a Man
could not do in the heat of his Youth, he should in the beginning of the Autumn
of his Age, and that there should be Twenty Three Years betwixt their Marriage
and the Birth of their first Child? I remember the Poets tell us, that Jupiter,
when he was to beget Hercules, was necessitated to make a Night three times
longer than the ordinary, so difficult was it even for the Father of the Gods
to beget an Hero, but our Invincible Hero, Lowis le Grand, required a longer
time to be gotten than Hercules, and Twenty Three Years was little enough time
to produce our August Monarch. What a shame was it for Cardinal Richelew to
throw away so much pains to no purpose? And how easy had it been to have made
the King a Father, and the Queen a Mother, in the twentieth part of that time,
if he had but understood the new English way of getting and bearing Children?
But it seems the Art of imposing Infant Princes was not then brought to that
perfection it has been of late, and Anna of Austria was not so good a
Proficient in the Trade as Mary of Modena. What needed the former have made
herself the talk of all France, for her Intrigues with her two Cardinals? It
had been the easiest thing in the World to make her a Mother, without the
trouble of one single throw: a close Balister about the Bed, and a convenient
Passage at the head of it, with a wary Midwife, and one or two more trusty
Confidents, might have done just as well.

But the Curse of all was, our Lowis the Thirteenth was neither to be imposed
upon in such an Affair, nor could be brought into the Design himself; his
Malice to his Brother, the next Heir, though at War with him, came not up to that
length, as to cheat him of the Throne: And though Lowis the Thirteenth had been
capable of so great a Weakness, or rather Madness, his Brother Monsieur was too
much concerned to let the Queen impose upon him, one to exclude him from the
Crown: During the Queens bigness, Monsieur had his constant Spies about her, to
watch her Motions, and to tell him every thing that past: Upon the News of the
Queens being in Labor, Monsieur was not out of the way, but hastens away to
her Bedchamber, and his Sedulity and Watchfulness was scarce allowable in
Modesty, the least Circumstance about the Mother and Child did not escape his
prying Curiosity, and the Field of Nature it self was laid open to his view;
such is the Misfortune of Princesses, when bearing Children, in prejudice of
other Men's Rights. Monsieur retiring himself to his Chamber, in a Melancholy
Mood, (as he had good reason) was asked of by Espernon, what he had seen: Alas!
says he, I am sure I saw it come out, but who the Devil put it in, I know not.

Queen Mary of Modena took a shorter cut, and a more modest Method of Lying in;
she would neither allow the Princesses concerned to search into her Bigness,
nor permit any in their Name to be present at her Labor; the poor Princess of
Denmark was hurried away to the Bath, upon the pretense of her Health, and the
Queen Dowager was not brought in till the Game was over; and who can blame a
Modest Italian to be more reserved in the Secrets of Nature than a blunt
Spaniard? How happy was it for the first, that instead of two Princesses at a
distance, she did not meet with a Blustering Duke of Orleance, to peep more
narrowly into the Scheme of her Contrivances, and render her and her Plot
ridiculous.

But to return to the Happy Birth of our Lowis le Grand, it seems all the
Endeavors of Cardinal Richelew, to provide an Heir for France, were
unsuccessful, whether hss Brain and his other parts were not of a piece, or his
pressing Cares of State, joined to some natural Impediment, were the cause of
it, I cannot tell; but it was reserved for a Person of a meaner Condition, though
of a more robust Constitution, to effectuate, what this Consummate Church Man
had attempted in vain; Monsieur le Grand, a Gentleman of a comely Person, and
sprightly Spirit, and a courtly Genius, was looked upon as the fittest Person to
make up the defects of an Impotent King, and a Wearied Favorite-Cardinal. This
Carpet Knight was admitted into the Embraces of the Queen, and by her teeming
Belly, she found, within a few Months, that she had hit upon a fit Stallion to
propagte the Royal Family of France.

It Is generally thought this Gentleman was not so much the Queens own choice,
as that of Richelew, and that this Refined Minister persuaded the Queen to
entertain Monsieur le Grand for her Gallant, out of a mere Principle of State,
as being more likely to make the Queen a Mother, than he himself was; and this
is the rather believed, that it is generally known, that immediately after the
Queen was found to be with Child, M. le Grand was dismissed the Court, upon the
Honorable pretense of being made Lieutenant Criminal of Provence, the wily
Cardinal fearing his intimacy with the Queen might prejudice him in her Favor;
and indeed after this Jobb was done, the Cardinal had no more use for him, as
the sequel made it too evident.

Pliny tells us a Story of the Wolf, That he never sees his Sire, because, says
he, he is Murdered by the rest of the Wolves, out of envy, that he was preferred
by the she Wolf before them. The same Fate had the Father of this Rapacious
Creature, Lowis the Fourteenth, for being noos'd into the Conspiracy of
Monsieur de Monmorancy, he was beheaded at Toulouse, by the Cardinal's express
Command, who was unwilling the Queen should have an abler Gallant than himself
for the future.

I cannot but regrate the Fate of this poor Gentleman, in being first brought
to the Bed of a Queen, and thereafter in having his Head chopped off, merely that
he might not tell Tales, or give any Jealousy to his Rival in the Queens
Favor; yet I judge him Happy in this, that he did not Live to see the Monster
he had begotten.

There happened a memorable passage at his Death, which was this. Being all
along, after his Condemnation, laid asleep, with an assurance of a Pardon, even
upon the Scaffold, to the end he might not discover any of his Criminal
Secrecies with the Queen; at last, being desired to lay down his Head, for the
blow, he came to understand, too late, that he was cheated out of his Life, and
just when he was beginning to express himself in these Words: O! la Vanite
d'estre aim d'une fame cruele, etc. O! the Vanity of being Loved by a Woman
cruel, and devoted to the Villainous Counsels of a Church Man. Here the Fatal Ax
did put an end to the Sentence, and to his Life together.

This end had Monsieur le Grand, Father of our August Monarch; and it is but
just his Son should bear the Name of Le Grand, not as an Epithet, but as the
Surname of his Father, Le Grand, by way of Epithet, being never his due; and
thus was Cardinal Richelew sevenged upon him, for being a fitter and abler
Gallant to the Queen than himself, though at first he was not only the Privado,
but the first Incourager of their Amors.

When I am on this Subject, I cannot but mention a Droll sert of Letter,
Written about that time by Monsieur to the Duke of Lorrain, his Brother in Law,
from Brussels, which was afterward found among the Duke of Lorrain's Papers
taken at St. Michel, which was to this purpose. Your Highness accuses me
unjustly, for not obtaining from Monsieur le Grand, when he was with me, a
Declaration of his Privacies with the Queen, which you say would have mightily
furthered my Affairs: But, Sir, though M. le Grand, at some certain times, out of
a transport of fury against the Queen, for her Unkindness, as he termed it,
would confess to me the whole Secrets past betwixt the Queen and him, yet the
very next moment he would pass from all he had said, and affirm, that what he
spoke formerly, was but in jest. One Night, when we were speaking of retiring
from Court, I brought him to promise, that he should wait on me the next
Morning, to give me an ample Declaration of what I sought of him, but he
changed his Mind that very Night, and told me the next day, that he would do it
some other time, when our Affairs were better ripened. Being astonished at this
sudden change, I found by inquiry, that the Cardinal had sent for him that very
Night, and that he was in his Privy-Chamber above an Hour together, and what
past betwixt them two, I cannot devine, but by the event. Notwithstanding of
all this, concludes Monsieur's Letter, I cannot think but this Unfortunate has
left some such Declaration in the hands of some of his Friends, which if it
could be fallen upon, would mightily conduce to the good of our Affairs, etc.

In this Letter, we see Monsieur asserts plainly, that Monsieur le Grand
confessed to him his Privacies with the Queen, and had promised in his angry
Fits, to declare them under his hand, though I must say, it was not generous on
his part, let the Queens Ingratitude to him be what it will; and it is more than
probable, that the taking vent of this Affair, hastened his Ruin. It seems
Mademoselle, who is yet alive, Daughter to Monsieur, was persuaded of the truth
of this Intrigue, and that her Father had told her how little Right Lowis the
Fourteenth had to the Crown, since a great many Years after, at the Barricado
of Paris, this Princess went in Person to the Bastile, and with her own Hand
Fired the first Gun against the King's Forces, with this Expression, I know of
no Right he has here.

If likeness be a Sign of a near Relation, never was there two Faces liker to
one another, than these of our Invincible Monarch, and M. le Grand; and I must
acknowledge the Wisdom of the Queen, in causing M. le Visme, her Painter, to
call in all the Pictures of M. le Grand that he could possibly get into his
Hands, when she found her Son betrayed his true Father by his Physiognomy; for
those who have seen both the Originals, will say, there was need of all this
caution.

Thus the Cardinal Richelew had the Honor of being a Gallant to a Queen, and
upon trial of his own want of a prolifick quality, had the goodness to provide
another better qualified than himself: Notwithstanding of this Obligation the
Nation has to him, I cannot forgive his Insolence in ordering these Words to be
Engraven in Capital Letters upon on the Pedestal of Lowis the Thirteenth's
Statue, in the Palace Royal, Cardinalis Richlieus Coadjutor suus in omnibus
suis Negotiis, The Cardinal Richlew his Helper in all his Affairs: As if it had
not been enough to have Cuckold'd his Master, without erecting him a Statue,
merely to tell the World that he did so.

As Similitude in Faces is often a Sign of a Relation in Blood, so the Likeness
of Condition is as often an Incentive to Love, and the Motive to Friendship:
Let no Body therefore blame Lowis the Great, for Patronizing the little Prince
of Wales; it is but reasonable the Great Bastard should protect the Little One,
and endeavor to set upon the English Throne just such a Creature as is already
upon the French one.

It Is just with our Great Bastard, as with the Fox in the Fable, who had the
Misfortune to lose his Tail; he would needs persuade his Neighbors to cut off
theirs, that thereby he might hide his own Infirmity. It Is certain Lowis the
Fourteenth would be content, that all the Scepters of Christendom were only
swayed by Bastards, that his own Spuriousness might be the less taken notice
of. And if it be true, that some Lawyers affirm of the old Law of Normandy,
that by it Bastards did exclude the lawfully begotten, no Body has Reason to
exclaim against Lowis le Grand his Succession to the Crown of France, since he
is a Norman by Birth, as Born at St. Germain en Lay, the hithermost Town of
that Province.

Methinks I hear the little Prince of Wales, or rather his true Parents,
exclaiming against me heavily, for calling him so often a Bastard, and thus
pleading against the Injustice of my Pen: What Devil must inspire a Man to call
one a Bastard that is really begotten in lawful Wedlock! and though he had the
good Fortune to be brought into Queen Marys Bed by a skilful Midwife, to be
there owned for her own Son, yet all this makes him not a Bastard: And pray who
would have refused to lend their Son to be the Heir of three Crowns? I confess
there is Reason in all this; and I am very inclinable to excuse both the little
Imposter and his Parents, since few would have refused such an Offer; and I
oblige my self, That if ever I happen to be in England when the Gentleman comes
to be King, I shall beg his Pardon, for giving him a Name he deserves not.

FINIS.

