TWO LETTERS WRITTEN To the AUTHOR of a PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, Solomon and
Abiathar: OR, The CASE of the Deprived Bishops and Clergy DISCUSSED.

PSALM. 50. 18. When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst with him; and
have been Partaker with Adulterers.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCII.

The First LETTER.
SIR,
ENcouraged by your Preface, I take the freedom to send you these few lines.
You acknowledge some such defects as to your self, that you cannot make a
satisfactory reply to your own Conscience; and I am sorry you should Print a
Case for the Information of others, of which you was never thoroughly satisfied
your self. That you have sufficiently consulted our Adversaries, I make no
doubt, because I find in your Book those two main things wherein their great
strength consists, Lies and Disguises. As for the first, they have plainly
imposed upon you, contrary to their own Knowledge and Conscience; and as to the
other, they have instilled into you their very Art: But had you taken Astraea's
Motto along with you (Audi alteram partem,) and as freely consulted some of my
suffering Brethren, as you have done their sly but implacable Foes, I am
confident you had set this Controversy in a much clearer light, and not
written (as you intimate you have now done) with a reluctance of Mind and
Conscience. But since you call us in to your aid, though so very late, we are
willing, as becomes Christians, to comply with your honest request; and I
scruple not in behalf of my Brethren to promise you full information, and that
the matter shall be handled mildly, closely, and fairly, all personal Quarrels
and Reflections laid aside, provided that you will procure us the privilege of
the Press in this particular. We may reasonably hope that we shall not be
denied in this; for else why do you in Print call on us for Information, and
tell us, that your design in so doing, is not only to quiet your own
Conscience, but also to provoke the Learned to offer such Discourses thereupon
to the public as may settle others; besides, it will be disingenuous and base
in Carolus Alston to license these Hue and Cries after us to vindicate our
Cause, and yet not suffer us to print a line in answer to those whom he
licenseth thus to call on us. But if after all we meet with a sham, you must
pardon me, if I plainly tell you, that I shall look on all your pretenses as an
artificial Contrivance, and an extraordinary Strain of of supersine Hypocrisy,
worthy of this more than Pharisaical Age: For what else can be the meaning of
it, but to keep us in hand, and employ us in looking after I know not whom,
whilst your Book uncontradicted slies abroad, and not only misrepresents our
Cause, but exposes us, as if we neither could nor would write in its behalf,
being so solemnly called on. And there is this more to engage you to assist our
Request to the utmost, that if there be any errors in your Book, (as I am sure
there are some very gross ones,) it will highly concern you, that Truth may
with all speed follow at the heels of it, to prevent, if possible, that
mischief which otherwise it may do, and for which at the great day of Accounts
you must in a great measure answer as uhe primary Cause and Author: But if we
must be mocked with Calls, whilst it is intended that we shall never be
suffered to return any Answer; you may justly expect, that if ever we can put
the blind upon your Watchmen, we shall not only defend our Cause, but also
expose their profound Hypocrisy, who like Joab kiss and stab, and never pretend
to be possessed with a fit of tenderness or kindness for us, but with a design
to put a Cheat upon Mankind, and push on our utter Ruin and Destruction. Sir,
Pray think of these things with due care, and let me have your Answer with
speed, and thereby you will much oblige,

Sir, Your unknown Friend and Servant, T. B.
June 28. 1692.
An ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
The foregoing Letter was sent acording to the Author 's direction and
pretended request, and therewith plain instructions how to return an Answer;
but he not vouchsafing one syllable after two months waiting, I thought fit to
send both this and the following Letter by the Press, seeing he would take no
notice of the Post.

The Second LETTER.
SIR,
YOur Preface savouring something of a Tender and Christian Spirit, made me
read your little Tract with the greater care; but when I had thoroughly perused
it, I not only sound my expectation sadly baffled, but stood amazed to see all
the Marks and Tokens of a most Wicked and Malicious Design carried on under
such plausible melting Pretenses: If therefore you are not conscious to your
self of any Insincerity, it will concern you to vindicate your self, by
publishing an Ingenuous and Fair Answer to the following Objections, wherewith
to me you seem justly chargeable.

And in the first place I cannot altogether acquit you Partiality and
Unkindness in assigning the Names of the Speakers in your Dialogue: for not to
concern my self with Mr. Easy and Mr. Troublesome, who chime so neatly under
the Greek disguise of Dyscheres and Eucheres, that which I think I except
against not without just cause, is, that you call one a Conformist, the other a
Recusant; now Conformist is in it self an honest word, and of good reputation,
and heretofore was used to signify a person who approved and complied with the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; but by it you plainly mean
the Good Old Cause Men newly come again in fashion, who have set aside God's
Commandments, and live in the open breach of them without the least remorse of
Conscience; who have not only departed from, but with all their might wickedly
set themselves against those Doctrines, which the Church of England always
valued as her Characteristical Mark, and for which she was esteemed all the
World over; who have enervated her Discipline, made wicked additions to her
Prayers, and attempted to make such alterations, as would not leave her the
same Church, if it could deserve the Name of any; and though they failed to
obtain this last by English Interest, yet they comfort themselves with no small
hopes, that e're long they shall compass it by a Sherlockian Authority Now some
few years since we were accustomed to call such Men as these Conformists; but
if by Conformists you mean persons that will comply with, or do any thing for
base ends, then I shall not envy them the Title, and I think you may have
bestowed it on them not unfitly.

Then as to the Name Recusant, you know it is most commonly applied to Papists,
in which sense it is as falsely as maliciously cast upon us; and indeed if we
either were Papists, or your Party did but so much as think us such, they would
use us better; for though the hideous Names of Popery and Papists be made use
of to affright people, and to stir up the Mob barbarously to use some persons,
whose Innocence the Malice of wicked Politicians could not otherwise reach; yet
I do not find, but that at present the persons of Papists are acceptable
enough, and in many places are not only protected, but courted and commended as
very good Subjects, if not put into places of great Trust: But then let the
word Recusant be taken in its full latitude for any sort of Dissenter, yet what
is that to us? We firmly adhere to the Liturgy, the Articles, the Canons, and
the true Authority of the Church; and I dare challenge your whole Protean Crew,
to tell us wherein we have stirred one step from our old ground, or wherein we
are changed from what we were? By what notion or figure are we called Recusants
for sticking close to that, for the departure from which others always were
styled Recusants? Pray Sir! unriddle this; for I confess it passes my
apprehension, if you are offended, that some Men cannot be induced to dote
either on old O. or young O. or O's Nephew, yet what is that to the purpose?
How comes that to be a Mark of Recusancy, which heretofore was thought to be an
evident note of the contrary? The Name is slanderously cast upon us, and an
ingenuous Man will think himself bound to make what satisfaction he can, both
for the ill Name he has unjustly given us, and for transferring (what in him
lies) our right by the Name he has given to our Adversaries.

I shall now briefly examine the Treatise it self: And though it may not be
worth my while to ransack it in every part of it; yet I do not intend to omit
any thing very considerable, and I will use my best endeavor not to mistake
your sense; and when I have made my Remarks, if you can after such pretenses
clear your sincerity, or acquit your self from being engaged with others in a
design utterly to ruin those who have suffered so much already, or can
maintain their Cause against us, I shall be willing to find my self
disappointed the best way, and not reject any reasonable Conviction.

But before I enter upon a particular Examination, I cannot forbear to lay
before you some things in general, wherein I could wish such a Master of
Language as your self had been guilty of less ingenuity, and not put tricks
upon us, whilst you make all imaginable pretenses of Tenderness and fair Play.
For,

First, The Objections on our part you rarely represent either fully or fairly,
and often deliver them clouded with such Flourishes of Rhetoric, or masked
with such Cant unproper for a Dispute, that it is not easy for the Reader to
discern wherein their main strength and force lies; and you that could say for
the contrary Cause more than it deserves, or will bear, ought at least to have
done us common Justice.

Secondly, When you come to Answer the Objections thus weakly proposed,
sometimes you plainly sham them, sometimes you dexterously steal away your
Reader, and carry him off to another thing, and sometimes you grant what is not
to be granted. Now this is not to argue our Case, but to betray our Cause; and
any indifferent person, that shall observe the whole contexture, will scarce be
able to free himself from a suspicion, that there was some such design in it.

Thirdly, You in downright terms shamelesly slander and belly our Suffering
Bishops and Clergy, and that to this very end and purpose, that you might stab
their Cause, and either furnish their Adversaries with new Objections, or give
a greater force to others, than indeed they had. And I think this so far from
being fair, that it is not honest dealing, and therefore is so very unbecoming
a person of that Sincerity and Indifferency which you pretend to; that if you
take not up some better course to secure your beloved Character, every one will
see through the thin frail Disguise, and discover the Wolf in the Sheep's
Clothing.

Fourthly, When Arguments fail you, you smartly stir up the Government against
us, and not content with the great Losses and the hard Circumstances we are
under, you move for an utter Extirpation; as if the only way to confute the
Cause, were by a Massacre of the Persons: Such a thing I have read of in
France, and Ireland; but did never think that I should have lived in such
Hellish times, as to see any English Man encourage it. I do not well know what
Men or Devils could devise more; but for a Man, who professes himself
doubtful of the Cause, who would seem so conscientious, as to prepare himself
to suffer with us; who talked of being so full of bowels of Compassion for us;
who values himself for his Sincerity and Resolution to part with all for Truth;
I say, for this Man at the same time slily to plead for the utmost Cruelty and
Barbarity that can be executed upon us, is certainly such a surprising unheard
of strain of Hypocrisy, as was never thought on, till this demure but worst of
times, wherein the Devil continually walks up and down like an Angel of Light,
and the most wicked work of Hell is done under pretense of the service of
Heaven: But that I may not seem to say these things gratis, I shall now come to
the particular Examination of your Treatise.

The Quarrel begins about Fasting and Feasting, and Dyscheres had as good have
accepted your Invitation, as to be so ill treated for the Refusal, though to me
you seem to make a very good excuse for him; That it was their Fast Day,
wherein they did solemnly humble themselves before God, to reverse his
displeasure, provoked by the deplorable Disloyalty and Schism of the Nation, in
rejecting the true King and sincere Bishops and Clergy for their bounden
Conscience and Loyalty, etc. (p. 1.) Any Man may easily perceive the malice of
this sly Insinuation. Whether any such days are observed I know not; but if
there be not, I wish there were, and the oftener the better. For to my
apprehension such are the crying sins of the Nation, that scarce any Repentance
can be deep enough, nor any Testification of it too solemn or too frequent:
But, good Sir! Why may we not humble our selves before God for the sins of the
Nation? To this you answer like the Man whom the Satyr thought not fit to trust
in his company, because he blew hot and cold with the same breath; for you are
glad and sorry at the same time; but the composition I find is not so strong,
but that your Joy presently overcomes your Sorrow, and makes it quite vanish.
You tell us, That you heartily bewail all the Evils that have happened in this
Nation on occasion of this great Revolution, (p. 1.) And I wish you say true,
you are so quickly again upon the merry pin, for you tell us immediately, That
we are obliged to sing the Songs of Sion; and you give us this reason, That the
goodness of God has not been cessant, but out of the Evils of Men has
produced a most eminent Good; and lest we should be at a loss to know what it
is, you tell us, That it is the redemption of his own (i. e. God's) People, and
faithful Children, and this endangered Church from the Inundations of Popery
and Bondage. But against this I have two small Objections, 1. That the latter
of these is notoriously false. 2. Supposing God out of a Miracle of his Mercy
to have done such a thing, yet that will not justify either you or any other
Men in your sins; and consequently all you say is no Answer to the Objection,
which you had put into Dyscheres's Mouth, That a good Christian may set a part
a time to humble himself for the crying sins of the Nation, and keep it too,
though others at the same time, like Job's Children, go to their Feasting: But
let us bring your metal to the Touchstone, and try whether your Redemption be
current Coin, or only false stuff washed over. The Complement of God's own
People and faithful Children, I suppose you intended for your Conformists, but
if you had not concealed from the World, that those faithful Chrildren were a
parcel of forsworn wretches, who had forsaken the Principles of their Church,
and the Commandments of their God; I doubt, an indifferent person would have
made it a question, whether God would own all those for his Children, whom you
lay to him? And for your own sake let me give you this advice, That before you
set up your Trade of Canonizing, you will consider what is denounced against
those, who call Evil Good and Good Evil. But pray Sir! Wherein consists this
Redemption of this endangered Church from Popery and Slavery? If by the Church
you mean those that stick to the Doctrine, Discipline, and Principles of it,
all those Clergy are driven from their Churches, and deprived of their Estates,
not so much being left to keep them from starving, as was allowed by their
sworn Enemies, the Rump and their Sequestrators; so much a Dutch Mercy exceeds
even an English Rebel's! And farther, when all others have their Liberty, they
alone are not suffered to serve God; but if they do meet together, the
Hell Hounds which are set to hunt them, seize the Persons, and then the
Auditors are plagued with Oaths, and the Minister committed to Newgate, or some
filthy Prison for high Misdemeanor, perhaps for high Treason, and then he
certainly continues in Limbo for two Terms, though he were as innocent as an
Apostle; and all to this end, that he may be utterly undone, and that ill usage
and the stink of a Gaol might poison him, whom they have not pretenses enough
otherways to murder. If this be Redemption from Bondage, I wish you had kept it
for your Friends: But to deal plainly with you, I think there was a time, when
we might have rejoiced in some such Redemption as you speak of; for whatever
designs King James had in his Head, or was put upon; it is certain, that the
resolution of the Church of England had not only baffled them all, but made him
lay aside the thoughts of them; nay things were at that pass, that he would
rely only on their Loyalty, whereby it was put into their power, not only to
have advanced the Reputation of our Church above all others, but to have given
a greater blow to the Papists, than they have hitherto received; but instead of
that a parcel of Laditudinarian Canary Birds betrayed their King and the
Church, set up a Schismatical Authority against the True, changed the laudable
Principles of the Church of England, for the worst of Tenets they could find,
either amongst the loosest Jesuits, or the rankest democratical Rebels, and
have hurled all into such a wild confusion, that every thing that can be dear
to us, is in danger, and we have now more reason to fear Popery than ever; and
I am apt to think, that if ever things come to that pass, those Religious
Weather-Cocks, who now make such a fearful outcry against it, would then be
the most forward Men to help it in: for what should hinder, when they have
already taken up several Papists Principles to defend their present practice,
and given us a plain instance that their Conscience will stretch to any thing
that will secure their Preferment. But after all, notwithstanding your great
pretense of Kindness to us, I am apt to think, that by the Church, you mean
only your own Conformists, as you call them: But, Sir! Till you can acquit them
from Schism, (which proves too hard a task for you,) you should not call them
the Church of England, of which they scarce hold any thing but the Revenues;
and have not only departed from her most signal Constitutions, but are
contriving daily to get farther from them. In the Language of the Fathers, the
Intruder into another's See is always called an Adulterer; such a one there is
cross the water, who can tell you with whom he not long since Treated, and by
whose order. Would it not make a fine Church of England to see the several
Sectaries taken in by virtue of an Act of Comprehension? Oh! But this is to
enlarge the Bounds, and preserve the Brethren. Is it so? But if a Man should
tell me, that he laid Firebrarnds together to preserve them, I should be
afraid, that it would only make them burn more fiercely, and consume more
speedily; indeed if he could do by them as Painters, who grind several Colors
together, something might come of it; but then it would be such a something as
was not before; the old Church of England it could not be: But the thing is
still worse, and there are some at this time, who are stark mad to put those
things together, whose natures will not suffer them to mingle; and you may as
well try to incorporate Oil and Water, which though you may seem to have
jumbled together for a while, yet in a short time they separate of themselves;
and thus it will be with your Sects coupled together, who can never truly
unite, unless one or both change their nature. Now what will be the effect of
these Mountebank tricks, and playing the Empericks with Religion, who can
divine? The Downfall of the Church of England (unless God intervene) any one
may easily see; but what shall follow, whether Confusion, Atheism, Popery, or
what else, is not so easy to guess. Now, Sir! If you can without dissembling
call this The Redemption of an endangered Church from Bondage and Popery, you
are either a Man of such odd intellectuals, or such infatuated Apprehensions as
nothing but this Age has produced, wherein too many have got the conquest both
of their Senses and their Reason, and in spite of all Argument will plainly
tell you, that they will or will not believe but what they list. But yet here I
must request not to be mistaken: I am not an Enemy to every Man, that is not of
my Persuasion; nor do I envy any Man the Liberty which Authority shall allow
him; but I am strangely mistaken, if it be so much as possible to imbody those
several sorts of Men into the Church: What there may be in Toleration, or how
far it may be granted, I dispute not, but leave it to my Superiors; but however
Men may delude themselves with vain fancies, I boldly affirm, that the project
of Comprehension is impracticable. Sir, Pardon this small Digression, and I
will now return to you again; and if what you say were as true as it is false,
would you make that use of it to encourage Men in their sins? If God bring
Light out of Darkness, will that justify us in our iniquities? Or does God
stand in need of our sins, as if without them he could not produce some great
good for us? Or are we therefore to rejoice in them, because God has done
great things for us nothwithstanding such Provocations? The Apostle sure was of
another mind, who tells us, That the goodness and long sufferance of God calls
us to repentance; and if God at any time continue his Mercies notwithstanding
the crying sins of a People; it is then high time for them to repent in
Sackcloath and Ashes, lest they sin away his Mercies, and convert his Patience
into Fury: And if you please to consider the matter better, it is not unlikely,
that you may judge this to be too much our Case.

I confess you suffer Dyscheres to speak some truth, when he says, That the
present State is worse than a deluge of Popery; for then the Church would have
saved her Integrity, though not her Ease; now the Daughter of Sion is become an
Harlot, the generality of her Children apostate and unchurched, and the Faith
and Communion with the few, etc. (p. 22.) But when you your self had made him
speak thus, and nothing but truth, you presently sham it off, stiling it a
wildfire Zeal, and fit of Fury. And thus you may easily answer any thing by
giving it ill names; but then your Submission to the present Constitution you
think to be so far from effecting this, that you now question, whether it can
be proved a sin? And truly if the breaking a lawful Oath, and taking an
unlawful one; if the witholding the Right from one, and the giving of that
which is none of their own to another; if the overthrowing the Constitution of
the Kingdom, and violating the Laws of God be no sin, you have made an
excellent discovery, and done a lewd Age a great kindness, who need nothing
more, than that there could be no sin at all; and at this rate it will be a
hard matter to find any: But then you farther say, that if you should admit it
to be a sin, yea a crying sin, yet it does not unchurch you: But, Sir! If it be
a sin, and a crying sin, I think it calls for your repentance, and you ought
not to persevere in it, as you plainly do. But however you say, That it is not
every such sin that does unchurch single persons, or public Societies; nor did
I ever know any body that said so: But here the word unchurch is unusually and
capriciously put; for the word Church is an equivocal term, and variously used;
for we often speak of Schismatical Churches, and you may have heard of the
Synagogue of Satan, of which if any Man have a mind to be a Member, I do not
desire to be one of his Society. And after all, though every sin do not
unchurch, yet there are such sins as exclude Men out of the true Church, and
put them into such a state, that sincere Christians ought not to join in
Communion with them; and if you please to take the pains, you will find it to
be the unanimous Judgment of the Fathers and Primitive Christians, that the
setting up Antibishops, the erecting Altar against Altar, and the adhering to
the Usurpers and Intruders, against those who had the true Canonical Authority,
did put Men into a state of Schism, and make it unlawful for other Christians
to join in Communion with them. St. Cyprian says of every such Bishop, that he
is not secundus, but nullus; nay, they accounted not only these persons, but
all that joined with them, as Schismatics, and cut off from the Church, as is
plain from the Case of Marcian of Arles, who joined with Novatian. And this is
the very Case, and your very sin; wash your hands of it, if you can; though if
it were necessary, I could farther prove what you seem to require, That the
Principles of Doctrine and Opinion, whence these sins receive encouragement,
are such as destory the Church's Fundamentals and Structure, if such Principles
which destroy all Morals, and all Faith and Truth amongst Men, can be said to
do it. You would do well to explain what you mean, when you say, That an
Authentic Act must pass in order to a state of actual Expulsion: For Men may
exclude themselves, as well as be excluded by others; and may depart and run
away from a Church, as well as be thrown out of it; and their act shall be too
Authentic, if by it you mean valid. Your instance of the Roman Church is
insignificant; for you know we do not communicate with it: But that of the
Eastern Churches is still less to the purpose; for I am not satisfied that
either they have condemned us, or we them as Schismatics; I am sure Dr. Baster
tells us, That some of the Greek Clergy desired him not only to communicate,
but to exercise his Ministry among them, nor did he refuse it; nor have I heard
any others make any great complaint of their unkindness in this matter.

In the next place, when you should introduce Dyscheres to defend us, you make
him state the matter so weakly, as to betray our Cause: For why should he
admit, that you are not unchurched (it is the word you will use) for want of an
Ecclesiastical Judge? (p. 2) I do not know that we want an Ecclesiastical
Judge; our Metropolitan, with his Suffragans, are a sufficient and proper
Judge; and if they have not lata Sententia, (which there may be great reason to
forbear,) yet in praxi their Judgments are sufficiently declared; and not to
mention other of your Bishops, even that graceful Hypocrite who is mounted into
his place, by his Canonical Oath owes obedience to him whom he has so
unworthily betrayed. But suppose we should want a Judge to your mind, yet you
may be actually excluded; and in case of erecting Altar against Altar, the
Canons ipso facto exclude you, and they make not only the Clergy, but every
Christian in this case to be so far a Judge, as to avoid all Communion with
such; and that this is your Case you have been told again and again; but you
are much like some Men, who are or pretend to be thick of hearing, who can
understand any thing that makes for them, before the words are well out of a
Man's Mouth; but if any thing unprofitable or pinching be spoken, they are as
deaf as a Beetle. But farther, it is not fair to make the true cause of the
Breach to be only danger; for it is not mere danger for which we break either
with you or Rome; it is not because there is danger in the Communion (for that
possibly might be avoided) but because the sin is unavoidable in it. And still
it is less ingenuous to call it a Secession on our part, for we are the very
same persons we were; we stick to the same Principles, we own the same
Ecclesiastical Authority; but you have forsaken both, and I think such make the
Secession. Nor can I imagine why you, who have renounced both the Doctrines and
Authority of the Church of England, should charge us with a Secession, unless
it be, that you have driven us from our Churches, and robbed us of our
Livelihoods: But in this case we have the most Eminent Fathers of God's Church
for our Precedents, who never thought their Cause the worse, because others
were more than ordinary unmercifull and maliciously bent against them.

When you had thus unfairly stated the case, you bring in your Champion
Eucheres making such an answer, as is enough to pull off the Visor, and lay
open all your Hypocrisy. For (says he) Though our Church (and I desire to
know what Church that is) justly and absolutely rejects the Roman Monarchy, yet
she will not refuse any lawful Communion or Correspondence with it, in any
good Ecclesiastwal Negotiations consistent with Integrity, saving still a
public remonstrance to all her Pollutions, (p. 3.) What can be the meaning of
this, but that your Church is ready and willing to join in Communion with the
Church of Rome, as many of your Brethren take the Oaths, i. e. with a
Declaration? Sir! Though this may be a kind of surprise to some of your
squeamish Disciples; yet I tell you plainly, that though you endeavor to
entangle and make intricate the sense with superfluous words, this and no other
can be your meaning; for your Argument and Parallel is insignificant and
senseless, if this be not your purpose: For thus it follows, so you should
communicate with us in all that is lawful. Now it is an actual Communion in
all public Worship and Offices, which you require from us; and the reason you
give why we should pay it, is in the words before cited, the sense of which
must be, that your Church is ready with a Remonstrance to afford the same
Communion to the Church of Rome, and therefore we ought not to deny it to you,
who take your selves to be a Church much less liable to exceptions. If
therefore your Argument be of any force, you must mean, that your Church is
ready to afford the same Communion which you require of us, and that is actual
Communion in public Worship. Now I desire all sincere Christians to take
notice of this; here are a parcel of Men, who for their Preaching, and Praying,
and seeming Zeal, and Mortification, have been idolized by many good People,
who have bellowed against Popery, till they have frighted People out of their
wits, till they had prepared them to rob any Man's House, or cut his Throat,
whom they gave out to be a Papist or Popishly affected; nay, till they had
persuaded them to drive away the lawful King for being a Papist, and yet here
in effect they tell you, that all this was trick, an Art to lead People by the
Nose, and mere damned Hypocrisy. For Popery is no such dreadful thing to
them, but that with an insignificant Remonstrance they can go to Mass, and are
as willing to do it, as they are desirous we should come to Prayers with them;
nay, it is their Argument to persuade us, that we may and ought to communicate
with them, because they think it lawful to communicate with the Roman, i. e.
as they think a more polluted Church; and this is laid down not as the single
Opinion of the Author, but as the sense of their Church. Good People! these are
your Zealous against Popery. Pray who betrays the Reformation now? If we should
be in danger of Popery, do not you think these your Idols would stand like
Bullwarks and Mountains against it, who you see declare, even when they have no
temptation, that they are now ready to meet it more than half way; It is an
unlucky thing, Sir, that you should make this discovery, not only for your
self, but in the Name of your Church; it is enough to take off the confidence
the Saints have had in you, and to make all persons who are not resolved to
blind themselves, that they may be deluded, to look on you as a parcel of deep
and demure, yet fulsome and pernicious Hypocrites. What you add, That if you do
amiss, it is through simplicity and want of understanding, which we might
easilier heal by accommodation, etc. is such a condescending strain of
Dissimulation, that I am afraid you are unwilling to be taken at your word; for
if another should tell you, which is the same thing, that you are a parcel of
silly weak fellows, who are not to be trusted with the management of Affairs,
but ought to be governed by wiser Heads, I am confident you would spit in his
Face, if you did not incense the enraged Mob to knock out his Brains: But
though this be a particular fetch to make easy People believe you to be a sort
of most humble mortified Men, yet some Men's actions have long since convinced
me, that they had rather be real Knaves, than so much as mistaken for Fools;
and it is clear as noon day, that those persons, who (you say) want
Understanding, have for many years either palm'd, curbed and kept under, or
deluded and abused, and now at last have undone all that would not submit to
their Understandings, and trukle under them; and indeed all the Knavery of the
Rump and Oliverian days, is mere indigested stuff compared with those most
Artificial Cheats, which some of your Masters of Hypocrisy, those humble
simple Creatures, (as you would persuade us,) have shown in our days. When you
please to call on me, and procure me liberty to answer, I will give you
instances.

But when Dyscheres had reliped to your desires of Accommodation, that there
was now no more hope, because you have broken the essential bonds of
Ecclesiastical Communion, and begun the Schism in admitting Intruders, etc*
Your Friend Eucheres makes answer by way of concession, that if their (i e. our
Bishops and Clergy) ejection was only for adhering to the Doctrines of this
Church, or to the Laws of God, then they are persecuted by the Church as well
as the State. (p. 3.) But, Sir! What if neither the Laws of God, nor the Church
had been concerned, and they had had only occasion to stand the Laws and
Constitutions of the Land, which under no pretense whatsoever allows the
Subject to use any force against the lawful Sovereign, much less to Depose
him; and in case he die or relinquinish, yet suffer no injury to be to the next
Heir, but proclaim him to be, without the help of any Ceremony or Formality,
immediately King, in the very first moment of the vacancy, as admitting no
Interregnum? I think this had been no ill cause. But then farther, suppose none
of these consented, and that the matter only was coram non judice, and they
were ejected by those who had nothing to do with them; with your leave, Sir, I
do not think my self bound to ratify the iniqulty of such proceedings: But
since you have assumed the Authority to assign what Causes you please, I will
stick to those you have named, i. e. The adhering to the Doctrines of the
Church, and the Laws of God. And what then, Sir? Why then you say, this will
require a very clear proof. But pray, Sir! Who are they that ought to bring
this clear proof? I have heard some say, that it is an Axiom in Law, That they
who expect the benefit, ought to make the proof. Now you get all into your
hands, and would you give no reason for it? The Meridian Sun is not more clear,
than that King James possessed His Crown by an undoubted Right; and the ejected
Clergy held their Sees and other Charges by an unquestionable Title, whether
you have respect to the Laws of the Church or the Land; when therefore you
dispossess them of such manifest acknowledged Right, you ought to bring, if
possible, more clear and demonstrable proofs for your proceedings; otherwise
all reasonable Men ought to condemn you for your bold and barbarous injustice;
so that this clear proof you call for, ought to be on your side. If a Thief rob
me of my Goods, it were very unreasonable to leave me no other remedy, than the
producing such reasons to him, as should prevail with him to restore them
again: For perhaps he would not hear me; or if he did, it would be but to mock
me; for though my proofs were never so clear, yet it is ten thousand to one,
that he would never own them to be so; yet much at this rate you deal with us,
and which is worse, you make our Plea for us, and suffer us not to speak but as
you please: But since it must be so, I Will follow you in the course you take,
though a very unreasonable task.

You seem to grant, That our Church teaches us to preserve an untainted
Loyalty to our Lawful Sovereigns, which with us come in by Inheritance; and
that accordingly our Oath of Allegiance binds us to the King, his Heirs, and
Lawful Successors. And you might have told us several other things, which this
Church teaches us, viz. Canonical Obedience to our Spiritual Fathers; the
indispensable Duty of Children to Parents, whenever they command it, or their
condition requires it; the not running with a multitude to do evil, nor the
encouraging other Men in their wickedness: In short, whatever the sacred word
of God, or the reverend Constitutions of his Church requires from us. But to
omit these things, which are so apt to gather the Tares of Schismatics and
Rebels, I shall examine what you say to your own Proposals. An untainted Loyalty
you approve, while the Obligation lasts; and we desire no more: But then you
think this Obligation may cease, not only by Death, or Resignation, but also by
Cession; nor do I think it worth while to dispute this with you, provided it be
real, not forced, nor falsely imputed: For so any Man that is driven out of his
House, or takes a journey from home, may be interpreted to have quitted his
Estate by Cession: But when Cession is real (which is very rare) it can effect
only the Party who makes it, and ought to be no injury to the next Heir, and in
our particular case our Constitutions will not suffer it. But after all, the
main assertion is such an impudent falsehood, as nothing but a person bewitched
with Rebellion would offer: For has that person made a Cession, who though, to
perserve his life, he fly from Fraud and irresistible Force, yet all the while
claims his Right, calls on all persons to do him justice, and uses all honest
means that may be to recover his Right? At this rate every Man would have made
a Cession who suffers wrong, though he bestir himself all he can to do himself
Right: But, say you, This was such a Cession, as the States in Convention
judged a virtual Abdication of the Sovereignty; and of this, you add, they were
the most Competent, Authentic, and Final Judges; and this, you tell us, we are
to submit to, because the Kingdom has ratified those proceedings in a second
Parliament. Now not to complain of unrighteous Judgment, though there was never
more cause; the Answer I shall return is, That they were neither Competent,
Authentic, nor Final Judges. Competent they could not be, who for the
prevailing part of them were either actually in the Conspiracy against him, or
joined with the Conspirators, and refused so much as to read his Letters, or
hear any Message from him: Nor could they be Authentic Judges, who had no Law
to authorize either them or their Proceedings; nor did I ever hear, that the
natural Subjects of a Sovereign Monarch could be his Authentic Judges, unless
from President Bradshaw, the Regicides and their Adherents: And if upon this
score you will have the proceedings valid against the Son, you must also
justisie the barbarous Murder of the Father. And then they could not be sinal
Judges; because being neither Competent, nor Authentic Judges, they were no
proper Judges at all. Nor does it all help the matter, that you call these your
Judges, the Estates; and farther to countenance the matter, place them in
Convention: For how are they Estates, but with respect to the King and
Constitution? Which if they overthrow, pray what becomes of their Estateships?
It is the King made them such, and they are so with Subordination to him; nor
is their Convention any thing without him; they cannot convene without his
Writ. You might have remembered, that your Oracle Dr. B -- tells you, that
single defect makes an essential Nullity: if they do convene, they can only act
by and under the King's Authority; and when they are come to a resolution, and
have concluded upon any thing, still all sinks again into nothing, unless it be
ratified with the Royal Assent. Thus without the King your Estates are
insignificant, but against him our Law condemns them as Rebels, and those of
all others are the most unfit persons to make the only Competent, Authentic,
and Final Judges of the most Fundamental part of our Constitutions. Did ever
Men make them Judges of the Law, who are condemned by the Law? This is to pull
the Judge from the Bench, and set up the Offender from the Bar. Nor will it
afford you any relief, that these proceedings were ratified by a second
Parliament, which had never a first. For as for your Transubstantiating
Convention, which would have persuaded us, that by a certain Hocus Pocus trick
they were Metamorphis'd into a Parliament; you see plainly, that they were no
better than a Riotous Assembly, whose transactions were in themselves null and
void, as being contrary to Law, and censurable by Law; And therefore your
second-first-no Parliament, which your Riotous Convention laid, could have no
more Authority than that was able to give; and that was none at all; for nil
dat quod non habet, nor can the Effect be greater than the Cause. What
signifies their Ratification who had no Authority, but from those whom they
ratisie, and those whom they ratify had none to give? Your Second therefore,
Sir, is as good as your First, and both good for nothing at all; and if you
should go and put ten thousand nothings together, still all will amount to just
nothing. But to secure this your weak, or rather wicked Plea against a just
Objection, obvious to every Eye, you add, That though King JAMES abroad
condemns them, yet that is no argument either that they were unjust or
inauthoritative. No! But pray Sir why not? Can you thus easily puff away the
Right of Kings with a breath; Is your bare assertion without reason sufficient
to overthrow him? Was he not their King? Were they not his Subjects? Did he
complain of any thing but wrong done him? Did he demand any thing but his own?
Might not he call upon his Subjects, in whose power it was, and whose duty it
was, to restore him? Can such a modest, moderate, tenderhearted Man as your
self, thus slight and insult over a distressed Prince? Or, when all other Men
are allowed to keep, or claim, or recover their right, was he, poor Man, alone
born odd, that whatever he does or says must signify nothing? This is cold
comfort for a banished Prince; but I hope others will not prove so hard hearted
to him. But you proceed thus, When a King is fled from his Throne into Foreign
Dominions, or does not exert any Royal Power or Presence to his People, the
Estates of this Land are the Supreme Domestic Judges upon the Tenure of the
Sovereignty. At this rate it will be good for Kings to keep exerting their
Power; for if they should but chance to sleep, or fall so sick as for a time to
incapacitate them for business, the Estates, if they please, may alter the
Tenure, or dispose of it to another. But, pray Sir, Answer me two Questions:
First, Who made your Estates Judges? Secondly, Whether I am bound to follow
their Judgment, against manifest right and my known duty? But after all, this
is a most malicious insinuation against your suffering King, as if he ran away
through wantonness, and would have nothing to do with us, but had quite
forsaken his People; whenas you very well know, that he exerts all the Power he
can; that he does not more is not his fault, but yours: You may have both his
Power and his Presence too among you, if you please; But will you, contrary to
your Duty and Oaths, keep him out by force of Arms, and then plead your own
wickedness in your defense? I did hope for more Ingenuity from such a Pretender
to Modesty: But you will not allow us to deny the Authority by which they (i e.
your Estates) sat; for by what Authority (say you) was that Free Parliament
called, or sat, that voted in King Charles the Second? Sir, if you please, let
another be called, and Vote in King JAMES the Second; when things are out of
order, and Good Men set them to rights again, I do not think any honest Man
will oppose it upon the score of some small niceties; but when Subjects rebel
against their Prince, and drive him away, and make that the ground of their
going on, and doing farther wickedness, I cannot understand the Authority of
this There is certainly in every Man an innate natural Power and Authority to
wish well to and vote for Right; by virtue of this, when things were in
confusion, the Subjects of King Charles the Second, returning to their Wits and
Allegiance, send a convenient number to act for the whole, who recall their
rightful King; and if you should do so likewise, I should not be very quarre
some with you; but whatever Name they might give it, to put a better gloss upon
the thing, they were no Parliament, till King Charles made them so; for he,
their lawful King, by an Act in a legal Parliament, might stamp on them that
Character, and give then that Authority and Force, which they had not before;
and thus several of their Acts might become Laws, by virtue of that
after-ratisication, not by any force of their own; but as for calling back the
King, that was not making any new Law, but enforcing the old; and was not so
much an Act of Authority, as Obedience and Duty; and if you could find out the
same way, you would be the best Friends both to your Country and your selves.
You tell us, That it is prodigious peevishness to require a King's Presence, or
Commission, when he is gone, and has left all in Anarchy. I hope, Sir, you do
not think, that I require a King to be present, when he is absent; and then,
with your good leave, I think it no such peevishness to act by his Commission
in his absence; but that it is rather a thing, which (if it can be had) ought
to be done, and in all regular times was done: Richard the First was engaged in
the Holy War, when his Father died; so that he was far enough from his Throne,
and unable to exert any Royal Power or Presence to his People; and to make the
matter worse, in his return he was taken prisoner, and detained, in Germany: In
this case, had you been one of the Estates, you would have been for setting up
another King, that would exert his Royal Power or Presence to his People; but
they had another sense of their duty; they mourned under the common Calamity,
caused all proceedings to pass under his Name and Authority, and stretched
their purses to the purpose to redeem him, and bring him home: But you drive
your King from home, when you have him; and when he would return to exert his
Royal Power and Presence, you will not suffer it; but keep him out with your
Swords in your Hands; and these rebellious Actions you make Precedents to
warrant all the Mischief you have, or would do; and after all you would
persuade us, that you are a parcel of guiltless, humble, modest, conscientious
Creatures: Clamat Melicerta periisse frontem de rebus. At last to help a lame
dog over a style, you say, The Estates of any Nation, being invited by a
victorious and unresisted Power, may come together and treat with him that thus
calls them, though he has not antecedent Authority (strictly taken) to call
them. Here is a pretty fetch in the word unresisted Power; for irresistible he
knew it was not; and if it was unresisted, whose fault was that? May they
refuse to resist an invading power, when they are able? And may they make that
disobedience the reason of their compliance with him, and casting off their own
Sovereign? But if, without daubing, you had put the case as it was, it ought to
run thus: The Estates of any Nation, or the Natural Subjects of any Sovereign
Prince, may combine with, and invite in a Foreign Prince; and when he comes,
though with a contemptible force, they may forsake their lawful Prince; and
then by their treachery, having left him helpless and hopeless, may treat with
the Foreigner, drive away their own King, give his Crown to the Foreigner, and
maintain it with their Swords and Purses, without which he could not keep his
ill-gotten Goods: But I suppose it was your modesty, which made you disguise
this true proposal of the matter; because so plainly set down, it would not
well bear the light. That the Church's Loyalty, as to the Object, is to be
guided by the true constitution of the State, I deny not; but I shall never
yield, what you would thence slurr upon us, That it is to follow every Civil
Judgment; much less the uncivil Judgment of any Set of Conspirators and
Traitors, into whose Hands you so liberally and piously dispose it.

When you had thus loosely argued, you introduce Dyscheres in our behalf,
yielding to your Plea; (p. 4.) but you see it is one thing for a Man to speak
for himself, and another thing for another to speak for him; for you may
perceive, that I am not of the same mind, for which I have given you some
Reasons, which I hope you will answer, or not for the future conclude that we
have yielded the Cause: It was more than belonged to you to take upon you to
plead our Cause; but to give it away and betray it, is too much; but to do it
in such a manner, that it might seem done by our selves, and that all persons
might believe we had given up the Cause, looks like a designed piece of
knavery. But, Sir, if you had no power to bestow, what you have so prodigally
given away, and the Reasons I have produced against it be valid, then you ought
to remember, that all your following discourse is insignificant and vain, as
being built upon a false Foundation: But let that pass, and let us see what you
will allow to be said in our case; and it is this, How could they (i. e. your
Estates) pervert the hereditary law and rule of Succession, that is fundamental
to this Crown? To this you Answer, That the general and ordinary rule of
Succession to this Crown is hereditary, but in extraordinary Interruptions and
Convulsions of State against the ordinary course, our Laws and Constitutions do
allow the Estates such a King as can be actually had for the time being, till
the ordinary rule can be fairly recovered. Now if a Man were to speak this in
plain English, it would be thus: By our Laws and Constitutions the Crown is
Hereditary; but if any Usurper or Traitor will not suffer it to be so, but puts
by the right Heir, and gets possession himself, the Laws and Constitutions
allow him to be King; yes marry, and a Lawful King too; i. e. the Crown goes in
a Lineal Succession, whilst People are peaceable and obedient; but if they be
troublesome and rebellious, then it is catch as catch can, and he had Right and
Law of his side who gets possession, and so will another, and another, without
end, who can successively wrest the possession from those who had the right
whilst they could keep possession. Did ever any Body hear of such a
Constitution as this? Or, was ever any thing better fitted to produce Eternal
Confusions? Certainly you have a mind to persuade us, that our Constitutions
were made by the Wise men of Goatham, or the Wiser men of Bedlam. Sir! I have
looked with both my Eyes, and cannot see how Happy we are (as you tell us) in
this; and I am afraid you have been cheated with false Spectacles; but at last
you are willing to qualify the matter, and to suffer this only, till the
ordinary rule can be fairly recovered. If this be so, pray why is it not
recovered? Sure you will not plead that in Justification of a People, which is
notoriously their Fault, and such a Fault as is in their power to mend when
they please; let them but unanimously (as they ought) return to their Duty and
Loyalty, and the thing will do it self fairly enough, and without any great
pains, trouble, or danger; but you presently relapse, and become a zealous
Advocate for your Extraordinary Kings, in whose behalf you plead Acts of
Parliament made by extra-lineal Kings, which were confirmed (submitted to, you
subtily phrase it) by the Lineal Heirs, and these were approved by Lawyers, nor
did the Church ever remonstrate against them. And what of all this? Let the
Usurpation, or Confusions, be what they will, still Men will eat and drink, buy
and sell, and such like acts; nor do I think that such a State does acquit Men
from the obligation to do (what in them lies) such things as seem absolutely
necessary for the preservation of the Society and the real Good of Mankind, and
if any such things as are necessary for the management of Humane Affairs, and
which are accompanied with common Justice in themselves, should be now done or
enacted, and hereafter confirmed by King JAMES, I know no reason to remonstrate
against this; but I think the need of such a confirmation, is a demonstration
where the Right and Authority lies, which is an odd way of proving the right of
your extralineal Kings. But, pray Sir, upon such extraordinary Interruptions,
did all Men ever thnik themselves bound to approve them? Did they not still, as
opportunity served, assist Right? Did not such proceedings cost a world of
Blood and Treasure, to none, or rather very ill purpose, whilst no peace or
ease could be had, till things were brought to rights again? When matters are
in trouble or confusion, wise and good Men think it the best way to put an end
to them as soon as may be; but you cast out that Right, which only can restore
our Peace; and when you have conjured up most horrid Confusions, plead for
their continuance; I know not what could be done more by an Advocate of the
Prince of Darkness. As for what you say concerning Bishop Overall's
Convocation-Book, I am sorry that a pretender to so much modesty should be
guilty of such an impudent assertion, when that matter has been so fully
cleared by so many learned and judicious Pens. At last you very gravely give us
your Opinion, That in the late Oath of Allegiance, the word Successors was
added, after Heirs, on this very self-same ground; That though Heirs, by the
ordinary course, are the Legal Successors, yet others legally may succeed in
cases extraordinary. This it is for Men to give their Opinions without-book,
and without any other consideration, than to pervert the State of the case. Had
you given your self the small trouble to read over the Oath, you could not for
shame have put this interpretation upon it; for the express words of it are
Lawful Successors, which follow the word Heirs, by way of limitation or
restraint, to show that none shall succeed but the Legal Heir. And thus, Sir,
the Words of the Oath, instead of admitting, plainly and peremptorily exclude
your extraordinary Successors, and extra lineal Kings: Thus your new invention
has added a fresh absurdity, instead of being a remedy, to those many others
which your Party run into upon discourses of this matter; and though you mince
the matter, yet you might as well have been so bold to say, The Oath requires
Allegiance to unlawful Successors, as what you have said; for whilst there is
One in Being, and claiming, to whom the right really belongs, What can your
extraordinary Successors be, but Tyrants, Usurpers, such as rob others of their
right, and live by injustice and rapine? To tell Men, that they ought to assist
a Tyrant against their Lawful Prince, and to preach up the Obligation of
Obedience and Allegiance to a known Usurper, would look like very odd Doctrine;
but do not call them by those buggish Names of Tyrants and Usurpers, only say
they are extraordinary Successors, or extralineal Kings, and then you may say
all this and more, and be thought a zealous Saint for it too: Is not this a
very pretty trick to catch Dotterils, and gull poor People out of all Truth and
Honesty with new-coyn'd Phrases?

You might have suffered Dyscheres to say as much as all this; but instead of
that you only put this faint Question in his mouth, which being neither clear
nor full, may be liable to various Exceptions: Can he be legal that thrusts out
the legal King, or legal Successor? (p 5.) I doubt not but you will strain a
point to make him so; and indeed in your way of arguing I do not understand how
any King, or any thing called a King, can want a good Title, who has actual
Possession; but let us see your fine Art of proving Right Wrong, and Wrong
Right: Your Discourse of Kings thrusting out Kings is a direct thrusting out
right, and an encouraging and justifying ambitious Persons in embroiling the
World in perpetual Wars and Confusions: But I shall not expose it as it
deserves, because it is nothing to the case of a plain known right and no
right; and if you would make a fair Answer here, you ought to give a direct
Answer to this Question: If a Person really having no right, does disclaim any
right to a thing, and by public Declarations does profess, that he makes no
Pretensions to it, nor has any design to disturb another in his right; I say,
if this person nevertheless shall by ill arts seize it, Does this,
notwithstanding all his Protestations and Declarations to the contrary, even
against all right and reason, create him a right whether he will or no? If fo,
then I find right will be always on the strongest and cunningest side; and so
generally will be fitter for Knaves than honest Men. Your Instance in the
Houses of York and Lancaster come not up to so plain a Case as this: Where
things are obscure and dark, (as that Title was, and perhaps still is to most
men,) great allowances are to be made; Lancaster had the more obvious, York the
better Title; though of late the learned Dr. St -- by a modest bastardizing the
only Daughter of that heroic Prince, Lionel Duke of Clarence, so many Ages
after her death, has rendered the rights of those two Houses more intricate than
ever, which if he had done in the days of Henry VIII. (who laid so fast hold on
his Mothers Title, derived from that traduced Lady, that it is thought the
Apprehensions of it hastened his Father's End,) that resenting Prince in all
likelihood would have preferred him to some thing else than a Bishopric. But
what means this preaching up Confusion? The Nation then weltered in Blood and
Gore, till an undoubted Title put an end to that Quarrel: But you would have us
obstinately maintain a bad Title, that our Miseries might have no end; a rare
Example of Justice and Love to your Country! As for the Cession you mention,
you would do well to prove it a little better, before you thus run away with it
for granted; you know we deny it, and have given our Reasons for it, to which I
know no Answer returned, unless it be Gaols, Fines, and Pillories, and
Threatenings to help it with Hemp. But you say, the hereditary Succession was
not violently broken, but altered by Consent of the next Heirs. He had need of
a case-hardened Face, who will undertake to defend this: With your leave, Sir!
it was broken with a Witness; for there were then four before your Idol, and
now there are six; and will you say there was no violence, when our native
Prince was close confined in his own Kingdom, in the midst of his own Subjects,
to their eternal Shame, by a foreign and a pitiful parcel of tattered beggarly
Rapescallions, whom the Boys of the City of London might have pelted to death
with Stones, if the Sense of our Countrey's Honor, as well as our Christian
Loyalty had not been utterly stifled. But you will needs persuade us, that this
was done with Consent: Now you would have done well to have produced the
Consent of King James and the Prince of Wales, who ought to be served in the
first place: And then as for the two Princesses, whom certainly you mean by
those whom you falsely call the next Heirs, they may dispose of their own as
they please; but they ought not, cannot give away another's right: Only as to
the Princess Ann of Denmark, if she have given up her right, it will concern
her for her Safety to make it as public as she can; but if she have not given
it away, it then perhaps may concern her to make as much haste after her Father
as may be, and to carry her Son with her, out of Herod's Clutches; for if her
Sister should dye, it is ten to one it proves too late. But the neatest Fetch
is, when we are told that all this was done, That a Prince of such mighty
Conduct might be a Wall of Defense, as well to the Royal Heirs, as to the
Religion, Rights, and Liberties of the People. Has he not actually ravished
away the Rights of all the Royal Heirs in being? and call you this their
Defense? So Robbers are a Defense to Travelers, and Wolves to Sheep: Pray next
time you write, be pleased to furnish us with a parcel of white Crows, or green
Jackdaws, or persuade us out of our Christian Names. What a Defense your Hero
has been to Religion, the miserable condition of the Church of England, and
the growth of Atheism and Fanaticism are sufficient witnesses; and then for the
Peoples Rights and Liberties, how strongly they are walled about, if they be
not sensible already, I doubt not but they will in a little time. And now Sir,
if you will give me the same liberty to put together, which you take; I cannot
learn from all this, how our old Laws and Oaths binds us to your new
Allegiance; but that rather our Constitutions and Oaths binds us to King JAMES
and not to William, though the contrary hereto is your shameless conclusion
from your wild Premises.

All along you make Dyscheres (by whom you represent us) to give up the cause
as far as you go, which disingenuous dealing we have too much cause to complain
of; but the better to detect it, I must follow your steps; and now comes such a
tremendous Objection, that I wonder your Joints did not tremble, and your Hand
shake, when you set Pen to Paper; it is to this effect, That when the violence
is essentially unjust, unnatural, and contrary to the moral and eternal Laws of
God and Righteousness, no Human compacts can ratify such wrong, or justify
and confirm what is essentially injurious, nor ought the Priests of the most
High God to consecrate and confirm such Rapes by Oaths and Religious Sponsions.
If there be any such thing as this (and such I fear we shall find there is, if
there be any such thing as God's Commandments) we had need have a care what we
do; That Man's wit is ill bestowed on him, who argues himself out of his own
Soul. But here you think to slip your Neck out of the Collar by telling us,
That the internal Immorality of all actions must be carefully distinguished
from the civil Consequences of them. Well, be it so, we will do this for you
too as fairly and carefully as we can; and what then? Why then, suppose (say
you p. 6.) A Son by fraudulent Arts gets Judgment in Law, and seizes his
Father's Estate and Body by Execution, and starves his Father in Prison, this
Man's Immorality is damnable. Is it so? I think this is a bone for some body to
pick, which may hold him tug though his Teeth were as long as his NOSE: But, Sir,
what if a Daughter should do thus? Will not this Woman's Immorality be damnable?
If not, pray next time you write, give us a reason of the difference: But it
seems if they should be both damned, Yet the Judges, Sheriffs, and other
Officers are innocent; It may be so, whilst they act as Officers of Law, and
according to the directions of Law; but if your Judges, Sheriffs, or other
Officers, make themselves Parties, and join with and assist such a wicked Son
or Daughter to effect such an evil act, or do applaud and approve it, when they
know it be done by such wicked and unlawful Arts, then their being Officers of
Law will rather increase than deminish their guilt: And so for your Robbers and
Pirates, a Man may lawfully suffer by them, though it were better if he could
escape it; but if you will plead that their Robberies and Piracies are lawful,
if you say they require a just right to what they get by such wicked means, or
if you actually join with them, and rob and share in their Booties, you will be
as very a Rogue as they; and which is most like the Case, I leave others to
judge. Much such another instance is your Lord of a Manor; let him look how he
came to be so, I may treat with him as Lord of the Manor, whom the Law
declares to be so: But if the Lord's Tenants conspire against their lawful
Landlord, and dispossess him of his Manor, and invite a Stranger, and say and
swear he shall be Lord of the Manor, and accordingly pay Homage and Fealty to
him, you, Sir, may determine for their swearing and lying too, if you please,
but I shall have nothing the better opinion of your Honesty for it. But now let
the Fifth Commandment look to it self, for it was never so hardly beset: There
are a sort of Protestants, who I think are resolved by making away the Fifth
Commandment, to be even with the Papists for suppressing the Second; and indeed
according as some Men act and write, unless it be to furnish pretense, and to
show our fine Clothes, and eat roast Meat on Sundays, I see not what occasion
they have for any Commandments; and so they might make Religion a Law of
Liberty, or a Liberty from all Law; and I do not perceive, Sir, that you much
mend the matter; you say, That from the Fifth Commandment we cannot charge K.
W. with Subjection to King JAMES, etc. (p. 7.) If by this you mean, that we
cannot thence prove him to have been his Subject, I do not know, that ever any
Man attempted such a thing; but does a Nephew and a Sonin-Law owe no Duty, if
he owe not that which is properly called Subjection? Or may a Man, because he
is not his Subject, spoil another of all he has? And must all persons applaud
and approve the Act, and swear he is in the right? The Case of an own Daughter
is still more severe; but for that you say, That she is in Duty bound to follow
her Husband's Fortune, Order and Authority, even against the Will of her
Father, and this with a more plenary consent, if she judged her Husbands Cause
to be just. I do not think either her or your judgment worth a farthing, unless
the Cause be just in it self. Sorry Arguments will serve to persuade Ambitious
persons, that they have right to a Crown, though unconcerned persons at the
same time plainly see the fallaciousness of them. But, Sir, I am not satisfied
with your bare word, that a Woman is bound thus to follow her Husband through
thick and thin; I grant that she ought to be the Partner both of his Joys and
Sorrows, but let her have a care how she becomes Partner in his Sins; nor does
the relation of a Wife take away the relation of a Child, as you seem to
intimate, though you are ashamed plainly to say it; they may indeed limit each
other, so that the Father may not command the Daughter any thing inconsistent
with the Duty of a Wife, nor the Husband the Wife any thing inconsistent with
the Duty of a Child to a Parent, but yet the great end of these relations is to
strengthen and support, not to destroy each other, as you closely insinuate.
Besides, your reason is a mistake in it self, as to this Case; for could you
with all your tricks of Legerdemain remove both King James and the Prince of
Wales out of the way, then there would rise another relation, and then he in
these Dominions must follow her Fortunes, not she his; for according to our
Constitutions she would be his Queen, and here he must be her Subject: It is
true the Name of King would be allowed, but the Power by our Constitutions
would be lodged in her; and he would be liable to offend against her Laws, to
Treason against her Person, and to be tried by her Authority. It is well known,
that though Philip of Spain's Name was made use of with Queen Mary's, yet when
it came to matter of real and proper Authority, neither Lords nor Commons would
own him for any thing more, than their Queens Husband, not their King properly
speaking; but to let that pass, in short, all that has been done in this case
being so contrary to the Duties of those relations, which both they and we were
and are under, and those Duties peremptorily required by the Fifth Commandment,
the contrary to your Conclusion must unavoidably follow, That in Moral Justice
they could neither desire or accept, nor we give the Crown, much less ought we
to confirm it by Oath. Your fulsome Panegyric I pass over; because you cannot
but think it well bestowed, when you shall consider from whom that Saying fell,
No body would trust an Engishman but the Devil.

You do us manifest injustice, when you make us to say, That no Settlement must
be admitted, under Powers procured by breach of God's Commandments, (p. 8.) And
this in all reason you must do knowingly and wilfully; because I think there is
not one, who in our behalf has concerned himself in the matter of the
Convocation Book, but has stated this question, and always admitted a thorough
Settlement, whatever were the means whereby it was procured: It Is true, we
neither commend nor encourage such wicked doings; but on the other hand, we do
not think Dominion to be founded in Grace, and that a Man cannot have a good
Title, unless he be a good Christian; we can mourn over the bad Man, whilst we
submit to the good Title; but we complain, that we have no Settlement, nor any
thing like a good Title, to which we may submit; for who can own that to be a
good Title, against which there are prior and better Titles in being,
contesting and claiming? Or who can take that for a Settlement, where a bad
Title by bad means is maintained against a just and good Title? But you ought
even in Complement to your great Mogul, to have omitted that Catalogue of sins,
of which usually consists an Usurper's Trade, Killing, Robbery, Deceit,
Covetousness, false Accusations, Lies, Pretenses, Subornations, Perjuries,
Treasons, etc. now put all these together and a bad Title, and then guess the
Owner; and when you have done, tell me seriously, whether the complying with a
good Title without all these were not much more becoming a Christian, than to
set up such a sour Stranger by such Monstrous Courses.

You will needs suppose, That if it be the Life of King JAMES, then it is not
the Breach of God's Commandments that incapacitates the Prince of this Crown;
but why may not both do it? For because the lawful King is living and
claiming, therefore the Commandments of God require of all his Subjects, that
they pay him their Dutiful and Loyal Obedience: They ought by all honest means
to support him in his Throne, or restore him to it, as his Condition requires.
But if in a rant (for I did not expect such a Blasphemous expression from such
a pretender to Modesty) you will say, That with the suffrage of the greatest
Laws of God, Reason and Nations, you may defend the present Governons, etc. i.
e. in plain English, that you may first betray your lawful King, and then
fight for an Usurper against him; you might as well justify all the
Usurpations in the World; and make Absalom and Massianello as lawful Powers as
David and Solomon; and in the consequence too you must encourage all the
Rebellions and Treasons that ever were or shall be: And are not these brave
things to justify by the greatest Laws of God, Reason, and Nations? If
Christian Religion can teach this, it were a just provocation to all the Kings
in the World to combine together to extirpate such a turbulent and abominable
Profession from off the face of the Earth: But I thank God I have not so learnt
Jesus Christ.

To the Objection, That Allegiance seems to imply Right, etc. since Allegiance
follows the Right, which is a tender point to be sworn to, (p. 9.) you answer,
that the Oath expresses no form of affirmation concerning Right; What if it do
not, so long as it expresses what manifestly includes Right? and this
Allegiance directly and immediately does; for it is the proper duty of a
Subject to his lawful Sovereign, and contains an obligation to the performance
of all those Acts, which are required from every Subject as he stands in
relation to his rightful Sovereign: It is the immediate result of that
relation; so that where you deny your Allegiance due, you in consequence deny
the Right of the Prince; where you pay your Allegiance, it is as owning him to
be your Prince; and therefore when you swear Allegiance, you tacitly swear a
Right: For though there is a sort of Obedience or Observance, which may be paid
to Usurpers, Robbers, and Pirates; yet Allegiance may not be paid to them, as
being that natural duty of the Subject, which the Laws and Constitutions have
appropriated to their legal Prince, and made inseparable from him; and now I
hope you will not tell us that the Oath does not express Allegiance: Well, but
for all this you are certain no such thing was intended, for you say your
Estates in Parliament rejected the motions made for an assertion of Right, and
yet you immediately add, That they and the ensuing Parliament judged their
admition of K. William and Q. Mary to be in their lawful right, rebus sic
stantibus; but yet say you, They bound not us to swear so, (p. 9.) I confess
this is pretty juggling, but my Friends, it will never serve any honest Man's
turn; for did your Conventioners, or those that followed them, intend to bind
you to any thing? If they intended to bind you to nothing, they laid their wise
heads together to such a purpose, as never yet any Men did; but if they did
intend to bind you to your new Governors in any thing, what can that be
reasonably supposed to be, other than what they admitted them in, and that you
say, was in their lawful right; they were indeed ashamed at that time to put
it into the body of the Oath, and besides they knew it would have made many
persons abhor it; but it is plain, that this they designed and tricked upon
you; hence you may perceive that your slippery remark will not deliver you from
the intention of the Imposer; and indeed if that could be avoided, and what
sense others please imposed, the Oath might be taken in a thousand several
senses, and not one come up with the sense and design of the Imposers, which in
this case always is the security of the Government. Besides, a thousand other
mischiefs would follow, vacating all Oaths, and destructive of all Government
and humane Society: For if Oaths may be thus eluded, Promises and Contracts
would soon follow their fortune, as being less sacred. Now, Sir, you would do
well to answer these and the like reasons, before you so peremptorily assert
any inferior Courts to be authentic Interpreters of public Oaths: You had
best have a care that you be not followed with a cry of Privilege of
Parliament, and indeed that legislative Power is little better than ridiculous,
which may be authentically evaded, or made quite another thing, by the inferior
Ministers of it; and after all; the Interpretations of those Courts will not
excuse you from Insincerity and prevaricating with the State, as you seem to
fear. (p. 10.) For if those Courts did give a lower and more easy sense of the
Oaths, than could reasonably be thought was intended by the Imposers, you ought
not to catch at that for an advantage which they had no Power to give; nor
ought you to join with them in eluding the Oath, but to take care of your
selves, that they neither cosen you, nor you others; for an Oath ought to be
taken in Judgment, Truth, and Righteousness, in all which points you will fail,
if you take this course. But have a care you do not gull your self at the last?
for what is that innocent sense, which the most tender Recusant might have
sworn to? Truly I think the secret is worth Money, and poor as I am I would
have given something to know it; but that we may not trisle with our
Consciences, I desire you and all your innocent Brethren, to give me any one
innocent sense, wherein an Oath may be taken to an Usurper in order to the
maintaining his Usurpation against the lawful King; and though I do not
believe, that either you or they (though Men of admirable invention) can ever
do it; yet if you could, it would not do your work; for it is not what sense
you give or take, but what they impose. But, Sir, whilst you plead for others
Sincerity, you render your own very suspicious; for why are you so scrupulous
about the sense of the Oath? Do not you insolently charge King James with a
Cession? Do not you thence ground a Vacancy? Do not you assert William to be
admitted according to the Laws and Constitutions, and by the proper Judges? Now
though these things be never so false, yet if you believe them true, you
believe him to be your Lawful King; and therefore, according to your declared
Judgment, may without scruple take the Oath in as severe a sense, as ever any
Oath of Allegiance has been given in amongst us; and therefore for you to make
such a pother about Senses, and to look about so sharp for an innocent Sense,
is enough to make a Man suspect, that you do not deal bona side; but that there
is something still gauls you, and that your Conscience lies snarling within,
whilst you make such fair weather abroad.

The Impiety of the Revolution has been already considered, and your Question
about Settlement answered; your pity we scorn; and whether we or you be the
Men, whose Minds are entangled with wrong Notions, that they can act well no
way, you ought to have considered, that such Men's Infirmities have less right
to overthrow, than to obstruct public Constitutions; you shall have free leave
to object the latter to us, when you have cleared your selves of the former.
Whereas you think those tame Persons, who submit, to be one sort of the meek
who shall inherit the Earth; though I do not take such easy Submitters to
wickedness to be any of God's meek; yet I believe you have hit the true reason
of most Men's submission; and upon the Principles many have proceeded, we may
have, as occasion serves, meek Forswearers, meek Rebels, meek Traitors; yea,
meek Jews, meek Turks, meek Renegadoes, and all to inherit the Earth; yet after
this slender return, as if our Mouths were quite stopped, and we had nothing to
say, you make us as it were to threaten a better Plea for our Cause, if ever
King James return: The Scoff is not worth Thanks; but, Sir, may King James
return as soon as God pleases, we need not stay till then, but can make our Plea
now, and need not your help, who take so much pains to spoil it; and this your
Godly Brethren are too well aware of, which makes them so strictly guard the
Press, and be so very cruel to all, on whom they can fasten any thing in the
least tending that way; witness the barbarous Usage of a poor Boy, whose
Mother, a Widow, is not able to find him Bread, who by the sly arts of your
never-forgiving High Priest, has, in spite of all honest endeavors, been kept
in Newgate near a year and half; and there lies still, and like to lie, to rot
or starve, merely for going on an Errand, and carrying he knew not what: As
justly, in a manner, might an illiterate Man be hanged for carrying the Greek
Testament, as a poor Boy thus used for delivering a Paper, not knowing what was
in it: Surely, he has forgot, that there is a God, who has both promised to
hear the Cry, and revenge the Wrongs of the Widow and Fatherless.

It is a material Question, By what Authority you transferred your Allegiance,
without his (i. e. King James) will? And it is no trifling Objection, That you
were sworn to him, not to the Estates of this Realm: But the Answer is amazing,
That you had his authentic Grant for so doing, (p. 11.) If this could be
produced, it would go a great way, though it would not fully do the business;
but see what a cunning Man can do, that which no body else thought on, he has
found in King James 's Declaration of Indulgence, where (you say) he does
dispense with the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to all his Subjects. I am
not bound to defend every act, either of him or you; however that act is far
from destroying his right; for the dispensing with a thing is not the giving an
Order and Grant to transfer it to another: And farther, you ought to consider,
that it is one thing to dispense with an Oath of Allegiance, another thing to
dispense with the Allegiance it self; an Oath may give a farther enforcement to
Allegiance, but the Allegiance it self is antecedent to it, and arises from the
natural relation betwixt Subject and Prince; he might be unwilling, that every
disloyal act of a fickle rash People, should seem to be aggravated with the
horrid crime of Perjury; but he never discharged them of the Allegiance it
self; for that had been to un-king himself, which certainly never entered into
his thoughts; for after that he reigned as King, and required and used the
Allegiance of his Subjects as before: But if he had done more than you say, and
not only dispensed with, but acquitted and absolved all his Subjects, not only
from the Oath, but the Allegiance it self, it would not help your Cause; for
though he might de-throne himself; yet immediately thereupon our Constitutions,
which admit no interregnum, had transplanted our Allegiance, and given it to
the next Heir: For if a King die or resign, we are not left to our selves to
pay our Allegiance to whom we will, but under the penalty of Treason are
confined to the Lawful Successor. And thus you see we are no way obliged to
plead, that That act was ineffectual and null in it self, as being contrary to
Law; which is that you say for us, with the design to draw on us the odium of
censuring the Actions of an afflicted Prince.

But I find you are a Man tam Mart, quam Mercurio, otherwise called an
Ambodexter; for if you cannot persuade us, you will affrigt us into the Oath,
or any thing else; for you endeavor to possess us with an Opinion, that King
James (if ever he return) will hang all that do not Swear and pay Allegiance to
K. William; a hard case, that a Man can be no way honest without hanging: But
why this extreme severity? Why! Because the lineal Heir may hang a Man as a
Traitor, for breach of Allegiance to an extralineal King, p. 12. Well! but if
King James should hang up all that did not pay Allegiance to William, one would
think he should not spare those who would not pay Allegiance to himself, and
this would make clear work. When Edward the Fourth first joined Battle against
Henry the Sixth, do not you think this would have made a powerful Speech for
him to his Soldiers? Gentlemen! go on courageously, your Cause is good, the
Crown is evidently my right, and if I can recover it by your assistance, I will
certainly hang you up every Man for fighting against the extralineal King Henry
the Sixth, who here appears in the Field against us, and keeps me from it. Such
persuasions could not fail to prevail with Men to fight to the last drop of
Blood. But, Sir, though I do think that a Man may do that under an Usurpation,
for which he may deserve to be hanged afterward; and that an exiled Prince at
his return may justly punish wickedness done in his absence; yet I do not
believe there is any Law to hang a Man for Loyalty, and of all Men living I
least fear it from King James: But in truth all this hanging stuff seems to
have another design, and not to tell what King James may do, but what you would
have others to do; as if they were excuseable for any severity toward those,
who deny them that for which (as you say) even King James himself may punish
them. It is a pious hint to your Government and your Mobb: We are a living
shame and reproach to you; you cannot see, speak, or hear of us, but bitterness
of Spirit, and pangs of Conscience seize you; the Devil tempts you to think
your Sin unpardonable, and that your only security is in making all others as
bad as your selves; and therefore you would have none find Mercy, who will not
cast in their Lot among you. I know not how Lucifer might hug such a Privy
Counselor; but I must tell you, that this ill becomes your Coat; especially
being a Man that pretends to so much compassion and tenderness of Conscience.

Whereas it is alleged, that this would make Subjection due to O. C. you
produce several arguments to prove the disparity betwixt him and the P. of O.
whereas there is scarce any arguments of them, that is not equally valid
against the one as the other; nay, I am sure some are more valid against the P.
of O. then O. C. but this has been clearly done by so many Hands already, that
I am ashamed to repeat them; but they ought to be a stark shame to you, who
pretend to be a Seeker of Satisfaction, and will take no notice of them; which
looks as if you were rather resolved to deceive both your self and others, and
to cloak it over with sham pretenses.

Hitherto the Arguments have been generally drawn from the Power of the Civil
Magistrate, or rather from the pretended power of those who are no Magistrates
to us; and you would persuade Dyscheres to admit these for true, and
consequently your inferences; but you will find, that you have reckoned without
your Host, and by that time you have read their Answers, you may easily
perceive, that I am as ready to conclude the quite contrary: That the Church
remains with us, with whom is the true Authority; that in erecting Altar
against Altar you are become formal Schismatics, having cut off your selves
from the Church, in forsaking the true Ecclesiastical Authority, and adhering
to, and supporting the false against it; and that as you are Schismatics we
ought not to frequent your Public Assemblies, nor have any Ecclesiastical
Communion with you, other than to convince you of your Sin, and persuade you to
Repentance. Now I beseech you, as you have any tenderness for your own and
others Souls, that you will seriously consider these things: This must be the
case on the one side or the other; and though Interest, Plenty, and Ease, may
put a specious gloss upon weak Arguments; yet at the great Day of Accounts all
false glosses will be taken off, and things will appear as they are; and
therefore, what temptations soever we may otherwise have, it is our highest
concern to take them so now.

Having thus (as you vainly think) made sure of your inferences, you take leave
of Civil, and enter upon Ecclesiastical Arguments. Now it is a sad thing, that
a Man should have two Strings to his Bow, and both rotten; for here you make
more woeful work than before; the most specious of all your Arguments being
either manifest Mistakes, or notorious Slanders. The First Objection is
concerning the Prayers, which might have been put much more fully and strongly;
but being a thing so well known, I shall only take notice of your Answers. And,
First, you say, The Prayers were consented to by all the Recusant-Bishops, and
by them (for their Officers without any prohibition) sent to the Clergy of
every Diocese, and by them generally received; the Bishops were present at
them, directed their Clergy upon Consultation to use them; and thus things
stood till the day of their Suspension, and no blowing the Trumpet against
Perjury etc. p. 14. Now if this were true, yet if the Prayers are truly
chargeable with something unlawful and wicked, that is such a daring affront to
God Almighty, that neither any act or neglect of theirs can justify either
yours or my concurrence in them; and therefore I wonder why you should make
such a Lie, when it will not serve you for a Reason; for it is well known to
all who frequented their Communion, that they never read or used those Prayers;
and that is no improbable argument, that they neither consented to them, nor
sent them abroad: But the truth is, that they were so far from either
consenting to them, or sending them to their Clergy, that they had no certainty
of the thing, till it was done and past; and whether somebody told you this
Lie, or you made it your self, if you please to consult the Printer in the
Savoy, if he dare speak Truth, and by the way I must tell you, that he is a
bold Man who dare speak such a Truth at this time, and he can tell you how they
were sent, and who sent them; and that those, whom you call Recusant Bishops,
were purposely kept ignorant, that they might not be able to give any
obstructions to the business. And now, Sir, do not you think that you have
acted a very mannerly part to our Reverend Fathers, in exclaiming against them,
and comparing them to winking Watchmen, and dumb Dogs, because they do not get
up of the top of the Monument, and baul out against a thing which they knew
nothing of? It could not be done before, and since it has been cried out
against sufficiently; have they not suffered enough already, unless you may
persecute them with calumnies? But you are not alone in this case; for they are
seldom mentioned in any Papers referring to this Revolution, but they are foully
abused, and charged with things which they were never guilty of; by which means
they are falsely represented even to good Men, and suffer in their good Names,
as well as their Persons and Estates; this in a great measure I my self could
prove: But, Sir, I will no farther concern my self with you, than as you
wrongfully charge them, and that only in the proper places; you seem to be
offended, that there has not been cry enough against Perjury; others, if we
mention it, say we are Uncharitable, Censorious, Proud, Peevish, Rash, and all
the ill-natured Titles their Schismatical Candor can afford us: Thus it is
impossible to please you, whether we speak or hold our Tongues; but for your
own part, since you are for such loud crying out against the fin, I hope you
will not be offended, if hereafter you hear of Perjury more often. Your Plea,
that you do not sine ratione insanire had been better let alone, it being
generally a ruled case, that those are incurable, who do cum ratione insanire.

Another reason, (though you shusfle both together) why we may lawfully join in
those Prayers, is because (as you would persuade us) King James and your King
William are very good Friends; truly this is the first time I have heard of it,
and I could wish it were true on good terms. But let us see how you prove it,
why it is certain the Prayers express him not; very true, and it is very rare
because odious, that Enemies are particularly named; but if general Prayers do
not mean something for or against particular persons, though not particularly
named, the greatest part not only of the Liturgy, but of all Prayers whatsoever
are to no purpose; but though they were not arrived to that unheard of
impudence as to name him as an Enemy in their Prayers, yet he is reviled,
belied, defamed, and bitterly cursed in Coffee-houses, and even in the open
streets; that is not only suffered, but encouraged: or if any Man should chance
to drink the Health of this good Friend of yours and your King, it perhaps
might cost him a Fine of 200 Marks, beside other ill usage. Sir, if you use
your Friends thus, I desire to be none of them; but you are resolved they must
and shall be Friends; for you flatly say, That you do not rank him among the
number of (your) K. William 's Enemies, for an Enemy is one that desires to
injure a Man, and we are not sure, that King JAMES does so design against King
William. And do you think King James to be that Good and rigorously Just
Person, who would do no wrong even to that Man, who by Treachery defrauded him
of two Kingdoms, and then by sorce drove him from the third, and with the
utmost malice still prosecutes him, and all that adhere to him? and can you at
the same time justify the Wrongs and Barbarities he has received? Must a Man
be abused for his Goodness? Methinks this makes but a scurvy Plea for the late
proceedings: But if you do not believe this of King James, I do; but still it
will do you no service; for supposing he will do no wrong, yet sure he may
demand and endeavor to recover his Right, and I am apt to think, that your
little, ambitious Dutch Savior would think no Man in the World so much his
Enemy, as he that demands three Kingdoms from him: Nor do we call only those
Enemies, who design Injuries; but even all who actually oppose each other, or
between whom there is any contest, let their designs be what they will, or
their Cause right or wrong; and after all your daubing, he certainly is
accounted the greatest Enemy, for whose sake all others are judged Enemies: Now
though the King of France be such an abominable Enemy, he should soon be
esteemed the best Friend in the World, if he would but renounce the Interest of
King James, and support the Usurpation of the Prince of Orange.

I did expect something concerning the Ammunition Prayers; but you leave them
to shift for themselves; and yet you think there is a Prayer on the 29th of
May, so dangerous, that you graciously give us leave to forbear to be present
at it: But, Sir, who gave you authority to dispense with terms of Communion?
Or, did you ever know any sober Society, that gave their Members liberty at
pleasure to take and refuse of their terms of Communion? You have done more, I
fear, than you will receive any thanks for; none you are like to have from us,
who have no need of your License; and you ought not to expect it from those who
will think their Authority hereby invaded. But yet you think we need not be so
very coy, as to the Prayer; for you say, That you have been assured by a Good
Father, that the Recusant Bishops did not at first stick at that; but that some
gave directions and consent to the use of it; and also, before their Suspension
deputed Persons to administer the Oath in the execution of the Authorities and
Offices Episcopal thus deputed. Sir, if I should say your Good Father was an
arrant lying Knave, and prove him so, I hope you would not only pardon my
bluntness, but also be more careful for the future how you gave any credit to
such Persons. As for any of their consenting or sending, it is only the former
falsehood repeated, which I have answered already; and as for this pretended
deputation, I will set before you the true story, and then you and all Men may
judge, how heartily our suffering Fathers are dealt with. On the 28th of Jan.
the Bishop of London and St. Asaph, and some others, presented themselves
before your mighty King William, with a mournful Address, in behalf of our
Reverend Fathers, then drawing near to a Civil Suspension, and since more than
uncivilly deprived: This was the pretense, but it is reasonable to think, that
it was a complotted thing, and that the real design was to get their
Authorities deputed in such sure Hands, as might effectually promote Perjury,
and the thrusting Good Men out of possession of their Estates and exercise of
their proper Authorities; for the effects of this Address was so far from being
any kindness to them for whom it was pretended, that others were presently
hereupon deputed to exercise their respective Jurisdictions, during their
Suspension, Deprivation, and till their Places should be filled: So that all
they got by this pretended kindness to them, was to be stripped stark naked.
But the Addressers having thus addressed themselves into their several
Jurisdictions, they then apply themselves to our Reverend Fathers, and with a
seeming humility and sorrowfulness acquaint them how matters were ordered,
requesting them, that since it must be so, they would not be displeased at
them, if they, who were ready to do them all the Service they could, did
exercise those Jurisdictions; to which they received an Answer to this effect,
That since it was resolved that it should be done, whether they would or not,
it was in a manner indifferent to them by whom it was done, though they were as
willing it should be done by those who applied themselves to them, as any
others; and there is a certain Man, well skilled in the Revelations and
Chronology, who can tell you, that when he particularly applied himself to one
of our deprived Fathers, he received this Answer, Seeing I must be suspended,
that is in English hanged, it is all one to me, whether I be hanged on a
Crab-tree or a Sweeting. Sir, this is the real Truth of the matter, and is so
far from being a deputation of their Authorities, that it does not imply any
consent, other than what is always unavoidably extorted from every Man in the
like circumstances. Suppose a Sheriff, or Bailiff, should come to a Gentleman,
and tell him; Sir, I have an Execution against you, and must ransack your
House, drive your Grounds, and seize your Goods and Cattle, pray be not angry,
that I observe my Orders; and he should with an angry smile return, I know you
will do what you list, do what you please: Would any Man living take this for
his giving his consent, when they know he abhors it in his Soul, and would by
any means prevent it? But indeed all such kind of Sayings amount to no more
than this, I am under the Common Fate of Mankind, and though never so against
my Will, must submit, where I cannot help my self. Cannot a Man bear his
afflictions patiently, without consenting to the Wickedness of others, and the
Wrongs done to himself? Would you have had them, like some fiery Women, flown
in their Faces, and scratched out their Eyes, or rather behave themselves with
that Moderation and Temper which became their Station and Dignity? This latter
they have done; and therefore consider how foully and unjustly you have
slandered your Superiors through your own mistake: And remember, that at last
all is a mere Subterfuge; for if they had made any Slip, it would not justify
your Wickedness.

What follows, p. 16, and 17. might have made an excellent Argument for Julian
or Dioclesian. You give many sly insinuations, as if we were guilty of great
Crimes, but you name none in particular, and it is well you do not; for you
know the charge against us, is, either our Religion, or our Loyalty; both which
you and your Party have forsaken, but are ashamed to say so; and therefore
would beat your Faults on our Backs. The Dangers you mention are to be
prevented by Men's repenting of their Sins, not by going on and adding Sin to
Sin: All your fine Words are to no other purpose, than to persuade us to be
reconciled to prevent Schism, i. e. when the greatest part have betrayed a Good
Cause, that the other would be debauched and go with them for company. You may
tell us of Novatian, Meletian, Luciferian, and the like Rigours, when we refuse
to receive you upon repentance, which the Church always required, in Order to
the readmission of such who had been Schismatics, or censured for notorious
Crimes; you are a very free Gentleman, who would have us give up not only all
Ecclesiastical Discipline, but all Christian Principles, for fear of being too
rigorously Pious: But the sum of all is, That we must do as you would have us,
Because the Church must yield to the State all just security to public Peace
and Order. This I as freely grant you, as you can desire; and I think our
former Oaths were given to that purpose, which if they had been well kept, we
had been free from all those Mischiefs and Miseries, wherein we are now
embroyled. But here give me leave to request an Answer to two Questions: First,
If I should fall in amongst the Banditti, or any association of Villains
whatsoever, Whether I am bound in Conscience to give them all the extravagant
security they shall demand? Secondly, Whether the Authority Christ left in his
Church, or the fixed Nature of Good and Evil, may not prescribe such bounds, as
neither ought the State to transgress in requiring, nor the Subject in
yielding? Let the Church give the State all security to public Peace and
Order; let her be most exemplarily peaceable in her self; let her most
effectually persuade Peace to others; and yet for all this, I am apt to think,
that she is at her Liberty, whether she will give any Security to those who
have no Authority; and ought to give no Security to Sin, even to the best
Authority. You talk here like one that was more than an Erastian, and willing
to give up not only the Church, but even Good and Evil it self to the State;
indeed you endeavor to come off of this afterward, but it is very scurvily.

Aster abundance of Questions and Answers, which would afford matter to fill a
Volume, if stated thoroughly, you come at length to tell us your Mind, That the
People by judgment of Conscience for their own Salvation, and the Church's
Peace, may separate from an Imposturous Bishop, and address to other Social
Bishops to consecrate them another: And for this you produce the instance of
Martialis and Basilides, p. 20. But what is this to our case? Are our Bishops
Impostors? This certainly you must mean, if you say any thing to the purpose;
if it be so, the Work is done; prove only that, and we will forsake them; but
if you cannot, bethink your self what a villainous Crime it is, thus slily to
insinuate into the People, so mischievous an Opinion of those great and pious
Sufferers: Besides, if my Memory fail me not, the Crime of Martialis and
Basilides was Sacrificing, which, by the Canons of the Church, not only
incapacitated them to discharge the Office of Bishops, but even to communicate
as Christians, and reduced them to the State of Penitents, usque ad articulum
mortis, unless for special Reasons the Church showed particular favor: But the
Crime of our Bishops is, that they stick too close to their Religion, and will
not alter it to be in the mode of the times. If any be Apostates, they are your
own dearly beloved Friends, for whom you take such pains; they have forsaken
the Church of England, and renounced the Christian Principles they formerly
maintained; they teach how to rob a Man without injustice, to forswear without
Perjury, to dis-obey Father and Mother without breach of the Fifth Comment, and
diverse other such Mysteries; which makes the Devil laugh in his Sleeve to see
himself furnished with such able Ministers, who will do his Work in the World,
whilst he may lie idle: And if the People do separate from such as these, your
Friend Mr. Hody could have told you, and ought to have told the World, that the
Fifteenth Canon of the Council of Constantinople, not only frees them from all
Censure, but gives them the Honor of the Orthodox, and incourageth all Persons
in this case so to do, as being the way to preserve the Church from Schism and
Divisions.

To justify a Lay-deprivation, you fetch an Example from the Jewish Church,
telling us, That Solomon deprived Abiathar of the High Priesthood, upon a
provocation merely in Civils, p. 21. But against this you your self have
brought such just exceptions, as neither you, nor all your Party will be able
to take off; for if the Crime was nothing like, if there was such a difference
between the Constitutions of the Jewish and Christian Churches, if it was a
manifest Cession on Abiathar's part (all which you have well proved,) then that
instance can by no means come up to this case. To these you might have added
several other things; as, First, That his Crime was High Treason; and to what
purpose should he insist on his right to the Priesthood, who had no right to
his Life? Secondly, That Solomon did no more than Justice in restoring the Line
of Eleazar. Thirdly, That it was in compliance with the known Will of God; for
it is expressly said, that he did it, That he might fulfill the Word of the Lord,
1 King. 2. 27. Fourthly, That he had the concurrence of the Church, and was
truly King; all which considerations laid together, will make this instance
utterly useless in this case: And after all, perhaps the very Instance it self
comes to no more than this, That Abiathar being both in the Eye of the King and
the Church, too scandalous and dangerous a Person for the discharge of that
great Office, was debarred the execution of it, and another deputed to it; for
that he was deprived of the Name, Honor, and share in the profits of the
Priesthood, I believe cannot be easily proved; for after all this, I am sure
the Title is still allowed him, 1 King. 4. 4. and if the Fields at Anathoth did
belong to the High Priests, it seems to put the matter out of doubt; so that it
seems to be a kind of state of Suspension very just upon him, whatever was the
power of the King, or however done with or without the concurrence of the
Church; though I think it is not to be doubted, but that the Church was ready
enough to do her part against such a Person: Such things are not so nicely
recorded; and Kings are often said to do, what they either command, direct, or
procure to be done, where others are concerned and consenting, though not
mentioned. This instance indeed proves, that Solomon did not think fit to deal
with the High Priest, though a Traitor, as with other Men; which shows the
great Veneration they had for the Priesthood; but sure it might have been
spared in these times, wherein your unfaithfulness has taught Men daily to
ridicule and abuse it.

Some other Instances you produce, which are drawn out with much pomp and
ostentation; but I will not trouble my self, or others, to examine them;
because you fairly confess, that after the great Cry they afford little Wool;
and though they make a noise and show, yet they were really insignificant; for
when you were grown weary with struggling, (as you call it,) you freely gave
them up, and acknowledge, That an Act of a State Christian, cannot alone vacate
a Spiritual Charge, p. 27. And That the Consent, public and actual Concurrence
of the Church, is necessary to give an Ecclesiastical Effect to Civil
Ordinances, in matters of the Church, p. 29. Now this Concession overthrows
your whole Book, and by being placed after the main Body of your Arguments, is
it self an Argument, that you had little Faith in them, however you endeavored
to slorish with them; for according to this our Bishops must be Bishops still,
and Bishops of their respective Sees, and the Flocks must owe and pay the same
Canonical Obedience as ever to them, unless it can be proved, that they are
also Canonically deprived. Now I thought it had been a plain case, that they
were never Canonically deposed, and so I believe did others, even their
Enemies; for I have not yet heard of any that offered at the contrary. But here
come you like a Spiritual Juggler; and as they with tricks deceive our Senses,
so would you with sham arguments our Understandings, and persuade us that even
this has been done also; for, say you, The Church ought to empty the Sees of
such Incumbents that are dangerous to the Civil State. But, Sir, must the
Church cast out her Bishops as often as they will not comply with Usurpers in
their unjust desires, and endeavor to gratify and secure them in their unjust
Possessions by wicked acts on their own part? He that will dare to say this,
(and no less you must mean, if you speak to the purpose,) I think the Church
ought to spue him out of her Mouth. But you say the thing is done by acts of
Separation properly Ecclesiastical, the Dean and Chapter of the Metropolitical
Church taking the Jurisdiction, till the Chapter Elect, and Bishops Consecrate
another. Sir, though by experience I find these to be very Taking times, yet I
cannot understand this taking Jurisdiction; Sure you mean Usurping, Robbing or
Stealing: This is no small cast; you have out-thrown the Scotch Doctor full two
Bars length; for this is a trick not only to translate our Allegiance, but our
Canonical Obedience too; yea, more than this, to seize the Jurisdiction of that
very Bishop, to whom we have sworn Canonical Obedience. O blessed days wherein
nothing is sacred, nothing certain either in Church or State! Yet I must
confess this was done, and there was one made a good bargain to carry it on;
but if you should offer to take his Jurisdiction of the Archbishopric of York,
as he did a better Man's, we should soon hear from him in another strain. But,
Sir, to be short, you cannot but know, that the Dean and Chapter have no
Jurisdiction over their Metropolitan; and the Sea must be vacant before they
can proceed to Election: But in this case, if they take upon them to Elect,
when the Church has not deposed, and that Election be followed by a
Consecration, they only set up Altar against Altar, create a formal Schism, and
are liable to the censure of the Church, and stand actually censured by the
Canons; and this being the Case, the Act of the Dean and Chapter argues only
their own sin and shame: And indeed if it were be to laid open, it would appear
to be as indiscreet and weak an act in some, and as insolent and vile an act in
others, as almost any this Revolution has produced; but let that pass, the act
is in it self null and void, and therefore cannot prejudice the Right of the
Metropolitan.

But lest the Dean and Chapter should not be strong enough, you call in the
Convocation for help: And, 1. You tell us what your worthy Conformists did, and
what was their Opinion; but this is just the Proverb, Ask my fellow, if I be a
Thief; but (say you) Their sending the Convocation shows their Subjection, and
condemns Recusancy as an Error, (p. 28.) And we say this is many Errors; but
what then? The Case is disputed between us; you say you do so, therefore it is
and must be so; as if your irreligious disloyal actions could justify not only
the evil you have done, but all that you shall proceed to do: But the silence
of the Convocation you think will work Miracles, for that argues their Opinion
to be, that they were in this to yield to the State; (p. 28.) And thus we are
utterly undone with the Arguments of Lovers and Fools. Silence gives consent:
There must be many other concurring circumstances, before the least consent can
be presumed from silence; for otherwise it is often a sign of indignation,
scorn, fullenness, yea, even of obstinate denial itself; and what they meant by
their silence you may better guess, when you have resolved this Quaerie:
Whether you can reasonably think, that they would have chosen him for their
Archbishop, whom they refused for their Prolocutor? But what if they were not
so silent as here you make them? It Is pity your Memory is not better, for
through forgetfulness you give in evidence against your self; for (p. 34.) you
tell us of a motion in the lower House of Convocation for a Petition for the
restitution of the Bishops and (then) Suspended Clergy. One would think this
looked very kindly toward them, unless there be a Revolution also in Men's
Sense and Brains, and their meaning is to be understood, as they read Hebrew,
backward; for otherwise no body would take petitioning for Men for appearing
against them; but what if there had been none of this, but they had been
eternally silent? Were ever Bishops deposed by silence? If you do not, you
ought to know, that before a Bishop can be deposed, he must be judicially
cited; upon his appearance he ought to have a full and fair hearing, a Crime or
Crimes meriting Deprivation must be proved against him; and lastly, a Canonical
Sentence by Bishops must be passed upon him, and published against him; and if
they fail in any of these things, the whole proceedings are null: and when all
this can be done by silence, I will yield you the Cause.

Your jumble of Q. Mary's and Q. Elizabeth's Bishops I shall not examine,
because a full answer to that either already is or suddenly will come abroad.
But I cannot but take notice of a Question which you start, that you may thence
take occasion to represent us to the Government, as the most dangerous Men in
the World, and set them on to use the utmost cruelty to us, who have suffered
so much already, that so you might end with a Sting in your Tail. The Question
is, Whether he that has unjustly gotten into a full Settlement upon another
Prince's Dominions, ought to succor the Church in those Dominions? Now this is
very disingenuous dealing, for you cannot but know, that we dispute not
against, but submit to a full Settlement; only we say, that a full Settlement
in one, while another, who has Right, claims and endeavors to recover his
Right, is contradictory nonsense. You have been often told the meaning of a
full Settlement, but wilfully shut your Eyes and will not see, though you
Hypocritically pretend to desire information: The Question therefore ought to
be in short, whether an Usurper ought to succor the Church under his
Usurpation? Now though it is most certain, that in Duty and Conscience he ought
to quit it, yet because those Beasts of Prey are rarely induced to part with
their Quarry, the Question must be, what is his Duty to the Church, if he will
not quit his Usurpation? And doubtless it is to succor it, or at least not to
destroy it, as you and some others would persuade him; and you might have been
so hardy as to affirm this, though the Church would not own him to be a lawful
Sovereign; for if he have done evil himself, must all be made away with, who
will not join with him in it, and approve of it? Must they be all served as the
Highland Clan, and have their Throats cut in their Beds, who contrary to their
Knowledge and Conscience will not own him to be the true Owner of his unjust
gotten Goods: Your Reasoning indeed shows the wretched necessity of sinning,
which Men are put upon, who resolve by any means to maintain injustice, but
does not at all teach them what they ought to do: And it had more become you to
have taught them some good, than to instigate them to more evil than they can
do. But however none of these things ought to move a Christian from his Duty,
in which he must proceed, and leave the event to God, who knows best how to
take care of his Church. The Blessed Jesus has left us a Religion, and
authorized Persons to teach and do all things concerning it, which will
infallibly bring us to Heaven, if we be true to it. This nothing can take from
us, if we our selves do not forsake it; in spite of Swords and Cannons,
Tyrants and Devils, we may obtain Salvation, if we be firm to our Religion; but
then if our Superiors set themselves against it, we are to maintain it not by
fighting, but suffering; and if it come to that hardship, to save our lives by
losing them; which is so far from endangering the loss of Religion, that by
experience it has been found the greatest means to propagate it: So that the
security of the Christian Religion lies in the Authority of our Savior, and
the Doctrine of the Cross; but you give both away, while you press a compliance
with whatever a Prince shall think necessary for his security. At this rate
there should not be a Christian under the Turk; and you your self must turn
Turk to morrow, if your new Master, whom you persuade to be more cruel than a
Turk, should declare for that Persuasion. This I think is indeed to expose the
Nation to an utter Destruction at the pleasure of any one, that is uppermost:
For whom it does not Butcher, it will Damn.

I should here have concluded, but that I cannot forbear to observe, how you
make manifest that great Love, Tenderness, and Respect you profess to have for
us, by your utmost endeavors to expose our Reverend Fathers. I know (say you
p. 34.) a Dioscess, where the Bishop utterly suppressed a Petition signed by
his Clergy, and ready to be presented to their Majesty's for the Restitution of
the Metropolitan, the Bishop, and the suspended Clergy of that Diocese. I am
apt to think this to be that very Bishop, to whom you have sworn and owe
Canonical Obedience, though at present you have translated it to an
Episcopal-Presbyterian, who baptizes without the sign of the Cross; but if you
will not obey, yet in civility you should forbear to reproach your good old
Bishop, or to stir up the Government against him: But what if he did suppress a
Petition? If you had told his Reasons, you will find, that you had better have
held your Tongue. If you consider with your self, perhaps you will remember,
that there was something in that Petition for a subsistence for the Bishop out
of the Revenues of the Bishopric; and might he not modestly and Christianly
say, That he desired not the Profits of the Bishopric, if he should not, be
suffered to discharge the Office. And here by the way behold the true Character
of Dutch kindness; when the mercies of the wiched had given away the Estates of
so many thousands, who, if they had continued honest, must have suffered, they
left a liberty to make provision for twelve; but the good Man to whom the
disposal was lest, like a trusty Steward never allowed one Penny or Farthing.
But to return to the Bishop you spoke of, there is another account I can give
you. A Petition of the like nature was signed by the Clergy of another Diocese,
and brought up to Town to be presented, but all the Avenues of Whitehall and
Kensington were stopped, and William fretted and fumed, and begged, and prayed of
all about him, that they would never suffer it to come near him; nor could it
ever find a way, but they were forced to let it fall and die. Now he knew this
miscarriage, and the Resolution taken up at Court; and shall any Man blame him
for easing his Clergy of that Labor and Charges, of which he was beforehand
assured there would come no good?

But you go on and tell us, that you have it from a good Hand, that a motion
for such a Petition was stifled in the lower House of Convocation, upon a
report made of my Lord Archbishop Sancroft 's request to the contrary: But what
if that report belied his Grace? This is no such strange thing in these times;
for I think it is out of doubt, whether this Government has gotten more by
Lies or Arms? His Lordship is living, and (thanks be to God) in health; and
before you had published such a story of him, you ought not only to have been
better assured of the Truth of it; but also, if possible, upon what account he
did it. Whether the tale be true or false, I know not, and therefore must leave
it to his Grace, to own or disown it, according to the truth of the matter, as
he shall see cause; and if he own it, I make no doubt, but he will give very
good Reasons for what he did: But if I might be allowed to speak my own
thoughts, I humbly conceive, that one great Reason, which might make our
Bishops under a Lay-Suspension more averse to Petitioning, was, That whether
such Petitions were granted or not, it would certainly redound to their harm,
but could do them no good; for if they were denied, it would expose the
Government, and consequently more incense it against them; but if they were
granted, it would entangle them in fresh difficulties, and run them into
greater dangers; for it would have been expected, that then they should not
only have approved the Prayers, which were issued out during their Suspension,
but also should tamely have gone along with all Orders, that came to them; and
perhaps they could as ill do this, as take the Oaths; yet if they had not done
it, there can be no doubt, but they would have been more severely prosecuted
than ever; and thus might have brought not only their Estates but their Lives
in danger. Now it is a hard case, that you cannot suffer Good Men to act with
common prudence; but there are some Men are very angry, that they cannot make
them act like Madmen; for no other Reason, but that they would have them
precipitate themselves into destruction: But you might have forborne to tell
these Stories, seeing they do your Cause no good but hurt; for the less they
regard your Government, the more strongly they assert their own Authority. Do
not they affirm themselves to be the Canonical Bishops? Was not the Archbishop
thrust out of his Palace under pretense of Law, and his Nephew imprisoned and
fined for not making a present submission; sure you cannot take this for
renouncing their Right, or think it to be a discharging the Clergy in their
admission of now Bishops. And yet you endeavor to make us believe this: But
what unheard of Impudence is this, that a parcel of Perjured Fellows should,
contrary to their former Oaths to manifest Right, and their own known Duty,
forsake their own Bishops, and enter into a Schism against them, and then cry
out, Their Bishops have left them. These things therefore plainly making
against you, I cannot think you tell these Stories for any other reason than to
gratify your Malice, and to set the Government, like the Devil upon Job, to
plague them more and more, whose Crimes are only their Innocence and
Sufferings. Sir, a Day will come, when you must answer for these things; and
therefore you would do well in time to consider how fatal the mischiefs you
design to others may prove to your own Soul; and repent not only of that, but
also that you have forsaken your first Love, and return from whence you are
fallen: And I dare engage to assure you, that a great Living, with Perjury and in
Schism, shall not afford you half the Comfort, which you may find in recovering
a Good Conscience by Repentance.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 32. dele of. p. 4. l. antepenult. r. of Partiality. p. 5. l. 18.
r. were not accustomed. p. 6. l. 15. r. Disingenuity. p. 8. l. 38. r. could
rely. p. 9. l. 6. r. popish Principles. p. 10. l. penult. r. captiously. p. 13.
l. 9. r. their lawful King. p. 14. l. 14. r. by the Laws. l. 21. for consented
r. concerned. p. 15. l. 15. r. apt to grate the Ears of Schismatics. p. 16. l.
30. after Parliament add which was built upon the foundation. p. 19. l. 34. r.
has Right. p. 22. l. 3. r. than ever. p. 23. l. ult. r. acquire a just. p. 26.
l. ult. r. my Friend. p. 30. l. 28. r. argument. p. 32. l. 3. r. yet when he.
p. 33. l. 40. r. Jan. 1689.


