DIRECTIONS AND INSTIGATIONS To the Duty of PRAYER, How, and why the Heart is
to be kept with diligence.

Pressing Arguments and Directions for hearing the voice of the Rod.

Being the sum and substance of nine Sermons (not heretofore Printed,) By Mr.
ANDREW GRAY, late Minister of the Gospel at Glasgow.

The second Impression, newly corrected and amended.

Col. 42. Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. Prove. 23
26. My son give me thy heart. Psalm. 94 12. Blessed is the man whom thou
chastnest, O Lord, and teach out of thy law. Edinburgh, Printed by George
Swintoun, and James Glen. Anno Dom. 1669.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT was not the design of the Lords Servant who preached these following
Sermons, to have them thus published. And if he had survived the publishing of
them, and of his other Sermons already printed, (and through importunity had
condescended they should be put to the Press) they would, no doubt, have come
forth more refined, and better digested: and therefore be entreated Courteous
Reader, rather to take in good part that which is intended for the public
good, then to carp at any thing which does not satisfy thine own Genius;
considering that what thou have here was gleaned by a Church-writer, gathering
together the substance of the matter from the mouth of the Speaker. And
although, for the most part, the expression be the same as they were spoken;
yet consider that Preaching and Writing have their several ornaments. These
things which are enlived by the expression of the Speaker, sometimes takes
well; which being committed to the Impression of the Press, seems flat,
superfluous, digressive, and redundant: The zealous Temper of the Speaker in
delivering his Message by word, carrying him sometime^ without the limits and
contextures o^ the ordinary method.

As these Sermons were delivered wit^ meekness and zeal, so be careful to re^^
them with a meek frame of spirit, (...) guard off all carping prejudices; and
(...) have thy heart burning with zeal, to the consuming of soul-depressing
dullness.

Directions and Instigations to the Duty of PRAYER.
SERMON I.
1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
Godliness is so sublime and divine a thing, and does so highly elevate the
Believer that is endued with it, that by it he is admitted unto that high
^inacle of honor, and inconceivable pitch of dignity, as to be made like unto
God, and to have a glorious participation of his divine nature; so that we need
not much Rhetoric to commend this unto you who have tasted of the sweetness
of it: for wisdom will be always justified of her children, Mat. 11. 19. But
there are some of you who savor not the things of God, and to whom these things
does appear but as some Europian fancy, and notions of a man's brain, who are
not much in contemplation of these things. So that though we could speak upon
this subject, in such a manner that the glo^ious light of it should surround
us, yet the ^lind heart cannot see it, because there is a dungeon within: and
till Christ open our eyes (as well as reveal his light) we cannot be enlight^ed
by it. But had we once as much divine understanding, as to take it up in its
beauty and necessity, in its advantage and dignities, in i(...) comeliness and
equity, we should esteem it the principal thing which we have to do in all ou^
life time, and should dig for it as for hidden treasures, Prove. 2. 4. And there
is no part of th(...) royal and beautiful ornament of godliness, bu^ it may
commend and ingratiate it self to any wh^ does not close their eyes. And
amongst all the beautiful effects and parts of godliness, this dut^ and grace
of prayer is not the least, and do(...) not a little, dommend it: and though it
appe(...) sometimes little amongst the thousands of th(...) graces of the
Spirit, yet out of it have come e^cellent things, and it has not counted it
pr^sumption to compare it self with the highest (...) chiefest (...) is that
(no doubt) by which a so(...) is elevated to converse and talk with God,
wi(...) the holy and blessed T^inity, yea, and that (...) often and freely as
the Christian pleases: for there it a door of access standing always open by
which we may enter in, and communicate (...) in part our thoughts to God, and to
have hi^ making known his mind to us. O! this is a di^nity and a privilege
that has been purchas^ unto us at an infinite rate and value, even t(...)
precious blood of Christ: for, no doubt, t(...) door of our access unto God,
is through t(...) ^ail of his flesh. And were this more deeply e(...)graven
upon our spirits, we should improve th(...) dignity more, did we once believe
the unspe(...)able highness of this duty of prayer, and the i(...)
comprohensible essence of God, that which (...) now neglect through ignorance,
we should s(...) to meddle with it through a sort of reveren(...) and fear,
being afraid to touch the mount, lest (...) should be shot through, and looking
upon o(...)selves, as unworthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, because we have
reproached him so often.

Now there are these two incomprehensible and cardinal evils which does
exceedingly man and intercept the obedience of Christians unto this great and
precious command of praying without ceasing, and they are these two, Atheism
(...) Idolatry; too much confidence in our selves, and too much leaning to our
own understanding, which is idolatry; it being a visible breach of the first
command, Thou shale have none other Gods before me, Exodus 20. 3. And too little
confidence and trusting in God, which is our Atheism; employing our selves in
all, and employing God in nothing: so that our blessed lord may propose that
inanswerable challenge and question to many of us, Hitherto have you ^sked
nothing in my Name, John 16. 24. And what is this practice, but an involving of
our ^^lves in that woeful curse, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, those heart departs from the Lord? Should the living
seek the dead, and not their God, who gives unto all men all things liberally
to enjoy? Jer. 17. 5. Were we dwelling more under the spiritual (...)pression
of our utter inability and impotency ^o save our selves, and that complete
ability and infinite power which is in him to help us, ^e would bind this
precious command of prayer ^s a chain of gold about our neck, and make it ^n
ornament of grace to our head, Prove. 4. 9. We (...)old certainly be
constrained to cry forth, ^ll that the Lord commands us, we will do, Deuteronomy.
(...). 27. And pray that there may be such a heart (...)ven to us, as to have
our practice correspon^^nt unto our resolutions.

O! what a glorious and unspeakable digni(...) suppose you it to be, to be
daily having yo(...) walk in heaven, in those beautiful streets th(...) are
all paved with transparent gold, and to (...) conversing with him whose
fellowship is of mo(...) infinite worth then all imperial dignities? (...)
Christian that is much exercised in prayer m(...) have this to say when he is
passing through t^^ gates of death to long and endless eternity, th^^ he is now
to change his place, but not his company. Heaven may be to him but a blessed
t(...)sition to a more constant and immediate enjo^ment of God. O? what a
blessed day suppo(...) ye it shall be when ye shall be altogether wi^^ out the
reach of the necessity of this duty, a(...) noble exercise of the grace of
prayer? For tho(...) it be a blessed and most divine exercise, yet (...)
involves an imperfection in its bosom; and (...) it must needs pass away, when
that which is p(...)fect shall come, 1 Cor. 13. 10. O! to be mu^^ in
correspondance with him, and in mainta(...)ing communion and fellowship with
him, A(...) of him, and it were to the half of his Kingdom(...) yea more,
whatsovever ye ask in his Name, acc^^ding to his will, and what he sees fit in
his wisd(...) for your good, believing, be will grant it to y(...) Math. 21.
22. and will not at all deny yo(...) We conceive there is not such a
comprehensi^^ promise annexed to any duty as this: in a manner, it is the sweet
compend and epitome of (...) Christian promises. What is included here(...) All
things, no doubt, for your good are he(...) included, and nothing of that kind
is exclud^^. We confess if our enjoyments were regulate a^cording to our
desires, they should come s(...) short of that which we stand in need of,
a(...) much more they should come short of that which he is willing to give;
and therefore we are blessed in this, that he walks not in his ^ispensations
to us by the rule of our desires, but by that precious rule of his free and
conde^cending grace: for he is able to give unto us ^xceding abundantly above
all that we are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. If you would ask what ^s the
great and eminent exercise which a Christian ought to have while he is here
below? Believe it, I could give no answer so suitable as prayer, this noble and
precious exercise of this grace of prayer. And if it were asked, secondly, what
ought to be the great and eminent exercise of a Christian while he is here? It
is prayer. And if it were asked, thirdly, what it ought to be? It is only
prayer. Prayer above all things, and above all things prayer. I mean true
serious, sincere, and nor hypocritical prayer: a pleasant retiring and
diverting our selves from all other things, to wrestle with God: to leave our
servants and our asses at the foot of the mount, until we go up and worship
God, and ^ury our idols under the vale of Sichem, and to wash our selves from
our pollutions, when we go up to Bethel: to return from the confused ^oise of
the multitude of our affairs, unto the pleasant delighting our selves in God. A
Christian (the sound of whose feet is much heard in ^he streets of New
Jerusalem, who, in a man^er, is anticipating the time of his endless en^oyment
of it; and who is daily bringing down heaven unto earth, or rather elevating
himself toward heaven, hearing of such an end^esse command at this, pray
without ceasing, (...) Romans 20. 12.) is constrained to cry forth; Lord, what is
man, that thou should be mindful^ of him? Or the son of man, that thou should
vis(...) him, and that thou have so highly magnified him (...) Ps. 8. 4. I
conceive, if a Christian would loo(...) upon all his duties of Religion under a
righ(...) notion and apprehension; certainly he will ^sapn^ther take them up as
his dignity, then his du(...) and rather as the singular tokens and
signific^tions of the infinite respect and love of God toward him then any way
given and commande^ him; Seeing by the practice of them we should testify our
thankfulness and obedience toward him, surely it were our servitude, and no^
our liberty to be freed from this blessed an^ glorious yoke of his
commandments. O! wh(...) a bondage were it for an immortal soul, not
a(...)ways to be living in a direct line of subordin^tion to him? But a
natural man hearing of th(...) decree and command of God coming forth, Pr(...)
without ceasing, will cry out, This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Joh. 6.
60. We ought t(...) study to be subordinate to God, and in subjectio(...) unto
nothing which may hinder our subord^nation to him, and to make use of all
things i^ subordination unto him: And he who accoun(...) the service of the
Lord a weariness, and do(...) snuff at it, as it were; and who never knew wha^
it was to be bound in spirit, till he go to pray(...) believe me, that man is
not much taken up i^ the obedience of this noble and most excellen^
commandment, Pray without ceasing.

Now being come to the words, having spoken at large of that radical and noble
grace of Faith^ we are come to speak of this excellent grace o^ Prayer: and I
would have none of you mista^ing the nature of this command, or excelle^^
grace; or to conceive that the Apostle does here so compendize and abridge
Christians duties, as to confine them within this one duty and grace of Prayer,
so that we should constantly and perpetually be taken up in this exercise,
(...) so neglect the exercise of all other duties. No, surely, this is not the
meaning of the words: for the words going before the Text may remove this
mistake; Rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5. 16. but we conceive it holds out these
things to us,

First, that in all our lawful diversions and interruptions from this divine
exercise, and employment in this noble duty and grace of Prayer, we may be
keeping our selves in a praying frame and disposition; so that when occasion
presents it self to us, we may retire our selves from the noise of our secular
affairs, and converse with him. A practice much unknown to the most part of the
Christians of this generation, who betwixt the times of their conversing with
God, and their addresses to his Throne, gives their hearts leave to wander
after many vain impertinencies, and to rave abroad in the path of their Idols,
and to entangle themselves with the affairs of this world; so that (in a
manner) they are incapacited for this holy and divine exercise of the duty of
Prayer, which does require much divine abstractednesse from the world, and the
things thereof, and much composedness of spirit; in which, our involving of our
selves too much in our affairs (that do but by the way belong unto us) does so
much interrupt and hinder us: And this exhortation, Pray without ceasing, holds
forth unto us that there is no condition, nor estate of life wherein we can be
placed, that exeemeth us from the necessity and obedience of being much in the
(...)ercise of this noble and excellent duty of t(...) grace of Prayer. For if
we be under bonds, (...) must pray that we may be enlarged: and if (...) lift
up the light of his countenance upon us, w^ must pray that we may be helped to
walk humbly with God, and to erect to our selves a dwe^ling in the dust, when
he erecteth to us a thron^ in heaven; and to be enabled not to stir him up(...)
nor awake him before he please. God has i^ the depth of his infinite wisdom
and unsearchable love toward man, so ordered it, that continual dependence
upon him, is both our du(...) and dignity.

And then secondly, it holds out this unto u^ that in the midst of all our
business, and oth^^ affairs that we go about, we ought to be sending forth
secret and divine jaculations toward God; which practice was no mystery unto
Jacob, for in the midst of his testament, having blessed six of his sons, and
having other six to bless, he breaks forth with that divine thought. I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord, Genesis 49. 18. Neither was this a mystery unto
godly Nehemiah, who while he was standing before the King with the cup in his
hand, did pray unto the Lord in this secret and silent way, Neh. 2. 4. He
prayed unto the God of heaven.

And then lastly, this command and exhortation, pray without ceasing, holds out
this unto us, that we should lay hold; yea more, that we should watch to lay
hold upon every opportunity for this duty of prayer: yea more, that we should
labor for all occasions for the enjoying of this admirable dignity, which is
the scope of that noble command, 1 Pet. 4. 7. But (says he) ^he end of all
things is at hand: be ye therefore so^er, and wat(...) unto prayer. A practice,
alace! that is not much now in request, and that the Christians of this
generation do very much un^ervalue, and set at naught: and we conceive that
which does so much interrupt our obedi^nce unto this command of praying in
public, and in our praying one with another, is either our atheism, or our
pride, we being more afraid ^o speak before men nor to speak before God, which
is our atheism; so that our silence is rather from our ^everence of men, then
from our reverence of God. And then our pride hinders (...) from it, we being
afraid lest going about that duty we discover our nakedness, and make our shame
to appear: and in our impertinent denials of our obedience unto this desire, we
study to cover the matter with a pretext of humility, and to gain reputation
amongst men, that pride is hid from our eyes, and that we walk low, when in the
mean time we sit on high places: And certainly that which does so much obstruct
our liberty and our having access unto God in our praying one with another, is
our greater fear of these before whom we pray, then of him whom we pray to:
And, no doubt, the divine impression of a Deity upon our hearts, would much
help us to get this overcome. Or it is our pride that hinders us from high
thoughts of God, and hinders and interrupts this holy and divine exercise of
the grace of prayer, even our selves; which is the great Diana which we do so
much adore: and about the adoring of which, and her silver shrines (so to
speak) so much of our talk and labor is spent: we still proposing that woeful
end in all our actions, the exalting of our self, and attaining reputation
amongst men; and therefore it comes to pass, that the(...) is little or no
advantage redounding to us b(...) the exercise of public prayer: so that we
m(...) say that which one spoke to another purpos^ Cum inter homines fui minor
homine redivi(...) for we may say this, that when we have be(...) amongst
Christians, we do oftentimes return l(...) Christians: for if in our praying
one with an(...)there, we be answered according to the Idols (...) our heart,
and have liberty of words, and pe^haps some real access to the Throne of Grace
when God lifts us up, we lift up our selves, b^ing exalted above measure, and
sacrifising to o(...) own net, and making a secret feast to our Dag(...) within
the temple of our hearts; proving o^^ selves to be but empty vines, bringing
forth fru(...) unto our selves, Hos. 10. 1. And hence it is ((...) Christian
will observe it) that he does not mu^^ advance in the work of mortification by
h(...) public enlargements, and that the power (...) iniquity in him is not
much restrained by these but that presently after his weeping over himself for
some short coming, some new tenta^^on presenting it self unto him, envolves him
(...) the like, or (it may be) in a worse sin: and ord^narily our public
enjoyments and enlarg^ments are not constant and permanent, by ou^ quenching
his holy Spirit.

However, by the way we would say th^^ which a Heathen said, It is much for a
man (...) be as serious alone in the exercise of his min(...) and affections in
pursuing after these duties, (...) when he is in company: And that which
do(...) exceedingly hinder a man's obedience when h^ is alone; unto this command
to pray without ceasing, is either the want of a solid convictio^ (...) the
necessity of this duty, or else it flows (...)om a not being deeply convinced
of the ad^antages that may be found in this exercise of ^ur secret retirements
with God, and abstract^^g our selves from the noise of the world, to ^onverse
with him. What joy in the holy Ghost? What mortification of our idols? What
divine ^onformity and likeness to the Lords blessed ^^d glorious Image might
we attain to by this? ^s likewise we may superadd this, the want of ^he solid
conviction of these unspeakable dis^dvantages that are to be found in our
wof^ll ^eglecting, and sinful suspending of the exercise ^f this duty when we
are alone, which are best ^nown to these which are most conversant with their
own spirits: but sure we are through, ^he sloathfulnesse of our hands, our
house dropeth ^horow, and our building does decay; and we are ^ecome remarkable
servants unto our own (...)sts and corruptions.

Now is there any of you that at the very ^eading of these words, pray without
ceasing, may not retire himself, and judge himself emi^ently guilty of the
breach of this command and ^xcellent duty? That whereas Eliphas did ac^use Job,
Thou restrainest prayer before God, Job ^5. 4. surely he may justly charge it
upon ma^y; yea, and alace! upon the most part of the Christians of this
generation, there are many, I ^ear, here, who does pass under the notion of
Saints and real Christians, who never did much ^tudy to obey this command:
there are many ^ere who need not much Arithmetic to calcu^at all their prayers
that they have powered out before his Throne. O! whither is your devo^ion gone?
If David and Daniel were now alive, would not their practice condemn the
Christ^ans of this generation, who at morning, at no(...) and at the evening
tide did call upon him, ye^ in the silent watches of the night, and at mi^night
did rise, and seek their Maker, who giv(...) unto his own their songs in the
saddest night (...) their afflictions? We conceive also if Anna th(...)
precious woman were now alive (to who^ that excellent testimony is given, Luke
2. 3^^ She was a widow about four score four years, whi^^ departed not from the
Temple, but served God wi^^ fasting and praying night and day) might not
sh(...) provoke many women; yea, all men and wom(...) unto an holy emulation in
this so singular at(...) divine a practice? Alace! there is none now(...)days
upon whom so brave a testimony cou^^ be passed, as was upon her. We must either
conceive that the way to heaven is more eas(...) then it was before in ancient
times, or else th(...) there is not so much delight and solace to (...) had in
him, as was before. Were we daily tasting of that pure river of life that
flows out from beneath the Throne of God; and of its sweetne(...) which
causes the lips of those that are asleep (...) speak, we would be more taken
up in givin^ obedience unto this precious command of pra^er. And if we were
sleeping more in the bed o(...) love, we would be less sleeping in the bed
o(...) security: we would likewise embrace more abstractednesse from the world,
and more fami^^arity with God. O! but our visites are rare, because we are not
constant in prayer, and serve(...) in spirit, seeking the Lord. It is no wonder
th^^ we forget what an one he is, because it is (...) long since we did behold
him: We may forg(...) his form and liveliness, there is such a numb^^ of days
and woeful space of time interveening ^etwixt our enjoyments of him.

Now we shall not dwell long in pointing out unto you what prayer is; we
conceive it is a sweet traveling and trafficking of the soul betwixt
emptiness and fullness, betwixt wants and all sufficiency, and betwixt our
inability to ^elp our selves, and his ability to help us; the one depth calling
upon the other depth; or in short, it is a souls conference with God.

Neither shall we stand in the proving of this unto you, that it is the duty of
a Christian to be much taken up in the continual exercise of this duty of
prayer, the Text does sufficiently prove it: But we shall only for the more
full clearing of this, point out one place of Scripture, and that is in Ephesians. 6.
18. where we are exhorted to pray with all manner of prayer and supplication,
etc. which we conceive to be understood both of public and private prayer, and
that we should watch to the exercise of both these; and that we should not be
in the exercise of these by starts and fits, but that we should ^ontinue in
them with all perseverance, as the ^ext does clearly hold forth.

Neither shall we insist long in speaking unto this, what is the spirit of
prayer: We conceive (...) does not stand in that promptness and volubility of
language that we use before him; for there may be much of that, and little of
the spirit: and upon the con^^ain, there may be ^ittle of that, or nothing at
all, and yet much of the spirit; yea, we are certain that the spirit (...)
sometimes an impediment unto much lan^uage; for either in our presenting or
expres^ing our grief before God, our spirits are so overwhelmed within us, and
so troubled, (...) we cannot speak, so that sighs or silent gro(...) are rather
our oratrie, then the multitude words. So likewise in the exercise of joy,
(...) soul is so filled, and in a manner, over shadow^ with the holy Ghost,
that the Christian is (...) up in holy admiration and astonishment; (...) that
in a manner, he loses not only the exerc(...) of invention, but also the
exercise of speec(...) He is so much taken up in gazing at that whi^^ he does
enjoy, and in a pleasant beholding a(...) contemplation of him who has
ravished hi^ with one of his eyes, and with one chain of his ne(...) so that he
can speak no more, but begins(...) wonder, his tongue cleaves to the roof
of (...) mouth, and his judgment is so confounded wi^^ the inexpressable
sweetness and glory of hi(...) that appears, and his affection does so
swe(...) and run over all its banks, that in a manner, (...) is clothed with a
blessed impossibility to ha(...) the use of his tongue, and therefore is
beginni^^ to admire that which he cannot speak: however, he that has much of
these things, has nothing over: and he that has little, has no lack.

Neither does the spirit of prayer consist (...) the finness and eloquency of
our dictions; these things being rather to prove our selves Or^tors, then such
as pray in the holy Ghost.

But we conceive it does more consist in the voice of the affections, not in
the voice o^ words, and in having unexpressable and unutterable sighs and
groans of the spirit, which is (...) deed that true spirit of adoption which he
hat^ given unto us, whereby we cry unto him, Abba(...) Father, Gal. 4. 6. If we
spoke no more in praye^ then what our affections and souls do speak^ truly, we
would not speak much: if we spoke (...)re with zeal and affection, that vain
pro(...)ity that we have in this duty of prayer, (...)uld be much compendized
and abridged.

Neither shall we speak long on this, how ^uch it is of a Christians
concernment to be ^^nvinced of the absolute necessity of a Media^^r and of a
Dayes-man that must lay his hands (...)on us in all our approaches to God: and
truly (...) conceive if many of you were posed when (...) the deep impression
of the need that you ^^ve of Jesus Christ (and of him that has taken that
glorious title and attribute unto himself, of being the Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.)
were (...)graven upon your spirits when ye went to prayer, you should find it a
difficulty to fall upon the number of the days: and I conceive, that the want
of the right apprehensions and ^p-takings of God, and of our selves, is the
reason why this great mystery and divine duty of the Gospel, to wit, the
employing of Jesus Christ in prayer, is so great a mystery, both un^o our
judgments and affections: However, know that this is a duty belonging both to
your knowledge and practice. There are many Christians who to their own
apprehension, have made a great progress in the course of Christianity, who
yet may turn back and learn that great and fundamental lesson to call on his
Name. Sure we are, were this more believed that God is a consuming fire without
Jesus Christ, we would not be so presumtuously bold as to approach before God,
either in public or in private, without him who by his blood must ^uench this
divine flame, and who must remove that Angel that stands with the flaming sword
in his hand, marring our access to God: Chr(...) must be to us Melchisedeck a
King of righteo^^nesse, and of peace. He, no doubt, is that trysti(...) place
in which God and finners must meet: h(...) that glorious ladder that reaches
from hea(...) unto earth, by which we must ascend up to G(...) his humanity
(which is the foot of that ladd(...) is the door of our access, by which we
must (...) cend to the top, which is his Divinity. We (...) once by our
iniquity fix a gulf betwixt God(...) us; but Jesus by taking on him our nature,
(...) make a golden bridge over that gulf, by whi^^ we may go over and converse
with God.

And first, surely want of the conviction(...) this, does make us come with
less confide^^ unto him: for upon what can ye build y(...) hope, except it be
upon that stone of Israel, (...) on his beloved Son in whom he is well
please(...) Matthew. 3. 17. We ought to rest upon him (...) is that Immanuel, God
with us.

2. As likewise the want of this, is the ca(...) of the little reverence that
you have to God(...) your approaches unto him: for did we o(...) take him up
under this notion, how inac(...)sible God is, except he be made accessible
(...) him who is the way, the truth, and the li(...) John 14. 6. O! how would
we fear to d(...) near such a holy God!

3. And this likewise is the occasion of t(...) little delight we have in
conversing with h(...) we are persuaded that there is no deligh(...) this
blessed exercise, but through him who (...) the vision of peace betwixt the
Father and u(...) his divine nature is an impregnable rock whi^^ we cannot
scale but by his humane nature: a(...) we must make use of Christ in all our
appro^ch^s to God, not only as one who must give us (...)ess unto him, and open
a door unto us, through ^^ich we must enter into the Holiest of all* (he (...)st
draw aside the vail that is hanging over (...) face, and we must go in walking
at his (...)k, as is clear, Romans 5. 2.) But we must likewise (...)ke use of
Christ in all our approaches unto (...)d, as one by whom we must be enabled to
(...) every thing he calls for at our hands, of the (...)h of that saying
which is in Joh. 15^5. With(...) me, you can do nothing, were more deeply
en(...)ven upon, and stamped on the tables of our (...)s, we would be walking
along our pilgri(...)ge with the sentence of death in our bosom (...) have
our confidence fixed on him above. (...)r there is not only an inability in our
selves (...)o any thing; but also we are clothed with (...)oful impossibility,
as that word does hold (...)th, Without me, ye can do nothing. And cer^^^nly
the lower we will descend in the thoghts (...)our own strength, we are the more
sit to re(...)ve this divine influence from him, by which (...) are capacitated
and rendered able for the do(...) of every duty. We must like wise make use
(...) Jesus Christ in all our approaches unto God, (...)ne before whom all our
prayers must be ac(...)ted before him. The sacrifices of Judah can(...) come up
with acceptance upon that golden (...)r before the Throne, except they be
presen(...) by him who is that great Master, of requests. (...)is is clear from
Rev. 8. where by the Angel (...)t is spoken of there, we understand to be the
(...)senger of the Covenant: and by that incense, (...) understand the merits
of Jesus Christ, which (...)hat precious vail that is spread over these (...)ul
imperfections of our duties, which they must be mixed with, before they be an
acc(...)table savor unto God. O! how does he a(...)minate and abhor all our
prayers, if they w(...) this precious ingredient, that sweet-smell(...) incense
the merits of our blessed Lord Je(...) Christ! It is he that does remove all
these (...)vings, and vain impertinencies of ours, that (...) have in the
exercise of that duty; and does p^^sent them in a more divine frame and
co(...)ture. He reduces them into few words, (...) makes them more effectual
for the obtai(...) of our requests. If the consideration of (...) were more
with us, O how would it make ^^sus Christ more precious in our eyes! As (...)
wise it would discover unto us a more abso(...) necessity in having our
recourse to him in(...) our approaches to God: Such is the dep(...) the
unsearchable grace of Christ, and of (...) his finite love toward sinners,
that the voice (...) complaining on them was never heard in h^^ven. Christ he
never spoke evil, but alw(...) good of believers before his Father,
notw(...)standing he has oftentimes spoken repro(...) to themselves: this is
clear from John 17. (...) where giving an account of the carriage (...)
practice of his disciples unto the Father, (...) does exceedingly commend their
faith and t(...) carriage toward him; and says, They have r(...)ved me, and
have known surely that I came (...) from thee, and they have believed that thou
d(...) send me; and yet in Joh. 14. 1. he does chall(...) their unbelief: the
one speech he directs (...) God his Father, and the other he directs o(...)
them. Love in a manner, does silence all (...) noise of complaints with him;
and makes h(...) always breath out love in his expression(...) (...)em before
the Throne. He will while^ speak (...)ughly to Believers here to themselves;
but to (...)y with reverence to his blessed Name, he never (...)lleth an ill
tale of them behind their backs.

But now we shall insist a little in pointing (...)t what things are convenient
and suitable (...)r a Christian to exercise himself into, before (...) go about
this divine and holy duty in con(...)sing and speaking to God.

And first, we think a Christian before he come (...)d take upon him this holy
and divine exercise (...) talking with God, he must be much in the ex^^cise of
meditation, not only of the inconceiv(...)le highness and dignity of that
glorious and inex^^essable person with whom he is to converse: (...)t also upon
the inconceivable baseness and (...)wnesse of himself; so that the
consideration (...) the highness of the one; he may be provockt (...)
reverence, and by the consideration of the (...)her, he may be provockt to
loathing.

2. A Christian before he go to prayer, would (...)die to have a deep impression
of these things ^^ich he is to make the matter of his supplica^^^n of to God,
and to have them engraven (...)on his heart: and truly we think the want of
(...)is is oftentimes the occasion of that woeful (...)ll of lying unto the
holy Ghost: for we com(...)in in prayer, and personate or counterseit
re(...)ntment for these things which never before (...)s the grief of our
hearts: Oftentimes we speak (...)ny things with our lips, ere we study to have
(...) hearts endyting these things that we speak. (...)d likewise in the
exercise of blessing and prai(...)g him, from the consideration of any great
(...) desirable mercy, we do personate and feign (...) from the consideration
of these things, which before we never made the matter of o(...) joy; because
they never were much the matt(...) of our consideration. It were, no doubt,
t(...) great advantage of the Christian in the exe(...)cise of prayer, to be
much taken up in the ob^dience of that command, Eccles. 5. 2. Be (...) rash
with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be ha(...) to utter any thing before God:
for God is in h^^ven, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy worcester(...) be few,
Seldom does the Christian talk (...) speak with God, but if he had as much
grace (...) to reflect upon it, he may be convinced that (...) is uttering
things that are not fit to be spok(...) to God. O to be studying that divine
abrid(...) meant of our prayers, which, no doubt, woe(...) make us to speak
nothing before him, b(...) what our hearts does endite, there is so^^thing of
this holden our in the practice of (...) vid, Ps. 45. 1. where he begins
with th(...) My heart does endite a good matter: and then (...) subjoyns, My
tongue is as the pen of a ready w(...)ter. Our ora(...)y might be more refined
(...) confined likewise; and it would be more e(...)ctual for the obtaining of
our desires, if (...) were studying this. O that our hearts mi(...) speak more
in prayer, and our tongues les(...) We through the multitudes of business,
p(...)duce multitudes of dreams to our selves.

Thirdly, this is likewise requisite for a C(...)stian before he go to prayer,
to be studying (...)linesse, to be endeavoring to have these fill(...) garments
wherewith he is clothed, chang(...) with change of raiment, he must pu^ off
(...) shoes off his feet, because he is to go to stand(...) on an holy ground.
This was the commend(...) practice of that holy man David, Ps. 26. 6. (...)ill
wash my hands in innocence, then I will com(...)ss thine altar, O Lord. This is
likewise clear (...)m Exodus 30. 18, 19. where Aaron and the ^ns of Levi were to
wash their hands and their (...)t in that brazen Laver that did stand betwixt
(...)e Tabernacle of the Congregation and the Al(...), when they came near to
minister or bur^ (...)ferings by fire unto the Lord: We must like(...)se
endeavor much to symbolize that practice, (...)d to have our selves washen in
that laver of (...)eneration, and in that precious fountain that (...)pened in
the house of David, for sin and for un(...)annesse, Zech. 13. 1. before we
enter into (...) Holiest of all. What ornament is so suitable (...) one that is
walking unto that higher Palace, (...) that glorious ornament of holiness,
with(...) which we are rendered unacceptable to God, (...) with which we may
with confidence and (...)duess, go and serve him in his holy Temples (...)
doubt, if the deep impression of that abso(...) holiness, and purity of that
Majesty with (...)om we are to converse (when we go to (...)yer) were engraven
upon our spirits, we (...)uld study to be like him: for the foundation (...)
^riendship and fellowship, does somewhat (...)d in a similitude of natures, and
in some (...)formity one with another.

And lastly, when a Christian is going to (...)er, he ought to be much in the
considera(...) of that advantage and dignity that is to be (...)d in the
exercise of this duty, this would (...)e us more ardent and serious in the
study o^ (...)ormer; and unless we superadd this to (...)est, we cannot long
continue in a constant (...)avour, after the attainment of these three (...)er
qualifications, who are required of one that would approach unto God.

Now we shall shut up our discourse by sp(...)ing a little unto this, what
ought to be (...) sweet companions of a Christian that is go(...) about the
exercise of this duty, in a serio(...) and not in a hypocritical manner.

I. He would study to have his spirit u(...) the deep impression of a Deity;
and ^ake (...) this, that he is talking with one before w(...) Angels (these
glorious and excellent spiri(...) does cover their faces with their wings:
wh(...) no doubt, does point out that holy rever(...) that they have of him:
their long familia(...) and constant conversing with God, has no(...) moved
that due and convenient distance w(...) they ought to keep with him: And
cert(...) were he known to us by none other Nam(...) by the Name of being
merciful, yet ough(...) to fear the Lord, and his goodness. O! (...) much more
he being made known and rev(...) to us by that great and terrible Name Jeh(...)
by which he is exalted above all Names t(...) in heaven, or in earth? Phil. 2.
9. A(...) which is pointed out that infinite distanc(...) is betwixt God and
us. No doubt, if th(...) pression of a Deity were with us, it woul(...) move
much formality that we use in pra(...) it would likewise remove much of our
m(...) lief that we have in all our approaches (...) him, were we afraid lest
that woeful inseri(...) that Paul did discern to be engraven on (...) tar at
Athens, to the unknown God, were (...) on us. Alace! I fear it may be
engrav(...) most part of our devotions; and likewis(...) wherewith Christ did
challenge the peo(...) Samaria, he may challenge many of us, (...) (...) 23.
And it may be written on our practice, (...) worship, ye know not what; we are
as those (...)o bless an Idol: And, no doubt, such sacri(...)es as these, are
as if we were offering swines (...)od, and cuting off a dogs neck, which are
abo(...)ation unto God, Esa. 66. 3.

That should be the sweet companion of a Chri(...)n in this exercise of prayer,
the excellent (...)ce of humility: we must put off our orna(...)s, and cloth
our selves with sackcloath, and (...)ead ashes upon our head, when we begin to
(...)ak to him. He that sits nearest the dust, sits (...)rest the heavens. We
must be walking under (...) impression of this, that we are not worthy
(...)lift up our eyes to heaven: And with holy (...)raham (upon whose effigy
this was engraven. (...)mes 2. 23. That he was a friend of God) when (...)
begins to talk to this glorious and incom(...)hensible Majesty, in a manner, he
conceived (...)o be presumption, Genesis 18. ^7. Behold now, (...)h he, I have
taken upon me to speak unto the (...)d, which am but dust and ashes, He does
pre(...)a note of admiration, behold! importing so (...)ch, that it was a bold
adventure for so low (...)rson to speak to so high a Majesty; or for (...)inful
a creature to open his mouth unto so (...)e and spotless an one; that the
footstool (...)uld speak to him who is the Throne; and (...)oubt, were this
more our exercise, we (...)ht be receiving more remarkable significa(...)s of
his respect and love toward us. What (...)e Royal gift which he gives to
these that (...)umble? Grace. For as the Apostle says (...)es 4. 6. He gives
grace to the humble, etc. (...)ove is seeking that person that sits low(...),
(...) ^s the waters do seek the lowest ground. He that is first in his own
estimation, is last (...) the estimation of God: but he that is last in (...)
own estimation, is amongst the first in the (...) mation of God. Therefore, no
doubt, that (...) suitable clothing for a person that is to go(...) the Court
of Heaven, which the Apostle P(...) does require, 1 Pet. 5 5. Be clothed with
h(...) lity. O! but that woeful evil of pride wh(...) does either arise from our
ignorance of (...) selves, or from our ignorance of God, does b(...) obstruct
our access unto him, and the retur(...) our prayers. If we should give a
descrip(...) of the person that is admitted to detain C(...) in his galleries,
we could not give it in (...) convenient and suitable terms nor this, tha(...)
is a humble and contrite spirit, Isa. 66. 2. and 5(...)

III. And a third sweet companion of a Ch(...) an in the exercise of this duty
of prayer (...) faith and confidence in God; but we have (...) with one who is
the hearer of prayer, and (...) is willing to give unto us all things that
we(...) sire, if we ask in faith: for we must exe(...) faith, not only upon his
promises, but like(...) upon that glorious and incommunicable (...) bute of God
that is given unto him, Psalm. 6(...) that he is the hearer of prayer: want of
(...) makes us come little speed: and we (...) likewise, that the want of
this does make(...) live so little in expectation, and wait wit(...) tience and
hope at the posts of his door, (...) we receive a return. Is it any wonder
tha(...) prayers be as the beating of the air, and the (...) ring out of some
empty words, if we be not (...) vinced in this, that he is not like unto us?
(...) is not like Baal, who because of sleep, or (...) other business, cannot
give present and(...) (...) our desires, so that we need not be constrai(...)d
to cut our selves with knives, or to leap up(...) the Altar, to provoke him to
cause fire to (...)scend upon our Altar to burn our drowned (...)rifice; he is
able to give audience to us, as (...)here were no other to employ him.
Multi(...)des of supplications will be no interruption (...)o the audience of
our desires: he has that (...)yal Prerogative, and Eminent Excellency (...)ve
all Judges of the earth, that he can take (...) many bills at once, which is a
demonstration (...)he omnipotency and infinite understanding (...) knowledge of
God, if that word, Matthew. 21. (...) 22. were believed, Whatsoever you ask in
(...)er, believing, you shall receive it. O! how (...)ld we study to have this
necessary and sweet (...)panion of says going along with us in all (...)
prayers! and as James speaks, chap. 1. 6. (...) that asks, let him ask in
faith; for he that (...)ereth and doubts, is as the Waves of the sea, (...)
can receive nothing.

^V. A fourth sweet companion in the exer(...) of prayer, is fervency. Can we
live under (...) a woeful delusion, as to conceive that God (...)eth those suits
and petitions which we do (...)cely hear our selves? Can we have much (...) in
proposing our desires, when we do it (...)h such a woeful indifferency? We have
the (...)ple of that holy man David, to commend (...) unto you, Psalm. 39. 12.
where we may (...)old a glorious gradation and climax: for (...)he says, hear
my prayer; and that not being (...)cient, he does ascend one step higher, and
(...), Hold not thy peace at my ^ry; that voice (...)g a little louder then the
voice of prayer: (...)yet again he ascends one step farther, and says, Hold
not thy peace at my tears. These (...)lent cries, the tears of a Christian,
have m(...) Rhetoric, and the loudest voice in heav(...) These sweet
emanations and flowings ou(...) water from that precious fountain of a con(...)
and broken spirit, they do no doubt, ascend hi(...) and have great power with
him who is Alm(...)ty. Jacob, in a manner did hold that Angel (...) wrestled
with him with no other cord, (...) with the cord of supplications, as is clear
s(...) Hos. 12. 4. and in Genesis 32. 26. Did ever y(...) eyes behold such cords
and bonds made of t(...) No doubt, these are of a beautiful frame (...)
contexture, and of infinite more value the(...) most precious and rare chains
that the gre(...) Princes in the world does wear as ornam(...) And truly the
want of this does proceed f(...) the want of the solid conviction of the
a(...) lute necessity that we stand in of these this (...) for as one siad
well, strong necessities, (...) strong desires. And also it does proceed s(...)
the want of the consideration of these pre(...) excellencies that are to be had
in these th(...) that we ask. The eminency of a thing (...) increase the vigor
of our pursuit after it; (...) makes us with seeking of it, mount up (...)
wings as Eagles, over all these difficulties (...)ly as impediments in our way:
ought w(...) to be emulous of the practice of Ninive(...) whom this is
recorded, that they cried mig(...) to God, Jonah 3. 8. we think many Chris(...)
of this generation (because of their w(...) remissness and coldness of
affection in p(...)sing their desires) may be constrain(...) mourn over all
their mournings, and pray(...) all their prayers.

Now if a Christins heart be the Temple of (...)e holy Ghost, O! how ought he
to pray! For (...) is the diamond which the Apostle puts in (...)e upshot of
all the graces of the Spirit, Ephesians. (...) 18. and after which he exhorts a
Christi(...) seriously to pursue. Oh! I think it is a (...)ystery that we
cannot well take up: but these (...)at are most in the exercise of it, can best
re(...)lve it, and take up its precious effects: But ^elieve me, I think it is
one of the most dark ^ysteries that is to be found in the practice of (...)
Christian, except he in whom is all the trea(...)res of wisdom and knowledge,
do unsold this (...)e divine sentence, Pray without ceasing; it (...)all always
remain a mystery to our obedi^^ce. It is a question, we confess, that is
some^^me difficult to determine, whether some du(...)es of a Christian that are
commanded to be (...)ne by us, be more mysterious to our under(...)nding to
take up the nature of them, and that is commanded in the lively and spiritual
^xercise of such a duty? Or whether they be (...)ore mysterious to us in our
practice and o(...)dience? We confess, it holds not alike in (...) things, it
being more easy for us to know, (...)en to practice many things: but we
conceive (...) holds out in some, and even in those things (...)d duties that
are most obvious (as we con(...)ive) and that have least of the
mysterious(...)ss of the Gospel engraven upon them, etc.

SERMON II.
1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
IT were for our great advantage to be mu(...) taken up in a serious and divine
consider^tion of that most sad, but most true say i(...) That there are many
called, but few chosen; y(...) if there were but one of each twelve that (...)
within this house to day, to whom Christ th(...) (sadly) should speak, One of
you will betray m(...) ought ye not all to be put to a holy inqui(...) and
search, and say unto him, Master, is it (...) Master, is it I? and to be
exceeding sorrowf(...) ^ntill that concerning question be determi(...) unto
you? How much more ought ye to (...) complish a secret and serious search, to
kn(...) whether or not ye be written amongst the livi(...) in Jerusalem, and
have passed from death to life(...) Seeing, alace! I think it is more probable,
t(...) if precious Christ were to speak to each twe(...) that are within this
house, we are affrayed th(...) he should thus (sadly) speak, There are ele(...)
of you that shall betray me, and only one sh(...) pass free. And, O that the
number of tho(...) who are to betray the precious Son of Go(...) were reduced
to so few, though indeed the(...) be many!

If he who sees not as man sees, who reprov(...) not after the hearing of the
ear, nor after the seei(...) of the eye, (who can reject an Elia^, the mo(...)
fair in show and appearance, and can choose (...) stripling like David) were to
come to give h(...) verdict, and pass his sentence on all of us th(...) are
here; ah! upon how many of our fo(...) heads might he engrave this dreadful
sentence, Mean, mean, tekel upharsin: thou art weighed in the balance, and art
found light! I am affrayed that even some professors (who have a form of
godliness, and yet have not the power thereof; and are like those painted
sepulchers, that are fair without, but within are full of dead men's bones) he
shall reject their confidence, and cut off their ^ope as a spiders web.
Religion that is pure and ^ndefiled, is another thing then we take it to be:
We must not go to heaven in a bed of ^oses; we must strive and earnestly
contend to enter in at the strait gate. And if ye would have a description and
definition of those that are shut out from the presence of the Lord, who are of
that woeful number, to whom Tophet is ordained of old, the Psalmist gives a
description of them, Psalm. 14. 4. They call not upon God.

But if ye conceive that this is the description of these that shall be
eternally secluded from Gods presence, that they pray not unto God, ^e will
think that ye are not of that list: for who is so absurd (say ye) that will
not pray to him that is Almighty, and pay that due homage unto him who is the
Creator of the ends of the ^arth.

But unto such Atheists as these, I shall propose these four things; which if
you be not able to give a positive answer unto, he persuaded that ye never knew
what it is to pray unto God, so as to have your offerings coming up with
acceptance upon his holy Al(...).

I. Did ye ever know what it was to go (...) ^rayer upon an internal principle
of love, and ^^e grace of Christ constraining you^? Are ^here not many of you:
O Atheists! who does not know what this means, to have the prec(...)ous bonds
of love constraining and imposing (...) blessed necessity upon your hearts to
conver(...) with God in prayer? Did ye ever know what (...) was to bind your
sacrifice to the horns of the A(...)tar, by the cords of love?

II. Did ye ever know what it was by pra^er, to attain to more conformity with
Go(...) and to crucify your l^sts? There are many, a(...) I may say some
professors, to whom this i(...) mystery; through fasting and prayer to
cruci(...) an idol or lust. It were good ye had a holy j(...)lousie over your
selves, that you are in bonds (...) iniquity, and gall of bitterness. The most
p(...) of our mortification is rather by consent, th(...) by constraint; our
Idols does rather go o(...) nor are cast out; or else our Idols dies rath(...)
to us, then we die to them: Hence it is, th(...) oftentimes after he has
famished our gods, (...) sit down and bemoan our selves over the gra(...) of
our Idols: and as David lamented over A(...)solom, so do we over our lusts.

III. Did ye ever know what it was to disti(...)guish betwixt absence and
presence? When (...) ye meet with such a place which ye might (...) Peniel,
that you had seen God face to face: a(...) in another place you might have
said, Here (...) did turn about the face of his Throne, and did v(...) himself
with a cloud, so that I know not wh(...) ^o find him.

IV. I shall in the last place propose t(...) question, which I conceive may
not only co^^ince profane Atheists, but also some w(...) have a show of
Religion: Did you ever kno(...) what it was to sit down and lament over (...)
since from Christ, and think it an import(...) want? Oh! where is the exercise
of the impa^ent grace of love now gone? O! but Christ may live long in heaven,
before the most part of us give him a visit! I fear he visit us, before we
visit him.

And now, O Atheists! examine your selves by these, and be persuaded, that if
ye know not what those things mean, ye are yet strangers unto the spiritual
exercise of this duty of pray^r: and all your prayers that ever ye have spo^en,
have been ^ut as a smoke in his nostrils, and a fire that burns all the day.
Believe me in this, O men of the world! that in the day when you shall solemnly
appear before God in the ^alley of decision, this shall be a great Item of your
di^^ay, that you have prayed so much, or rather that you have profaued his
Holiness (...) which you pretend to love) so much. O than all of us were not
almost but altogether persuaded to be Christians. Seeing Christ does offer that
precious dignity, to make us not only sons in law to a King, which ought not to
seem small in our eyes; but also to make us Kings and Priests unto God, can we
refuse such an offer a^ this? ^ight he not summond the heavens and the ^arth,
and angels, and our brethen who are ^ow above to behold a wonder? yea, and no
doubt it is a wonder that any of us should ^light such an offer?

Now if any of you would ask at ^e that que^^ion, what is and should be the
native exercise (...)f a Christian while he is here below in the and of his
exile, and a stranger from his fathers (...)ouse? Whether he should exercise
himself in (...)ging, or in praying? We answer, that pray^r i^ and should be
the main exercise o^ a Christian, while he is here below in the land of h(...)
exile, and is a stranger from his fathers house(...) when the promises are not
yet accomplish(...) nor all the prophesies fulfilled. We confess(...) the
exercise of joy and of rejoicing in Go(...) ought to be a necessary duty and
exercise o(...) Christian: We may sing the songs of these e^cellent Musicians,
and heavenly Harpers, th(...) stands upon the sea of glass, having harps in
th(...) hands. And our songs which is here below, (...) only different in
degrees: their songs are o(...) higher key, and our songs are of a lower
ke(...) though we confess they are more expert (...) that divine art, for we
oftentimes spill o(...) songs in the singing of them: as likewise th(...) are
most constant in that blessed exercise, b(...) ^alace, we are oftentimes
constrained to ha(...) our harps on the willow trees, while we sit (...) ^hese
rivers of Babel. But if we would pra(...) more, we should pray more: and if we
did p(...) more, we should praise more. O! but pray(...) would furnish us
matter of new songs eve(...) day: and if we were much in that exercise, (...)
might have that blessed Psalm to sing, He h(...) put a new song into my mouth,
even praise unto (...) Lord. I think a Christian may examine hims(...) by this
un^rring rule of his growth in gra(...) he may know it by the exercise of
secret pray(...) this is the pulse of a Christian, by which (...) may know his
constitution: and the slow be(...)ings of the pulse of the Christians of this
ge(...)ration, does prove this unto us, that grace in a remarkable decay; it is
groaning with(...) ^s as the groans of a wounded man, O! but if (...) were more
obedient unto this precious command, Pray without ceasing, our grace might
(...) more vigorous, and our bed might be green, and we might be bringing forth
fruit, even in our old age.

But now to that which we shall insist mainly upon, in going through this duty
and grace of prayer (beside these things that we spoke at the last occasion)
viz. what are these strong impediments and obstructions that does imped and
hinder a Christians access unto God in his secret retirements in prayer? If we
were asked at, When did we last behold him? We may say that which Esther spoke
to the servant of Mordecay; It is thirty days since I did behold the Kings
face. But, alace! our lot of lamentation and defection from God, may ascend to
a higher pitch; yea, it is many thirty days since we did ^ehold the King. O!
but we are great strangers in heaven: and though we should be eternally so, we
could nor debate with his Justice.

The first impediment that obstructs a Christians liberty in having access to
God in his secret devotions, is that woeful and carnal design which he does
propose to himself in the exercise of that duty: we are low in our designs,
which makes us low in our enjoyments: this ^s clear James 4. 3. where this is
given as a reason why we do not receive that which we pray for: We ask amiss,
to spend it upon our ^usts. We pray in secret that we may be more ^^tted to
pray, when we go abroad, and thereby ^et applause: hence it is that so much of
Christians pursuits are rather taken up in seeking after the ornaments of
prayer, then after the ^race of prayer; rather to pursue after these things
that are adorning in it, then these things that are saving in it: and even
oftentimes the Ministers of the Gospel have that woeful en^ proposed to
themselves. How oftentimes does our heart speak that which Saul said to Samuel^
Honor me this day before the people and Elders (...) Israel? And I think this
is an evil which Christians may easily discern and take up, whethe^ or not they
do propose themselves as the las(...) and ultimate end of all their devotions?
An^ one that has this woeful qualification, he do(...) resent and grieve more
for his public stra(...)nings and bonds, then for these which he has in
private. Are there not many of us here wh(...) will rise up from secret prayer
under the un(...) denyable convictions of much distance from God, and yet never
know what it is to hat^ anxious thoughts about it? O! when did absence from
Christ in our secret retiremen(...) make us forget to eat our bread? Ah! that
sickness of love, whether it is gone? We are s(...) unto death of imaginary
health; and we wi(...) that that sickness of love were more epidemi(...) and
universal in those days, which were not sickness unto death, but for the
glory of G(...) And in our public straitnings when we co^verse one with
another, how much will (...) grieve and repine, though we confess these a(...)
rather the grievings of our pride, then of o(...) love; rather lamentations,
because of the lo(...) of our reputation, then because of the loss (...) our
absence with Christ? One that has th(...) woeful qualification of proposing
themselves (...) the end of their devotions, they may likewi^^ know it by this,
that when they are strait(...) in their public approaches to God, and wh(...)
others are enlarged, they envy and fret; th(...) are rather endued with envy,
then a holy e(...)lation; which proves unto us, that we are (...) great in the
Kingdom of heaven, because we are not much taken up to glorify God, which has
given such gifts to men: but we sit down at his wise and wonderful
dispensations, that he has given unto others five talents, and to us but one;
so that oftentimes we are provoked ^o that impious course, as to bind up our
talent ^n a napkin, and to dig in the earth, and hide our Lords money. Studying
by that practice to appropriat the estimation of humility unto our selves, when
we cannot get the estimation of one that is eminent in parts and abilities,
which does oftentimes provoke God to take that from us that we seem to have,
and to give to him that has more, so that he may have abundance. One that has
this woeful end, himself, as ^he end of all his devotions, may likewise know it
by this, that seldom or never does he go about that exercise of prayer from a
principle of love, or delight to walk with God, but to attain the expressions
of prayer, rather then the grace and spirit of prayer: hence it is, when most
part of Christians come abroad, they do rather prove themselves Orators, then
Christians: the voice of words is more heard, then the voice of the affections,
and these inexpressable sighs and groans of the spirit.

Ah! the real and spiritual exercise of that duty, it is far gone into decay!
There is not ^ne amongst a thousand that does study earnestly after it. Think
ye to pursue and win God ^y your fair blossoms and flourishing Rhetoric,
gallantness and fineness of expressions? Will not he who is infinite in
understanding, laugh it your folly? Are ye to persuade a man? Are ye not rather
to persuade God? Ye may likewise know it by this, whether or not ye propose
your selves as the last and ultimate end o^ all your devotions, and it is when
ye have mos^ enlargements and access unto God in your secret retirements, and
ye desire and covet t^ have manyest spectators and auditors, that s(...) they
may pass that testimony on you, that (...) are men greatly beloved of God,
that does receiv(...) such singular testimonies of his love, and of hi(...)
respects: but woe be unto you that are such hy(...)pocrits, who covet the
greetings in the market^ and the uppermost rooms at feasts, desiring to b(...)
called of men Rabbi: Verily, ye shall have you^ reward: When he that is first
shall be last, a(...) he that is last shall be first. When that prove^^ shall
be taken up over you: How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer! son of the
morning. When satan by his tail shall draw glistering sta(...) down out of
heaven toward the earth. An^ we think this woeful evil of proposing ou^selves
as the end of our devotions, does not only obstruct this grace, but likewise
when w^ attain to it in some measure, it breaks it off. It is certain that when
a Christian has mos^ nearness with God, and is in a manner, lifted up to the
third heavens, then he does receive^ great liberty of expressions, winning to
some high and eminent conceptions of God, and some significant expressions of
his own misery, th(...) our pride causing us to reflect upon what w(...) have
spoken, do much quench our holy flam(...) of zeal and love: we study to have
expressions in our memory, that we may express them when we come abroad, rather
then affection in the heart: and this has obstructed many Christians of
precious enjoyments, and does prove this eminently to you, that ye are more
taken up with the expressions of your enjoyments, then with the enjoyments
themselves. We confess there are some who are more rude and gross in their
carriage, who go about this exercise of prayer, that they may take advan^age to
sin with more liberty, and with sewer ^hallenges; like that adulterous woman
men^ioned in Prove. 7. 14, 18. who after that she said, she had peace offerings
with her, and that she had paid her vows, she infers this, That she would
go and take her fill of loves, and solace her self to the morning. Your
prayers, O Atheists! are always an abomination in the sight of the Lord: O how
much more, when ye bring them with such a wicked mind! How will you hide your
sins with such a covering? O take heed to your spirits, least ye deal
treacherously with God. There are many of us that prays like Saints, but we
walk like devils. Surely one that heard us pray, might prophecy good things of
us; but in our life may find their prophesies fail in the accomplishment.

There is a second impediment that obstructs (...) Christians liberty in the
exercise of prayer in his secret retirements, which is that woeful formality and
indifferency of spirit that we use in the exercise of our secret prayers: the
most part of us are ignorant what it is to cry mighti^y to God, when we are
alone; and to wrestle with him were it until the dawning of the day, ^ill he
bless us, that so we may indeed be Princes with God; that by these two hands
we may lay ^old on him, Faith and Love: Love lays hold ^n the heart of Christ,
and Faith lays hold on his Word, and by it detains him in his gallerie^ I may
speak this to the shame of many of yo(...) that it were your advvntage to be as
seriou(...) speaking to God when ye are alone, as ye a serious when ye are in
company. A Heath(...) did observe this, and therefore did press it up(...) all
to whom he wrote, and they should be wa(...) of woeful indifferency: And we
confess this w^ful indifferency of ours, is but an involving o(...)selves in
that curse, Cursed be the man that h(...) in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices (...) to the Lord a corrupt thing. O what if preci(...) Christ
should propose that unanswerable ch(...)lenge to many of us who are here, Are
the (...) solations of God small to you? Or is there any (...)cret thing with
you, that ye do so little p(...) sue after these things? We confess, our
for(...) lity and woeful indifferency, does much proce(...) either from the want
of a solid impression (...) a Deity before whom we pray, or else from (...)
want of a spiritual conviction of the absol(...) necessity of these things that
we pray for, (...) formalists, whose constant practice is to be fo(...) mall,
by your formality ye make your bo(...) stronger upon your spirits, and do
wreath (...) yoke of your transgressions round about yo(...) necks. These
impertinent rovings of spirit th(...) we have in the exercise of prayer, does,
(...) doubt, come from this fountain of woeful s(...) mality that we have in it:
Fowls does with (...) berty descend upon the carcasses, when we (...) formal,
and it is only fervency that must dr(...) these away.

The third impediment that obstructs a Ch^^stians liberty: We are not much
taken up(...) employing of the holy Ghost that must help o(...) infirmities,
and must breath upon our withered ^pirits; other ways such dead bones as we
are, cannot live; Our bodily exercise profits little, ^t is the spirit that
quickneth, as is clear, Joh. 3. 5. And certainly, except the North or South
wind (...) low, our spices cannot flow out: and except the Angel move the
waters, we cannot step in and be ^ealed. O but that word is a mystery to our
practice which is in the 20. verse. of the Epistle of Jude; (surely we may stand
astonished when we read it over, and we may be ashamed that we are so little in
the real practice of it) where ^his is put in amongst the midst of all the
Christians duties, that we should pray in the holy Ghost: and certainly that
duty is required of (...), although it be a mystery and an unknown thing to the
practice of the most part of the Christians of this generation. I think a
Christian that is much in the employment of the ^oly Ghost, when he goes to
pray, he is put to ^n holy non plus, so that he knows not what he shall say,
and is oftentimes put without any complement to propose that desire to God:
Lord, teach us what we shall say, for we cannot ^rder our speech before thee,
by reason of our darkness. Think ye not that Peter, James, and John, had the
spirit of prayer eminently above us all, and yet they were not ashamed to
propose that desire to God, Lord, teach us to pray? It were for your
concernment and advantage, to pray even as though ye had never prayed before. I
am persuaded of it, that if this exercise of prayer were so gone about, we
should have more liberty of words and of expressions then we have: it is
certain we must have no confidence in our gifts and abilities of prayer. The
Prayers that are penned in heaven, are best heard in heaven. That which the
holy Ghost does dite (with reverence be it spoken) the Father can best read.
The Father can read no characters of any petition (to admit it) but that which
his blessed hands does pen.

There is this fourth impediment and obstruction which obstructs a Christians
liberty and access to God in his secret retirements and prayers, That we are
so little taken up in the employing of Jesus Christ as a Mediator in our
approaches unto God. I think it is impossible for a Christian to delight and
enjoy himself with God, but through Jesus Christ, who is that vision of peace.
O Christians! through what door will ye enter into the Holiest of all, if ye
enter not in through him, even through Jesus Christ, the vail of his flesh? In
a manner, he is the door of heaven, and we must enter into heaven through the
door. Christ is that great Courtiour in heaven, by whom we must have access
and permission unto the King. If any person dare adventure to go to prayer
without him (who is that blessed Dayes-man betwixt God and sinners) he comes
without his wedding garment, and so that question shall be proposed to him:
Friend, how came thou hither? or rather, O enemy! how came thou hither
without a wedding garment: and be persuaded of it, that ye shall remain
speechless, not opening your mouth.

The fifth impediment and obstruction which obstructs a Christians liberty and
access to God in his secret retirements, Is the woeful entanglements and
engagements of heart that we have to the impertinent vanities and trifles of
this passing world: our hearts are mightily taken up with the perishing and
decaying things of this life; yea, the most part of our hearts are married to
the world, and to the things thereof; and we think, and are persuaded of it,
that that does exceedingly obstruct and mar our liberty and access to God: This
Divinity was well known to godly David, Ps. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. Hearing and access, although they be
not much different, yet always the last presupposes the first: and this
Divinity was also well known unto that blessed man that is spoken of in John 9.
31. And this we know, that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and obeys his will, him he hears. I think those woeful
and dreadful evils that does so easily beset us, does exceedingly hinder and
obstruct us to ascend in a spiritual cloud of divine and holy affection unto
God: the souls of the most part of us are divided amongst many, even amongst so
many lovers, that it cannot devote and resign it self to God: every impertinent
Idol and lust, does claim a right and relation unto the soul, and then that
obstructs a Christians liberty in his secret retirements. O to be more in the
exercise of this precious and excellent grace of faith, whereby we may purify
our selves from all uncleanness of the flesh, and of the spirit, and may be
able to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord. O can it be that such a
fountain, that such a defiled and corrupt fountain that sends forth only salt
water, can send forth any sweet, precious, and soul-refreshing springs of
living water? This was a mystery and a paradox unto the Apostle James in his
chap. 3 12. Can fig trees bear olive berries? Or can an oliv^ tree bear figs?
so can no fountain yield salt water and fresh. And certainly it shall always
remain impossible for us to do both good a(...) evil. Would ye know the livery
which the Church of Christ must have and her members* It is to be clothed with
holiness; for, (...) doubt, that is the robe and garment with which we must
enter into the Holiest of all; and m^^ not that incite and provoke your desires
to fo^low after it which is so excellent and preciou(...) Believe it, we are
not able to tell the worth of i(...)

There is this sixth impediment which obstructs a Christians liberty and access
to God (...) his secret prayer, and it is that woeful resistin^ and quenching of
the motions of the Spiri(...) that oftentimes we fall into: hence it is,
th(...) when a Christian does go unto God, he is d(...) barred, and his prayers
is shut out from God^ and the reason of it is, because he debared Go(...)
before: and this is remarkably clear from t(...) Brides practice, Cant. 5. 2.
compared with the following verses; she held Christ at the do(...)
notwithstanding his locks were wet with the d(...) of the night, and his hair
with the drops of t(...) morning. But when she had condescended (...) open to
him, he had withdrawn himself from her. O who would hold out ^uch a precio(...)
guest? Surely it were a more suitable exerci(...) for us, that we should admire
and wonder a(...) stand astonished at his low condescension, th(...) ever he
should have condescended so low as (...) come unto us, rather then to requite
that ma^velous and unsearchable grace of his toward us, after such a way as
many of us so sinfully d(...)

There is this last impediment that hinders a ^hristians liberty and access to
God in his se^ret prayers, and it is that woeful evil of pride wherewith we are
clothed so much in our ap^roaches to God: we ought to how our head se^en times
toward the ground, when we begin to ^ake our approaches unto him, even unto
him ^ho is greater then all the Kings of the earth: ^elieve it, if the grace of
humility were more (...)r exercise in secret prayer, certainly we (...)old
enjoy more of him then we do. This is (...)ar in 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6. where he
says; God (...)veth grace to the humble, but he resists the (...)oud. And it
is likewise clear from Isai. 57. ^5. though he be that high and lofty one that
(...)habiteth eternity, and whose Name is holy, (...)t he says; I dwell in the
high and holy place, (...)ith him also that is of a humble and contrite
(...)irit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to re(...)ive the heart of
the contrite ones. And although (...)e be that high and holy one, he loves one
(...)at is of a pure and contrite spirit. O! might (...)e not always say, that
we are not worthy that (...)ou should even condescend so far as to come
(...)nder our roof? Modesty and reverence might (...)ache us admire such
wonderful and precious (...)isits: Whence is it, says Elisabeth, that the
(...)other of my Lord should come to me? Much more (...)ay we say, whence is it
that our Lord himself should come to us? We may challenge our ^^lves, that our
enjoyments of God are not more then they are.

Now we shall speak secondly, a little to you before we shut up our discourse)
how a Chri^^ian may be helped, after his enjoyments in ^rayer (and after he
has been admitted to taste of that pure river that flows out from b(...)neath
the Throne of God) to rest in his love (...) Christ, and not to stir him up,
nor awake hi^ before he please. We confess, it is as much di(...)ficulty (if
not more) to maintain communio(...) with God, when it is gained, as to gain it
wh(...) it is lost. Oh! but satan has oftentimes ca(...)ched much advantage
over the people of Go(...) after their enlargements. When was it th(...) John
fell down to worship the Angel? Was (...) not when he had seen the Bride, the
Lam(...) wife adorned? as is clear from Rev. 19. 10. compared with the
preceding verses: and it (...) clear again from John's practice, Rev. 22. (...)
compared with the foregoing words: A^^ when was it that the disciples did
rove, n(...) knowing what they spoke? Was it not wh(...) they were upon Mount
Tabor, and did see (...) fashion of his face change before them? M(...) 17. 2,
4, 6. Though we confess we must give^ indulgence unto that, it was nothing but
t(...) rovings of holy love that made them do so which, ^lace! is not much
heard in these day^ we rove in a more impertinent manner, A(...) we think a
Christian after his enjoyments a(...) enlargements, ought especially to stand
on (...) watch, and to pray lest he enter into temptati(...) for the stroke
that he does receive after enjo^ments and enlargements, is one of the most
d(...) couraging strokes, and most anxious that (...) meets with; it has
been the occassion (...) much misbelief, and has made his own (...) mourn not
only over the foundation, but al(...) even to raze it down: arguing thus with
themselves, if that when Christ was present wi^^ them, upon whom their strength
was la(...) they were led captive unto the obedience of (...)eir lusts, Romans 7.
23. how much more shall (...)ey be led captive with them when Christ shall
(...) absent and away: They have been put to ^aw that conclusion, One day shall
I fall by the end of some of mine enemies. We should guard (...)ainst such a
stroke, because it does always (...)most make the Christian call in question
the (...)ality of his enjoyments: It is hard for a Chri(...)an to receive a
stroke by the hand of his ini(...)ities after enlargements, and not presently
(...)ll in question the reality of them; yea more, (...) call in question his
estate in grace; for they (...) thus often debate with themselves: If i^ had
(...)en he who visited me, would he not have enabled (...) to sing a new song
of triumph over my lusts? (...)d also ye would guard against it, because it
(...)one of the most dishonorable indignities and (...)ronts that can be put
on precious Christ: and ^here were no more to provoke you to guard (...)ainst
it, may it not be sufficient unto you that (...)at stroke which ye have
received by your ini(...)ties after your enlargements and enjoyments (...) God,
if it be by your own consent (believe (...) and be persuaded of it) that in a
manner, it (...)h this much to you, that ye have preferred (...)dol and lust
even to Jesus Christ? We think (...) Jews preferring Barrabas before Christ,
(...)en the crown of thorns was upon his head, (...) when he was spitted upon
and buffeted, is (...)ot such an indignity and disgrace that ye (...) upon him,
when ye prefer your lusts and (...)s unto him, even when he is appearing (...)h
a crown of glory and majesty unto you, with a robe of righteousness and of
joy? (...) are ye even in his presence prefer any thing before him? Might not
Angels, and the souls (...) just men now made perfect, and all that (...) round
about the Throne, might not they (...) take up that lamentation over you, Do ye
it(...) require the Lord, O foolish people and unwise! A(...) we think there
are these three woeful evils th(...) readily befalls a Christian after
enlargeme(...) and enjoyments that he meets with.

There is this first evil of security, Cant. 5. (...) compared with the first
verse, where G(...) when he was come into his garden, and (...) gathered his
myrrh with his spices, and (...) eaten his honeycomb with his honey, and
(...) drunk his wine with his milk, and yet for (...) these enjoyments the
Spouse was sleeping: (...) likewise in Zech. 4. 1. compared with the
p(...)ceeding chapter, where the Prophet fell a(...) after his enjoyments,
until the Angel came (...) awaked him. Ah, we readily sleep in the bed (...)
love! and that has impeded many excel(...) visits we might have. O what a
visit was (...) of the Spouse! Cant. 5. 2, we may questi(...) whether ever she
got such an one while was here below.

And secondly, that woeful evil of pride, (...) certainly presupposed in 2 Cor.
12. 7. wh(...) lest Paul should be exalted above measure, thr(...) the
abundance of revelations, there is a mess(...) of Satan sent to buffet him. O!
but it is a d(...)gerous exercise for a Christian to search his (...) glory. We
confess we do not search to stre(...) then our own confidence, or our love:
bu(...) add oil to that fire of pride in our reflexi(...) upon our selves: The
wind does lift us upon (...) wings, and we ride upon it till our substanc(...)
dissolved.

And there is that third evil which is not so (...)ious; but, no doubt, does
oftentimes he^ (...)l the Christian, and that is self love, which (...)entimes
he falls into after his enjoyments; (...)d this evil certainly does break off
many of (...) enjoyments, to the disadvantage of the (...)istian, and hinders
him to exercise himself (...) that grace of true love, which always we (...)ght
to be keeping in exercise, because it is (...) oil by which ou^ chariot wheels
must (...)ve swifter, and be as the chariots of (...).

Now for that which we proposed, viz. how (...) Christian may be helped to keep
his enjoy^^nts which he has attained to by prayer? (...)e shall only propose
these two things: (...). Be (...)ch in the exercise of watchfulness after your
(...)rgements, that ye enter not into temptation. (...)d 2. be much in the
exercise of humility, (...)t when grace lifts you up, ye may not lift (...)ur
selves. O but a Christian that walks al(...)is with his feet toward the
earth, and does (...)er mount an hand broad above it, he wall(...)h most safely.
I know nothing to keep your (...)joyments in life, and to keep you from snares
your enjoyments, so much, as the grace of (...)mility: but we need not insist
long i^ ^elling (...)n how ye shall maintain your enjoyments; (...)re are;
alace! so few of them in these days: (...)en were ye in heaven? Or when was
hea(...) brought down ^o you? in a manner. If the (...) of us did now behold
Christ, we (...)uld not know him, it is so long since we (...) him. O precious
Christ! how much is he (...)dervalued in these days? I think if such a (...)
position as this were possible, that if Christ would go down to the pit to
those damned p(...)sons that are reserved in everlasting chains, (...) preach
that doctrine unto them, Here am I, (...)ceive me, and ye shall obtain life; we
questi(...) whether obedience or admiration would (...) more their exercise;
Would they not bind th(...) command as a chain of gold about their neck(...)
But know it; ye that refuse him now, ^r^ lo(...) he shall refuse you. Oh! when
shall that p(...)cious promise that is in Zech. 8. 21. be accomplished, And the
inhabi^ants of one city shalSpan^ to another, saying, Let us go speedily to
pray (...)fore the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I (...) go also. Or (as
the word may be rendered) (...)tinually. O! when shall such a voice be he(...)
in this city of Glasgow? Seeing our breath(...) above sing without ceasing, let
us pray wit(...) ceasing. And to you that prays, I shall (...) this word, ye
that fervently pray without (...)sing, it is not long before ye shall sing
with(...) ceasing, and without all interruption.

SERMON I.
1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
REal godliness is so entire and undivi(...) a thing, and the parts of it are
so ins(...)rably knit and linked one with anoth(...) and cannot be pa^ted, that
it is like* Ch(...) coat that was without seam, that it could not (...)
divided; and except the whole fall to us by (...)vine lot, we can have no part
nor portion (...) it: and were this more solidly believed (...) imprinted upon
our hearts, the insepar(...) connection and near cognation that is amo(...)
(...) the graces of the Spirit, we should not be (...) partial and divided in
our pursuit (...) after (...)em, separating those things which he has
joy(...)d together; which oftentimes is the occasion (...)at our nakedness and
deformity does appear: (...)ither should we (if this were believed) be so
(...)on satisfied with our seize; but (in a (...)nner) should be
entertaining an holy oblivi(...) and forgetfulness of all that we have
pur(...)ased and put by our hand, and should be pas(...)g forward to these
things that are before, till (...)ce we attain to that stature of one in
Christ. (...)d till grace have its perfect work, and want (...)thing, we can
never be constant. Amongst all (...)e graces of the Spirit which a Christian
ought (...)gorously to pursue after, this grace of prayer (...)not amongst the
least; it is that which keep(...) all the graces of a Christian in life and
vigor, (...)d makes us fat and flourishing, and bringing (...)th fruit in our
old age: and except the Chri(...)n be planted by that wall, his branches
(...)ll never climb over the wall. Who is the (...)ristian that grows like a
palm tree, and does (...)rish as the cedar in Lebanon? Is it not he that
(...)lanted in the house of the Lord, which is a (...)se of prayer: And we
conceive that the foun(...)ental cause why grace and the real exer(...) of
godliness, is under such a woeful and remark(...)e a decay in these days, it is
want of obedi(...)e unto this great commandment, Pray with(...) ceasing. Were
we dwelling forty days in (...) Mount with God, our faces should shine, and
(...) should be constrained to cast a vail over them. (...)re we entertaining a
holy and divine corre(...)ndancy with heaven by this messenger of (...)yer, we
might be tasting of the first fruits of that Land (...) off. Prayer is one of
th(...) faithful^ messengers and spies which a Christi(...) sends forth to view
the promised land, (...) which always does bring up a good report (...) on
that excellent and glorious land. O w(...) went ye to the brook Eschol by the
exercise (...) prayer, and did cut down a branch with a (...)ster of g(...),
and were admitted to beh(...) th^^ land, which is the glory of all lands (...)
the (...)st of which does grow that tree of (...) which (...)s twelve manner of
fruits every y(...) O what a land suppose ye it to be, wherein (...) twelve
^arvests every year? Alace! we (...)st, (...)ned in our desires, which makes us
(...) (...) our enjoyments. May not we blush (...) be ashamed that the men of
the world (...) (...) their desires; as hell and as death (...) (...) Give,
give, after these passing and t(...) (...) ^^nities of the world, and that
Christ(...) should not be provoked to enlarge their (...), (...) heaven, and as
the sand by the sea s(...) (...)i these things that are more high and (...)
^i^^ in their nature (...)d are mo^^ fuitful (...) advantageous in their
enjoyments? We (...) ignorenceis is the cause of our flow pursuit (...) these
things: and ignorance in men of the w(...) is the occasion of their swift and
vigorous (...)suit after these endless and passing vaniti(...) this vain and
transient world.

We did at the last occasion (speaking (...) these words) speak somewhat to that
which (...) obstruct a Christians liberty in his secret re(...) me^^s and
conversing with God, so that (...) door of access is oftentimes shut upon him,
(...) he has not the dignity conferred upon h(...) enter into the Holiest of
all.

We spoke likewise to that which was the best ^^d most compendious way to
maintain fellow^^ip and communion with God after once it is ^ttained, that when
our hearts are enlarged, we may keep our spirits in a tender and spiri^ual
frame, we shall now in the next place speak (...) little to you, how a Christian
may be helped ^o know the reality of his enjoyments, whe^^er they be delusions,
yea, or not; or tokens and significations of the Lords special and sin^ular
respect: and before we speak of that, we shall permise these two things.

First, that a man which has but a com^on work of the spirit, and has never
^een endued with real and saving Grate, he ^ay attain to many flashes of the
spirit, ^^d some tastings of the powers of the world (...) come, as likewise to
the receiving of the lord of the Gospel with joy, as is clear from, Heb. 6. 5.
and Matthew. 13. 20. He may have ^any things that looks like the most Heavenly
^^d Spiritual enjoyments of a Christian, but we ^^nceive that the enjoyments of
these that (...)ve but a common work of the spirit, they (...)e no^ of such a
measure and degree, as the ^^joyments of the sincere Christian. Hence ^^ey are
called in Heb. 6. 5. but a tasting; the lord is sometimes used for such a
tastin^, as ^hen one goes to a Merchand to buy liquor, (...) does receive
somewhat to ^aste to teach him (...) buy, but that is far from the Word which
is (...) Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied ^ith the fatness of thy
house: and thou shall make (...)em drink of the River of thy pleasures. And
(...)om the word which is in Cant. 5. 1. Eat and (...)ink abundantly, O
beloved! We conceive likewise that their enlargements and enjoyme(...) which
they have, the strength and vigor their corruptions are not much abated
there(...) neither is conformity with God attained: he(...) is that word,
Matthew. 13. 20. Though they (...)ceived the Word with joy, yet the tho(...)
(which we do understand to be corruption (...) they do grow without any
opposition; any t(...) never knew what it was to have the streng(...) and vigor
of their lusts abated by their enj(...)ments, they have but a common work of
(...) spirit. The Hypocrites enlargements are (...)there in public, and in
their conversings o(...) with another, then in their secret retiremen(...) and
those enjoyments that they have when th(...) converse one with another, they do
ra(...) joy and rejoice, because of applause that t(...) have by such
enlargements, and of a reputa(...) of having familiarity and intimatness with
G(...) rather then for the enjoyments themsel(...) and that dignity and honor
has been con(...)red upon them to taste somewhat of that Ri(...) that flows
from beneath the Throne of G(...) We conceive likewise that in all their
enjo^ments that they have, they do not much sto(...) and endeavor to guard
against all obstructi(...) and impediments that may stir up Christ, (...) awake
him before he please; they can g(...) their heart a latitude to rove abroad
after (...) pertinent vanities, yea, presently after (...) seeming access and
communion with God. (...) likewise their desires to the exercise of Pray(...)
and Christian duties is not much increased (...) these enlargements which they
receive bei(...) strangers to that Word which is in Prove 10. (...) The way of
the Lord is strength to the upright, (...)

That which secondly we shall speak of, (before we come to speak how a
Christian may be ^elped to know the reality of his enjoyments) (...) this, that
there is an enlargement of gifts, which is far from the enlargement of the
spirit, and of Grace. There may be much liberty of words and of expressions,
where there is not much liberty of affections: We think that it is (...)
frequent delusion amongst his own, that ^hey conceive their liberty of their
expressing of themselves in prayer, is enlargement* but we ^re persuaded of
this, that there may be much of this, and not much of the spirit and of the
grace of Prayer (as we told before.) The spirit of prayer is sometimes an
impediment to words, ^o that a Christian which has much of that, ^ay have
least of volubility, and of expression.

But first, these enjoyments that are real (...) which indeed are
significations of his love and ^espect to you) they do exceedingly move and
^umble the Christian, and causes him to walk ^ow in his own estimation; hence
is that word (...), 2 Samuel 7. 18, 19. where David being un^er such a load of
love* that (in a manner) he (...) forced to sit down and cannot stand: He does
(...)bjoyn that expression. Who am I, O Lord? and that is my house that thou
have brought me hither(...)? and also in Job 42. 5, 6. where that en^oyment
which Job had of God, as to see him ^ith the seeing of the eye (a sight not
frequent (...) those days) He subjoyns a strange inference (...)om so divine
premises, Therefore, I abhor my (...)f in dust and ashes: and in Isa. 6. 5.
compa^^d with the preceding verses, where Isaiah (...)om that clear discovery
of God, as to see him (...) his Temple, he is constrained to cry forth, Woe is
me, I am undone, because I am a man of (...)clean lips* It were our advantage
that wh(...) we are lifted up to the third heavens, were to hear words that are
unspeakable, yet to (...)ver our upper lip, and cry, Unclean, unclea(...) we
ought always to sit nearer the dust, (...) more that grace does exalt us to
heaven: (...) we conceive that it is a most excellent way (...) keep our selves
in life after our enjoyments, (...) be walking humbly with God, and to know
t(...) the root hears us, and not we the to(...) Christians enlargements
that are real, has t(...) effect upon them, it does provoke them co(...) more
constant exercise of pursuing after Go(...) their diligence is enlarged when
they are en(...)ged: hence is that word, Psalm. 116. 2. Beca(...) God has
inclined his heart unto me (which p(...) supposes access) therefore will I
call upon (...) as long as I live. It is certain, that if our enj(...)ments be
real, they will be well improven, (...) this is a sweet fruit which does
always (...) company them.

2. Ye may likewise know the reality of yo(...) enjoyments by your endeavors
to remove (...) impediments and obstructions that may int^^rupt your fellowship
and correspondance wh(...) God, according to that word, Cant. 3. 6. wh(...)
after the Church did behold him who had b(...) so long absent, she is put to
this: I charge (...) O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by (...) ^inds
of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake(...) beloved till he please. I
conceive this is one (...) the most certain demonstrations of the reali(...) of
enjoyments, when you are put to more ca(...) ^olnesse and solicitude to have
all things tak(...) out of the way that may provoke him to g(...) away, and
quench his holy Spirit. O! but it is (...) marvelous undervaluing of the grace
of Jesus Christ, to take such a latitude to our selves after we have been
enlarged!

3. Ye may likewise know the reality of your ^njoyments by this, when ye do
attain confor^ity with God by your enjoyments: hence is that word, 2 Cor. 3 18.
Whom beholding as in a ^lasse the glory of the Lord, we are changed unto ^he
same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Our
corruptions must be ^bated, if we would prove the reality of our ^njoyments:
for if we give them that complete (...)tude which they have had before, we have
^eason to be suspicious and jealous of our selves: and we shall say this, Do
not rest upon all ^our enjoyments that ye have here with(...) time, (...)
satisfactory; but let them rather provoke ^our appetit, then suffice your
desires and long^^gs. That holy man David knew of no beginning of satisfaction,
but when eternity should come; according to that word, Psalm. 17. 15. When I
awake (that is, in the blessed morning of the resurrection) then I shall be
satisfied with ^hy likeness. Did David never find satisfaction ^ere below! All
that he did receive, was but ^he streams that did flow from that immense and
profound fountain and sea of love: He did ^rink but of the brook, while he was
here (...)ow; but when he was above, he was drowned ^n that immense sea of
love, and there was abun^antly satisfied. O let the streams lead you to ^he
fountain; and when ye are win there, y(...) may sit down and pen your songs of
everlast^ng praise: these are but of the valley of Achor* which must be a door
of hope, to have more entire and full enjoyment of him.

That which thirdly we shall speak to, shall be to those advantages which a
Christian m^^ have by the exercise of prayer, we may say th(...) unto you, Come
and see, can best resolve the question: for those spiritual advantages which
(...) Christian may have in the real and spiritual di^charge of this duty, they
are better felt no^ told. It is impossible sometimes for a Christi(...) to make
language of these precious and excelent things that he meets with in sincere
an^ serious prayer.

The first advantage, It does keep all the graces of the spirit eminently in
exercise: (...) makes them vigorous and green: it keeps the grace of love most
lively; for one that is much in the exercise of prayer, he does receive (...)
many (...)table discoveries and manifestations (...) the sweetness and glory
of God, and most (...) participations of that unspeakable delig(...) which is
to be found in him, that he is constrained to cry forth, Who would not love him
w(...) is the King of Saints? O! when met ye wi(...) such an enjoyment of God
in prayer, as thy(...) Did ye conceive that ye were clothed with (...)
impossibility to love him too much? Or (...) love him as he ought to be loved?
And wh(...) did ye conceive that it was an absurd opinion that he could be
loved too much? Hence these two are conjoined together, Rejoice evermore and
Pray without ceasing. And what is joy, but a fruit of love, or rather an
intense measure (...) love? We confess, it is a question that is difficult to
determine whether prayer or faith does keep love most in exercise? We think
lo(...) (whose foundation is upon sense) is most kep^ in exercise by prayer:
hence it is when we are strai^ned in the exercise of that duty, and when he
turns about the face of his Throne; then love begins to languish and decay, and
then that excellent grace of faith does step in, and speak thus to love: Wait
on God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God. Faith can read love in his heart, when sense cannot read love in his
hands, nor in his face; but when he seems to srown, or to strike, faith can
make such a noble exposition on such a dispensation: I know the thoughts of his
heart, they are thoughts of peace, and not of war, to give me an expected end.

Prayer does likewise keep the grace of mor^ification eminently in exercise:
Would ye know what is the reason that our corruptions do sing so many songs of
triumph over us, and why we are so much led captive by them according to their
will? Is it not the want of the exercise of secret prayer, and that we are not
much taken up in employing of the Angel that must bind the old Serpent, the
Devil, as in men^ioned, Rev. 20. 1. that has that great chain ^n his hand.
Hence Paul when his corruptions were awakened, and stirring within him, he
^new no weapon so suitable for them a^ prayer, (...) is clear from 2 Cor. 12.
7, 8. where the mes^enger of Satan was sent to buffet him; it is said, that he
besought the Lord thrice, that this ^ight depart from him. And our blessed Lord
jesus (speaking of the casting out of a devil) ^e says, Matthew. 17. 21. This
kind goes not out ^ut by fasting and prayer. It is no wonder that ^^tentimes
we are led captive by your iniquiries, and our lusts and corruptions mocking at
our ^rofession, and scorning such weak and seeble builders as we are, say to
us: Can such fee(...) Jews as these are; build such stately and glorio(...)
buildings in one day? But ye who are much (...) the exercise of this duty, and
who to your o(...) apprehensions does not receive much victo(...) over your
lusts, which makes you oftentim(...) cry forth, It is in vain for me to seek
the A(...) mighty, and what profit is there that I pray u(...) him? (We
confess, the small success that (...) Christian has when he does discharge
this do(...) of prayer, does sometimes constrain him (...) draw that
conclusion, I will pray no more.) W(...) think the small victory that ye obtain
ov(...) your lusts, and the little increase in the woe(...) of mortification,
may proceed from the w(...) of that divine fervency and holy fe^vor that ought
to have in your proposing your des(...) unto God. The effectual servent prayer
of (...) righteous avails much, as James says, chap. (...) 16. If we want
servency in our proponing (...) desires unto God, it is no wonder that we
w(...) success: or likewise it may proceed from o(...) want of faith, our
misbelief giving the reto(...) of our prayer before we begin to pray, and (...)
ing this unto us, That though we call, he w(...) not answer: but as James
says, chap. 5. (...) The prayer of says may save you who are sick, (...) may
raise you up; for whatsoever ye ask in pra(...) believing, ye shall receive it.
And it does som^times proceed from the love and great resp(...) that God has
to you, desiring that yo(...) wounds may be always bleeding, that so (...) may
be always kept about his Throne. I(...) not known that if our necessities were
away (...) should abridge and inch much of our secret (...) votion to God? In a
manner, necessity is the chain whereby God binds the feet of his own (...) his
Throne, he desires not that they should (...)e away; and therefore they halt,
so that they ^ay rely on his his strength to bear them.

Prayer does likewise keep the grace of pati^^ce (under our most sad and
crushing dispen(...)tions) eminently in exercise: would ye know (...)e most
compendious way to make you pos(...)ess your souls in patience under great
trouble? ^hen be much in the exercise of the grace of ^rayer: Hence is that
word, Jam. 5. 13. If any man be afflicted, let him pray, etc. And what made
Paul and Silas to sing in the prison, and so patiently to endure the cross?
Was it not ^his, They were praying at midnight? Act. 16. ^5. Certainly one that
has attained to much ^ivine submission and holy enjoyment in the ^earing of
their cross, they have been much in ^he exercise of prayer. Did ye never know
(any of you) what such a thing as this mean^d, that going to complain of your
anxiety to God, you have been constrained to forget them, and begin to bless
and praise him, because he has stopped the months of your complaints, and has
put a more divine and heavenly ex^rcise in your hand? This the Psalmist did
at^ain to in Ps. 89. where the scope of the Psalm will bear, that he was going
to complain of ^he misery of the Church, and of himself, yet before ever he
began to propone a complaint ^o God, he spent to the 38. verse in praising of
^im. Sometimes Christians have been constrai^ed to cry forth, It is better to
be in the house ^f mourning, then in the house of mirth: and to ^esolve not to
fr^^ to be put in a fiery furnace ^ot seven times more then ordinary, if they
have in the furnace one like the Son of God to wal^ with them.

Prayer does likewise keep the grace of Fait^ eminently in exercise. O! but
Faith (which (...) one of the mysteries of godliness) does much languish and
decay in us through the want o(...) prayer! It is impossible for a Christian to
b^lieve, except he be much in the exercise (...) prayer. We may maintain a vain
hope and pe^swasion; but that spiritual exercise of Faith cannot be kept in
life without that holy exe^cise of prayer: hence it is that prayer, when(...)
Faith is beginning to decay, does go to God and cries forth, Lord, I believe,
help my unb^lief. And we conceive there are these thr^^ grounds and golden
pillars of Faith, on which it does lean, which prayer does oftentimes (...)
minister and give unto it. First, there is th(...) golden foundation, The
faithfulness of G(...) which prayer does abundantly make evid(...) to the
Christian: hence when a Christian do^^ pray according to his promise, and does
receive a return of his prayer, he does receive^ demonstration of the
faithfulness to God, which is a pillar on which Faith does lean. Pray^^ does
likewise give unto Faith this second pillar, which is the evidence and
demonstration of the goodness of God. O! but one that (...) much taken up in
the exercise of the grace (...) Prayer, what large and eminent discoveries
(...) God does he receive! He oftentimes disappoints their fears, and overcomes
their hop^ and expectation: he does not regulate our e^joyments according to
our desires: but (...) does regulate them according to that divi(...) and most
blessed rule, his own good will a(...) pleasure: and, O blessed are we in this
that it (...) so! And thirdly, Prayer does likewise furnish ^o Faith,
experience, which is a pillar on which ^aith must lean: that which makes the
Chri^^ian have so small experience, is want of the ^erious and constant
exercise of Prayer. O! but when he frowneth, we might have many things ^o
support our selves, if we were much in the ^erious exercise of this duty of
prayer. And ^ruly if we had these three pillars, our prayers would not return
empty.

Now the second advantage that a Christian does reap by the exercise of Prayer,
is, he is ^dmitted by this duty to most intimate and fa^iliar correspondance
with God. Did ye never ^now what it was to behold him who is in^isible in the
exercise of this Duty? Did ye ^ever know what these large and heavenly
communications of his love does mean? Prayer is that divine channel through
which that river of consolation (that makes glad the City of God) does run:
When was it that Cornelius did ^ee a man standing in white apparel? Was it ^ot
when he was praying? And when was it that Daniel did meet with the Angel? Was
it ^ot when he was in the exercise of prayer, and ^ffering up his evening
oblation to God? O for ^ommunion and fellowship with God (which (...) so rare
and singular in these days) were the ^weetnesse of it believed, we should be
more ^requent and constant in the pursuit of it. (...) ^onfess, and I wonder
that we are not put to ^ebate oftentimes whether there be such a thing as
communion and fellowship with him, ^e do so little enjoy it. What happiness, (O
^^loved of the Lord, if so I dare call you) have ye, which does so much
satisfy you, that wh(...) your eternal happiness is clearly holden fo(...)
before your face, yet ye do so much underv^lue it? Surely this persuasion
comes not fr(...) him that called you. I think, if Angels and (...) souls of
just men now made perfect (if so (...) may speak) if they were admitted to
beh(...) that wonderful undervaluing of commun(...) and fellowship with God
that is amongst (...) Christians of this generation, O how mi(...) they stand
and wonder at us! They would th(...) it a paradox and mystery, to behold any
und(...)valuing of him who can never be overvalu(...) Would ye not blush and
be ashamed, if (...) should embrace you, ye that have so much (...) dervalued
him? I know no sin that a Christ(...) shall be so much ashamed of, when he
shall (...) hold that noble Plant of venown, as the low (...) undervaluing
conceptions and apprehensi(...) that he has had of him. If in heaven th(...)
were a latitude for us to pray, we would p(...) that prayer (when first our
feet shall s(...) within the threshold of the door of our ev(...)lasting rest)
Pardon us for our undervaluing thee, O precious Christ!

The third advantage which a Christian h(...) in the exercise of prayer, is
this, It is that d(...) by which we must attain to the accompli(...)meant of the
promises: Though God be m(...) free in giving of the promises, yet he will
(...) supplicated for the accomplishment of the^ this is clear in Ezekiel. 36. 37.
where in the p(...)ceeding words there is named and holden for(...) large and
precious promises, yet he subjoy(...)eth, Thus says the Lord God, I will yet
for t(...) be enquired, etc. This is likewise clear, 2 S(...) 7. 27. where
David receiving the promise t(...) is house should be established for ever, and
that the Messiah should come out of his loins according to the flesh) he makes
that sweet ^uit of it: Therefore has thy servant found in it heart to pray
this prayer unto thee. Is not this mystery to turn over your promises into
prayers, and your prayers into songs of praise? a i^ no wonder that we
of^^^times complain, That his word does fail for evermore; because ye (...)e
not much in the exercise of that du^y, which must bring the accomplishment of
these things that he has promised.

The fourth and last advantage that a Christian does receive by the exercise of
prayer, it is ^he most compendious and excellent way to ^esist temptations that
assaults us. We^ spoke (...)e of mortifying of corruptions when once they have
seized upon us, and that it is a notable way to mortify them by prayer: this
is (...)kewise an advantage, that when temptations ^egins to assault us* then
we should go to our (...)es for relief: and I conceive, if a messenger ^f Satan
were sent to buffet us, we might be constrained to pray without ceasing. Hence
Jesus Christ who knew what was the best and most effectual remedy to resist
temptations, he gives this remedy of prayer, Matthew 26. 41. Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation.

Now we shall shut up our discourse, by speaking a little to the last thing we
intended to speak of at this occasion, and it is how a Christian may ^e helped
to walk suitably, as he ought, under his spiritual bonds and straits. We
confess, it is one of the most hard and difficult tasks in Christianity, for a
person to walk with divine submission under his public bonds, that when God
(in the depth of his unsearchable wisdom has thought fit to draw a vail over
his (...) to subscibe that truth, He has done all thin(...) well. We confess,
God has these precious (...) signs in such a dispensation, as that he may
(...) hide pride from our eyes, and that we may (...) taught to walk humbly
with him. O! but (...) we were always enlarged in our public co^versing one
with another, how would (...) esteem of our selves above measure, and be(...)
to undervalue these persons that are not th(...) kindly dealt with by God!
Hence is it that (...) always mixeth our wine with our water; (...) knows
that the pouring in of such precio(...) liquor, these bruckle vessels of ours
could (...) contain it.

He has this ^^sign likewise in such a dispensation, that we may be put to the
sweet exerc(...) of the grace of prayer; in a word, that we (...) ^e constant
and serious in that duty: We conceive, if some liberty of words and
enlargements in public were granted us, we woe(...) abridge and come short in
our private devo(...) ons* (...) is the great scope and main drift of so(...)
to seem great in the Kingdom of heaven amongst men, though they be least in the
estimation of Christ, who is that faithful and (...) witness.

And there is this d^sign likewise in such a dispensation, and it is that we
may be convince^ of our folly, and of the atheism and pride (...) our hearts,
that we can rise up from secret prayer, and yet never have any anxious thought
about it, but in our public straits and bond^ O how can we mourn and repine!
And w^ confess, we think these repinings does rather proceed from this, that
we think that gourd of (...)ldy applause is now beginning to wither ^^^r us,
and therefore we cry forth; It is better (...)r us to die then live, then from
this, want of (...)e presence of Jesus Christ, and the purticipation (...) his
sweetness; which we may most strongly ^onvince you of by this, is it not
sometimes so ^ith you, that under your public bonds when ^e have been most
remarkably straightened within our selves, yet if your hearts have not concei^ed
evil of you, but have restified their satisfa(...)ion, does not your sorrow
then decay, and (...)ere is no more repining thereat?

Now we think the best and most compendi(...)us way for a Christian to bear
such a dispensa(...)on (as to attain to a divine submission to christ in all
things, and to leave our complaints upon our selves) is this: We should study
much ^e vanity of our popular applause, what an ^^pty and transient a thing it
is. I confess, I ^ould wish no greater misery to any then to (...)k, and to
have it. We think it is misery (...)ough to have it; but certainly they walk
(...)est and most securest that cares not for it. (...)ence a Heathen said well
to this purpose, (...) been la^uit, been vixit: He that lurks well, (...) lives
well. I would likewise have you much (...)ken up in the consideration how ye
have great (...)sadvantage by your repinings and murmur(...)gs which ye have
against his dispensations, in (...)airning you in public. O Christians! does
(...)t your repinings incapacitate and indispose (...)u for the going about the
exercise of secret ^^ayer? Does not your repinings under your (...)blike bonds,
make your bonds strong upon ^ur spirits? I confess, a Christian may contract
and draw on mo^^etters and bonds by o(...) hours repining against such
dispensations, (...) he is able to shake off for many days: (...) when ye are
repining against such dispensatio(...) that ye have met with, does not your
lu(...) and corruptions stir and awake within yo^ Surely they then prevail, as
we may say, (...) contradicenti, nothing standing in opposi(...) against them
to your apprehension.

We would also say this to you, that ye (...) attain to a divine and holy
submission to su^^ dispensation as this, ye would be much in th(...)
consideration from what fountain your rep^ings and murmurings does proceed,
what is (...) rise and original of them, and from which th(...) spring? Is it
not rather from a principle (...) pride, then from a principle of love and
delig(...) to God; from a principle of self estimation rather then from a
principle of longing for Jesus Christ, and sorrow for his absence and wi(...)
drawing himself from you; the evil of Di(...)phas (desiring the pre-eminence
amongst the (...) thren) it is frequent amongst us; covering (...) be, as one
said, Aut Caesar, aut nihil. We de(...) either to be singular and marchlesse,
or else(...) be nothing. We confess, if a Christian did se(...)ously ponder
these things, and meditate up(...) them, certainly he might blush and be
asham(...) at his own solly: he might cover his face wi(...) confusion, and not
dare to look up.

But however, we would desire you (e(...) you that have in some reality and
sincerity (...) heart, gone about this most precious and m(...) blessed
exercise of the grace of prayer) that y(...) may now begin to renew, your
diligence, (...) to add to your diligence, Faith, and to yo(...) Faith, Virtue,
and comfort your selves with ^is, that there is an everlasting feast prepared
^r you in heaven above, which is not like that ^^st of Assuerus, that lasted
for an hundredth and ^^rscore four days: but this blessed feast shall (...)st
throughout all the ages of long and endless (...)ernity. Believe it, it shall
be a blessed and e(...)erlasting feast. It shall be an everlasting feast of
(...)ve. It shall be a feast that shall not be capable (...) any period nor
end, nor yet shall know of any (...)thing: there is no satiety, neither any
loa(...)ing in heaven. And, O may not this comfort (...)ou in your journey, and
incite and provoke our desires to follow after him, who is alto(...)there
desirable, and altogether lovely, and (...)at bright and morning star?

And likewise I would say this to you, even (...) you who are Atheists and
strangers to this (...)ecious exercise of the duty of prayer; I (...)ink it
were complete misery to you, if there (...)ere no more but that ye are
strangers to it, (...)en to this exercise of the duty of prayer: for (...)e
think the exercise of godliness it is a re(...)ard to it self, as we may say
that word, Pie(...)s-sibi premium. It is such an inconceivable and (...)ellent
a thing, that it is a reward to them (...)hosoever have it. And, oh! will not
your ^earts be prevailed with, to fall in love with (...)ch a rare and
excellent exercise, even with (...)e exercise of godliness, which we conceive
profitable for all things? And, O will ye make your study to pray to God, and
to be in the (...)ercise of godliness, without which ye shall ^ver see God;
without which ye shall never (...) admitted to behold him (the beholding of
(...)om is the exercise of all the Saints, and of all the souls of just men now
made perfect, and (...) all those precious thousands that are no^ about his
glorious Throne) and without the exercise of which, these feet of yours shall
never be admitted to stand within the bless(...) gates of that precious City,
even the City (...) New Jerusalem, where all the redeemed of (...) Lord are;
and without the exercise of which (...) shall be eternally and undoubtedly
undone. (...) ye want godliness, ye shall undergo the pains(...) hell, and the
torments of that lake that bu(...)eth with fire and brimstone: and the day
(...) coming when that curse (that sad curse!) sh(...) be sadly accomplished
upon you, which is (...) Deuteronomy. 28. 34. Thou shall be mad for the sigh(...)
thine eyes which thou shall behold: and when (...) Lord shall smite thee with
an evil that thou ca(...) not be healed of, even from the sole of thy foot,
(...) the crown of thy head: and thou shall become (...) astonishment, and a
proverb unto all Nations, (...) thersoever the Lord shall carry thee, and (...)
shall be smitten before thine enemies: Thou sh(...) go out one way against
them, and thou shall (...) seven ways before them: and thy carcass s(...) be
meat unto the fowls of the air, and to the bea(...) of the field, and none
shall fray them away; a(...) all these things shall come upon thee till thou
(...) destroyed.

O Atheists! what a terrible and dread(...) sight shall it be, when ye shall
behold tho^ black and hideous everlasting chains, that sh(...) once be wreathed
about your cursed necks! (...) to be thinking that ere long ye are to dwell
(...) take up your everlasting prison, out of whi(...) there is no redemption
again; and the do(...) the prison house is sealed with the seal of t(...)
King, which is an unchangeable and unalte(...)ble decree! Oh! if the
apprehensions and (...)oughts of this could once provoke and stir (...)n up to
pity your own precious and immor(...)l souls! (with which there is no exchange)
(...)h! what a woeful and marvelous stupidity and (...)rdness of heart has over
taken the people of (...)is present generation, that go to hell with (...) much
delight and ease, as if they were go(...)g to heaven! Oh! that your spirits
were (...)ee awaked from your security, that ye might (...)rceive the woeful and
miserable condition that (...) are lying under! O Christians, what are ye
(...)solved to do? Are ye not afraid that ye shall (...) be-nighted with your
work? Oh! shall the (...)ffering of these pains first resolve you, and (...)are your of the sadness and inex^^icable sor(...)ws that are in that bottomless pit?
Now to (...)m who is that blessed Master of assemblies, (...)o can fix these
words as nails in your hearts, (...)d who can roove them therein, to his
bles(...)d and holy Name we desire to give praise.

SERMON IV.
1 These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
WE desire to commend the blessed and precious estate of those that are now
exalted above the reach of this bles(...) exercise, and who have now made a
blessed (...) precious exchange; that in stead of pray(...) without ceasing,
they are now praising (...)hout ceasing. And, O beloved of the Lord (...)
(...)so we may call you) whether is that blessed(...) gone which you did speak
of, the enjoyment and fruition of Christ, so that if he would ha(...) required
it of you, you would have plucked (...) your right eyes, and given them to him?
O! he become less precious, that your respect^ him are so much impaired? Was it
not o(...) your divine and blessed lot, that ye could (...) have lived one day
without the enjoyment him, in whose face your eternal blessed(...) dothly? O!
but absence and est^^angem(...) from him, is thought a dispensable want those
days? And that which is the ground the expostulation is, that ye are so little
in g(...)ing obedience unto this blessed and precio(...) command, Pray without
ceasing. Yea, if (...) stones and walls of this house, and if the ra(...)
thereof could speak, they might utter this (...) plaint upon many of the
inhabitants of (...) City, that they do not watch unto prayer, and (...) not
exercising themselves in the entertaining divine and precious correspondance
with hea(...) Oh! whither is the exercise of that preci(...) duty of prayer
gone! O how independent are(...) in our walk with God! O! when did ye (...) so
much of his sweetness, that when ye did (...)flect upon it, ye were forced to
say, Did our hearts burn within us while he spoke with When did he cast an
indissolvable knot of (...) upon your hearts, which ye hoped et(...) could not
loose nor dissolve? I wonder (...) this is not a question which we do not (...)
debate. How such undervaluers of commu(...) and fellowship with God here below
((...) can live many days without seeing the S(...) Stars, without beholding
of him) can (...) with such woeful contentment? O! can(...) a delusion overtake
you as this, that ye (...)ign as Kings without Christ, and be rich and (...)ll
without his fullness? It were, no doubt, (...)e special advantage of a
Christian, to be retir(...)g from all things that are here below, and to (...)
enclosing himself in a sconce, in a blessed and (...)vine contemplation of that
invisible Majesty, (...)d to have our souls united to him by a three-(...)ld
cord which is not easily broken.

But now to come to the words, the next (...)ing which we intend to speak from
them, is, (...) know what is the most compendious way to (...)ep your souls in
life, and to have them flou(...)hing as a watered garden in the exercise of
(...)air, we shall say these four things unto (...).

First, be much in the exercise of the grace (...) fear when ye go to pray,
that ye may have (...)gh and reverent apprehensions of that glory(...)s and
terrible Majesty before whom ye pray: (...)ere is a precious promise for this
in Isa. 60. 5. (...)ou shall fear, and be enlarged, etc. O! but our (...)heism
(and our having that inscription en(...)en on all our devotion, worshipping of
an un(...)own God) makes us to have so little access to him, and taste so
little of that sweetness, (...) causes the lips of those that are asleep to
(...)ak. How oftentimes go ye to prayer, and (...) no more in the exercise of
fear, then if ye (...)re to speak to one that is below you? Those (...)ified
spirits that are now about his Throne, with what holy reverence and fear do
they (...)re him! And if it be the practice of the (...)her House, why ought it
not then to he the (...)ctice of this Lower House?

Secondly, if ye would attain to enlargement (...)he exercise of prayer, ye
would be much in paying those vows that ye have made to (...) when ye were
enlarged. I am persuaded this, that our making inquiry after vow and our
deferring to pay them, saying in (...) practice (before the Angel) It was an
erro^ does, no doubt, obstruct our access and lib(...) to God: these two are
conjoined toget(...) paying of vows, and access to God, Job 22. Thou shall
make thy prayer unto him, and he (...) hear thee (which is access) and thou
shalt^ thy vows. Are there not many of us that crees many things with our
selves, that are (...) established by God? O! when shall our (...)lutions and
our practices be of like equal(...) tent!

There is a third thing we would give yo(...) a compendious way to attain to
the exercise prayer, and enlargements in it, be much in (...) exercise of
fervency. Ah! when we go (...) prayer under bonds and straitnings, we ta^^
berty to our selves to abreviate and cut (...) our prayers! O! do we know what
a bl(...) practice this is to wrestle with God, were i(...) til the dawning of
the day, and not to let hi(...) till he bless us? What was it that made way
Jacobs enlargements? Was it not his seri(...)nesse and fervency? And these two
are of times conjoined in the Psalm; I cried, (...) heard me; the one importing
his fervency, the other his access. Our prayers, for the (...) part, dies
before they win up to heaven, (...) proceed with so little zeal and fervency
(...) us. This was the saying of a holy Man, th(...) never went from God,
without God; th(...) where he left him, he knew where to find (...) again. It
is a saying that many of us does n^ such as endeavor to attain to. Alace! we
may (...), that sin of neutrality and indifferncy in (...)yer, has slain its
ten thousands of enjoy(...)nts, when other sins (in prayer) has but in their
thousands.

There is a fourth thing which we shall speak to, as the most compendious way
to attain (...)argement in the exercise of prayer, and it is (...)s. Ye would
be under a deep and divine im(...)ession of these things that ye are to speak
of (...) to God in the exercise of prayer, either to (...)ve your spirits under
an impression of sorrow, under an impression of joy. In a manner, a
(...)ristian ought to speak his prayer to his own (...)rt, before he speak it
to God; and if we spoke more nor what our hearts does endite, our (...)yers
would not be long, and we should eshew (...)se vain and needless repetitions
that we use (...)he exercise of that duty of prayer. O! but (...) are exceeding
rash with our mouth, and (...)ty with our spirits in uttering things before
(...)d. Almost we never go to prayer, but if we (...)d so much grace as to
reflect upon it, we (...)ght be convinced of this, that we have utte(...)
things that have not been fit to be uttered God; as when ye speak of your
burdens and (...)sses, which ye never did seriously premedi(...) upon; and
likewise speak of these things, ^our joy, in which ye did never rejoice. O!
(...)eive ye him to be altogether such an one ^our self, that such a woeful
cursed practice delusion as this, should overtake you? If a (...)istian would
study before he go to prayer, (...)mprint and engrave his desires and petitions
(...)n his heart, he might have more liberty and (...)sse in the proposing of
them unto God.

Now that wherewith we shall shut up (...) discourse upon this noble grace and
duty prayer, shall be this, To speak a little unto (...) answers and returns of
prayer.

And the first thing which we shall speak up this subject, is, What can be the
reason that (...) Christians in these days are so little expect(...) and
waiting for the return and answer of t(...) prayers? For do we not oftentimes
pray, (...) yet does not know what it is to wait for answer and return to these
prayers of o(...) This exercise which is so much undervalued us, the want of
it, does, no doubt, prove (...) marvelous decay that is in the work of
C(...)stians graces, And we conceive, that the (...) waiting for the return and
answer to pray does proceed from the want of the solid (...) and of the
absolute necessity that we st(...) of these things that we pray to God for
((...) strong necessities makes strong desires, and nest expectations) but we
may say, that necessities dies with our petitions; we sh(...) be more in
waiting for, and expecting the turns of our prayers.

There is this likewise that is the reason that woeful practice, We have not a
lively deep impression of the burden of these th(...) which we would have
removed by God when one is praying for the removing of(...) lusts, and some
pregnant and predominate (...) and yet never cares whether it be remove not:
and the reason of this which mak^ wait for and expect so little the answer
a(...) turn of our prayers, is, because we are not g(...) ing under that yoke
and burden, as tho(...) were unsupportable; but we walk lightly (...) that yoke
and heavy burden, and therefore (...)e wait not for the answer of our prayers:
We (...)ok upon our chains and fetters of iniquity, as (...)ough they were
chains of gold, and fetters of (...)ver; and so it is no wonder that we are not
^uch in the expectation and waiting for our (...) of prayer, and to have these
chains and (...)s removed from off us.

And there is this likewise which is the occa(...)n of our little waiting for
an answer to our (...)ayers; We have not a right apprehension (...)d uptaking
of the preciousnesse and excellen(...) of those things that we seek from God;
we (...) not know and understand what advantage (...)old flow to us from the
having of these (...)ings that we seek, and what marvelous disad(...)ntage
shall flow to us from the want of them. (...)! but the people of this present
generation, (...)erein we now live, have put a low rate upon (...) things of
Religion, which are of their ever(...)ing and soul-concernment, even those
things (...) were accounted most precious and excel(...) by all these that have
gone before us, and (...)ve taken up their possessions and eternal ^b^d^ that
blessed land which is above. There is (...)s one thing which we do undervalue
and set naught, and that is our communion and fell(...)ship with God: We are
indifferent in the (...)ving of i^, and cares not whether we have it not, which
makes us not earnestly to press (...)er the pursuing of it. O Christians, be
per(...)ded of it, that there are these three disad(...)ntages that follows
unto a Christian that not much in waiting for the answer and re(...)n of his
prayer after he has prayed.

The first disadvantage is this, it is a compendious way to win to formality in
the duty prayer. I will not say that one which do th(...) always wait for an
answer to his prayer, t(...) he cannot pray in spirit, and in sincerity (...)
fervency: but I need not be afraid to say th(...) that he which is not much in
the exercise waiting for a return and answer to, his pray(...) he prays little
to purpos^ and it may be (...) monstrated and clearly shown by this reas(...)
Can ye be serious in the accomplishment of (...) means, if ye do not propose
some end and (...) sign before your eyes why ye do so? No(...) what is the end
and scope that ye propose (...) fore your selves in your going about the
exe^cise of that duty of prayer? I confess, (...) ought to go about it, not
only as a help (...) mean to remove our evils, and to obtain (...) advantages;
but likewise we ought to go ab(...) it as a duty encumbent to us: but if we go
(...) about the exercise of prayer, under both th(...) considerations, and
except we wait for the(...) turn and answer, certainly we pray not ar(...)*

There is a second disadvantage which a Ch^^stian has that does not wait for
the answer(...) return of his prayer, he loses many sweet (...) periences of
the love and good will of God (...) wards him. It is no wonder that many of
(...) does not receive much from God; the rea(...) of it is, because we are not
expecting and w(...)ing for much from him. I will not say bu(...) Christian
that is not much in the execise waiting, may sometimes obtain the answer (...)
return of his prayer; but we may say th(...) things to such persons, If your
prayers be(...) swered, and ye have not waited for the re(...) and answer of
them, surely ye lose much sw(...) (...)esse and preciousnesse of the answer of
your ^rayers. There is this likewise which we would ^ay to such persons as
these, If a Christians ^rayer be answered when he does not wait for ^he answer
of it, then the Christian cannot so (...)esolutely build his faith upon such an
experience to believe that God again will answer his ^rayers, as if he had been
waiting upon a return.

There is this third disadvantage that follows (...) Christian who is not much
in the exercise of waiting for the return and answer to his prayer, He cannot
continue long in a praying frame. (...) conceive that the most fit and
compendious way for a Christian to keep his spirit in a holy (...)d divine
correspondance with God, is to have (...) always in a holy and fit capacity to
converse with God: this is a way to be much in the ex^rcise of waiting for the
return and answer of ^rayer. It is a sweet exercise to be expecting and waiting
till the vision shall speak to you.

Now are there not many here who if ye ^ere posed with this question, When were
ye ^ut to the serious exercise of waiting for the ^eturn and answer of your
prayers after ye have ^rayed? I am persuaded of it, ye should find (...)
difficulty to fall upon the number of the (...)yes wherein ye were taken up in
this exer^^se. I think that which does so plainly demon(...)ate that woeful
formality and dreadful in^^fferency that is amongst us (in going about (...)
exercise of this duty of prayer) is this, We (...) not wait for the answers and
returns of our ^^ayers from God. O Christians! are ye so (...)fectly complete,
or have ye already attained (...) the full stature of one in Christ, that ye do
^^t wait for the answers and returns of your prayers, that so ye may receive
more from God*

And I would say this to these Atheists a(...) strangers to God, who never knew
what it w(...) to wait for an answer and return to their pr^^ers: and are there
not many such here, who their consciences were now posed when th(...) did wait
for a return to their prayers, th(...) might (if they speak the truth) say that
th(...) did never wait for an answer to their pray(...) I say to such, that
they did never p(...) aright.

Now the second thing which we shall sp(...) upon the returns and answers of
prayer, (...) How a Christian may come to the distinct kn^^ledge of this, that
his prayers are heard and (...) swered? A thing indeed, we confess, t(...)
many of us are not much taken up with, we(...) being in the exercise to know
such a thing.

And first, there is a difference betwixt (...) hearing of prayer, and of
getting a return (...) answer to prayer. God, in the depth of his
(...)searchable wisdom, may sometimes hear (...) prayers, and yet make a long
time to interv(...) before he give the sensible return and ans(...) of that
prayer: this is clear from Dan. 10. 12, (...) where it is said to Daniel, That
from the (...) day that he afflicted his soul, his prayers and s(...)plications
were heard; and yet it is one (...) twenty days before the answer and return
his prayer did come. These are two did(...) mercies to the Christian, the
hearing of (...) Prayer, and the receiving the answer and re(...) of his prayer
which he has prayed for. A(...) it is clear from Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man
cr(...) and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of his trouble.

We shall say this secondly, that there is a eat and vast difference betwixt
the returns prayer, and the delays of the returns of it; (...)d yet it were a
bad inference to infer that God (...)th deny to give us the answer of our
pray^^s, though he delay them a while, or to say (...)t we can have no answer
at all, though we (...)nfesse that is the common place from which (...)ristians
does bring all their arguments to (...)ove that their prayers are not heard,
even the ^lay of the answer and return to their prayers: (...)d this is clear
from Rev. 6. 10* 11. Where the (...)ls of these that are crying to God for the
re(...)ge of their blood upon the earth, their prayer heard, and yet withal
they are desired to stay (...)ittle, until their brethren (that are to be
slain) (...)old be fulfilled, and then their prayer shall be (...)filled and
accomplished unto them.

There is this thirdly, that we shall speak to* (...)d it is this, That
sometimes our prayers may (...) both heard and answered, and yet we will (...)t
believe that it is so, when we are waiting (...) the distinct and solid
apprehension of this (...)rcy: and we conceive that this is either
oc(...)sioned through the greatness of affliction (...)on a Christian, and the
continuance of his (...)oak, as it is evidently clear from Job. 9. 16, 17.
(...)here Job says: If I had called, and he had an^^ered me; yet would I not
believe that he had (...)rkened unto my voice. And he gives this to the reason
of it, For he breaks me with a (...)pest, and multiplieth my wounds without
ca^se* (...) this may be the reason of it likewise, Why? (...)en our prayers
are both heard and answered, (...) believe not that it is so, and it is because
of (...)e want of the exercise of waiting for (...) answer, and that we are not
much taken up (...) expecting a return from God to our prayer^ and therefore
when our prayers are heard (...) answered, we cannot believe that it is so.

There is this fourth thing which we sh(...) speak to, concerning the returns
of prayer, th(...) the prayers and petitions of a Christian, ev(...) while he
is under the exercise of misbelief, th(...) may be heard and taken off his
hand, as it (...) clear from Psalm. 116. 11, 12. I said in my ha(...) all men
are liars: But there is a sweet and precious experience which follows that,
W(...) shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits (...) wards me? And this
is clear from Jonah 2. (...) compared with verse 7. where he says, I (...)
cast out of thy sight; and yet he says in verse^ When my soul fainted within
me, I remembered (...) Lord, and my prayer came in unto thee, unto th(...) holy
Temple.

Now, to give some answer to the quest(...) which we proposed, how one may know
wh(...) there or not his prayers be answered: First, (...) Christian be
enlarged, and enabled to go on(...) duty, though he do not receive a sensible
man festation of the grant and acceptance of (...) prayer, but (in a manner)
he is denied of (...) answer and return of it, yet if he do attain (...) such a
length, as to pray without ceasing, and (...) have strength to accomplish this
duty of pray(...) that is, (no doubt) a clear token and evid(...) that your
prayers and supplications are h(...) by God, and in his own and appointed (...)
these prayers of yours shall be answered, (...) this is clear in Psalm. 138. 3.
where David giv(...) this as a token and evidence that his pray(...) were heard
and answered; In the day wh(...) cried, thou answeredst me: And what is his
argument that he brings to prove this, that his prayer was answered? It is,
and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. Certainly it is a bad sign, and
an evil token that your prayers are not heard; if because he denies your suit
and petiition for a time, ye leave off the exercise of the duty of prayer, and
fai^t in the day of your adversity.

There is a second thing by which you may know whether or not your prayers have
met with a return and answer from God, and it is this: If your prayers be
suitable unto his own word, and agreeable unto his holy and most divine will
and pleasure, then you may be persuaded of this, that God has heard your
prayers, this is abundantly clear from, 1 John 5. 14. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will
he hears us. Certainly it is difficult and exceeding hard, we confess, for a
Christian to exercise faith upon the sure word of prayer, abstracting from all
other grounds: But if we would have our faith elevated and raised to so divine
a pitch, we would believe this precious ^^uth, that what soever we ask
according to his will, he ^eareth us, and that he will answer our
supplications, therefore will ye wait patiently and faithfully upon God.

There is this third thing whereby you may know whether or not your prayers be
heard, ^^d it is, if ye have delight and spiritual joy in ^he exercise of this
blessed duty of prayer, though ye have not the return and answer of your
prayers, yet it is an evidence and token that your prayers are heard, and you
shall shortly have an answer given to them; and when ye lose your delight in
duties which ye once attained to, then ye may be afraid thereat: There is
somewhat of this hinted at, in Job 27. 9, 10. where Job gives this as a reason
and ground that he will not hear the prayer and supplication of the hypocrites,
because he delights not himself in the Almighty: Inferring this much, that if
he would delight himself in God, then he would hear his prayer, and give him a
return and answer to it.

There is this fourth thing whereby you may know whether or not your prayers
are heard and answered, and it is when your sadness and anxiety (about that
which you were asking from God in prayer) is removed and takes away; this is
clear from, 1 Samuel 1. 18. when this is given as an evidence that Hanna w(...)
heard in her prayer and supplication, beca(...) her countenance was no more
sad: and certainly when our prayers have such a return, then (...) may know
distinctly that they are answered b(...) the Lord.

And the fifth thing that we would propo(...) to you whereby ye may know
whether or no(...) your prayers have met with a return and answer from God, if
ye pray making use of Jesus Christ as a blessed Dayes-man to interpo(...)
himself betwixt the Father and you; then y(...) may be persuaded of this, that
your pray(...) are heard; this is clear, where it is twice (...) pe^^ed, Joh.
14. 13, 14. Whatsoever ye ask(...) my name, you shall receive it, believe it,
(...) can deny you nothing that you seek from him if you ask in faith.

Now, that which thirdly we shall speak upon the return of prayer, it is, to
these things which does obstruct the hearing of our prayers, why they are not
answered by him, so that oftentimes when we pray to him, he shuts out our
prayers from him, and covers himself with a cloud, so that our prayers cannot
pass through: O but if that duty and precious council which Hezekiah gave
unto Isaiah 37. 4. (which truly is worthy to be engraven on our hearts) Lift
up thy prayer, etc. which does import that it was a weighty thing which would
require much seriousness in going about it: I say, if that worthy counsel
were obeyed, we should not have need to propose these obstructions, and to
complain of Gods ways. Now we shall speak to these obstructions which hinders
us.

First, hypocrisy which we have in the exer^ise of prayer: O but we pray much
with our ^^dgement, when we pray not much with our ^ffections! that is, our
light will cry out, crucify such a lust; and our affection will again ^ry out,
hold thy hand, it is a difficulty to have ^he spirit of a Christian brought
such a length, (...) to have his judgments and affections of like ^easure and
extent: Job gives this as a reason why God will not hear a hypocrites prayer,
^ob 27. 10. even because he is not constant* there (...) a woeful disagreeance
betwixt what we speak, ^^d what we think: We speaking many things ^ith our
mouth, which our hearts sometimes (...)ness that we would not have God granting
us (...) a manner) our affection is a protestation a(...)inst the return to
many of our prayers: Our (...)ols are so fixed in our hearts, that we spare
(...)gag the King of our lusts, though there be given out a commandment from
the Lord to destroy all these; and it may oftentimes speak, the the bitterness
of death is past out against us Seeing we do oftentimes spare them contrary to
his blessed command.

There is a second thing which obstructs th(...) exercise of prayer, and it is
that woeful a(...) cursed end that we propose to our selves in going about this
duty, this is clear in James 4. 3^ You ask, and receive not, because ye ask
am(...) that you may consume it upon your lusts. Oh! that woeful idolatry that
Christians does intertain in the exercise of Prayer! That glorious and
inconceivable attribute of God, of bei(...) Alpha and Omega which we do
sacrilegiously attribute to our selves in making our selves the beginning of
our prayers and the end of the^ also, it hinders much our return of prayer;
certainly these woeful ends that we speak of (...) the beginning of our
discourse (and all along(...) it) does (no doubt) marvelously obstruct t(...)
answers of our prayers.

Now the last thing that we shall speak up(...) the return of Prayer, shall be
to some advantages which a Christian may have from th(...) that his prayers are
answered, and that he h(...) received a return from the Lord, believe m(...)
there is more love in the answer of one pray(...) than Eternity could make a
commentary up(...) O what love is in this, that he should condescend to hear
our prayers? That such a glorious and infinite Majesty should (in a manner deign
himself to bow down his ear to take (...)tice of these petty desires that we
propose u(...) him? And there are these five advantages th(...) a Christian may
have from this.

First, it is an excellent way to keep the grace of love in exercise, this is
clear in Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my
supplications. O but love in some has eminently taken fire when they have
reflected upon this, that their prayers are heard.

There is this second Advantage that a Christian has, It is an excellent
motive and persuasion to make us constant and frequent in the exercise of
prayer, this is clear in Psalm. 116. 2. where he reflecteth upon the hearing of
his voice, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. I am persuaded of
this, that our little exercise in prayer, does much proceed from this, that we
wait not for a return of prayer, and therefore oftentimes it is so that we do
not receive a return. Believe me, there is more ^oy and Divine satisfaction to
be found in the solid and spiritual convictions of this that our prayers are
heard, than we will have in the exercise of many prayers that we pray.

There is a third Advantage that a Christian has from the return and answer of
his prayers, it is an evident token from the Lord that ^is prayer is accepted
by him, when a Christian can read his reconciliation by the gracious returns of
his prayer, and that he is in a gracious ^st^te and condition, and, O! is not
that a great Advantage? We confess God may hear the prayers of the wicked for
mercies that are common, but the hearing of a real Christians prayer both in
mercies common and special, proves that his person is accepted by God, For
(...)e must be accepted of him through Jesus Christ, before that he can have
pleasure in our (...)crifice, and is not this a precious Advantage to read your
Adoption upon the returns and answers of your prayers from God? May not t(...)
Christian say when he meets with such a retu(...) and answer of his prayer, Now
I am perswad(...) that I am begotten unto a lively hope, because (...) has
heard the voice of my supplication* I^ manner, it is a character wherein you
may (...) your interest and infeftment in that precio(...) and most blessed
inheritance that is above. (...) if there were no more to provoke you to w(...)
for the return and answer of your prayers, n(...) this, it may be sufficient to
u^ty many of the(...) debates and disputings that you have abo(...) your
interest in Jesus Christ! And O may (...) this argument provoke you to love him.

There is a fourth Advantage that comes (...) the Christian from the
consideration of the return and answers of prayer, It is a compendio(...) way
to make us desist from the committing (...) iniquity: Hence is that word in
Psalm. 6. (...) Whereupon the consideration of the heari(...) of his prayer, he
breaks forth in that saying Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; for
(...) Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. I^ manner, speaking so much,
that he would ha(...) nothing to do with such ones as they were.

Lastly, the return and answer of prayer, i(...) an excellent way to keep our
Faith in exercis(...) it is a sweet experience of the love of God, up on which
we may build our hope in our darke^^ night, even to call to mind these things
that (...) has given to us in former days, certainly Holy and Divine
reflection upon these thing might persuade us that he will not shut up (...)
tender and loving mercies, into an everlasti(...) for getfulnesse.

Now to close up our discourse upon this noble duty and grace of prayer, we
shall desire this one thing of you, Who is begotten unto a lively and precious
hope. That you may be more in that noble execise: I may say, that there is no
sin which a Christian shall be more deeply convinced of in the day when his
feet shall be standing upon the utmost line of time, as this sin of the neglect
of the duty of prayer: And we confess God may reprove many. That they bind
heavy burdens on men's shoulders that are grievous to be born, and does not so
much themselves, as (...)uch them with one of their fingers.

But however, seriously enlarge your hearts unto this blessed exercise, for
believe me, it is the way (if so we may speak) to bring down Heaven upon Earth:
But alas, I am afraid that this duty of prayer is not much now in practice
amongst many of us in these days: Is not prayer that noble duty almost laid by
in this evil and perverse generation as a thing unsavo(...)y? Oh that ye had
now a Divine anticipation of that glorious enjoyment of him, which you shall
have throughout all the ages of Eternity if you be serious in this exercise!
Oh, may we not walk mournfully many days in the bitterness of our souls,
because we are not more in the exercise of secret prayer? Oh! whither is our
devotion gone in these days? Oh! whither is it gone? I am afraid, that if
these that have lived before in ancient days, were now alive, doubtless they
would be ignorant of us, and they would not acknowledge us for Christians. I
would say this for these who never seriously practiced this duty as yet, of
which number there are many. O but prayer be another thing then the most part
of you conceives it to be; I think it is not only mysterious in its na ture, to
conceive how the spirit of man can converse with him that is the Father of
Spirits, how there should interveen a communion and fellowship betwixt such
two? It is a mystery and riddle surely which we cannot easily unfold: But
withal, This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, that the
exercise and practice of prayer is grown as mysterious, as t(...) nature of it.
O but there are many of you, that supposes ye are praying aright, and therefore
you think all is well. Who shall be cut off as those that never prayed. I
conceive if we believed all that is spoken upon this exercise of prayer, what
Divine properties are requisite to a Christian that would seriously go about the
exercise of that precious duty, we might cry forth, This is a ha^^ saying, who
can hear it? And certainly it is altogether impossible for us, though it be not
impossible for God to enlarge our hearts to pursue it, For with him nothing is
impossible Oh! that if once ye might be persuaded to se^ about the exercise of
this precious and mo(...) excellent duty of prayer, which will be to yo^
eternal advantage, and soul everlasting co^cernment! I am afraid (O Christians)
that one from heaven (who has entered into those everlasting and blessed
possessions of that excellent and blessed estate of life) would co(...) down to
earth (if so with reverence we may speak) and preach upon this Text of ours,
Pray without ceasing, and speak of these precious and unspeakable advantages
which does accompa^^ the man that is much in the exercise of prayer there are
many of us, I fear would scarcely b(...) inclined to hear such an exhortation.
And more nor this, if one from the dead would ^rise, and come from the pit unto
this City, and preach upon this Text unto you, pray without ceasing, having the
chains of everlasting wrath hanging about his neck, and preach upon these sad
and unspeakable disadvantages which are to be found in the neglect of this
blessed exercise of the duty of prayer, and should desire you to flee from that
wrath that is to come. Oh! would there not be many of you (I am afraid) who
would stop your ears, and would not listen unto the voice and language of such
an exhortation? Ah! whether are many of us going? whether are we going?
certainly the apprehensions and thoughts of everlasting separation from the
presence of the Lord is not much engraven and deeply imprinted upon the spirits
of the hypocritical Christians of this generation! We are not afraid of that
wrath and eternal destruction which is approaching unto us.

But to you that are heirs of the promise, who are heirs of the grace of Life,
and who are begotten again unto a lively hope, I would say this to you, Pray
without ceasing. And once you shall (...)ng without all ceasing, and without
all interruption: And to these that prays not, the day is coming when they
shall howl in that bottomless pit amongst those everlasting flames of fire and
brimstone! when they shall be (...)rayed in the Mortar of the wrath of God by
^he Pestel of his severe Justice, when his Omni^otency shall uphold you, and
his Justice shall ^mite you eternally! Oh, it were many of your advantages that
you were (indeed) Beasts without immortal souls. For to have soul does
capacitat you for an eternal being, a^ for an eternal punishment.

SERMON V.
Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all di(...)gence, for out of it are the
issues of li(...)
WE conceive if there were a windo(...) opened in each one of our bosom
through which each one of us the are here, might behold one another hearts,
(...) would become monsters and wonders one of to another, and to our selves
likewise, and mig(...) cry out, O! where is the God of judgment, t(...) takes
not vengeance on such deceitful hearts? our hearts were turned out of us (so
to speak and if we saw the inside of our hearts, we woe(...) wonder at his
patience. I think such is the d(...) perate deceitfulness of our hearts, that
is(...) the Saints since Adams days, and shall be the end of the world, had
but one heart guide, I think they would misguide it: I woe(...) only say this to
Believers, that if your hea(...) were left one hour to your selves to keep,
y(...) would commit more iniquity, than ye can i(...) gine or dream of. There
is only these f(...) things that I would speak to before I come the words; and
I would request you to (...) notice of them. And first, there is many os(...)
that has two hearts in our bosom, for so(...) an one is the hypocrite, James.
1. 8. A dou(...) minded man is unstable in all his ways, th(...) a man that
has two hearts, a part of (...) heart goes to God, and a part of his heart
go(...)h to the devil: And I think, if we were all (...)ell searched, it is to
be feared that many (...) us would be found two hearted men. (...)condly, that
although ye would give Christ (...)l your members, yet if you would not give
(...)m your hearts, it should be nothing thought (...); if you would give him
your eye, so that (...) should not look to your idols pleasantly, or yet look
with delight upon any cursed or (...)full object; and if you would give him your
(...)rs, so that you could nor would not hearken (...) the voice of any of your
temptations, but be deaf as an adder unto them; and if you would (...)ve him
your tongue, so that you should not (...)eak any thing dishonorable to him;
and if (...)u would give him your feet, so that you (...)old not walk in any
way, but in an appro(...) path of godliness: Now, I say, although you (...)uld
give him all these members of your bo(...), yet if ye give him not your hearts,
it is all no purpose, Prove. 32. 26. My son, give me (...) heart, etc. Thirdly,
there is many which (...)veth their hearts to their idols, and their (...)gues
to Christ, but in one day they shall be and to be but deceivers. Lastly, it is
a noble (...)ing for a Christian to be taken up in the keep(...)g of his heart:
I may say this of the heart, (...)ich the Apostle James said of the tongue, It
an-unruly evil full of deadly poison, Jam. 3. 8. (...)e heart is taken up with
whoring from God, (...)d with contriving the way how to satisfy its (...)ts,
and continually forsaking the living God. (...)r hearts are doing nothing in
all our life(...)e (many of us) but profaning his holy (...)me, and
blaspheming the God of Jacob.

Now to come to the words, there is fou^ things therein. First, the duty
imposed upon(...) a Christian, and that is to keep his heart. S^condly, that the
heart of man has many see^ers, which is imported in that word, ke(...)
Thirdly, you have the qualification and w(...) how a Christian should keep his
heart, whi(...) are rendered in these words, with all diligen(...) or as the
words may be rendered, with all ke(...)ing. And lastly, the reasons why you
sho(...) do so, for out of it are the issues of life, fo(...) you do so, you
shall have life, but if not, fro(...) thence is the issues of death. Now from
(...) first thing in the words, ye would consid(...) these two things.

First, that it is a duty encumbent to ev(...) Christian to keep his heart;
this is clear, (...) only from our Text, but likewise in Deuteronomy. 4. (...)* Only
take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul dil(...) gently, etc. Prove. 23. 19.
Guide thy heart in(...) way: Which is, study to keep it diligently the way of
godliness; and it is clear likewi(...) that a Christian ought to keep his
heart fr(...) the great advantages that are holden out Scripture for so doing;
only take that plac(...) Prove. 16. 32. Better is he that rules his spi(...)
then he that takes a city.

The second thing that I would say, is, (...) point out the woeful disadvantages
that w(...) upon him that rules not his own heart, (...) gives it leave to rove
here and there, Prove. (...) 28. He that has not rule over his own spirit, like
a city that is broken down, and without w(...) And there is these two
disadvantages that w(...) upon not keeping of the heart. First, T(...) is no
tentations that assaults a heart that is (...) (...)pt, but they become
victorious; spiritual (...)rength has forsaken them that keeps not (...)eir
hearts. Secondly, There is no exercise (...)r duty a Christian is employed in
which (...)eps (...)ot his heart, but he is like a ruinous city which (...)th
no walls, and in which there is no order.

Now, the next thing that I would speak to, (...) to show what it imports to
keep the heart, (...)d what are the directions and ways which Christian ought
to have before him in the ex^^cise and duty of keeping his heart.

And first, it imports this, that a Christian (...)old observe the motions of
his heart, and (...)old not let his heart nor thoughts go astray, (...)t
should have a register of all their motions, (...) is clear in Luke 21. 34. And
take heed to your (...)ves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharg(...) with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of (...)is life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. The second thing which keeping of the heart (...)cludes, is,
You must keep all the things that (...)rtains to your hearts; and there is
these five (...)ings which ye must keep. First, your (...)oughts, you must keep
your thoughts so (...)tly, that you must not give them any sin(...)llatitude in
the least manner. Secondly, a (...)ristian he must keep his eyes, which are the
(...)ndows through which much wickedness is (...)veyed to the soul, Prove. 23.
26. My son (...)e me thy heart, etc. Prove. 4. 25. Let thine (...)s look right
on, and let thine eye lids look (...)ight before thee: As if Solomon had said,
It but foolishness to keep your hearts, if ye (...)p not your eyes. Thirdly,
ye must (...)p your tongues, that they speak no (...) of the ways of
godliness, for so is the words following the Text. Put away fr(...) thee a
froward mouth, and perverse lips (...) far from thee, which is, Order thy
tongue(...) Fourthly, you must keep your seet, that y(...) walk not in the paths
of wickedness, if on(...) you give a latitude to your feet to go in the (...)
to hell, it shall be but in vain to keep yo(...) hearts, therefore keep your
feet from runni(...) to the murder of your own souls. Las(...) you must keep
your Ears, ye should deli(...) to speak good of Godliness, and ye sho(...)
also delight to hear good spoken of it: y(...) should not be amongst these that
savor of (...) thing but of sin. But ye should be amongst (...) that savor of
good, therefore as ye would (...) be accessory to the murder of your own
so(...) and as ye would not have the blood of (...) lying upon your heads, ye
must needs keep(...) these parts that belongs to the keeping your heart aright.

The third thing which the keeping of y(...) hearts includes, is to eshew all
unclean th(...) that may defile your hearts: Prove. 5. 8. (...) move thy way far
from her, and come not nigh^ door of her house. When you see any evil (...)
approaching, you must depart from it, (...) eshew it; Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Take heed
to thy self(...) thou be not snared; there is many snares (...) may be
accessory to destruction, and the(...) this that Moses marks as a chief evil,
and (...) wise oftentimes forbids in this book to (...) false weights and
balances, Lev. 19. 36. (...) 25. 15. They are not sinful of themselves,
because they are an appearance of evil, should eshew them, therefore he forbids
(...) And the Apostle bids us likewise abstain f(...) appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.

The fourth thing which keeping of the heart (...)cludes, is to put restraints
on your hearts (...)t so ye may not commit iniquity, ye ought (...)st to lay
the bond of Christ's love upon your (...)lves, ye should likewise lay the bond
of judge(...)ent upon your selves, knowing that once God (...)all call you to a
reckoning for all your wick(...)dness, which now most wickedly you commit:
(...)d ye ought to lay the bonds of Gods Omnisci(...)cy upon your selves, to
know and consider (...)t all things are known to him, and that he (...)eth all
things, and ye ought likewise to con(...)der how grievous and how displeasant a
thing (...) is to the Majesty of God, that man, who is (...)e workmanship of
his hand, shall rise up ^^inst him: We may say that of our selves which (...)
in Lament. 3. 22. It is of the Lords mercies (...)at we are not consumed,
because his compassions (...)il not, they are fresh every morning, etc. All
(...)ese things a Christian ought to lay to heart, (...)d seriously to consider
them.

The fifth thing which keeping of the heart (...)cludes, a Christian ought not
to slight the op(...)ortunities given unto him for the strength(...)ng of his
Grace for they which slight op(...)rtunities keeps not their hearts.

The last thing which it imports, is, that (...) (...)hristian would be much in
the diligent exer^^se of duties, that the heart may be kept and (...)lden in a
noble frame, and there is two ex(...)ises which a Christian ought to be
diligent (...) First, the exercise of prayer. Secondly, (...)he exercise of
watching. There is a five-sold (...)me which a Christian should be in, which
(...)old rightly keep his heart: First, in a frame of praying; that he should
not be slack (...) cold-rise to go about duties, the comm^ thereof is holden
o^t in that Word, watch a^ pray, and also in that word, pray without (...)
sing. The second frame should be a believ^^^ frame, and it is to be feared that
there are (...) many such here, but that there are many w(...)ing in such a way
and frame, which alas (I (...) will lead them in the way to hell! If we w(...)
sincere, we would hold Christ fast, and woe(...) not let him go, and if our
hearts were in right frame, we would avoid any thing th(...) might make him to
depart from us, but al(...) we have many clear evidences (now days) that we
care not for Christ, we care^ whether we have his presence or want it, (...)
want of his presence is as lightsome and pl(...)sant to us, and as well taken
with by many, ((...) will not say all) as the enjoying of his presen(...) and
this is a sure evidence of gross proph(...)nesse, ignorance, and enstrangement
from G(...) If there were no more to prove it but this, y(...) stoutnesse of
heart to meddle with sin, pr(...) that you are unsound Christians: We would
sire you by all the torments of hell, and by the terrors of that everlasting
lake which b(...)neth with fire and brimstone for ever and e(...) by all the
joys of Heaven, of that higher ho^ that ye would carry a circumspect walk
be(...) God. The third frame that we would d(...) you to walk in, is in a
tender frame; and if so(...) were walking, ye would be loath to com(...) sin
wilfully, and woe shall be to them eter(...) which do so! we will not (many of
us) (...) lieve this, although Angels would preach(...) unto us, for our hearts
are hard like an A(...) (...)nt stone: I would only say this to you, this ^ook,
this glorious Book is sealed with seven ^eals, and our hearts are sealed with
14. seals. (...) woe be to those hard hearts that many of us ^^ve, we will never
know until they run us ^^ernally into the bottomless pit! The fourth ^ame
that a Christian should walk in, is in a ^^ving frame, you ought to have your
hearts ^rning within you with love toward that ^orious, infinite, and
mysterious object, Je^^s Christ. We shall never be able to compre^^^d, nor
recompense that love which he has (...) us; for the furthest we can go, is to
be sick ^f love for him. But O! he died with love for (...), he had so great
love to us, that he laid ^^wn his life for us. The fifth frame that a ^hristian
should walk in, is a fearing frame, to ^^alk under the fear of the hazard that
you are (...) if you be left to your selves, and to your ^wn strength, I may
say, cursed be the per(...)n that never kept his heart in none of ^ese five
things that we have spoken of.

Now, the third thing that we would speak from the words, is, to know the times
when Christian should especially keep his heart, ^d there is six times when (I
conceive) he should watch over his heart carefully and keep

First after he has met with some enjoy(...)t, then he should keep his heart,
and not (...) it go wrong. The second time is in the ^e of desertion, for that
time is a wandering ^e from the living God. Thirdly, a Christi(...) should keep
his heart when he perceives his (...)ptations to be very subtle. And the
fourth (...)e is to keep your hearts diligent in duties; (...) when you are
negligent in duties, then the Devil is busy to get your hearts. The fif(...)
time is under a secure frame, then you shou(...) keep your hears mightily. And
the last ti(...) when temptations are like to grow very stro(...) you should
then at that time keep your he(...) with a strong guard. Now, as for the first
ti(...) to wit, to keep it under enjoyments, we sho(...) then study to keep our
hearts, for then, and (...) that time the Devil condescends to ^andle (...)
upon his knees (if so we may speak) and (...) this we would give you some
considerations.

The first Consideration is, the heart of (...) is never prouder and proner to
commit iniq(...)ty, then after enjoyments of God, he is (...) more prone to
security than after enjoyme(...) when was it that the spouse sleeped? But
w(...) she was full of joy, Song. 5. 3. I have put of (...) coat, how shall I
put it on again? etc. W(...) was it that the Disciples ^aved? but when th(...)
were on the Mount, when they said, L(...) make three Tabernacles, Matthew. 17. 4.
(...) when was it that John committed Idolatr^ was it not when he saw these
excellent vi(...) of Heaven.

The second Consideration is, that the st(...) which is given by the Devil
after enjoyme(...) it is a very sad stroke, and has caused many (...) say, who
can stand before the children of A(...) And to to draw that conclusion, I shall
once (...) by the hand of some of mine enemies.

The third Consideration is this, if a Chri(...) embrace a temptation after
enjoyments, it (...) be very hard for him to shake it off.

The fourth Consideration is, that the braceing of a temptation after
enjoyments is a sin very hardly to be repented for, it often him many tears for
repenting of it; for it (...) a hardening thing which will harden his heart
^ightily under all sorts of sins which we can ^ommit.

Fifthly, Consider this, that the embracing of temptation after enjoyments, it
is very dis^leasing to Christ, when ye embrace an idol, and refers it before an
absent Christ, O that is a ^ost dangerous sin! But when you embrace an ^ol
after enjoyments, that is a damnable sin, (...) ye prefer it to a present
Christ, O that is a (...)atful sin!

Now the second time when ye should keep ^our hearts, is when ye are going
about the ^xercise of duties, and especially in the duty of ^rayer, and ye
should keep it in four or five ^espects. First, in going about duties, and
^amely in prayer, ye are letting in vain thoughts ^f your hearts be not well
kept. Secondly, the ^eart of a Christian is most ready to fall in the ^n of
formality, and therefore if ye keep not ^our hearts well in duties, you cannot
be but (...)rmall in the performance of them. Thirdly, ^ur hearts many times
have too low thoughts and uptakings of the incomprehensible Majesty ^f God, the
damnable ignorance which is a^ongst people, makes them get so little
advan(...)ge in prayer, do you not speak to him as to ^ne of your
fellow-companions? Where is the ^xercise of fear, and of trembling, which
Chri(...)ians in old times used to have? as Moses when ^e appeared and came
before God. Fourthly, ^ur hearts are prone to misbelief, and ready always to
misbelieve God and his promises, ^astly, Except ye keep your hearts, it is
im^ossible for you to take along with you your necessity; if one were
standing by and hear^ your prayers, they would say that you are (...) in
earnest with God, for you seek such thing from a principle of light, and not
from nece^sity. Now I would pose you with this, whether ever you have been
observant in any (...) these duties or not. There are many who(...) prayers
makes them to have more dista(...) with God, therefore I would request you
(...) look to this, that ye be serious in prayer, (...) to know whether or not
this be your frame for there is some that will come from praye^ with far more
bonds on them than when the^ began; and what is the reason of that? b(...) want
of fervency: it is a great mystery of (...) love that he sends not fire from
heaven to b(...) our sacrifice, and consume our selves likewise for what is
many of our prayers, but as it w(...) the cutting off of a dogs neck, which is
an ab(...) nation to the Lord.

The third time when a Christian should e^pecially keep his heart, is under
desertion; (...) I shall give you three reasons why he shou(...) watch well at
that time. First, The devil (...) busiest to seek our hearts under
desertio(...) Secondly, The embracing of an idol under d(...)sertion; it is for
that why God lengthneth o(...) the time of our lying under desertion so lo(...)
because we go to the bed of love with an id(...) when Christ is away. Thirdly,
Because a Chr^stian has least strength then, he loses bo(...) much of his
faith and of his love: Makes (...) you then to look on the world as tastelesse
the white of an egg; ye must take that (...) dispensation of Christ's love,
that he makes (...) things tastelesse to you under desertion: Th(...) is a
noble dispensation, for by it he imposes a necessity upon you to keep your
hearts till he return unto you again.

The fourth time when a Christian should keep his heart, is, In a secure frame:
I think there are some sleeping in a sleep of conscience, which will never
awake until the screighings of the damned in hell awake them. I shall propose
two considerations to keep your hearts in security. First, Because when ye are
secure, ye have then least strength; and is there any amongst you that dare say
but the devil then assaults you most bitterly? and when your heart is lying in
security, it speaks that ye are in a carnal frame. Secondly, If ye keep not
your hearts when ye are secure, then ye may bid faith, love and joy farewell
until some other time, as ye may see in the practice of Foelix, Go away, and I
will hear thee at another time, Acts 24. 25. I would not desire a more sad case
to an enemy then not to keep his heart when ^he is under security, for he may
bid the graces of the spirit farewell until another time.

The last time when a Christian ought especially to keep his heart, is, when
strong and subtle temptations appear plausible, honest-like and beautiful,
then ye must be upon your watch. O does not temptations win in upon your
hearts before ever ye be aware; and this speaks much security and
unwatchfulnesse: I would ^ay it is hard; yea, very hard to a Christian who ^s
not watchful to take up the ways of the ^evil, whose ways are more subtle
than the way of an Eagle in the air, or the way of a Serpent upon, a rock, or
the way of a Ship upon the sea. Who can comprehend his ways? he tempts us
always, both upon our right hand, and upon our left hand, both behind and
before, bot^ awaking and sleeping; we are never free of hi^ deceitful and
unsearchable crafts. I would sa^ this unto you, he is happy that fears alwaye^
and hearkens to Christ's voice of direction in (...) word, depending upon him
for strength, b(...) many listneth more to the voice of temptation nor to
Christ's blessed voice.

Now, the next thing which I would spea(...) to, is, to propose some
considerations to pre(...) you to keep your hearts; and, O that ye would
consider of them, and lay them to heart.

The first consideration is this, I think many of us may be afraid that the
devil dwells and keeps possession in many of our hearts, an^ alace! He is like
to be a possessor of some (...) them perpetually. I will give you five
evidences of one (that by all appearance) the devil has his heart. And, now I
charge yo(...) (O Atheists!) in the Name of our Lord and Savior precious
Christ, that ye would exami(...) your selves by them. First, Was never one
(...) you convinced to cry out that word, Psalm. 25 11. For thy Names sake, O
Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great: I say to such persons th(...) was
never convinced to cry out this, and we(...) never convinced of the hard
difficulty to w(...) to the right keeping of your hearts, by all appearance
the devil hath-your hearts in keeping for these whose hearts are in the hands
of th(...) devil, they are never sensible of their lost esta(...) Secondly,
These who never wan to make us(...) of Christ, that is a token that the devil
has their hearts in keeping: There is many of (...) who is convinced of the
vanity of our ido(...) but yet, alace, many of us drowneth our convictions with
the sin of tippling, and buries them in the sepulcher of drunkenness; but
believe it, if ye go on so and continue therein, God will plead with you for
the samin. The third evidence, one that has a silent, hardened and deceiving
conscience, and whose conscience is silent: By all appearance the devil has
that persons heart in his hand, for the devil intiseth many to sin with
greediness, and will make their conscience not to reprove them, so that they
delight in no better, for he has taken away the tongue of their conscience, so
that it cannot speak: But believe it, the day is coming when your conscience
shall be the greatest foe and enemy that ye can or shall have: and believe it,
there are many of you here who has your hearts so hardened, as those that are
mentioned, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. Who walk in the vanity of their own mind, having
the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts. Your
conscience when it is cauterized, it will not speak to you, although ye would
commit that damnable sin against the holy Ghost: And ye think your selves well
enough when it does not reprove you: But alace, ye sleep with a false witness
in your bosom, it has many alluring delusions, but one day the words of it
will be as sharp as swords; it will cry, Peace, peace, when behold sudden
destruction: It will make you sleep sound for all the danger that is hanging
above you. You walk (many of you) adding drunkenness to thirst. O atheists!
What will ye do when that day shall come upon you, when these two books shall
be opened? First, the book of your wanderings and backslidings, in which a
hudge innumerable troup of sins are written; and secondly, the book of your
consciences, and there shall be nothing read out of that first book, but thy
conscience shall confirm it with Amen.

The second consideration is, that if ye were to live eighty years, and though
ye would weep and mourn forty of these years perpetually, if it could be
possible, and pray other forty of these years, yet all that would be for
naught, if ye will not give him your hearts: Believe me, if ye give not him
your hearts, that sentence shall be pronounced upon you, Depart: Oh! will ye
not give him your hearts who ought to have them, both by Creation and
Redemption.

The third consideration is, did ye ever find any difficulty to believe, or to
pray, or to love God? Ye may be persuaded of it, that ye are sleeping under a
dangerous delusion, that ye think ye are going, and shall go to heaven, when ye
shall be thrust down to hell. I would say this, There has been much joy
amongst the ^evil and his angels, for the success which he ^ath had in Glasgow:
he has purchased many (...)rpers to himself, to sing that cursed song, (...)
(...) not far from victory: I think we may tu(...) (...)at word in another way,
which Christ said to his Disciples, There is one of you twelve th(...) shall
betray me: I think he may say other wise of us, eleven of each twelve that are
here will(...) betray me. O! it is sad, that the Son of God even precious
Christ, should have so many betrayers amongst us. O therefore give Christ your
hearts; Did ye never read that of Mat. ^5. (...), there was five wise virgins,
and five foolish, and if there be of Professors that shall be rejected; alace,
what shall come of you that never knew him? And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, O what shall the ungodly, and sinners do?

The fourth consideration is, I would propose these three things unto you:
First, What is the cause (O atheists) that ye cannot endure hypocrisy, why ye
cannot look upon Christians? The cause is, You hate not only the Image and
Picture of Christ, but the very substance of Christ: Why hate ye not the rest
of sins as well as hypocrisy? It is because the rest of sins looks rather like
the devil, and therefore ye love them, but hypocrites seem to have something of
God in them, therefore ye hate them. Secondly, (O atheists) do ye believe that
there is a heaven and a hell, and an eternity of pain, and a day of judgment?
If ye believed those things, ye would not be so profane. Thirdly, Did ye
ever find any delight in praising and commending of him? Your hearts says,
no, and your practice says, no, O woe, woe to you eternally!

The fifth consideration is, the day is approaching, when the least iniquity
shall be preached in the hearing of angels and men that ever ye committed,
there shall not a jo^ of sin be passed by, and of all sinners, the hypocrites
shall have the saddest countenance, because they shall be disappointed of a
joyful end, and lose the opinion of the Saints which will make them to look
with a sad countenance, in that day: A hypocrite will be more moved for the
lose of the approbation of the Saints, then for the lose of divine approbation.
O! know and consider these three things, First, Know that all your iniquities
shall be read in the hearing of angels and men: The very thoughts which you
have had at midnight shall be known: What will be your thoughts then (O
atheists) in that day? Secondly, Know that hypocrisy may win easily through
the world under the name of grace; but in that day there shall be a clear
distinction made. It is hard to rid marches betwixt hypocrisy and grace, but
God shall take your visorn off your face, and let you be known, and ye shall
get the name which ye deserve, O hypocrites! Thirdly know, That woe shall be to
such which shall not be found in Christ at that day; O will you take him and
give him your hearts: I take all the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints about
the throne of God to witness; yea, I take the very stones of these walls, and
the timber of this house, and this book in my hand to witness against you that
ye were invited to give your hearts to Christ.

The last consideration is, he that will not give his heart to Christ, believe
it, These four things are coming upon him: First, He shall be no more entreated
to keep his heart, neither shall he be entreated to give his heart to Christ
any more, for the devil shall have it. Secondly, O Atheists! These four things
shall overcome you. First, Sin it shall have dominion over you, you once
delighted mightily in sin, but alas, it shall be a heavy burden to you in that
day. Secondly, The wrath of God shall overcome you, O that shall be a mighty
Prince! Thirdly, The devil: And lastly, The lusts of your own hearts, all these
shall tread you in the mire. Thirdly, There is this which is coming upon you (O
atheists) there shall be a sentence of eternal excommunication pronounced
against you which would not give your hearts to Christ: These blessed and
gracious lips that always did delight in speaking good to lost sinners, shall
then pronounce that sad and woeful sentence against you, Depart from me ye
cursed, I know you not! The last thing which is approaching unto you is, the
day is coming when you shall be sent away to that prison, out of which there is
no redemption, ye shall be a number of miserable comforters one to another in
that day: ye shall not have a grain weight of comfort for all the joy and
pleasure which many of you has had in a world: you shall be Physicians of no
value, and gnash your tongues for pain! We would say this to you, O ^et the
torments of hell, or let the joys of Heaven persuade you to give him your
hearts, let the one constrain you, o^ let the other terrify you to this noble
duty of giving him your hearts, and if ye give him not your hearts, ye shall
curse the day that ever you were born, or that ever there was a Prophet amongst
you. And ye shall lament that ever ye heard tell of Christ if you make not use
of him: Now I would only read the Text over again, Keep thy heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. But if you do not keep it with
all diligence, out of it shall be the issues of death, ye shall get eternal
torments for your reward! Now to him who can persuade you to give your hearts
in keeping to him, and who can anoint your eyes with eyesalve to see your lost
estate, to His blessed Name we desire to give praise.

SERMON VI.
Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of life.
THere are two great Books which a Christian ought mainly to study, there is
God, and his own heart: and he would study to know the unspeakable goodness of
the one, and the desperate wickedness of the other: And we may say, the first
time that a Christian turns over the first page of his heart, and looks upon
that desperate wickedness which is therein, he might be constrained to cry out,
Woe is me, I am undone. Yea, there is as much wickedness in every ones heart who
is here, as might be a quarrel to destroy a whole world, if God would contend
with us in his just judgment! I think Christians can never trust their hears
too little, and they can never trust God to much. And have we not received many
proofs of both these? I may say as Jeremiah said, The heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? O but a sight of the evil
temper of our hearts, and a sight of the goodness of God, would make many of us
renounce our self-righteousness and our spiritual pride, and admire his
transcendant righteousness. I think a Christian ought to be as these four
beasts which is mentioned in Rev. 4. 6, 7, 8. where the four beasts that are
spoken of there, may relate to the Ministers of the Gospel, and may also be
taken for every real Christian: First, We should be full of eyes before to wait
on Christ and depend upon him as an handmaid upon her Mistress, and not to
reflect upon these things that are behind, as to rest upon them, according to
that word of the Apostle, I press hard toward the mark, forgetting the things
that are behind, etc. Secondly, A Christian should look to those things that
are behind; to guard against enemies, and to be much in searching his former
ways, to see how much of them has been given to God, and how much of them
has been given to the Devil. Thirdly, Christians should be full of eyes within
to examine themselves and to see their own corruptions. There are many who have
eyes without to take notice of other peoples carriage, but they have no eyes to
look within to themselves: O would to God that there were fewer markers and
observers of other peoples carriage, and more of the examiners and lookers to
themselves, Purifying our selves, even as he is pure. Fourthly, We should be as
a Lion in our walk, to point out our boldness against the devil and his
temptations. Fifthly, We should be like a Calf, or an Ox, to point out our
laboriousness. Sixthly, We should be like the face of men, to point out our
understanding and knowledge. Lastly, We should be like a flying Eagle, to point
out our heavenly mindedness, all our conversation should be directed by the
Law of God, all our thoughts and all our actions, and all our words should be
conformable to his mind, and as the Eagle has wings, so also ought we to have
wings, even as they had six wings, we should have two of them to cover our
face, to point out the reverence which we ought to give to God; and we should
have two wings to cover our hands, to show out our readiness to obe^ Gods
Commandments: and we should have two wings to cover our feet, to point out
o(...) Imperfections, and the crooked paths we walk into. O Christians, will ye
study these three following things, and ye will not have so high thoughts of
your selves as oftentimes ye have. First, It is through the restraining grace
of God, that those grievous sins which ye commit, comes not up to the
perfection of Adultery, Sodomy and Incest. Secondly, There is no sin which ye
commit, but there is some secret inclination to it, although ye think ye hate
it much. Thirdly, It is impossible for you to comprend, take up, and remember
those iniquities that you have committed since ye were born, as David is
convinced, Psalm. 51. 2. Cleanse me from my sin, etc. which we conceive to be
not only from his known sins, but from his sins which he had forgotten: And
therefore he bids God make them known unto him, and I would say this to you,
David who was a man according to Gods own heart, he knew not the number of his
sins: and O how much less can we that never came the hundredth part so far? And
also you may see it in the practice of Joh. How many are mine iniquities and
sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.

Now we come to the words, and there is four things which we spoke to from them
at the last occasion: First, The duty commanded, Keep thy heart. Secondly, The
qualification how this duty of keeping the heart should be gone about, and it
is with all diligence. Thirdly, That the heart of man has many temptations
seeking it, which is likewise presupposed in that word, keep thy heart with all
diligence. Lasty, The reasons why we should keep it, for out of it are the
issues of life. Now for the first thing in the words, we spoke to two things
from it, First, That it was a Christians duty to keep his heart. Secondly, What
was comprehended under this for a Christian to keep his heart, and likewise of
those disadvantages which a Christian has from the not keeping of the heart.
Now for the first thing, to wit, that it is a Christians duty to keep his
heart. We shall speak yet to some Considerations to persuade you to this duty.

The first Consideration is, Take notice of the had qualifications of the
heart, and there is six or seven bad qualifications of it. First, The heart is
exceeding deceitful, Jer. 17, 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it! and likewise Isaiah speaks of a deceived
heart which leads people aside, Isa. 44. 20. The heart of man is a deceitful
thing, it will preach peace, peace, when there is none. O it is deceitful, it
will make us commit sin when there is no outward pleasure therein. Secondly,
That the heart is desperately wicked, who can know it? that is, if there were
threatenings, commands, promises, and convictions of sin, yet the heart will
cause you to sin, if hell were put in your way, yet for the pleasure of an
idol, ye would run to the sin. Thirdly, That there is a cursed union betwixt
the heart and idols, Hos. 4 8. And they set their heart on their iniquity. Hos.
4. 17. Ephraim is joined to his Idols, let him alone. And that word is thrice
repeated in Ezekiel. 14 3, 4, 5. They have set up their Idols in their hearts:
Keep your hearts with all diligence, I say, lest that union be i(...)tertained.
Fourthly, There is many of ou^ hearts that is exceeding mad, Eccles. 9. 3. The
heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madnes^ is in their heart, while
they live, and after tha^ they go to the dead. Alas, there is nothing bu^
madness in our hearts; according to that word, the land is full of Images, and
they are mad up(...) their Idols. Certainly the madness of our heart^ speaks
that we keep not our hearts. Fifthly, Our hearts are divided, as in Hos. 10. 2.
Then heart is divided, etc. which speaks a great necessity of keeping our
hearts. Sixthly, Our hear(...) are exceeding whoorish, Ezekiel. 6. 9. Because I am
broken with their whoorish heart which has departed from me, etc. Lastly, Our
hearts are exceeding dull and ignorant in the ways of godliness, as in Ephesians.
4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
heart. There is such an Egyptian darkness upon our hearts, that we cannot
know sin, there is some of us that (I fear) knows not good by evil.

The second consideration is, that there is such a difficulty to keep our
hearts, therefore we ought strongly to guard them: Adam had his heart but a
short time in keeping, and yet he could not keep it; which shows the
difficulty in keeping of it, Psalm. 25. 20. O keep my soul, and deliver me, let
me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee. 1 Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore, let
them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. I would say to you,
pray that prayer which Christ prayed when he was upon the cross, Father, into
thy hands I commit (...)y spirit: O pray that prayer every day! for (...) say,
if God forsake us but one hour, O what a great multitude of sins would we
commit, Acts 5. 4. Why have thou conceived this thing in ^hine heart? thou have
not lied unto men but unto God: Yea, even to God, who is the judge of all, ^s
if he had said, it was conceived in thine ^eart, and then it was brought forth.

The third consideration is, That the heart is ^he mother and original of all
evil; and if this were believed, no doubt, we would watch with much
watchfulness, and serious self-examina^ion. Likewise I would say, that the not
keep^ng of our hearts, is the cause of many of your walkings so profanely as
we do; It is impossible for you to walk with God aright, if ye have not your
hearts kept: if ye would keep (...) good conversation, then keep your hearts,
for ^e must never at any time trust your hearts, for ^ither one time or another
they will turn ene^ies unto you.

The last consideration is this, It is a most excellent thing for a Christian
to keep his heart, would ye win to that commendation that Solo^on has, Prove.
16. 32. He that rules his spirit, (...) better then he that takes a city. O
then keep ^our hearts, as if he had said, It is better to ^onquer that Modicum,
and little thing, the ^eart, then it is for one to conquer a city.

Now, the second thing that I would speak to from keeping of the heart, is to
these disadvan(...)ges which is waiting upon the not keeping ^f it. Prove. 25.
last verse, He that has not ^ule over his own spirit, is like a city that is
^roken down, and without walls. And I would give you these disadvantages which
will at(...) upon these that does not keep their hear(...) First, A temptation
will soon overcome th(...) person with little difficulty; the devil will (...)
need to use many arguments for the gaining (...) that persons heart: Alace, our
hearts (ma(...) of them, by all appearance) is in the de(...) hands, and that
he has a surer grip of them, th(...) we our selves have. Oh that the devil
sho(...) have so many of our hearts, and that so (...) of them should be at his
command! O beli(...) it, he is the hardest master, and he is the woe(...) master
that ever ye served, and if he once (...) us within his grips, it will be hard
getting o(...) again. These hearts which are not kept, (...) all put through
other with confusion, like (...) ruinous city, that wants government. B^lieve
it, ye cannot do God a greater servi(...) then to keep your hearts well, and
the de(...) would count it a great courtesy done to hi^ if ye would resign
them to him: Therefore s(...) which of them ye will obey. Fourthly, If (...)
would consider and look what a thing the hea(...) of man is, O ye would guard
it more then (...) do; for it is always besiedged with the (...) which the
devil sets before your eyes! (...) there is three lusts which the devil do
(...) siedge you with, and be sure they shall all ov(...) come you if ye keep
not your hearts. (...) The lust of the eye; O but that lust has broug(...)
many to his obedience! Secondly, The lust (...) the flesh; O that has overcome
many! A(...) thirdly, The pride of life; O to think ho(...) these three enemies
has taken many captive(...)

Now, the next thing which I shall insi(...) little upon, is, to point out some
marks (...) evidences whether ye have kept your hearts or ^ot.

First, If ye have kept your hearts aright, (...) will endeavor to crucify
vain thoughts: Are (...)ere not some here that never knew what it (...)s to
crucify and crush vain and idle thoghts? ^his was an evidence that David kept
his heart. ^sal. 119. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy (...)w do I love.
There is some that repents for (...)ward breakings out of sin, but not for
se(...)et sins in their hearts, and be sure these ne(...) kept their hearts.
Did ye never read that, (...)at. 5. 8. Blessed are the poor in heart? Your
(...)ctification shall never grow so long as ye (...)dge vain thoughts within
your breasts. O Je(...)salem! how long shall vain thoughts lodge with(...)
thee, says the Lord? Be careful to think upon such thoughts as ye may answer
for one (...)y to the Lord, for your midnight thoughts (...)all be read in the
hearing of angels and men. (...) would ye not be ashamed and loath your
(...)lves, if ye would consider these vile and vain ^houghts that lodge within
many of you?

Secondly, These hearts that is not kept, they ^mbrace tentations so soon as
they are assaulted (...) them, and they do not take notice that they (...)e
temptations, and that is a mark of one that (...)eepeth not his heart, that
takes not notice of (...)e devil til he has shut his temptation with(...) his
breast: this is clear that David kept (...)ot his heart when the devils
temptations did (...) assault him, 2 Samuel 11. and got such a victory ^ver him;
and it is also clear in the practice ^f Peter, when he denied his Master
thrice, it was a token that he kept not his heart well.

The third Evidence of one that keeps not his heart is, he will commit sin
with much d^liberation: many of us commit sin after we have been thinking long
upon it: hence it (...) spoken, that there is some that studies iniqui(...)
upon their beds, and when it is light they put (...) in practice, Micah 2. 1.
and likewise in Prove. (...) Amongst these heinous sins that is odious (...)
hateful to God: Wicked imaginations is reck^ned amongst the midst of them,
verse. 18. I s(...) ye who sin with much deliberation, ye h(...) losed much of
the fear of God; for to sin wi(...) deliberation or advisement, is more then to
(...) against light.

The fourth mark of these that does not kee(...) their hearts, they sin with
touch willingne(...) and pleasure; Ephraim willingly worshipp(...) the Calves of
Dan and Bethel, are there not so(...) here, whose hearts are following their
Ido(...) and posting hard after them? But O can yo(...) idols do you any good,
and purchase pleasu(...) to you one day? and be sure of this, these w(...) sin
with such willingness and pleasure, that a clear evidence that they keep not
their hea(...) well.

The fifth Evidence of a heart which is (...) kept, is, when a Christians
heart can mis(...) guard opportunities, in which opportunit(...) communion with
God may be attained, it i(...) token that the Brides heart was not keep when
she would not rise and open to Christ.

The sixth Evidence, when the heart (...) not up the motions of God toward it,
tha(...) a token that that man's heart is not well keep^ who cannot take up Gods
motions: but Christian whose heart is kept, he can (...) up the motions of
the Spirit, this is clear (...) compare the 2. and 3. Chap. of the Songs
(...)gether.

Lastly, ye may know whether your hearts (...) kept or not, and that is, when
ye do not (...)scern the decays of the graces of the spirit (...)ithin you.
There is four graces by which a (...)hristian may know whether he keeps his
heart (...) not. First, If the grace of prayer decay. Se(...)ndly, Tenderness.
Thirdly, Faith. Fourth(...), Love. O therefore I would desire you to try
(...)ur graces what condition they are in, lest ye (...) down to the grave with
a mistake in your (...)some: Now I shall shut up our discourse (...)h speaking
these four things.

First, A Christian ought to keep his heart (...)stantly: The Hypocrite has a
sort of keep(...)g of his heart, but he keeps it not so con(...)tly as a real
Christian. And there is five (...)es when especially he keeps it, the first
time (...), When he is under affictions and crosses, (...)en he will not let
his heart wander from the (...)yes of Gods commandments, and he will (...)ep
his heart mightily at that time. Second(...), He will keep his heart at that
time when (...)victions are sharp and strong upon him, (...). 2. 37. When they
were pricked in their hearts, (...)y cried out, men and brethren, what shall we
(...) amongst which we may conceive there were (...)dry Hypocrites. The
Hypocrite thinks to win (...)ough the world, under the notion of a real (...);
but believe it, although ye would win (...)ough the world under this notion (as
many (...)th) yet the day is coming when ye and your (...)ctise shall be put to
the touch stone. The (...)ird time when the Hypocrite would keep his (...)rt,
is, when he is going to the Sacrament of the Communion; but when he is come
from it, he will take no notice of his heart any more and the only reason that
he keeps his hear^ then, is, that he may have peace with a natural conscience.
Yea, I fear, if we were all searched, it would be known that the most end w^
pray for, is to satisfy a natural conscience, and not to please God: The 4.
time when a Hypocrite will keep his heart, is under sickness and diseases, yea,
any gross one will keep his heart (...) sickness, they who never prayed (almost)
will pr^^ at that time. The last time when he will keep his heart, will be when
he is called to some public holy work, as if he were called to pra^ amongst
Christians, O then he will keep h(...) heart diligently! and if he be in a
Minister^ sight he will keep the Sabbath day: but (...) these men does not
remember that a grea(...) one than a Minister sees them; even God the Lord. A
Hypocrite will keep his outward (...) but not his inward man: he will not swea^
but in his heart he will curse God, he will kee^ his feet outwardly, but
inwardly he will commit adultery in his heart; If ye would be sincere, ye must
mortify your invisible idols (...) well as your visible idols.

The second thing that I would say, is this, (...) ye keep your hearts, and not
resign them freely to God, although ye were to live eigh(...) years, and if ye
would pray the one forty (...) weep the other forty of these years, (if suc^
a thing could be possible) yet all that p(...) should be for naught, if ye do
not freely fi(...) give him your heart, for you shall get that fearful
sentence pronounced upon you, Depar^ from me you cursed, I knew you never! O
the(...) fore while it is called to day, give God your ^arts: Psalm. 78. 56. Yet
they tempted and pro(...)ked the most high God, and kept not his
testi(...)nies. Psalm 34. 16. The face of the Lord is (...)ainst them that do
evil, to cut off the remem(...)ance of them from the Earth. If ye had the
(...)ogue of an Angel to speak and pray, yet if ye (...) him not your hearts,
all your prayers shall (...) back empty to you.

The third thing which I would say to you, (...)his, the heart of man is a
thing which ye will (...) a great difficulty to keep, and this is a proof
(...), that a Christian will even sometimes (...)nge in prayer. He will
sometimes change (...) times, First, When he begins, he will be (...) flame of
love to God. And secondly, He (...) fall secure. And thirdly, He will have
(...)ible thoughts of God. And lastly, (ere he (...)e done) he will speak to
God as to his com(...)ion, and I would pose all of you that are (...)e if ye
have not been in all (or most part) of (...)se frames when you have been
praying? (...) I would charge you (as ye will answer Christ one day) that ye
would give him your (...)! there is two words which I would say you, and O that
ye would consider upon (...), Christ comes and says to us first, Take (...)y
Cross, and deny thy self, and follow me: (...) is Christ's first word unto a
Believer: and (...)ut that be a great mystery to flesh and (...)d. And the
Devil comes and says the se(...)d word, which is, Fall down and worship (...)
and I will give thee a Kingdom. The first (...)d of the Devil, is ay the
fairest word that (...)all get, and the first of Christ's is the sharp(...) Now
which of these two offers will ye choose? I would only say these two words (...)
you, First, Think ye not shame to refu(...) Christ so openly as ye do?
Secondly, That th(...) answer which ye give him, is not the answ(...) which he
seeks, I say one day ye shall be broug(...) before his throne waiting for your
condemn^tion, if you give not precious Christ yo(...) hearts; ye shall stand
before his Tribunal to receive your last and fearful doom! O man, and O woman!
with what face will thou st(...) and what will thou have to say when tho(...)
stands before him? I remember the word of (...) cursed Emperor who had made
defection from Christ, he was forced to breath out his l(...) words, thus,
sadly. Thou have overcome me (...) last, O Galilean! So he is too strong a
pa(...) to thee to contend with, and at length he w(...) overcome thee.

Now the last thing that I would say unto y(...) is, if you do not give him
your hearts, I (as (...) Ambassador of Christ) declare to you, (...) Christ and
you shall fight together! Put (...) your harness, put on your Steel coat,
(s(...) Christ will be ready for you) and boast wh(...) ye put off again. And I
would say this unto yo(...) that it is impossible for you to take Christ
(...)cept ye get a sight of Christ and his beauty, (...) if you saw him in his
beauty, ye would (...) I Will take him although I get not a Kingdo(...) O the
Angels and glorified Spirits of just (...) now made perfect, may wonder at us
why (...) stand out so long! Oh! Will you give to (...)there your hearts, and
not to precious Chr(...) who has given you his heart, and who worthy of all
your hearts: Can you look up(...) that noble Plant of renown, and not give
(...) your hearts? who had a hole made in his side through which ye may see his
heart! Oh man! and Oh woman! Why will ye not give Christ ^our hearts? what
shall ye say, when Christ shall say first to you, why would ye not sincere^y
give me one day in your life time? Secondly, Why would you not give me your
hearts? (...) will tell you three things which will be very terrible for you (O
atheists!) In that day when ^ou shall appear before Gods Tribunal. First,
(...)e hearing of the Gospel. Secondly, Which (...) more terrible, the
Resurrection of Christ* ^astly, Which is terriblest of all; when that ^earfull
sentence shall be pronounced against ^ou, Depart, Depart! O then you shall
curse ^he day that ever ye were born in Glasgow o^ (...) Scotland! Now O you
inhabitants of this ^lace, I charge you (as ye shall answer one day (...) God)
that ye would give him your hearts in ^eeping, and in so doing, ye shall have
life e^ernal, O therefore, Kiss the Son by the way, (...)st his anger break
out, and you perish for ever! (...)ow to him who can persuade your hearts to
^mbrace him, we desire to give praise.

SERMON VII.
^ov. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life.
THere is a great and vaste difference betwixt the heart of a Christian while
he is on earth, here below, traveling in (...)ese Tents of mortality; and the
heart of a ^hristian when he shall be above taking up his Eternal possession in
those blessed and everla(...)ing Tents of immortality: And O! is it (...)
mystery for you to believe that such a day is (...)proaching when those hearts
of yours wh(...) have been so unstedfast in the ways of go(...)ness, that they
shall once be made as pill ar(...) the house of your God, no more to go out? We
(...) compare the heart of a Christian (while (...) here below) unto Reuben, it
is unstable, as (...)ter which does mar its excellency; For a C(...)stian
(while he is here below) he is like (...) moon, changeable, and subject to many
vici(...)tudes, but when he shall be above, he shall as the Sun, Having the
light of seven day(...) And is not this a mystery for you to belie(...) that
such a day is approaching, when th(...) hearts of yours that have wearied so
much the service of God to whom prayer has (...) a cross, to whom the
worshipping of God the public ordinances has been a burden (...) say, is it
not a mystery for you to believe (...) such a day is approaching, when ye shall
s(...) God night and day without any wearying: Th(...) is not such a voice
heard in heaven as this, (...) is a hard saying, who can hear it? If it (...)
possible that ye could ask that question at (...) if he desire to change his
estate, or is wea(...) to do God service (he who of all the lost p^rity of Adam
was the first inhabitant in he(...) he would disdain to return an answer to
s(...) a question, it being without all ground or (...)son: And is not this a
mystery for you to (...)lieve that such a day is approaching, w(...) these
hearts of yours, that are now unde(...) much darkness, such misconstructions
of G(...) such misconceptions of the holy Majest(...) God, and of the great
mysteries of the king^om of heaven, I say, Is it not a mystery for ^ou to
believe that such a day is approaching ^hen your hearts shall be fully taught
to com^rehend those depths, and profound secrets of the kingdom of God, when
the most brutish and (...)kest understanding shall be made to resolve (...)t
question and mystery, how three can be in (...), and how one can be in three?
They shall (...)n be able to resolve that profound mystery ^f the two natures
in the person of our blessed lord Jesus Christ; and in that day your hearts
(...)ll be able to comprehend that blessed uni(...) that is amongst the Persons
of the blessed ^rinity; and likewise in that day ye shall be ^ble to take up
that blessed knot of union which (...) betwixt Christ and believers: And is not
(...)is a mystery for you to believe that such a (...) is approaching, when
your hearts that ^ath been under such exercise of sorrow, that ^hey shall be
clothed with the garments of (...)y and praise? And I would ask at you, O
(...)hat a robe must that be, to be clothed with (...) garment of praise? It
is a more excellent (...)d glorious robe than all the robes of the great
(...)ings and Emperors of the world. Did your (...)es ever see such an
excellent garment as the (...)rment of praise? There is a threefold
cloth(...)g which a Christian shall put on when first (...)is heart shall
enter into heaven, in that blessed (...)y of the resurrection. First, He shall
be cloth(...) with the robe of the righteousness of Christ, (...)d O what must
such a robe as this be? Secondly, He shall be clothed with the robe and
(...)rment of immortality; and O what a robe (...)d resplendant garment shall
this be! And thirdly, in that day when first a Christian sh(...)enter into
heaven, he shall be clothed with (...) garment of praise; and O what an
excel(...) and glorious robe shall all these be! When (...) shall be brought
to the King in raiment of need(...) work and shall be made all glorious within
(...)

At the last occasion when we spoke up(...) these words, we told you that there
was (...) things contained in them; and the first was (...) duty imposed upon
Christians, that they sho(...) keep their hearts, the second thing was, (...)
there is many spiritual enemies who studies (...)gain and conquer our hearts,
which is pres(...)posed in these words, Keep thy heart. (...) third thing is
the qualifications which sho(...) be annexed to this precious and
soul-concer^ing duty, holden forth in these words, K(...) thy heart with all
diligence, or as the woe(...) may be rendered, with all keeping, or abov^ all
keeping. The last thing which was conta(...)ed in the words, was, the spiritual
advantage which attends the exercises of that duty, (...) the reasons enforcing
the duty, for out of it (...) the issues of life, that is the ground on which
Christian should walk in persuading himse(...) the doing of this duty. Now, as
for the (...) thing, viz. the duty commanded, that (...) should keep our
hearts: We have spoken (...)veral things from it, now there are only (...)
things which we would speak to.

First, A Christian should study to keep (...) heart from these predominant
lusts which d(...) in it; it is of the concernment of a Christian keep himself
from all iniquities, but it is of (...) special concernment of a Christian to
keep (...) heart from his predominant sins; this was practice of David, Psalm.
18. 23. I have kept my (...)lf from mine iniquity, which we conceive to (...)e
understood of his predominant lusts: There (...) not an idol or lust which a
Christian has in (...) heart, but he ought to offer it up to God, (...)nd to
put a knife to the throat of his most plea(...)nt Isaac. I will tell you of
five great idols which a Christian has no will to quite, and (...) is
impossible for him to keep his heart till (...)e quite them. First, A Christian
has no will (...) quite his religious idols, that is, those idols, the loving
of which is a commanded duty; but (...)he immoderate love of which, is an idol,
as for (...)stance, it is a great difficulty for a tender Abraham to put a
knife to the throat of his on(...)y son Isaac, or for parents to be denied to
their ^hildren, and for a husband to be denied to (...)is wife, the loving of
which is their duty, but (...)he immoderate love of them is sin. Secondly, A
Christian has ill will to quite his advanta^ious idol, that idol in pursuit of
which, he ^onceives there is outward advantage to be (...)aiting upon it, as
for instance, it is a great ^ifficulty to persuade a covetous man to be ^enied
to his riches. O but that divinity which (...) in Prove. 23. 4. It is the
divinity which the ^ost part (or at least many) of the Christians, ^ow adays,
does not study to close with or ^bey: Labor not to be rich, etc. There is a
^reater easiness and facility for one to quite his pleasant idols, then to
quite advantageous idols, ^s for example, a covetous person will sooner ^orsake
his lusts nor his riches. Thirdly, A Christian, has ill will to quite his
invisible ^dols, these idols that does lodge within his ^eart, there is a
greater easiness for a Christian to quite his visible, than to quite his
i(...)sible idols: Sometimes a person will for s(...) his drunkenesse and
cursing, which will (...) forsake his pride and lust; but it is of yo(...)
concernmens, to be as much taken up in (...) mortification of invisible idols,
as in the (...)tification of visible idols. Fourthly, A C(...)stian has
difficulty to quite these idols wh(...) he has a natural inclination unto,
besides (...) love which we have contracted to some pre(...)minant idols, by
the reason of the constituti(...) of man's body: there is some that has a
na(...)ral, inclination to one idol more than to a(...)there; and to clear this,
I would say this (...) you, I presuppose some under these three p(...)dominant
lusts: First, That there is some o(...)der the predominant idol of love to the
worl(...) Secondly, That there is some under the pred(...)minant idol of pride.
Thirdly, That there (...) some under the predominant idol of lust, (...) is the
idol that you have most natural incli(...)tion unto; assuredly you have
greatest un(...)lingness to mortify that idol. Fifthly, A C(...)stian has
much difficulty to mortify that (...) the forsaking of which has great
outward (...) advantage waiting upon the forsaking there(...) as that young man
in the Gospel, he could (...) endure that doctrine, Go and sell all that (...)
have, and give it to the poor, etc. That was (...) idol which had much
disadvantage (as he co^ceived) attending upon the forsaking of it, that he
could not embrace such a doctrine, (...) it is said, He went away sorrowful,
etc. Cu(...) be that person which goes away sorrowf(...) when Christ and an
idol is put in the ball(...) together, and whose hearts consents rather take
the idol than Christ: I would only say this by the way to you, Are there not
many here, that if they would tell that which is their practice, they might
condemn themselves, for this, that absence and distance with Christ was never
so great a burden to their spirits as the want of the actual enjoyments and
fruition of an idol, and does not this speak that ye prefer your idols before
Christ? not this man, but Barrab as, is the cursed divinity of many of your
hearts.

The second thing which I would speak to you, is this, a Christian should not
delay to give obedience to this precious and soul-concerning command of keeping
his heart: I know there are some that does not simply deny obedience to this
command, but they postpone the giving obedience unto it until another time. I
would only say this to such, Boast not of to morrow, for ye know not what a day
will bring forth; if ye keep not your hearts to day, it will be a great
difficulty for you to keep them to morrow: therefore follow the practice of
David, I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119, 60.
Amongst which we conceive he made haste to keep this commandment of keeping
his heart.

Thirdly, We would say this unto you of the duty of keeping your hearts, if ye
would keep your hearts aright, ye must entertain these four noble and excellent
guests within your hearts, otherwise there will be a great difficulty for you;
yea, an impossibility for you to keep them. The first guest that must be
dwelling in your hearts, is our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, he must dwell in
your hearts by faith. Secondly, The word of God must dwell in your hearts
b(...) love; and if once ye hide his word in yo(...) hearts, then ye would be
helped to keep yo(...) hearts, and that with much advantage and gai(...)
Thirdly, If ye would keep your hearts, the lo(...) of God must dwell in them,
and if these were indeed, your seize, then we might pronounce that
sentence upon you, The peace (...) God that passes all understanding, shall
keep ((...) in a garrison) your hearts and minds in Jes(...) Christ. Fourthly,
Ye should keep the fear a(...) dread of God within your hearts. Study (...)
live under the divine apprehensions of the Omnipotent Majesty of God: We
conceive the little taking up of the Omniscience of God, o(...) the Omnipotency
of God, and of the terrors o(...) God, has a great and especial influence upon
you(...) neglect of the duty of keeping your hearts.

Fourthly, There is this which we would speak from this duty of keeping the
heart, and it is this, We shall propose several things th(...) ye would
endeavor, by all means, to keep your hearts from them. First, A Christi(...)
would study to keep his heart from the deceits thereof, and from these strong
delusio(...) that it speaks: This is the great mystery of iniquity, that even
our hearts will deceive o(...) own hearts, and studies to bring, them to ruin
(...) Take heed ye deceive not your selves, etc. sai(...) Jeremiah, or as the
words may be rendered take heed ye deceive not your souls, 1 Cor. 3 (...) Let
no man deceive himself, etc. and Gal. 6. (...) Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for what (...) man sows, that shall he also reap. It is certai(...)
there are many soul-destroyers, and self-decei(...) (...) amongst us, their
hearts speaks peace (...) them, when there is no peace to them from God; and in
speaking to this, that a Christian should keep his heart from the deceivings of
his own heart. I shall speak a little to two things, First, what are these
deceits that lodges in the heart of man.

And there is this first deceit of the heart of man, the most sinful thing
that can be; we can put a favorable title and name upon it, there are few
sins which any are lying under, but they can put a favorable title upon them.
Do not many call their presumption faith? Are there not many that call security
peace? Are there not many that call passion zeal? Are there not many that call
their lukewarmnesse, and indifferency in things of godliness, their spiritual
wisdom? Are there not many that call their misbelief humility? And are there
not many which call their vain prodigality mortification to the things of a
world? And likewise, are there not many which call their worldly mindedness
fraugality? This was the deceit of Jehu, that called his proud loving of a
kingdom zeal: Come see, says he, and behold my zeal for the Lord, whereas if
he had spoken the language of his own heart, he might have said, Behold my zeal
for my self.

Secondly, There is this deceit of the heart of man, that the most excellent
and choice things of God, our hearts can put an unpleasant name and
construction upon them; as for instance, Are there not many who call
tenderness hypocrisy? And are there not many who call humility of spirit
stupidity? And are there not many who call zeal for God rashness? This was the
cause that caused Ahaz fall, he called believing in God, tempting of God: I
will not tem(...) God, says he, while in the mean time he w(...) pressed to
faith in God; it is a cursed practi(...) in the hearts of many, they put a
false rob up(...) godliness, and studies then to flee from it: J(...) like the
practice of the Jews, they put a scarlet rob upon Christ, and then mocked him.

There is this third deceit of the heart of many, that it does present as
impediments and diversions to hinder us from the exercise of duty. I would pose
you, O Christians! When(...) went ye to duty, but there was something th(...)
your hearts proposed a diversion from the exercise of that duty? This is clear,
Prove. 26. 13. The sloathful man says, There is a Lion in the way, a Lion is in
the streets: He presents to himself an imaginary impediment to divert him from
his duty, which words points out the solly of the excuse, seeing there uses not
to be Lions in the streets nor in the highways; they frequenting more in
solitary and desert places; this is also clear in Song 5. 3. where the carnal
and secure heart of the Spouse, when she (...) called to open to Christ, she
presents this impediment, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I shall only in speaking of these
impediments, which our cursed hearts does propose to divert us from duty,
instance them (...) the exercise of prayer, that our heart does propose several
impediments to divert us from that precious and soul-concerning duty o(...)
prayer, and I shall name five impediment which our cursed and carnal hearts
does present to hinder us from that duty, after God has presented to us a
golden opportunity for doing of the duty.

First, Our carnal heart does propose this impediment, O say ye, I am not in a
praying frame, and so I must desist from this duty of prayer at this time: I
would say to such that desist from prayer, because they are not in a praying
frame, these two words: First, Do ye suppose the way to attain to a praying
frame, is to desist from prayer; should ye not go to prayer, that ye may be
helped to win to a praying frame. Secondly, Do ye never go to prayer but when
ye are in a praying frame? I suppose ye pray not once in a week then, and it is
much if ye pray once in a month, if ye pray not but when ye are in a praying
frame.

The second impediment is, our hearts tells us, it will be more advantage not
to pray, than to pray: Sometimes a Christian will be under that conviction that
he does more offend God in prayer, than in desisting from prayer, and upon that
account we do fold our hands, and neglects this duty. First, I would say this
to such, It is indeed a sad and afflicting thing, the offending of God so much
in prayer, but it is far sadder to give over prayer. Secondly, I would say this
to such, I can hardly believe that ever ye can offend God so much in prayer, as
by the total neglect of that duty.

There is this hard impediment which our hearts does propose to divert us from
duties, and especially from the exercise and duty of prayer: we argue thus with
our selves, we are not under the sensible necessity of what we need; and so we
say, we will not go to God at this time, for if we pray under such a case, we
will turn but complementers with God, we will but flatter him with our mouth,
and lie to him with our tongue. I would say this to such, the best way to bring
up your hearts to the sensible conviction of your necessity, is to (...) much
in the exercise of prayer; a Christian must pray for sorrow of sin, if he want
it, a Christian must pray for sense of necessity, if he want it, and a
Christian must pray for tenderness when he wants it: Prayer is the universal
messenger which we must constantly send to God for the supply of all our
necessities: There is not a case which a Christian can be in, but prayer may go
to God as a messenger for a remedy to such a case, when he stands in need.

The fourth impediment which our carnal hearts proposes to divert us from
prayer, is, our hearts are not under an right majestic apprehension of God,
and so ye say, if we go to prayer at this time, we will be guilty of the third
command, in taking his holy Name in vain: If we go to prayer at this time,
says our deceiving hearts, we will but run our selves into that sin, To speak
to God as to our companion: I confess it is a sad thing to go to God without
some divine impression of his Sovereignty and Majesty; and I would say this to
you, I think it is one of the most sad and undeniable evidences of the little
grace of God which is in the hearts of many; that constantly in their prayers
they speak to God as to their companion; but I would ask this question at you,
When went ye to prayer but ye might find your hearts short-coming in the due
apprehension of the Majesty of God?

The last impediment which our carnal hearts does propose to divert us from the
exercise of prayer, is this, We say (many of us) that it is an inconvenient
time for the exercise of that duty, therefore our hearts says, that we should
delay the time of praying til a more convenient season, according to that
practice in Hag. 1. 2. The time is not come, the time that the Lords house
should be built. It is the cursed practice of our hearts, that when God
presents an occasion to pray, we delay praying at that time under the
expectation of a more convenient season for going about that duty; just like
that word which Felix spoke to Paul, we speak that to our occasions. O occasion
that is presented to me to pray in, Go away at this time, and at a more
convenient occasion I will call for thee again: I would say this to these which
does so much slight the opportunities presented to them to pray: I would only
say these three words unto you who does so; First, What know ye, even ye which
slights the call of God to go about prayer? What know ye, I say, but that may
be the last call from heaven that ever ye shall get to pray? I would have
Christians, and all of you that is here, meditating upon this, that when
occasions are presented to you, ye may argue thus, with your selves, I must
embrace this occasion, for I know not but this may be the last occasion.
Secondly, I would say this to you which slights your occasions to pray, when
the next occasion is presented to you, ye will be more unfit for the exercise
of prayer; and when the convenient time that ye did propose to your selves is
come, ye will then defer it till another time. Thirdly, I would say this unto
you who slights these golden opportunities that are presented to you to pray,
know this for a certainty, the slighting of occasions i(...) disobedience to
the commandment of Go(...) would ye know what occasions to prays They are
even Gods call, inviting you to (...) about that duty, and if ye slight that
occa(...) the call of God is slighted by you.

There is this fourth deceit of the heart (...) man which we would press you
to study (...) eschew, and it is the heart of man studies by all means to
extenuate sin, and make it se(...) little when it is so, this is one of the
great deceits of the heart, according to that of S(...)mons, So is the man that
deceives his neighbor and he will add that as an excuse, was I not (...)
sport? I will tell you three great faults which are incident to Christians,
First, there are some that look upon their perfections through (...)
multiplying glass, their perfections appear to be more than they are, the
Church of La(...) was guilty of this fault, supposing her self to have attained
to much perfection, and to a great length in duties, when indeed she had
attained to nothing. Secondly, There is some, they look upon their sins through
an extenuating glass, they are like the unjust Steward, wh(...) they owe an
hundredth Talents, they go and write down fifty. Thirdly, These iniquities which
they are convinced of, and are forced to charge upon themselves, they study to
extenuate them, and says, Is it not a little one? and so they desire it may be
spared.

The last deceit of the heart is, the heart does oftentimes preach peace, when
there is no peace from God, I am persuaded of this, let all the persons that
are within these doors be asked o(...) that question, whether or not they have
faith in God, or peace with God? I suppose there are not many, but their hearts
would say, they have peace with God: O that is a damnable deceit of the heart,
that oftentimes it preaches peace to a man or a woman, when there is no peace
to them from God. I shall only to make this deceit appear more lively in its
native colors, say this of it. 1. That is a most mysterious and strong deceit
of the heart that will so speak peace to a man, sometimes the word will speak
war to a man, and yet his heart will speak peace to him: And O is not that a
mysterious deceit, that I suppose if an Angel from Heaven, would preach that
doctrine to you, that there is no peace betwixt God and you, many of your
hearts would (for all that) preach and speak peace to your selves. And, 2. This
makes it a most mysterious deceit, that sometimes your consciences does declare
and preach to you, that you are not at peace with God, yet over the belly of
that assertion, your hearts will preach peace to you. 3. This makes it a most
mysterious deceit, that notwithstanding your lives and conversations that they
testify to your selves and others that you are at enmity with God, yet your
hearts will preach peace to you.

Now the second thing that we would say to you from this, viz. That a Christian
should keep his heart from the deceivings of his own heart, and it is this, ye
would mainly guard this, ye would mainly guard against discouragments, this our
blessed Lord Jesus presses, John 14 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, etc.
And it is clear: this is dehorted Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, etc. and
in Psalm. 42. 5. David does (as it were) expostulat with his own so(...) for
being discouraged and cast down. Now (...) speaking to this, that a Christian
should gu(...) against discouragement, I shall speak unto (...) things, and the
first shall be to the rise of discouragement, and from whence it does spring
And secondly, I shall speak to some considerations to press this upon you that
ye would keep your selves from discouragement.

And first, we conceive that discourageme(...) it arises from this, when a
Christian has (...) visible victory over his idols, then his discouragement
comes apace upon him: A Christian after long wrestling with his idols, lusts
and corruptions, and has little victory over them, he is prone and ready to
draw that sad conclusion there is no hope, but that once he shall fall (...)
the hand of some of his idols.

The second Rise of discouragement, is, fro(...) Christ's withdrawing of the
sensible manifestations of his love, and of his presence, Psalm. 30. (...) Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled. And it is clear in the practice of the
Disciples, the withdrawing of Christ's bodily presence, it male sorrow to fill
their hearts. I confess there are not many which are sick of the disease of
discouragement under absence with Christ; but however, it has been the reason
of his ow(...) discouragement, when Christ for many days had absented himself
from them.

Thirdly, This is the rise of discouragement, when a Christian has no return
of his prayers Lam. 3. 8. compared with verse. 18. wherein verse. 8. he cries
out, When I cry and shout, he shuts out my prayer, and verse. 18. he
draw(...) that sad conclusion, My hope and my strength is perished from the
Lord. The not getting returns (...)f prayer has been an occasion of much
dispu(...)ng the good will of God, and a foundation of (...)uch discouragement
to his own people.

Fourthly, This is the rise of discouragment, when a Christian does interpret
the sad and af(...)cting dispensations of God, and he conceives (...)at there
is nothing but wrath speaking to (...)im therein; then he falls into a great
sit of discouragement, as in Lam. 3. 17. compared with verse. 18. where the rise
of his discouragment, was the mis-interpreting of the sad dispensations of God.

Fifthly, This is the rise of a Christians discouragement, When he is made to
possess the (...)iquities of his youth, and all the terrors of God (...)emeth
to be called as in a solemn Assembly round about him. O then he takes on a
great sit of discouragement!

Now to that which secondly we shall speak (...)o, is, to propose some
considerations unto you (...)o guard against discouragement.

The first shall be this, These that have a hear (...)hat is under the spirit
of bondage and discouragement, they cannot pray as they ought, discouragement
makes prayer a most unpleasant duty, as is clear, Psalm. 77. I am so troubled,
that I cannot speak. Discouragement (as it were) hinders and obstructs the
exercise of prayer. Secondly, Discouragement does exceedingly interrupt the
exercise of faith, as in Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and
why art (...)ou discouraged within me? trust in God, for I shall yet praise him
for the health of his countenance. The Psalmist (as it were) speaks a
difference (if not an opposition) betwixt disquiering and faith. If you would
not interrupt the lively acting of Faith, ye would study to guard against
discouragement, that ye do not sit down and draw desperate conclusions against
your selves, I know ye may call a Christian Marah, now; because he is indeed
under bitterness; but the day is approaching when we may call a Christian
Noami, when he shall be comforted with the consolations of God.

The third Consideration to press you to guard against discouragment, is, there
is no duty that a Christian is called to when he is under discouragement but it
makes it a burden to him, according to that word Jer. 20. 9. discouragement
brought forth that resolution, then I said I will not make mention of him, nor
speak any more in his Name etc. A soul that is under the exercise of Faith
moves swiftly as the Chariots of Aminadab; but a soul that is under the
exercise of discouragement, moves as the Chariots of Pharaoh heavily.

Lastly, there is this Consideration to press you to guard against
discouragement, and it is this, misbelief and discouragement is the mother of
Apostacy, as is clear in Lam. 1. 8. she sigheth, and what follows upon? and
turns backward. And it is no wonder discouragement grow big with child of
Apostasy, because it makes duties become tastelesse.

Now the rest of the things which we would have a Christian keeping his heart
from, we shall only but name them briefly unto you.

The third frame that a Christian should keep his heart from, is from an
impatient frame, he should study to make his heart keep silence to any cross
that comes to him from the hand of God. Fourthly, he should keep his heart from
(...)sting frame, not to be taken up in an immo(...)ate pursuit after the
things of the world. (...)ly, he should keep his heart from an un(...)der
frame, he should study always to keep (...) heart tender, that he may have
that Divine (...)ness that his heart may melt: likewise, he (...) to keep his
heart from an unpraying frame, (...) be at every occasion in a sit temper of
spi(...) for the duty of prayer. Lastly, he is to (...)p his heart from a
secure frame, always to (...)pon the watch tower, and wait for the mo(...) of
Christ: and there are three things, the (...)tions of which a Christian should
take up; (...)st. He should take up the motions of Christ, (...) hear if he can
take up the motions of the (...)d of Christ's feet coming over the moun(...)ns
of Bether. Secondly, He should take up (...)e motions of his conscience, that
he may not (...) sleeping when sin awakes. Thirdly, He (...)old take up the
motions of the heart, to see (...)at frame it is in; A Christian should be able
(...) write a diurnall of his own heart, that in (...) an hour of such a day I
was in a believing (...)e, and in such an hour of such a day I was (...)
discouraged frame; and in such an hour of (...)h a day, I sought him whom my
soul (...)eth, and at such an hour of such a day he (...)ought me to the
banqueting house and his (...)er over me was love. The sum of all is, (...)
ye would keep your hearts, ye must give (...)is it them to keep, for that is the
best way to (...)p them well, it is only to Christ ye must (...) the keeping of
them: Ye know man (...) but his heart a short time in keeping, and (...) lost
it; and I shall, before I close, because it is the great design of the
preaching of the Gospel, give you five considerations that may provoke you to
give your hearts to Christ.

The first Consideration is, will ye consider t(...) matchless and transcendant
excellency which in precious Christ: O! does not that transcendant beauty
preach, My son, give me t(...) heart, Psalm, 24. 7. The Psalmist presses
opening to Christ upon this account, Lift up y(...) heads, O ye everlasting
doors and gates! A(...) what is the argument wherewith he press(...) it, and
the King of glory shall come in. I would only ask this at you (O ye hard
hearted) is (...) not marvelous presumption for you to refus(...) the precious
offers of such a glorious King?

The second Consideration to press you to giv^ your hearts in keeping to
Christ, Take a vie(...) and a comprehensive look of the precious act(...) of
the infinite condescentions of Christ: Do(...) not his coming down from heaven
preach th(...) doctrine, My son, give me thy heart? Does no(...) his being born
under the Law, preach that doctrine, My son, give me thy heart? And do(...) not
his being born in so low a condition, pre(...) that doctrine, My son, give me
thy heart? A(...) if nothing will persuade you to give yo(...) hearts to
Christ, ye would take a look of tho(...) five wounds which he received in his
bless(...) body. First, Does not the wound that he r^ceived in his right hand,
preach this, My s(...) give me thy heart? Secondly, Does not t(...) wound that
he got in his left hand, preach th(...) doctrine, My son, give me thy heart?
Thirdly Does not the wound that he received in his pr^cious side, preach this
soul-concerning doctrine My son, give me thy heart? And likewise, do(...) not
the wounds which he received in his blessed (...)ggs, preach this doctrine, My
son, give me thy (...)eart? O! were ye never constrained to wish (...)r ten
thousand hearts, to ware and bestow (...)em upon him? Oh? what hearts have ye,
which refuses the offers of so noble and conde(...)ending a Prince?

The third Consideration is, If ye will look upon these things which entreats
you to give christ your hearts, ye cannot but give them unto him. Christ cries,
O come and give me (...)our hearts. Necessity cries, O go and give christ your
hearts: and we say likewise, O give christ your hearts to keep.

The fourth Consideration is, Will ye look up(...)n these unspeakable
disadvantages which at(...)nds those that will not give their hearts to christ.
I would say this by the way, there are (...)o balances upon which we weigh our
hearts. (...)irst, some weighs their hearts in the balance (...)f the
Sanctuary, and they are found light. Se(...)ndly, some weighs their hearts in
the bal(...)nce of deceit, and they are found without (...)lt: but now I say
this to the persons which (...)ill not give their hearts to Christ, I defy all
(...)e Angels in heaven to speak forth their un(...)eakable disadvantages; yea,
sense shall be the (...)st preacher of it in that day: and I shall name
(...)ese three inexpressable disadvantages to you. (...)rst, if ye give not
Christ your hearts, Christ (...)all be your eternal enemy: and in the con(...)
to that precious doctrine which he once (...)eached, Come unto me, he shall
pronounce (...)at sad sentence against you, Depart from me; (...)d therefore as
ye would not engage Christ to your eternal enemy, ye would give him your
hearts. O the Gospel-vengeance of a crucified Savior, will be more terrible,
sad an^ fearful, then the vengeance of the Law! Chr(...) is the best friend,
and the most terrible fo(...) The second disadvantage is, ye shall be
eternally shut out from the enjoyment of the ble^sed company of Angels, and
from the souls (...) just men made perfect: and, O therefore meditate and
consider upon this, what it is to b(...) separated from the Father, the first
person (...) the blessed Trinity; and from the Son, the second person of the
blessed Trinity; and fro(...) the holy Ghost, the third person of the
bless(...) Trinity, and from all the blessed society whi(...) are in heaven.
And the last disadvantage is, (...) shall be kept under these everlasting chain
even all of you which will not give your hea(...) to Christ. If ye be not under
this everlasti(...) chain of love, ye shall be under these everla^^ing chains
of wrath. I suppose if the most sto(...) hearted sinner here, if he could but a
mo(...) hear the screighings of the damned (if it we(...) granted to him) he
would not delay to give h(...) heart to Christ.

The last Consideration is, O consider these i(...) finit, eternal, and
unchangeable advantages th(...) those have which gives their hearts to
Christ(...) we conceive if all the Angels in heaven wou(...) preach together
upon the unspeakable blesse^nesse of the Saints in heaven, they would a ways
close their sentence with this, It is u(...)speakable joy which attends those
that are a^mitted to that blessed life. There are five thin(...) which are
unchangeable to Christians, and (...) things which are unchangeable to
reprobate(...) There is this first, which is unchangeable (...) the Saints: (I
mean not here) their communi(...) with God shall be unchangeable; for after
^hey shall win to heaven, they shall be under a (...)ontinual and blessed
emanation of Christ's pre(...)ce. Secondly, They shall have an unchange(...)le
love. A Christians love while he is here, is (...)e unto the Moon, subject to
many vicissitudes (...)d alterations; but afterward when they (...)ll be in
heaven, their love shall be unchange(...)le. Thirdly, His holiness shall then
be un(...)ngeable when once he shall put on the robe (...) Christ's
righteousness: he shall then sing that (...)g, O Death! where is thy sting?
And, O (...)ve! where is thy victory? Fourthly, praise (...) God shall be
unchangeable: O what a plea(...)t sight shall it be to see the souls of just
men (...)de perfect, with harps in their hands, sing(...)g these pleasant songs
unto God most sweet(...)! Alelujah to him that sits on the throne, and to
(...)e Lamb which lives for ever; their tongues is (...)de like the pen of a
ready writer, there is not (...)h a complaint uttered by Moses in heaven,
(...)am a man of slow speech, neither does Jeremiah (...)w complain, I am a
child and cannot speak. (...)fthly, desires after God shall be unchangeable;
Christian while he is here below, will desire (...)od now, and within a little
while he will de(...)e his idols, but then when he shall be above, (...)s
desires after God shall be unchangeable.

And upon the contrary there are five things (...)changeable in the lot of a
reprobate, and of (...)se that will not give Christ their hearts. (...)st,
their separation from God shall be un(...)ngeable, when once they shall go down
in(...) the pit, there shall be no hope of coming up (...)in: Ah! ye would
think upon this, what a life shall it be to be under eternal excommun^cation
from Christ's presence: O but if ye kne^ Christ, and believed what a One he
were, (...) would close with him! Secondly, the repr^bate shall have an
unchangeable sorrow, O (...) may be sad when the vengeance of God shall (...)
squizing the marrow out of his bones, an^ when he is eternally shut up in these
horrib^^ flames, and out of them to have no redemp^^on! Thirdly, reprobates
they shall have an (...)changeable hatred against God; and God sh(...) have an
unchangeable against them, and I cannot wish a greater misery to any, then
(...) Christ to have an unchangeable hatred agai(...) them. Fourthly, Ye that
are alients fro(...) God, ye shall sin unchangeably, ye shall ne(...) cease to
sin, and ye shall never cease to be to(...)mented; on these two eternity shall
be spe(...) Lastly, Your inward anxiety and tortering consciences shall be
unchangeable, that woe(...) shall never die, but shall eternally gnaw yo(...)
consciences.

Now what shall we say more? we have (...) life and death before you, and
whither of th(...) will ye embrace? O that you would imbr(...) Christ, even
precious Christ, and give o(...) your hearts to that blessed Lord! It is like
(...) these days, that the devil has purchased (...) ny Harpers to himself to
sing that song, I (...) not far from victory: the curse of a cruci(...) Savior
shall eternally come down upon (...) heads of these that will not give their
hearts Christ, and to you that will give, or has g(...) your hearts to Christ,
the eternal blessing Christ shall come upon your heads. Behold day is coming (O
Atheists) when ye woe(...) ^ive ten thousand worlds for one invitation of ^he
Gospel again; and ye would be content to (...)i would ten thousand years in hell
for one preaching, and it shall be denied to you! O! therefor do not withstand
Christ's offers; take him, (...)e will get him for a look: and know that if ye
^ill not love him now; his heart shall burn ^ith hatred against you; and one
day ye shall (...)rse your cursed hearts for that hatred ye bare (...) him. Now
to him who entreats you to im(...)ce his offer, be praise.

SERMON VIII.
Micah 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name, hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.
IT is a question that is hard to determine, whether the greatness of God, or
the condescendancy of God, be the greatest mystery; (...)t O! when both these
are put together, they (...)ke up a matchless mystery. What is more
(...)eadfull then power which cannot be resisted? (...)d what is more terrible
than wisdom from which nothing can be hid? And yet what is more (...)eet, than
the love wherewith he has loved (...), and the unchangeablenesse thereof which
(...)oath cut off all suspicion? I would only say this (...)o you, God has been
speaking to you di(...)se ways, and by different things, and as the ^postle
speaks, There are many voices in the (...)rld, and every voice has its own
signification. (...) I may say, there is not a voice by which God speaks to
you, that needs to be a Barb^rian speaking in an unknown tongue.

I confess it is sad, that when God cond(...)scends to speak unto us in so
many differe(...) ways, that there should be so many which should stop their
ears; are there not some (...) whom Christ has piped, and they have n(...)
danced? And now he is beginning to mourn (...) you, and Oh will ye not lament?
I would s(...) this to you, the day may be approaching, wh(...) Glasgows rods
shall be preachers, and its cross(...) Teachers from the Lord. Yea, God is
begi(...) ning to preach that word to you, which is (...) Jer. 2. 31. O
generation, see the word of t(...) Lord, etc. If ye will not hearken to God, in
t(...) voice and mouth of his Preachers, he will se(...) a more severe Preacher
unto you; and ye sha(...) be forced to hear his voice. I say, look that t(...)
contempt of Christ in his Rods, in his Ord^nances, and in his offers, make not
this pla(...) an Aceldama, a field of blood, and a Golgo(...) the place of dead
men's skuls. I say to you, t(...) day may be approaching when ye shall me(...)
with these six silent things from God. Fi(...) when ye shall meet with silent
rods, when y(...) shall not know nor understand the language (...) them, when
they shall speak to you in stran(...) and profound language which you shall not
(...) derstand. Secondly, when ye shall meet with silent God, when you shall
cry to him and (...) will not hear you: Thirdly, when you sh(...) meet with
silent and dumb Ordinances whi(...) shall not speak unto you. Fourthly, when
(...) shall meet with silent mercies, that all the go(...) things he does unto
you, ye shall not kno^ the language of them. Fifthly, when you sha(...) ^eet
with the sad lot of a silent conscience, when ye shall not be reproved by it,
when ye (...), but God shall give you leave to ^^ll and de^art, and not to
return. And lastly, when ye ^^all meet with silent commands, with silent
(...)eatnings, and with silent promises, that is, (...) shall never know what
the promise calls for, that the threatenings calls for, nor what the ^ommands calls
for, when he shall chasti^e you (...) the dark, and there shall be none to
deliver ^ou, and when there shall be none to plead ^our cause, but a sin
revenging God entering ^he lists with you, when he shall say to them that are
left, do not pray for this people, not (...)ceed for them, for they are the
people up(...) whom I will have no mercy: I may say by (...)ll appearance, our
judgment does speak this. (...)e has spoken to us in the still voice of the
^ospel, and he has spoken to us in the whirle(...)d, and yet he is in none of
them: But what (...)ow ye but God may the next time speak to (...)u closing
himself in a circle of ^ir^: I have ^ometimes spoken that word to you, awake,
^^ake, O sleepers, and call upon your God.

But to come to the words, in this Chapter ^he Prophet has been leading a sad
process against this people, for the neglect of duties which were lying at the
door, and now we have in this verse the conclusion of it, the scope whereof is
this, showing the people that the Lord would send a more sharp message if they
will not obey. And in it there are four things considerable.

First, we have an excellent exhortation given to hear the Rod, and by it, is
not only meaned to take up what the Rod speaks, but also, Who has appointed it.

Secondly, There is that excellent Consideration to press them unto it, it is
the Lord voice, we may say that of the rod which wa(...) said of Herod in
another sense, it is the voice (...) God and not of man.

Thirdly, We have the people to whom th(...) Exhortations is given; and it is
unto the City that is, to Samaria, and to the bordering tow(...) thereabout,
now the reason why the Lords voi(...) cries unto the City rather than to the
Country, the reason of it is either this, the City ordinarily has most eminent
tokens of the me(...)cies and respects of God, which being abused makes God
especially to contend with them or else because of this, ordinarily most
prophenity is broached within the City, and do(...) vent it self thence into
the Country, accordi^^ to that word which is spoken of Jerusalem that from it
Prophanity goes out into the Coun(...) or whole land.

The fourth thing in the words, is the persons that will hear the voice of the
rod, or th(...) Lords voice, and it is, The man of wisdom sh(...) see thy Name,
or as the words may be rendered the man of substance, or of substantial wisdom
which speaks, that it is one of the greatest fo(...)lies that is imaginable not
to hear the voice o(...) the Lord and his, threatening rod.

The last thing in the words, is the way h(...) the man of wisdom winnes to the
right us(...) making and understanding the voice of the to(...) and it is by
seeing his Name; now by the Nam^ of God may be either understood, the seeing
(...) the Authority of God in his threatenings; or by the Name of God may be
understood, His wisdom, His peace, His power, His justice, His so(...)raignity,
and His holiness, the man of wis^om shall see these five excellent Attributes
of God shining into the Rod, and in every sad dis^ensation which he meets with,
and the reason (...)using that expression, he shall see, is to point (...)ot
these certain and distinct discoveries which (...)e man of wisdom shall have by
such a cross.

Now having thus made plain the words un^o you, there are three things which we
shall ^^eak a little unto from the scope, before we (...)me to the first thing
in the words.

The first thing which we shall take notice of (...)om the scope, is this, That
the slighting of (...)own duties is the fore runner of some sad (...)nd
lamentable stroke from the Lord upon a ^erson or people, these things which
they know ^o be duties, and yet they slight and disobey them, I say it is the
forerunner of some sad and (...)minent act of the displeasure of God to a
person or people. This is clear, Luke 12. 47. That ^ervant which knows his
lords will, and prepares not himself, neither does according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes. And that word in Jer. 5. 5. I will get me unto the
great men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord;
and the judgment of their God, etc. yet it is said of these, they have
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds: And what follows? verse. 6.
Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall stay them. Rom, 1. 21. 26. where they
professed themselves to know, And yet they glorified him not as God. This is
given as a reason, That he gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do things not
convenient. It is probable the impiety and prophanity of a people is come to a
wonderful height, when they can sin agai(...) light and knowledge. Now in
speaking of th(...) more fully, I shall speak to some aggravatio^ of the sin of
slighting known duties.

The first Aggravation is, when a person slights duty after the sinfulness of
that sin hat^ been discovered unto him, and engrven on hi(...) conscience; O
that is a mighty aggravation o(...) that sin: This is clear, Hos. 5. 2. And the
revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them
all. Nehem. 9. 29. an^ have testified against them, yet they dealt proudly and
hearkened not to thy commandments, but sinne^ against thy judgments. I confess,
sinning against convictions of conscience (especially when they are sharp) is a
greater sin than to sin against light, this is indeed to sin with a lifted up
hand, and not to blush, nor be ashamed, nor yet to be afraid to commit
iniquity. Know now therefore, there are many here that slight known duties
notwithstanding of light, and the convictions of conscience which they have had
for doing so: I would only say to that person, be afraid and stand in awe lest
the day may be approaching, when God shall cease to be a reprover unto you, and
the reinyies shall be laid on your own neek, and you shall be as a wild Ass
snuffing up the wind.

The second Aggravation of slighting known duties, is when a person slights
known duties after God has been discovering discontent with another person for
that sin, when we see the justice of God overtaking another person for
slighting of a known duty, and yet the person which stands beside, is not
afraid to persist in the same sin. This is clear, Jer. 3. 8. And I saw, when
for all these causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery, I had put
her away, and give her a bill of divorce: yet her treacherous sister Judah
feared not, but went and played the Harlot also. As if he had said, though
Judah have beheld what I have done to Israel for her whoorish carriage, yet
notwithstanding of this, she went and played the harlot also. I confess this
is a greater aggravation than the former, and it speaks that such a sinner (in
a manner) has given a de^iance to the justice of God, and has cried out (in a
manner) I care not what God will do, I will do my pleasure.

The third Aggravation of the sin of flighting known duties, is, when persons
flights known duties after God has begun to contend with them for so doing,
this is a mighty aggravation of sin, as is clear, Isa. 57. 17. For the iniquity
of his covetousness was I wroth, and smot^ him: I hid me and was wroth, and he
went on frowardly in the way of his heart. After a person has had the Rod
shaken over his head, and has drunk something of the justice of God for
^^^ighting such a duty, yet to persist in it, O that is a scarlet and mighty
transgression, and yet are there not many here who are such?

The fourth Aggravation of flighting known duties, is, when a person slights
known duties upon very small temptations, is not this certain, a word of a
temptation, the half of a word; yea, the very nod of a temptation will put us
from the doing of known duties? Yea, sometimes we will be glad of a temptation
to divert us from the exercise of duties; yea, sometimes it is known, when
temptations are not present to divert us from the exercise of known duties, we
will go forth and seek a temptation. I confess the devil needs not to be at
much pains i(...) these days, there is many which gives the devil work and
employment, yea, and if he see(...) not them, they will seek him!

The fifth Aggravation of the sin of slighting known duties, is, when persons
does not so much as set about well doing of them, that is (...) great
aggravation, this is clear, Luke 12. 47. He that knows his masters will, and
does it not, neither does prepare himself to do it, is worthy of double
stripes. He will not take pains to prepare his heart for duty, that is a mighty
aggravation: Some they are content to be under their setters as though they
were bound of God, some they are content to live under their convictions as
though it were impossible for them to answer them; and they say there is no
hope.

The sixth Aggravation of slighting known duties, is, when a person slights
duties after God has commended the beauty and excellency of such duties; that
is no doubt a great aggravation, as when God does commend prayer, and discovers
the beauty thereof to a Christian, O then it is a sad and lamentable thing for
that person to sit down and slight his duty, that is (as it were) to slight
prayer when it has on all its ornaments.

A seventh Aggravation is, of slighting known duties, is when persons slight
duties after they have been convinced of the advantage which waits upon the
doing of them: Are there not some that slight prayer, notwithstanding they have
been convinced that prayer has been unto them a mount tabor in which they have
seen Christ transfigured? some they will slight prayer, after they have been
convinced that prayer has been the trysting-place betwixt Christ and them, and
after they have been convinced that prayer has been as the top of mount
Pisgah, on which they have gotten a view of the promised land, O that is a
notable aggravation of slighting of known duties, when the person has this to
say, Now I am slighting my own advantage?

There is this last Aggravation, when a person slights known duties, yet with
very little resentment and grief of heart: Are there not many that have
slighted their morning prayer here to day, and yet not have convictions
therefore? And are there not many persons here to day, that oftentimes goes to
bed without saying their prayers, and yet have as much peace of conscience as
if they had done it? I think a person has gone a great length in hardness of
heart, when he can slight known duties, and yet not be grieved; yea, and it is
a token that they have not only to do with a hardened conscience, but with a
hardened will: Are there not many persons that notwithstanding of the slighting
of known duties, yet never had a broken heart therefore? Does not the
misbeliever slight the commandment of faith, and yet not weep for it? Does not
the secure Christian slight the commandment of prayer, and yet not be grieved
therefore? Does not the presumptuous sinner slight self examination, and yet is
not much grieved? And does not the dissolute sinner that is under the power of
his idols slight the commandment of mor^ification, and yet not have a sore
heart for it?

Now the second thing which I shall speak from the scope, is, I shall propose
some considerations to press you to the exercise of all known duties.

The first Consideration, it is the Christian which practices, and not the
Christian which knows, to whom the promises are made: Would ye know the
Christian which has a right to the promises? It is not the Christian which
knows his duty, but it is the Christian that does his duty; This is clear in
Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
heaven, I think if the promises had been annexed to knowledge of duties; then
doubtless Balaam had been in heaven; it is not the knowing Christian, but it
is the practicing Christian to who the promises are made.

The second Consideration to press you to the exercise of known duties, it is
the Christian that is taken up in practicing, and not the knowing Christian
that is blessed; would ye know the blessed Christian? It is not he that knows
his duty only, but it is he which knows his duty and does it; according to
that word, Joh. 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
Where ye may see happiness is annexed to doing, and not to knowing: I
confess, if ye could speak your duty like an Angel, and if ye knew the
smallest command in Scripture to be a command lying at your door, yet if ye do
it not, ye shall never be blessed. O, know it, there are many knowing persons
in hell to day!

The third Consideratirn to press you to practice it, is the practicing
Christian, and not the knowing Christian that is approven and commended of God;
This is clear, Song 7. 1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes
daughter, etc. Christ takes first notice of the Brides feet, which is her
practice, and commends her from that; believe it, Christ commends a Christians
feet, more than his eyes, that is, his practice, more than his knowledge: It is
the practicing Christian which shall have that word spoken to him in the day of
the Lord, Well done good and faithful servant; it is not said, well known good
and faithful servant, but it is said, well done, for if you know never so
much, and yet not practice it, Christ will never commend you.

The fourth Consideration to press you to the doing of known duties, it is not
the knowledge, put the practice of duties which will give peace to a Christians
conscience, if ye would know all the commandments in the Bible, and yet never
do one of them, it is nothing, it is not your knowledge that will give your
conscience peace. I say this to you, many others knowing and their slighting of
duty, in one day will make their conscience roar like a Lion, and they have
nothing to answer it. I say unto you, O Christians! if ye would have peace of
conscience in the great and terrible day of the Lord, then practice what ye
know, and desire to know what ye ought to practice.

The fifth Consideration, it is the practice of your duty, and not the
knowledge of your duty, by which ye rise up in conformity with God; it is the
practicing of what ye know, and not the knowledge of what ye should do, that
raises you up in conformity with him; if ye know all that ye should do, and do
it not, ye may be strangers to God, in respect of conformity with him, as if ye
were mere ignorants. I wish there were in these days less knowledge and more
practice, or rather I wish there were more knowledge and practice both
together. I think the Christians of this time sins against a witness in heaven,
and a witness against their own conscience: I think there are some (but few
amongst us) in these days that sins out of ignorance, but I would say this,
the person that sins out of knowledge, condemns himself, but the person that
sins out of ignorance, the law condemns him.

There is this, thirdly, that I would say to you from the scope, I would have
you observing these six things concerning known duties.

And first, many persons are more desirous to know what they should do, then to
do what they know: Some persons cry out, Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord? and the Lord may answer them with this, Have I not showed thee? O man!

There is this second thing which I would have you knowing, the question which
shall be proposed to you in the great and notable day of the Lord it shall not
be, O man! what know thou? But it shall be, O man! what did thou? This
shall be the question which Christ shall put home to you in that day, What
did thou in thy lifetime, and not what know thou in thy liftime.

Thirdly, I would say this, believe it, A grain weight of sincerity and
practice, is worth a talent of knowledge: it is better to practice as the
weakest Christian, than to know as the ^ost excellent angel, not practicing
what we know: Christ weight not our grace by quantity, but by quality; not by
degrees but by the truth and reality of them: I say, if thou knew never so
much, a grain weight of sincerity and practice in Gods sight, is more worth
than it all: If thou were as eloquent as Appollos, and (...)s wise as Solomon,
and could ye speak with as many tongues as Paul, and if ye knew and understood
all mysteries, yet if ye do not practice your duties, it is all to no purpose.

Fourthly, I would say this, the slighting of known duties has many sad
disadvantages waiting upon them, and I shall name these four unto you. First,
The slighting of duties, it is that which makes Christians weary in duties; Is
there any person here that slights duties at such and such a time, I prophecy
this to thee, thou shall weary of duties ere long, this is clear, Isa. 43. 22.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel. (...) say, slighting of duties, and wearying in duties they will not be
long asunder: Secondly, slighting of known duties brings on much hardness and
stupidity of heart, according to that word in Nehem. 9. 16. where disobedience
and hardness of heart are knit together: Would you know the reason why so many
persons are under so much deadness, and under so many bonds? It is because
they slight known duties. Thirdly, The slighting of known duties does these
three things to our conscience. It either marres the peace of Conscience, or
else it hardens the conscience. Or thirdly, It luls our conscience a sleep. I
wonder how many of us can call our selves render, since there is so much
slighting of that we ought to do. Are ther^ not many Christians, which may soon
tell al^ their private prayers that they make to God. There is a fourth
disadvantage which waits o^ the slighting of known duties, and it is this the
Christian who slights duty sometimes, tha^ duty which a Christian does, it is
exceeding formal: There are some Christians which slights prayer one day, and
the second day, and it is one to a hunder but the third day when(...) that
Christian prays, but it be mere formality. O what makes Christians pray so
weakly? It is because they teach their hearts the art of praying formally by
slighting of duty.

Fifthly, I would say this to you, the slighting of known duties is the first
step of the s(...) against the Holy Ghost. This is clear in Heb. 10. 26. For if
we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin. I Will tell you what is betwixt the sin of
slighting known duties, and the sin against the Holy Ghost, there is no more
betwixt them both but that word wilfulness. And what know thou, but thy
slighting of duties may come to wilfulness ere long? Ye would know this, that
under the Law there was Sacrifices for sins of Ignorance, and likewise for sins
of infirmities, but there was no sacrifice for presumptuous sins, now if this
be the first step toward the sin against the holy Ghost, I am sure there are
some here which have gone this length, yea, and I fear a little further: Now
will ye take home this conviction, and I would say this, let the person which
is not guilty of this offense amongst us, take up the first stone and cast at
us: I suppose our conscience might accuse us, and we might steal out one by
one. O! the dreadful disadvantages which attends that person that slights
known duties! This is a strange thing, our consciences are no more moved at
what one can speak of that which is our sin indeed, than though it did not
concern us: I suppose there is not one here, bu^ they may write this on their
foreheads, Guilty, guilty.

Now there is this lastly which I would say unto you. The day is coming when
the slighters of known duties, shall be forced to cry out, Ah that I had been
an idiot and had never known my duty! I confess the slighting of known duties,
and the sinning against Light, shall be a mighty aggravation of our sin. O what
terror was it to Judas conscience when he came to think of this, I sold my
Master, and I know I have sinned in so doing! And O what terror likewise will
it be to you, when ye shall be convinced of this, my conscience told me that
this was my duty, and I would not do it!

Now the next thing which we shall speak to from the words in general is, that
God (in the depth of his condescendancy*) has many various ways in making
known duties unto a person or people, this is clear from the words, where God
having pressed duties upon this people by the voice of his Ministers, now he
sends a more sad and terrible preacher to them; even a threatening Rod. Now this
is clear that God has many ways in pressing people to their duties, Isa. 5.
4. What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it,
etc. This is also eminently clear, Songs 5. 2. Open to me my sister, my Spouse,
and if that will not do it, he will knock at the door and say, it is the voice
of thy beloved that knocks, and if this will not do it, he will use arguments
to persuade her; open to me my sister, is not that an argument? yet he will
give her another, for my head is filled with dew, and my hair with the drops of
the night, and if all these will not do it, Christ will put in his hand by the
hole of the door, which speaks this, that Christ in the depths of his
condescendency, leaves nothing unassayed to press people to their duty. This
is also clear, Deuteronomy. 11. 26, 27, 28. where he sets life and death, blessings
and cursings before them to press them to their duty. I confess there are
many in heaven to day that Christ never took the half of the pains on them as
he has taken on some of us, and there are many in hell to day, upon whom
Christ took never half so much pains as he has done on some of us: and is it
not then a wonder that we are not sent away to hell likewise? Now I will tell
you six great voices or means wherewith God presses people to their duty.

The first voice is, the voice of threatenings, all the threatenings which is in
the Scripture, this is the voice of them all, O give obedience to your duty!
This is remarkably clear from that choice and remarkable place, Jer. 36. ver. 3
6, 7. Therefore go thou and read this roll which thou have written from my
mouth, etc. Baruch, he is commanded to read all the threatenings of God to his
people, and what is the precious end he has before him? It may be they will
present their supplication before the Lord, and will return every one from his
evil way, etc. This is the very end and scope of Gods threatenings, that persons
may present their prayers before him; and he will shake the Rod over our heads
for this end. Therefore I say, give the threatenings of God (who are his
Messengers) that which they require, and it is, to put the Rod by the door.

The second great voice whereby God sometimes presses home duties upon folk, is
by the voice and Rod of these sad afflicting dispensations which we meet with:
This is (indeed) the end of them that persons would give obedience to the
commands of God, this is clear in the very scope where he presses them to hear
the voice of the Rod, that they might give obedience to their duty. And it is
also clear from that sweet and excellent promise, Ezekiel. 20. 37. And I will
cause you to pass under the Rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the
Covenant. I say the very great end and design of God in sending Rods, is, that
persons may be engaged to their duty.

The third voice wherewith God presses people to their duty, is by the voice of
promises, what is the great voice of the Covenant of promises? It is, give
obedience to commanded duties: This is clear, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. And I will give
them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; And I will take the
stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of flesh, that
they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them, etc. As it
were, all the great promises of the Covenant have this promise, obey, and ye
shall have, it is obedience that leads us to the possession of the promises.

The fourth voice whereby God presses persons to the doing of known duties,
is, by the voice of all the mercies which we meet with; I say, the voice of
them all is this, O give obedience to his commandments: Yea, this is the very
language of mercies: All the great things which God has done to you, what is
the scope and end of them all? It is, O will ye come and obey.

Fifthly, Does not the great voice of ou^ consciences, and of all the
convictions which God rooves upon them, do they not say, O give obedience, and
obey him with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength?

There is this last voice whereby God presses people to the doing of known
duties, and it is by the voice of all the public Ordinances; what is the great
voice of all these preachings which we daily preach unto you, but this, O give
obedience to the Commands?

Now I would say this unto you, O people in Glasgow! has not God spoken to you
by all these voices? Has he not spoken unto you by mercies? Has he not spoken
unto you by threatenings? by the voice of promises? by the voice of the rod? by
the voice of our consciences? and by the voice of public ordinances? Oh! look
that the 26. Chapter of Leviticus be not Glasgows plagues! Lord keep this place
from Gospel-condemnation. For it is a fearful and dreadful thing to fall in the
hands of the living God! yet seven times more, yet seven times more, I fear be
your plague, Oh* what can God do more to us nor he has done? Have we not
pressed this duty upon you that ye would embrace Christ, and that this duty
might be your delight! If Christ cannot allure us to give our hearts away to
him, (in a manner) he will force us to give our hearts to him. I confess it is
sad to slight and disobey the voice of the Rod. God has two times fearfully
shaken the ^hreatning Rod of his wrath over this City of Glasgow in a few
years, look that so many menacings of Gods Rods be not the forerunner of some
sad stroke from the Lord. Now this is ^our duty to be harkening to his voice:
this is Christ's first word, and it is his last word, and it (...) his best
word. O then take him and embrace him! I think there is seven steps of
judgment which is like to overtake us, if we hearken not ^o his voice: I say,
God has spoken much, and what can he speak more! And what can ^e do more? And
what can we do less to him? (...) say, all the slighting of these threatenings
of God, to you they are the forerunner of these seven remarkable steps of
judgment.

The first step of judgment which ordinarily does befall slighters and
disobeyers of Gods ^oice, is, God shall slight their voice when they ^ry unto
him: and, oh! is it any wonder that God stop his ear at all our prayers?
because, ^s it not known that we stop our ears to this precious invitation and
cry which Christ has ^o us, O take me. Therefore, I say, O give Christ your
hearts, and then he will hear your ^oice.

There is a second step of judgment which ordinarily befalls these who slight
these great and precious voices by which God is speaking to us: and it is, Be
afraid that at last thou come not to this, that thou shall have no answer from
God; that God shall speak no more unto ^hee; yea, that thou come not to this,
that God shall speak his last word unto thee, and have no more to say. I
confess, when God goes from preachings to Rods, it is an evidenc^ that we are
hard to be persuaded. It is sa^ when he makes the Rods our teachers, and w^
will not be taught by them; though, I think that were a blessed cross that
should make u^ come to Christ. I think, Christ must do to us as Abosolom did to
Joab, he sent to Joab to com^ to him, and he came not; Absalom then set hi^
corn fields on fire, so that at last he might come So, I think, Christ must set
our corn fields o^ fire, that we may be constrained to come to him.

There is this third step be like of our judgment, and it is this, I fear,
that sad and lamentable word is like to befall us, if we continu^ to slight
this Gospel, Ezekiel. 21. 5. That all flesh may know that I the Lord have drawn
forth my sword out of his sheath, it shall not return any more. Yea, God has
begun to draw the sword of his Justice out of his sheath, and who know^ when he
will put it up again? Is there any person that has confidence or persuasion
tha^ God will quickly sheath the sword which he has drawn against us?

The fourth step of judgment which light^ down upon those that the slights the
voice o^ Gods threatening Rod, is that which I think is more sad, Ezekiel. 21. 11,
12. The sword is sharpnes and fourbished that it may glitter, and that i^ may
make a sore slaughter, and that it may b^ given into the hand of the slayer:
And what know ye but your disobedience to all these voices by which God has
been speaking to you, has made him to draw his sword, and he is to deliver it
into the hand of the slayer? And oh (...) who shall be the slayer, into whose
hand the sword shall be delivered?

There is this, fifthly, which shall be a step of our judgment, if we continue
to slight all these voices by which God does speak to us, and it ^s that word,
Ezekiel. 20. 31. As I live, says the Lord God, I will not be enquired of by you.
I will cease now to have correspondance with you any more.

There is this sixth step of judgment which may and shall befall us, if we
thus go on to ^light all the voices of the Lord to us; and it ^s that word in
Ezekiel. 24. 13. I would have purged thee, and thou would not be purged: thou
shall not be purged any more, till my fury, etc.

There is this last step of our judgment, which I think, is the cap-stone of
all the rest, if we continue in all our slightings of the voices by which God
speaks to us. By all appearance there shall be one of these two decrees past in
heaven against us. First, either that in Hos. 4 17. Ephraim is joined to his
idols, let him alone. Or, secondly, that decree in Rev. 22. 11. He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy, let him be filthy
still, etc. I say, To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as
in the day of provocation. Glasgow is yet within speaking terms to God. O! who
knows how long it shall be so? Now, if ye will not hear him in the still voice
of the Gospel; O! will ye hear him speaking in the whirlwind? There is
nothing that will befall us, which will be the cap-stone of our misery, so much
as that, when Christ shall come and take his farewell. I think there is few of
^s who are here, who is within sight of Christ; but I am sure there are many
here which are within speaking terms to Christ.

Now, what does he require and call for a^ your hands? Does not all the
promises in the Covenant say, O come, and take him? Do(...) not all the Rods
and sad dispensations which we meet with, say, O come, and take him Does not
all the threatenings in the Law, say unto you, O come, and take him? And does
not al^ your convictions of conscience (whereby you need of Christ is
discovered) say this unto you, O come, and take him! Are ye not surrounded
about with many voices, that cry o^ this unto the City, O come, and take him
Therefore, O harden not your hearts to thi^ pleasant voice. I have only these
seven word to speak to you, and I shall close.

And first, God has a threefold Rod, where by he makes himself known to
people. First He has the Rod of his mouth, whereby he makes known his word to
us. Secondly, ther^ is the Rod of his hand, and that is affiction an^ crosses.
Thirdly, there is the iron Rod of h(...) destruction, when God does utterly
destroy that destruction shall not rise up the secon^ time. Now God has been
long speaking t^ you by the Rod of his mouth, and by the To(...) of his
afflictions and crosses; and O, now b^ ware lest he come and speak to you by
the iro^ Rod of destruction! Look that the trea^ which is betwixt Christ and
you be not broken O be persuaded to lay hold upon your tim^ while it is with
you.

Secondly, I would say this word unto yo^ I think the slighting of the sad and
lamentabl^ threatenings of God, which he has threatn(...) and denounced against
you, is a sad fore-run(...) of some sad stroke from the Lord. Are the^ not many
persons which slights threatenings through the want of faith? they believe not
that such a threatening is true, and therefore I think it is like that God will
preach to your sense before you believe what he now preaches ^o your ear. I
say, the day is coming that before the threatenings of God be believed by some
of you, he must preach to your sense, and make you to feel that which ye would
not believe: And are there not many that will not make use of the threatenings,
because they believe the threatenings is not to them? And therefore they ^ake
not particular applications of the threatenings to themselves. I confess, I
think it were good for every one of us to take home the threatenings to our own
bosom.

Thirdly, some will not take and make use of the threatenings, because they
mistake what is their (...)ing. There are some that let Christ threaten them
what he will; they are still in the dark, and cry out, O what does Christ mean
^y this threatening? This is clear from the ^ractice of the Jews, John 7. 33,
34. compa^ed with the 35. and 36. verses: Christ threat^ns them with this; Yet
a little while I am ^ith you, and then I go unto him that sent me. Ye (...)all
seek me, and shall not find me: and where I (...), thither ye cannot come. Now,
what hin^ers them to make application of this threatening? It is in verse. 35,
36. What manner of say(...) is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall
(...) find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot (...)me? Will he go unto the
dispersed amongst the ^entils, and teach the Gentiles? So they know ^ot the
meaning of the threatening, and that (...)ders them to apply it.

The fourth reason why many persons make not applications of the threatenings,
and it i^ ignorance of their own condition. Some persons will be living under
such a sin, and yet when that sin is threatened, they will not apply it, because
they know not their sin. Are there no some persons, that will not take a
threatnin^ for their worldly-mindedness, because they c(...) their
worldly-mindednesse, frugality? Ar^ there not some persons, that when a
Minis(...) threatens against presumption, they will not tak^ with it, because
they think their presumption, faith and confidence? And are there no^ many
things threatened against hypocrisy, an^ few of them applied, and this is
because we^ think our hypocrisy sincerity?

Fifthly, this marrs the application of threatenings to many, because God has a
mind to destroy them; therefore they do not apply threa^nings: That is a
terrible word which is spoken of the sons of Eli, in 1 Samuel 2. 25.
No^withstanding they hearkened not unto the voice (...) their father, because
the Lord would slay the^ Some, God has a mind to destroy, and therefore they
do not apply threatenings.

There is this sixth ground why persons w(...) not make application of
threatenings, and it (...) because ordinarily some persons are possess(...) with
high thoughts of themselves, and to^ much self-love. There is nothing marrs the
a^plication of threatenings so much as self-love we have no will to believe any
sad thin^ against our selves.

Lastly, there is this which marrs the applic^tion of threatenings, and it is
our not knowi^^ what a sad and sinful thing it is to, slight (...) (...)t
apply threatenings. I confess, I think it is (...) question that is hard to
determine, whether ^he slighting of promises, or the slighting of commands, or
the slighting of threatenings, be the greatest sin? But I am sure of this, our
slighting of threatenings, is the rise of (...) slighting of promises, and
likewise the rise of our slighting of commands. Now I shall say no more: O that
ye were persuaded to hearken ^o God, that Christ might not be provoked to
depart from you, and to take his farewell. And to him who is able to help you
to hold him till the breaking of the day, we desire to give praise.

SERMON IX.
Micah 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name, hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.
IT is not much though a Christian be put in a furnace hot seven times more
then ordinary, if one in the form and likeness of the Son of man ^alk up and
down with him in the furnace. Is it ^ot Christ's presence which makes a
wilderness ^ike the garden of the Lord? Is it not Christ's presence which makes
afflictions pleasant? Is (...) not Christ's presence which makes a crown of
^horns a crown of joy? Is it not Christ's pre^ence which makes heaven pleasant?
And must (...) not be Christ's presence that must make earth pleasant also? I
confess, disertion under the cross is one of the most sad and afflicting
dispensations which a Christian can meet with: bu^ however, ere long there will
be a blessed exchange of cups; that in stead of the cup of bitterness, which is
presented to a Christian t^ drink (while he is here below) he shall have (...)
cup of the eternal consolations that is above presented to him from the hand of
the Lord.

I think a Christian may be poor in possession, but rich in hope. I think a
Christian may no^ have much, as to his sensible enjoyments, bu^ may he not cast
up his eyes unto the eternal inheritance, and cry out, yonder is my portion, i^
that land are my lines cast. There are these fou^ things that I would say unto
you before I com^ to the words.

The first thing which I would have you taking notice of, is this, there are
three things which a Christian may meet with which ar^ unspeakable. First,
sometimes a Christian may meet with an unspeakable sorrow so that he cannot
make language of it, because of the anxiety of his heart, but is forced to cry
out tha^ word, my stroke is heavier then my groaning. Secondly, A Christian may
meet with an unspeakable mercy, he may meet with such a mercy and token of love
from the hand of the Lord, that i^ he were put to it, he could not make
languag(...) of it, he could say no more to the commendation of his mercy but
this, What shall I sa^ more? he has spoken it, and himself has done it.

Thirdly, A Christian may meet with an unspeakable joy, he may be brought to
that cas^ and condition that he cannot make language o^ his joy, according to
that word, 1 Pet. 1. 8 Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and ful^ of
glory.

Secondly, I would have you taking notice of this, that it is exceeding much of
the concernment of a Christian to believe and close with this truth, that there
is not a grain weight of ^ffliction in his cup, which infinite wisdom does not
think fit should be there, and which infinite love did not put there: To know
and rest upon this, that infinite wisdom and infinite love was ^t the mixing of
the cup, (and his tender heart will carve no more out to us then we are able ^o
hear) this is an help to patience.

Thirdly, I would have you taking notice of this, I think there are some
Christians that is forced to bless God more for their crosses than for their
mercies, and that they have been forced (...) their darkest nights to cry out,
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

There is this fourthly which I would have you taking notice of, that the
cross of a Christian, it has two faces, an outward face, and (...) inward
face, and the outward face of the ^^osse seems oftentimes the most unpleasant,
^ut O if a Christian could win to see the inside of his cross, He might sit
down by the River of Babel, and there pen songs of praise to God, even praise
for this that he has been afflicted; O it is comfortable to the Christian that
Christ has gone to heaven by the way of the cross, that his blessed feet has
trodden that way, and that his precious lips has drunk of that cup.

But to come to the words, we told you, that there was five things in the words
to be considered. First, that here was an excellent ex^ortation given to the
people of Israel and Samariah, which in short is this, Hear the voice ^f the
rod, and who has appointed it; and from this exhortation ye may take notice of
these five things. First, That every cross and sad dispensation which a
Christian meets with, it has a voice and language in it, therefore says he
hear the voice of the rod, as if he had said, take notice what the Rod says,
and what it calls for from you. The second thing to take notice of from this
command and exhortation is this, that it is the duty of a Christian to observe
and give obedience unto what the Rod speaks a^ calls for; therefore is the
command given forth hear the voice of the rod. The third thing that we take
notice of from this command is, that there is a great unwillingness in persons
to hear what the Rod speaks, and therefore the command is put home, hear the
voice of the rod. Fourthly take notice of this, that the voice of the Rod, and
the voice of him that has appointed it, are one and the same very thing
therefore these two are knit together, hear the voice of the rod, and of him
who has appointed it. There is this lastly which we would have you taking
notice of from this command and exhortation. It is a great point of spiritual
widsom for a Christian to take up and hear the voice of the Rod, therefore it
is said, the man of wisdom shall see thy Name. It is not every man that can
take up what the Rod speaks, it is only the man that is endued with much
heavenly wisdom from God.

Now as for the first thing that we spoke from the words, viz. That every rod
which a Christian meets with, it has a voice in it. Before I speak to this, I
would have you to take along these considerations.

First, It is a singular and most remarkable step (...)he good will of God,
when he does manifest the ^eaning of a rod to a person or a people. Job ^3. 16.
He opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, which is brought in
as a singu^ar favor from God, that is, he makes them ^o know what the rod
speaks, Elihu puts such (...) note of mercy upon this, that he thinks it (...)
(...)p to delivery from the rod, He delivers the ^oor from affliction, how is
this, that he opens their ^ars, and seals their instruction? it is, when God
makes a person to take up the meaning of the Rod, for when he makes them to
understand ^he voice of the Rod, it is half a delivery from ^he Rod, do you not
know this, that when the (...)se of a disease is known it is half healed? So
when the end that God has in sending rods, is known and taken up, we may say
it i^ half ^emoved.

Secondly, The Christians of old has taken much pains to know the voice of the
Rods that they meet with, as i^ clear from, 2 Samuel 21. 1^ where the land of
Israel being three years under famine, David went and enquired the cause of
that Rod, and it is likewise clear from Job. 7. 20. where Job is exceeding
desirous to know why God set him up at a mark for his arrows, and that he was
become a burden to himself.

Thirdly, We would have you to take notice of this, that it is exceeding
anxious for a tender Christian to be under a silent Rod, to be under such a
dispensation that he knows not the language of it, this is clear in Job 3. 23.
where Job makes this the capestone of his sorrow, that his way was hid, that
is, he knew not what was the reason of Gods contending with him after such a
way, as likewise it is clear in Job 10, 2^ where Job is put to propose that
question to God, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me?

The fourth Consideration, that we would have you taking along with you, is
this, It (...) exceeding hard for a Christian to profit by a Rod till once he
take up the meaning of it, and I shall give you these three grounds, why it is
so hard for a Christian to profit by a Rod till he know the voice and meaning
of it: First, Because it is hard for a Christian to win to submission to the
Rod, till he know the voice of it, it is the knowledge of the meaning of the
Rod that makes a Christian cry out, I was dumb and opened not my mouth:
Secondly, Because as long as the meaning of the Rod is hid from a Christian, he
knows not what remedy to go about to deliver himself from that Rod, but when
he knows the reason of Gods contending with him, he has a clear way before
him how to win out from the cross. Thirdly, This is the reason why a Christian
cannot profit by the Rod till he know the voice and meaning of it; he cannot
win to a solid closing with this truth, that God is in the Rod, till he win to
^he knowledge of the voice of the Rod in some measure; there is nothing will
help a Christian more to cry out, God is in the Rod, than this, his knowing the
reason of Gods contending with him.

There is this fifth Consideration that we would propose, a Christian may be
long under a Rod before he know the voice and language of it; we conceive this
is clear in 2 Samuel 21. (...), 2. where the land of Israel is under three years
famine before David could take up the reason of Gods contending with them: It
is not to be supposed but David had made frequent supplications to God for
understanding the meaning of that Rod, and yet there are three years
interveening before he can know it.

The last Consideration that we would propose unto you, When a Christian wins
to take up the voice and language of the Rod, he ought not to delay, but
presently go about and answer it, this is clear in the practice of David, when
he knew the reason of Gods contending with him he immediately sets about to
remove it. I confess it is a fault amongst many, they are more desirous to
have their crosses removed then to have their crosses sanctified unto them;
some prays to have the bitterness out of the cross, more than to have the
bittenesse of (...) removed out of the cross.

Now in speaking to the first thing in the words, viz. That every Rod and
Dispensation of God has a voice and language in it: I shall speak a little to
these four things. First, How a Christian may win ^o take up the meaning of the
Rod in particular afflictions. Secondly, I would speak a little to some
mistakes in taking up the voice and language of such a Rod and afflicting
dispensation. Thirdly, I would speak to this, how a Christian may be helped to
give obedience to the voice of the Rod. Fourthly, I shall speak a little to
eight or nine special voices which the Rod oftentimes has; As for the first of
these, viz. how a Christian may win to take up the meaning of the Rod and sad
Dispensation, I shall prescribe unto you these six ways.

First, Be making serious application to the throne of grace, that God would
give you light concerning such a Rod; This is remarkably clear in that instance
in Genesis 25. 22. where Rebecca being under such a particular Rod, and she knew
not Gods way in it, therefore she went and enquired of the Lord, and she
received a particular and distinct answer to her case; and it is also clear in
the practice of David, 2 Samuel 21. 1. Israel being under a Rod of famine, David
went and enquired of the Lord concerning the meaning of it, and he met with a
distinct answer: And this is likewise clear in Job. 10. 2. where Job being in
the dark, concerning the meaning of the Rod, he desires that God would show him
wherefore he contends with him. I will tell you seven sad cases which a
Christian may be put to, of which Christ is an excellent resolver: The first
case which a Christian may be put to, which Christ has exceeding good skill to
resolve, and it is that, Song 1. 7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where
thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon, etc. When a
Christian knows not where Christ is feeding, to go to him, he will sweetly
resolve that question, for ye may know this, a Christian may be brought to
these two steps of disertion. First, Christ may be gone, and secondly, ye know
not in all the world where to find him, as in Joh. 20. 13. in that instance of
Mary, and in Job 23. 3. Job has not only lost God, but also he knows not
where to find him. The second case which Christ has exceeding good skill to
resolve, is this, Who is the Lord that I may believe in him? That case or
question which the blind man was put to, Joh. 9. 36. O will not Christ sweetly
resolve that question, Is there any person that has this question, Who is
Christ that I may believe in him? The third case or question which Christ has
exceeding good skill to resolve, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Is there any here that is put to that question? go to Christ,
and he can sweetly solve it you. The fourth question which Christ can best
resolve, is that question which Paul had, What will thou have me to do? The
fifth case in which it is best to go to Christ to get it resolved, when a
person is brought to this strait, I know not the mind of the Lord, go to God
and humbly ask, O why am I thus? There is this sixth case, and it is Job 7. 20.
I have sinned, and what shall I do to thee, O thou preserver of men? When thou
art put to this case, Christ can answer it sweetly thus, Only acknowledge thy
iniquity. The last case which Christ can sweetly resolve, is in the word before
the Text, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? If thou be put to this
question, no answer can be given unto it but this, The sacrifices of the Lord
are a broken a contrite heart. Now this is the first way how a Christian may
win to know the voice and meaning of the Rod, even to make serious supplication
to God that he would make known to them his Name.

There is this second way, by which a Christian may win to know the voice and
meaning of the Rod, if the Rod was timed to thee when thy heart was under much
distance from God, that probably is the meaning of the Rod, It is good for thee
to draw near to God; or if the Rod be timed unto a Christian when he is much
taken up in pursuit after the things of the world, and if thy Rod tryst thee
when thou art under much formality in going about duties. then by all
appearance that is the voice of the Rod to thee, to stir up thy self to take
hold on God: So if a Christian would win to know the meaning of a Rod, let him
compare his present frame with the timing of the Rod unto him.

The third way how a Christian may win to know the voice and meaning of the
Rod, is by reflecting on the manner and circumstances of the Rod; for this is
certain, the sins of a people or person may be engraven on the Rod in very
legible letters, so that he that runs may read them: There are sometimes that
the Rod does preach our sins so plainly, that we need not to interpret it; this
is clear, Judges 1. 6, 7. there is such a relation betwixt Adoni-bezek's
judgment, and his sin, that he might read his judgments, as he did his sins
in his stroke; says he, Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and their
great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table; as I have done, so God
has requited me, etc. For now was he taken prisoner, and his thumbs and great
toes cut off: and it is clear from that word that Solomon has, Prove. 21. 13.
He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he shall cry, and God shall
not hear him. Zach. 7. 13. Therefore it is come to pass that as he cried and
they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of
hosts: Where ye may see a divine proportion and analogy betwixt the Rod and the
sin.

The fourth way how a Christian may win to know the voice and meaning of the
Rod, and it is by observing what has been the mind of the Lord, and what he
called for from his people in Scripture, when they were put under such a Rod
and anxious dispensation: Search what was Gods mind to the godly in Scripture
under such a Rod, and by all appearance it is yet his mind in the same cross,
according to that general rule, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were written
afore-time were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope.

The fifth way for a Christian to win to know the meaning of the Rod, is to be
much in observing the circumstances of the Rod, there may be circumstances in a
Rod by which a Christian may win to exceeding much light concerning what is the
Lords mind by such a Rod: It is known the observing of the circumstances of a
Rod will help a Christian to these three things. First, That such a Rod is from
the hand of the Lord. Secondly, That God in the midst of wrath remembers
mercy. Thirdly, It will help a Christian to know the voice and language of the
Rod, sometimes in the cross it self, a Christian cannot read love, and yet in
the circumstances of the cross he may win to read very much love.

There is this sixth and last way how a Christian may win to the knowledge of
the voice and meaning of the Rod, and it is to be considering that all the Rods
and dispensations which a Christian meets with, has one of these three ends.
First, The Rod is either sent to a Christian that he may mortify his
predominant idols. Or, secondly, for exercise of his predominant grace. Or else
thirdly, that he may be put to the exercise of that which ought to be his
predominant duty: These are voices and languages of the cross which a
Christian meets with. And I would only by the way say these two things to you.
First, It is easier to bear a Rod patiently which is for the trial and exercise
of our predominant grace, than to bear a Rod patiently which is for the
mortifying of our predominant idols, there is no Rod which a Christian can bear
worse, than the Rod which strikes at the root of his predominant idols; so a
proud man he can bear any cross better nor reproach, and a worldly minded man
can bear any cross better than poverty, so the cross which stands in direct
opposition to our predominant idols, we have great difficulty to bring our
hearts to a patient submission under it, are there not many that when their
idols are stricken, they cry out with that man in Judge. 18. 24. They have taken
away my gods, and what have I more? Is it not certain that when God strikes
sometimes at the root of our predominant idols, we cry out with Jonah, That it
is better for me to die, than to live? Though I may say, the cross which we
have least will to meet with, is ordinarily best for us: For (if so we may
speak) our will and our well are seldom or never knit together; but precious
Christ, his will and our well are oftentimes knit together. Secondly, I would
say this by the way, There are ordinarily some Analogy betwixt our cross and
our sin, if the Egyptians did kill all the male children of the Israelites by
casting them into the River, God does likewise kill all the first born into the
land of Egypt, and if Nadab and Abih^ offer strange fire upon Gods altar, he
will consume them with fire from heaven; and if the Sodomites be taken up with
the fire of lust, God will bring down fire from heaven and consume them.

Now the second thing which we promised to speak a little unto, was to some
mistakes which Christians have concerning the meaning of the Rod.

And first, many thinks (indeed) the cross speaks wrath when it speaks love,
and some when they cannot read love in the hand of God, they think it is
impossible to read love in his heart, some thinks that love and the Rod cannot
be together at all: I say, God may never love a person more nor when he is
correcting him. But first, I would say to a person under that mistake, we never
know by any of these things whether love or hatred belongs to the person that
is afflicted; For all things happen alike to all, as it happens to the fool, so
happens it to the wise man, to the righteous even as to the wicked. Secondly, I
would say this to the believer that is under this mistake, he reads wrong that
reads wrath only upon the cross, for it is certain, love is written in dark
characters upon it, and the spiritual man he may read them: Hence it is Heb.
12. 5, 6. We are commanded to remember the exhortation th^^ speaks unto us, as
unto sons: My son, despise not thou the chastnings of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives.

The second mistake concerning the meaning of the cross, is, some thinks God
can never answer their prayers so long as he is plag^ing them, according to
that strange divinity, Job 9. 16. If I had called, and he had answered me, yet
would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice. So this is the mistake,
all the answer of their prayers are nothing, if God be contending with them.

The third great mistake concerning the meaning of the Rod, is when persons
begins to dispute their interest when they meet with such a Rod and sad
dispensation, and when they do not (indeed) see what is the reason of Gods
contending with them: When he puts them in the furnace, presently to fit down
and reject their confidence, and cast away their hope, this is certainly a
great mistake of the meaning of the Rod.

The fourth great mistake of the voice and language of Gods threatening Rod, is
for a person to think Religion but van^iy and an empty thing under the cross,
a Christian may be brought to this: Now I would not give a plack for godliness,
it is nothing worth at all: as is clear from Psalm. 73. 13. when he takes
notice, He was plagued every morning, and the wicked was in prosperity about
him, he cries out* verily I have washed my hands in innocence, and cleansed my
heart in vain: Yea, it is hard for a person not to cast at Religion when God is
contending with him, O it is hard to have a great respect unto the ways of
godliness under the cross.

There is this fifth mistake under the cross, and it is to dispute the
fellowship a Christian has with God, according to that word of Gideon, Judges
6. 13. If the Lord be with us, how then is all this evil come upon us? The
Christian will cry out, I cannot reconcile Gods heart and his hand; I cannot
reconcile love in God, and his being with me, and this cross and Rod.

Now thirdly, I would speak a little to this, how a Christian may be helped to
obey the voice of the Rod, and we conceive if you will take along these things
with you, ye may be helped to obey what the rod calls for at your hands.

And first, then if the rod call for the mortifying of such a particular lust
and idol, it is encumbent for you presently to sit down and bring up your
hearts to a spiritual detestation of such an idol, that if God be punishing you
for your idols, ye must subscribe a bill of divorce to them, and cry out, What
have I any more to do with idols? and say to them, Get you hence, and cast them
away to the moles and to the bats.

There is a second way or help how a Christian may win to the obedience of the
voice of the Rod, and it is, if the voice of the rod be for the mortifying of
such an idol, I entreat you sit down and study the disadvantages of such an
idol, and study also what hazard there is by keeping thy soul constantly knit
to it, that when the voice of the Rod is this to thee; O quite such an idol, or
such a Delilah, thou must then study to know what it is to thy disadvantage to
keep such an idol, and what it is to thy advantage to quite it: I confess there
are some that their idols are mortified to their light before they be mortified
to their affections; yea, there are some, they have a constrained
mortification, their idols are mortified and die to them before they be
mortified to their idols.

Thirdly, If the voice of the Rod be this, stir up such a grace, and be much in
the exercise and practice of it; then I say, study to know that there is as
much spiritual advantage in the real and spiritual exercise of such a grace, as
ye can lose by all the Rods ye can meet with. Is it not certain that Job gained
as much spiritual advantage by the exercise of his faith, and of his patience;
yea, much more than in losing all the things which he lost? if a Christian once
knew that his riches consisted in the exercise of his grace, there would not be
a rod sent for the trial and exercise of his grace, but he would take it
cheerfully in his arms.

The fourth way how a Christian may be helped to win to obey the voice of the
rod, and it is, If the voice of the Rod be for the trial of thy predominant
grace, and for the exercise of it, then, I say, consider this, that the trial
and exercise of thy predominant grace by the Rod it shall have (if it be
sanctified) a glorious and excellent issue and peace, it is the Rod that has
most noble advantages that is immediately errected for the trial of thy
predominant grace.

The sixth way how a Christian may win to obey the voice of the Rod, and it is,
If the voice of the rod be that thou should set about the exercise of such a
duty, then endeavor seriously that all impediments and lets to that duty be
laid aside; as if the cross call for the exercise of faith, or if the cross
call for the exercise of prayer, then I say, remove all things which may be
impediments to hinder thee from the exercise thereof, or from the exercise of
^aith: Leave (as it were) thy servants and thy asses at the foot of the mount,
and go thou up and sacrifice all thy idols and lusts.

The seventh and last way how a Christian may be helped to win to obey the
voice of the Rod, If the voice of the rod be to be much in the exercise of such
a duty, then study to have the luster of that duty, and the beauty thereof
commended unto thee. O but prayer is a thing which does much good to us! I
think this is the reason why God has contended with many; he would make duties
sweet to them, and he would make sin bitter.

Now the fourth thing that I shall speak a little unto, is to what ought to be
a Christians duty while he is walking under a silent Rod, and knows not the
voice of it; and I would give you these five di^^ctions how a Christian should
carry himself under a silent Rod.

First, he would know God to be just, though he knows not for what he
contends with him.

Secondly, he would be serious in making supplication to God, to know the
distinct meaning of such a Rod; I confess sometimes we take the rod to be
silent, because we cannot hear the voice of it; but oftentimes the silence of
the rod is from this, that we know not the voice of it, and we hear it not
though he speak to us in an ^^dible language, but if a Christian be under a
silent Rod, it becomes him then to go to God with this, I have sinned, I will
do so no more, show me wherein I have offended.

There is this third direction which I would give to a Christian under a silent
Rod, he would be serious to know what is the reason of Gods keeping up his mind
from him in such a Rod; I say, when the rod is dark, and the cross is silent,
it is suitable then to say, What is the reason of this that God does not let me
understand the voice and language of the Rod? I confess there may be sad
things hinted at when God puts a Christian under dark and dumb crosses, however
although it be so, I think it is good for us to be walking submissively in the
dark, for he will guide the blind in the way that they know not; sometimes it
is better for us to have dumb and silent crosses than to have a speaking cross.

The fourth direction, The Christian would study to bring his heart to a tender
and spiritual frame; for sometimes our not understanding the voice of the Rod,
it is because we are no^ spiritual.

Lastly, I would give this direction to the Christian who is under a dark and
silent cross, study at that time to have thy heart most united to Christ, for
at that time thou is most ready to fall: O that is a time when the devil fishes
most, because that is the Christians drumly water (so to speak) O it is known,
the devil never gets any advantage over a Christian so much as when he knows
not the meaning of the cross! I confess the devil will tell you a false
meaning of a cross, he can interpret the language of a cross after another
way th^^ God does interpret it.

Now being to choose our discourse, I shall name these eight or nine
Observations concerning the cross, which I would have you taking notice of.

First, When a Christian does first meet with a cross, he may be patient and
submissive under it, and yet if the thread of the affliction be spun out to any
length, he may turn impatient. I confess it is not much the first day that
the cross meets with us to be patient; but let the cross ly on us, then we
will cry out, why is it that God deals thus with me? this i^ clear in the
practice of Job, when first he met with the cross he could take it in his
arms, and cry out, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed
be His Name. But let the cross ly a little while on Job, then he will cry out,
I choose strangling and death rather than life: A green wound is half whole (as
we use to speak) but let once our wound begin to feaster, then we will be
impatient.

The second Observation which we would have you to take notice of concerning
the cross, There are five sorts of blasphemy which one that is under a cross
may fall into. First, He may fall into that blasphemy of calling God unjust,
according to that word, Ezekiel. 18. 25. Yet ye say the way of the Lord is not
equal, etc. The second sort of blasphemy is, when we call God unfaithful;
according to that strange word, Jer. 15. 18. Will thou be altogether unto me as
a liar, and as waters that fail? O do we not think that God is not half so
good as his word under the cross? The third sort of blasphemy is, when we
call God weak; there are sometimes we are brought to that, Is there no balm in
Gilead? and is there no Physician there? my stroke is grievous, and my wound is
incu^able. Sometimes when we are under the cross, we think it is above Gods
power to set us free from it. The fourth sort of blasphemy which a man may have
under the cross, and that is, when he charge God with chang^blenesse, I
think Christians under the ^rosse, are like men first going to Sea, when ^hey
go first out from the Haven or by a Rock, they think that they are standing
still, bu^ the land beside them is moving, stirring; so when first we come
under the erosse, we think God is changeable, but we are still the same. The
fifth sort of blasphemy which one may have under the cross, and that is, when
he charge God with forgetfulness; you know that forgetfulness is the
property of an ingrate man and O if you call God ingrate or unthankful you may
call him any thing, I confess, I thin^ Christ forgets nothing of a Christian
but hi^ wrongs.

The third Observation concerning the cross^ is this, It is a speaking evidence
of the want of Son-like frame, if the cross do hinder us in the exercise of
duties, I confess little proficing under the cross, speaks this much, that
either w^ are not sons, or have not a son-like frame, so these who are the
Lords children, when folly bound to them, the Rod of correction drives away:
there are many of us in our afflictio(...) are of Ahazs frame, we sin more and
more (...) our afflictions.

The fourth Observation which I would gi^^ you concerning the cross, is this,
there are fo(...) things which a Christian would take up conce^ning his cross.
First, He would take up (...) speakable wisdom in his cross. Secondly, (...)
would take up unspeakable love therei^ Thirdly, He would take up unspeakable
justi(...) and holiness in his cross: And fourthly, (...) would take up these
great advantages that fl^^eth to him from the spiritual use-making (...) his
cross. Some Christians, they can read w(...)dom, justice and holiness on a
cross, before they can read love upon it, but however it good to take up all
these four in the crosse^, and did dispensations which you meet with.

There is this fifthly which I would say concerning the cross, there is not a
cross and sad dispensation which a Christian meets with but it is a gift and
royal donation sent by the hand of Christ to him; there are some they look upon
the promises as gifts, but I say to thee, thou must look upon thy crosses as
gifts also, Philip. (...). 29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suf^^r for his sake: And there
are some likewise that look on their sensible enjoyments, but not (...) their
crosses as gifts. I say if once a Christian win to know that the cross is a
gift, he wol^ ^ikewise win to patience under the cross.

The sixth Observation concerning the cross, ^^ere are some peaceable fruits
of righteous^esse that redounds to a Christian which is ^ightly exercised under
the cross, Heb. 12. ^1. Now no chastening for the present seems to be (...),
but grievous, nevertheless it yields the ^^aceable fruits of righteousness
unto them which (...) exercised thereby. I say sometimes the Rod (...) a
Christian is like Aarons Rod, it will ^^ud ^^d blossom in a night and bring
forth plea^^^t fruit.

The seventh Observation is, the most ^^re ^^joyments of a Christian are
trysted to the ^^e of his being under the cross, When was that Jacob saw the
Angels of God descending (...) ascending upon that ladder? was it no^ ^hen he
was forced to ly in the open field? ^^en was it that these three Children saw
Christ ^^he likeness of the Son of man? was it not ^hen they were in the
furnace, when it was not seven time^ ^ore then ordinary? When was it that John
g^t such a vision of God? was it not when he was the Isle of Patmos for the
Testimony of Christ? When was it that Ezekiel saw the visions of God? was it
not when he was sitting by the River Chebar in the land of his captivity? And
when was it that Stephan saw the heavens open and saw Christ standing at the
right hand of God? was it not when they were stoning him to death for the
Testimonies of Jesus Christ? I say the most remarkable enjoyments of a
Christian are trysted under the cross: According to that word of the Psalmist,
To the righteous there arises light in darkness.

The eight Observation that we would propose concerning the cross, Oftentimes
God tristes joy to a Christian under the cross, when a Christian is beginning
to lose his hope, and all things (as it were) growing dark about him then does
sight arise unto him: According to that wonderful and strange expression,
Zech* 14. 7. At the Evening time it shall be light, when(...) there is more
appearance of darkness coming on Yea, even at that time it shall be light; Is
(...) not certain, a Christian has been sitting dow^ at the midnight of his
afflictions, crying ou^ My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord, and
yet the Lord has said to him eve^ by his dispensations, thou art a liar? have
w(...) not sometimes been casting away our hope, a^^ the Lord has loosed our
bonds, and we have been as Peter when he was loosed from his pr^son, we have
been as though we had seen a v^sion?

Lastly, I would say this to commend the cros^ there are strange expressions in
the Scripture that may make out to a Christian that the cross is not such a
thing as many takes it to be. The first expression is in that word, James 1. 2.
My brethren count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. There are
two things in that expression, which may make it strange. First, A Christian
should count it all joy: It had not been so strange if he had said, count it
joy or rejoice when you are afflicted, but O that is strange! Count it all joy
when you are afflicted. That which secondly makes it strange, Count it all joy
when you fall into diverse temptations, that is, rejoice ay more and more when
you meet with many crosses. There is this strange expression which may commend
the cross, and it is that word, Job 5. 17. Happy is the man whom God
corrects, etc. There is very much happiness in such a lot and dispensation:
Some of us thinks there is no people so cursed, as these who are afflicted; But
I say, a Christians afflictions are no small mercies and blessings. The third
strange expression which may commend the cross, Job 5. 22. At destruction and
^amine shall thou laugh, etc. Not to have a sad look (as it were) for all the
crosses and afflictions that may come. The fourth strange expression which may
commend the cross, is that word, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulation, etc. The
last expression which may commend (...)t, and it is the glorious ends that
waits upon these persons which is exercised under the cross: According to that
word, Jam. 1. 10. Blessed is the man that endures temptations, for ^hen he is
tried, he shall have the crown of life, I say let a Christian comfort himself
in this, That in (...) evils he will deliver him, and in seven no(...) (...)
shall come near him: Let a Christian be p^^ to ^ever so much afflicton, let him
comfo(...) himself with this, that his Savior was put (...) walk up and down
in the earth, and had (...) whereas to lay his head, and let him likewi^^
comfort himself with this, that the day is coming, when he shall enter into
those glorious and excellent habitations; what is the cros^ of Christians? Is
there not much in heaven (...) comfort them against their crosses? I shall no^
say much to press Christian-submission und^^ the cross! I think it is more
suitable to be e^quiring after duty under a cross, than to (...) enquiring how
to escape out from under it? (...) is good to put all in Christ's hand,
concerni^^ the cross, the manner of it, and the lengthni^^ (...) it, and also
the outgate from under it. No(...) (...) (...) who is able to make all things
work t^ ^^ther for the best (even afflictions) unto h(...) ^^ople, we desire to
give praise.

FINIS.

