March 2. 1671.
IT is Ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
that none shall Re-print or Import this Book of Mr. Andrew Gray, on
Mortification and Contentment; nor any other of his Sermons, without the
License of the Printers hereof.

The Spiritual WARFARE: OR, Some SERMONS concerning the nature of
Mortification, right exercise, and spiritual advantages thereof.

Whereunto are added other two Sermons, concerning the mystery of Contentment.

Being the substance of ten Sermons, never heretofore printed.

By Mr. Andrew Gray, late Minister of the Gospel at Glasgow.

Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members, etc. Heb. 13. 5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, etc. EDINBVRGH, Printed by George
Swinton, James Glen and Thomas Brown, ANNO DOM. 1672.

Unto the sincere Sinmortifying, and Soul-contentment-seeking-Christian.
Dear and loving Friend,
AS the name of the precious Author (who now enjoys what he then aspired to,
when he preached these following Sermons) will, no doubt, ingratiat them to
thee, so we are persuaded, that the divine Subjects here treated upon, when
perused by thee, whose serious design is to study and aspire to what is here
pressed, may not only prove effectual to increase thy esteem of the worthy
Author, and thy respects to his Works; but also may highly advance thy soul, in
thy begun work of mortification of sin, of dying to the world, and of having
the world crucified to thee, that so thou may possess thy soul in patience, and
sit down as a contented one, in every state whatsoever, good or bad, letting
patience have its perfect work. O! how timely has the Lord begun with the
blessed Author, to make him not only acquainted in his own experience as a
Scholar, with the hardest lessons of Christianity, but also to make him a
practical Preacher of the spiritual and successful method of learning these so
intricat lessons, and of the advantages of studying, or disadvantages by the
neglect of the study of them. This we dare say, that in perusing of them, thou
shall find him a workman, who (if he were alive) needed not to be ashamed, nor
afraid of thy censure, if thou be a real student in these spiritual duties thy
self. For these two or three things (as eminent perfections in a youth) are
most remarkable in him. First, that from the speculations and metaphysical
contemplations of Schools, he was immediately, as it were, rapt, not only into
the contemplation, but also soul experiencing and powerful preaching of the
most mysterious points of Christian profession and practice. Secondly, that in
the handling of these mysteries, he was free of all youthly vanity and
affectation of humane literature, (though he had more then common abilities
therein) and having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
crafinesse, nor handling the word of God deceitfully* he preached the Word of
God, not as the word of man, but as the Word of God, commending himself to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. Thirdly, that he was gifted of God
with such plainness of speech, and with such an open door of utterance, in
delivering these mysteries, that he did out stripe and overreach many of those
who entered into the Lords Vineyard long before him, the Lord verifying that in
him which is, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
All which singularities and eminencies of a spiritual Preacher, to have been
his special mercy from the Lord, to fit him to be eminently a burning and
shining light, for the space of about two years in our Western climate, is
manifest from what of his Works have already come forth to the view of the
world, and does now further appear by these excellent and divine Sermons, upon
these two most necessary, but little studied and less practiced points of
Christian Doctrine, viz. Mortification of lusts, and Spiritual Contentment,
never heretofore Printed. Wherein the zealous servant of God endeavors to
awaken this secure generation unto the study of these so excellent and
necessary duties, by laying before us the necessity of these duties, and the
advantages attending the study of them, and the prejudices and disadvantages
accompanying the neglecters of the said duties: As also, to encourage and
strengthen in the way, all such as have begun the spiritual conflict against
sin, and are aiming at perfection in the study of spiritual contentment. He not
only presses the duties, but also points out the right means whereby a
Christian may be helped to attain at last, victory over his lusts, and to sit
down contentedly with Jonah under the shadow of his Gourd, Jon. 3. 6. And be
satisfied with Elijah to hide himself by the brook Cherith, and to drink of the
brook, and to have the ravens to feed him there, I King. 17. 3, 4. And to say
with David in an universal resignation of himself to the will of God, 2 Samuel
15. 26. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him: And
withal thou shall find intermixed, soul-reviving and comforting resolutions,
of the most pressing soul-exercises accompanying such as seriously set about
these so much soul-concerning duties, of sins mortification and spiritual
contentment under every lot. That thou may read with that same affection that
the holy Author preached, and reap the same blessing which was with much prayer
wrestled for by him to his hearers, wherein he was not unheard, is the earnest
prayer of his soul to God, who is

Thy servant in the Gospel of our dearest Lord and Savior. A. S.

THE SPIRITUAL WARFARE.
SERMON I.
Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?
WHen the sword of the justice of God was coming down upon us, then our blessed
Lord Jesus, in the infinite depth of his unsearchable love and compassion to
self-destroying sinners, cried forth with a loud voice, that justice might hold
the hand* And as that ram sacrificed for Isaac, so was he willingly content to
be caught in a thicket, and to become a spotless and everlasting sacrifice for
sinners. He was content to be bruised, that so we might pass free, and his
Fathers hand might be turned upon the little ones. But, notwithstanding he has
died for our sins, and risen for our righteousness, yet has he given to all
his followers a spiritual warfare to accomplish, so that they should be
continually taken up in contending against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places; or, as the words are rendered by some,
we conceive more appositely, in heavenly things. And certainly, there is no
discharge in this war, neither any interruption while we are on this side of
Eternity: We confess, God might easily have served an Inhibition on all our
spiritual enemies, that they should no more oppose themselves against a
believer after Justification, but He in the depth of his unsearchable wisdom,
and, we may say likewise, infinite love toward his own, has so contrived their
way to heaven, that through many afflictions and tribulations in our spiritual
warfare, we must enter there; It is much indeed for a Christian to die a victor
after war, though not a triumpher; that must come after death, and the
trophies and rewards of our victory, shall then be fully given to us, when our
feet shall stand within the gates of the new Jerusalem, and when we shall
receive these two glorious and everlasting badges of our victory, a crown set
upon our head, having this written upon it, It endures for ever; A motto which
could never be engraven upon any Crown here below; and a Palm put in our hands;
and then indeed shall we sing, as those that divide the spoil, when we have led
captivity captive, and fitten down upon a Throne which is established for ever.
And we conceive, much divine reflection and holy contemplation upon that
precious recompense of reward, and that high and unconceivable pitch of dignity
unto which belivers and overcomers are to be advanced, would make us with much
cheerfulness and alacrity undergo this spiritual warfare. And yet all our
triumphing is not suspended, till our war be ended; believe me, there is more
real joy in the victory and vanquishing of one lust, yea more divine
satisfaction, in a serious pursuit and contending with them, though with very
small success to our apprehension, than in the actual enjoyment and fruition
of all thy lusts. Thou may hide sin under thy tongue, and have it pleasant to
thy taste, yet at last it shall be as the gall of asps, and the poison of
dragons. O! put on so much holy generosity and spiritual ambition, that though
Satan should offer unto thee all the Kingdoms of the world, that thou may fall
down and worship him, thou may cry forth in holy zeal and indignation, Get
the hehind me Satan; O! that deceitful oratory and malicious guile wherewith
he ensnareth immortal souls, and brings them into subjection. O! but the depths
of Satan are subtle and great; And he is a man of understanding that can draw
them out, and not be ignorant of his devices; and except we be helped by the
candle of the Lord that discovers the inward parts of the belly, to know
these mysterious subtilties of him, whose name is A deceiver, they will remain
still riddles and mysteries to us.

But since we are compassed about with this body of death, and there is a law
in our members rebelling against the law of our mind, we should be much in
groaning for the day of our redemption, when the lawful captive may be
delivered, and the prey taken from the mighty, and that blessed decree may come
forth, O prisoners of hope, go forth and show your selves. We are afraid that
the Christians of this generation, have proclaimed a cessation of arms, and
have concluded a treaty of peace with their lusts, and a league not only
offensive, but (shall I add this) even defensive; not only, that we shall
offend our lusts, but shall defend them: and if once we have sealed this treaty
and agreement with our Idols, what can they require more at our hands? We
conceive, we may sadly allude unto that word, that there is not one amongst
forty thousand in Israel, with whom there is a spear and shield seen in
contending in this holy warfare. O! can such a delusion as this overtake you,
that ye can be an overcomer without fighting; is your strength greater then
those that have gone before you, that you think you can accomplish this war in
one day, and pursue your enemies till ye overtake and consume them? O! when
shall that day be, when we shall be groaning forth daily this mournful dittay,
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death.

In the words we conceive first, there is a sweet and pleasant emphasis in that
word ( me) speaking so much, that if infinite power and grace were capable of
any limitation, and there could be any bounds fixed to it, Paul did conceive he
was the bounds and limits of infinite power and grace; if there were an
impossibility for grace to save any sinner, it should be impossible for grace
to have saved him who was the chiefest of sinners, and less then the least of
all Saints. And if each Christian did look upon himself as the greatest debtor
to the Justice of God, his debt to the infinite grace of God should appear more
singular.

Secondly, we may perceive, that a Christians happiness, does consist in a
sweet exchange of dominion and governments: Once sin does reign in his mortal
body, and he is under the dominion of his lusts, but then grace does step in,
and exauctorats and dethrones the former King, and does reign in the temple of
our heart. This is clear, Romans 5. last, and that is a remarkable word which is
there, that grace may reign, the word in the original does signify so much,
that grace may play the King, (...), and this fullness of graces dominion, is
that, the Apostle would be at here. And certainly, there is no repentance of
this exchange of Masters: There is much noise and rumor of complaints amongst
people in these days of the exchange of governments, from one species of
government to another, we shall leave these debates unto men who desire to
exercise their spirits about them: but sure we are of this, that those who are
given up to this change, shall have it pass as most legitimat and lawful, by
the divine approbation, both of angels, and of the souls of just men now made
perfect.

Thirdly, the way that Paul takes here to propose his complaint under the
strong prevalency of the body of death, by way of question who shall deliver
me? does not import any hesitation about his persuasion of certainty, that he
at last should sing a song of triumph over his lusts; but only that it would be
among the richest and the most singular monuments and trophies of the victory
of Christ, to save him. Paul did (no doubt) conceive that amongst all the
royal monuments of Christ's conquest, that should be, as it were, hanged about
the walls of that higher and glorious palace, Paul should be put in the highest
place, as having least merit to bring him there, (if there could be any merit
at all) and most love and grace.

Now to come more particulary to the words, after Paul has most divinely, set
forth that woeful opposition and contradiction, that was betwixt the unrenewed
part and the renewed, and what strong dominion sin had over him he does in
these words breath out a sweet desire to be delivered, not only from his actual
corruption, but from his original guilt, which here he calls the body of this
death, not only because corruption is a thing which may be easily discerned and
known to us, it being (so to speak) a thing which may fall under the object of
our sight, being no spirit but a body; but also because of these great
multitudes of corruptions that flow from that root of original sin, it having
so many different members and parts which are so diversified and so complete,
that they may make up a body, which body if it be entertained, shall certainly
bring and occasion death. So when he is under the strong convictions of his
guilt, and has had a complete discovery of himself, you may see his exercise
holden forth in these words, O wretched man, the word in the original (...),
signifies one that is wearied with troublesome and continual combats, with
little apparent success, and this does certainly import that he was a man,
much and continually taken up in wrestling against his corruptions, and
endeavoring to bring them unto subjection unto the obedience of Christ Jesus.

And ye may see likewayes in these words, the way that Paul took to overcome
his lusts, he was much in the exercise of prayer; for the words that we have
read are indeed a short and pathetick prayer. I conceive that word which is
recorded in Isa. 38. 14. O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me, is a sweet
paraphrase upon these words.

Fourthly, You may see his great and principal suit to have been, deliverance
from this body of death: this captive exile was hastening to be delivered, and
looking out at the windows of his Prisonhouse, waiting till the Jailer should
come and open the doors, and take his chains and fetters from off his feet: We
confess these shall not be fully taken off, till we shall be passing through the
door of our everlasting rest, and then that woeful and sad complaint shall take
his everlasting adieu and farewell; for if we may speak so, the burial place of
sin is before the door of our eternal rest, it then cease to be, when we
begin more eminently to have a being* But may we not be ashamed and blush,
that we are not more in uttering those inexpressible sighs and groans of the
spirit, under the conviction of our sinfulness, since this holy man, who had,
no doubt, attained unto a great length in mortification, who had plucked out
many right eyes, and cut off many right hands, and often times returned victor
after war, was so much in groaning under his corruption. O! but we have
inverted strangely the way to heaven! I conceive practical Antinomianisme is an
Epidemick error in these days: Many think that it is below a regenerat man to
mourn, and to sit down and lament over the body of death; we know not what it
is to make our bed to swim with tears, and to be bedewing the way to Zion, when
our faces are thither ward; ye conceive that it is a lesson to be practiced,
and learned by those in a lower class, and those who are learning (so to
speak) the Rudiments of Christianity, and not to be exercised by those, who are
now advanced unto the high class of Christianity, that being, (as it were in
our apprehension) a degrading of your selves from that pitch of perfection unto
which in your imagination you have attained: but, believe me, it is a work not
below the eldest Christian, nor above the youngest believer; and the more one
be old in reality in Religion, this work will always be new in their practice.
I shall only give you that divine counsel of a holy man, who desired Christians
to set about the mortification of their lusts, as though they had never been
taken up in that duty before; each day to set about to mortify, not as a
proficient, but as a beginner, who has never made any progress in that
blessed work.

Now in speaking upon Paul's exercise, which is here holden forth, that he was
continually exercised in wrestling against those corruptions, and that body of
death that was in him; we need not stand long to prove that it is the duty of a
Christian to be so exercised and taken up; there is somewhat of that employed in
that word, Act. 24. 16. And it is more clearly pressed, Col. 3: 5. Ephesians. 6. 13.
and, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And, no doubt, if a Christian did reflect more upon the
nature of sin, and consider that by it, difformity with God is increased, and
precious conformity with him lost; and, did we take up sin in its woeful
effects, that it works death, and involveth us under the curse of a living
God, we would be more constant in this spiritual warfare. O! but Christians
through want of the apprehension of these, are much disinabled to stand fast to
that liherty wherewith Christ has made them free, and oft-times entangled
themselves again with the yoke of bondage: So that I conceive if God were
coming to give a name to the Christians of this generation, he might call us,
Isfachar, because we do now croutch down under two burdens, and are become
servants unto tribute; and even those that are more refined and tender in their
walk in those days, he might call them Reuben, because they are unstable as
water, which marreth their excellency.

But that which first we shall speak to is, how the wrestlings of a natural man
against the body of death, and those corruptions that are within him, may be
distinguished from the wrestlings of one that is really godly.

And first we conceive, that it is without debate and controversy, that a man
altogether unregenerate, by natures light may be put on to mortify (if so we
may speak) and contradict those sins, which are most sensual and gross;
natures light including an antipathy and detestation of those things within it
self; though we confess, through the depravement of our nature, those sins,
which fall under the sphere of natures mortification, are now abridged unto a
small sum, it being not now refined and clear, as it was when man was in the
estate of innocence.

Secondly, another sort may, from some common qualification, oppose some sins,
as those that are of more heroic and refined spirits, will have detestation
against covetousness and other sins of that nature, and so in some sense may
endeavor the mortification of these things.

Thirdly, the same may a natural man do, by such a conviction of the holy
Ghost, as is but a common work of the spirit, he may be put on to mortify
these sins that are more visible, and some what gross in their nature, as is
clear from the practice of those who cleanse the outside of the platter, and
studies to have an outward conformity unto the law of God, notwithstanding of
that inward and secret antipathy, against the strictness of his law; yea more,
a natural man who has some predominant evil, may endeavor and will atempt to
wrestle against that sin, which is in a direct line of opposition against it;
as one that is given to that vice of covetousness, he will study to mortify
that vice of prodigality, those being two opposite vices. Now from all these we
may conclude, that upon every opposition which we use against our corruptions:
it is not safe to infer, that we are really engaged in this spiritual warfare;
it being, we think another thing then the most part of us do imagine it to be:
And we confess, it is a difficulty even to attain that length of endeavor in
mortification, which the natural man by these things which we have spoken may
attain to. But for the difference betwixt their debates, the first is this;
that a natural and unregenerat man, does mainly wrestle against these sins,
that are outward and more gross, and not so much against those sins that are
inward, and falls not under the eye of man: we do not deny but a natural man
may wrestle against vain thoughts, and have some small opposition, against the
stirring of corruption within his own bosom, but we conceive, that there are
these two secret sins which a natural man is not at all taken up in wrestling
against, at least very little, viz. his original corruption, and his unbelief;
whereas one that is really godly, is much taken up in bearing down these. Paul
is here taken up in wrestling against his original sin; and David, Ps. 51. 5.
compared with ver. 2. and 7. is likewise taken up in wrestling against it; and
that good man that is recorded in the Gospel, who cried forth, Lord I believe,
help my unbelief, was much taken up in wrestling against his unbelief; and,
David, Ps. 77. from the beginning to the I0. verse and forward: and certainly,
one that never was taken up in wrestling against these two (at least in some
small measure and degree) he may hesitate much whether or not he was ever
seriously engaged in this holy warfare. O! but if many that pass under the
notion of Professors were posed, when they did enter into the lists with
original corruption, there are many who without breach of truth might say, they
never knew what it was to contend against it: And this certainly speaks forth
much of our ignorance of original guilt; And believe me, there is more
difformity unto the Image of God in original sin, then in a thousand actual
outbreakings: And it is but in vain for a Christian to attempt the
mortification and cutting off of branches, till once he study to pluck up the
root, which does bear wormwood and gall.

A second difference is this, a natural man wrestleth against his corruptions,
rather because they bring him under the stroke of the justice of God, than
because they are contrary to the holiness of God: Hence is it that the most
part of a natural man's wrestling is, when he is under affliction; somewhat of
which is pointed out, Ps. 78. 34, 35. Now this difference is clear in Joseph
and Paul, who made the holiness of God, the great topics and common place
whence they did produce all their arguments for contradicting sin, as Paul in
this Chapter, and Joseph in that precious sentence, Shall I do this, and sin
against God? but Cain, who was a man cut off from the right hand of the Lord,
had another principle of contradicting and wrestling against his lusts, My
punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13. And hence is it that a
natural man does never oppose sin, as it is a cause to interrupt fellowship and
communion with God, or from that divine principle of Christ's love constraining
him: O! but the principle of a natural man wrestling against corruption, be
selfish and low! and if there were not a hell, and a place of torment, natural
men would take a latitude to themselves not to mortify sin. But sure it argues
a divine and heroic spirit, and most suitable to them, who have Christ in them
their hope of glory, that though there were neither any regard or remuneration
of their obedience, neither any punishment of their disobedience, yet simple
desire to please God, and not to profane his holinsse which he loves, does tie
them to obedience. I may confidently say, that these who never knew what it was
to have that threefold cord, and that precious triple chain, binding them to
obedience, and inducing them to mortify their lusts, to wit, the holiness of
God, the fear to interrupt communion and fellowship with him, and the love of
Christ, they may question whether or not ever they were seriously engaged in
this holy warfare: But withal we do not deny, but the fear of punishment is
likewise a most divine principle of mortification, in its own place; but except
there be somewhat higher, it is not to build upon.

The third difference is this, that a natural man studieth more to restrain
sin, then to mortify it; for he is a man that rests satisfied with the
restraint of the actings of sin, though there be no mortification of that
vicious inclination which is in the man: this is clear in Haman. Esth. 3. 5. in
Saul. 1 Samuel, 24. 16, 17. and following verses compared with 1 Samuel 26. 2. and
in the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 25. But, the mortification that the
Gospel requires, quireth is of a higher nature, Gal. 5. 24. where we are
commanded to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts; not only to
restrain the acts, but to mortify the habits: we confess it is a difficulty
to determine the difference betwixt the restraint of sin, and mortifying of
sin, and this makes it the more difficult, that sins which are really
mortified, sometimes a Christian may be overtaken to commit, which I conceive
seldom or never holds of sins that are more gross, but holds oft-times of sins
that are of a lower nature and degree. Yet, these things may a little point
forth the difference, first, a Christian who has sin mortified, is filled with
much divine joy and satisfaction in the mortifying of it, which we conceive
partly does proceed from this, that a Christian, when he is honored to
mortify a lust, he ordinarily then receives the intimation of his peace and
interest in God, in a more lively and spiritual way. And, secondly, because at
that time also he does receive much precious and sweet communion with God, his
soul then is in life; somewhat of this is pointed out to us, Romans 8. 13. and,
Romans 7. 24. compared with verse. 25. Thirdly, the difference may be known by
this, that when a man has been much in the exercise of fasting and prayer for
the mortifying of such a lust and idol, and has not attained to this with
great facility, there is great appearance that upon the desisting of tentation,
and the actings of his spirit to commit such a thing, such a lust is mortified,
and not restrained only; there is somewhat of this pointed forth, Matthew. 17.
20, 21. where it is said, that power of casting out of devils goes not forth
but by fasting and prayer. We conceive the place is principally to be
understood concerning the faith of miracles, though by proportion and analogy
it may hold of sanctifying faith: O! our lusts in these days do rather go out,
then are cast out; they rather die to us then we to them. Fourthly, the frame
of spirit which we have after mortifying of a lust, may let us see whether it
be a real work, or only some restraint for a time; a man that does attain such
a length, as really to mortify and crucify any lust, is much taken up in the
exercise of praise, Romans 7. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. he is under conviction
of his duty to bless the Lord though he is also convinced of an impossibility
of blessing him as he ought to be: but we think, when lusts are restrained
only, and not mortified, the man is not so much taken up in the exercise of
praise. O! what heavenly Elogies and Songs of praise have the Saints penned
unto the unsearchable and omnipotent grace of Christ, when they have been
enabled to overcome, and crucify a lust, Their souls have been enditing a good
matter concerning the praises of the King, their tongue has been as the pen of
a ready writer. And this may, lastly, point out the difference; Sins that are
mortified do not for the most part presently recur so, as to obtain victory
over the Christian; we confess, Satan, to weaken our confidence, may assault
us with tentations to commit that iniquity, that so we may be brought to call
in question our real and spiritual victory over it: but if lusts be only
restrained, it cannot be long away form obtaining victory: this is clear from
Esth. 4, 10. compared with the following verses, as likewise from 1 Samuel 24.
16, 17. etc. compared with 1 Samuel 26, 2.

The fourth difference; a natural man is not constant in his wrestling against
his corruptions, but takes it by fits and starts, either when he is under
affliction, or some other sad occurrence that does befall him, or through some
sharp and sudden conviction of a commonly enlightened conscience; but he that
is really taken up in this spiritual warfare, has a constancy in maintaining
of it, at least in his endeavors: this is clear from Act. 24. 16. and Col. 3.
5. and indeed that woeful inconstancy that we have in this spiritual warfare
does evidence our little real engagment in the work. Are there not many here,
who can interrupt the warfare many weeks, and yet not be much under either the
discovery of their loss, or under any impression of sorrow because of it? Sure
if this were believed, that there may be more lost in one day, than can be
gained in many, we would endeavor to be more constant. O! but grace is a
tender thing, and we ought to keep it as the apple of our eye. Alace, there are
but too many, who slacken their endeavor against sin, and will ly idle many
days, and yet are ready to think, that when they please, they can shake
themselves of their lusts as at other times; but to these we shall only say
this, beware lest that dispensation once meet you, that when ye shall begin to
shake your selves of your lusts and of your bands, your strength shall be gone
from you, and then your enemies shall lead you captive, and put out your two
eyes. O! but some times our corruptions get such advantage over us, that we may
say, Vidio meliora proboque, deteriora sequor.

The fifth difference, they go not about this warfare from a right principle,
which the Christian does, the one wrestles in their own strength, but the other
resting upon the strength of Jehovah, that everlasting strength, this is
pointed at, Romans 8. 13. there is a command, that a wrestling Christian studies
always to obey: a Christian uses much that precious divinity of David, 1 Samuel
17. 45, 46. when they go to war. And alace there are many that are living under
the apprehension of this warfare, who in the day of their accounts, we fear
shall be found never really to have entered in the lists with principalities
and powers and spiritual wickedness. And it is no wonder that many of us be
foiled by the hand of our iniquities, we not having sitten down first when we
engaged, to consult, whether we with our ten thousand, were able to meet him
that came against us with his twenty thousand, we engaged without the
apprehension of difficulty, and so no wonder we be overcome without much
difficulty. Now examine your selves, by these, whether indeed you be engaged in
this spiritual warfare.

Now that which, secondly, we shall speak to, shall be, to those advantages
that a Christian may have by being continually taken up in this spiritual
warfare. The first advantage is this, it is an excellent way to obtain victory
over these lusts and Idols, wherewith we are beset: we conceive it is no wonder
that this be the great and general complaint of Christians in these days, that
they are led captive by the hand of their iniquities, and that the voice and
noise of the spoiler is so much heard with them, because they are not taken up
in a constant debating and contending with sin; there is somewhat of this
pointed out to us, Rev. 3. 5. where though that promise be principally
understood of the reward of an overcomer, when he shall be above, that he shall
be clothed in white, yet we think it may include this, that a man that is in
the way, and constant exercise of overcoming, shall attain to much divine
conformity with God, and much divine difformity with the world: and to those
who are much discouraged with their little success and apparent victory in
this war, notwithstanding of their constancy in debate with their lusts, we
shall only speak that for their comfort by way of allusion, which is Dan. 7.
12. Their dominion shall be taken from them, but their lives be prolonged for a
season and time: the dominion of your lusts shall be taken away, though their
lives may be prolonged for your exercise and dependence on him for a short time
and season: ye may have tribulation in this spiritual warfare ten days, but be
convinced of this that the day is coming; when ye shall sit down upon a Throne,
after ye have overcome, as Christ also did sit down, after he had overcome;
once ve shall stand and defend the field when all your lusts shall flee as
chaff before the wind: albeit oftimes our discouragement speaks that word which
Saul spoke to David, 1 Samuel 17. 33. (when we are to wrestle with the devil)
thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for thou art
but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth: yet a Christian ought to
answer, through God I shall do valiantly.

Secondly, it is the way to attain much divine consolation, as is clear, Rev.
2, 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat the hidden Manna, which is (as
we conceive) in part, he shall have of the consolations of the holy Ghost,
though it be principally understood of Jesus Christ. O! what a divine
contentment and unspeakable solace of mind does a Christian attain by
intertaining a constant enimity against his lusts. I am persuaded that that
which does interrupt a Christains peace much, is the interruption of that holy
and divine enimity, which we ought to have against sin; believe me, there is
more real satisfaction to be found in one days serious debate against sin,
then in having an eternity of enjoyment of the most flourishing pleasures in
the world: ye may sow in tears in this warfare, but ye shall only reap in joy:
the first part may be true of the men of the world, in their pursuits after
their pleasures, they do sow in tears; but it was never yet heard nor left upon
record, that they did reap in joy; there was always a correspondence betwixt
their seed-time, and their harvest; but there is a divine transmutation and
disproportion betwixt the seed-time of a Christian and his harvest, unspeakable
joy can spring off the root of their most bitter sorrows.

Thirdly, it is an excellent way to maintain the faith of our interest in God,
this is clear from Rev. 2. 17. where Christ gives this promise to the
overcomers, that he will give them a new name, which holds forth their
adoption and interest in him, which no man can know, but he that receives it;
and certainly there is nothing that over-clouds a Christians hope so much, nor
darkneth his interest, as an intermission in this holy warfare. Yea more
particularly he attaineth to the most certain persuasion of his victory over
his corruptions: there is somewhat of this pointed out, 2 Timothy 7. 8. I have
fought the good fight of faith, and hence he does infer, that there is laid up
for him a crown of righteousness, which does certainly import and include in
its bosom, that Paul upon his constant endeavor to wrestle against
corruption, did attain to much certainty of overcoming. I think it is
altogether impossible for a Christian, intermitting this holy warfare, to
intertain any divine or assured persuasion, that there is a blessed issue and
period unto his warfare. And we think it is from this, that of times his own
cry out, who can stand before the children of Anak, and do conclude to make to
themselves a Captain, and go back unto Egypt: though we think, that if we were
constant in this, we would be taught, not only to intertain a holy undervaluing
of them, but likewayes a divine certainty of overcoming. I think a Christian
has not only that advantage by being constant in this warfare, that he is
brought to an assured persuasion that he shall overcome, but likewise does most
sweetly conclude, that the strength of their corruption is gone, therefore they
may go up and war with them.

Fourthly, by maintaining this warfare, a Christian gets much experience; by it
he attains to much distinct apprehension of the deceitfulness of him, who is
the deceiver of the brethren. We are persuaded, that these who are constant in
this warfare, can speak most to those singular subtilties of Satan, and can
most distinctly fathom these deep devices of his; as likewayes, they can most
take up the unsearchable deceitfulness of their own heart: and there is, no
doubt, no small advantage in the taking up of these two, both that we may be
provoked unto self-diffidence, as likewayes to have our confidence and hope
much reposed upon Jesus Christ, who is the Captain of our salvation, that we
may be constrained in that day when the blast of the terrible one, is as a
blast against the wall, and when the archer does shoot at us, and grievously
wound us, to go unto him, whose name is an everlasting strength, that so by his
strength we may be enabled to overcome.

That which thirdly we shall speak to, shall be, what is the reason Christians
do obtain so small victory in this spiritual warfare: and in this, we shall not
only speak to these moral and culpable causes, why Christians do not obtain
much victory, but we shall likewayes speak a little, to these divine and
precious ends that God has in denying victory to his own, who in some small
measure are entertaining a constant enimity against their corruption. And as
for the first, it does proceed from too much self-conceit and presumptuous
opinion of their own strength; I am persuaded, that that which made Peter so
incapable to resist the tentations of denying Christ, did much proceed from
that word which is Matthew. 26. 33. Though all men should be offended because of
him, yet he would never be offended. Therefore we think, that the first and
most excellent way to obtain victory is, to be dwelling under the apprehensions
of our own weakness to overcome, that holy and divine paradox being always
made true, that when we are weak, then are we strong: and we may enter into the
lists with our corruptions, having no confidence in the flesh, but desiring in
the name of the God of Israel to wrestle with the strongest Goliath that we meet
with. O! but humility is a most sweet and strong armor, wherewith a Christian
ought to be clothed, when he goes to war: he must walk in that holy fear,
which may be consistent with faith, and entertain so much faith, and spiritual
confidence, as may not altogether cut off holy fear.

There is a second cause, which is, too much intanglement with the pleasures,
and affairs of the world: It is impossible for one who is taken up in the
continual noise and buz of things here below, to be an overcomer; hence Paul
presses, 2 Timothy 2. 4. that no man that warreth ought to entangle himself with
the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a
soldier; and that word, 1 Cor. 9. 25. He that striveth for the mastery must be
temperate in all things. O! oft-times through the deceitfulness of the world
and pleasures thereof, we are led captive by the hand of our iniquities, and do
fall before our enemies. I know nothing so suitable and helpful for a
Christian to overcome, then to be denied to these three cardinal and
fundamental temptations, by which Satan stands to allure us, which are the
lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life; that our eye may
not take in, any sweet or pleasant representations of the transient vanities of
the world, neither may our sensual appetite be taken with the taste of these
bitter and most sour delights, neither may be ambitious in the enjoyment, and
actual possession of them.

There is a third cause, which is, that we are not taken up in the exercise of
watchfulness: this is certain that the exercise of this grace, has most
divine influence for the overcoming of our corruptions, as is clear from Matthew.
26. 41. and Mark. 14. 38. That ought to be the great Motto of a Christian
soldier, which ought to be engraven upon his arms* Watch: Watchfulness is
not only effectual for overcoming in this respect, that it does discover unto
us our temptations, when they begin to assail us, but likewise it takes up both
the subtilty and strength of our temptations, as likewise it takes up the
weakness and inability in the Christian to resist that temptation; and if
those three be attained, seldom or never is a Christian much foiled by the hand
of his iniquities, therefore that which I would say to a Christian soldier, I
would say unto all, Watch.

There is a fourth cause, which is, that we are not much taken up in the
exercise of secret prayer, prayer being indeed that noble and spiritual weapon
by which Christians do overcome, as is clear from Matthew. 26. 41. and 2 Cor. 12.
7. where Paul, when a messenger of satan was buffeting him, was constrained to
beseech the Lord thrice* a practice much unknown by the most part of
Christians, who know not what it is to pray without ceasing, when they are
tempted much without interruption. I think of all the weapons that almost a
Christian takes to resist temptation, this is the most effectual; for when
Satan sees that a Christian improves the temptation so much for his own
advantage, as to make it an errand to go to God, then he desists and gives over
to contend: I confess a Christian may in so far glory in his infirmities, as
they give him an occasion to converse more frequently with God, O! but had we
spent more of our time in conversing with God, when we were alone, we might
have attained many sweet trophies, and fruits of our victory, which now we have
only in hope and expectation.

There is fifth cause, which is, that we are not much taken up in the exercise
of Faith, which is that general piece of armor that Paul does prescribe unto
the Christian, Ephesians. 6. 16* Above all things, taking the shield of faith,
whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: there is
that sweet note of commendation put upon this armor, that there is no
temptation a Christian can meet with, but through the exercise of Faith, he may
be able to overcome it: hence Paul says, ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the Devil: This piece of armor is not only defensive, but we
may say, in some measure, it is offensive likewayes: now Faith helps a
Christian to overcome his temptations and corruptions, wherewith he is
assaulted, not only by laying hold on the infinite strength of him who is the
Captain of Salvation; but likewayes, Faith is that grace which has the most
subtle and divine eye in taking up the strength of corruption: O! but a man
much in the exercise of Faith, is a man that can pass a most accurat sentence
upon his lusts and Idols wherewith he does rencounter: there is nothing
impossible to the believing man: and I think, if there be any grace by which a
Christian does ascend most to a divine similitude unto the omnipotency of God,
it is by the grace of Faith: hereby is the Christians power most intended. O!
but Faith will make those that are weak, strong: Therefore we would desire you
to be exercising your confidence upon him, who is that munition of rocks, that
so through him ye may overcome, as likewayes through the word of your testimony.

This lastly may be a cause, that after some small victory over our lusts, we
are ordinarily entangled with security, not knowing what it is to make the
victory over one lust, a sweet provocation to the overcoming of another. I
think (if we may allude unto that word which is, Psalm. 18. 37) it ought much to
be the practice of a Christian, to pursue his enemies till he overtake them,
and never to return again till they be consumed, that by the strength of him
who is Jehovah, we may run through a troup, and by our God we may leap over a
wall. O! but constant exercise in this war, never proclaiming a cessation of
arms, would make a speedy riddance of all our adversaries; he then should
teach our hands to war, and by our arms a bow of steel might be broken. I
think that which made David so little successful over his lusts after some
small victory, was his security: as likewayes in Peter. There is no discharge
in this war till death, and then we shall receive our everlasting arriers for
all our toil.

Now to the second, those divine ends that the Lord has in this, why
Christians do not attain victory over their lusts, though in some small measure
endeavoring constancy in war; it does either proceed from this, that God
knows that we can better improve a wrestling estate than an overcoming estate,
while we are here below; we can better dispense with war, than we can with
victory. Therefore, while we are traveling through this wilderness, he does
still keep us in exercise with serpents and scorpions: or it does much proceed
from this, that we may be kept in a constant dependence upon God, and may
intertain a holy and constant correspondence with him: It is certain, that if
we were not constrained to walk with God, through a principle of necessity,
seldom would we walk with him through a principle of a Duty, or from a
principle of love: for it is obvious to a Christian upon his secret search,
that we walk most with God, when we stand most in need of him: It does likewise
proceed from this, that we may be kept humble while we are here below, and that
we may not be exalted above measure; as also, that the grace and power of our
blessed Lord Jesus, in helping us to overcome, may be rendered more conspicuous
and evident, this being the great stage in which Christ's power does most
eminently act and appear over our weakness, and the apprehensions of these
insuperable difficulties, wherewith we are beset and often overcome.

Now to shut up our discourse, we shall desire, that once ye may give up your
names unto Jesus Christ, to fight under his royal banner, and believe me,
though your corruptions were never so strong, yet at last he shall overcome
them, the certainty whereof is made out unto you by this, that your blessed
head, has led captivity captive, and is now exalted at the right hand of
Majesty on high: and the hope and expectation of that blessed issue may make
you rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

SERMON II.
Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
O! when shall that great and excellent wonder be seen in heaven, which John
did see, Rev. 12. 1. 6. to behold the invisible Church, and those that are
expectants of heaven, which is that woman clothed and adorned with that
spotless and beautiful righteousness of a crucified Savior, which is
pointed out, by her being clothed with the Sun, and to be regulat by the
Doctrine of the twelve Apostles, which are indeed those precious Stars that
will bring us unto the place where Christ lies, and will sweetly conduct us
unto him; and withal to have that great Idol under our feet, the world, the
divine emblem of which is the Moon, because it is subject to many vicissitudes
and changes, and has most different and contrary aspects: though we conceive,
that if many Christians were to be painted, we might fix the Moon upon their
head, for they use not the world as their servant, but as their Master;
Mortification is an exercise that does not suit with flesh and blood, it is a
hard saying to a man settled upon the dregs of nature, and yet incorporate in
that old stock: O! but it is sad Divinity to many, that except one die with
Christ, they cannot reign with him, we must win to the fellowship of his
sufferings, and be conformable unto his death, before we attain to the
resurrection from the dead: we love to divide those things that God has
conjoined, to take Christ for righteousness and salvation, but not for a King
and for sanctification: And if it was an evidence unto wise Solomon, that she
was not the mother of the child, who pleaded for the division of it, so it may
be supposed, that he who will not take whole Christ, but would have him
divided, is not one that is predestined to the adoption of children: we
confess there are many that love Christ's coat, rather than his graces, and if
they pursue after those, it is more after those graces that are adorning then
saving: And we conceive that there are these three graces that a hypocrite does
most pursue after; there is the grace of prayer, the grace of knowledge, and
the grace of humility, and of the last we may say, a hypocrite may endeavor to
personat it, but there is always within his bosom some convictions of this
little attainment: it is impossible for a hypocrite to think himself nothing;
and, O! that we could once attain to that precious length of Christianity, as
to be entertaining a holy oblivion of our seize, and a sanctified memory
of our imperfections; that the former may be written, as it were in the sand,
and the latter might be engraven in the fleshly tables of our heart, and kept
constantly upon record: we confess there is not much of our leaf that withers
in these days, but much of our fruit withers and decays: O! is not man become
so brutish and ignorant* that he may be sent unto the beasts of the field to be
instructed of that which is his duty: Solomon makes mention of four beasts upon
the earth which are little and exceeding wise, Prove. 30. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
all which may teach us some spiritual doctrine; first there are the Ants, who
may teach us that grace of divine prudence, and Christian policy, in laying
hold on our occasions and opportunities, who though they be not a strong
people, yet provide their meat in summer; and no doubt, we should be fighting
with our spiritual enemies, while it is the day, for the night comes wherein
no man can fight: actions done in season, adds a great deal of luster and
perfection to them, every thing being beautiful in its season: Secondly, there
are the conies, who may teach us that grace of deny all, to distrust our own
strength, and in the day of straits to run unto him who is that Munition of
rocks, when the blast of the terrible one, is as a storm against a wall; for
they being a feeble people, make their houses in the rocks; And no doubt,
Atheism and Idolatry are the two great impediments of mortification, too much
confidence in our selves, which is Idolatry, and our too much diffidence in
God, which is our Atheism. Moreover, we may go to the locusts, which would
teach us that primitive grace of unity, who though they want a King, yet go
forth by bands: and lastly, we may go to the spider, which may teach us that
grace of spiritual mindedness, and of aspiring after those sublime and
excellent things of God, for they are in Kings places: and, O! to be more
conversant with heaven, and those things that are above: this would make us to
distaste these lower springs, and they would be to us as the waters of Marah.

But to come more particularly to the words, you have many precious things
concerning Mortification holden forth, which is that precious and cardinal
grace of which we intend at this time to speak; you have the infinite advantage
of this grace held forth, to wit, that such do meet with divine intimation of
their interest in Christ, and that they are Christ's, which is indeed the high
elevation of a Christian: And this is clear from the words, that such an one
may from this gather, that his name was written in the ancient and precious
records of heaven: And, no doubt, little divine wrestling with our corruptions,
makes us to have the extract of our peace so often withdrawn to our sense:
there is this held forth concerning it, the extensive nature of mortification,
that a Christian ought not only to mortify the flesh, which is original sin,
which is so called, not only because of that woeful knot of amity and affection
that is betwixt us and our lusts, hence that word, no man ever hated his own
flesh; O! those invisible knots of union that are betwixt us and our lusts; but
it is so called, because sin has contaminat the whole man, so that from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is nothing that is not
defiled, as likewayes, because during our abode in those tents of mortality, we
must have this woeful and sad companion* and there is an unchangable and
unalterable decree of heaven that during our time of Minority, we should have
that bad associat; but more, a Christian should mortify his affections, which
are his predominant lusts, to which our affections are so much joined, and our
soul does so much go out after; as also his lusts, which are the first motions
and risings of corruption within one, and withal may comprehend the eschewing
the first shadows and appearances of evil, Prove. 4. 14, 15. Enter not into the
path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by
it, turn from it, and pass away: our mortification should be als much of our
invisible Idols, as our visible lusts.

There is this likewayes held forth, the difficulty and painfulnesse of this
work under this notion of Crucifying, which was one of the most painful
deaths: we conceive, that there are many who are of that man's humor, who
wallowing upon the grass, cried forth, utinam hoc esset laborare: there is, no
doubt, more difficulty in this then we apprehend, we must not ly in the bed of
ease, if we intend to be mortifying Christians, we must wrestle as princes with
God, till we prevail; the longsomnesse of this work is also pointed at, under
the notion of crucifying, it being a longsome death: we cannot ordinarily fight
and triumph in one day; that ambitious letter of Cesars will not hold here,
Veni, Vidi, Vici; we must die mortifying and struggling with our corruptions,
and when one of our feet is within the borders of eternity, to be sighing out
that lamentation, O wretched man that I am, etc. You have also the intensive
nature of mortification, that a Christian should be content with nothing but
the death of his lusts, which is held forth in that word, crucify. O! to bind
our self with a holy oath and vow, not to dwell in much contentment, till we
have gotten the life of our predominant lust: we must not give our idols
quarter upon the most plausible and fairest terms of subjection, otherwise,
if ye do, I shall not say that word which the Prophet spoke to Ahab, that your
life shall go for his; but sure I am that confederacy shall be broken, and
likely not without many sorrows to your spirits. There is lastly, the certainty
of this victory held forth in that word, they have crucified; it is here in the
preterite time, as it were already accomplished and brought to pass; and no
doubt, this may make us to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, that
once we shall have a triumphant song put in our mouth.

Now before we shall speak unto any of these, we shall speak to some few things
as previous to be known: We shall not dwell long in pointing out the nature of
Mortification; we conceive it thus. It is a divine quality of the immortal soul
derived from the efficacy and virtue of Christ's death, whereby the strength of
sin is impared, and its dominion taken away, so that we should not totally nor
with full consent yield our self unto that iron-yoke of our iniquity: Neither
shall we stand long to prove that it is your duty to be much in the practice of
this duty: It is clear not only from Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members
which are upon the earth, but also from 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. and, 2 Cor. 7. 1. it
ought to be our great design and aim to bring all those things in subjection,
which stand in opposition to Jesus Christ, and it is the noble prerogative of
those young men, 1 Ioh. 2. 13, 14. that they have overcome that wicked one, and
has in some measure trodden Satan under their feet.

But we shall speak a little unto this, first, whether or not a Christian can
fall again to the committing of that sin which once they have mortified and
repented for, and withal has received an act of pardon? We conceive indeed
(so far as we know) there can be no explicit proof given of such a case in
Scripture, that ever any of those that were heirs of the grace of life, did
fall into that sin which they had once mortified and repented for: but however,
we are confident to aver, that it is not inconsistent with a gracious estate,
which we conceive is clear, not only from his names, but from his promises and
from his commands; does not that name, that he is a healer of our
backslidings, and the repairer of our breaches, and that name, he will
multiply to pardon, speak out that a Saints relapsing into a mortified sin,
does not put him without hope, Is. 55. 7. Hos. 14. 4, but that he may have
confidence that he shall not die but live, and declare the wondrous works of
the Lord, though God may speak that word to him, which Absalom spoke to Hushai,
Is this thy kindness to thy friend: and withal, do not his promises speak
this, Ier. 3. 22. I will heal your backslidings; and do not his commands speak
it, Ier. 3. 1. 12. 14. 22. how often is backsliding Israel exhorted to return,
and he who imposed that commandment upon us, to forgive our brother until
seventy and seven times, if he return and repent, will not his bowels be moved
within him, toward a backsliding heifer? But withal, to provoke you to
beware of that sin, to sin after repentance and mortification, we shall propose
these things. First, such a sin does creat and beget much hardness and
stupidity of heart, so that our own backslidings do reprove us, and become not
only our sin, but our punishment; and when God has spoken peace to us, should
we again turn to folly? Secondly, there is this to dissuade you, that such
Apostasy as this, makes a Christian to loss the sense and comfortable
assurance of their Interest, so that sometimes they will be even razing, as it
were, the foundations: O! but backsliders in heart are filled with the fruit of
their own way, and are made to walk in darkness and to have no light: it is
much for a Christian to keep fast his hands, when after this manner, he has
lost his feet.

Fourthly, such an one does ordinarily give much reins, and much liberty to his
corruptions; that is indeed, their year of Jubilee and release, as is clear
from Ier. 5* 6. where these two are joined: and may not the nature and
aggravating circumstances of that sin, make you to eschew it? is it not a
sinning against light? is it not a sinning against God, after he has appeared
unto you twice? So that this may be the manner of your bemoaning your self, If
it had been an enemy that had thus done, O Lord, thou might have born it,
but that it should be one, whom thou did condescend to make thy familiar, and
to take sweet counsel together with, that has lift up his heel against thee;
this no doubt is an iniquity of deep dye; and we shall only say this, that it
is imprinted upon the effigy of godly Judah, Genesis 38. 26. that after his first
fall with Tamar, he knew her again no more: And, no doubt, it were your
advantage to obey that counsel, let him that stands take heed lest he fall..

Now that which secondly we would speak to is, to propose something to you, by
which you may know your growth in Mortification, since there are many that
delude themselves in this, supposing that their lusts are really mortified,
when they are but sleeping, and that they are really cast out, when they only
go out for a season: those are they that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
are not cleansed from their iniquity. And before we shall speak any thing to
this, we would have you considering these things. First, that there may be a
growth of leafes, where there is not much growth of fruit; a plentiful measure
of profession, and yet much barrenness in practice; there are some whose leaf
does not wither, though their fruit does much decay, who have many specious
appearances, and yet cannot say that the root of the matter is with them; and
with all we would say, that there may be some real growth to the fruit, when
there is not much growth to the root, so that though we spread forth our
branches, yet we do not cast forth our root as Lebanon; we grow sometimes more
in prayer, and knowledge, and joy of the Holy Ghost, then in mortification and
humility, though there be a promise for both their growthes, Hos. 14. 5. 6. Now
there is this secondly, that we would have you knowing, that there is a divine
necessity for Christians to grow somewhat in all the graces of the Spirit, and
to bring forth fruits* even in old age, to be advancing in Mortification, to be
ascending up in a divine conformity with God, till we shall be made like unto
him: we confess indeed, there are some sad interruptions, when we almost
forget that we were purged from our old sins; And this necessity of growth,
appears not only from this, that Christ is the head of believers, and they his
members; this similitude the Apostle uses twice to express Christians growth,
Ephesians. 4. 15* 16. Col, 2. 10. and no doubt, since Christ is the head, and we the
members, we must grow till there be a divine conformity and resemblance betwixt
us and our head; and are not we predestinate unto this divine and noble end,
Romans 8. 29. and must not we purify our selves, and endeavor to wash our
selves from our spots, through that precious blood of sprinkling, that we may
be holy, as he who has called us, is holy. And more, this is one end of that
fullness, which was communicate unto Jesus Christ our precious head, ever to
make us complete, Col. 2. 9, 10. And as his fullness is for our growth, so our
growth is for the making up of his fullness, Ephesians. 1. 23. Mystical Christ will
not be complete, till once all his Members grow up to the stature of the
fullness of Jesus Christ, and so from that, there is such an invisible knot of
union and supernatural relation betwixt us and Christ, that a Christian must
grow, and if once the first draughts and imperfect lineaments of Christ's image
be engraven on our soul, he will bring it unto perfection, since this is his
noble prerogative, that his work is perfect. There is this also that speaks a
necessity of a Christians growth in mortification, and all the graces of the
spirit, that the faithfulness of all the persons of the blessed Trinity, is
engaged for this, and is laid in pawn: it is clear that the faithfulness of
the first person of the blessed Trinity is laid in pledge, from Psalm. 92. 14,
15. they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, to show that the Lord is
upright, or faithful: which we conceive does relate to that promise made by
the Father to the Son, in that ancient and eternal transaction, Isa. 53. 10.
And is not the faithfulness of the Son laid in pledge, is not this
commandment of the Father laid upon him, that of all that are given to him, he
should loss none, but raise them up at the last day, Joh. 6. 39, 40. so that
as Christ must be answerable to his charge, he must present all the gifted ones
unto the Father, which presupposes their growth in grace, and their being made
meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light: and is not the faithfulness of
the third person of the blessed Trinity likewayes engaged in this? in that it
is his great work, to apply Christ's purchase, to reveal unto us the whole mind
of God, and to communicate all things that are needful for us to know, and to
guide us in all truth Ioh. 16. 13. And if this be his work, will he not
accomplish it, and bring it unto perfection? all which great works that are
committed unto the Holy Ghost to do, have that sweet and precious result,
growth in grace. There is this thirdly, that we would have you knowing, that
there are some graces of the Spirit, of whose growth, before we can judge,
there must be a time allotted; grace is not like the grass of the field, which
grows in a night, and perishes in a night: it is a woeful practice among
many, they begin to search their growth, before they have well begun to grow:
we would rather counsel you to grow, then to search your growth; though it is
indeed a Christians duty to take notice, to go up early to the vineyards, to
see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomgranats
bud forth; this is clear from Cant. 7. 12. and from Psalm. 63 8. where David
takes notice, not only of his following after God, but that his soul did
follow hard after him: but if in this we may allude, we shall say this unto
you, Judge nothing before the time, let your graces grow before you judge of
their growth. And there is this lastly that we would say, that growing in grace
and the fruits of the Spirit, is a mystery that is more taken up by faith, then
by sense; we must grow by Faith, and by Faith we will best discern, especially
under desertion, and when we are walking under a cloud, and Christ carves out
bitter things unto us: we confess indeed, when we are dandled upon his knee,
and our cup of divine consolations is running over, and he covers to us a
table in the wilderness, then our growth may be known by sense.

But as to the question we proposed, we shall give you these evidences of your
growth in Mortification: There is this first, those are admitted to read their
names in those ancient and precious Records of heaven, and to know that they
were engraven upon his heart, before ever the cornerstone of the world was
laid; this is clear from Rev. 2. 17. and, 2 Timothy 4. 8. and the ground of it is
this, that those who are wrestling as Princes with their lusts, and enduring
the heat of the day, he lets them see a sight of the crown, and of that eternal
felicity, that so they may endure that good fight of faith, and persevere to
the end, that they may obtain that crown of life. And there is this ground of
it also, because such are much in the exercise of those two cardinal and
architectonick graces of the spirit, faith and prayer, by which much divine
familiarity and fellowship with God is attained, and so faith does increase
with the increase of God.

There is this second evidence, when our lusts have not such power to disturb
us in holy duties, as in prayer, hearing and meditating; if you have
dispossessed those unclean things, and can go about those duties, with a great
deal of more divine serenity, and composedness of spirit; but if this be
wanting, it is an evidence of no great growth in Mortification, as is is clear
from Ier. 23. 11. and Ezekiel. 33. 31. And we conceive, that this is an evidence
of growth in Mortification upon those two grounds; First, A Christian that is
much a victor in this blessed warfare, is oft-times under the dreadful
impressions of the Majesty and Holiness of God, by which those sinful
stirrings and motions of his heart are much abated; by reason of his terror,
he cannot endure himself to be with the fool in the ends of the earth, because
such a one has power over his spirit and rules over it, so that he is not like
a city broken down and without walls. O! but it is much for one, to subject all
his thoughts to the obedience of Jesus Christ, to have nothing within him that
lifts up the heel against the knowledge and excellency of Jesus Christ: and by
the way, it is a woeful and irrational evil, that we lodge Christ in our face,
and in our mouth, we speak of him, and seem to love him, but we lodge idols in
our heart, that glorious and excellent Mansion, which should be kept for that
excellent guest, that immortal King of glory, who is the light of the higher
House.

There is this third evidence of growth, to be much in exalting and magnifying
of Jesus Christ, and lifting up of that burdensome stone of his praise; this
was an evidence of Paul's growth in Mortification, Romans 7. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 56,
57, 58. O! but one that has really tasted of that noble thing, mortifying and
pardoning grace, their soul will esteem Christ matchless, and a divine
necessity of speaking out his praise and setting him on high, will lie upon
them: There are two special times, when Christians are put to a divine nonplus
in speaking out his praise, and are constrained to cry out that word, Psalm. 65.
1. Praise waits for thee, (or is silent) that is, it cannot be expressed.
There is that time, when a Christian is caught up, as it were, unto the third
heavens, and has some eminent discoveries of God, then they are constrained to
cry out, exalt thy self, O Lord; their thoughts are so high of him, that there
can be no expressions found suitable unto his worth; And we confess indeed, it
is hard, if not impossible, to commit any hyperbole in commending of him. And
there is that second time, when Christians are able to turn the battle to the
gate, and in some measure are enabled to conquer their spiritual enemies; then
are they put to this, who can exalt him who is by infinite degrees exalted above
our blessing and praise? Sometimes a Christian is put to that spiritual posture
and heavenly frame, that he cannot make language of his thoughts of Christ,
that though his heart could indite a good matter concerning the King, yet his
tongue cannot be the pen of a ready writer.

There is a fourth evidence of a Christians growth, when a Christian has more
spiritual discoveries and insight unto his corruptions, and is more wrestling
against them: and we would have you considering these two things; 1. That
discovery of bosom and invisible lusts, is that which we mainly take to be
meant in this evidence, and wrestling against them; and there is this secondly,
that all our victories over our lusts, should increase our antipathy against
sin, and make us to be zealous, till once we shall obtain a complete victory,
and shall have accomplished our warfare.

There is a fifth evidence of our growth, when the remembrance of our former
lusts and Idols, do not provoke desires, after the enjoyment of those things
again, but rather does provoke the exercise of sorrows, that ever that should
have been our lot, to have been under the dominion of such lusts and Idols: O!
but there are many, to whom remembrance of their lusts will provoke their
affections, Ezekiel. 23. 19. 21. and this speaks much strength of love, that the
picture of his Idols, should so much inflame him, and gain his affections; O!
but looking upon our old sins with an affectionat eye, speaks little growth in
mortification.

There is this last evidence of our growth, our high and majestic thoughts of
Christ and his Word, for if once our humors be purged out, we shall then as
new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word; and I am persuaded, that
as one does obtain success in this precious warfare, he does ascend in his
spiritual conception of Christ; such an one is endeavoring that evangelick and
heavenly captivity of affections, to have them all confined unto Jesus Christ,
that precious and excellent object: O! but one sight of Jesus Christ, in his
matchless and transcendent comeliness, to behold that divine contemperature,
harmony and conjunction of all spiritual graces that are in him, would it not
provoke us to cast away our Idols to the Moles and to the Batts, and should not
they loss their beautiful hue and image? O! but eternally to contemplat that
infinite Majesty that is in him, sweetly contemperat with his lowliness, so
that we may say, there is both Majestic lowliness, and lowly majesty in him,
to see likewayes his infinite highness, and his matchless condescendency, to
see his absolute Sovereignty, and his unparalled humility, those things if
once they were attained, might make us to cry out, who would not love thee, O
King of Nations.

Now that which we shall lastly speak to shall be this, to show unto you those
things that speak and prove our soul-union and heart-conjunction with our
Idols, that so we may be provoked to the mortification of them; There is this
first, that we embrace our Idols after frequent convictions of the
disadvantages of them, that after they have been seen in their own native
colors, yet we dandle them upon our knee, like that word, Isa. 57. 10. and
that, Ier. 50. 38. they are mad upon their Idols, demented in their pursuits
after them; and no doubt this speaks a most unmortified frame, and one filled
with the love of his Idols. There is this secondly, that speak it, our
embracing of our Idols upon small tentations, like that, 2 Samuel 12. 2, 3. there
are some tentations of our lusts to gain our affections, and some to gain our
judgment; and to sin without the proposal of some great advantage, or some
solacing delight or pleasure, speaks us most strongly united to our lusts.
There is this thirdly, that speaks it, that infinite toil and labor that we
expose our selves to, to satisfy our lusts; you will see it Eccles. 2. where
Solomon making pleasure and carnal joy his Idol, is put to much toil to
satisfy it: and believe it, it is more easy to mortify your lusts, then to
satisfy them, for that is impossible work: our Idols have two daughters that
still cry, Give, Give: our Idols are like the grave, the barren womb, the earth
that is not filled with water, and the fire, who never cry, It is enough: our
Idols have two attendants, Impatience, and diligence; we will weary our selves
in the fire, to obtain satisfaction to our lusts; and if we do not attain it,
we will curse our King, and look upward. There is this fourthly, that speaks
our soul-union to our Idols, and it is embracing of them, after application of
threatenings, against those who should embrace that sin; and yet, to commit this
sin with lifted up hand, is indeed, to sport with the justice of God, or rather
to put a bill of defiance in his hand, supposing that we are above the reach of
his justice and power. And there is this fifthly, that speaks it, our killing
of convictions, which tend to the discovery of the sinfulness of sin, and
pressing upon us those duties, by which we attain to the Mortification of them;
and is it not certain, that we kill our convictions in the birth, and makes
them to prove abortive? Love to our Idols is that which kills our convictions,
and our killing of our convictions, is the mother of our love to our Idols: And
there is this, lastly, that speaks our soul-union with our Idols; those anxious
sorrows when we miss the enjoyment of our Idols, we are then ready to cry out,
It is better for me to die then to live: and oft-times, when our Idols are
taken from us, and are laid in the grave, our living lusts sit down, and lament
over the grave of our buried Idols, crying forth, Ah, my Lord. And since there
are such invisible, and woeful knots of union betwixt us and our Idols, we
should endeavor to have all these knots loosed, and to have our soul united
unto him, by those two precious and golden chains of Faith and Love, and to
have our hearts a Bethel, a house for God, and a temple for the holy Ghost; and
not a Bethaven, a house of Idols, and a cage for all unclean birds, that our
spirits may be mansions for that eternal Spirit, and he may have an arbitrary
power over us, and a negative voice in conducting us to heaven.

SERMON III.
Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
MOrtification is that precious duty imposed upon man, not only by the law of
Nature, but by the royal and excellent law of Grace. Does not the law and light
of nature instruct man thus, it is better to kill then to be killed; and
certainly, except a Christian be the ruin of his iniquities, iniquity shall
certainly be his ruin; we shall either sing a song of triumph over our lusts,
or our lusts shall sing a song of triumph over us; and does not that royal law
of liberty and grace enforce this upon us, while it desires, that we should
crucify our members which are upon the earth* and be aspiring after a divine
conformity with the Image of the invisible God; Though we conceive, there be
some, that if they would retire themselves a little to behold those subtle and
invisible actings of the mystery of iniquity within them and those deep devices
of Satan, and how many strange Lords, beside Jesus Christ, exercise dominion
over them; they might be constrained to put in their amen unto that truth, that
it is more easy for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for such
unmortified Christians, as many of us are, to enter into the kingdom of God. It
is better for us to dwell in the house of mourning, then in the house of mirth,
and we may say of much of the carnal joy that is amongst us, Such laughter is
mad, and such mirth what does it? we may wish for some retired cottage in the
wilderness, where we may go aside, and spend our seventy years in the
bitterness of our soul, and account it marvelous loving kindness, if we shall
obtain hope in our end: It is without all debate, that the general and
universal evil of our days is, that Christians are so little in the exercise
of this precious grace of Mortification; we think, we take a greater latitude
in our way to heaven, than that cloud of witnesses which went before us, did
adventure to take: and it is certain, that if one from the dead were admitted
to write Commentars upon the disadvantages of satisfying the lusts of the
flesh, they would point forth marvelous hurt and infinite loss in exercising
any of those; as likwayes, if any from above were admitted to write upon the
advantages of crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, what
precious commendation might they give to those that are exercised in those low,
but exalting works of Mortification? Believe me this is most certain, that it
is easier to mortify your lusts, than to satisfy them: for we conceive, that
such an one who is spending his precious time in the satisfying of his lusts,
does spend his time betwixt these three, the impatiency of his lusts, which
still cry forth, give, give; the impotency and weakness of the means he has
to satisfy such lusts, and the conviction of the impossibility of satisfying
the insatiable desires, and infinite lusts of sin: anxiety and sorrow are the
constant attendants of a man that is not studying to crucify his lusts and
affections: and certainly, if we may allude to that word, Jer. 48. 10. Cursed
be he that keeps back his sword from blood, he is cursed, that does not
endeavor to crucify and bring low the seven abominations of his heart, that
we may with Naphtali and Zebulun, jeopard our lives unto death in the high
places of the field, and that there might be none of our lusts to cry forth
within us, the bitterness of death is past; but may endeavor to cut them in
pieces before the Lord. We conceive, this work of Mortification, is the most
pleasant exercise of a Christian, if not in its own nature, yet in its fruits
and effects.

Now before we shall speak any thing unto those things which we proposed to
speak of at the last occasion, we shall speak a little to this, what is the
reason that Christians resolutions and purposes to quite such a predominant
lust, and to forsake such an idol, do oft-times evanish without any fruit? All
these cords of divine resolution by which they bind themselves, are but as tow
and flax before the fire of temptation, they decreeing many things which are
not established: And we confess, this is so incident an evil unto his own,
that sometimes they are resolved in nothing so much as this, to resolve no
more; they in a manner give over the duty of resolution, because they are so
short-coming in the duty of performance: And we conceive, that this is
occasioned either through this, that Christians do not resolve upon the
strength of a Mediator, or if they do resolve upon his strength, they are not
much in the improvement of it for the bringing low of such an iniquity. And we
conceive, this was the ground that Peter's resolutions were brought so much low,
and were blasted; and this is somewhat pointed at* lsa. 40. 30. 31. where it is
said ev^n the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly
fall; the greatest natural abilities which might help men to run and not be
weary, and the most promising evidences from themselves, shall fail and be
blasted; but (as it is in the 31. v.) they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew
their strength, even those who are denied to their own strength. And we
conceive, that there are these two great mysteries of Christianity, first, to
resolve so as being convinced of this, that we are not able, as of our selves,
to think one good thought: And, secondly, which is a little more mysterious, to
believe that Christ's strength laid hold on by faith, is as effectual for the
crucifying such a lust, as if it were our own proper strength and excellency:
certainly, one that has once swallowed this camel of Christianity, needs not
strain at the lower gants of it: we would only say this by the way, study to
flee comparative resolutions, for ordinarily these are much blasted, as was
clear in Peter though all shall forsake thee, yet I will not: study to be
positive in your resolutions, but beware of comparisons.

This is likewayes occasioned through this, that ordinarily they determine the
mortifying of such a lust rather with their light than with their affections;
as it is sometimes the exercise of a Christian, when he goes to prayer for the
mortifying of such a lust, his light prays more than his affections; and
sometimes it falls out, that when light and judgment is praying for the
mortifying of such an Idol, affection, as it were, enters a protestation
against the granting of such a desire, and in a manner says, Lord mortify not
such a lust. This we conceive was the case and practice of those who are made
mention of, Ezekiel. 14. 4, 5. who came to enquire of the Lord, having their Idols
in their heart: we may put our idols from our mind, but have our idols in our
heart, when we come to seek the mortification of them; and we would only say
this unto you, when ye begin to resolve, study to have your souls under a
divine impression of the sinfulness of such a lust, as likewayes under the
infinite disadvantage of following such a lust: we conceive, that the ordinary
time of a Christians resolution is, when they are blessed with the dew of
heaven, and are admitted to taste of his sweetness; And oft-times Christians
resolutions are rather according to their present frame, than according to that
which probably will be their frame ere long: And this is the occasion that
Christians who are big in their resolutions, are often short and defective in
their performances; or else we conceive it to be occasioned through Christians
being too much given to sloathfulnesse, and that woeful idol of
self-indulgency, they resolve fair, but do not take pains to accomplish their
vows; This is clearly pointed at, not only, Prove. 13. 4. where it is said, The
sluggard desires, but he has nothing but more clearly, Pro. 21. 25. The
desire of the sluggard stays him, and the reason is subjoyned, because his
hands refuse to labor: it is most certain, that except a Christian be
diligent, he can never be a mortifying Christian; Mortification is not attained
with ease, we must travel in pain, and have the pangs of the new birth before
Christ be formed in us.

And there is this lastly, which does occasion it, Christians do not propose to
themselves a sublime and divine end in mortifying of their lusts; and certainly
we conceive, this is the most ordinary and incident case unto his own, we
either propose this end in mortifying of our lusts, that we may have somewhat
whereof to glory, and to make mention of our righteousness, even of ours only;
or else we propose this carnal end, of studying to have a name continually
amongst the living in Jerusalem, lest that inward mystery of iniquity that is
within us be engraven on our foreheads; and I think certainly, that name may
be engraven upon many professors in this age, which Jude gives them, verse 12.
of his Epistle, he calls them twice dead, that is, not only dead in reality,
but that through the deceitfulness of sin, they had even lost any name of
living they likewayes had, so that it was also evanished and gone away. I am
persuaded, that were we known each one to another, as we are known to him, who
has those seven eyes that run too and fro through the earth, no doubt, we
should wonder at the boldness of our hope: and laugh at the strength of our
delusions.

Now that which first we proposed to speak of from the words was this, the
advantage which a Christian has by the mortifying of his lusts, and being
contiunally exercised in this precious warfare; and (as we cleared at the last
occasion) the advantage of a Mortifying Christian was this, ordinarily such a
Christian does live under the impression of his interest in God, he is admitted
to read his name written in the book of life: now this is clear from Rev. 2.
17. where he says, to him that overcomes, who is in the way of overcoming,
will I give a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows saving he that receives it: as likewayes from Rev. 2. 11. he that
overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death: as also from 2 Timothy 4. 8.
where these two are sweetly conjoined and linked together: and it must
certainly be so, that a mortifying Christian is one that lives under the
divine impression of his interest in God, not only because of this, that one
who is not mortifying his lusts, as it were, does darken his hope and obscure
his evidence; every days intermission of mortification, being (as it were) a
score drawn through the extract of our peace with God, so that in process of
time that precious extract of peace becomes illegible unto us. And we shall
say this, that a Christian who can keep the faith of his interest, without the
exercise of Mortification, may suspect the reality of such assurance:
mortification and assurance die and live together, are weak and strong
together: But likewayes it must be so, because of this, that ordinarily God
rewards a mortifying Christian with the intimation of his peace, he takes
them in unto the eternal purposes of his heart, and the secrets of his counsel,
and lets him see his name written in the records of heaven, lest he should
faint in the day of adversity, and so prove his strength to be but small: did
ye never know what such a thing as this meant, that when ye were most serious
in the exercise of Mortification, ye were admitted to behold that precious and
everlasting hope? There is this second advantage that a Christian has by being
continually exercised in this blessed warfare, and it is this, Mortification is
that grace which keeps all the graces of the spirit in action and exercise; it
is that superior wheel, at the motion of which, all the inferior wheels do
move; and if we may so speak, Mortification is this, its all the graces of the
spirit combined in one, and exercising themselves in one divine act; Faith is
exercised by a Mortifying Christian, not only in this, in drawing furniture
from Jesus Christ who is our head, but likewayes, in that it is that defensive
piece of armor, (it being called the shield of Faith) by which we quench the
fiery darts of the Devil: this war will not proceed with much advantage, if
faith be out of the field: So also the grace of hope is exercised by a
Mortifying Christian, for this is its exercise in this blessed warfare, to hold
up the crown of immortal glory in its right hand, with this motto engraven upon
it, he that persevereth to the end shall be saved, and obtain this crown of
life, which is the great encouragment of a Christian in this exercise:
Likewayes, the grace of watchfulness is exercised in this blessed warfare: for
watchfulness (if so we may speak) is the sentinel of the Christian, that
stands upon the watchtower, and gives warning unto a Christian of the
motions of his adversary; watchfulness warns us when first corruption begins
to stir: So the grace of love is much exercised in this blessed warfare; for
a Christian where he beholds that divine and unsearchable compassion of Jesus
Christ which he exercises toward it, in upholding it under its straits, that
when the archers shoot at him, and do grievously wound him, that yet his bow
should abide in its strength, this makes the grace of love to burn and live
within a Christian. And lastly, the grace of Prayer is much exercised in this
blessed warfare, for when faith begins to die, and hope begins to loss its
courage, when watchfulness begins to sleep, and love begins to be remiss, and
to wax cold, then prayer as a flying Cherub, does go to the Captain of our
salvation, and desires that he might help them in the day of their need:
prayer is the sweet correspondent of the Christian betwixt heaven and earth;
prayer stays upon the Mount with Christ, when faith and watchfulness are in
the field with our corruptions and lusts that are in us: and we shall only say
this by the way, I know not whether a Christian be more obliged to Jesus Christ
for justification than for sanctification; but we conceive it is better to
conjoyn those together, than to compare them one with another.

There is this third advantage that a Mortifying Christian has, such a
Christian does most ordinarily meet with most divine solace and intimate
communion and fellowship with God; such a Christian is admitted to taste of the
honey out of the rock, and to be satisfied with the finest of the wheat. Would
ye know the reason why you have not been in heaven these many days? it is
this, ye have not been fighting these many days. Now this this clear from Rev.
2. 17. where that promise is given to the mortifying Christian, that he shall
taste of the hidden manna, which is the sweetness of Jesus Christ: as
likewayes, Romans 8. 13. If ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the
flesh, ye shall live: as also, Romans 7. 24. verse. compared with 25. where
wrestling Paul does receive songs of everlasting praise put in his mouth: would
ye know the person that is admitted to sing one of the songs of Zion, while he
is in a strange land? it is the Mortifying Christian: for when he is in the
pursuit of his enemies, he is then admitted to put out his singer and taste of
the honey, that his eyes may be enlightened. There is a mortification that is
pleaded for by many in these days, whose highest advancement in this precious
grace does not consist in that which it is, in knowing and being convinced of,
and mourning over sin; but this is their Mortification, that one should be dead
to the sense and conviction of sin: we shall pass no other verdict upon such
Antinomian Mortification as this, but only this, it is indeed the Mortification
of godliness, it is a crucifying of repentance and holiness, it is a killing
of the new man within a Christian, as likewayes a quickening of the old man in
its lusts and affections; this Mortification is no other thing but Satan
transformed in an angel of light, and this is a piece of that new Gospel which
is so much preached in these days, which if an angel should bring from heaven,
we ought not to believe it: this is no new light, but old darkness covered
over with the vail of a glistering light. O! study to be much under the
impression of the bitterness of sin, that so ye may taste of the consolations
of the holy Ghost.

There is this fourth advantage that a Christian has by being continually
exercised in this warfare, which is, that such a Christian has distinct and
perfect discoveries, not only of the deceitfulness of his own heart, but also
of the subtility of corruption and sin that does assault him: a mortifying
Christian is a most experienced Christian: this is clear all along, Romans 7.
where wrestling Paul has so distinct discoveries of himself, as he says,
there being a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and
bringing him into subjection. And certainly, there is much precious advantage
that redounds unto the Christian by being convinced of the deceitfulness of his
own heart, and of that mystery of iniquity that is within him, for such a
Christian does attain to the exercise of the grace of humility: for when he
beholds himself as in a glass, he cries forth, Woe is me, I am undone: I
think it is in some sense lawful for Christians to practice much of Peter's
divinity, which he had, Luke 5. 8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; not
that it was well argued by him, but it spoke forth the high apprehensions he
had of the holiness of God, and the low apprehensions he had of himself: as
likewise, such a Christian is much denied to his own strength, and so is
necessitat to go unto one, on whom his strength is laid, as likewise such a
Christian is much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulness; he is not
ignorant of the devices of Satan, which make him to stand continually upon his
guard, lest he be overtaken with the snare of the devil.

There is this fifth advantage that a Christian has by being much in the
exercise of mortification, he does attain to much divine conformity with God,
and is made a partaker of the divine nature, of that invisible Majesty: this is
clear from, Rev. 3. 5. where that promise, I will cloth him in white, is in a
part accomplished to a Christian, even while he is in this valley of tears. And
certainly, this is the compend and sweet epitome of all Christian advantages,
to be made like unto the Majesty of God; and it is not a conformity unto him
for a day but such a mortifying Christian, is most constant in keeping the
divine lineaments, and spiritual characters of that precious image undefaced in
him; as it is promised, Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes, I will make a pillar
in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: And certainly that
promise of stability, is in a part accomplished to a Christian, even while he
is here below: what could a Christian desire more then this, to be admitted to
partake of the image of the invisible God, and to be made like unto him?

There is this last advantage that a Christian has, by being continually
exercised in this precious work of mortification, such an one has his
antipathy and hatred against sin much increased: would you know the Christian
that lives under the impression of the sinfulness of sin? it is the
mortifying Christian. I think that vain distinction which Papists have, of
mortal and venial sins, Christians in their practice do much allow and commend;
there are some sins seems venial to them, which to commit and exercise, they
take a latitude to themselves, as may be clear in this, a Christian will
without much difficulty, if he be not tender, commit such things as are not
consistent with the exercise of grace within him; he needs no other toleration
but this, to have this made out to him that there is a consistency betwixt such
a lust, and the living and spiritual nature of grace within him: but, no doubt,
if we argued right, we should be provoked to desist from sin, even from the
disadvantages that attend the pursuing after any lust.

Now that which we shall speak to next, shall be this, what disadvantages a
Christian has by an interruption of this spiritual warfare, and not being much
taken up in the exercise of Mortification. If this question were proposed to
many, when they did last set some hours apart to mortify their sins? the most
part should be put to a nonplus, not knowing the last time when they were
exercised in this precious warfare. And I would only say this, a Christian that
can interrupt the work of Mortification for some weeks together, may either
suspect that grace is groaning within him, with the groanings of a deadly
wounded man; or else that he is not at all begotten unto a lively hope, there
is no forloffe nor discharge in this warfare, but we must fight till once the
one foot be within that place of everlasting delight.

There is this second disadvantage that attends a Christian who interrupteth
this warfare, ordinarily such a one does contract much hardness and
impenitency of heart; this was clear in the practice of David, who when once he
intermitted this war, could write a letter to the killing of godly Uriah, and
no mention of smiting of heart: This is certainly a constant attendant of one
who is not mortifying himself, he makes his heart die as a stone within him:
the mortifying Christian keeps this holy Zeal within him, he hates the
garments spotted with the flesh: would ye read the original and rise of
hardness of heart in these days amongst us? It is this, Christians are not
much in the exercise of Mortification; And I believe the Gospel has been
preached nigh six thousand years, and it is much to be debated, if ever
misbelief, and hardness of heart were so universal diseases among Christians
as in these days: we think to win to heaven by gueste, which makes us so
little intend this blessed work.

There is this third disadvantage, that a Christian meets with, by the
intermission of this warfare, and it is this, that ordinarily such a Christian
has his lusts most reigning and living within him: Sin will gather more
strength, by the interruption of one days exercise of Mortification, than ye
can prevail over, by wrestling with it many days: This is that subtle
dexterity of sin, it can recruit it self in few hours with much ease; and
certainly, if ye be not constant in this warfare, it is like ye will not sing
many songs of triumph over your lusts: he must be constant in this fight, who
would be a triumpher in the fight: how long is it since ye set up an Eben-ezer
to God, saying, hitherto to has be helped me? and when did ye set up trophies
and monuments of your victory? We think the Christians of this age, leave
sewest and least trophies of their victory in the way to heaven, as ever any
that went before them.

There is this fourth disadvantage which a Christian has, by the intermission
of this warfare, and it is this, that ordinarily such a Christian lives
without sight of return, and overcoming at the last: A Christian who
interrupteth this exercise of mortification, fights as we speak, with a
doubtful war, not having determined whether the fight shall be in his favor or
not; there is somewhat of this pointed out in the 1 Timothy 4. 8. where Paul
fighting in an agony, as the word imports, persuades himself that he shall
have that crown of righteousness, which is the suitable reward of a conquering
Christian: and believe me, I know not what shall afford a Christian, more
Christian peace and consolation than this, to believe, that be shall put all
enemies under his feet, and make them his footstool.

There is this fifth disadvantage, that a Christian interrupting the exercise
of mortification has, and it is this, that ordinarily such a one, when he is
passing through the first and second gates of death, and when he is to render up
an account of his stewardship, has least persuasion of his interest in God.
Would ye know the reason, why Christians die with so little faith of evidence?
it is this, they have not been much in the exercise of Mortification;
certainly, the conviction of short-coming in this duty, and the apprehension of
eternity and of approaching judgment, are two sweet companions together: I
think, next to Justification and Faith in Jesus Christ, which is the hinge of
all our consolation, a Christian has most peace in the work of Mortification,
in the day when he shall be standing upon that utmost line betwixt time and
eternity. O! what consolation had old Paul, when he spoke these words, when he
was ready to be dissolved, I have fought the good fight of faith; I doubt much,
if ever Paul sang a song of praise upon a higher key, than when he sung that
song, 2 Timothy 4. 8. I have fought the good fight of faith: Paul's heart was half
transported, when he did reflect upon this, that all his lusts were dying and
killed at his feet,

And there is this last disadvantage that attends a Christian, who interrupts
this warfare, that ordinarily such a one is much blasted of God, in the
exercise of other graces; yea more, he is blasted in the exercise of gifts;
these two losses will attend a Christian who interrupts this warfare: and
certainly, if a Christian be blasted in grace, and be not blasted in gifts, it
is one of the sorest strokes that can befall him; for ordinarily, it is a
pillow sewed under out arm-holls, which makes us pursue sin without fear: this
is secretly hinted at, Eccles. 2. 9. where that which made Solomon rove after
his Idols, was this, Also my wisdom remained with me: he was as wise a man now,
as he was before. And certainly, when gifts are vigorous, and graces not, they
may sit down and lament over themselves seven nights and seven days.

Now we shall shut up our discourse at this time: we shall only speak a little
to this, what may be spoken for consolation to those who are somewhat serious
in accomplishing this warfare, and yet have not sensible advantage, nor
success over their lusts, who have been toiling all night, and yet have
catched nothing; And we conceive, that God does ordinarily propose to a tender
Christian these three divine ends, by carving out to them such a lot, first
that he may be kept in a constant correspondence with the Throne of grace; he,
in a manner, wounds us in our leg, that we may not wander much abroad from his
Throne: and certainly, Christians may be convinced of this, that if they had
their will in Mortifying, they would not be much in corresponding; which may be
demonstrat unto you thus, because that which provokes one to converse with
God, is rather a principle of necessity, than a principle of love: a Christian
will go six times to prayer, yea many times, from a principle of necessity,
before he go twice from a principle of love and delight. Secondly, That the
Christians faith may be put to trials and exercised, whether or not we will
believe and rest upon him, notwithstanding that we see not Mortification
growing within us: we confess, our little advancement in Mortification, is the
foundation of misbelief: and certainly, to his own, God has this design, even
the trial of their grace, whether or not they will believe and hope against
hope. Thirdly, The Lord does it, because he knows that a Christian can better
improve his little advancement in Mortification, than he can improve his great
success; believe me it is certain, that in a Christians advancement in grace,
it is more difficulty to bear it, than to bear his little advancement and
progress in grace; and the great reason and occasion of it is, because
ordinarily pride and arrogance do blossom and spring off this precious root of
grace; for what does decrease to a Christian of the lust of the eye, and of the
flesh, seems to accrease to the pride of life; for as the one seems to go
down, the other does ascend and go up. And to you who never knew what this
exercise of Prayer and Mortification meant, (are there not many here who never
knew what it was to have any change in their life?) We would only propose this
unto you, did ye never know what it was to be under the impression of the
sinfulness of sin? or, did you ever know what it was to water your coutch with
tears, under the impression of it? like that word, Psalm. 32. 3. where David
says, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day
long. That word roaring speaks forth not only this, that sometimes a Christian
does rather mourn as a beast, than complain as a man, ( roaring being the voice
of a beast) but likewayes speaks forth this, that sometimes Christians are
under such an exercise, that the open field is a more fit place for them, then
the secret retirements of their most quiet chambers. David was forced to roar
as a beast, when the bones which are the pillars of his house, were waxing old
and mouldering within him: certainly the day is coming, when ye who never knew
what it was to crucify a lust, Christ shall crucify you upon that cross of
everlasting pain, when he shall tread you in the win-presse of the indignation
of the most High, when he shall make the arrows of his indignation sharp upon
you; ye who will not quite sin, sin shall once be your eternal companion: and
when Christ has been inviting you so often to quite such lusts, and ye return
so often an negative answer to him, this will be the sentence, which shall
(...) past upon you, Be it unto you, even as you will, they are joined to
Idols, let them alone; and certainly, when Christ cease to be a reprover,
that man is in a sad and desperate estate. O! that ye might once fight this good
fight of faith: your scent does remain with many of you; are there not many
here who never knew what it was to spend an hour in secret wrestling and
debating with their lusts? The strong man keeps the house, and so all is at
peace with them, there is no going out, nor coming in at the gates of their
city, but peace is as it were, exactors of that house, and those bear sway
within it. O! cursed be that peace which shall end in everlasting war with
God. Would ye know the exercise and case of those who are in everlasting
chains? We can represent it under nothing so fit as this, it is infinite justice
and infinite omnipotency, wresting and crushing finit and sinful man; sometimes
the pestil of divine wrath coming down upon one part of his body, and at
another time upon another; they are now living an endless life of death, and
are spending their days in a dying life, they shall be eternally dying, and
yet never able to die. Are there not some of you, who are so joined to your
Idols, that if Dives shonld come from hell and preach this text to you,
Crucify your lusts, ye would stop your ears at that precious exhortation. Ye
may hide sin under your tongue, but be preswaded, that at last it shall be in
your belly as the poison of Asps, and as the venom of Dragons. And we would
leave this advice and counsel upon Christians, who have begun this precious
warfare, stand fast to the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be
not entangled again into that yoke of bondage. Sin is a yoke that neither we
nor our fathers were able to bear; and we desire you to meditate upon this
advice, Study to be as much in mortification, and in the exercise of this duty,
as if ye were to obtain salvation by works; but withal, study to be as much
denied unto those things, and to have as low an esteem of your selves, as if ye
were bound to do nothing, or had done nothing at all: study to work as one that
is a legalist indeed, and one who desires to maintain good works, but study
selfdenial, as one that has fied for refuge unto that blessed hope that is set
before you. Christ is standing at the end of the walk of a Mortifying
Christian, with a crown in his right hand, and he desires us to persevere unto
the end; that we may obtain that immortal crown: one day with precious Christ,
shall be an infinite recompense of all our toil; and the more exercise of
mortification you are put to, heaven will be more sweet and delightsome unto
you.

SERMON IV.
Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
SUch is that universal stupidity and hardness of heart that has overtaken
the professors of this generation, that if Christ should come from heaven and
read over unto us the complete roll of our iniquities, and show unto us these
records, in which all our wanderings are written, the most part of us would not
be much affected, not much in the exercise of sorrow. No doubt, it is easier
for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for stupid Christians,
such as we are, to enter into the Kingdom of God. It is one of the mysteries of
his overcoming grace, that he has not broken these two precious staffes of
beauty and bands amongst us, that he has not broken the covenant of his peace,
and ceased to entertain so near a relation betwixt himself and us. As
likewayes, it is a mystery of his love, that we are not made eternal monuments
of the justice of God, and this Motto engraven upon us, behold these that made
not God their refuge: God is glorious in the exercise of all his holy
attributes, but in none more, than in the exercise of his patience and
long-suffering toward us; and in a manner he darkeneth the glory of his
justice, and casts a vail over his spotless holiness, that the exercise of
the attribute of patience and long-suffering, may be rendered more conspicuous.
I only pose you with this question, is not mortification a mystery unto your
practice? Can such a delusion as this overtake you, that ye shall reign with
Christ, though your lusts reign with you as long as ye are here? It is certain
ye know, that mortification is that precious exercise in which ye ought to be
taken up: and I conceive, that there is only this difference betwixt sinning
against Light, and that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, that the
sinning against Light, is a sinning against the common work of the spirit upon
your understanding, but the sin against the Holy Ghost, is a sin against the
common work of the spirit upon the affections: and no doubt, there is a near
bordering betwixt these two, it is the first step to it, by which ye go up and
ascend unto the acting of this sin. It is a faithful saying (says the Apostle
Paul) that if we die with Christ, we shall also reign with him; and we may
likewayes say, It is a faithful saying, that if we be not with Christ, and be
not conformed unto him in his suffering, we cannot be conformed unto him, in
the power of his resurrection: ye are all willing to take Christ as a Iustifier
and as a Savior, but unwilling to take him as a Sanctifier and as a Prince:
but know this, that the gifts of this spotless Lamb, are so sweetly linked
together, that they were like his own coat that was upon his body, which was
without seam that could not be divided: and so except the whole gifts of Jesus
Christ fall unto us by divine lot, we can have no part nor portion therein:
This Mortification is the compend of Christianity; and certainly, a Christian
reading these words, he may stand amazed and be ashamed at his own stupidity,
that interest in Christ should be connected with such a degree of
Mortification, though we conceive, there be many who take to themselves the
name of Christians, that never knew what it was to exercise themselves in
Mortification.

I shall only (before I speak to that which mainly we intend to speak to) press
this grace of Mortification upon you by these things. First, This may enforce
this duty of Mortification of lusts, because it is impossible for one to
satisfy their lusts, let them accomplish never so diligent a search to find
satisfaction to them; therefore ye would be undeceived and convinced of that
delusion, ye conceive that if your lusts had their desire, they would be
satisfied, but that is most clearly held forth to be false, Psalm. 78. 29, 30.
where it is said of their lusts, they got their hearts desire, and the word
that is subjoyned, yet were they not estranged from their lusts. Let a covetous
man suppose this with himself, that upon the having of so many thousands in the
world, his lust of covetousness would be satisfied, but Job does refute this,
chap. 20. 22. saying, in the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in
straits: It is easier to mortify your lusts, then to satisfy them. And this
secondly we would say, that though ye hide sin under your tongue, and though it
be sweet unto you yet know, that the day is approaching when it shall be in
your bowels, as the gall of Alps, and as the poison of Dragons: know this for
a certainty, that the momentany pleasures of sin which they afford unto you are
not worthy to be compared with that eternal weight of unsupportable misery that
shall be inflicted upon you. O! but it is a terrible sight to behold a living
God entering eternally in the lists with a poor sinful sinner, to have
omnipotency and justice fighting against the dust of his feet. There is this
lastly which we would say, not exercising your selves constantly in this
precious work of Mortification, does interrupt much precious fellowship, that
you might have with Christ; ye that are tasting of the sweetness of sin,
cannot taste of the sweetness of heaven: this is clear, Romans 8. 13. where
mortifiers have that promise, that they shall live. And I shall only say this
by the way, we conceive it to be a question that is difficult to determine,
whether it be more for the advantage of one that is under any predominant lust,
to have the objects upon which it seeds withdrawn, or to have them furnished,
to feed upon: as for instance, if one be under the woeful predominant of pride,
it is a question whether the want of occasion to exercise and feed that lust,
be better, or to have it; proud Achitophel, when he wanted the objects upon
which pride does feed, he will go and strangle himself; and when we have them
furnished unto us, what secret Idolatry, what desperate Atheism do we commit in
the secret temples of our heart, and in the chambers of our Imagry? Mortify
more, or ye shall pray less.

Now that which we intend mainly to speak to, is that second thing which we
poposed concerning Mortification, from these words, and it was the extent of
Mortification, that they did not only crucify their predominant lusts, which
are here called affections, because they are Idols, and these are linked
together by that passion of love; but likewayes they ought to mortify the
first motions and stirrings of corruption, and all occasions to it, which are
here called lusts: but moreover, one that is a spiritual mortifier, must
mortify original sin, which is here called the flesh, as oft-times it has
that name in Scripture, an exercise which is unknown to many, if not unto all:
we think original sin but a Zoar, and it is hard indeed, to be convinced of the
sinfulness of original sin, and to take it up in its native colors. Now in
speaking upon the work of Mortification of original sin, we shall not insist
long upon this, that it is the duty of a Christian to be exercised in the
crucifying of this sin, it is clear from, Coll. 3. 5. where we are commanded to
mortify our members; and it is clear from the practice of Paul, Romans 7. 24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? there is
a strong Emphasis in the word me, as if Paul would have said, if infinite grace
can have bounds, then, no doubt, sinful Paul is the bounds fixed to it.

We shall for more clear speaking to this, first, speak a little unto this,
what is original sin; and we conceive, that it stands in these, original sin is
the imputation of that transgression of Adam unto us; for he being a common and
representative person, we fell in his falling, and did stand in his standing,
but likewayes original sin does comprehend this, want of original
righteousness, man not being created after that noble pattern and divine Idea,
the Image of God; man now carries but the image of God in his wisdom and in
his omnipotency, but while he was in his primitive estate, he did carry an
impression of the holiness of God: as likewayes original sin does comprehend
this, a proneness to the committing of all evil, as also an ineptitude and
unfitness for the doing of any good, and this is that which we are all by
nature. The first part of original sin is clear from Romans 5. 12. and 14.
verses. And the rest may be gathered from many places of Scripture, but is
comprehended in that one word, Ephesians. 2. 1. We were dead in sins and trespasses:
one can no more move in the acting of any spiritual good, than if he were one
altogether without life

We shall secondly speak a little to those advantages that a Christian may
have, by being convinced of original sin: I^ is most certain, that a Christian
is less convinced of original corruption, than he is of any actual
transgression almost that does befall him; and (as we were speaking) the reason
of it does proceed partly from this, that a Christian takes not up the
sinfulness of original sin, though it be a sin having more in it, than is in
twenty, yea an hundred actual transgressions: or else it proceeds from this,
that Christians are not convinced what influence original sin has upon all the
outward actings of iniquity; it is that fruitful womb that does always bear
twins, and is never barren; it is that root that does daily bring forth
wormwood and gall: or else it does proceed from this, that we think that
original sin is not our own, and that we are not so guilty, as if indeed we had
eaten this cursed Apple.

But as to the advantages of being convinced of original corruption, we
conceive that there is this first advantage, That it is impossible for any to
have high thoughts of Jesus Christ's love, and of the offer of mercy, except he
be convinced of original sin: Would ye know the reason why Christ has so small
an esteem among you? it is because of this, ye are not convinced of your
original corruption: this is somewhat pointed at, Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. verses,
where the Apostle heighteneth the love of Christ in dying for us, he pitches
upon this to commend it, our original corruption, that we were sinners and
without strength. O! what a mystery is the condescending grace of Christ unto a
sinner believing original corruption; it is as it were, the foundation upon
which all our esteem does arise and spring: there is somewhat of this likewayes
pointed at, Romans 7. 24 compared with verse. 25. where Paul beginning to commend
free grace, his song does arise to the highest key, because he has been
convinced of this body of death that dwells within him. I would only say
this, if you would learn this divine lesson of putting a high account upon
Christ, study original corruption much.

There is this second advantage that a Christian has from the conviction of
it, and it is this, it does exceedingly commend the omnipotency of his grace in
mortifying corruption, when ye are convinced of this sin: when was it that Paul
had the highest account of the omnipotency of the grace of Christ? was it not
when he was forced to cry forth, O! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? And this is certainly pointed at, Ephesians. 2. 1. where
the quickening virtue of grace, is commended from this, the object upon which
it is exercised, ye that were dead in in sins and trespasses.

There is this third advantage, that flows from conviction of original sin,
and it is this. It is a compendious way to keep the Christian under the
exercise of humility, under the highest seize of Mortification, or under
the highest seize of communion and fellowship with God. Would ye know the
reason why we are so easily puffed up under some small success, or some small
familiarity with Christ? It is want of reflect thoughts upon original
corruption that is within us: Therefore I would prescribe this to Christians
under their highest advancement by grace, to sit down and seriously reflect
upon that which they are by nature, that their father is an Amorite, and their
Mother an Hittite, and the rock from whence they are hewn, may preach humility
to them; this is clear, Romans 7. 24. where Paul under the conviction of original
sin, calls himself a wretched man, and is clear also from the 9. verse. of
that Chapter, where when once original sin is discovered, he died in his own
apprehensions: if we were in the apprehension of this more, the wind of the
wilderness would not bind us up in her wings, till our substance were
dissolved.

There is a fourth advantage a Christian has from the conviction of original
corruption, and it is this, it keeps the Christian under the deepest
impression of the sinfulness of sin. I confess, that is one of the greatest
mysteries of Christianity, to have our soul constantly under the impression of
the sinfulness of sin, which we conceive, is impossible to be attained without
solid conviction of original corruption: this is somewhat hinted at, Romans 7.
13. when Paul once by the Commandment, having original sin discovered, sin
became unto him exceeding sinful: and the reason why original sin discovered,
has such influence upon this, is because ordinarily we conceive, that the
actings of sin do not proceed from our selves, but from that deceiver of the
brethren, which James does abundantly refute, for when a man is tempted, he is
entised by his lusts.

There is this fifth advantage that a Christian has by being convinced of
original sin; It is an excellent way to keep the Christian under a most
watchful and fearing frame: such language would not been heard out of a Hazaels
mouth, Am I a dog to commit this if he had been convinced of original sin; but
because he was a stranger to this, his presumption led him above that which was
indeed within him: therefore, when one is convinced of their proneness to act
iniquity, of their want of that conformity with God, they remember to stand
upon their watchtower lest they be ensnared: this is most clearly pointed at,
I Cor. 9. last, where Paul is put to this exercise, I bear down my body, and
bring it into subjection; and the reason is subjoyned, because he was possessed
with a holy jealousy of himself, and entertained a divine suspicion, which was
consistent with the acting of hope. I know nothing to make a Christian watch
over his own heart so much as this: to see that spawn of iniquity which is
within him, to behold that fruitful mother of iniquity which never was declared
barren, and never shall be, till sin shall be no more within his own.

There is this fixth advantage a Christian has, by being convinced of original
corruption; It is that which will keep the soul under the highest estimation of
Christ, and will make the grace of love to burn most vigorously within a
Christian: O! but when one shall reflect upon these two, the spotless
holiness of Christ, that absolute purity of that precious Lamb, and shall
again descend to reflect upon these mysteries of iniquitiy which are within
himself, it is no wonder that sometimes he be put to use Peter's divinity, to
cry forth, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man; but when he improveth the
sight most fully, his case is, to have his soul transported, and as it were, in
a holy ecstasy of love, toward that precious and matchless One.

And there is this last advantage that a a Christian has by being convinced of
original sin, It is that which puts a Christian to a holy diffidence in his
own strength, and makes him to be much in the employment of the strength of
him whose name is Jehovah. What is the reason that Christians commit a breach
of that first Command, so much trusting to their own strength, and not making
mention of his righteousness, and laying hold upon his strength, even upon his
only? It is this, because we do not dwell under the constant impression of
original corruption. We conceive it is as great a mystery to men's judgment, as
it is a mystery to their practice, to mortify it. What made Paul so much to
cry forth, Romans 7. 18. to disclaim his own ability, and ver. 23. was it not the
conviction of original sin which was within him?

Now that which we shall secondly speak unto, shall be this, to press a little
upon you the necessity of the mortification of original sin: and we conceive
these things point out its necessity; first this, That all mortification is in
vain, and as the beating of the air, until once original corruption be
mortified: What is all your mortification without this? it is, as it were, the
lopping off of the branches, while the root does remain entire, it is a damning
up of the streams, while the fountain is still running; and no doubt, that
mortification will easily grow vain: you must once mortify this which is the
mother of sin. And we would only say this by the way, that under correction, we
conceive, that original sin is not, nor cannot well be mortified in the body,
but only is to be mortified in the members, that is, we must study to mortify
such a part of original sin, to mortify some living lusts, which are within
us, and to be groaning under the rest; for we conceive, it is hard to take up
the whole body of original sin, and to make that the subject of mortification,
or to lament over it.

There is this secondly, which speaks forth the necessity of Mortification of
original sin, it is that which is an undeniable evidence of a Christian, to be
taken up in the mortifying of this sin; for we conceive it to be impossible for
a hypocrite to attain to such a length, as to study the real mortification of
original corruption: It was the practice of these two holy men, the Apostle
Paul, Romans 7. 24. and of David, Psalm. 51. 5. where they sit down to lament over
the iniquity which was within them. And the reason why the mortification of
original sin, is an undeniable character and evidence of a Christian is, not
only from this, that one that sets about the mortification of original sin,
is a Christian that has most distinct discoveries of himself, as likewayes
some discoveries of the holiness and spotlesnesse of God. It is hard to be
convinced of original sin by the light of nature, if at all, for to us it is a
question, if he can be, which the Apostle seems to intimate, Romans 7. 7.
Saying, I had not known lust, except the Lord had said, Thou shall not covet.

There is this, thirdly, which speaks forth the necessity of the mortification
of original corruption, that all the duties that proceed from a Christian, are
exceeding defiled and polluted, except he endeavor the mortification of this
sin: for this was a paradox to the Apostle James, chap. 3. 11. That a fountain
at one place shall send forth bitter water and sweet: and till the fountain of
corruption be removed, it is probably to be conceived, that all the actings of
duty by us shall be exceedingly polluted. O! but when original sin lies without
the stroke of a Christians mortification, his duties will not ascend with
acceptance upon his Altar.

And there is this fourthly which pleads the necessity of the Mortification of
original sin, that it is that sin which does exceedingly war against the grace
of God in a Christian: would you know why grace is in such a languishing
estate? it is because of the power of original sin. We conceive this, that the
opposition of original sin to the advancement of grace, is more invisible, and
the opposition of actual corruption unto the actings of grace, is more visible
and obvious; but certainly that which does entangle a Christian in his walk,
and makes him not to ascend as pillars of smoke from this present wilderness,
is that original sin; this is clear from Romans 7. 23. and, Gal. 5. 17. Where the
spirit warreth against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and these
two are contrary one to another.

Now that which thirdly, we shall speak upon the mortification of original sin,
shall be this, what is the way how a Christian may be convinced and brought
unto the spiritual impression of original sin? And certainly we conceive, that
if a Christian shall exercise himself in these three, he may attain to some
spiritual convictions of this sin. First, let him be much in the exercise of
self-examination, and when he shall reflect upon himself, he will behold the
invisible motions of iniquity unto every sin that has been named among the
Gentiles: who is so great a stranger unto his own heart, but if he will reflect
upon it, may sometimes see the stirrings of unknown (almost) corruptions? which
speaks that aloud to the Christian, that there is a fountain and spring
within him, that would send forth such bitter waters, except they were
graciously restrained.

There is this secondly, by which a Christian may be brought to the conviction
of original sin, and it is, to be much in the exercise of the study of the
spirituality of the law, which was the way that Paul attained to the conviction
of original sin, Romans 7. It is that compendious cut, by which one may behold
that holiness of God who imposes a command not only to desist from the
actings of sin, but to desist also from the first motions and lusts of sin.

There is this lastly, a Christian would be much in the exercise of prayer, for
that spirit who convinces the world of sin, that what you do not know as of
your selves, he who is the great convincer of the world, may imprint those
convictions upon your souls, which may make you sit down and bewail your
selves, in the bitterness of your spirit. And we shall at this time shut up
our discourse; only we would say to these who are entertaining this holy
warfare against their corruptions, that they would not be much discouraged,
though they see not sensible victory: you must know that sin must be with you
while you have a being: we may certainly allude unto that word, Dan. 7. 12. and
may say, that the dominion of your sins shall be taken a way, though their
lives shall be prolonged for a time and for a season. As likewayes we would say
this for your encouragment, who have your corruptions stirring most within you,
that ordinarily Satan when he is in the way to remove, then stirs and
acts most; as it is observed, that the last beating of the pulse in a dying
man is most strong, so the beating of corruption, when it is going to be cast
out, may be most violent. And we shall only give the reason, why Christians are
not much affected with this, that the day is coming when once they shall
prevail over their corruptions, and shall tread Satan under their feet; why
the feet of those who bring such glad tyding are not beautiful upon the
mountains? And we conceive that it does either proceed from this, that
Christians are not seriously engaged in this holy warfare, for that is most
certain, that if you were fighting day by day, then the hope of victory, and of
a blessed issue would be as glad tyding; from a far country, and should be as
cold water unto a thirsty soul, that though your hope were deferred until your
hearts were sick, yet the accomplishment of your desires should be sweet to
your souls: or else it does proceed from this, that Christians do not believe
this truth, that there is an issue and period of their fight; if once you could
be brought this length to seal this truth, that that victory shall be once
heard in heaven, Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, for her warfare is
accomplished, if we may allude unto these words; or if a Christian be seriously
debating with his lusts, and has also the faith of this truth in some measure,
then it does proceed lastly from this, want of the distinct persuasions of our
interest, and want of the assurance of our peace with him; for as long as a
Christian is under debate concerning his eternal rest, he cannot be much
affected with joy, under the declaration of these means, that there is a period
of their fight, and that they who have been made partakers of the first
resurrection, over them the second death shall have no power. O! what a blessed
day suppose ye shall that be, when your feet shall stand within the gate of the
new Jerusalem, when you shall receive these two precious badges and eternal
trophies of your victory, a crown put upon your head, of infinite more value
than all material crowns, and a palm put in your hand. We conceive, it is
impossible to determine, what joy will accrue to a Christian upon the reflect
thoughts of this, that he has trod Satan under his feet, and has bruised
the head of him, who has so often bruised his heel: And as for those who are
strangers (as the most part of us are) unto this spiritual warfare, be
convinced of this, that within threescore and fewer years, God shall enter into
an eternal warfare with you, where there shall be no cessation of arms,
neither shall there be any interruption. It is better to fight with your lusts,
than to fight with a living and eternal God, when he shall declare himself to
be your opposite and enemy. Man once was made perfect, but he did find out many
inventions, and amongst all those inventions he found that accursed one, how
there might be a separation betwixt him and the living God; and except He whose
name is Prudence, and has found out the knowledge of many witty inventions,
had found out that precious invention of reconciling sinners unto God, we
should have been Magor Missabib, terrors to our selves. O! that you might be
persuaded once to contend with your lusts, that ye may endure the heat of the
day, and the cold of the night, in wrestling against sin; know this, that sin
goes not out, but by fasting and prayer; it is so straightly united unto us, it
is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for many of us
to mortify our corruptions. We shall shut up all that we would say in this one
word, be persuaded of this, that the day is approaching and near at hand, when
our blessed Lord Jesus shall come with ten thousands of his Saints: what if
this were the day (O unmortified sinners!) that ye should behold that white
Throne Fixed in the clouds, and ye should have a summons given into your hands
without continuation of days, to appear before his Tribunal? What could ye
answer when ye are reproved? Would not silence and confession be your best
desence? Certainly there is an eternal curse to be pronunced against those who
do not exercise themselves unto this precious act of Godliness, of crucifying
the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof. There is a law of death over
your head, and there is a law of sin, which is within your hearts, and ye shall
be eternally subjects unto these two Laws, except the Law of the spirit of life
do make you free.

SERMON V.
Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
THe walk of a Christian, who has Christ in him the hope of glory, is most
sublime, and it being from spiritual principles, for spiritual ends, is also
according to a spiritual rule. The walk of a Christian is from faith and love
in Jesus Christ, as that predominant principle; nay more, from the spirit of
Christ, living in the soul of a Christian by faith, and dwelling in it by love,
which is that primum mobile, and first wheel of all its motions; as likewise,
it is for a spiritual end, it being for the glory of God, and to subordinate
unto this, their own salvation and advantage: they are not like Ephraim, empty
vines bringing forth fruit unto themselves, but it is their design to make
Christ all, and themselves nothing, though it be natural unto a man to deifie
himself, and to make himself the first Alpha of his actings, and the last Omega
of all his performances: as likewise, it is according to a spiritual rule, it
being conformed unto that precious word of life, which is perfect in it self,
and leads man unto perfection. But this is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation, that we love to take such a liberty to our selves, and such a
latitude in our way and walk to heaven. There is much fear and complaint
amongst many, for the loss of their civil liberties, and that they are
detained captives in their own land by the hand of straingers, but there is a
captivity and bondage that is less lamented, and yet more intolerable, and
that is, the bondage of sin and iniquity, that though we should expire and
spend seventy years (which is one of the utmost lines of our life) under this
captivity, yet we should not cry forth, Return our captivity, as the rivers of
the south. Are there not many amongst us, who ly with as much contentment under
the bonds of their sin, and fetters of their iniquity, as if they were chains
of Gold, and ornaments of fine gold? Mortification is a mystery unto our
practice: That which was a paradox to Saul, that a man should find his enemy
and yet keep him alive, that paradox is often committed in these days, when we
do not study to crucify the lusts and affections of our hearts. I think,
Christians in these days, when they reflect upon those unmortified corruptions
that are within them, must be constrained to cry forth, that all their hope
does consist in this, that a living dog is better than a dead lion, and that
their confidence is terminate upon this, that yet they are within this side of
eternity. We love singularity in opinion, but hate singularity in practice,
though the one, no doubt, is much more commendable than the other. May we not
wish for two months, wherein we may go unto the mountains and bewail our
virginity, that we have not been espoused unto that precious and excellent one
Jesus Christ, and that we have not been endeavoring to conform our selves unto
his blessed and precious image? We confess this may be a mystery to many every
day, that they are not eternal monuments of the justice and indignation of God,
and that somewhat of Cains divinity does not possess our hearts, that
whosoever shall find us, shall kill us. We would only say this, that ye would
be as much in the exercise of the mortification of your invisible lusts, as ye
are in the exercise of the mortification of your visible lusts and iniquities.

At the last occasion that we spoke upon these words, we told you that the
second thing that was held forth concerning Mortification, was the extent of
it, that a Christian ought to mortify not only original corruption, but also
his predominant lusts, and the first motions and occasions unto sin. Concerning
the mortification of original sin, we have spoken somewhat, and shall insist no
further: only we would say this, that we laid down this as a conclusion, that
original sin could not be mortified in its body, but only was to be mortified
in its members, and the ground of this assertion we conceived to be this,
because it is impossible for a Christian to take up original sin in its body,
as is clear from Ier. 17. 9. where it is said, that the heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? It is above the reach
of any man to fathom and comprehend the deceitfulness of his own heart. It is
a mystery that was never unfolded, and as long as we are within time, cannot be
unfolded. We would only say this, that a Christian who is convinced of original
sin, that there is the spawn and seed of every imaginable corruption within him
will be much in the magnifying of restraining grace, and will sit down, and pen
a song of praise unto the unsearchable grace of Christ; who has redeemed them.
I confess, that which makes Christians have so much to do with pardoning
grace, which was David's practice, 1 Samuel 25. 32. We may call original sin Gad,
for after, it comes forth a Troup, chorus vitiorum, a troup of vices; it is
that fruitful womb that does always bear Twins. And we conceive, that
Christians who are so called, ought to be much in the study of original sin. It
is a wonder, that we walk with such woeful contentment to heaven, and to that
imagined happiness which we suppose to have: can such a delusion as this
overtake you, that you can reap in joy, who never did sew in tears, and that
you can return, bringing sheaves in your bosom, who never went forth bearing
precious seed? we think to climb to heaven by that short ladder of presumption:
I would say it, and wishes that you may consider it, we are afraid that there
shall be many woeful and sad disappointments of many of our hopes, and we shall
be constrained to reject our confidence: we separat those things which God has
conjoined, we either pursue for holiness without justification, or else we
pursue for justification without holiness.

Now in speaking upon the mortification of predominant lusts, which are here
called affections, because the spirit of a Christian, and of any, are most
strongly united unto these, we shall not insist to prove this unto you, that it
is the duty of a Christian, or of any, to mortify their predominant lusts, it
is clear from Matthew: 18. 8* 9. Where we are commended to pluck out our right
eye, if it offend us, the meaning of which is this, that if we had a lust as
dear to us as our right eye, if it hurt and offend us, we should pluck it out;
and from Mark. 9. 45. and 47. and from Coll. 3. 5. where we are commanded to
mortify our inordinat affections. Neither shall we insist much upon that
distinction of predominant lusts, that there are some predominant lusts, which
are more pure and refined, which ordinarily pass under the notion and vail of
virtue, as pride, when it is mixed with prudence in its actings, passes under
the vail of generosity, and highness of spirit and prodigality when it is not
sensual and brutish, passes under the notion of mortification to the world;
and Satan in tempting people to the acting of these predominant lusts, does
not only study to gain the affections, but likewayes studieth to gain our light
and our judgment unto the acting of these things: There are some predominant
lusts which are more gross; the sinfulness of which is more easily discerned,
and Satan in tempting people to the acting of these lusts, studieth mainly to
gain the affection, which in so far gains the judgment, as it sets about to
devise and meditate upon the way, how such predominant lusts may be effectuat
and accomplished. O! but the mind of man will plot subtle iniquity, and the
affection and heart will execute the plottings of the mind, with greatest
carefulness and sedulity.

Now that which first we shall speak upon the work of mortification of
predominant lusts, shall be this, what are these disadvantages that a Christian
has by not studying to mortify and crucify his predominant lusts, but giving
way and concession to them to live.

The first disadvantage we conceive to be this, that a Christian who is not
much in the mortification of his predominant lusts, does hinder much of that
precious fellowship and divine familiarity which should be betwixt God and him;
the giving way to the King of our lusts to live, separats friends, and that
word is true, that a brother offended is harder to be won, than the bars of a
strong castle. Now this is clear from Ezekiel. 14. 5. where it is said, They are
estranged from me by their idols: as likewise, ver. 7. of that chapter, Every
one that separateth himself, whether of Israel or of a stranger, and sets up
idols in his heart. Separation from God, and that woeful idolatry, are two
inseparable companions: as likewise, it is clear from Ezekiel. 44. 10. where these
are conjoined again; and Isa. 59. 2. Your iniquities have separated betwixt you
and me. And I would only say this, that a Christian who can to his
apprehension, find some sweetness and enjoyment of God, without the exercise of
mortification may question much the reality of his enjoyment: And it is
certain, that the entertaining of predominant lusts, does exceedingly interrupt
communion and fellowship with God. not only because of this, that predominant
lusts, when they are in exercise, do exceedingly weaken a Christian in
diligence, and in his zeal and servency in going about these duties, by which
communion with God is attained: Some folks predominant lusts have gotten such
advantage over them, that they will almost cease to pray without conviction, or
if they be convinced, their convictions will suddenly evanish: but also because
of this, that when a predominant lust is in its vigorous exercise, then a
Christian loses much of the impression of the sweetness of communion and
fellowship with Christ. O! but Christ might live long in heaven, ere we give
him a visit; we think we could be happy without him, and that is but an
imaginary delusion of our lying lusts.

There is this second disadvantage that a Christian has by not studying to
crucify his predominant lusts, and it this, that such a Christian does not
receive any return of prayer, and God does deny to him the answer of his
desires. This is clear from Ezekiel. 20. 31. where he says, Do ye pollute your
selves with your Idols, and come and enquire at me? As I live, says the Lord,
I will not be enquired of by you. And this was the divinity of that blind man,
Ioh. 9. 31. God hears not sinners: And it was the divinity of David, Ps. 66.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer: and most
clearly, Is. 59. 2. where their iniquities does cause him deny to hear their
suits. O! but there are many Inhibitions served in heaven against the
Professors of this generation, that they should pray and not be heard, and
should cry and yet not have access: And certainly it is no wonder, that such
prayers as we present unto God, while our predominant lusts are in exercise, be
not heard; we pray to God with such indifferency and formality, as in a manner,
we turn over our prayers unto a complement to salute God with in the morning,
and to take our farewell of him at night; we know not much more use of many of
our prayers, and hence it is that he denies to us the answer of them. I would
only speak this to you, let Christians hearts first speak the words which they
are to speak in prayer, and then let their words speak their heart, that their
heart may endite that which is the matter of their desires.

There is this third disadvantage that a Christian has by entertaining his
predominant lusts, and it is this, it does excedingly interrupt a Christians
motion unto heaven: how far have you gone these many days, or these many
years? the motion of Christians is retrograde in these days, they go backward,
but do not go on from strength to strength. O! that we might give obedience to
that command, which is, Heb. 2. 4. Let us lay aside every weight and sin that
does beset us, and run with patience the race that is set before us; more
Mortification would make more motion toward heaven then we do attain to.

There is this fourth disadvantage that a Christian has by entertaining his
predominant lusts, and it is this, that when predominant lust is not mortified,
then any corruption that is within you, will easily be discovered in the day of
trial; the Lord oft-times takes that revenge upon many, that because they
would not mortify at home, he will write their iniquities in legible letters
upon their foreheads, that those that run may read them: and if Christians
believed this more, that God may be provoked to write your lusts that are not
mortified, in capital letters upon your forehead, it might provoke you more to
be in this exercise: This is clear, Ezekiel. 16. 36. compared with 37. ver. where
their entertaining of their Idols, is threatened with this curse, that he will
discover their nakedness, and make the shame thereof to appear.

There is this fifth disadvantage that a Christian has by it, and it is this;
that in the day, when he shall be passing through the valley of the shadow of
death, and shall be looking long and endless eternity in the face, then a
predominant lust unmortified will be ill company, and will raise a storm within
the conscience, which will not easily be appeased: There are not many of us fit
for eternity, neither do we live as though we were daily to die. If you would
walk with peace through the first and second gates of death, study the
Mortification of your lusts: O! but at the singing of that triumphant song, O
death where is thy sting? and O grave where is thy victory? shall not the soul
be fraughted with divine consolation and unspeakable joy?

There is this last disadvantage that waits upon the Christian, and it is this,
that such a one does exceedingly mar all the performances which he goes
about, and (as it were) leaves a print of his hands upon these most holy and
excellent duties. A Christian who has a predominant lust, and is not studying
to mortify it, his gifts prays more than his grace: as likewayes, he is more
in seeking the approbation of men, than the praise of God: A Christian that
does not study to mortify his lusts, he is more in seeking the ornaments of
Christianity, then the substance of it: I think, the vitals and essentialls of
Christianity are much exhausted and spent; and there are some few bones left,
rather the picture and anatomy of a Christian, than really such a one; As
likewayes there is this, one who does not study to mortify his predominant
lusts, he will not make conscience of obeying the commandment of faith; And
this likewayes waits on him, much hardness and impenitency of heart. O! but
oft-times through the deceitfulness of sin, our heart becomes as a stone
within us, and we are delivered unto the hands of our iniquities.

Now that which secondly, we shall speak to, upon the Mortification of
predominant lusts, shall be this, what is that profound subtilty and desperate
deceitfulness that Satan uses in tempting people to the acting of their
predominant lusts: we have six thousand years experience, that he is a liar,
and a murderer from the beginning, though we believe the flatteries of sin, as
though our iniquities were of good report and of known integrity that never did
deceive: and we conceive, that Satan's subtilty does appear in these, first,
his subtilty does appear in this, that ordinarily when a Christian, or any is
in a most secure and presumptuous frame, then Satan acts and tempts a
Christian to the acting of his predominant lust, when Christ is away, than he
does assail; this is most clearly pointed at, Luke 22. 31. compared with 33.
verse. where christ says to Peter, Satan bath desired to sift thee as wheat;
and if ye will read the 33. verse. ye will behold Peter's frame, that he was in a
high string of presumption, though all men should forsake thee, yet I will not
do it: as likewise it is clear from 2 Samuel 11. 2. where when David was lying
upon his bed, and walking upon the roof of his house, then is he tempted to the
acting of the sin of uncleanness; Satan studieth to catch his advantage,
especially at that time, when we are most prone to embrace, and most unapt to
resist; therefore it should be a Christians endeavor to exercise
watchfulness, and to stand upon his watch tower.

There is this secondly wherein his subtilty does appear, that ordinarily he
does propose the imaginary advantage of embracing of such a lust, and does
affect our affections with the pleasure of it, but does not make mention of the
disadvantage and infinite hurt* that does appear and come from such a lust: this
was clear in his first temptation with our first father, he makes mention of
this. If thou eat of the forbidden fruit, thou shall be as God, but no mention
made of this, that he should be a sinner: and most clearly in Matthew. 4. 8.
where Satan shows unto that holy and spotless one, all the Kingdoms of the
world, with the glory of them, and these things he promised to give Christ, and
showed him the glory of the kingdoms of the world, but did not show to him, the
vexation and toil of these kingdoms; and no doubt, the one is much more then
the other: The hook wherewith he studieth to take us, is varnished over with
the bait of imaginary dignity, with transient pleasures, and with passing
vanities, O! that we were wise as serpents, to know the depths of Satan, that
we might not be ensnared, nor taken by entisments.

There is this thirdly wherein it appears, that ordinarily he studieth either
to extenuate the sinfulness of sin, that a Christian may be brought to call
this but a Zoar; or else he studieth to prove the consistency betwixt such a
sin, and the reality of the grace of God: and when once a Christian is brought
to such a length, as to debate the reality of the grace of Gods consistency,
with the acting of such a lust, they are near a fall, for then they cry forth,
Master, pardon me when I shall bow my knee in the house of Rimmon, and when my
Master leans upon my hand: they then take an indulgence and a latitude to
themselves, to commit that iniquity.

There is this fourthly wherein his subtilty does appear, that oft-times he
will restrain the temptations to the acting of your predominant lusts, and
withdraw the objects of them, that either you may be put off your watch, or,
which is more ordinary, that lusts may take life, when the object of lust is
withdrawn: And that is most certain, that lust oft-times grows most when
there are fewest temptations to assail it; for upon the absence of our Idols,
our love to these things does increase; a lusting Amnon will wax lean every
day, when he wants the object whereupon to feed.

There is this fifthly wherein his subtilty does eminently appear, that
ordinarily he will tempt people to the acting of these sins, that are
introductive, and bring on the acting of their predominant lusts: he will tempt
one that is given to uncleanness, to pride, idleness, fullness of bread: And
certainly one who is given to the evil of pride, he will tempt him to the
smaller actings of these sins, that so he may ascend by degrees: he will study
to seize upon the out-forts of the soul, that so he may gain the affections: he
will break the Covenant that we have made with our eyes, that so we may break
the Covenant that we have made with our heart.

There is this lastly, wherein his subtilty does appear, that ordinarily he
will tempt people to the acting of their predominant lust under the vail of
virtue, and things commendable, as, he will tempt one to Covetousness, upon
this account, that they may be capacitate to be charitable to the poor, and may
be useful to these who want in their generation: he will tempt one to sin, as
is clear, Romans 3. 6. that the grace of Christ may be more conspicuous in
pardoning them: he tempted Christ to presumption under the vail of faith, as is
clear Matthew. 4. 6. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, and the
ground he gives is, For it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, etc. And likewayes he tempts many to the acting of Misbelief,
under the vail of humility, knowledge, and distinct apprehensions of God.

That which thirdly we shall speak to, shall be, to give you some evidences
whether or not ye have attained unto the mortification of your predominant
lusts, and whether indeed you have sung a song of triumph over them, and having
spoken somewhat of this before, we shall not insist much upon it: only we would
say these three things, 1. That a Christian that can reflect upon lusts which
he supposes to be mortified with delight, and want of the exercise of grief,
may suspect the reality of his mortification. O! but one that can meditate upon
his predominant lust which he supposed was mortified, and yet not be
constrained to cover himself with ashes, and to put fackcloth upon his lions,
may cry forth, Miserere mei, have pity upon me.

And there is this second evidence that your predominant lust is not mortified,
when you are not sedulous and careful to. eshew all things that lead unto the
acting of that predominant sin: If ye be not giving obedience unto that
command, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil, you may question
the reality of your Mortification. It is an excellent practice of a Christian,
to be as much under the impression of the sinfulness of predominant lust and
sin, after it is mortified, and to be as much in pursuing it, as when it is in
its vigorous exercise and life with you.

And there is this lastly, which may evidence it, and it is, when one can upon
suitable and convenient occasions of acting such a predominant sin, have their
lust set on fire, and endeavor to act it, they may question the reality of
their Mortification. I know the great bond which restrains many from the
acting of their predominant lust, is not the apprehension of the holiness of
God, but the want of secrecy: O! but if we had secrecy, we would not mourn much
for these sins which we commit in secret, neither would we be much in desisting
from the acting of these things, unto which our lust does lead us* It was
certainly a commendable practice of one, who being tempted unto the sin of
uncleanness, did condescend to satisfy the desire of one that did pursue her,
upon this condition, that he would bring her unto a place where nothing should
behold her; which he attempting to do, and bringing her to the most retired
imaginable place, she then most piously uttered forth these words, does not God
behold us? which words had influence upon him to whom they were spoken, that he
desisted from further prosecuting such woeful and carnal designs. O! but the
apprehension of the omniscience of God, would keep us much to the crucifying of
our most predominant lust.

We shall shut up our discourse at this time, only we shall say a little unto
those who are guilty of that predominant lust of Covetousness, which we
conceive, is not only a predominant lust, but an universal lust: Sin is an
universal King over the most absolute Monarch, and over every one that sits
upon the dunghill. And we conceive that covetousness is one of Sins greatest
Princes, acting under this absolute Monarch, and having manyest subjects. And
we would only propose these things, by which you may be helped to mortify such
a lust and idol. O! meditate much upon the disadvantages attending this idol of
covetousness; we conceive the disadvantages thereof are clearly pointed forth,
1 Timothy, 6. 9. 10, where the Apostle Paul enumerateth four disadvantages of that
sin of covetousness. 1. That it is that which makes people err from the
faith, 2. It drowneth them in destruction and perdition. 3. It is the root of
all evil. And lastly It pierces them through with many sorrows. And for those
whose god is the world, we would only propose this consideration to them, which
we conceive has most influence upon such, be persuaded of this, that
covetousness will abbreviat and shorten your life, as is clear, Iam. 5. 3.
where this is one property of this idol of covetousness, that it shall eat up
your flesh as it were fire. It is not an unsensible cutting short of your life,
but most sensibly it will abbreviat, and bring you in the midst of your days
to your long and everlasting home. And there is this disadvantage of it also,
that covetousness is that sin, which does most directly commit a breach of the
first command, Thou shall have no other gods before me, as is clear Col. 3. 5.
where this sin of covetousness is called Idolatry, and covetousness which is
Idolatry. And certainly, what are those things that you pursue after, but white
and yellow dust and glistering clay? the excellency of which we conceive, does
consist as much (in the estimation of men) in the rarity of these things, as in
any intrinsical and internal worth and excellency: And how contemptible a thing
riches and the world is, does not this speak it, that when there is abundance
of these things, they become contemptible? as is clear from that word, that
Solomon made silver as stones in the streets of Jerusalem; which does not only
speak out this, the abundance of these things in his days, but likewayes it
speaks forth this, that abundance of these things makes them contemptible,
and moves us to undervalue them; And that which Solomon has, Prove. 23. 5. Why
set thou thy heart on that which is not, for riches take to themselves
wings and flee away: e're long the world shall either leave you, or you shall
leave the world.

Now we shall desire to shut up our discourse with this, that ye would
seriously intend the mortification of your lusts, and that ye would be much in
the employment of the spirit of Christ: Christ has killed the damning power of
sin, and has promised to us the Spirit of Mortification, by which we may kill
the dominion of sin: And certainly, a Christian ought to act so in dependence
upon the Spirit of Christ, as if they were mere patients and instruments under
his hand: but with all we conceive, that in respect of activity and endeavors,
a Christian ought to act so, as if he acted independently from him, and did act
all himself; but withal in respect of self-denial, he ought so to act, as if
he acted nothing at all, but the Spirit acted alone in him, and therefore
should cry forth, after he has done all, that he is but an unprofitable
servant: O! that ye would be persuaded seriously to ponder and balance these
things, that except ye be the ruin of your iniquities, iniquity shall
certainly be your ruin, and ye know not how long it is unto that day when that
decree shall be past in heaven against you, they are joined to their Idols, let
them alone. I shall only say that word which John has in his 1 Epistle. 5.
last, Little children, keep your selves from Idols.

SERMON VI.
Gal. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
IT is an unchangeable and unalterable decrce of heaven which cannot be
repealed, that the wages of sin is death, and, that which a man sows, that
shall be also reap; Though we conceive, there are many that are possessed with
this imaginary delusion, that though they add drunkenness to thirst, and do
daily taste of that forbidden fruit, yet at last they shall obtain a place to
walk in, amongst those that stand by: They conceive, that there is a possible
union of pure Religion and undefiled, and the want of Mortification; though we
think that religion without mortification, is nothing else but the
mortification of religion, and the crucifying of Christ afresh. Are there not
many here, who in stead of traveling in birth, until Christ be formed in them,
are traveling in birth, till they bring forth iniquity, and till the Image of
that old man be fully framed in them. Now there is this that we would have you
know, and wish, that it were engraven upon the fleshly tables of your heart, as
with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, that there are two Tribunals,
upon which God does sit to judge; there is a Tribunal of Justice where all the
sentences past, are pure, unmixed wrath, without all temperament or mixture of
mercy; And before this Tribunal, all flesh must once appear, and receive that
dreadful sentence of eternal separation from the Majesty of the Lord, and, if
you do well, you must say Amen unto the equity of that sentence: But know this
for your consolation, that this is not his last word; know that that Justice
Court is but subordinat, and there is another higher, unto which we may appeal,
to have that sentence of Justice sweetly repealed. And is not this one
mysterious depth of infinite love, that Grace should declare them righteous,
whom Justice has condemned, and yet leave no imputation upon the Justice of
God? that love should sweetly reduce decreets of Justice, and declare them in
law to be void and null? this is the law of love. And is not this a mystery of
infinite love, that that which is an abomination for man, to justify the
wicked, should be love and Justice in God, to Justify the ungodly? And is not
this a wonder, that though there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, yet there should be many things condemnable in them, and that divine
love should make such an abstraction, as to make a separation betwixt many
things that are condemnable, and condemnation? Justice and judgment are the
habitation of his throne, yet mercy and truth go before it, and comes nearest
sinners, to make ready their way, that they may speak with Justice. There is
this that we would have you know, that in the accomplishment of this work of
mortification, (of which we have been speaking at many occasions) a Christian
has that same power communicable unto him for the overcoming of his
temptations, which Christ had in the overcoming of principalities and powers ^
this is clear, Ephesians. 19, 20. And certainly, sometimes when a Christian does
reflect upon those living and strong corruptions that are within him, he will
have much of that fear which Elisha's servant had, who cried out, Master what
shall we do? but if our eyes were opened, we should see that there are more for
us, nor against us: put on much of that divine generosity of Nehemiah (if we
may allude unto it in this combat of says) Shoulds such a one as I flee?
however, keep a midst betwixt discouragment, and anxious Misbelief: And I would
only give Christians who are indeed engaged in this holy warfare, that counsel
which Ahab gave to Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 11. Let not him that puts on his
armor, boast as he that puts it off, let confident faith be mixed with holy
fear, that there may be a sweet mixture of these two. And there is this which
we would speak to you, that there is a difference betwixt the grant and gift of
pardon, and the intimation of pardon unto a Christian: yea more, there is a
difference betwixt the intimation of pardon, even for a sin mortified and
repented for, and the divine application of it: this is clear by comparing 2 Samuel 12, 13. with Psalm. 51. where Nathan says to David, thine iniquities are
blotted out, and they sin is taken away. There is both the grant of pardon, and
the intimation of it, and yet he himself, Psa. 51. prays for the application
of pardon; pardon was not applied, though it was intimated: and this would
speak this to us, that we would not always conclude from the want of the
sensible convictions of pardon, the want of the grant of pardon.

But now to come to that at which we left at the last occasion, which was the
extent of Mortification, that a Christian ought not only to mortify original
sin, but his predominant lusts also, with all the motions and occasions unto
the acting of these sins. Concerning the mortification of original sin, which
is here called the flesh, we have spoken already, and have spoken somewhat
concerning the mortification of predominant lusts and presumptuous sins; It is
turned now to be an improper expression, to make mention of a predominant grace
that should stand in opposition to predominant lusts: I would only say this,
that under the law, there is no express mention made for any sacrifice for
presumptuous sins, unto which the Apostile does allude, Heb. 10. 26. If a man
sin wilfully after he has received the knowledge of the truth, their remains
no more sacrifice for sin, And certainly this may make us astonished to
entertain our predominant sins, and our presumptuous iniquities, to entertain
them so, as not to debate and wrestle with them, for they turn not unto
presumptuous sins, except we go such a length: therefore we should be much, in
presenting that supplication, Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me.

Now that which we shall speak to first, shall be this, what are the most
effectual and spiritual means, by which a Christian may be helped to the
mortifying of his predominant lusts? And before we speak of them, we shall only
say this, that this generation desires rather to know what to do, then to do
and practice what they know: we think to win to heaven by knowledge; though we
confess we will not win to heaven without it, yet there is more requisite in a
Christian.

The first way how a Christian will be helped to mortify his predominant
lusts, is this, for a Christian to be much in the exercise of secret prayer.
And I would say this, he is a blessed Christian who ever won to the
mortification of the least strength of a lust by public prayer, whether more
public, or in families, or with society: pride and self-seeking, is that
Caterpillar and worm that eats up the fruit of these addresses unto God; but if
you were much in secret prayer alone, it would be a compendious way to attain
to the mortification of your lusts, that when a Messenger of Satan buffets
you, ye may go to the Throne thrife and beseech the Lord, that this evil may
depart from you, this is clear, not only, Ephesians. 6. 18. where amongst all the
rest of the spiritual armor of a Christian, prayer is made mention of; Pray
with all prayer and manner of supplication: it is clear, Iam. 5. 17. If any man
be afflicted, let him pray. and, 2 Cor. 12. 7. 8. the words that we were
speaking just now. O! whether is that washing of our bed with tears, and that
presenting of supplications with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed, now
gone? There are few Christians, but can make language of their grief, whose
grief of heart goes never to such a length, as they may cry forth, I am so
troubled that I cannot speak. He were indeed a Phoenix of his time, who could
without lying to the Holy Ghost, say, that his bones were waxing old through
his roaring all the day; and we would only say to such, that are not
endeavoring after this, you shall go down to your graves, having your bones
full of the sins of your youth.

There is this second mean that we would speak to, That a Christian would be
much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulness: This is clear from Luke.
21. near the close, and from Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation. And certainly, watchfulness is a most requisite piece of armor,
that after we have done all, we may stand; not only because watchfulness is
that which discovers unto a Christian his weakness and inability, for a
Christian to be convinced of this, it is his strength, as is clear from 2 Cor.
12. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong: this is a paradox to nature, but no
mystery to grace; but also because watchfulness is a most effectual mean to
discover to a Christian, the subtilty and profound deceitfulness of his
adversaries, which makes him to be much in watching over his own heart:
watchfulness likewayes is that grace, which discovers unto a Christian, the
formal and remiss actings of grace in this precious combat: when faith
begins to die, and hope begins to languish, and love and zeal begins
to wax cold, then watchfulness gives warning to prayer, that it may go to
seek strength for those that were languishing: As likewayes watchfulness is
requisite, because it discovers unto a Christian, the first motions of his
adversaries, and when first he begins to stir, which, no doubt, is a great
advantage, And more, watchfulness discovers unto a Christian, that advantage
which he has over his lusts, which does exceedingly encourage* him to go on in
this spiritual warfare.

There is this thirdly which is requisite, that a Christian would be much in the
meditation upon the sufferings, death, and love of Jesus Christ. I know not (to
a tender Christian) a more effectual mean to Mortify his affections and lusts,
then this, this is clear that it is so, not only from 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. where
Paul says, The love of Christ did constrain him, because we thus judge, that
if one died for all, then were all dead, that we should henceforth no more live
to our self. And Peter presses this, 1 Pet. 1. 18. compared with ver. 20. Be
ye holy as he is holy: and he subjoineth the reason of it, for ye are bought
with a price, even with the incorruptible blood of Jesus Christ: and 1 Pet. 4.
1, 2. he presses the doctrine of Mortification from this, that Christ was
crucified in the flesh: and it is clear from Psalm. 26. 3. where the great
argument which persuaded David to pursue after sincerity, was this, for the
love of God is always before my eyes. And is not this a sweet portraicture,
always to contemplat and behold, to look upon love, until ye be changed into
that same Image from glory to glory. And certainly Christ's death and love must
have a most effectual influence upon this: Can one read these words, he swat
drops of blood; and that word, If it be possible, let this cup depart from me.
Can you read these words and not be provoked to hate sin with a perfect hatred?
Can ye love that which crucified Christ, and brought him so low? If such a
supposition had been possible, that all that were sinners had been standing
round about the cross, in the day that Christ was hanged up betwixt heaven and
earth, in the day that his precious body was dropping down drops of blood,
might not ye have said, O! what a thing must that be which we call sin, that
has brought him so low? And may not the reflect thoughts upon the love of
Christ, provoke you to this, that if Christ has so far condescended unto you,
ought not ye to please him, and give obedience to his Commandments? Who would
dispute the commands of such a One? And it is certain, that if we would
meditate on these things till we wondered, and wonder till we loved, no doubt,
it should persuade you to be endeavoring Mortification of your lusts. Christ's
death has not only a moral influence (of which we have spoken) but it has a
physical influence also upon the mortification of sin: for we are bought (says
the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 1. 20,) with a price from our vain conversation:
Christ has crucified the damning power of sin, and has purchased this gift,
the Spirit of Sanctification, to crucify the dominion of sin.

There is this fourthly which is requisite, that a Christian under debates with
lusts, be much in the exercise of the grace of faith: It is a most insensible
and unknown help to our apprehension: we think faith is a help, when all things
are desperate. And therefore we judge prayer a more suitable help to sense and
apprehension; therefore a Christian under the prevailing of his corruptions,
will be more in the employment of the grace of prayer, than in the employment
of the grace of faith; though we may say this to the advantage of the grace of
faith, that it has a most effectual and most divine influence for the
crucifying of lusts: if so we may speak, faith is that that comes nearest
himself; for faith, (as it is spoken of it) has a kind of Omnipotency, as it
is said, all things are possible for those that believe. Now this is clear not
only from 1 Ioh. 5. 5. This is our victory, whereby we overcome the world, even
our faith: and it is clear from Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all things take ye the shield
of faith, by which you may quench the fiery darts of the Devil. And certainly
had we so much faith, as a grain of mustard seed, we might say to every
mountain that is in our way, be removed, and hurled unto the midst of the sea,
and it should obey us. We shall clear the influence of faith in the mortifying
of corruption, not only in this, that the grace of faith, discovers unto a
Christian that super-eminent and precious excellency of Jesus Christ, at the
appearance of which, the glory and luster of our Idols do disappear. We think
our Idols are like stars, that in the night do appear, and seem beautiful
creatures, but when once that Sun, even the Sun of righteousness does arise,
then their glory is not seen, neither can they be beheld. Saw you never such a
sight of him, that constrained you to cry forth, what have I to do any more
with Idols? If such a supposition were possible, that any idol should get
entrance above it should get no entertainment there: for they are upheld by an
infinite strength that cannot fail: As likewayes, the influence of faith may be
cleared in this, that it is that grace, that does lay hold upon the promises,
by which and through which, strength from the head is conveyed unto the
combatant: As for example, when a believer is wrestling with his lusts, faith
lays hold upon the promise of help, and by it, lays hold on Jesus Christ,
who is the Promiser. As likewayes the influence of Faith may be cleared in
this, Faith is that grace, which discovers to a Christian, that crown and
recompense of reward, one sight and view of which makes love and z^al take
fire, and makes them to tread upon the high places of the earth, that when the
Archers shoot at them, and do grievously wound them; yet their bow does abide
in its strength.

There is this mean likewayes, by which a Christian would mortify his
predominant lusts, and it is this, that he would be much in entertaining the
grace of tenderness, Ioseph-like to cry forth, when temptation does assail
him, Shall I do this and sin* against God. I am persuaded that sin not resisted
in its motions, does procure hardness; And likewayes we may say, that sin
resisted in its beginnings, does bring forth the grace of tenderness, in a
most effectual and eminent way.

And there is this mean likewayes which is requisite, that a Christian be much
in the apprehension of death, judgment, and eternity: these three much
meditated upon, would make us afraid to sin. I think a Christian never walks
as he ought, till he walk so, as if each moment next to that wherein he lives,
he had the expectation of appearing before the judgment seat of Christ. O! but
it would be a sad despensation to many, to have this day a summonds without
continuation of days, to appear before that dreadful and terrible tribunal of
Jesus Christ, when the books shall be opened, wherein your wanderings are
written, and the books of your consciences shall be opened, that shall say Amen
to every thing that is recorded within the volume of these books: this is clear
from Act. 17. 30. 31. He has commanded all men every where to repent, and the
argument enforcing it is, because he has appointed a day, in which he will
judge the world by this man Jesus Christ: as likewayes it is clear in Eccles.
11. 9. where Solomon presses by way of holy Ironie (for so the scope is) young
men not to take their pleasures in the morning of their time, because for all
these things God should bring them to judgment. And we wish that that memento,
which did always walk with a holy man, might walk with you, and sound in your
ears, Awake, and come to judgment, that it may be that which may regulate your
walk. I shall not say much, but beware to entertain your lusts, lest judgment
overtake you, the stones of the wall of this house shall bear witness against
you in the day of the Lord, that ye have been invited to flee from the wrath to
come, and have refused the precious offers of a crucified Savior. We would
obrest and beseech you, that, if there be a heaven, if there be a God, if there
be an eternity, which are most certain and infallible, if there be a hell, and
everlasting separation from the presence of the Lord, and if you have precious
and immortal souls, that you would tender your own salvation, and speak much of
Peter's divinity, pity your selves, for you are destroying your selves through
the want of knowledge, and if we may say it, hell is enlarging it self wide for
the receiving of many of the inhabitants of this place, and of many that live
in this generation, who are destitute and void of the grace of the living God.

Now that which secondly we shall speak to shall be this, what are the
evidences and tokens of this, when lust has dominion over one? And we shall
shortly point out the evidences of lust, when it has dominion? And we
conceive, this first may evidence it, when one wins to such a length, as they
can commit sin with delight, and with greediness, when it is pleasure to them
to go after the heart of their detestable things, then sin has dominion over
one: as it is clear, sin has dominion over those made mention of, 2 Pet. 2.
13. They account it pleasure to riot in the day time, and are sporting
themselves with their own deceivings; such fools, as Solomon speaks of,
making a mock at sin: and likewayes it is clear of those that are made mention
of, Ephesians. 4. 19. They commit iniquity with greediness, and as the Prophet
speaks in another place, their hearts are mad upon their Idols.

There is this secondly which may evidence it, and it is this, when one sins
with his predominant lust without conviction, or if they be convinced, their
convictions do suddenly evanish, like those made mention of, Ier. 6. 15. Were
they ashamed, when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all
ashamed, neither could they blush: They had won to such a length in impiety,
that not only they would not do it, but they could not do it: and that same is
made mention of, Ier. 8. 12. It is clear likewayes, Jer. 3. 3. Thou had a
whores forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed; and from Prove. 30. 20. Where the
adulterous woman says, that she has done no wickedness. When you are brought
unto such a length of impiety, then know that you have yielded your selves
servants unto unrighteousness for a time.

There is this which may evidence it likewayes, and it is this, when one can
commit iniquity upon small temptations, yea, upon none at all: this did prove
that that sin of adultery had some dominion over David, when he did commit it
upon so small or no temptation; for this is brought in to aggravat it, 2 Samuel
12. 8. I gave thee thy Masters wives into thy bosom: and it is most
emphatically aggravat, ver. 2. 7. one poor man should have had one ewe lamb,
and yet he had so many, and that yet he should pursue after that: And most
clearly, Isa. 5. 18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as it were with a cart-rope: the meaning of these words we conceive it to
be this, that they did most violently, without any allurement or entisement,
pursue after the heart of their detestable things: certainly, those may suspect
themselves, that upon the first presentation of an idol, they presently bow
down their heads and worship it.

There is this likewayes which may evidence it, and it is this, when one
notwithstanding of the convictions of the omniscience of God that does behold
them, will commit such an iniquity: no doubt, then sin is brought unto a most
damnable and most attrocious height: then sin had dominion over Er, Genesis 38, 7.
He did evil in the sight of the Lord: the meaning of which word we conceive to
be this, that he did the evil, notwithstanding he was convinced of the
omniscience and all seeing eye of God: And it is recorded of Ahab, 1 King. 21,
20. He sold himself to commit iniquity in the sight of the Lord, when
notwithstanding he knew that he had seven eyes that ran to and fro through the
earth, yet he did act these abominations.

And there is this lastly, that does evidence it, when one does sin with much
deliberation and advice, they are not overhailed by their temptations and
lusts, and they sit down in counsel to consult how such a thing may be
effectuate: then had iniquity dominion over those that are made mention of,
Mic. 2. 1. Woe to them that devise iniquity upon their beds, that sit down
deliberatly in the silent seasons of the night to contrive the mischievous
plots of their hearts: and we would only say to such, read the 3. or 4. verse.
of that chapter, where God says in a sweet and just opposition, in regard of
their devising of iniquity; Behold (says he) I will devise against this
people: God will deliberatly and with much indignation, punish those that sin
deliberatly, and it is clear from, Ier. 18. 12.

Now we shall shut up our discourse at this time, only we would speak a little
unto this, why God does sometimes think fit to expose his own unto some
dominion of their lusts? It was a notable and most true saying of a heathen, As
many vices, as many masters, for every lust is a master; and we may say, every
lust has a servant, and some have ten thousand waiting on: And we conceive
when a Christian begins to establish his own righteousness, then he is in
hazard to be given up for a time unto the dominion of his sin: this is clear,
Ezekiel. 33. 13. If he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity; and
there may be this reason of it, that they may know to distinguish, betwixt the
yoke of Christ, and the yoke and bondage of sin, as it is pointed at, Deuteronomy. 28.
47, 48. And we conceive this may be a reason of it, because God intends to
magnify the glory of his unsearchable grace, by delivering them from the door
of the pit, when this song shall be sung, This my Son was dead, and is alive,
and was lost, and is found: this is the song of restoring grace, after grace
has once prevented the Christian.

Now we will desire you seriously to intend this precious work of
mortification: the most part of us are idol-Christians, we have hands, and we
do nothing, we have eyes and we see not, and we have feet and we walk not: And
certainly, that practice and maxim of Matchiavel is much practiced amongst us,
he thought it was advantageous to have the possession of religion, and of
virtue but he thought it dangerous to have the reality of religion: there are
many that desire to be clothed with the coat of Christ, that never desired
conformity with Christ in the inward man: And we think if Christ were to come
down from heaven, he might preach this to many of us, Betrayest thou the son of
man with a kiss? There are many that I am sure have a lower spirit then Judas,
that would sell Christ at a lower rate then thirty pieces of silver: O!
eternity, eternity, what shall you do in the day of desolation, when your
visitation shall come from a far? where shall you flee for help? and where
shall you leave your glory? I shall shut up all that I have to say with this
the wrath of that living, but contemptible stone, that was cut out of the
Mountains, shall be more intolerable then the weight of mountains and hills.
Therefore the reprobats rather choice to be under the weight of hills and
mountains, then to be under the weight of this living Cornerstone but so much
despised. Will you not embrace him? may not angels laugh at your folly, and
have you in holy derision? the triumph is above, and it is not long before his
own shall cry forth, It is finished. And no doubt, if we were much in the
exercise of faith, we should easily accomplish this warfare: we may call Faith
Eliezer, of whom it is reported, that he did so pursue his enemies, that the
people returned to gather up the spoils. Love, prayer, and joy, will eternally
sit down and reap the sweet fruits of the victory of Faith. Now to him that can
make you overcome through the blood of the Lamb, and the word of your testimony,
we desire to give praise.

SERMON VII.
Gal. 5. 24: And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.
IT was a divine sentence of that Master of experiences, that love covers a
multitude of sins; we may say, that precious and infinite love, that Christ has
had to sinn^^s, has covered a multitude of sins: though this is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation, that the most part of us have not come that
length of religion, which the publicans and sinners did attain to, which is, to
love those that love them. Does not Christ his engraving of his love to
sinners, in letters of blood, call for this at our hand, that we should devote
our selves wholly to him? But we confess, such is that desperate enimity and
deceitfulness of the hearts of all flesh, that if all who have been partakers
of the divine Nature, or shall be partakers of it, had but one heart to conduct
them to heaven, they would misguide it in the way, it being the matchless and
incommunicable prerogative of the Captain of our salvation, to guide many sons
and daughters to glory, I think, if there were a description to be given of the
most part of us, we must give that which is, Prove. 6. 13. He speaks with his
feet, and teaches with his fingers: and the great lesson that we would teach
with our feet, and preach with our hands would be Iniquity, formality, and
distance from God. And I would have you* who are expectants of heaven, and have
some small hope of being eternally with him, to be much in this precious work
of mortification. There are some s^ habituat to sin, (if God do not prevent
them) the last act they shall commit in this stage of the world, shall be an
act of iniquity, and they shall breath out their last, in departing from that
invisible Majesty. There are some that though they live seventy years, they
shall not have this to say, of one day of all their life, that they have
devoted and given it to God. Mortification is a mystery to our knowledge, but
much more a mystery to our practice: It is a wonder that many of us are not
distracted, and that much of Cains divinity does not possess us, that
whosoever shall find us by the way, shall kill us. However, unto those who make
any conscience of this duty, we would say these two things; 1. Ye may yield
unto the premises and assertions of misbelief, which they draw from the
dominion of your sin over you, but deny the conclusions of misbelief: This was
the practice of David, Psalm. 65. 3. there is the assertion of misbelief in the
first words, Iniquities prevail over me, but he denies that conclusion which we
draw from it, that we are reprobats; but faith does sweetly subjoyn, As for our
transgressions, thou will purge them away. This is bad Logic to deny the
conclusion, but precious divinity: And secondly, we would say this to you, that
ye may with a great deal of liberty, make use of the dominion of your iniquity,
as an argument to plead with God for pardon, according to that famous prayer of
David's, Psalm. 25. 11. For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it
is great. And we would say likewayes, that God makes use of the iniquities of
the children of men, as an argument to provoke himself unto mercy, and even
those iniquities, which before he has made use of, as an argument of Justice.
It is strange to parallel and compare these two places, Genesis 6. 5. with Genesis 8.
21. where the reason that God gives of the destruction of the world is this,
because that every imagination of the thoughts of the heart of man, is only
evi^ continually: and yet, chap. 8. 21. he gives this as a ground, why he
would curse the world no more for man's sake, because says he, the imagination
of man's heart i^ evil from his youth.

Now we told you at the last occasion we spoke on these words, when we wa^
speaking upon the second thing of Mortification, which was the extent of it,
tha^ a Christian should not only mortify original sin, which is here called
flesh, bu^ likewayes, he should mortify his predominant idols, which are here
called affections; and of these two we have spoken* There is this likewise in
the extent of Mortification, that a Christian should mortify the first motions
and tentations unto sin, which are here called lusts. And for clearing what we
shall speak upon this; we conceive, that the first motions of sin do comprehend
these two: first, that a Christian should study to mortify the first
tentations he meets with unto acting, or embracing of any particular lust. And
secondly, that a Christian should study to avoid all appearances of evil, by
which he may be brought to the acting of that sin. We shall not stand long to
prove that it is the duty of a Christian to do the first; it is clear not only
from Iam. 4. 7. where we are commanded to resist the devil, which comprehends
even the resisting of the first motions of sin, as likewayes from 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Whom resist, steadfast in the faith; but likewayes it is clear from the practice
of David, Psalm, 56. 3. where when misbelief began to stir, he put faith in
exercise, What time (says he) I am afraid, I will trust in thee. And it is
clear from the practice of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. where there was a messenger of
Satan given to buffer him, he went and beseeched the Lord thrice. Neither
shall we stand to prove, that it is the duty of a Christian to flee the
appearances of evil,

It is clear, not only from Deuteronomy. 12. 30. where it is said, thou shall not
enquire how the Nations serve their gods: ye may suppose there was no iniquity
in this iniquity; yet because it was the appearance of evil, God did sorbid it:
as likewayes from Deuteronomy. 25. 13. 14. Thou shall not have in thy bagg, diverse
weights, a great and a small; thou shall not have in thine house diverse
measures, a great and a small: it might be supposed, that the having of these
things when not used, was not unlawful, but the very having of them, because it
was an appearance of evil, it was desired to be eshewed: and that remarkable
place, Prove. 5. 8. Come not nigh the door of her house, who is a whore: and
that in Deuteronomy. 12. 3. where the people are commanded, even to forget the names
of Idols. And from Jude 21. to hate the garments spotted with the flesh: and
Deuteronomy. 16. 19 where it is forbidden for a judge to take a gift, not that there
is iniquity in this, but because it is an appearance of evil, lest he should
pervert judgment, it is forbidden.

Now that which first we shall speak to upon this, that a Christian should flee
the first motions and appearances of sin, shall be this: to propose some
considerations unto you, that may enforce this duty more.

The first consideration that we propose is this, that iniquity when it is
resisted in its first motions, is most easily conquered and overcome; when sin
is killed in its birth, it is killed with the greatest facility and easiness:
and certainly, when we delay the mortifying of our lusts, and resists not the
devil, it is no wonder that we are led captive by the hand of our iniquities:
It was an ancient saying worthy to be practiced, resist the beginning of evil,
for the remedy is ever more difficult in the close, then in the beginning.
However, we would give Christians these two directions for this consideration.
1. After by the power of grace, ye have overcome the first motions of sin, do
not give over your watch, nor sit down in carnal confidence, for he will again
assail you, even after you have overcome: It is a remarkable word that is
annexed to the close of Christ's temptations, Luke 4. 13. where, after Satan
was foiled most remarkably, it is said, he departed from him for a season; he
had a mind to return, though he was overcome. 2. We say this, that most
ordinarily the resisting of the motions of sin, and overcoming of them, if they
be not improven with humility, it is the forerunner of some sad stroke from
the hand of the Lord.

There is this second consideration that we would propose for inviting of you
to resist the first motions of sin, and it is this, a Christian that makes
conscience of this duty, ordinarily he is blessed with most divine and precious
enjoyments of Jesus Christ: let a Christian try this by experience, and when
first sin does assail them, if they will make conscience to resist it, the dew
of heaven shall come down and ly upon their branch, that their glory may be
fresh in them, and they shall be constrained to put up an Eben-ezer unto God,
and to cry forth, hitherto has the Lord helped us; this is clear from Romans 8.
13. If ye through the Spirit shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
live; and clear likewise from Rev. 2. 17. Where, to the man that is in the way
of overcoming, Christ will give him the hidden Manna: And certainly, we think,
if we may make allusion to these words, that curse is accomplished in these
days, I will make the heavens brass, and the earth iron. There are some upon
whom it has not rained these three years and six months, but are become as
the bottle in the smoke, the marrow of whose bones is consumed.

There is this third consideration that we would propose, and it is this, that
the resisting of the motions and first stirrings of corruption, is the way to
get the soul under a most divine impression of the sinfulness of sin: when was
it that the Apostle Paul cried forth, O wretched man that I am? was it not,
when there was a law in his mind, wrestling against the law of his members?
When he was the greatest wrestler, then did sin appear out of measure sinful
unto him. I confess, that distinction which Papists do so much adore, of venial
and mortal sins, I think Christians in their practice do make much use of. Are
there not many sins, which ye account venial, and writes this name upon their
forehead, this is a zoar, a little thing, and ye desire to be pardoned, when ye
bow your knee in the house of Rimmon, if ye go no further: but certainly, the
way to bring the soul to a divine loathing of all sin, is to be resisting the
first motions of it.

There is this first consideration, that resisting of the first motions of sin,
is that which keeps the grace of faith much in exercise, especially in an hour
of trial and of temptation. I think, there is nothing that will darken a
Christians evidence so much as this, the conviction of this, that there was
never a sin did assail them, that was resisted in its first motions and
stirrings, I confess, I think a bad conscience, is the mother of misbelief,
which the Apostle does clearly point at, 1. Tim. 3. 9. Holding (says he) the
mystery of faith in a pure conscience, as if he would have said, that divine
and precious guest Faith, can lodge in no dwelling but a pure and undefiled
conscience: And to make this clear, that the resisting of the motions and first
stirrings of sin, have influence to preserve faith in exercise, see Rev. 2. 17.
To him that overcomes, that is in the way of overcoming, I will give him a new
name; he shall know that his name is written in these precious records of
heaven, and that before the morning stars did sing for joy, e're ever the
corner stone of the world was laid, he was engraven upon the heart of precious
ones, in indelible letters which cannot be blotted out: As also it is clear
from, Romans 7. compared with 8. and 1. verse: when was it that Paul cried forth,
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus? was it not then,
when he was wrestling against corruptions?

And there is this last consideration, which we shall propose to enforce this
duty, and it is this, that not resisting sin in its first motions, does
ordinarily creat and bring to pass much hardness and stupidity of heart, when
we silence our convictions with laziness, and answer our reprover with this, I
have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I shall say to such, it is a bad
omen and sign that God is upon his way to cease to be such a reprover unto you:
I confess, there is a difference betwixt sinning against light, and sinning
with light; and we conceive that there are many guilty of the one, that are not
guilty of the other: However, if once ye shall come this length, as when
temptation does assail you, to make a covenant of peace and agreement with it,
ye may expect, if you go to heaven, you shall be safe, but so as by fire: and
we confess there are some whose consciences may bear them record, that they
never knew what it was to resist the first motions and stirrings of corruption.
It is a lesson of so high nature, that it would need explication unto them: And
think ye that ye can attain unto that living and precious hope, who never knew
to wrestle with sin, and with your corruptions? is such a delusion as this
amongst you, that ye can reign, though ye fight not, and triumph though ye
contend not? ye may reign to your own apprehension as kings without Christ this
way, but shall never reign as kings with him, if ye do not study to mortify
your lusts.

That which secondly we shall speak upon this, shall be this, what is the
reason that Christians do not resist sin in its first motions and stirrings
within them? And we conceive, that it does either proceed from this, that
Christians are not much in the exercise of the grace of watchfulness. I think
temptations seises oft-times upon a Christians affections before they be a war,
hence it is, that when the Apostle Peter is prescribing this direction of
resisting the motions of sin, he requires this as an antecedent duty, that
they should be watchful, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be vigilant, and then, resist him,
steadfast in the faith: when once a Christian has given over his watch, he is a
prey unto his lusts: we may certainly say of him, that he is a city broken down
and without walls, that does not exercise the grace of watchfulness. Or else it
does proceed from this, that Christians are not in a divine and spiritual frame
to resist temptations, when they are first assailed with them. We confess, our
spirits oft-times are so loadened with the pleasure of a world, and are so much
taken up with the passing delights of a transient world, that when temptations
do come; we do easily condescend to embrace them: hence it is that the Apostle
James when he is passing this exhortation upon these to whom he writes, resist
the Devil, he subjoyneth this in the 9. verse. as a concomitant duty, draw near
to God, as if he would have said, If temptations find you at a distance with
God, then ye may cry forth, have pity on me; for ye are a prey, if ye be not
found within sight of him, and if your hearts do not study to walk in the sight
of his precious face. As likewayes, Peter does prescribe this, 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9.
Be sober and then, resist him steadfast in the faith: and more clearly it is
pointed at, Matthew. 26. 41. Watch, and pray, left ye enter into temptation. And
I would only say this unto you, it is a most high and divine walk always to be
living within sight of God, that when ye go down to the grave, ye may have this
to say, I am now to change my place, but not to change my company; heaven may
be to you but a precious passing and transition unto a more constant and
immediate enjoyment of God: Or else it does proceed from this, that Christians
when they are first assailed with the motions and stirrings of corruptions,
they dow not do violence to their own flesh. I consesse these two Idols, which
are dependant one upon another, that idol of Self, and that idol of Ease, they
are the cutthroats of a Christians diligence, and are the great occasion, why
we do not overcome, through the word of our testimony, and by the blood of the
Lamb; Think ye that it is an easy thing to overcome temptations? I confess,
those that are not acquainted with it, may probably say it, but this is
certain, that such kind goes not forth, but by fasting and prayer. It cost
Christ much toil to liberat you from the guilt of sin, and it will cost you
much toil to liberat your selves from the filth of sin. And there is this
lastly from which it proceeds, that Christians do not mortify sin, in its
first stirrings and motions, because they are not living under an impression of
the sinfulness of sin. We conceive, that oft-times when temptations do assail
us, we think, departing from God a dispensible evil, and that which easily we
may obtain pardon for: I would prescribe that unto you, as one of the greatest
mysteries of Christianity, and blessed, blessed is he eternally that has win
to it, and it is this, to be living constantly under a divine impression of the
sinfulness of sin, that ye may take it up, in its nature, and in its effects, I
think, if one should come from the dead, having the chains of everlasting
wrath, wreathed about his feet, and the sheckles of the fury of the Lord,
wreathed about his hands, and should preach to you, concerning the nature of
sin, and how damnable a thing it is, there are many who would not take heed
much to such doctrine.

Now that which thirdly we proposed to speak to from these words was, the
difficulty to attain to Mortification, which we conceive, was held forth under
that word Crucify; which does import, that Mortification is a longsome work, as
crucifying was a longsome death: as likewayes it does import, that
Mortification was a painful work, as crucifying was one of the most painful
deaths: And like ways it holds forth the intensive nature of Mortification,
that a Christian should study not to be content until he did kill corruption:
And concerning these three we shall speak together: And we shall point out the
difficulty of attaining to Mortification in these things. Is there not this
which points out the difficulty of it, that there is a woeful unity of affection
betwixt us and our lusts, they are dear to us as the right eye, and our right
hand, and right foot: And I confess, to convince you of that unity that is
betwixt you and your lusts, I think that expression which ordinarily ye use,
when one is reproving you for your passion, or for your swearing, may suffice;
ye will answer, what aileth you at me? which does speak this, that you say,
your lusts and you are one. And I confess Paul has an expression like this,
Romans 7, 8. I know (says he) that in me dwells no good thing. There are two
me's in a Christian; there is a spiritual and a refined Me, there is a carnal
and a wicked Me, as Paul does distinguish them in that verse, I know (says he)
that in me dwells no good thing: and yet he subjoyneth, In me to will that is
present, which is one good thing. And we confess, that word is accomplished in
Me, They are joined to their idols, let them alone.

There is that secondly which points out the difficulty of Mortification, and
it is the strength of those lusts that are within us, we think the Scripture is
so abundant in pointing out the strength of sin, that we need not speak much to
it: there is that expression, Romans 8. 2. which is a most strange word, it is
there called the law of sin and of death: as it were, sin pleads for as much
subjection from us, as if we were tied by law to obey it: And in that verse,
there is a sweet contrariety of laws, the law of the spirit of life, has made
me free from the law of sin and of death. If so we may speak, there is, in a
manner, one decree and statute of heaven declaring another to be null; for it
was a law in heaven, that we should be under death, because we were under sin;
but behold, here is a posterior law that does sweetly reduce this prior law,
and it is, the law of the Spirit of life. As likewayes, that expression
points forth the strength of corruption, which is 2 Cor. 10. 4. where he
says, we are to fight for the pulling down of strong holds, as it were, sin
fortifieth it self within our bosom: and we confess, if this were believed,
we should study to mortify our corruptions with a great deal of more pains and
constancy. There is this likewayes, which points it out, and it is, the
deceitfulness of our lusts, and the subtilty which they vent in their
deceiving of us; which is clear from that expression, Iam. 1. 14. When a man,
(says he) is drawn away, and entised of his lusts: the word there that is
rendered entised, is taken from the fishers, who deceive the silly fishes, with
an apparent bait of pleasure. We confess, these two are the great obstrucions
of a Christians progress to heaven, there are temptations of fear, and there
are temptations from advantage: which two, if they were removed, we might with
greater facility overcome our lusts, and sing a song of triumph over our Idols:
oft-times that expression is recorded, the deceitfulness of sin: we confess,
if this were believed, we would use a more divine and holy prudence, least we
should be ensnared. And to shut up our discourse upon Mortification, upon which
we have been speaking so long; we shall only speak a little to obviat any
mistake that may be about the difficulty of any Mortification, which shall
include that which we intended to speak upon; which was the certainty of
overcoming.

And that which first we would say unto you is this; Be persuaded of this, that
there is more divine satisfaction in the resisting of your lusts, and wrestling
against them, then there is in the actual fruition of them all: that word of
Solomon's, Stolen waters are sweet, says the adulterous woman, but at last
they shall be convinced of the contrary: and that word which he speaks, Bread
of deceit is pleasant to the mouth, but he knows not, that the dead are
there, etc. And we think the Apostle sweetly chydeth the Romans concerning this
thing, What fruit have you of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? it is
sad to think upon that woeful disappointment that many shall meet with.

There is this which we would likewayes say, that there is a divine certainty
of a Christians overcoming, let the difficulties be never so many, and (O
beloved in the Lord) are not these glad tidings from a far country, and may be
as cold water to a thirsty man's soul, that a Christian shall once overcome: And
I confess there are these four things, that speak the certainty of a
Christians overcoming: 1. The faithfulness, and the love of Jesus Christ is
laid in pawn for our overcoming, which is clear from that Joh. 6. 39. And this
is the fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should loss nothing but should raise it up again at the last day: And we
confess, this is certain, it is more of Christ's concernment that a believer
should overcome, then it is of his own. O! what songs to the faithfulness of
Christ, what songs to his love shall be sung that day, when the precious troup
of his Saints, shall return from the day of judgment, and that general infare
shall be of all those that have been begotten unto a lively hope, when they
shall convey Christ home, through the ports of the new Jerusalem, every one
having a harp of God in his hand, and shall cry forth, Halelujab* Halelujab to
him that sits upon the Throne, and to the lamb for ever and ever: that song
shall have no period; though it have a beginning.

There is this likewayes which points forth their certainty of overcoming,
Christ has overcome, and therefore a Christian shall overcome. It was the
sweet divinity of the Apostle Paul, Heh. 2. 9, 10. there is a promise (says
he) that all things shall be put under our feet, but we see not that promise
accomplished, says he: I see one thing accomplished, which is a pledge of it,
I see Jesus Christ, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and with
Majesty: Christ is in heaven, and he must be there: and that word John 16.
last, Be of good cheer, says he, for I have overcome the world; which is a
pledge and certain token, that ye shall once overcome.

There is this likewayes which points forth their certainty of overcoming, that
that same power which was exercised in bringing Christ from death, and in
making him to overcome principalities and powers, is communicate to believers
to make them overcome; as it is clear from Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. where it is said,
That power that wrought mightily in Christ to raise him from the dead, does
also work in those that believe. O! Christians, heirs of the grace of life,
believe this, that Omnipotency is engaged on your behalf; and have you not
learned that first point of the Creed, that there is nothing-impossible to God;
and so when you are constrained sometimes to cry out, Who shall stand before
the children of Anak: Content your selves with this, that there is nothing too
hard for him.

And there is this lastly, which points it out, that divine and invisible knot
of union that is betwixt Christ and his members: Is Christ above? the members
must follow; for ye know, though Christ be the fullness of the Saints, yet the
Saints are the fullness of Christ: there is a sweet mutual fulfilling and
accomplishing each one of another: know ye not that word, that where I am,
there they may be also: I think of all the words that Christ ever spoke to the
Father, that word was the most imperious and commanding-like word which he
has, Joh. 17. 24. I will (says he) that those that thou have given me, be
where I am. It was not his prayer which came that length, he willed it, and
would not be contradicted: And certainly there is nothing that may comfort you
in the our of trial so much as this, Christ is upon his way to relieve you, and
ye are upon your way of overcoming: And I shall only say that word, which ought
to be your practice, 1 John 5. 18. Whosoever is born of God sins not, and
that wicked one touches him not: That ordinary expression which you have you
should not rub cloths with him, not touch him. And to those that are walking in
the broad paths of sin, I shall only speak that to you which is, Joh. 21. 22.
His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the
Almighty. Your eyes and your taste shall be satisfied; and that word which is
verse. 30. he shall be preserved to the day of destruction, or as the word in
the original, he shall be reserved to the day of wrath: as it were, there shall
be a combination of wrath* and justice that shall seize upon you. Now to him
who is upon his way, who shall come and will not carry, and whose reward is
with him, we desire to give praise.

SERMON VIII.
Gal. 6. 14. By whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.
CHristianity does consist in a blessed exchange of affections, a soul dying in
its affections and respects to all things, that are here below; and living and
advancing in its desires toward him, who is that blessed and universal good. It
ought to be that arch-plot, and great design, that Christians ought to promove,
to attain to that original unity, which once was in man's affections toward
God: O! what blessedness did Adam enjoy, while he did stand in that estate
wherein he was created, he having a blessed harmony of all his affections
toward God, and likewayes there being a most divine correspondence and blessed
familiarity betwixt heaven and earth, betwixt him who fitteth on the Throne,
and the footstool: but that was most eminently verified, that man being in
honor, did not abide. O! what anxious and perplexing thoughts had poor Adam,
no doubt, some hours after his fall, when he did reflect upon that which was
once his condition, and did compare it with that which was now his lot: might
not he take up that lamentation over himself, Man in his best estate is
altogether vanity; And likewayes he might have that proverb taken up of
himself, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? Now,
man by lossing that blessed unity that was in his affections, has contracted a
woeful and infinite diversity in his affections toward these things that are
here below: so that those affections which did once sweetly run in one channel
toward God, are now divided and separated in many channels, toward those things
that are below him: And there is nothing beneath the Son, that leads captive
so many of our desires as the World: therefore it were your advantage to be
crucified to the world, and to have the world crucified to you: that you may
discover, that endless vanity, and unspeakable vexation of spirit, that is in
all things that are here: The world is a perfect compend and complete epitom of
all misery: God himself is that compend of all blessedness, so that there is
nothing that we can take up under this, but it is most eminently in him. It is
a duty which is much undervalued in these days, Christians to be promoving in
that blessed work of having themselves crucified to the world, and having the
world crucified to them: O! how suitable is it for those who are heirs and
expectants of that blessed hope and everlasting enjoyment of being with God,
who is the Judge of all flesh, and with Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and with the innumerable company of holy Angels, and to be
made heirs and coheirs with Jesus Christ. Is it not below you to be much taken
up in your vain and anxiouspursuits afterthose things that are here below: The
objects of the desires of your immortal spirits ought to be more high than
things below; and ought to be more divine than things humane; your affections
ought to be ascending as pillaes of smoke, and ye should be breathing after
that blessed day when there shall be a confinement of all your affections on
him. We have at some occasions spoken unto you, of the grace of humility, and
of the grace of love, the one teaching us to undervalue our self, the other
teaching us to value God: And had you been much taken up in the spiritual and
living exercise of those, there should not have been much difficulty to
persuade you at this time. We shall not insist long in telling what
Mortification is; It is a constant and blessed endeavor of the Christian, to
remove out of his way all those impediments, that do interrupt the exercise of
love; As likewayes, it is that which entertaineth a constant and perpetual
antipathy and holy indignation against every thing, through which his conformity
with God, and that perfect likeness and sim^litude with his Maker, might be in
any way impaired. Mortification does not consist in those unconstant and
unequal exercises of mortifying our lusts, it consists not in those violent
flashes of holy zeal and indignation against our iniquities; for though that
indignation be violent for its time, yet it does quickly evanish and pass away:
but that grace of Mortification must be a constant and daily exercise; We will
solace our selves in the chambers of our imagry, by beholding our idols
pourtrayed up the wall, we will study to receive satisfaction in our
apprehensions, when we cannot receive satisfaction in the actual fruition of
them: Such is likewayes the woeful desperatness of the hearts of the children of
men, that when God has put a worm to the root of that gourd, under the shadow
of which, we used to solace our selves, we cry forth from a discontented humor,
It is better for us to die then to live: O! there are many here, to whom it
would be death to outlive their idols; their idols and they are pleasant in
their lives, and they desire not to be divided in their deaths. 3.
Mortification does not consist in that partial and divided way of mortifying
our corruptions, we taking vengeance upon some of our lusts, but with Saul,
spareing it who is the King. Naaman the Syrian must have an indulgence of
bowing his knee in the house of Rimmon: Lot must plead for the sparing of Zoar,
that small thing: and so when we are intending that work of Mortification, we
plead for the sparing of these things, which we call Zoars, these small, but
our Master-corruptions. Certainly that evangelick Mortification which is
required of us, does not consist in this, for we must intend an universal
separation betwixt us and all our idols, we must cast away all our idols to the
moles and to the batts, and we must defile the covering of them, and he alone
must be the cover of our eyes: He never knew what the grace of Mortification
meant, who never set about the accomplishment of the ruin of that great and
master-idol which domineereth over him: And we conceive, that the best and most
solid way of knowing our growth in Mortification, is by reflecting upon the
decay of these idols, which are our predominants; other sins which affail us
may decay, and their strength wax weak, and yet mortification not be on the
growing hand, for there are many of our lusts, that rather die by concession,
then by constraint; there are many of our idols that rather go out of us, then
are cast out.

Now the first thing that a Christian ought to endeavor to mortify is, his
love to the the world, which was the practice of this holy man: In the words he
points out unto us that way, wherein he did attain this complete and
spiritual Mortification to the world, holden forth to us in these words, by
whom, which does relate unto Jesus Christ, who is made mention of in the words
going before: or, as the words may be rendered, by which I am crucified to the
world, and so they relate unto the cross of Jesus Christ. Now under this notion
of being crucified, he does certainly hold forth unto us, that great difficulty
that is in accomplishing the work of Mortification; And under this name of
being crucified, he holds forth unto us, the longsomnesse of the time that we
must spend, before we can attain complete Mortification, Crucifying being one
of the most lent and slow of all violent deaths; Mortification is not a work of
one day, it will cost us many days and years, before we shall crush the head
of him, who has so oft-times crushed our heel, before that blessed promise
shall be fulfilled, that all things shall be put in subjection unto us: Sin
does most easily invade us, and take possession of us, but it is not easily
dispossessed; for except we had the infinite strength of him who is Jehovah, we
might sit down, and close our hands, and never mint to oppose these Idols,
under whose subjection we are: This word of being crucified, does likewayes
hold forth the painfulness and uneasiness of this work of Mortification,
Crucifying being a death, amongst all violent deaths, one of the most bitter:
we must certainly be mortified to our ease, before we can be mortified to our
lusts, we must travel in birth, before the grace of Mortification can be formed
in us. It is a woeful evil in these days, that the most part of people walk
under this apprehension, that there is not much difficulty to Mortify their
corruptions, but it is a token, that they never knew what it was to mortify
them, who never knew the difficulty of Mortification.

The third thing that is holden forth under this name of being crucified is,
that woeful reluctance and indisposition of spirit, which we have to this
blessed exercise of Mortifying our corruptions; we have as great unwillingnesse
unto it, as though we were to go to subject our selves to some violent death.
O! how is vanity and corruption joined to the spirits of the sons of men: how
loath are we to have that woeful and accursed union betwixt us and our lusts
dissolved? O! how many Orators and Procurators within our selves have we to
plead for this, the sparing of our lusts: we may be persuaded of this, that if
we be not the ruin of our iniquity, iniquity shall certainly be our ruin. O!
how may we blush and be confounded seven days, that we should be so loath to
have a separation betwixt us and these things, by which our distance with God
and estrangement from him, is so much increased: this vanity is unspeakable,
that we should be so averse from that wherein our eternal blessedness dothly,
in having that woeful band, which we have wreathed about our own necks, taken
off by the blessed and everlasting hands of him who has died and risen again,
to accomplish this blessed design.

Lastly, under this word of being crucified, is held forth unto us that
complete and spiritual Mortification to the world, that this holy man attained
to, he was as one dead to these things: he was not much exercised in joy in
having the world, neither was he exercised in grief, by wanting the things of
the world, he was a man dead, which could not be moved by any of these things:
We do not say so, that Paul was altogether a Stoic, without all passions of
grief and sorrow, or of joy, but we only say this, that he did not grieve for
the want of the world, as those who have no hope; neither did he so joy in
having the world, as those who have not a more divine and high spring of
consolation, he was clothed with a holy indifferency, and a blessed neutrality
in having or wanting these things; it was none of Paul's desires to have the
world, he had learned that divine and excellent art of being content with every
estate of life: he knew not what it was to murmur; And it were certainly much
our advantage, to be provoked to jealousy, when we reflect upon the practice
of this holy man. I conceive, that if all that are here would examine
themselves, by how many degrees their Mortification to the world, does come
short of this, they might sit down and conclude with themselves, that they are
yet to begin to mortify; yea, there are many here, to whom we may say, that
they are so far from being clothed with a holy indifferency in having the
things of the world, that they are clothed with that woeful and indispensible
necessity in pursuing after these things: this is the language of the most
part, Give, give, men hurrying themselves in multitudes of hopes, and of fears,
and of expectations, and likewayes an infinite number of desires; And what is
the end and result of all these things, but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Now that you may be helped to attain this concerning-duty, to be mortified to
the world, we shall propose these things unto you: The first is this, be much
taken up in a holy contemplation and spiritual beholding of these unsearchable
excellencies that are in God. If once the foul of the creature were elevated to
behold him, there should not be much difficulty, to be mortified to the world:
were we once admitted to draw by a lap of the vail, and behold that uncreated
glory and unexpressible Majesty that is treasured up in him, Mortification
should be no great difficulty unto us: this is clearly held forth here, for
Paul does tell by whom he had this grace of Mortification, it was by beholding
that pleasant plant of renown Jesus Christ. This is clear likewayes, 1 Ioh. 5.
5* Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God? Did we once believe that fundamental Article of faith, that
he who was crucified upon the tree, was the real Son of God, we should most
easily win to this concerning duty of Mortification. We may reduce all the
causes of our little growth in this blessed work, to that woeful ignorance of
God, wherewith the most part of us are clothed: were there a door opened to us
in heaven, and were we in the spirit to behold him who sits upon the Throne,
whose countenance is like a Sardine stone, and about whose Throne there is that
rainbow; could we penetrat through these vails, wherewith both he and we are
covered, we being clothed with the vail of our ignorance, and likewayes with
the vail of our impurity; and he being clothed with these two most glorious
vails, the vail of his unsearchableness, and the vail of that wonderful and
unexpressible Majesty that is in him, the one confounding the judgment, and
the other confounding the affections, so that affection and judgment in a
manner is put to a none-exercise, and both of these do sweetly resolve in that
blessed one act of admiration. We need not speak much to the commendation of
those unto you, who were never acqainted with him, that so ye might be
persuaded to forsake your old lovers; We shall only say this, silence and
admiration they speak least, and yet speak most: there is more divine Oratory
in holy silence, and more excellent expressions in blessed admiration, than all
our inventions could reach: what can man speak of him who is that unsearchable
and incomprehensible Majesty? This may appear a paradox to you, that silence
should speak, and admiration commend: but it is no paradox, when the object of
our commendation, is by infinite degrees exalted above our blessing and our
practice. O! men of the world, will you once be persuaded to make that blessed
divorce betwixt you and your idols, that there may be an everlasting
conjunction betwixt God and you: O! if ye had so much divine understanding, as
to judge of things according to their real worth, He alone should be exalted in
that day: Come and see and behold what i^finit sweetness is treasured up in
him, those springs wherewith ye delight your selves, shall ere long dry up; but
he is that high and infinite spring, which always flows out, and yet is not
impaired.

The second thing whereby we may attain to this blessed duty of Mortification
to the world, is this, by reflecting how passing and transient those things
are, wherewith the sons of men use to solace themselves. Paul does press
Mortification to the world from this consideration, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion
of this world passes away: the word is most emphatick, this Schema and
representation of the world or this stage play of the world, it passes away;
therefore, let those that rejoice he as though they rejoiced not, and be
careful for nothing: this is clear, 1 John 2. 17. and 1 Pet. 4. 7. did we
solidly believe how changable those enjoyments of the world were, would we
hurry our selves so much in our pursuits after them? Those who are listed up in
their enjoyments this day, may be thrust down low the next day: Ioh, who was a
man enriched in many things, yet a few days, yea, we may say, a few hours made
a sad and strange exchange: We may affirm that, with great assurance of truth,
Surely man at his best estate is altogether vanity: that word that is there (
at his best estate) may be rendered thus, man although he stand: Etiamsi
constitutus, in your most fixed and settled condition in the world: his is the
Emblem and Motto of your state vanity, most subject to change: and why should
you weary your selves in the fire for that which is very vanity?

The third thing by which ye may attain this duty of Mortification, is to be
much taken up in the consideration of the brevity of your life: I suppose, that
if we were walking more in the house of mourning, and were believing that
truth, that it is appointed for man once to die, and that shortly, we must be
brought home unto that unchangeable estate of life; O! how would this allay us
in our pursuits? I think this were a little water, which we might mix with our
wine, when there is greatest confidence of Creature contentments: left the foam
of this wine should distemper our head, we may mix it with this water, the
brevity of our life. It is a sweet subject for meditation when we are most
high, to be much in the consideration of this, that within a few days we shall
be most low. What is your life but a vapor, which does quickly evanish, and
does but appear for a little? Suppose the whole Creation should stay with you
during all your time, yet how short should your enjoyment be? what is man's
life, but a hand-breadth, these four finger-breadths, which is one of the least
of all geometrical measures; there is morning, forenoon, afternoon, and night,
all which do amount to a day? there is infancy, youth, manhood, and old age,
and those do quickly evanish and pass away. How many are hurried into
eternity, in the first step of their days, in their infancy? And again, how
many in their youth? and we have frequent experience, that many in their
manhood, and in the flour of their age, that sentence comes forth, Return ye
children of men: and there is not one amongst an hundred, that do attain to
that utmost period that nature does allow; and what though ye did live
fourscore of years, which is the utmost period that nature has allowed, yet
does your time quickly evanish and flee away? Why should you solace your selves
with those things that cannot eternally remain with you? when ye go down to the
grave, you can take nothing of these things with you* for in all points as you
came, so shall ye go, and what profit is there that ye have labored for the
wind?

The fourth thing whereby we may be helped to attain this, is this, Be much in
the mortifying of those corruptions which cannot be entertained, but by
intertaining also this woeful corruption of covetousness: there are some
corruptions, which have so near affinity to, as likewayes dependence upon, this
sin, that if these be not crushed, we cannot attain to this duty of
Mortification, there is prodigality and pride, these two grand enemies, to the
accomplishment of this blessed design: and we would begin to crush these,
before we can begin to accomplish this.

There is another way which is this, be much taken up in the reflecting upon
that blessed hope, and that grace which shall be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ. Peter presses sobriety to all things here below,
by this arguments, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Be sober, and he gives this reason of it, for
the grace that shall be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ: O!
were we much taken up in beholding that blessed estate of life, which the souls
of just men made perfect shall have with God, where we shall enjoy, and yet not
loath: there shall be an everlasting conjunction betwixt desire and enjoyment
of him who is the person beloved, so that it thinks never to receive
satisfaction; all it does receive, is more to provoke its appetite, then to
satisfy its desire.

There is a last, which is this, be much in the consideration of that day, when
all the families of the earth shall appear before him in the valley of
decision. This indeed would help us, to much mortification to these things of
the world, as is clear from Eccles. 11. 9. had we the faith of that day
engraven upon our spirits, that we must render an account of our ways, O! how
wary should we be in engaging with vanity? I think the great cause why sin has
so universal a dominion over the sons of men is, because we do not solidly
believe that there is such a day approaching, when we shall appear before the
judgment seat of him, who shall judge not after the seeing of the eye, nor
shall reprove after the hearing of the ear, but shall judge righteous judgment:
The terror of the Lord would certainly persuade us, if we did believe this. O!
what a holy unwillingnesse should we have in walking after the paths of our
idols.

Now we shall shut up our discourse with this, be persuaded once to begin that
work of mortification, and especially in mortifying your love to the world: he
that returns victor after war with his idols, we may call him Joseph, for he
shall be as a fruitful bough whose branches run over the wall. If once you
spoil that grand and arch-rebel, who does so much oppose you, in a manner, you
should stand alone and sing a triumph, they should flee when none pursues; and
we ought be strong as a lion, and who should rouse us up?

Of Spiritual CONTENTMENT.
SERMON IX.
Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
IT was Adams ignorance of this divine mystery of Christianity, to be content
with every estate, wherein he was placed, that did bring him down from that
high pinnacle of his excellency, and did degrade him from that primitive glory,
wherewith he was clothed, for he not being content with that precious and
excellent lot, wherein God had placed him, but coveting after a more noble and
excellent Being, he came exceedingly short of this design. And such is the
Athenian and woeful frame of spirit, wherewith men are possessed, that they can
fancy no blessedness in what they are, but imagine a great blessedness to be
in what they are not; hence is it that men do covet the lot of others, and are
dissatisfied with their own estate and condition: and certainly the affections
of men while they are living under these spears which are in perpetual motion,
can never be satisfied, nor be at rest: which was the observation of that
master of experiences. Prove. 27. 20. Hell and destruction are never full, so
the eyes of man are never satisfied; and as he says, Eccles. 1. 8. The eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing: And we may
likewayes add, that the heart is not satisfied with the enjoying; And it is
certainly through the deceitfuness of the spirit of man, and that invisible root
of pride, that every lot and condition of life is subject to satiety and
loathing: private men do envy the greatness of Princes, and Princes do envy the
quiet repose of private men, though they will not descend nor reduce themselves
unto that estate, but do always fear that, which sometimes they are
constrained to desire: And believe me, a Christians sitting down seriously, to
contemplat and view what an infinite multitude of hopes, fears and desires the
spirit of man is possessed with; as likewayes to behold how that vanity and
vexation of spirit, is engraven upon the choicest lot that a Christian can meet
with here, he may be provoked to look out at the windows of his prisonhouse,
and long for that precious day, when Christ should be as a roe, or as a young
hind coming over the mountains of Bether, waiting to be exalted to that
precious and excellent estate of life, where there shall be neither loathing
nor longing: Abel who has been the first possessor of heaven of all the house
and family of Adam, and has dwelt in it near six thousand years, yet there is
not in him the least inclination or motion to change or alter his estate; there
is no loathing in heaven nor desire to flit there; And, believe me, this divine
mystery of contentment with every lot and condition, in which a Christian is
placed, is not easily attained. O! what repinings has the unmortified spirit
of man to the dispensations of God, in regulating his lot and estate, which
does alone speak forth the Atheism of our heart: for it is, as it were, man
proposing a model, and form unto God, how he should rule and govern the world.
I think Christians are as much subject to the fashion of this contempt and
pride as any. It was a noble saying of one; in the commendation of victory over
a man's self, Tunc omnia regna tenebis, cum poteris rex esse tui, ye shall then
be made a possessor of all kingdoms, when ye shall be made a ruler and king of
your self. And no doubt, one that is once mortified to this passion of
discontent, he may dwell upon the Mountains of Ararat in the midst of all the
revolutions, and changes that are here below; such a Christian may sweetly
contemplat the overturning of Estates and Commonwealths, and may patiently
endure every lot that does befall him, and possess his soul in patience: And
certainly, if men knew but this one thing, that the whole circumference of the
earth, is but one point of the Universe, and that all time that has been, is,
or shall be, is but one instant, in comparison of eternity: and what is man but
a part of that point? and what is his life but a small part of that instant?
And why then should man anxiously complain, to spend a part of a moment in
enduring the most anxious and sad things that can befall him? And, (as Christ
does most divinely speak) Can a man by taking thought, add one cubit to his
stature? what poor advantage has a man by his coffeehouse and sorrow, if it
be not to render himself more miserable? we may say of heavenlymindednesse and
of contentment, they are like Hippocrates Twins, that live and die together,
they are two sweet companions, that always go along together, and cannot be
divided.

But to descend a little more to the words, you have Paul in them obviating any
misconstruction, that the Philippians might have of his joy, which he
expresses in the former verse, as if he had been one that was coveting great
things for himself, or desiring to be great in the world, no, says he, I speak
not these things because of want, which formerly I had, and is now made up,
for, says he, I have learned in every estate that I am, therewith to be
content. There is no lot, says Paul, but I can patiently endure it, and can
with a divine complacency carry my self under it; And this he proves in the 1
2. verse, I know says he, how to be debased, I am instructed in this divine
art, how to walk soberly under debasement, and I know, says he, how to abound:
I am not one that is puffed up with a prosperous lot in the world: And least this
assertion of Paul's should seem to be a boasting beyond his line, and of being
exalted above measure, he does sweetly subjoyn that humble assertion, I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me; As if he would have said, do
not mistake me, or conceive me under a more divine and high notion then ye
ought, for I am but a poor and sinful man, who can do nothing of my self, but
as I am over-acted by a divine and supreme hand. I am enabled to triumph over
the most adverse and sinistrous lot, that can befall me.

The words which we have read, in the original they are most significant and
emphatick; that word which is here rendered Content, is All sufficient, and so
the words may sweetly run thus, I have learned in every estate wherein I am, to
be all-sufficient, of which that word, Pro. 14. 14. Is a sweet commentary, The
back-slider in heart shall be filled with the fruit of his own way, but a godly
man shall be satisfied from himself* In a manner, there is a wellspring of
everlasting consolation with in the Christian, which makes him endure every
anxious lot. And no doubt, that word I have learned, does both speak the
difficulty of attaining this mystery of divine contentment, as likewayes it
speaks out that ignorance of this divine and noble end, wherewith Paul was
once possessed: I was once, says he, as rude as any in the knowledge of this
thing* but now through the understanding and wisdom of God, I am made perfect
in the knowledge of these things. And that word in every estate, does
exceedingly commend that great pitch of Christianity, unto which Paul had
attained, there was no lot that could befall him wrong; And we shall only say
this by the way, continuance of affliction is one of the greatest occasions of
impatience that is imaginable. A Christian, when first he meets with a cross,
may be provoked to salute it, and embrace it but if it be lengthened out upon
him, then he cries forth, have thou found me, O thou mine enemy? and then
begins to call in question the loving kindness of the Lord, and to complain,
that he has shut up his mercies in everlasting forgetfulness; though we may
say, in the day that a Christian shall be passing through the valley of the
shadow of death, he shall be sweetly convinced of his impatiency, when a
Christian shall be constrained, to engrave that Motto upon the door of his
everlasting rest he has done all things well: What thoughts will ye have of
these risings and debatings of spirit wherewith ye have been possessed? We may
imagine and not without some ground, that a great part of eternity shall be
spent in interrogations, Christ shall interrogate us, if we laked any thing
while we were here below, and we shall be constrained to answer, nothing, even
in that day when he sent us forth without scrip; or money, or without sandals
or any thing, and those that did belong to us, we shall be constrained, to
subscribe to the infinite wisdom of God, in regulating of our lot.

Now in speaking upon this divine quality and duty of divine contentment,
(which we conceive, is a duty most requisite in these days) we shall not insist
long in pointing out what this divine grace of contentment is, but we conceive,
it includes not only this, a sweet and composed frame of spirit, under every
anxious lot and dispensation with which we meet, of which that word is a
commentary, Lev. 10. 3. where it is said of Aaron, when his sons were cut off,
He held his peace, and that word, Psalm. 62. 1. Truly my soul waits upon the
Lord: But the words in the original are this, Truly my soul be thou silent unto
God, as they are rendered in the margin of the book, as if he would have said,
do not fret nor be disquieted, because of any thing that he carveth out unto
thee.

But likewayes this grace and duty of contentment includes, a holy
complaceney, and sweet serenity and calmness of spirit under every lot, of
which that word is a commentary. Jam. 1. 2. Count it all joy when you fall into
diverse temptations, and that word, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulation. Neither
shall we dwell long upon this, to prove that it is the duty of a Christian to
be content with every estate wherein God shall put him: This is clear, 1 Timothy
6. 8. Having food and raiment let us therewith be content: and Heb. 13. 5. Be
content with these things that you have and Iam. 4. 7. and Luke 3. 14. And we
may say, if a Christian made the world but his servant, little would content
him, but if once he make the world his master, and lord of his affections, then
his desires will be infinite, and cannot at all be satisfied. We shall not long
stand to inveigh against that too much addictedness of man to those passing and
transient vanities of the world: we conceive there are these three things,
which men do most earnestly covet, there is pleasure, riches, and honor; And
certainly, these are below an immortal spirit, to fix their desires upon them:
would ye have Solomon's verdict of riches, O ye that trust in uncertain riches,
ye have it sweetly in, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is
not? In a manner, riches they have not a being, for they take wings to
themselves and they flee away, as Solomon does most sweetly speak, Eccles. 5.
11. If riches increase, what profit (says he) is there to the owner thereof,
save to be beholder of them with their eyes: all that the owner of riches has
is, the seeing of them, which a man, who is a passer by may likewayes have,
though he be not a possessor of them. And hence is that word, L. k. 14. where
the man desiring to be excused for not coming to Christ; says of himself, I
have bought a piece of ground and must needs go see it; all his enjoyment of it
was comprehended in that one poor thing, to behold it; And as for honor and
glory, which, spirits that are more refined, and are not so wedded to the
things of a world, pursue after, I would only have them knowing that one word,
Psalm. 62. 9. Men of high degree are a lie, and men of low degree are vanity: as
if he would have said, any preheminency that one has, that has an excellent
lot in the world above a poor one, does consist in this, the one is a vanity,
and the other is a lying vanity, speaking somewhat to be in him, which is not
really in him; and that word, Act. 25. 23. where, speaking of Bernice, that
came in with great pomp and glory unto the Senat-house, the word that is there
rendered pomp and glory is this, he came in with a great fantasy (...), with a
great show and image, without any thing in reality: And as for pleasures of the
world, with which these epicurean spirits of the world are so much besotted,
know that verdict of Solomon, which he has of these things. Vanity of
vanities, and all things are vanity and vexation of spirit: And what can the
man do that comes after the king? If Solomon found no more, no doubt, none
that comes after him, can find any more.

But that which we shall speak to first upon this, shall be, what are the
causes and principles from whence the coffeehouse of one does flow, under
any anxious or sad lot that does befall him? And we conceive that it either does
proceed from this, a Christian not being much in the exercise of
selt-examination, as it is clear from that word, Psalm. 4. 4. Examine your
selves upon your bed and be still, speaking so much, that the compendious way
unto submission and contentment under any lot, is to be much in
self-examination: And certainly self-examination has much influence upon
contentment under every lot, because such a one does most accuratly take up
these imperfections and blemishes that are in him, so in stead of complaining,
he is constrained to wonder and cry forth, Why should a living man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sin: likewayes one that is much in
self-examination, is a man that can take up the intendment of the rod, as
likewayes the advantage of it, and so he is constrained patiently to bear the
rod, in his youth, and to sit down and adore the unsearchable wisdom of God in
dispensing such things to him. That word, Prove. 19. 3. is oft-times verified of
us, the heart of man perverteth his way, and then he fretteth against the Lord,
when he is chastened for it. O! but if a Christian were dwelling much at home,
he might wonder that yet he has a being in the world, and is not cut off from
the right hand of the Lord. O! bless him eternally that ye are not sent away to
be reserved in everlasting chains.

There is this likewayes that does occasion coffeehouse under our lot, and
it is, want of that divine preparation to meet with every lot that can befall us
before it come. We think a Christian ought to be general in his resolutions, to
bear every cross that Christ will carve out. And certainly there are these two
advantages that a Christian has of general and universal resolutions. First he
has this advantage, that when he is chastened, as it were, in his goods or any
other thing that belongs to him, he begins to sing a song of praise,
because it is not worse with him: there can no lot befall a man who is universal
in his resolutions, but he will have a song of praise unto God, because of it.
Secondly, he has this advantage, that foresight and resolution to meet with
any cross does exceedingly dispose the Christian for meeting with it: we
conceive that word which is, Job 3. 25. has had great influence on Jobs
patience, for the thing which I greatly feared, is come upon me: afflictions do
oft-times surprise us, and so we faint in the day of adversity, and so prove
our strength to be but small.

There is this likewayes which occasioneth our coffeehouse, and it is this,
that little heavenly mindedness, that is in a Christian, when he meets with
his rod: O! but a Christian sitting down upon mount Pisgah, to behold that
promised land, might with patience bear his rod: this is clear, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
compared with verse. 17. where Paul gives this reason of his courage and
constancy under his rod, that he had an eye unto those things that were
eternal: did ye never know what such a thing meant, as to drown the thoughts of
your present misery, in these precious depths of eternity, to be beholding so
much in heaven, as might infinitely solace, yea, and make up all your losses
here. I confess that opinion of the Stoics, that did commend apathie and want
of passions unto men, that they should not be much moved with grief for the
want of any thing, nor be moved with joy for the having or possessing of any
thing, is in some sense good: hence was it that in some sense they (...)
divinely, nihil boni vel mali accidit homini, nisi bonus vel malus animus; that
there was no evil nor good that did befall man, but only a good and evil mind:
If the heart was in a divine and spiritual frame, they knew not what any other
sad or anxious lot could do to them.

There is this likewayes which occasioneth coffeehouse, and it is this, the
want of the taking up God as the cause and author of those sad evils which
befall us; which if it were once believed, we should be ashamed to dispute and
murmur so much as we do: this is clear, 1 Samuel 3. near the close, that word of
Elies, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: and that word, Psalm.
39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, and this reason is given of it,
because thou did it: and that word, Isa. 39. 8. Good is the word of the Lord,
And certainly the murmurings and repinings of our hearts, do speak that gross
Atheism that dwells within us: O! durst we debate with him who is Almighty,
or put him to render an account of his ways, who is that supreme and absolute
One? Is it sit to be said to such a Prince as he is, thou art ungodly, and to
condemn him who is most just? O! be much in the study of the sovereignty of
God, when he, as it were, does call as in asolemn assembly, all your terrors
round about.

There is this l^kewayes which does occasion it, which is, our little being in
the meditation and serious thoughts of the brevity of our life and of time: If
a man knew that it were but for an hour, or for ten days that he were to endure
tribulation, he might patiently submit, and bear with his rod: this is clear, 1
Cor. 7. 29. compared with the following verses, where, from that doctrine that
time was short, he does infer this exhorration, let those that weep, be as
though they weeped not, as if he would have said, let them not be much moved
with those things, time time will have a close: Believe me, it is not long
before the small period of time that has interveened betwixt eternity before,
and eternity after, shall be sweetly swallowed up, and there shall be nothing
but eternity.

And there is this lastly which does occasion our great coffeehouse, under
our rod, which is, that unmortifedness and subduedness of spirit: pride being
the great predominant evil, and if we may allude to that word, Only by pride
comes contention; we may certainly say it holds well here, that only by
pride are these contendings that we have with God, concerning his dispensations
toward us. In sum, it is this, it is impossible for a Christian not humble, to
be content: pride is one of the greatcst opposites unto divine contentment
under any rod that we meet with: O! but if a Christian were humble, he might
sit in the dust, and sweetly adore the infinite love and patience of God.

Now we shall in the second place propose some considerations, that may hinder
a Christian, or any other, from being discontent with any lot that does befall
them; and the first is this, that there are many sad and woeful companions of a
Christians coffeehouse and repyning against any dispensation of God, and we
conceive there is not only this bad companion, that a Christian hereby is
indisposed and unfitted to go about spiritual duties, especially these two, of
prayer and praise: It is impossible for a Christian that is under the exercise
of coffeehouse, to pray or praise; there is some what of this pointed at, 1 Timothy 2. 8. where this is a qualification of a right prayer, that he should be
without wrath, not having any murmurings or repynings within his heart: as
likewayes it is clear concerning praise, Psalm. 57. 7. My heart is fixed, it is
fixed, which speaks so much as this, that praise does require a divine and
composed frame of spirit: and it is most certain, that coffeehouse does
impede prayer, for there are three sweet ingredients of the exercise of prayer,
which coffeehouse does exceedingly cut off; there is love, fervency, and
faith; which no doubt coffeehouse does abridge; a discontented Christian
cannot be a Christian burning with love; jealousy is such a predominant with
him, that love cannot be his exercise: And certainly, if prayer do not proceed
from the precious principle of love, it wants that one arm which it ought to
have: Neither can a Christian exercise faith, because he has now, as it were,
taken up so bad an opinion of God, that he cannot repose his confidence not
hope in him: And as for fervency, they are so much in porring upon their
present lot, that they can as it were, be servent about nothing, but only in
the removal of that. It is certain, that let a Christian examine himself, there
is nothing that cuts the neck of prayer so much as discontent; in a manner, the
spirit as it were, is turned brutish, being uncomposed for any spiritual
converse with God.

There is this bad companion likewayes, which accompanies coffeehouse, we
are incapacitat, and rendered altogether unable to resist temptations, while
coffeehouse is in exercise. It is impossible for a Christian to be a
Mortifier, or resister of lust, when coffeehouse is once in exercise; And
there are these two evils, that get most marvelous advantage under
coffeehouse, and these are, the predominant lust of such a one, be what it
will, and pride, these two evils do spring apace: And certainly, all other
lusts do get much victory over such a one: a Christian may loss more by one
hours coffeehouse under a cross, then he can regain in many Months, yea on
this side of eternity: And it is no wonder that temptations do prevail upon
such a one, he is off his watch, and his strength is gone: In a manner,
temptation speaks that, Their strength is gone from them, let us go up and
put them to flight.

There is this bad companion likewayes, that does accompany coffeehouse,
want of tenderness of spirit, and the loss of it. It is most certain, that
there is nothing that does cut off tenderness, so much as coffeehouse: for a
Christian that is such, is not living under the impression of the fear or of
the love of the Almighty, which are the two great principles of tenderness of
spirit. Certainly, let one examine. they will find, that by their anxiety and
briterness of spirit, they have made their hearts to die as a stone within
them, and have made their bands strong upon their spirits.

And there is this last bad companion of coffeehouse, A Christians
undervaluing of all the former mercies which he has received, when once a
Christian meets with that which contradicts his humor, he loses his esteem
of every thing that formerly has been bestowed upon him: There is something of
this pointed at, Genesis 37. last in Jacobs impatiency of the loss of Joseph;
where he does undervalue all his mercies beside; And it is most clear in that
word, Esth. 5. 12, 13. where, though it be spoken of a wicked man, yet by
proportion it holds of a Christian, that because Mordecai did not bow his
knee, he cried sorth, concerning all his other mercies, they avail me nothing;
he knew not what it was to put a price upon mercies that he had received; but
because this which was the great lust of his heart was away, he did undervalue
the rest: And it is most certain, that there is nothing does so highten a
Christians disrespect unto the most precious and excellent things of God, as
this of discontent: And this is one subtilty and device of Satan, that a
Christian may with greater ease, and with less conviction do it: They do
ordinarily construct their choicest mercies, to be delusions, and so upon that
account begin to undervalue and misprize them.

There is this consideration which may move you to wrestle against
coffeehouse, It is a character and distinguishing mark of a Christian from a
Reprobat: I would have Murmurers seriously to meditate upon that sad word,
which is in Jude. 19. verse. compared with the 15. where speaking of Christ's
coming to judge and execure vengeance, the first put in the roll are these,
These are Murmurers and complainers: and that word 1 Cor. 10, 10. Be not
murmurers, as many of them were; and were destroyed by the destroyer: And
certainly, it is no wonder that Murmuring pass under so bad a notion, not only
because it is indeed that sin, which speaks out our Atheism most, but
because it is that sin which does declare most a Christian or any others desire
to be independent, and not in subjection unto God. In a manner, such is the
woeful ambition of our spirit, that we desire not to depend upon him, but that
we should have our own lot in our own hand, to carve out unto our selves. O! we
know not what it is to give Christ a negative vote in the dispensations that do
befall us: we love to be co-ordinat with God, and not subordinat to him. O put a
blank in his hand, desire him to fill it up with what he likes: Christ does
oft-times put a blank in a Christians hand, as in that word, What will ye that
I should do unto you, there is Christ's blank, that he does give us, and though
through our ignorance we cannot fill it up, it is best to give it back to
himself, that he may fill it up, with what he lists.

There is this consideration also, that may persuade you to desist from
coffeehouse; It is that sin which does interrupt the accomplishment of the
promises. As likewayes it does interrupt the exercise of faith upon the
promises; this is clear, Number. 14, 27. compared with 28. where that promise that
was given to them of entering into the land of Canaan, they were cut short of
it, because of their murmuring: and it does interrupt the exercise of faith
upon the promises, as is clear, Psalm. 106, 24. compared with verse. 25. where it
is said, they believed not his word, and the ground of it is given, for they
were murmurers: And it is no wonder that murmuring interrupt the exercise of
faith upon the promises; for it is impossible for a murmurer either to have the
faith of the omnipotency of God, or to have the faith of his goodness or love,
which are these two precious pillars of faith upon which it must build it self:
O! but these that begin once to debate with him, do quickly put faith out of
exercise. And I would have you knowing this, That there is a coffeehouse of
judgment, and a coffeehouse of the will and affections; and oft-times a
Christian will win over the coffeehouse of judgment and reason, when he
cannot mortify the coffeehouse of his will and affections; for the
sovereignty of God; and the sinfulness of our nature, will silence our reason;
but, no doubt, it must be his own immediate hand, that must silence the
murmurings of our will: this is clear, Psalm. 42. 5. where David is convinced of
the unreasonableness of his discontent, and yet he is forced to debate with his
will concerning the quiting of it.

There is this consideration likewayes, which may provoke you to desist from
coffeehouse under your lot; It is a most unreasonable evil for a Christian
to be discontent. for as Christ speaks Math. 6. 27. What profit have you by
taking thought? Can you add one cubit to your stature? It is a poor thing, when
a man has lost his good, to loss his patience also: what a poor revenge is
that which a man takes of himself? And certainly, the unreasonableness of
impatience under the rod, does not only appear in this, that it hinders and
interrupteth a Christians seeing of any mercy that is in the rod, it is
impossible for a discontented one to take up mercy in his stroke: but also that
impatience is the compendious way, for the prolonging of your strait; and the
involving of you in greater miseries and thraldoms: As likewayes, impatience
does heighten and increase the cause of your bondage, and multiplieth your
iniquities: O! but it is a sweet and excellent study for a Christian, to
endeavor patience under every lot? And, in a manner, when we cannot read love
in his hand, nor in his face, because of his frowns and strokes, yet by faith
to draw aside the vail, and read love in his heart, and cry forth, I know the
thoughts of his heart, that they are thoughts of peace, and not of evil:
Certainly it is through coffeehouse, that we cry forth, Though his words be
as soft as oil and butter, yet war is in his heart; we do change him with
contradictions, betwixt his profession and his purpose.

And there is this consideration likewayes, which may deter you from
coffeehouse, which is this, It is impossible for a Christian to profit by
his rod, while he is discontent: all the time that a Christian is under the fit
of impatience, he spends so much of his time most prodigally: not employing
it, not promoving that which is the great design of the rod, to take away Sin,
but studying to involve himself in greater captivity and bondage, and to
subject himself under the hand of his iniquities. O! that ye might be persuaded
to exercise more divine contentment under your lot, and that ye may be more
exercised in contemplating and beholding those precious and excellent things
that are above. That is a most remarkable word which Jacob had to Esau, Genesis
33. 11. I have enough: the word in the original is this, I have all: And as
Critics do observe, that word which Esau had in the 8. verse: I have enough,
is not that which Jacob has in the 11. verse, I have enough; that though Jacob
was a poorer man then Esau, yet he had all: Such a Christian as has Christ for
his portion, may sweetly sing, though I be poor, yet do I possess all things,
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, as sorrowing, yet always
rejoicing as poor and yet behold we are rich. It is not long before that day
shall come, when Christ shall make up his Iewles, when there shall be a clear
and most palpable difference made betwixt the precious and the vile: Behold he
is upon his way, and therefore do not murmur nor repine: A Christian must not
expect two heavens, it is enough, if he possess one, we must not travel to
heaven through a bed of roses, it is not much though we go to heaven in a fiery
chariot, having afflictions and calamity our companions all alongs the way:
when our feet shall be passing through the thereshold of the door of our
everlasting rest, then our chains shall fall from our hands, and our fetters
from our feet, then might we lift up our heads with joy and rejoice. O! but
when those heavens which you behold shall be rolled up as a scroll, when those
two great vails, the visible vail of the heavens, and the invisible vail of
iniquity shall be rent from the top to the bottom, and we shall have most clear
and precious discoveries of that noble plant of renown, when we shall sit down
at the well head and drink, and forget our misery, and remember our poverty no
more: let hope evanish unto fruition, and says unto possession, and let time
sweetly evanish unto eternity.

SERMON X.
Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
IT is an ordinary and usual error and delusion among Christians, that they
place the exercise of religion in these duties that are more sublime and high
unto their apprehension, as faith, hope, and prayer, but undervalue the
exercise of those lower duties as contentment, mortification to the world, and
charity to the poor, as not being so essentially necessary for the being of a
Christian. I am persuaded, that if any of you had been a hearer of the Apostle
James, when he was discoursing upon that divine subject, wherein pure Religion
and undefiled did consist, no doubt, ye would have imagined, that he would have
brought forth some divine and profound thing, in the exercise of which, pure
Religion before God and the Father, did consist: but believe me, Religion does
more consist in practice, then in speculation, and more in obedience, then in
refined notions: What conceive ye of such a definition of pure Religion and
undefiled, as that which is Jam. 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled does
consist in mortification to the world, and in charity to the poor, those two
low undervalued duties. And this may further ingratiate and commend the
exercise of these low and undervalued duties, that in the day when Christ shall
appear to judge the quick and the dead, the ground of the approbation of the
Saints shall be founded upon this low and contemptible duty, charity to the
poor, and shall be that ground which is given of that eternal blessedness,
which approbation of Jesus Christ, no doubt is a confirmation of James his
doctrine: and that which shall be the ground of the reprobation of the wicked,
shall be the neglect of this low duty, want of charity to the poor, and
visiting of the fatherless: And believe me, in the exercise of this divine
quality of Christian-contentment, not a little of religion does consist: Paul
says, Godliness with contentment is great gain. It is by faith, that a
Christian enjoys God, it is by love that he enjoys his neighbor, and by
contentment that he enjoys himself. We confess, it is a most mysterious and
difficult lesson for a Christian in each lot he is placed in, to be cryin
forth, It is good for me to be here, let me make a tabernacle here. Ordinarily
we have strong desires to have the carving out of our own lo^. Solomon makes
mention of three things, that are not satisfied, and of four things that never
say it is enough, the grave, the barren womb, the earth that is not filled with
water; and the fire. And we may add unto these four, this one fifth, the most
part of men who are unsatisfied in their lot: It is no wonder that men
unlimited in their desires, meet with great disappointments, for those that
have exorbitant and excentrick desires, must have great hopes, as likewayes
great disappointments: Therefore it were certainly your advantage, to be
studying to compendize and abridge your desires after these things that are
here below: for as one spoke well, he conceived that the greatest riches of a
man did consist in poverty of desires, and in being content with that lot,
wherein God had placed him. There are only these three things that befala
Christian, under which it is great difficulty for him to attain to contentment;
there is the loss of his predominant lust and idol, especially if it be any
whit refined and veiled under the vail and vizard of any virtue, as if one be
given unto the seeking of the applause of the world there is nothing under
which there is so great a difficulty to exercise contentment, as in the losing
of that applause, our hearts oft-times crying forth, they have taken away my
gods, and what have I more? And certainly, oft-times our lusts die unto us,
before we die unto them, which is the occasion that our living lusts, do sit
down and lament over the graves of our buried idols, and wishes that they may
awake and stand up from the dead. And we shall only say to such, Woe to you,
when all men shall speak well of you, which may hinder people from pursuing
after that idol, but much more especially that word, Ioh. 5. 44. How can ye
believe, that seek glory one of another; which words seem to import an
inconsistency betwixt the exercise of faith, and betwixt the exercise of
pursuit after idols.

There is this likewayes that befalls a Christian, under which it is a great
difficulty for him to attain to contentment, and that is the continuance and
lengthning forth of any affliction that does befall him: Oft-times a Christian,
when first he meets with his cross, will salute and embrace it, and will cry
forth, this is a grief, and I must bear it: but when the thread of our
affliction is spun out unto any length, then we begin to be discontent and to
cry forth, have thou found me, O thou mine enemy? This was clear in the
exercise of Job, who when first he met with his cross, did express divine
contentment under a most eminent way, crying forth, blessed be the Name of the
Lord; when he was made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights were
appointed for him, then he cries forth, I choose strangling and death, rather
than life. And we shall only say to such, be much in the meditation of that
precious and immense hope, and go up to the top of Mount Pisgah, and there be
with Moses in the viewing of that land which is afar'off. As likewayes, study
to seal that divine conclusion, that he does all things well.

There is this thirdly which befalls a Christian, under which he has a great
difficulty to exercise contentment, which is, poverty and want in the world.
Solomon who was well acquainted with his own heart, and knew well his
unsuitablenesse to bear such a cross, cries forth, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give me
not poverty, least I steal, and take the name of my God in vain. It is certain,
that to exercise faith upon God, for the receipt of common mercies, is more
difficult, then to exercise faith on God for our eternal salvation, and for our
interest in Jesus Christ. And we conceive, that the reason why a Christian
finds greater difficulty, to exercise faith upon God, for the receipt of
these common mercies, then for the receiving of that eardinal and unspeakable
mercy, salvation through Jesus Christ, to be either this, that faith, when it
is exercised upon the one, most simply and immediately relyeth upon the
omnipotency and faithfulness of God, abstracted from all other props and
considerations, for there, sense and reason does contradict the exercise of
faith; but when Christians do exercise faith upon God for righteousness and
salvation, they ordinarily have either somewhat of sense or somewhat of holy
reason, that does under-prop and help their faith: And this likewayes is the
occasion of it, that not so ordinarily a Christian is put to the exercise of
the one, as unto the exercise of the other: But believe me, It is no small
difficulty, for a Christian to act confidence upon God, when he is redacted
unto a low and pinching estate in the world: And we shall only say to such who
murmr and repine under such an estate; cast your eyes upon him who was the
the heir of all things, of whom it is recorded, that he had not so much as
where to lay his head. As likewayes, cast your eyes upon a number of that
precious cloud of witnesses, who are now entered into the everlasting possession
of that precious and excellent lot, who were constrained to wander in dens and
caves of the earth, having sheep and goat skins for their clothing. Ye are now
in the estate of your minority, and therefore ye are rich but in hope and
expectation, and so ye may dispense, though ye be not rich in possession;
though we may say, a Christian that has him who is all in all, must of
necessity enjoy all and all.

Now that which we shall further speak upon this divine quality of contentment,
besides these things which we spoke at the lost occasion, we shall point out a
little, the difficulty of attaining unto contentment under every lot and estate
that a Christian falls in: The difficulty of it is fully shown in that word,
I have learned, as it were, it speaks so much as this, once Paul was an
ignorant of this mysterious lesson of divine contentment, but he was instructed
by him, who is that Prince of Pastors, by whom he did attain to the knowledge
of this: and this speaks forth the difficulty of it, that a Christian must be
much in self examination, and self searching before he can attain unto
contentment: there is somewhat of this poninted at, Psalm. 4. 4. Examine your
selves upon your beds, and there is a promise annexed to this, and ye shall be
still, or be still: And the influence that self-examination has upon this
divine quality of contentment, may not only appear in this, that a Christian
who i^ much in reflecting upon himself, takes up ordinarily a suitableness
betwixt the cross and his humor, as it were, he sees infinite wisdom shining,
in carving ou^ such a lot and dispensation unto him, and so is constrained to
adore the unsearchable riches of the wisdom of God: A^ like ways, its
influence may be showen in this, that a Christian who is much in
self-examination, does behold such spo^^ and blem^shes in himself, that he is
forced to wonder, that it is not worse with him, and so is constrained to
glorify God in the fire. I confess, it may be a wonder that this is not a
wonder unto a Christian every day, that he is not consumed, and cut off from
his right hand. O! tha^ ye would once be much in the study o^ your self: That
ancient advice of a heathen, (...), know your self, were worthy to be practiced
by all Christians; we are too much roving abroad, and too little at home. It is
reported of some Beasts, that they have eyes to see abroad but have no eyes to
see at home; which no doubt is the case and exercise of the most part who live
in these days.

This likewayes points forth the difficulty of attaining to this duty of
contentment, that a Christian before he can attain it, must be much in the
exercise of these two cardinal graces, Faith and love; certainly, till once we
be studying the exercise of them, contentment will be at a low and weak
standing with us: And no doubt, the exercise of faith, not only in concluding
out interest in Jesus Christ, and in sealing that conclusion, that he is ours,
is most necessary for attaining of contentment; but likewayes the exercise of
faith for attaining of contentment may be showen in this, that faith is that
grace, which is the best interpreter of the dispensations of God: This may be
recorded to the commendation of the grace of faith, that it knows not, what
it is to bring up a bad report upon God. And certainly as long as we consult
with these three bad counselors, sense, reason, and misbelief about the
dispensations of God, this will be the result of that counsel, to have sorrow
in your heart daily, but study to employ that wise counselor Faith, which
sometimes, because it is so intelligent a grace, is called understanding, as is
clear from Col. 2. 2. Now this is clear, that faith has influence upon
contentment, 2 Samuel 23. 5. where David from this, that God had made with him an
everlasting covenant, he cries forth, I am not much anxious, though other
things should fail, and though my house should not he so with God As likewayes
it is clear, Psalm. 142. 4, 5. where the exercise of says upon this, that God
was his portion, made him with patience to submit though all refuge should fail
him., and though none upon his right hand, or his left hand should care for his
soul; As likewayes, Psalm. 37. 1. compared with verse. 3. where he presses that
duty of trusting in God, by which they may obviat the exercise of discontent
and fretting. Love likewayes no doubt, must be exercised, before a Christian do
attain unto this divine quality of contentment: There are these two precious
properties of love which are given, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Love endures long, and
love thinks no evil, which, no doubt, have great influence upon contentment;
we confess, love sometimes is the most impatient grace of a Christian, and
sometimes the most patient grace of a Christian; in a manner, love when it is
in its most vigorous exercise, will endure more sad afflictions then faith;
Faith sometime will be languishing and giving over, when love will support and
strengthen it, it being afraid to seal that woeful conclusion, that he is not
ours; love knows not what it is to intertain, jealous thoughts of him, who is
the lover, it thinks no evil: And certainly, when the grace of love is in its
vigorous exercise, it is most tender to act any thing, by which the person that
is loved may be wronged, or a bad report may be brought up upon him. A
Christian that is united unto precious Christ, by that golden and invisible
chain of his beauty, and transcendent excellency, can with patience endure the
loss of all things beside Christ; love is peremptory in nothing but this, the
enjoyment of the loved: And love is sorrowful for nothing, but the loss of him
who is loved: he moves in so high a sphere, and is so far elevat above all
things that are here below, that in a manner, he possesses his soul in
patience in the midst of those revolutions and changes that are here below; in
a manner, the grace of love does incorporat a Christian in Jesus Christ, and
does make him to dwell in Christ as his mansion and house, and so he is not
much taken up with those things that are abroad.

There is this likewayes, which speaks forth the difficulty of attaining unto
divine contentment, and it is this, a Christian must be much in the exercise of
the grace of Mortification to all these passing and transient vanities of the
world; do not these risings and murmurings of spirit; speak the little exercise
of Mortification that is amongst us? for if we were once mortified to the
world, we should then exercise contentment under every lot: this is clear from
the comparing of these two places, Psalm. 119. 29. where David says, I have
seen an end of all perfection, which speaks forth that distinct discovery
that he had of the vanity of the world: in a manner, he had it brought within
his sight, which is one of the most unerring senses, compared with that most
remarkable place; which breaths forth much of divine contentment in him, 2 Samuel
15. 25, 26. where he says, But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold,
here am I, let him do unto me, as seems good unto him. Here, in a manner, is
David making a resignation of his crown, and seeing an end of the perfection of
that glistering and passing vanity. As likewayes it may be shown from the
paralleling of these two places, Gal. 6. 14. where Paul says of himself, I am
crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me; in a manner, Paul and
the world made a sorrowlesse parting, as two dead men parting one from another:
and the words that we have read, where he breaths forth this divine quality
of contentment. I think certainly, a Christian reflecting upon the
changeableness, inconstancy and vexation of things here below, will not be much
moved with the loss of them. It was upon this ground that heathens did attain
unto such a length in this divine quality of contentment, for they beholding,
that fear and desires were the two inseparable companions of those that had
most of these fancied delights of the world; for even those that have the
greatest a bundance, are vexed betwixt these two passions, fear and desire:
fear to loss what they have attained, and desire to attain more: We conceive,
that it is a remarkable thing that is recorded of Sesostris King of Egypt, who
was so ambitious, that he would needs have his Chariot drawn with four Kings,
one of which had his eye continually upon the motion of the wheel of the
Chariot, which the King observing, did ask him the ground why he did so
exercise himself? He did most fitly reply, it puts me in mind of the
mutability and changeableness of the things of the world; for, says he, the
highest part of the wheel is instantly the lowest part, and the lowest part of
the wheel, is instantly the highest; which moved that ambitious Prince to
desist from so ambitious a practice: And believe me, if ye would read that
inscription upon the forehead of all things, vanity and vexation of spirit, ye
might easily attain unto contentment.

There is this fourthly which speaks forth the difficulty of attaining unto
contentment, that a Christian before he win to it, must necessarily be
mortified unto that innate and connatural idol of pride: Pride must be once
brought low, before contentment can be attained: We conceive, discontent and
pride have sworn a covenant of agreement, that they shall be undivided in their
life, and undivided in death, they are chained together by an unchangeable
chain of amity; and believe me, it is impossible for a Christian to be
discontent, but he must of necessity be proud; And upon the contrary, a
Christian that is proud, he must of necessity be a discontented one; for there
is nothing that is the mother of contentment so much, as humility, which
moves, a Christian silently to bear his yoke, and to sit down, and put his
mouth in the dust, because he has done it. In a manner, a humble one, and one
that has distinct knowledge of his own baseness, knows not what it is to
cry forth, Why am I thus? such a one is much in admiration, and little under
murmuring, much in praise, and little in complaint.

There is this lastly, which points forth the difficulty of it, a Christian
cannot win to contentment, without he be much in heavenly mindedness, and have
his spirit in a spiritual and heavenly frame. There is somewhat of this pointed
at. Ioh. 14. 1. compared with the 2. verse. where Christ proposing a remedy unto
the coffeehouse of the Disciples, that their souls should not be troubled,
he does begin a discourse of heaven, that in his Fathers house were many
mansions, and that they had an interest into it: As likewayes, there is
somewhat of this pointed at, Matthew. 6. 25, 26. where to obviat their taking
thought what they should eat, or what they should drink, or wherewith they
should be clothed, he desires them to seek first the Kingdom of God. And
certainly one that is much taken up in the contemplation of eternal life, and
who is viewing these precious and endless delights that are at his right hand,
moves in a most composed and divine frame, in a manner, he drowneth the
thoughts of his present miseries, in those precious depths of eternity; he
knows that one moment of the enjoyment of precious Christ, shall fully
recompense and make up all those sorrows that he has met with. I know not what
shall be the thoughts of Christians, when that volumn of the mercies of the
Lord, shall be presented unto them, which they have met with here below: how
may they be filled with admiration to see that book written within and without,
of the receipts of most singular and precious demonstrations of his love.

We shall secondly speak a little to provoke you to the pursuit of this divine
quality, and so to these advantages that a Christian has by exercising
contentment under every lot: We conceive, it is so excellent a grace, this
grace of contentment, that it is indeed a compound of these five graces, faith,
humility, patience, hope and mortification; in a manner contentment is the
result of all these graces, exercising themselves in one; and except those be
in a most vigorous exercise, that absolute contentment is not easily to be
attained: but no doubt, it must be an excellent thing that deriveth its
pedigree and descent from so high and excellent things, as those precious
graces of the spirit. But the first advantage that a Christian has by divine
contentment, under his sadest lot, is this, it does advance a Christian unto
most nigh fellowship and correspondence with God; as likewayes a contented one
receives most sweet manifestations of the presence and fellowship of God with
him under his cross: It is most certain, that contentment when it is attained,
is ordinarily accompanied with most nearness and correspondence with him:
there is somewhat of this pointed at, Heb. 13. 5. Where pressing that doctrine
of contentment, he says, the Lord will not leave you nor forsake you, which,
though we confess it be principally understood of his providence yet it may
include the manifestations of his presence: as likewise that in Iam. 4. 7.
Humble your selves under his band, which he is pressing from this duty of
contentment, and he shall lift you up: And no doubt, that invitation does
ofttimes come to a contented Christian, Come unto me from Amana, and from the
top of Shenir, and from the mount Lebanon, Can. 4. 8. Christ loves to dwell
with one that walks in a composed and silent frame of spirit: And the reason
why a contented Christian enjoys much of God under his cross, is because he
is much in prayer: It is impossible for a discontented Christian to pray to any
purpose under his cross, for he wants that divine qualification that is
required in prayer, to lift up his hands without wrath, the soul is in such a
confused and distempered frame, it is so troubled that it cannot speak; this is
clear from Psalm. 77. 4. or 5. verse. where David had this advantage by his
discontent, I am so troubled, (says he) that I cannot speak: though we
conceive that there is that which is imitable in David in that case, that a
Christian, when he cannot speak, he may make this prayer, I am so troubled that
I cannot speak, which was David's practice in that Psalm. There is this second
advantage that a Christian has by the exercise of divine contentment, the want
of it does exceedingly obstruct and hinder a Christians improving for the
cross of his advantage: a Christian that is discontent cannot receive any
advantage by his cross; there is somewhat of this pointed, Heb. 12. 11. where
the peaceable fruits of righteousness flow to a Christian that is exercised
under his cross, which no doubt does take in the divine quality of
contentment. There are these three precious advantages, that a Christian may
have by his cross, which discontent does exceedingly obstruct, there is the
exercise of humility, the exercise of prayer, and the exercise of
mortification: one that is discontent, does obstruct that great advantage of
the cross, even humility; he is so much in repining against the dispensation
of God, that he cannot at all sit down, and fold his feet, and quietly bear his
yoke. O! but contentment includes in its bosom much divine humility: In a
manner, a Christian, when he is content, is clothed with it: coffeehouse is
the mother of pride, and does add fuel unto that fire: discontent does
likewayes obstruct mortification and conformity with God, which is the precious
end of the cross, he does chastise us, that we may be partakers of his
holiness: And this is the fruit of all these things, to take away your sin.
And certainly, a discontented Christian cannot be a Christian taken up in
mortification; yea it is most certain, that a Christian may loss more by one
hours discontent, then he can gain in many days, yea on this side of eternity;
O! to what a length may discontent lead one? Likewayes it does obstruct the
exercise of prayer, which is a precious end of the cross, in their affliction
they will seek me early, and when my chastening hand is upon them, they will
then pour forth their prayers into my bosom: but one that is in a distempered
and discontented frame, is incapacitate to go about this duty of prayer, he is
so much in conversing with his cross, that he cannot be much in conversing
with God: And that is certainly one great defect in a Christian, that they are
more taken up in studying the disadvantages of the cross, then in studying the
advantages of it; the most part of us, will be Orators like Cicero in
declaiming our calamities, and in setting them forth to the full, as it is
clear in Job, who proved a most elegant Orator in setting forth his calamities,
but in the exercise of praise, our tounges stick to the roof of our mouth, and
we are silent unto God. There is this third advantage that a Christian has by
the exercise of contentment, it does obviat and obstruct many temptations, that
a Christian is liable unto by his coffeehouse. I know not any sin in
Scripture that has produced such bad and woeful effects, as that sin of
coffeehouse: what made Achitophel to seek a cord, and go hang himself, was
it not his discontent? discontent is the mother of most sad and desperate
resolutions; for we cannot submit unto our cross, and therefore we study to
extricat our self out of our cross, by envolving and entering our selves into
that endless and unsupportable cross. Therefore we would desire you under your
afflictions to study contentment: O! what atheistical thoughts will lodge in
the bosom of one that is discontent: we may see them clearly in the practice of
David, who cries forth, under his coffeehouse, I have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence. Certainly there is nothing that will
occasion the want of the faith of the existency of a Deity, and that there is
not a God, so much as this of coffeehouse. There is this fourth advantage
that a Christian has by his contentment, it makes the cross most easy to a
Christian: would you know what is the greatest ingredient of the heaviness of
any cross, it is discontent: It is certain, by it we make our chain more heavy
and more unsupportable upon our necks; whileas, if we were studying this divine
quality of contentment, it should abate much of the bitterness of the cross:
we may say to one that has attained to contentment, they may cry forth, the
bitterness of death is past, and may thus triumph over their cross, O cross
where is thy sting, and O affliction, where is your victory? Certainly,
discontent is that which makes us to sit down, and cry forth, my stroke is
heavier then my groaning. Did you never know what it was to bear your
affliction with much inward joy and peace of mind, when you had this grace of
contentment?

There is this advantage likewayes that a Christian has by exercising
contentment under his cross, that he meets with; It is a compendious way for
a Christian to win to an outgate under his cross. Would you know what is the
most compendious way, to have the thread of your affliction spun out unto a
long length? then study coffeehouse: But would you know what is the most
spiritual and compendious way to have the rod taken off, and to have God, no
more to turn about the face of his Throne? then study contentment: In a manner,
the cross has gotten and obtained that end and errand why it was sent, when
you do attain to contentment and humility under it: We may say of the sin of
discontent, that it is a most irrational and reasonless sin, for you cannot by
your discontent, extricate your self out of your calamities; all the advantage
that you have by it is this, to make your bonds stronger upon your spirits, and
to have your fetters and chains lying more heavily upon you.

There is this advantage likewayes that a Christian has by the exercise of
contentment under every rod that he meets with, it is that divine quality of
the soul by which a Christian does attain to most mortification unto the
pleasures and vanities of a world. O! how sweetly will a contented Christian,
under the loss of things here below, speak to the dispraise of these fancied
images? It is a poor sight, to behold a living substance tied unto shaddows by
these two iron chains of love and delight. Ought we not to study so much holy
ambition and spiritual generosity, as to undervalue all things that are below
God, as being below us? In a manner, as Ionadab spoke to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13, 4.
Why art thou, being a kings son, lean from day to day? We may likewayes bespeak
the heirs of the promise, and those that are begotten by a lively hope, who
being the children of him who is the King of kings, do you wax lean for the
loss or want of those things that are here below? Have you not a kingdom? And
why then should you repine at the loss of these things, which are but passing
and transient vanities? That which is the great idol of the world, silver and
gold, what is it but more refined dust? It is white and yellow clay: And we
conceive, that much of the excellency of it does consist in the estimation of
men, that they have so valued it: but one that has the assurance of eternal
life, and that God is their's, may walk through the wilderness with joy. We
confess, it is an evil amongst the heirs of promise, that they love to go to
heaven through a most easy and pleasant way, they love to walk to that palace
of everlasting rest, through a valley of roses; but we must not meet with two
heavens, it is abundance, if we have that one eternal and everlasting heaven.
And as for the cause of discontent under our cross, or any calamity that we
meet with, we conceive pride and want of mortification are those two catholic
and general grounds of all our discontent and impatiency.

We shall shut up our discourse upon this divine quality of contentment,
desiring that men that have abundance of the world may study contentment:
though this may seem a paradox unto many, why those that have enough, should
yet be desired to pursue after contentment: We conceive, there are none more
discontent, then those that have the greatest occasion of contentment; their
desires are so much wedded unto things here below, that that voice is never
heard among them, It is enough, and I am satisfied: I conceive, that may fully
confute that vain opinion that Christians and others do intertain, that if they
had such a competency of the world, they would be discontent no more, but would
silently make on in their way; and that which is the ground of their discontent
is (as they allege) the want of a competency of subsistency: I shall only say
to you, that which is recorded of Alexander, who after he had purchased the
possession of the world, he was so far from attaining to contentment that (as
it is recorded of him) he sat down and wept, because there was not another
world to purchase. And believe me, this is most undeniable, that if you cannot
attain to contentment under your present lot, it is impossible for you to
attain to contentment when your lot is better; It is only the delusion of
Satan, under which the evil of your discontent is veiled.

But as for those that have abundance of these worldly goods, we shall press
this exhortation upon them which is, Prove. 23. 4. Labor not to be rich, which
is a thing that ye will not easily close with, though certainly riches (as he
there most divinely speaks) are a thing that is not. Now this is most clear
that there is a necessity of pressing these, who have abundance of the world to
be content, where Paul does subjoyn in the following words, I know (says he)
how to abound. People might have imagined, that is no great lesson, but believe
me, it is a great, if not greater, then the other, which is that by which we
would press contentment to those that are poor in each lot and estate that
they fall in here below: know this that the day is coming, when ye shall
acknowledge infinite wisdom in guiding you to heaven by that way. O give Christ
a negative vote in the dispensation of your lots, and be content to be
regulated by him, who is that wonderful counselor, who, though he lead you by
a way that ye know not, yet take Christ's advice upon implicit faith, for he
knows not what it is to disappoint any of their expectation. Study
contentment, for that is heaven brought down to earth: for what is the
happiness and blessedness of those that are above? It is confined in this one
word, Contentment; they have now all anxiety, and all loathing, and all desires
save one, taken away from them* O I what a life must it be to drink of the
rivers of pleasures? Did you ever know or read of such a river, the waters
whereof were pure delight and pleasure? when we shall sit down, and be
overjoyed with these consolations, that shall flow from his face, when we shall
draw forth that endless line and period of eternity, in having joy and light
flowing in, admiration and praise flowing out: believe me, the gleanings of a
Christian, are better then the vintage of a reprobate; Little that a righteous
man has, is better, then the riches of many wicked, for it is a messenger of
hope, of that more enduring substance which Christ shall give; And since it is
the exercise of those* that are above, let it be the exercise* of those that
are below, that there may be a sweet conformity and harmony betwixt the
practice of that higher house, and the practice of this lower house, that we
may have our souls united unto him who is perfumed with all the powders of the
merchant, and whose garments do smell of myrrh and aloes. Believe this, time
shortly is to have a period, and eternity is to come. Let a Christian comfort
himself in this, eternity is at hand, when they shall hear that voice, and
truth sealed by the oath of an Angel, time shall be no more: Let that precious
day come, and let all other days pass away.

FINIS.

