John Baptist's DECREASING AND CHRIST's Increasing WITNESSED: Being a Treatise
concerning Baptism in the Type, AND Baptism in the Mystery.

By John Gratton, Well-Wisher of the Anabaptists, etc.

Printed in the Year 1674.

TO THE Friendly Unprejudiced READER.
Friend,
IT is no Desire in me, that because so many have appeared in Print, that
therefore I would be one also that should be accounted Eminent; But having been
one of the greatest Sinners upon Earth, and therefore have through infinite
Love and free Grace much forgiven me, my Love is so much to him that is Lord of
all, that I am not a little grieved to see his Pure and Precious Truth so
strongly on all hands incountered with, and fought against its Comfortable and
Glorious Appearance in the Lord's poor despised People, called by the scornful
World Quakers: And seeing that this of Water Baptism has been and is a Thing,
they that are not only Adversaries to Truth, but to their own Souls, have so
publicly made use of to fight us with; I having both been an Eye and
Ear-Witness of the same, have been not a little exercised in Mind about this
Matter, but have seriously considered and tried all their Arguments that I have
been acquainted with for this thing, and I find them so far contrary to Truth,
and the Mind of Truth, that a Necessity fell upon me to write what it pleased
the Pure Eternal God to communicate unto me by his Spirit; so that what is
according to Truth and sound Judgment thou will here find written (as to the
Tenor and Substance of the Matter) from the Spirit of God in me, and so is not
mine but his; to him be the Glory wholely given forever; But if there be any
circumstantial Defect for want of Heed or Exactness, which may either fall upon
me or upon the Printer, charge it in its right Place, and lay it not upon the
Spirit of God. Having given thee this Caution; I desire thee to observe in the
next place my End in the publishing this little Treatise, which is, First, To
clear Truth of Scandals in this Point laid to our Charge: 2dly, To strengthen
the Owners and Lovers of it: 3dly, To acquaint or inform them that are mistaken
about it: And lastly, That I might so aswer that Love so greatly bestowed upon
me, as to be clear of all Men, and stand single unto God, whose Servant I am
through Mercy, and might bring Glory, Honor and Praise unto his Holy Name
forever.

So now, before I leave thee, I shall only acquaint thee of the great
Differences amongst men about this thing, and then take leave: The Presbyterian
says, Water Baptism belongs to Children of Believing Parents, and therefore
they examine the Parents of their Faith; Now if the Parent be an Unbeliever,
then his Child is not to be accepted to this Ordinance, as they call it: From
which I shall only now observt this, That if this be so, then is the Child a
Sufferer for the Sin of the Father's Unbelief, which God has said, shall never
be; The Child shall not suffer for the Sin of the Father, nor the Father for
the Sin of the Child; but the Soul that sins it shall Dye. 2dly, The Episcopal
says, The Child is by this regenerated and born again, sanctified and changed,
and made a new Creature; and therefore if a Child be in Danger of Death, great
Haste is made to get it sprinkled; And if this be true, What further need of a
Savior? 3dly, The Baptists say, Believers only have Right to Water Baptism: I
grant, Believers are only they that are Truly Baptized; but that they are
enjoined or commanded to observe this Water Baptism, they now so differently
observe, I find not. But, I hope, if thou read what follows with a single
Eye, thou may come to see all these Dippers and Sprinklers, and their
Shortness in this, and gain some Acquaintance with the Lord's Mind, as thou
waitest in his pure Light, which makes all things manifest, to which I beseech
thee to turn thy Mind, and believe in it, that thou may be a Child of Light,
and then thy Fellowship will be with us, who are Children of it; and so we may
Praise the Lord together, who is Light; to whom be all the Honor and Glory
forever and ever.

Written by one of the Least of all, yet one of the Lord's Chosen Ones, unknown
to many, yet known by the Name of John Gratton.
Monyash, the 4th of the 3d Month, 1674.
A TREATISE Concerning BAPTISM.
THey that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, live in him, and are
One Spirit with, or in him; are all united by One Spirit into One Body, and are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh and of his Bones, and of his Fullness receive
Grace for Grace; and know One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism; and are One in him,
and he in them; and so are come into the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
End, the First and the Last; He, whose Name is called The Word of God, by which
all things were made in Heaven and in Earth; to him be Glory forever.

Now the Baptism of the Spirit is One in all; and all that are baptized by the
One Spirit, are baptized into One Body, and are all made to drink into One
Spirit; and these have no Confidence in the Flesh, but are they that worship
God in the Spirit, and are truly led and guided by the Spirit, hear and know
his Voice, and are acquainted with his Operations, Life, Power and Virtue; and
can do nothing acceptable to God, but what they do in it; and so it rather may
be said, as in Truth it is, That it is the Gift or Grace of God in them and by
them, that works both to Will and to Do of his own Good Pleasure.

Now all other Baptisms whatsoever, that are not in the Spirit, are of no
Profit; for the Substance of all is come, I say, of all those Shadows, Figures
and Types, which had their Day, and in their Day were appointed to be used,
according to the Appointment of the Father, but were but for an appointed Time,
until the Seed came, to whom the Promise was made, who is the Heir, in whom all
Fullness dwells [mark that] that in all things he might have the Pre-eminence;
for he alone, of himself, is sufficient and able to save to the uttermost them
that come to God by him, and him only; without the Help of any outward
Washings, outward Offerings and Oblations, or whatever may be named, or has
been named either of things in Heaven or in the Earth, they are all to give
place; for him only has God highly exalted, and given him a Name above every
Name, that at his Name every thing, though it has been never so highly
exalted, should bow; and that in all things he only, who is Heir of all, should
rule as a Son over his own House; for all these were but as Servants, and were
not to abide forever; I say, All those Types and Shadows, and whatsoever came
before him, though useful in their Place, and to be observed in their Time, yet
were all to give place, and pass away, and not to abide forever in the House;
for they were but Servants; and the Son is over all, and has Power over all,
and alone has Right singly to Reign; of the Increase of his Government and
Kingdom there shall be no End.

So Moses was Faithful in all his House as a Servant, and did faithfully
minister in the Law, which was added because of Transgression, until the Seed
came; but when the Seed came, to whom the Promise was, who was and is the Heir,
He, as a Son over his own House, was and is established: I say, When he was
come, then the Servants Services ended in that Nature, gave place, and were
taken away; he took away the First that he might establish the Second, and that
forever, which will never be removed into a Corner; to him be all Glory wholely
forever.

So John also was faithful in his Day, as a Forerunner, or as One sent to run
before him, whose Way he was to prepare; and he cried (for he was that One,
foretold of, whose Voice was heard in the Wilderness, saying) Prepare ye the
Way of the Lord, make his Paths straight: but the Lord's Voice, which is nigh
in the Heart, cries, This is the Way, walk in it; I am the Way, the Truth and
the Life; No man can come unto the Father, but by ME [mark ME] Said Christ, I
am the Way it self, walk and live in Me, and abide in Me; in Me ye shall have
Peace: He does not say IN ME AND JOHN; nor, I AND JOHN AM THE WAY; No, no; But,
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; I am the Light, or, am come a Light into
the World; He that believes in Me shall not abide in Darkness, but shall have
the Light of Life [mark] Not a Lifeless, Changeable or Shadowy Light; but an
Unchangeable, Pure, Living Light; for his Life is the Light of Men: He that
has it, has Life; he that has it not, has not Life, but is in Darkness,
under Wrath.

So John testified and said, I am not that Light, but am sent before, to bear
witness of that Light, that true Light that enlighteneth every man that comes
into the World: I am not the Way, but a Forerunner, or one sent to run before,
to make Preparation for the Way of the Lord; and he that sent me, sent me to
Baptize with Water: But, GREATER IS HE THAT SENDS, THEN HE THAT IS SENT: For
though he came after me, yet he is and even was preferred before me, the
Latchet of whose Shoe I am not worthy to untye; he shall Baptize with the Holy
Ghost and Fire: I indeed Baptize with Water, He with the Holy Ghost and Fire: I
must Decrease, he must Increase: That he might be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come, Baptizing with Water, as I was sent to do; for this End,
that he might be made manifest to Israel; AND WHEN he is made manifest to
Israel, then is the End of my so Baptizing with Water ACCOMPLISHED; then must I
Decrease, but He must Increase; for, of the Increase of his Government and
Kingdom there shall be no End.

Now the Day dawned, the Sun appeared, and all lesser Lights were overtopped,
and all Shadows fled away. Now its true, John was a Burning and Shining Light;
but John received all from above; but He that (...) above all, and gives to all
Men Life and Being, is the Fullness of Light and Life; and as he arises and
ascends in his Glory, he gives to all men liberally, as it pleases him; Glory
to his Name forever.

Now, that Water Baptism, or Baptizing into Water, were only ascribed unto John
(as ^^ving Commission) both by our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, and by
John himself, see Mat. Chap. 3. Verse. 11, 15, 16. where John affirms, I, says
John, I, mark, Indeed Baptize you with Water unto Repent^nce; but, mark here
all ye Water-Baptists of all sorts, mind this, but HE that CONETH AFTER, ME
[mark] What then John? thou must depart it seems, if he must (...) After; this
word [ After] signifies Io^^'s going away, or giving place to him that was to
come after him: What then, John, thou art but for a Time? No; I must D^crease,
for He is Mightier then I, whose She^ Latchets I* am not worthy to unloose.
Well, John; And what will he do for us? Will not he Baptize with Water? I tell
you, I Baptize with Water, that he might be manifested to Israel; but he will
exceed me or my Baptizing into Water; for he shall Baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and Fire* whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will throughely purge his
Floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner and burn up the Chaff with Fire
Unquenchable.

Well, they might still have said, John, This is a Great Work; but will he not
own thee and thy Baptism, and establish it with his forever, or to the End of
the World? [mind] Yes, might John have said; for in Effect he did say, He will
own me; for GOD SENT ME BEFORE; and for this End, that Christ might be made
manifest to Israel, therefore am I come; But not that he will establish my
Baptism with his; for I must Decrease: and there is no Necessity for it; for
his Baptism is the Substance of all other, and thoroughly purges and refines,
and makes pure; and I am but a Forerunner of him.

Well, But he comes to thee, to be baptized of thee? Yes; but John forbad him,
saying, I have need to be Baptized of thee, and come thou to me? [mark] Here
was need for John; I have need, said John; well, Jesus denies it not but there
was so, nevertheless Suffer it to be so NOW [mark Now] Why Now? Because Now is
thy Time; for thou wast sent before me for this End, might Christ have said,
and this Dispensation is of God; and thus, or therefore it becomes us to
fulfill all the Righteousness: why, then John suffered him.

But some may Object, and say, If it was Righteousness to be Baptized into
Water then, and that Christ was, ought not we to follow Christ in all
Righteousness?

I Answer; In all Everlasting Righteousness he ought to be followed; not in all
the Outward or Ministerial Part of Righteousness; for there is the
Righteousness of God revealed within, from Faith to Faith, and the
Righteousness of the Law without; the Law was Righteous, Holy, Just and Good,
and Christ fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law; and had he not fulfilled the
Law in every Tittle, he could not have said Its Finished; but he fulfilled the
Law: And he also fulfilled John's Dispensation, or he obeyed or did all the Law
commanded; and he obeyed and did also all that was commanded by the
Dispensation of John; and when all the Righteousness required was fulfilled, it
was Reason that he only should have Place that had fulfilled it: So down to the
Circumcision he went, and to the Passover, and to all the Law called for; he
humbled himself, and became obedient as a Servant, and served it in its Time
and Place, and fulfilled it in its Time and Place, and fulfilled its Will and
Requirements; and not only so, but bore all the Curse due to us that had broken
it, and been disobedient unto it, and set us free from it, was the End of the
Law for Righteousness to us that believe: so that we are not under the Law, but
under Grace, or the Gift of God that brings Salvation to us, who have not the
Shadowy Works of the Law; but are Believers in and Obeyers of Him, who is
exalted both above the Law and the Prophets.

So also down into the Water he goes, and fulfilled John's Dispensation, or
that Righteousness required by it; which when it was fulfilled, He only was
worthy to have Place, that had fulfilled it; And having fulfilled it, he went
up straight way out of the Water [mark] He did not there abide or stay; but
straight way went out of the Outward thing, and then came the Word of Power,
and the Heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended like a Dove and
lighting on him; then came the Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Now is he descended that is also ascended, and is now established alone; This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Hear, Hear, Hear him: He that
has Ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says: Hear him of whom Moses,
and all the Prophets, and John, who was more, spoke; for now he is come that is
mightier then all, and all Power is given unto him, not unto him and John, or
unto him and Moses; No: But unto him, Him only has God exalted to be both King
and Priest unto Israel; and he alone is established a Priest forever, of an
Unchangeable Priesthood; not changeable nor finite, but forever, of an
unchangeable Priesthood [mark ye] but not after the Order of Aaron, nor after
the Order of John, but after the Order of Melchizedeck, who met Abraham and
blessed him, him that overcame, and blessed him; and will give to him that
overcomes to sit with him in his Throne, as he has overcome, and is set down
in his Father's Throne.

Not after the Order of a Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless
Life: This is the Sun that choathes the Woman, who has the Moon (with all
changeable Dippings in Water) under her Feet; and the least in his Kingdom is
greater then John, though he was more then a Prophet.

Also in Mark 1. 8. I indeed have baptized you with Water, but he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost.

Also Luke 3. 16. I indeed baptize with Water, but one mightier then I comes,
the ^atch^t of whose Shoe I am not worthy to unloose, he shall mind] baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and Fire.

But he ever takes Water Baptism to himself, and never asscribes it to Christ
Jesus; but speaks of a greater Work to be done by him, a Purging, Purifying,
Refining, Cleansing Work; and John's was but a Type of what was a coming, and
therefore ran before, and hasted to give place to him that came after, who
alone is himself established, in all things to have the Pre-eminence.

Now [mark] this word Forerunner, or One sent to run before; one that runs
makes haste away, that he may finish his Course before his Time be out. Now its
plainly said, that as John fulfilled his Course, he said, Whom think ye that I
am? I am not He: Mind ye, John was not He, not He that was to be established to
abide forever, a Priest forever, of an Unchangeable Priesthood, but was sent
before him; therefore when the Apostle here comes in the 13th Chapter of the
Acts and Verse. 23, 24, 25. he speaks on this wise (as he was preaching Christ
Jesus, not John; he was not, I say, preaching John, nor John's Baptism, but
Christ, the Seed of David) Of this Man's Seed (says he) has God according to
his Promise, raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus, when John had first preached
before his Coming the Baptism of Repentance to all the People of Israel: Mind
ye, all ye Baptizers in Water, when Christ was raised unto Israel, when John
had first preached before his Coming [mark] John had a Time we grant and own
with all our Hearts; but was it not before his Coming here spoken of? But when
his Course was fulfilled, when John had first preached the Baptism of
Repentance [ first, mind ye] then God raised up unto Israel a Savior. Oh! but
John could not save; but him whom God has raised saves to the uttermost them
that come to God by him, Him whom God has raised: And so John honestly
disclaims all the Honor due to Jesus Christ; and as one afraid lest the People
should asscribe any of it to him said, Whom think ye that I am? as he fulfilled
his Course [mark that] John's Course was fulfilled; I am not he, but behold
there comes one after me, whose Shoes of his Feet I am not worthy to loose
[Him] Behold he is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; but I
am not he. And so in the 47th Verse the Apostle comes to declare in much
Plainness, how that Christ is set or established, and he joins none with him;
For so has the Lord commanded us (says he) saying, I have set there, says the
Lord, to be a Light to the Gentiles, that THOU [mark, not Thou and John, nor
Thou and Moses, but in the singular Term, Thou] that Thou should be for
Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth, Isa. 49. 6.

But again, in John 1. 2, 26. The People came to John, and asked him, saying
unto him, Why Baptizest thou, if thou be not that Christ, neither Elias, nor
that Prophet? John answered them, saying, I Baptize with Water [ mark] but
there stands One among you, whom ye know not, He it is who comes after me,
is preferred before me, whose Shoe's Latchet I am not worthy to unloose: These
things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the Sins of the World: This is He of whom I said, After me
comes a Man that is preferred before me; for he was before me, and I knew him
not; but that he might be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come
Baptizing with Water.

Mark the End of John's Baptism was, That HE might be made manifest to Israel
therefore am I come, baptizing with Water: So then this was the Service of
John's Baptism, and it served for this Purpose, and to this End, That Christ
might be made manifest.

And so John bare Record of him, and preached him, and not himself; but cried,
Behold the Lamb of God; look not at Me; b^ hold not Me, nor the Lamb of God and
Me; no, he never joined himself to Him; but said, I am sent before Him, and now
he is come behold Him, the Lamb of God; He takes away the Sins of the World;
but look not now at Me; I am not that Light, but am sent before, a Witness, and
am come Baptizing, that He might be made manifest; and if He were manifest to
Israel, then were my Desire answered, and the End of my Labor in Water Baptism
accomplished, so that they might believe in him.

John bare Record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending like a Dove, and it
abode upon him, and I knew him not; but he that sent me to Baptize with Water,
said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on
him, the same is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; and I saw and bear
Record that this is the Son of God.

See how plainly John preached Christ and his Baptism, and all along put this
Distinction, I Baptize with Water, He with the Holy Ghost and Fire; I must
Decrease, He must Increase.

But they might have said, Why John, why must thou Decrease? Why, John might
have said, Because my Baptism is but with Water, that He might be made
manifest; but His Baptism is with the Holy Ghost and Fire, a Baptism that
exceeds mine as far as the Light of the Sun exceeds the Light of the Moon.

So its clear, that John was sent to Baptize with Water, and Christ was sent to
Baptize with the Holy Ghost and Fire: And Christ fulfilled John's, and the Law,
and all the Righteousness required by them, and then was himself alone
established, a Priest forever, of an Unchangeable, Unalterable Priesthood.

But further; for I am desirous to clear my self of this Matter at this time
from all Opinions concerning this thing. I have already made it appear, that
John himself was on my side; and his Record is clear to prove, That the Baptism
of Christ Jesus is that of the Holy Ghost, and that he himself was sent to
Baptize with Water; and he no where makes mention of any other that was sent to
Baptize with Water but himself, I say, that was sent. In the next place, I
shall bring the Testimony of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who also at all
Times asscribeth Water Baptism unto John.

Acts 1. 5. And being assembled together with them, commanded them, That they
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father,
which, says he, ye have heard of me; for John Truly ( or might he not have
said, and is it not all to one sense had he said so, John, its True) Baptized
with Water: But mind, he does not say, Do you so too, or, I will baptize you
with Water also; No, no: John, said he, Truly baptized with Water, but YE [mind
Ye] YE shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence

This is the Baptism they were to wait for, and to be by Christ baptized
withal, no Water at all enjoined to it by Christ Jesus, though he owned it in
its Time, and fulfilled it, as aforesaid: But [mark] now was the Time of
Promise at hand, Not many days hence (says Christ) ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost.

So also Peter, in Acts 11. 16. saying, Then remembered I the Word of the Lord,
how that he said, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost. Still Water Baptism is asscribed to John, by himself and
by Christ Jesus; let us hear what the Apostles say concerning it.

In Acts 1. 22. Peter in his Declaration to the Disciples concerning Judas, and
choosing another in his stead, makes mention in the 22th Verse, on this wise,
Beginning (said he) from the Baptism of John [mark] unto that same day that he
was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be Witness with us of his
Resurrection. Here it is still asscribed unto John.

Again, in Acts 13. 23, 24, 25. Paul speaking of the Promise, God has ( says
he) according to his Promise, raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus, when John
had first [ mark first] preached BEFORE HIS COMING [mind] before his coming,
the Baptism of Repentance to all the People of Israel, and as John fulfilled
his Course. [ Mind here Paul still asscribes it to John.

Again, in Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. And it came to pass, that while Apollos was at
Corinth, Paul having pass^d through the uppermost Coasts, came to Ephesus, and
fi^ding certain Disciples there, he said unto them, Have ye received the Holy
Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, WE HAVE NOT SO MUCH AS HEARD
WHETHER THERE BE ANY HOLY GHOST. And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye
Baptized? They said, Unto JOHN's BAPTISM.

[Mark] Had John's Baptism been in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
then how should they but have heard of a Holy Ghost? So that here, before I
proceed any further, I shall take notice of this place a little. Water Baptism
is still asscribed here to John; I indeed baptize with Water, said John; John
indeed baptized with Water, said Christ; and say the Apostles, John verily
baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People, that they must
believe on Him that was to come after him, that is (said he) on Christ Jesus:
So I shall yet bring no more Proofs for this Point, these being sufficient. But
before I leave this Place, take notice, That though they had been baptized unto
John's Baptifm, yet they had not heard whether there was ANY Holy Ghost; which
does clearly manifest, that although it should be granted, that John's Baptism
was still of Necessity, which far be it from me to do, yet how does it thwart
all our Water-Baptists of our Age, who baptize with, or into Water, using the
words [ Father, Son and Holy Ghost] which they cannot bring Precept or Example
for.

For though the Apostles did by Permission baptize, it was but in Condescension
unto John's Baptism; for Commission they cannot bring from Christ no where; nor
that they did use the words now used by you, saying, I Baptize thee in the Name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

So that your Practice, all of you Water-Baptists, is contrary to the Holy
Scripture; for in this place Paul baptized those in the Name of the Lord Jesus:
And Peter (in Acts 10.) commanded to be Baptized, Repent, and be Baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus: But no where can they find, that either John, or
any of the Apostles used to say, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: so that your Practice in this is grounded of a sandy
Foundation, and will undoubtedly fall.

Prop as hard as you can, and take ye altogether, ye Water-Baptists of all
sorts, and work never so hard with both Hands, your Babel-Buildings will all
fall, and great will be the Fall thereof; and all your Props and all your
cunning Work will be broken to pieces, and you shall never be able to raise
your Buildings again; but the chiefest of your Workmen shall be ashamed of
their own Doings, and you shall gather Paleness in that Day.

Oh therefore be entreated in tender Love, I beseech you, to Return! Return out
of Babylon, unto the Gift of God, the True Light, that makes ye all manifest,
and in which ye are all seen and comprehended: I say in the Name of the Lord my
God, and in much Love to your Souls, be entreated to return unto it; its near
you to instruct you, and to make all things manifest to you, if you will come
unto it. Oh turn your Minds! How often have you been reproved by it, and you
never found Guile in his Mouth; though he has told you all that ever you have
done, yet you regard him not, but prefer fading, finite and unprofitable Things
above him. Oh! haste, haste out of Babylon, tarry not; the Day of Vengeance is
near, and then will you come to know the True Baptism is not into Water, but
into the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit; and that Christ (in the 28th of
Matthew 18, 19.) when he sent his Apostles out to teach all Nations, and that
the Baptism there spoken of, and commanded by Christ, was not into Water, but
into the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit; neither is there any such a word
as Water mentioned in his words there spoken to them; but into the Name of the
Father, Son and Ho^y Ghost he bad them baptize.

But some may say, It must needs be Water there intend^d, because that none can
baptize with the Holy Ghost, but Christ.

I Answer, True; None can but He, and by his Power only; therefore he tells
them in the first place, that All Power is given unto me (says he) both in
Heaven and in Earth; and they now must not go in their own Strength or Power,
but in his Power; and it was his Power in them and by them, that did the Work
he sent them to do; and so he says unto them, Without me ye can do nothing:
but lo, I am with you always, even to the End of the World: and all Power is
mine. And now you Water-Baptists, let me ask, Now where is John's Power? John
has now no Power, nor Moses has now no Power in a way of Administration, if
all be given to him, and be his, as I am satisfied it is: And here its plain,
he only is here established.

Now it must not be admitted for any other to have a Tabernacle standing or
builded with his; No; Though Peter would have had Three, one for Moses, one for
Elias, and one for Christ: That Elias was already come [mind] and they have
done to him whatever they would: And is it not plain to you, that this was John
the Baptist here spoken of and intended? And yet, mind, neither Moses nor Elias
must have a Tabernacle built with his; but a Cloud came and took them away
[mark] and Christ only left; and a Voice from Heaven came, saying, This is my
Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Oh! what would you have? How
clearly is it manifest unto all who walk not in Darkness, that he only is by
himself established to be heard in all things: And says the Apostle, He that
refuses to hear this Prophet shall be cut off from off the Earth: And again,
See ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not that refused him
that spoak on Earth, even Moses, how shall ye escape, if ye refuse him that
speaks from Heaven, whose Vo^ce then shook the Earth? but now says he, Yet once
more will I not shake the Earth only, but also Heaven [mark] that those things
that cannot be shaken may remain: Mind what must remain, and how he alone (even
Christ) is above all established.

And its said again by Paul, God ( says he) who at sundry Times and in diverse
Manners spak^ in days past to the People by the Prophits, has in these last
days spoken unto us. BY HIS SON [ mark, not by his SON and JOHN but by his
SON] whom He has appointed Heir of all things [ mind] So All Power is given
unto me ( says Christ) Go ye therefore, teach all Nations, Baptizing them into
the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit, or if you had rather have it [Holy
Ghost] teaching them to observe whatever I command you; and lo, I am with you
always, even to the End of the World; but tarry at Jerusalem till ye have
received Power from an high; for without me ye can do nothing: So it is not (
says Peter) by our Strength or Righteousness that this man is made whole; Why
stand ye gazing upon us, as though by our Power and Holiness it was done? Be it
known unto you, that by the Name of JESUS, whom ye crucified, even by Faith in
his Name, is this Man made whole. And said Paul, I have labored more
abundantly then ye all, yet not I, but the Gift or the Grace of God that is in
me. And so it was in his Strength that they were more then Conquerors, and
could do all things through Christ, that strengthened them; but before they
could not, before (I say) that they went in his Strength. So there was need for
them to wait at ^erusalem, till they had received of his Fullness, of which they
all received Grace to help in Time of Need.

But now [mark] They had not Need to have stayed at Jerusalem for Power to have
Baptized with Water; for they had been doing that before, and were Able enough
for that Baptism; but now they were to en^er upon a Greater Work; and it is not
they must do it, but the Gift of God in and by them, or the Power they
received; so says Christ, Lo I am with you; and as many as received him, to
them he gave Power; for, all Power is given to me (says Christ) ALL [mark] So
though the Apostles, as Men, could not baptize into the Name of the Father, Son
and Spirit, no more then we, as men, can do; yet [mark] Christ in and by them
can, or us either, and in and by them did; and when the Apostles laid their
Hands on them that believed, the Holy Ghost fell upon them and sometimes when
they were preaching unto them, the Holy Ghost fell upon them; yet it was not
them that could so much as preach as they ought, but Christ in and by them: God
speaks by his Son through his Vessels of Honor, fitted for his Use; so its not
them, but Christ, who also Raised the Dead, Opened the Eyes of Blind, Healed
the Sick, Cleansed the Lepers, and many great and good Works did they, yet not
they, but the Gift of God in them and by them; and so they went in the
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, and preached Christ the Wisdom of
God, and the Power of God, the Savor of Life unto Life IN THEM [mark, in them]
that are saved, and the Savor of Death unto Death in them that perish.

But they never cried out, Water Baptism is the Door; for Christ Jesus said, I
am the Door, by ME [mark, not Me and Water, nor Me and John, but BY ME] if any
man enter in, he shall be saved (Oh he is of himself sufficient) and shall go
in and cut, and find Pasture.

The Apostles never called it as you do, An Initiating Ordinance, and (say you)
A Command of Christ: But who say so beside you? Where do you prove it? Prove,
Friends, whoever you are. I challenge all the whole World to prove, that
Christ ever mentioned such a thing to any of his Ministers, as by way of
Command, as Water Baptism; but said, as above said, Ye (said he) shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost; and Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them into
the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost; say not, We cannot, be not
dismayed; for, Lo I am with you; and all Power is given unto me, both in Heaven
and in Earth; therefore without me ye can do nothing; but abide in me, and then
ye shall bear Fruit; in me ye shall have Peace.

But though it were so, that he had meant as you Baptists say he did, Water
Baptism, and that that Commission belongs to you, (say you) the World is ^ot
yet ended, therefore (say you) it is still to be observed; suppose this were
granted you, then I ask you, How missed Paul of it, that he had no Share in
this Commission? for Paul says in 1 Cor. 1. 13. That Christ sent me not (says
he) to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel [mark] How comes it to pass that you
are greater Sharers in this Commission then Paul? And how must we do to know
it? For if it did not reach Paul, who was Converted, and one not behind the
Apostles, how can it reach you? And though you may say, All are not sent to
Baptize; Then I ask you, How must we do to know who are, and who are not? But
say you, Paul meant [NOT ONLY] Oh Friends! have you this Hole to creep out at?
its a little One, too little to get out at. It Is your Meaning: but we must not
take your Meanings when the Lord lets us see he means otherwise; for Paul said
not so; nor dare any true Christian say that Paul meant so, but said what he
meant, and meant what he said.

Well, but say you Baptists, He did Baptize.

Its true, he did some Few; but he thanks God they were so few: But it seems
though he did, he did not do it by Commission; For Christ sent me not to
Baptize (says he) but to Preach.) How then? why, by Permission as he also
Circumcised Timothy by Permission, because of the Jews; but not, because Christ
had commanded it; for he had not.

Paul himself said, If ye (speaking to the Galatians) If ye be Circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing; yet took that Liberty for a particular End,
because of the Jews, to do that particular Act. He also observed the Law, and
went under Seven Days Purification, and had an Offering bought according to
the Law, but not, because it was commanded by Christ; for Christ had not
commanded it, but because of the Jews: Yea, and had (had he not? another time
his Head shorn, and was under a Vow. Much might be said that was done by the
Apostles, that was not commanded by Christ; nor that they left No Command to
after. Ages to observe.

But its also clear in Acts 26. 15, 16, 17, 18. that Paul had no such word in
his Commission, as to baptize into Water; For I (said the Lord) have appeared
unto thee for this End or Purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness, both
of these things which thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will
appear unto thee; delivering thee from the People, and from the Gentiles unto
whom now I send thee [mark] What to do? Not to baptize into Water; he mentions
no such thing, no; but to open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive Forgiveness
of Sins, and an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by Faith that is
in Me. This was Paul's Commission, if we may so call it, as he himself tells
the King Agrippa; but here is not one word of Water Baptism, or not only to
Baptize, as you Baptists say: But if you have no better Weapons then these,
the^e are too short to save your Heads.

But to proceed: You still say, The Apostles did Baptize.

Peter said in the second of the Acts, REPENT and be BAPTIZED every one of you
in the NAME [mark] of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and y^ shall
receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost (this Baptism, being for the Remission of
Sins upon Repentance, was necessary to Salvation; but so is not yours) for the
PROMISE [mark] is unto you. But the Promi^e was Not WATER BAPTISM, but, ye
shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, said the Lord Jesus by way of Promise:
And this is that which was spoken by the Prophet, Joel 2. 28. And it shall come
to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my Spir^t upon all
Flesh [mark] Was not this the Promise of God to them and their Children, and to
all that are afar off, and so on?

And in Verse. 21. Then they that gladly received the Word, were Baptized; and
THE SAME DAY were added unto them Three Thousand Souls [mark ye, the same day]
It was a Great Number to be baptized into Water, as you do, all of one day, if
it was so; but it is not here so said, nor no mention made of Water in this
Chapter; so that this place will not carry your Matter you would lay on it; for
all these (its said) continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine; and their
Doctrine I hope, you will own was for Christ: If any preach any other Doctrine
then what is already preached, or lay any other Foundation then which is
already laid, let him be accursed: We preach Christ (says Paul) to the Jews a
stumbling block, to the Greeks Foolishness; but unto them that belive, Christ,
the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. It was Christ they preached.

But say you, Philip baptized the Eunuch, and the Iaylor was baptized, and
Cornelius and those with him Peter commanded to be baptized in the Name of the
Lord; and (say you Baptists) when was that Command repealed?

I Answer; Though it was a Command, yet it was but Peter's Command, and Peter
had not all revealed to him at first, but was ignorant of things that were
afterward revealed, and so were the rest of the Apostles, witness Peter's
Vision, and the Apostles blaming Peter for going to the Gentiles, because they
yet saw not into that foretold Mystery, nor many before them saw it not; but
it was revealed in the Lord's Time to them, how that the Gentiles should be
Fellow-Heirs, and Partakers of the same Glory: But you cannot prove that
Peter's Command was obeyed: He commanded them (it is true) to be baptized; and
if they were, his Command was fulfilled; but who commanded you, or sent you?
Show us your Commission; For Peter did not any where that I can find, command,
That Water Baptism should be observed to the World's End: No, no; it was the
Baptism of Christ Jesus, with the Holy Ghost and Fire, that was, and is, and
will be to the End, established and commanded in Mat. 28. by Christ: And though
the Apostles did make use of John's Baptism, yet they laid no stress upon us,
that were to come after them, to use it; neither was it commanded by Christ for
them to use.

But come; May not I say, that they saw not to the End of John's Baptism
(though John had plainly said, I must Decrease) no more then they saw the
Coming of the Gentiles, till it was showed by a Vision; and that though Christ
had said, That the True Worship was in Spirit and in Truth, yet that they saw
not through the Outward Worship; and have I not more Ground for it then you
have for Paul's [ NOT ONLY] but if you were in the Light, you would see that
the Apostles did see but in part, and no further then it was revealed unto
them, no more then we do now.

But though we should say, that they did see unto the End of John's Baptism,
and unto the End of all Visible things, as I know they did in Time, as I shall
prove hereafter; yet although they might, yet they that were daily added, might
have stumbled, had they denied them that of John's Baptism, except they also
had seen into the Mind of God with them in this Matter; for they were but
Enterers in as little Children, and not grown up to man's State at first, but
went from Strength to Strength in the Spirit of the Lord, and so the Apostles
could take Liberty for the furtherance of the Gospel, to command John's
Dispensation, b^t were above it themselves, out from under its Command, in the
Power of Christ, who was greater then John, and had all Power now himself; and
so it could not command Them, but they It: And so Philip said unto the Eunuch,
If thou believe with all thy Heart, THOU MAY; not, thou must, No; but if
thou believe, thou May; he would not deny it him, though I believe, Philip
knew, that it was the Spirit's Baptism that must sanctify, and that Water
could not reach the Soul of any, nor any way sa^isfie the Spiritual Part of
Mankind. And yet took that Liberty in the Spirit, because of the Weakness of
their yet Childish Capacities to submit to their Weakness in many things that
belonged unto the Law, as well as in this of John's. And is it not also clear,
That the Apostles would not yet seem to lay the Building, if I may so call it,
of John waste, until they had laid and builded on a More Sure Foundation? nor
wholely preach his Baptism useless, nor the Law neither, until such time as the
Gospel had got some hold of the People? and then they testified of One Lord,
One Faith, ONE BAPTISM; and that by one Spirit they were all baptived into One
Body, and had been all made to drink into One Spirit; and that they were made
able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: and
came not with words Man's Wisdom teaches, but with the Words the Holy Ghost
teaches, with which they were now baptized; comparing Spiritual Things with
Spitritual, not with carnal, or external, or elemental Things with Spiritual,
as you do, No, no; but Spiritual with Spiritual. Now they saw by the Revelation
of the Spirit into the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, and therefore in Heb. 6. 1.
the Apostle comes in with these words, LEAVING (says he) mark, Leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto Perfection. Come,
Friends, deal plainly for your own Souls Good and God's Glory, and tarry not
short of him that makes Perfect, and cleanses from all Iniquity; and be
persuaded to come and wait for the True Baptism of Christ, which is with the
Holy Ghost and Fire, that ye may be sanctified and refined, and made every whit
whole; for it is in much Love to your Souls that these Lines are written, by
One that desires your Salvation even as his own, and truly breathes for the
Prosperity of Zion, and the Establishment of Truth and Righteousness.

But now some may Object, and say, That the Apostles could not have left them
if they had not been in Them, or in the Use of Them.

I Answer, True, they had so; and had also been in the Use of those things the
Law had required; but mark, All these could not make Perfect; The Law made
nothing Perfect (said the Apostle) as pertaining to the Conscience. And the
Baptism of John (say you) was but a Type: Now if the Type could make perfect,
then there would have heen no need of the Substance; for if Perfection had been
by the Levitical Priesthood, then verily Righteousness would have been by the
Law; and now say I, If John 's Baptism could have taken or have washed away
Sin, then verily Righteousness would have been by John; I mean, that men would
have been then by it made perfectly and truly Righteous: but John himself
preached no such thing by himself; but said, I am not He, but behold him, the
Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World; This is he of whom I spak^
one Mightier then I comes, he must Increase, of the Increase of his Government
and Kingdom there shall be no End.

And therefore says the Apostle [ LEAVING] which word therefore seems to
entail the fore going words in the Chapter before, where he had bin telling
them of their Childishness (he mentions the Doctrine of Baptisms, which cannot
prove the Imposing of Water Baptism any more then all the rest) and was now for
bringing them on to a further State, where they might know Perfection, and have
Meat that would satisfy, True Bread, that comes down from Heaven, and impowers
to be Sons of God. And it seems clear to me, that there was some Need for those
things they had so long lain like Children weak, and like Babes in, to be left;
Therefore LEAVING these, let us go on to Perfection; and says further, This
will we do, if Godpermit: But if they had been commanded by Christ to have been
used to the World's End, then why should Paul (for so I call that Author) have
been so earnest at that Day, which was soon after Christ's Ascension, to have
had them then to leave them, and to go on to a more Manful, Powerful, Perfect
State: So that it is very clear to all whose Eyes the Lord has opened, that
though the Apostles had by Reason of their Weakness, submitted to their
Childish Capacities, rather then they would lose their hold they had got of
them; yet this or these things were not the Thing they were driving at: But the
Aim and End of all they did, both in Circumcision, Passover, Vows and Seven
Days Purification, and Water Baptism, yea, and all those things they did
concerning Meats, and other things that they did by Permission, and not by
Commission from Christ, I say, their Intents in all t^ese were never to
establish them with Christ Jesus, to abide as long as the World lasted n^: But
after they had held them in hand, in order to get them on, they took all
Occasions they could, to bring them on further and further, till they all come
in the Unity of the Faith unto a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, unto the Measure
of the Stature of Christ Jesus; and so these became Useless, and all gave place
to him, who is alone by himself established a Priest forever of an Unchangeable
Priesthood; Glory is wholly due unto him.

And so, now they came to speak of One Baptism, One Faith and One Lord, as a
foresaid; and that by One Spirit they were all baptized into* One Body [mark,
they were ALL, he says, ALL Baptized by One Spirit into One Body] and had all
been made to drink into One Spirit: but none can prove that [ All] were
baptized into Water; for Paul was instrumental in the Lord's Hand, for the
concinoing and converting of many: But he says, He baptized none but Crispus
and Cajus, and the Household of Stephanus, beside (says he) I know not whether
I baptized any other but many were convinced by him, doubtless very many, yea,
Multitudes; yet no man can prove, that all that were convinced and converted by
the Gift of God in Paul, were also All baptized into Water; yet says he, Ye
are All baptized by One Spirit, and have been [ALL] made to drink into One
Spirit; and there is One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.

Well, but say you Baptists, He does not say, There is but One Baptism. No, nor
he does not say, There is but One Lord; must we therefore say, There are more
Lords then One? God forbid; for to us there is but One Lord: And he does not
say, There is but One Faith; must we therefore say, There are more Faiths then
One? So he also says, There is One Baptism, and so say we too; and that One
was promised, and accomplished, and commanded; for we believe as Christ said,
The Works that I do [mark ye, the Works that I do] shall ye do, and greater
Works then these shall ye do: But its plainly said, That Christ baptized not, I
say, not with Water, but with the Holy Ghost: And do you think that he used One
Baptism to them, and commanded them to use Another to them that believed in
him? do you think that he baptized them with the Holy Ghost, and then sent them
out to baptize with Water? I know, whatever you believe, you have said no less;
but you can never prove it: For, the Works that I do, shall ye do; but Christ
baptized not into Water, nor never said that they should, that you or any other
can prove; for Peter in the 11th of Acts declares what the Lord said, when the
Disciples were talking with him about his going in to the Gentiles: Then (said
he) remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that the Lord said (mark ye Christ's
words) the Lord said, John indeed baptized with Water, but you shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost. But he no where mentions Water by way of
Commanding them to use it in Baptism; but said, Ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost; and, Go ye, teach all Nations, baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and, Lo, I am with you.

But further, I remember you Baptists have said, That your Baptism into Water
does signify Death, Burial and Resurrection: By which words you acknowledge it
is but a Type. And you further say, That no man ought to be buried before he be
dead. Now I conclude, that the Dead you mean, are such as are Dead to Sin; and
if so, how can ye that are dead to Sin live any longer therein? Know ye not
(says Paul in Romans 6. 2, 10, 7.) that so many of us as were baptized INTO
(mark into) Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death; therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead
by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life: And
in the 7th Verse, For he that is dead is freed from Sin. Well, now let me ask
you, are you thus dead, buried and risen with him by your Water. Baptism? Or
can any Man conclude, that Paul here speaks of Water Baptism? Is it not plainly
said, into Christ; not, into Water, but into Christ, into Death. And in Gal. 3.
27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ;
and they that are in Christ, are new Creatures (behold, all ye Water-baptizers)
all Old things pass away, and all things become new, a new Heaven and a new
Earth, in which dwells Righteousness. And we say, that the Sons of God inhabit
in the New and Living Way, that which is pure, and changes not, but endures
forever, and in Righteousness are they established, and act not by the Power of
a Carnal Commandment, but in the Power of an Endless Life; not in Imitation of
the Letter, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit: For although it should be
so as ye would have it, That Christ had commanded the Apostles to baptize into
Water, as he never did, nor can it be ever proved; yet if it had been so, what
is that to you? Who commanded you? Show us your Commission; Where did you
receive your Power and Authority in this Matter, that you both preach and
baptize? Whereas Paul says, He was not sent to Baptize, but to preach: And we
say, and know what we say to be true, That we are not sent to Baptize into
Water, but to Preach the Gospel; and our Authority came not by Man, of Man, nor
from Man, but by the Grace of God we are what we are; and his Grace is
sufficient for us, and ever has been since we were a People, and so will be to
the End.

And we further say, we own that John was sent to baptize with Water, and we
own him in his Day; but where did John baptize using those words, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost? for they that had been baptized unto John's Baptism had not so
much as heard of a Holy Ghost; so that this Baptism ye practice cannot be
John's, nor Christ's it cannot be; for he never had Water asscribed to him: But
John, who was a true Minister in his time of Water Baptism, said, HE (meaning
Christ) shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and Fire: So then, if not John's,
as its clear it is not; for John's was a Type of the True Baptism of the
Spirit, and when the Types, Figures, Vails and Shadows were ended, and HE, the
End and Beginning, First and Last was arisen, and had rent the Vail from the
Top to the Bottom, I say, when his Sun of Righteousness did arise, the Shadows
fled away, and gave him place over his own House to rule, whose Right it was,
then was the True Baptism known; then came the Holy Ghost upon them; then did
the True Light shine, and the Darkness fled way; then were they inwardly
washed, and their Understandings opened; then was the Circumcision of the Heart
known; then was he entered into that within the Vail, into the true Tabernacle,
which God pitched, and not Man: And so John went before as a Type, but
willingly gave place to the Substance. So that its clear, the Baptism you use
is not John's, and it it much more clear that it is not Christ's Baptism, and
so it must needs be your own, done by you in Imitation of the Holy Men of God
gone before, who did what they did in Obedience to the Lord, and in his Power,
and were sent by him: but, oh! who ever sent you Baptists in this great and
notable Day of the Lord? It will one day be said, Who has required these
things at your Hands? Either show us your Commission, or else acknowledge your
great Error, and Repent, and come unto the true Light, and walk in it, prize it
and obey it, that ye may be saved by it: For it is not a fair Outside of the
Cup or Platter, but the inward Washing of Regeneration by the Spirit, and a
living in the Spirit; and the whole Worship of God, say we, and say the
Scriptures the same, That the True Worship of God is in Spirit and in Truth;
but that your Water Baptism is Spiritual, I deny; or that it ought to be
observed in the Worship of God, you cannot prove; but John's was ordained to be
used as a Type (before the Spirit's Worship, or the true Worship in the Spirit
was fully established) and of it self a thing that I believe none of you dare
say, does in any measure sanctify and wash the Soul: And if it be of so little
Effect unto the Soul, why, what Necessity is there for the Continuance of it to
the World's End, since also ye cannot prove it so commanded? for, once more let
me tell you, that the Baptism commanded in the 28th of Matthew, was INTO the
Name of the Father, Son and Spirit or Holy Ghost: but, I say, this was not
John's; for they that had been baptized unto John's Baptism had not so much as
heard of a Holy Ghost ( Acts 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. which they must needs have done if
they had been baptized with the use of these words, In the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost.

But further, you acknowledge your selves that it is but a Type; well, I ask
you then, What does it type forth unto us; or what is it a Type of? If it be a
Type of the Baptism of Christ, then I ask you, What further need is there of
it, when the Thing signified by it is come? Or do you think that the Type and
Substance must remain together to the World's End? Was it not always from the
Foundation of the Law, that when the Substance came, that the Shadows fled away?

But although you should still say, Why then did the Apostles use it after the
Spirit's Baptism was accomplished? I answer as before, The Apostles had Power
over it after they saw beyond it, and could submit unto the Weakness of
Believers Capacities in many things, as above is mentioned; but that they saw
not beyond it till it was revealed unto them is clear; but then they spoak of
the one Baptism, of the one Lord and of the one Faith. And so John himself,
when he saw Jesus walking, he said unto his Followers, Behold the Lamb of God,
that takes away the Sins of the World: and John 's Disciples LEET John [mark]
they Left John, and walked no more with him: For John's Baptism could not wash
them from their Sins; but behold, the Lamb of God takes away Sin, puts an End
to Sins, finishes Transgression and brings in everlasting Righteousness; he
makes every whit whole, and fully saves to the utmost them that come to God by
him, and makes clean them he washes; And if I Wash thee not, says he, thou
have no Part in Me: He satisfies; for he is the Bridegroom himself, but John
was not; he, its true, was the Bridegroom's Friend, and would not rob him of
his Prerogative or Honor, but rejoiced to hear his Voice, and when it was
heard, said, This my Joy therefore is fulfilled.

So we own John in his place and Time, but we own the Bridegroom above John,
although John was his Friend, and did what he was commanded, but thought not
much to give him place who had commanded him.

And so my dearly beloved Friends, it is in much Love to all, but chiefly to
you called Anabaptists, that this is written, as I can truly testify in the
Manifestation of that true Light spoaken of in the Scriptures of Truth, unto
which I once more beseech you, to turn your Minds, and believe in it, and come
to walk in it, and obey it; and then will you have Fellowship with us, and
truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus; by whom
we have also received the Atonement, and in whom we live, out of whom we
cannot live; for He is our Life; To him be Glory forever.

Written the 7th of the 1st Month, 1674. John Gratton.

GReat has been the Travail of my Soul for the Prosperity of Sion, and for her
Establishment above the Top of all the Mountains; and, blessed be the Lord my
God, my Eyes behold her, and see her Beauty to exceed all the Glory of the
Earth, and her coming out of her Wilderness State is come; I say, the Time is
come: and many have lied or lain in the Way side, to have drawn her aside, and
would gladly have allured and enticed her from her Beloved, and gladly would
have had her turned aside unto other Lovers, and have cried out unto her, What
is thy Beloved unto another Beloved? and have spoken against her; and when
they could not prevail with her, have evil-entreated her, and per secuted her
for her Beloved's sake: and many have been her Troubles, but the Lord has
delivered her out of all: And great is her Joy at this Day, and her Glory
exceeds all the Glory of the Nations: Her Beauty is Perfect: she is a Virgin,
and never was defiled, but is all Glorious; The King's Daughter is all Glorious
within, her Garments are of wrought Gold, wholely pure; she has no Blemish, she
is all fair, without Spot, the only beloved of the Lord; Glory to his Name. He
has remembered her in Love, and her Sorrows has he seen, and will plead her
Cause, and subdue Kingdoms for her sake, and make her Way plain before her. Oh!
come unto Sion, all ye that desire her Prosperity, and be not so foolish as to
sit down short of her; her City is free, her Gates are open hy Day and by
Night: she has no need of the Sun by Day, nor of the Moon by Night; but the
Lord God and the Lamb are the Light thereof: Her Light will never grow dark,
her Sun will never set, Night shall be no more upon her; for her Sun is arisen,
and as one to run a Race is marching on, his Strength is as a Lion, his Voice
is heard to Roar, and great Fear is fallen and a falling upon the Beast of
Prey. Oh! who would not live in her? Her Gates are paved with precious Pearls,
her Inhabitants are all Kings and Priests unto God; she is altogether Comely,
and her Glory shall never have an End, Amen.

Oh! who, who would not dwell here? Come, come unto Sion, all ye that are
sincere to what ye know: Turn ye, turn at her Call, and embrace her Counsel:
Why will ye bestow your Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for
that which satisfies not? Oh! come unto me, says the Lord, my Voice is near
you; How often have I called, and ye regarded not, nor have not answered my
Requirements, but are imitating them whose Life and Power you are out of. But
now turn ye unto the Lord with all your Hearts, believe in his Light, and Life
will you know that never can have End; but if you still Refuse, you will one
day know that you were Warned and Invited by one that truly seeks not himself,
but earnestly travails for the Welfare of all men, and is become Servant to all
for Iesus's sake; To Him be all Honor, Praise, and Dominion forever and for
evermore.

J. G.

THE END.

