THE GREAT CASE OF THE JUSTICES Stated and Determined, TOUCHING Their Duty of
putting the Laws in Execution, whether Dissenters were Indulged, or Not. OR, A
DISCOURSE concerning the OATH of the Justice of Peace, explaining the Extent of
its Obligation: Being a Case universally seasonable, in regard to
Righteousness, Peace, and the Prosperity of this Nation. Published with
Allowance.

London, Printed by W.D. and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor. 1688.

(...) ligation upon them, to the Execution of the Statutes of the Realm,
having once Sworn thereunto, notwithstanding the King's Declaration for
Indulgence, (being short of a Law); so that upon Supposition an Information was
Legally brought, they could not forbear doing as they did formerly, without
having an Ill Conscience: And if there were no Volubility in Humane Affairs, to
Disturb the Dissenters in the Possession of their present Freedom, but that
they might think themselves so Safe and Inviolable, as to be out of Fear, That
what Has been, May be again: Yet were it a thing insufferable, for a
Dissertation upon this Subject, which is so Elaborate, (being Written with such
Care, in weighing every thing it sets down, with so much feeling Tenderness,
and pondered Moderation; with such an Acumen, yet Calmness of Style; and which
has been so well Advised, and Supervised by the most Judicious of any I know),
to be Cast away, and become as Water spilt on the Ground, which cannot be
gathered up. But if, on the contrary, there be many Justices of that
Persuasion, and amongst a new set of Aldermen and Justices, there are some
likely to be more Tender in a point of Conscience, than They; Then must this
Discourse be absolutely Necessary at present, in regard to Such: And if the
Fire that is pent up, does but Burn more vehemently, so that when the
Indignation breaks out, it is likely to rage more furiously for the Restraint:
And if the Lives of Princes (especially when they are Benign and Good) are not
certain to be longer, than other Mortals; Besides, a multitude of other
Accidents of Life, that go to the turning about that Wheel, which makes those
Persons and Things, that are at the Top now, to be like to be at the Bottom
again, at another Season; Then does it seem Convenient also for Others, that we
imitate the Provident Householder, who sets down a Profitable Receipt in his
Book, for an Occasion hereafter; though, at present, never a one of his Family
has need of it.

This Case (Reader) is a Case of very great Moment, and Difficulty; and the
Determination Singular, (for so would it have) been judged undoubtedly, if it
bad come out at another Time): But the Author has so managed it, laying his
Foundation so sure, as he goes; and then raising his Structure so evenly upon
it, that what is Difficult, he has made appear Easy; and that which is
Peculiar, he has made appear as Common; so that every Body will be ready to
say, He would have determined the Point just so himself; when there is a great
deal more Study, Learning, and Judgment goes into the Matter, than comes to
Another share to be Master of.

I will note a few things. There is one short Paragraph in the Book, (let the
Reader find it himself) which states that Ticklish Point of the King's Power
about the Laws. He has written so Castigately on it, distinguishing the
Negative and Positive Power, and offering his Notion in regard to the Public
Good, (the Supreme Law), that, I think, so compendious and clear a
Determination is not any where else to be found. I will by way of Confirmation
thereof, add this Story. Not long before the Death of the Late King, the
Justices were sending Mr. Richard Baxter to Prison; but He, out of his kind
Nature, (being told, That it would kill the good Man) sent word immediately he
should be forborne. Should the King have Controuled the Law to his Hurt, it had
been Tyranny; but when it was done only for his Good, without hurt to any, who
is there will not justify the King's assuming Power over Law and Justices both,
in that matter? To Vsurp Authority over the Law, only for the sake of a Man's
self, as to take our Money without a Parliament, were the greatest Latrociny,
and which our King does abhor (who has declared for his Subjects Property, as
well as Liberty): But for a King to declare his Pleasure, that He will have all
his Subjects be Happy, and Enjoy their Consciences, so long as the Public
receives no Detriment by it; and to that end, will forbear to Execute such and
such a Particular Law or Laws, which appears to him prejudicial thereunto; I
must say, after this Grave Author, That this being a thing altogether for the
Welfare of his People, and not for his Personal Benefit, He must be said to
Govern still According to Law, seeing He does Act by the Supreme Law, to which
all Others are Subordinate, according to the Profound Determination of that
Paragraph.

Another thing I will note, in regard to the Candor of this Gentleman, who no
doubt, does Write in Favor of the Dissenters, and could not be pleased with
any Cause or Party, who were for Persecution; Yet does he, very purposely,
Vindicate the Church of England, her Liturgy, and the Law, from the abuse of
such Justices and cursed Informers, who (as they dealt with many People) did
make them worse than Mahumatism; while they pressed Them only to militate
against the Sober Exercise of the the unquestionable duties of Christianity.
This Author will not have That which is barely the Fault of the One, to be
Imputed to the Other.

Reader, I have no room to proceed to any further Note; but commit this Piece
to Thy Hands, as a Jewel in my Opinion.
THE Justices CASE.
THERE was a Book (I cannot tell just how many Years ago, but it was at a
time, I remember, when the Fanatics were not troubled) which, together with
some other Books, was put out de industria, toward the raising a Storm upon
such People: the Contents whereof came to this, That the Oaths of the late
Times, the Covenant, the Negative Oath, the Engagement, were unlawful, and not
to be kept; but the Oath which the Justices of Peace take, is unquestionable,
and must oblige: And if they do not therefore Execute the Law to their utmost
upon the Dissenter, they are Perjured Persons; and must every Man of them, for
ought I could see by that Book, be inevitably Damned.

I am very apprehensive, That His Majesty's Justices of Peace, throughout the
Realm, are little beholding to any Men for such Discourses. If they were to be
supposed of that profligate Conscience, that they thought they might Swear any
thing, and not be obliged to Perform what they Swear, then might such a Book be
Serviceable (though not so much, I hope, as barely Reading over the Third
Commandment): But if there be any thing of Judgment or Discernment required in
an undertaking of that Nature, to yield the Reader the expected Fruit of
establishing his Conscience, if he be a Justice of the Peace, (whether Lord,
Knight, Mayor, Alderman, or Gentleman) I must not wish any Body to seek it from
that Book: Of which, as the Bookseller then did not name the Author, I will not
now rake up the Title. Only the Distress of many Serious, Conscientious, Pious
Gentlemen, that are (or at least have bin, or may be) called to this Office, in
regard to the Taking and Keeping that Oath, which is then put upon them (in
which Case, the tender Constable also may be included, in regard to His) does
require a more Candid determination.

In all Oaths that are Promisory (we are to know) there are some Conditions to
be supposed, or understood, as the Ground of the Lawfulness of such Oaths,
which else could be nothing but Snares to any good Men that took them. I do not
think it easy presently, nor needful, to reckon up all such Conditions: But as
for the Execution of the Laws of the Land, unto which the Justices Swear, there
is this One most certain, viz. That these Laws still be Executed in
Subordination to the Supreme Authority. There are several things might be
Instanced, which a Justice is to do according to Law; when, upon Command from
Above, he is to Surcease: His Authority is Subordinate to the King; and the
Laws to Almighty God. God now is the Supreme Authority in the World; and
consequently, there is no Man takes such an Oath to see the Laws Executed, but
it must be understood with Subordination to the Authority of Heaven, as that of
the King. If therefore there be any thing in the Laws of the Land, that will
not stand with our Duty to God, according to the Law of Nature, or his Revealed
Word, the Justice is to be supposed that he Swear not to Execute That; but this
Salvo is to be understood in his Oath, Saving the Rights of God Almighty, no
less than those of the Crown.

The Ground of this does lie a little more deep, than every one at first sight
does see: which is, That every thing that is such, is not indeed Law. That
which the Justice Swears to Execute, is the Law: But if this or that particular
thing enjoined by Man, be disagreeable to the dictates of Nature, or the
Scripture, which both are God's Will, such a thing cannot be made Law, is no
Law; and he is to look to himself, as not Sworn to perform it.

I suppose the Justice will readily give his Ear to this, and it is thus
confirmed. Power is a Right to Command. This Right is the Grant of the
Superior Authority. God is Supreme of All. He does not grant that a Man, or
any Men should Command what he Forbids. Whatsoever then is disagreeable to his
Will, cannot be Commanded, that is, cannot be Law; and the Justice Swears only
to Execute Law.

I remember, a great while ago, I applied my self to a Justice, to deliver a
Quaker out of Goal; I found him willing heartily, but he believed he might not,
for fear of his Oath. I went away, not daring, if he thought so, to press him
any more to it, but I thought upon it. I considered it was a hard thing that
Men by the Law should be Imprisoned, and kept Year after Year, only for their
Persuasion. I considered again, that Goodness which makes Men like God, the
Rule of Righteousness [ Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri, ne fieris], the Law of
Love, and the Duties especially of Mercy, Kindness, Gentleness, (which Christ
requires of his Followers) did prompt to acts that are Contrary. I resolved
then, if the Law required one thing, and Christianity or the Law of Nature
another, the Law of God must take place; and no Oath consequently could bind
against God's Commandment.

(...) is to be Exercised: And the Issue perhaps will come to this, That
according as he believes, the sparing or not sparing such made Faults (that is,
Faults of Man's making by Law, upon such extrinsical accounts, and not God's)
to be conducive to those ends (if they be good) he is to be guided in his
actings.

Saul binds the People with a Curse, That they shall not Eat till the Evening:
Jonathan, knowing nothing of this, Eats; and upon Lot and Discovery is
Commanded to be Slain. The People, for all this Oath, will not Execute that Law
or Command, but save Jonathan. Now look, what would justify the People in
refusing Obedience to that Oath, will acquit the Justice; who upon the same
account (for all his Oath) does not Execute some Law of the Realm. The People
thought it a rash Determination, an unreasonable Sentence, and a Sinful Command
against the Sixth Commandment, that the Innocent should be Punished. It had
been Murder, if they had pursued the Oath. And upon that account, we are to
judge Saul reproved of his unadvised Curse, and he bound to Repent, but no body
to Execute what he had Sworn: And yet all of them, nevertheless, bearing still
the same Faith and Allegiance to the Anointed of the Lord.

If you desire more than this, I will distinguish in the next place between the
Law and the Reason of it; the Letter of the Law, and the Purpose of it,
according to which it receives its Construction. If a Justice of Peace does act
according to the Intent and Reason of the Law, I do apprehend he does perform
his Oath better than if he rigorously stood upon the Letter. Nay, he may
contract Guilt upon himself in the One, when he shall not in the Other. The
Laws now against the Dissenter, I apprehend to stand in general upon this
Reason, They would have them come to Church, and secure the Peace of the
Nation. If a Justice then apprehend, that the using of Rigor will but drive
more from the Church, and enkindle disturbance; I ask, Whether he be most
obliged for the observation of his Oath, to Forbearance or Prosecution?
Severity, it is true, has been found a little of late (as it so happened) to
have done something: But at another time, with other Persons, where the
Conscience is Steeled, it has done, and it can do just nothing, unless where
it is Over-Cruel; and that makes Desolation, and at long running, does but
widen the breach. Solitudinem faciunt, and pacem vocant.

Again, Though the Law pass in Parliament, the Executive part is committed to
the King. I will suppose now a Prince to be of the Mind, that Tenderness is
like to be more conducive to the Good these Laws design, than Violence, or to
be in his Judgment against Persecution: I ask then, Whether the Justice, who
acts under the King, might not satisfy his Conscience in this, That he shall,
according as he Judges, by Indulgence rather than by Rigor, best comply with
the Will of the Supreme Governor? I remember well, in the time of the late
King, That I my self once heard Him, with my own Ears, declare at
Council Board, and that Solemnly, (for he rose up, saying so), That He was
against the Persecuting any for their Consciences. This I take to have been his
Native Judgment; and whatsoever his Adventitious Practice might be, upon the
Scene-altering, there are none but must confess both alike favorable, at the
time of his Declaration to his Loving Subjects; which is not so many Years
past, as to be out of our Remembrance.

(...) rightly, according to a Man's Conscience, not erring intollerably, is)
instead of Vice and Ill-doing: I do ask, How can the Justice be bound by his
Office to do that which does prevent the Institution it self?

But let us suppose a Justice of Peace, who is of the mind that the Dissenters
are ill Men, and their Conventicles not to be endured: I pray let me see this
Justice as Zealous also against Profaneness, Swearing, Drunkenness, and
Debauchery of all sorts, which are Offenses against the Law, and alike
Punishable by him: or else, if the Man be so Hot for Restraining Meetings, but
Cold for Repressing Vice, I can hardly think, that what he does is done merely
out of Conscience of his Oath.

There is a Law, That a Nonconformist may not abide within Five Miles of a
Corporate Town: What now if his business brings him thither, and he cannot
possibly live else? Is this a piece of Evil-doing, unto which the Ruler should
be a Terror? Suppose an Informer should come to a Justice of Peace, and Swear
against a Brewer for Brewing with Hops: There is a Law made against That, as I
have taken it up, (though it may not be in the ordinary Book of Statutes, which
pretends only to Collect those which are fit for use), and the Justice Swears,
He will do his Office after the Statutes of the Realm: I will ask now, Upon
what account can any equal Justice dismiss such a Brewer, and not Punish him
upon that Complaint; but he may, upon the same, dismiss a Nonconformist, who is
accused of being in a Corporation, notwithstanding his Oath? If a thing be not
Evil, it is against Righteousness to Punish it. No Law but must give place to
Righteousness, no Oath can bind against it.

I would put it here to the question, Whether the not coming within Five Miles
of a Corporation, as the Brewing without the Ingredients of Beer, be matters of
that Nature as ought to be brought within the Sanction of a Law, any more than
that a Man shall not make Water against a Wall? Quod non habet rationem publici
commodi, non potest proecipi lege humana. I would make it a Moot Case at the
Inns of Court, as well as a Problem in the Schools. What is unreasonable,
methinks, should be against Nature, and cannot be commanded for a Law, seeing
Laws are grounded upon Reason. I will not be so bold as to averr, That the
Execution of such an Act does Clash with Magna Charta, Nullus liber homo
capiatur, imprisonetur, aut disseisietur de tenemento, vel libertatibus
utlegetur, exulatur, aut aliquo modo destruatur, nisi per legem Terrae: But if
it does but clash with that which ought to be the end of every Commandment, (
The end of the Commandment is Charity), it will be more certainly enough to
take off the obligation from the Conscience. See Dr. Tailor. Duc. Dub. l. 3. c.
1. r. 3.

But I must advance a step farther: I do not apprehend only, That when the
Execution of a Law will not consist with the Law of Nature, or God's Word, that
is, with Religion, and Moral Good, but when it will not stand with that
Political Good which the Law intends, the Magistrate is not in that case to
observe it. For, when the King and his Justices are bound to see the Execution
of the Laws, they are not to be looked on as Blind, Brutish Executioners of
them; but that they must judge of them on necessity, so far as concerns their
own acting about them. The King must judge whether the matter be good for his
passing the Law. The King and Justices must judge, whether it be still good, as
to the Execution. Nay, every single Man must Judge of the Laws made, so far as
concerns his own Obeying them; seeing, If he be bound to do nothing that is
ill, he must likewise be bound before he does any thing, to satisfy himself
whether he does ill or no; as is very honestly said, though in an adverse Book,
Entitled, Toleration Discussed; which came out about the same time with the
Book at first intimated, but not named.

By the way, We must upon necessity observe here, the Case being brought on to
this state; That the King, as well as the Justice, is concerned in it. There is
therefore the Positive and Negative Power of the King, and there are matters
Civil and Ecclesiastical. It is true, That the Government of England, is (...),
a Government Regulated by Laws, and that the King can Positively do nothing but
according to Law: But there is this other thing to be known and considered
also, That the great Law, the Supreme Law in all Polities, is the Common Good.
And in the use of that Power which is Negative, or in Suspending his own Act
(which the not permiting a Process in his Name, or the granting a Nolle
prosequi (I think) is no other) in the Execution of his Government (at least in
matters Ecclesiastical, wherein he has all that Authority given him by the
Statute, as the Pope ever had) a Prince is never to be said, Not to Govern
according to Law, when he does only give Pre-eminence to That which is the
Greatest, the Weal of the Community. Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto.

And thus much being said in referrence to the King, Let any one that please,
reason what will follow, in regard to the Justice, who is but an Officer (I
suppose) under Him, to act in his stead, and in his Name. If the Magistrate
then (to go on), whether Supreme or Subordinate, does judge that such or such a
Law be good, and good to be executed, that is, That the Execution of it will
tend to the Public Good, which is intended in it (as in all Laws it must be),
and that it is not inconsistent with Religion or Morality (in which case the
Superior Law does vacate this), then is he to look to himself, and what he
has Sworn; knowing that God will not hold him Guiltless, that bears the
Sword, and much less him that takes his Name also in vain. But if he judge
sincerely in his Conscience, That the Execution will not be for the Good, but
rather Hurt to the Government, and the People, (though otherwise the thing be
not unlawful), I do apprehend the Execution of his Office, in this case, does
lie in the Non-Execution of that Law (if the Higher Powers be contented), and
he shall do his Duty, by leaving such work undone. I have heard that some
Judges, in their Charge to the Jury, have given Directions to Prosecute the
Dissenter, upon One Statute of the Queen, and not upon some Other; which, in
effect, is a suspending that Law at present, and justifies this Plea.

In the Oath which the Justice takes, for the Executing his Office, the words
run thus; You shall do equal Right to Rich and Poor, after your Cunning, Wit,
and Power. By which Word [ Cunning] continued from Ancient Use, I understand
not so much according to the best of a Man's Skill and Knowledge of the Law;
which is comprised rather in the Word [ Wit]; But according to the best of his
Discretion, Wisdom, and Prudence; which includes (...), i.e. Candor,
Moderation, in Cases that require it: That is, You shall well and truly do
(...) trary to the Law of Nature and Reason, lose their force, and are no Laws
at all; Finch's Law, p. 75. The Law of Nature and Reason is unchangeable and
perpetual, and no Statute can prevail against it; Doctor and Student, p. 4.
Constat profecto ad salutem civium vitamque omnium beatam conditas esse leges
(says Cicero): Ex quo intelligi par est eos qui perniciosa populis jussa
descripserint, quodvis potius tulisse quam leges; in his two excellent Books,
De Legibus, which have, indeed, given the first Light to all things, almost,
which our Divines and Lawyers have said well on this Subject. I will add St.
Augustine, and turn to no more: Mihi lex esse non videtur quae justa non
fuerit; De Lib. Arb. l. 1. c. 5.

After these Testimonies, it is yet needful I explain the thing a little more,
for which I bring them. When I say, therefore, That a Command or Law made
against Charity, Righteousness, the Public Good, is No Law; I understand not,
but that any Bill which passes the Houses, and the King, is a Law, or Statute
of the Realm; that is, a Law in Foro Humano, in Man's Court, or at the Bar in
Westminster; and if any Justice will Execute it, the Outward (...) Publicum:
And consequently, if a Law prove otherwise, or is against the Common Good; it
must be supposd, also, That such a Law is devoid of their intention, or is not
according to their Will; and so does not bind the Conscience, even upon a
double ground; both because it is destitute of the Authority it should have
from God, and its Authority from the Will of Man also, upon the account already
given.

If any Man now rise up again, with a But who shall be Judge? he may return to
his Seat, unless he choose to be a Bruit; seeing every man (according to the
Religion of Protestnnts) must be allowed a Judgment of Private Discretion to be
his Guide, in all which himself acts: And if, when a thing is commanded him, he
must judge, whether it be agreeable to God's Word (which is so much harder),
how much rather, whether it be aggreeable to Right Reason (which is the Law of
Nature) and the Common Good?

There were two Laws made in the latter Long-Parliament, One about Burying in
Woollen, and the Other about Wagons; Neither of which were at first regarded:
But the Woollen Act being found good for the Public, was renewed, and is
observed; but the Other not being so, is neglected; that is, as to the number
of Horses, very frequently; but as to the breadth of the Wheels, altogether. I
ask now, Whether the Waggoner, that makes no Conscience how many Horses he puts
in his Wagon, no more than of the dimension of his Wheels, and breaks this
Law, does sin in it? If he does, seeing he does it every day, and continues
without amendment, how can he be Saved? If it be no Sin, because the Common
Good supersedes the Law; I ask, Who then is Judge, whether this Law be for the
Public Good, or not? It is plain, the Man himself finds the Inconvenience of
it, and he judges what is good for his Wagon, and can do it better than they
that Passed the Act; and so orders his matters accordingly. Suppose then, an
Informer comes to the Justice, and Swears against him; the Justice may Punish
him if he will; but he, judging it no ways conducive to the Public Advantage,
as well as the Waggoner (at least, not so much as can countervail the private
damage of the Poor Man), lets him go. Here the Justice of Peace does judge of
the Law, in regard to his Execution of it; and the Waggoner (...) put Fear into
the Heart of Man, to be the Instrument by which his Vicegerents Govern the
World.

And now, having stated the Case I took in hand, as near as I can to my Mind, I
will suppose, the most of such Gentlemen, who are in Commission for the Peace
(if they may choose), would be willing to live quiet with their Neighbors; and
if they may enjoy Their own Consciences, be loath to vex others about Theirs;
but yet, That there are some of another Make, who either out of Hatred to the
Conventiclers, or Zeal for the Church, or Sense of their Office, or Instigation
of Others, or put upon it by some Informer, are still for the Executing the Law
against the Dissenting Meeter: I must therefore, take upon me to argue a little
with the Justice of this sort, and ask him two Questions; What a Conventicle
is? and, In what Manner he will proceed?

For the former, The Act against Conventicles declares against all Assembling
under Color or Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than
according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England: And the Oxford
Act describes such Meetings as, under Color of any Exercise of Religion, are
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom. It is not all Meetings then
of above Four, that are not of the same Family, to perform a Religious
Exercise, are Conventicles; but such as can be proved to be in other manner
than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church; or, are contrary to
the Laws of the Kingdom. The Church and Law now of England, does own the Word
of God, and Gods Word commands Religious Exercises at home and abroad, as
well as Church-Worship. Christ Prayed and Preached on Mountains, in Houses in
Ships; and so did his Disciples. Cornelius called together his Kinsfolks and
Friends to hear Peter. The Apostle commands, To Exhort one another daily, and
to consider one another to provoke to good Works. The Thirteenth Canon requires
all Persons to Celebrate the Lords Day, not only by Public, but Private
Prayer, Confessing their Sins, Reconciling themselves Charitably to their
Neighbors, and using all Godly Conversation. Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions,
1559. allows a Minister at all times, when necessity requires, to comfort his
Flock with the lively Word of God, which is the stay of Man's Conscience.
Moreover, The Church has appointed the Psalms in Meter, for Private Houses,
Forms of Prayer, bound up with the Bible, the Practice of Piety, Nowel's
Catechism, Jewel's Works, to be kept in every Parish, where more than Four may
Read them. If more than Four or Forty meet to Feast together, the Church and
Liturgy forbids them not to give Thanks for their Meat, no, nor to Pray, or
read the Scripture, or a Licensed Book, or Sing a Psalm, if they will, at the
end of their Supper. If any one then shall go to turn the Law and Church
against God, by threatening Godly Persons for doing these things, and would
seduce the Justice to Prosecute them for it, with Mulcts and Imprisonment, let
the Accusation be heard. Is it for the mere number of such that meet, that they
must be made Criminal, or for the Faultiness of the Thing that they meet about?
It cannot be for the mere number, because there are more allowed to meet at a
Playhouse, a Sessions House, an Exchange, at an Horse-Race, a Cock-Match, a
Bull-Baiting, a a Bear-Baiting, an Hunting, an Execution, in the Street, in a
Ship. It must be the unlawful Exercise, then, must make it a Crime, or nothing;
for to lawful Exercises no Limits are set. And what, I pray, then is that? If
it be only reading God's Word to more than Four, besides the Family; that is
not unlawful; nor a Licensed Book, no, nor Repeating a Sermon; for, where does
the Law or Liturgy forbid either of them? If Men Meet to call themselves
adistinct Church, and to form Rules of Discipline, and Impeach the Government
or Liturgy; This indeed, the Canon forbids, and makes it the Character of a
Conventicle, and so expounds the Name. Tutors may Catechize more at once than
Four; and more than Four may join in Prayer: If a Godfather have Four and Four
God-Children, may he not, after they are Sixteen Years of Age, Exhort them
together to perform their Vow, which he made in their Name at Baptism? May not
more than Four together give God Thanks at a Table? More than Four Travel
together, or Visit; and are they forbidden Religious Conference, to Edify one
another? Should the Church or Law forbid this, what were the Church but an
Anti-Church, and the Law the Devil's Militia, to Fight against Piety, and Men's
Salvation?

Well then, The Church and Law not forbidding, but allowing these things, I
come, in the next place, to inquire how the Justice will proceed; for I will
conceive him to be a Man of Temper, who acts with Prudence and Righteousness,
with Care and Conscience in what he does.

If any Witness will Swear only in general, That above Four met for Religious
Exercises, in other manner than the Church and Law allows; either they must
Swear also what that unlawful Exercise was, or they do not. If not, the
Liberties of Englishmen are brought to a sine pass, when two Persons, that
list, may take them away, and undo Folks at their Will. Is it thus, besides, in
all the Courts of Justice? Do they Hang Men as Felons, when any will but Swear
that they are Felons, and never tell what they Stole, nor from whom? Will the
Lords Condemn a Peer for Treason, if two will Swear that he spoke Treason, and
never tell what Words he spoke? Will the Church excommunicate a Man, if two
will Swear that he is a Murderer, but cannot tell of any body he Murdered?
Turks and Heathens abhor such doings, as we abhor Toads and Snakes. If they
Swear what the unlawful Exercise was, it is supposed they are but Witnesses and
Accusers, and not the Judges. If every Woman or Beggar, that can but Swear,
does become a Judge, whether the Religious Acts of Lords, Knights, Minister and
People, be according to the Law and Church, or not, when they know not what the
Law and Church is; it were far better be among Serpents and Tigers, than for
People to have their Estates and Lives at the Will of such Persons: for, who
dare then displease any Beggar, Rogue, or Servant? It is not the Accuser,
therefore, but the Justice is Judge; and he must Examine the Witness, (seeing
else he must become but a Register or Executioner), and that must be of two
things; What the unlawful Exercise was? (as is already Suggested) and how the
Witness knows it?

He must examine first, What the unlawful Exercise was? If they say now, There
was a Meeting, and plead Notoriety of Fact: So is there at a Play, at a Market,
in a Ship, and other such greater Meetings, as are before-named. If they say,
There was Notoriety of a Religious Meeting: So is there in all Church-Meetings,
in Meetings only for House-Prayer, Holy Conference, Grace at Table, and the
like, not forbidden; which are also before touched. At Doctors-Commons they do
meet about Admonishing, Excommunicating, Absolving, and these are certainly
Religious Exercises, of Grand Importance; and yet performed without reading
Common Prayer. Either the Crime that Men are Accused for, is Omission of
something required; or Commission of somewhat forbidden. The Omission of the
Liturgy cannot here be Criminal, because the reading That, is required in
Church Worship; but it is not imposed on Private Persons, and Places, Families,
Converse, or Occasional Meetings: And there is no Crime of Commission, because
neither the bare number of Men, nor any of these Exercises before-named, (and
supposed only here used), are forbidden. If they say, That the Law forbids not
above Four to be at a Play, a Tavern, a Feast; but it forbids all above Four,
of another House, to be at any Religious Meeting, it is a Slander; for the Law
never forbid more than Four to be at Any Religious Exercise, but Forbidden
Exercises, which differ from the Church Liturgy and Practice; which none of the
forementioned Exercises do.

The other thing the Witness must be Examined upon, is, How they know the
Accusation to be true? And if it be Omission of the Liturgy, that they Swear,
they must Swear they were present from first to last, else they cannot Swear,
that it was not Read; and Men must not be Judged and Ruined upon Presumptions
and Opinions of others, without Proof: If part of the Liturgy is said to be
omitted, (even in Church) they must Swear which Part. But if they be Crimes of
Commission that are Sworn, the Words and Deeds must be recited, with all that
is Integral to the Sense, before any Judgment can be given. It is against all
Humanity, Law, or Reason, that any Man should be refused to speak for himself,
and see his Accusers Face to Face, and know what they are, and have leave to
put Interrogatories to them. If you reply, That Leave to know the Accusers and
Witness, will hazard and discourage them, and Leave to plead for ones Self, it
may frustrate all, both Judgment and Execution. I answer, If indeed you stick
there, you are not the Man I took you for, that is, no fair Man; and if that be
the Rule you would go by, I will tell you, there is a nearer way than yours
yet: Never stand troubling us, or your self with Laws, Courts, Judge, or
Witnesses; but take all Men's Goods and Money that you have a mind to, or
Imprison or Hang up any Man that you will, without giving any Reason or account
for it. It will be considerable Clemency to a Man to let him Dye as Innocent,
and escape the Infamy of Accusation. Jesus Christ and his Apostles had not so
much Justice.

These are things that the Justice, who is of the Prosecuting Persuasion, is to
think upon; and if he be a London Justice, there is one thing more to be put to
him. There are at least a Hundred, or two Hundred Thousand Souls in the great
Parishes, in and about London, more than can hear in the Churches: I ask him
now, Would you have all, or half these Persons to live as Atheists, and Worship
God in no manner at all, in any Congregation, or would you not? If you would
not, Why do you Prosecute them for going to Private Meetings, when they cannot
come to the Public, in their own Church, which will not hold them? If you
would, I desire, Sir, then very fairly to have done with you; for it were
better to have to do with a Mohammedan, than with a Christian of such a Mind.

After this, I must return to the state of our Case, to touch it again in the
main Point. If any Law of Man be inconsistent with God's Will, either
manifestly by the Light of Nature, or Scripture, such a Law should not have
passed by the Lawgiver, and is not to be Executed by the Inferior Magistrate,
or observed by the People: But if the Matter of a Law be such, as is of an
indifferent Nature, and, all Circumstances considered, it does appear doubtful
and difficult to us, what we are to do: There is some Rule to be laid down, on
necessity, to walk by, or we are at a loss. Now, as God has given us a Rule in
Matters of Religion, which is the Scripture, by which we are to judge and try
what is to be Believed and Practiced therein; and every Man's own Private
Judgment or Conscience must be the Discerner of it: And as in Moral things He
has given us the Dictates of Reason for our Rule: So in Matters that are
Political, has He given us our Rule or Test also which is the Public Vtility,
(for the Apostle, speaking of the Higher Powers, that give Laws, or Supreme
Ruler, does tell us, That he is the Minister of God for our Good, as I have
noted); and Man being a Creature endued with Discernment, by his Rational
Faculties, he is to attend, and compare such things with that Rule; And as they
agree, or not agree thereunto, he is to Pass to Execute, to Obey a Law, or Not
to do it, accordingly. This is a Truth, I am persuaded, or Light, that I have
struck out of the Collision of many Thoughts; and do propose it therefore, as
Tasted, Clear, Fixed, and Established, to Others. When a thing now (to proceed
upon it) is really against the Common Good, or a Man so judges (his Judgment
not being the Rule it self, but the Discerner of it), such a thing (at least,
to that Man) is never to be thought to have the Authority of God (as that
Religion has none of it, which has not Foundation in Scripture), nor indeed
the Intent of Man (this Public Vtility being the scope of the Lawgiver, or
which ought to be in all his Laws) as has been before signified and settled;
And consequently, whether it Be, or be Not so, (as whether it Be (more
predominantly) or Not agreeable to God's Word) is, for the most part,
therefore, the chief point to be inquired into, as to the Obligation of
Conscience, in these matters Any Man may be made to do the thing for fear of
Wrath, whether Justice or People: So that, if the Supreme Power will have it,
they must do it, or Suffer, all Resistance being forbidden; (and as for the
Law, it is all one whether a Man act out of Conscience or not, so long as it
makes him do it): But if a Man, really in his Soul, does judge the thing
Commanded to be against the Common Good, the Justice that Executes not that
Law, and the Man that Obeys it not (if they can escape with Man) are not
obliged for Conscience Sake (even, as when they think it against God's Will;
for God's Will, indeed, is, that Men should Rule only for our Good), so as they
need think, by that Omission, they Sin against God. I pray, note all the way, I
speak still, not of what is safe in point of Law, but of what is Innocent in
point of Conscience. And when I allow a Private Man to judge of a Law, whether
it be for the Public Good or not, this is not to have a hand in determining
the Question, Whether I am obliged or not to obey it, under the Penalty of the
Law, but under the Guilt of Sin and God's Judgment?

Neither must I forget to distinguish from that well Studied Divine, Dr. Field,
upon the Church, between Subjection and Obedience; and consequently, between
the not Obeying a Law, and Resisting of Authority; the latter whereof is made
always Damnable by the Apostle; and the former is Good or Evil, or Indifferent,
according to the Matter required, with consideration of the Circumstances a Man
is in. And, though I am persuaded (as to the point of Obedience), that when a
Law is unprofitable, that is, when a Man does Impartially judge the Matter
Commanded, not to be conducive to Public Benefit, (or, at least, if he truly
judge the same to be against it), such a Law does not, such a Law cannot oblige
the Inner Man (which all wholesome Laws, I hold, do) any farther than to avoid
Contempt and Scandal: Yet do I (in the point of Subjection) hold and maintain,
and am ready (so far as it may concern me) to declare, That I hold it unlawful
for any Subject, or Subjects, to take Arms (that is, Levy War) against the
Authority of the King (that is, against the Supreme Executive Power, which God
has committed into his hands, according to the Constitution of this Realm),
whether as Residing in his Person, or issued out from Him to any other Person
or Persons, by his Commissions, upon any Pretense whatsoever. Which I do
declare the rather, because I am out of doubt, that those they call
Nonconformists, as well as the Conformists, who understand themselves on both
sides, (however it comes to pass, that One Party of them are scrupled for want
of but so little Explication as this is), are perfectly reconcilable on that
Point.

To conclude, The Law in such or such a particular Case, requires the Justice
to act against the Common Good: What must he do then? I speak not of what he
may choose to do, in point of Prudence (which, in case a Law is directly
against God's, or so extremely to Public hurt, as quite over-ballances our
Sufferings, is not to be consulted); but of what he is bound to, in point of
Conscience: And every one, I think, will give this Answer, That the Superior
Law must have still the Pre-eminence, unless there be something particularly to
be alleged, in regard to that Matter; which is not exceptionable in the Case,
if it be against God's Word. He must himself judge in referrence to his own
Act, or he acts as a Beast, and Punishes as an Horse strikes. And he is also
the Minister of God, under the King, for the Peoples Good. This is the very End
Of Magistracy it self, Of the Laws, Of the Execution. Consequently, the Common
Good, Salus Populi, being the Supreme Law; whosoever he be that sincerely seeks
That, whether he Executes or Forbears a Statute, he is, he must be, in the
Forbearance or Execution thereof, upon that account, the best Minister Of the
Laws, Of God, and Of the King: Princeps est Dei imago; Lex Principis opus;
Finis Legis Justitia; Ex Justitia Communis Salus.

Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. Line 8. for fieris read feceris p. 20. l. 7. for prevent r. pervert.
p. 45. l. 3. for are r. may be. p. 57. l. 9. for forbid r. forbad.


