A REPLY TO A Vindication OF A DISCOURSE Concerning the Unreasonableness of a
New Separation, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M DC XCI.

AMONG all the Reformed Churches, none departed from Rome with greater
Advantage than the Church of England. The certain Succession of Authority, as
well as purity of Doctrine, and both maintained by Men as famous for the
Integrity of their Lives, as Profoundness of their Learning, made her for a
long time the Glory of the Resormation, and both the Envy and Terror of her
Adversaries. For this Reason she became the principal Mark, at which all
Firebrands were darted; and no Arts were neglected, which might by any means
raise up Enemies against her, till in the former Rebellion, overwhelmed with
the Multitude, Malice, and Wickedness of her Foes, either her Priests, with
others, were barbarously murdered, or shut out from the Temples, and debarred
from the daily Sacrifice: And Jerusalem it self was made an heap of Stones. But
though this did eclipse her Beauty, and (as some thought) well nigh defaced
her, yet such was the Sincerity of her Members, that those bloody Persecutions
did indeed raise her Reputation; and made many, who admired their Constancy,
enquire into those Principles, from whence sprang such wonderful Effects;
whereby she gained no few Proselytes: And as, when the Heathens, accounting all
sure, erected Statues to Dicclesian, with this Inscription, Superstitione
Christi ubique deleta, the Christian Church soon after broke forth with greater
Splendour than ever; so when our Enemies thought they had raked up that long
afflicted Church in Ashes, on a sudden, and beyond hopes, she rose with such a
Luster as struck Envy dumb, and her Enemies with Admiration, as seeing the
Finger of God in it. And thus it might have long continued, had there not been
a falling away, and her own Members renounced her Principles. But, alas! now
her Condition is worse and more desperate than ever, unless God be her Helper.
Rome hugs herself, and laughs to see the Members of that Church debauched, and
that effected by some few Vipers bred in her Bowels, which all their Craft and
Industry could never bring to pass. The Dissenters smile and insult, to see the
worst of their Principles taken up, and pretended to have been always
Principles of the Church of England. And as for those few, whom no Plagues or
Penalties can force to abdicate their Mother, and with Rancour vomit up that
Divine Food they sucked from her Breasts; whilst even their Enemies commiserate
them, those who call themselves their Brethren prosecute them with the utmost
Malice, as if nothing would serve them but Root and Branch, and they were fully
resolved to destroy that poor distressed Church, both Name and Thing: And
unless God of his Infinite Mercy prevent their implacable Designs, to the eye
of Sense it scarce seems avoydable.

Experience may have sufficiently taught us, That Schism not only breeds ill
Blood, but worse Actions; and not only causes Heats and Animosities, but often
raises Men to that Madness of Zeal, that they think they do God good Service
by the most unjustisiable Deeds, and barbarous Immanities; and I pray God that
these times may not too much feel the Effects of it. Upon this account every
good Man will not only Mourn over the Divisions of Reuben, but by all honest
Means endeavor to allay them: And if I could be convinced, That the Guilt of
the present Schism lay at our Door, I should think it ought to be my first Work
to Repent of it. And tho the Author I have to do with writes at that rate, as
if he intended not to convince any Man, but reproach all, who are not of his
Party; yet I will pass that by, and do him the Justice to examine whatever may
seem in the least material thorough his whole Discourse, and so leave the
Judgment to the Impartial Reader.

For a taste, at first, what awkard doings we must expect all along, he answers
my little Piece backwards, and begins at the end. And because I said I was
unwilling to judge severely of my Brethren, he thinks he has no small
advantage in picking up three or four harsh Phrases, which dropped from my Pen:
As if a Man could have no kindness for others, who sometimes speaks in sharp
Language, when bitter Truth enforces him to it, and the Nature of the Thing
will not be otherwise expressed. But this Complaint very ill becomes him, who
at every turn, on set purpose, calls me by all the scornful, despicable Names,
a malicious Wit can invent; and sometimes gives me such ill-favored Titles,
with Threatening to boot, as if he had a mind to deal by me, as the Heathens
with the Primitive Christians, who, when they would expose them to be torn in
pieces, dressed them in the Skins of Bears, or other Savage Beasts. But this I
can neglect: For though it may recommend his Book to some kind of Wits, yet it
will certainly disparage it with all Men of Sense.

My Answer contained only two Sheets, so that it could be neither difficult nor
tedious to have answered it as it lay: But, as if he were lost in a Wood, or
had to do with some Voluminous Author, he reduces it to Heads; but as there I
followed another Man's Steps, so here, to prevent all Complaints of foul play,
seeing our Author will not allow me my own Method, I will follow his. But
first, I cannot forbear to tell him, That I do not think that he has done like
an ingenuous Man in these things. 1. That he has quite omitted several Reasons
of mine, which were material as to the Matter in Controversy. 2. That when he
mentions Topics, or hints at any of my Arguments, he never repeats those Words
wherein the strength of the Argument lay. 3. That he rarely makes any direct
Answer; but shifts and turns it off to another Matter, like some crafty
Huntsmen, who being desirous to save the life of an old chased Hare, and yet to
gull those who follow the Sport, and think the same Game is still on foot,
start, and lay the Dogs into a fresh one. And in these three things consists
both the Artifice and Strength (if it have any) of his whole Book.

The first Topic he makes to be of Church Communion and Schism; and here the
first Offer he makes is a Sideblow, in stiling us the New Separatists, (p. 3.)
Now Schism certainly goes along with the Cause; and those properly are the
Schismatics who are the Criminals: Now let Matters be first adjusted, and the
Cause examined, and let those be the new Separatists who shall be found Guilty
upon Trial; and if his new Titles of Honor be not found of Right to belong to
himself and his Party, I will confess that I have been woefully mistaken.

That we do not fall, but are forced into this Division, I had alleged. This
he says he will answer in due place, and I must wait his Leisure. But when he
calls it a Spiteful Return, when I desire that Author to speak with more
Reverence of a Case of Conscience, if he had withal added my Reasons, it would
have plainly appeared that nothing but frontless Impudence would have called
that Spitefulness. But to divert the Discourse, he tells me, That I have
overrun the Point. For (says he) the Word Only is not as if a Case of
Conscience was not a matter of Consequence; but that the taking or not taking
the Oaths, is only a Case of Conscience, not matter of Doctrine. But does not
the Strength of his Argument lie in this, That the taking or not taking the
Oaths is only a Case of Conscience, about which wise and good Men may differ?
And does not he by this means endeavor to represent it as a Matter of small
Moment or Importance? and I think this is not to make it a Matter of any great
Consequence. Or do I there speak any thing of Doctrine, but strictly keep my
self to the Plea of a Case of Conscience? Was not my principal Reason this,
That there was not any Moral Action, and consequently not any Duty of a
Christian, about which a Case of Conscience might not at one time or other
arise? And if these may be determined either way, because wise and good Men may
differ, this will either destroy the very nature of Good and Evil, or make the
Bounds so moveable, that we shall never know certainly where to find them. But
because these and other Reasons deserve no Answer, let us see whether he has
made the matter better or worse by what he will vouchsafe us. It is only a Case
of Conscience, (he says) not Matter of Doctrine. What is the meaning of this?
Does he think practical Cases things indifferent, and that nothing is of moment
but matter of Theory? Provided that a Man does believe in general that Oaths
are obligatory, is it lawful for him in practice to take contradictory Oaths,
and be guilty of Perjury? I confess, That I should have a better Opinion of the
Quaker, who denies the Lawfulness of all Oaths, than of that Man who maintains
the Lawfulness of Breaking all Oaths: The one may prevent Perjury, the other
encourages it without end. But if Men put such a Sense upon promissory Oaths,
as, contrary to their Nature and Design, makes them to be no Security, I leave
it to indifferent Persons to judge, whether that Man does not in effect
invalidate all promissory Oaths, and set up such a Doctrine as teaches the
Lawfulness to break them: And I think we need not go far to seek Men who do
thus. But this Oath (he says) is a Matter of a Civil Nature. What then? Is not
God appealed to in the taking it? Is not his holy Name profaned, and his Wrath
and Vengeance provoked, if it be taken in Violation of former Oaths, i. e. in
Perjury? What if its Meaning be to be learnt from the Constitution and Laws of
the Realm? Has it not therefore a certain Sense and Meaning? And if there be
Sin in it, is it not a sufficient ground to refuse to communicate in that Sin,
or to join with perjured Persons in their Perjury? But here he shamelesly
insinuates, That the Matter of our Difference is only Scruples; when I had told
him, as plainly as a Man could speak, That we had no Scruples. If a Man should
encourage me to murder my Father, or rob him of all he has, should I make any
Scruple to reject the Council of such a Villain? I think there is as little
Reason for a Man to raise Scruples why he may not forswear himself, as why he
may not commit Theft, Murder, or Adultery. He scarce deserves the Name of a
Christian, who does not, without any Scruple, condemn these Sins.

After this shift, he next puts two Pleas in our Mouths, and then makes two
Answers for his learned Author. The First Plea is, That when any Thing unlawful
is made a condition of Communion it will justify a Separation. As to which he
tells us, his Author made Answer, That taking the Oaths is no condition of
Communion with us, and showed that the Terms of our Communion are not altered.
This, indeed, he said, but he never showed or proved, nor ever can. For will he
say, That the matter of the Oaths is not made a condition of Communion to all
Men? Are we not obliged to pray for the same thing in more ample, plain, and
signicant Terms, than we are to swear it? Now whatever Objections we have
against the Oath, our principal Objection is against the matter of it, as
unduely, and unjustly assigned; and if the Owning and Praying for this be made
a part of the daily Office, it is made a condition of our Communion; and if so,
then the terms of our Communion are altered. And thus he may see that a Man may
sooner prove the Oaths to be made conditions of Communion, then tell of forty
Things they are not: But this will be done more fully afterward.

As to the Second Objection, he tells us his Author says, That it is the
Scruple about mixed Communion, which has been so long exploded among us; and
this he says, I was very careful to pass over in silence: And perhaps he did
not very advisedly to be my remembrance: For I will not pass it over so now.
For should I suffer that to lie against us, I should expose both my self, and
others to a severe Censure. But I have known Boys set up a Daslin, and then
strangely laugh and triumph to see how bravely they knocked it down again; and
when other Men make our Objections for us they may frame them on purpose so as
to fasten on them some ridiculous Consequences, which they had before in their
Head; and that indeed may make them Sport, but it does not affect us: And I
cannot think that this Author did believe himself, when he cast this Calumny
upon us, as think us so very Weak and Silly to separate upon the Terms of those
Enthusiasts, who thought themselves Defiled in mixed Communions. Had he stated
the Objection fairly, there had been no color for his Answer: But since he is
resolved to cast all Slanders upon us, I shall briefly represent our Sense in
this Case, which will be sufficient to wipe them off. We do not separate from
them upon the account of any particular Frailties, or any personal Infirmities,
or Sins. We do not separate from them for that they have taken unlawful Oaths,
though we think them bad Men for doing so; and worse for hardening themselves
in their Sin by maintaining them, and encouraging others to be as bad as
themselves; good Offices may be discharged by ill Persons, if lawfully
authorized thereto; and where the Terms of the Communion are Sound, the
particular personal Failings of a Man, in other matters, affects not the
Communion; both Judas and Demas may execute their Office to the benefit of
others, though it were to be wished, that scandalous Sins were less rife in the
World; for a fulsome Cup is apt to turn the Stomach against the most wholesome
Liquour; and Devotion is apt to grow chill, when the Offices of the Communion
are discharged by a Person, whose ordinary Actions are known to be Wicked, and
disagreeable to his Official Prescriptions; but, yet this will not Warrant the
violation of Communion. But the reason, why we Communicate not with you is,
because we cannot do it without being guilty of Sin in so doing, which I have
already in part proved from these two Heads; First, That we are unjustly
discharged from the Exercise of our Office, which we ought not to submit to,
but Exercise at our Peril, being we cannot do it otherwise. Secondly, That
there is evil in the very Terms of your Communion; and therefore whether the
Oaths be made conditions of Communion or not, we have sufficient Ground to
refuse your Communion; and this I shall more fully prove hereafter, as our
Author gives me Occasion; for I am bound to follow a kind of desultory Wit,
which like a Monkey, in a drying Room, is always leaping from one Line to
another, and though he never stays long on the same, yet he is never long from
it.

Whereas the Author against a New Separation had put this Case, That supposing
the Swearers to blame, yet if they acted according to their Consciences, there
could be no reason for a Separation, unless it be lawful to separate from all,
who follow the dictates of an erroneous Conscience, and so there will be no end
of Separation; to which I did reply to this effect, That though we may be bound
to separate from some erroneous Consciences, yet it does not follow, That we
may lawfully separate from all. This he calls another of my Blunders. But to
prove that we may separate from some erroneous Consciences, (and, I think, we
ought to separate from no other) and yet Schism not be endless: I gave this
Reason, That all erroneous Consciences had not an equal influence on Communion
and good Manners, so that it is not the erroneous Conscience, but the nature of
the Thing wherein Conscience errs, which according as it affects Communions,
either requires a Separation, or allows a continuance of Communion; and
particular instances I there proposed. But as if he were afraid he should burn
his Fingers, he never says one Word to his Blunderers Reasons and Instances;
and yet to give him his due, he here endeavors to split the Hair. For he calls
me back, and tells me that his Friends supposition was this, That though the
Swearers were to blame, yet if the Oaths were not made a condition of
Communion, there could be no cause assigned for a Separation on that account.
But if I give him this, yet it is plain Force on his part, and to make me agree
to his Authors Supposal whether I will or no. For it was my Business to show,
That the Supposition did not lie in our Case; and I there not only asserted but
proved, That the erroneous Conscience, concerning which we Discoursed, was such
as did affect Communion. Now if a Man will always say the same thing, and
constantly hold and repeat his Conclusion, without any regard to any Arguments
offered against it, I must allow that Man to have this peculiar advantage of
all others, That he can never be Confuted.

I confess I did charge his Author, That he had not fairly stated the Case;
and, I think still, that it ought not only to have been considered, whether the
Penalties bore any proportion to the pretended Crime, but whether the Power it
self had any lawful Authority either to impose the Oaths, or inflict the
Penalties? For if that was wanting, than it is certain, That greater Iniquity
and Injustice could scarce be committed, then such unlawful Impositions, and
such mercyless Usage. But here, to be even with me, he tells me, That it was my
Mistake; for if there be no reason for the Scruples about the Oath, there can
be no reason for their sake to separate. (p. 6.) Still he is at his Scruples,
though in effect I had before told him, That if there be such a thing as
Perjury, the Oaths must without Scruple be unlawful. But to admit his Reasoning
at present, yet if there be Reasons for Scruple, and the Oaths be unlawful,
than the Penalties are Unjust as well as Mercyless, and there may be Reason to
separate on their account; and, I think, this ought to have been considered as
well as the other, and not such an easy state of the Case, only propounded, as
if there were no more to do, but get up and ride. And yet, after all, as
tryumphant as he is, his Consequence is not universally Good; for though it is
not our Case, yet there may be Cases, wherein an Oath may be either lawfully
taken, or lawfully refused; and though there be no Scruple in such Case, yet a
Man's Actions may be Warrantable, so far as tending to the Just and Honest
Defense of his Liberty, when such Oaths are imposed with Unjust and Mercyless
Penalties.

But it seems I am guilty of another mistake; for he tells me, That if the
Oaths are Lawful, the Penalties how Unjust and Rigorous soever, cannot make
them Unlawful. But he ought to have considered, That I called those Penalties
Mercyless, in respect of the Disproportion; and such they might be, though the
Oaths were Lawful: But then I said they were Unjust, in respect of the
Unlawfulness of the Oaths themselves. Now to answer this by saying, if the
Oaths are Lawful, is merely to beg the Question, and to argue upon the
Supposition of that, as granted, which is the Matter in dispute.

He will needs reduce my Arguments to three Heads, of which the first he makes
this, That the Penalties to be inflicted upon us, want nothing of being a
condition of Communion to us, quatenus Ministers. Now I thought they had been
inflicted already, but if they are to be inslicted, than it seems there are
more to come, and I was more in the Right than I was aware, when I called them
Mercyless, for so they were with a Witness; of which we shall know no end, nor
from time to time what they shall be. To secure Usurpation what in them lies,
by endless Punishments, is to put the Usurper into the place of God Almighty:
For none but he can in Justice punish without end. I now begin to think, that
instead of pitying our unjust Sufferings, they will inflame what they can, and
get those Barbarities put in Execution, which some have threatened, for the
Warning against which we are more beholden to their Anger than their Honesty.

But before he takes notice wherein my Argument pincheth him, he pretends to
answer what I urged as the fatal Consequence of such Penalties. And here, with
a great deal of wit, (as he thinks) he tells me, That there may be Forty things
which may have the same fatal Consequence. And if what he says be true, is it
any Answer to my Argument? But let us however examine his Instances; and he
tells us it would have been of the same fatal Consequence, if the Clergy had
not subscribed, etc. if they had not declared their Assent and Consent, etc. if
they had not taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy in former Kings
Reigns; and he might have added, if People should Renounce Christianity, which
I fear many are, strongly tempted to, whilst they hear the Ministers of it
Preach away God's Commandments, and those who ought to be the severest Enemies
of all Wickedness, to Canonize Perjury and Injustice for Christian Virtues. But
to answer his particular Instances; Will he say, That either the things
commanded, or the Authority commanding, then was unlawful? If not, how comes it
up to our Case; or how could they justly be made a ground of Separation? But he
would not see wherein the Fatality of the Consequence I urged lay; which if he
had pleased to do, he might have spared all his Instances, though he had had
Forty more. Suppose the Case thus; a Government requires something to be done,
which is sinful and unlawsul, with which if the Clergy will not comply, they
shall be discharged from the Exercise of their Function and Duty. Now in such a
case, God forbids Compliance; and if they are bound to submit to the
Government, and cease from the Exercise of their Ministry, upon Noncompliance;
then it will lie in the Power of the Civil Government, whether God shall be
worshipped in the Land or not. For sin we must not; and yet if we must
acquiesce under the Penalty, for not complying, then it is in their Power to
discharge every Man from his Duty: And therefore in such a Case I say we must
do out Duty at our Peril; we must do well, and be content to suffer Ill; we
have no Remedy in such Case, but to bear our Cross. And to avoid or explode the
Doctrine of the Cross here, were in the consequence to thrust Christianity out
of the World. Of this not a word; and indeed our Author's great Skill lies in
avoiding, not answering, Arguments.

He farther adds, That the Penalties, though great, are neither unjust or
merciless, if the Government is not otherwise to ^e secured. What! not though
the thing commanded be Sinful? May a Government then enjoyu Wickedness under
the severest Penalties, if it be thought for its Security, and yet be
blameless? There are a sort of Men are strangely careful for some Governments,
and what a small ado is required to establish a Throne in Unrighteousness, and
after all, it will never be done; but either this will not secure the
Government according to your Principles, or it may be without it. For I must
entreat you to remember a common Distinction amongst your selves, I mean that
between Government and Governors; and then be pleased to call to mind who it
is, that expressly says, That the Oath is to the Government, not to the Person.
Now suppose a Man should take the Oaths with a design, at the same time, to
secure the Government, by putting it into other Hands: I cannot see but that a
Man may lawfully do thus upon your Principles; and yet this were to make an
Oath the most detestable Cheat that ever was known, or heard of. Sure the Eyes
of Governors will one time or other be opened to see, that these Men really
strip them of all Security.

All our Churches (says he) are open, (p. 8.) and every one furnished with a
bold Swearer; But what is this to the purpose? Or how does it answer the Case I
put? For may they not on that account be shut at any time, and for a longer
time, than they were in the Reign of King John? And let me desire you, Sir, to
remember, though you have shut us out, That the Church is not tied to the
Walls, but follows the Authority, of which we shall Discourse anon. What he
means by his Proportions of 12000. to 16000. and 2000. to 10000. I cannot
imagine, unless it be to expose the Apostasy and Iniquity of these Times, which
none before can parallel: If he mean to upbraid us with the fewness of our
Number, it is only to increase their own Shame and Reproach; for Argument in
this Case, it is none, or of no Force; for it might as well have been pleaded
against the Church in Elijah's time, and he might for the same Reason have
condemned all Christians in general, because Christ calls them his Little Flock.

Whereas I alleged and proved, That the Oaths were made a condition of
Communion to us, quatenus Ministers. He could not deny this, only it seems we
must be like Pelicans in the Wilderness, and none must come near us; For if we
will separate we may, but then we must separate alone: For the People cannot
join with us without being guilty of a notorious Schism. (p. 8.) But if
Ministers fall under a Deprivation, which has neither Cause for the Ground,
nor Authority for the Act, and consequently is null and void in it self; May
not a Minister's own Flock join with him without being guilty of notorious
Schism? And if other Ministers will not only justify such unjust Proceedings,
but greedily rob them of their Livelyhoods, and enter upon their Charges; May
not those, who receive the Wrong, separately do their Duties? But here he
objects, That this is nothing to the People, of whom, as Church Members, this
is not required. And this (he says) is a tender Point, and what I durst not
touch upon. The Point indeed is tender; and though I had not Courage enough to
swear, i. e. to be Perjured, yet my noble Hector shall find, that I dare do any
thing that is Honest. It is not the Oaths in themselves, nor their taking, or
our refusing, upon which we merely justify the Separation, but it is the
influence those Oaths have upon Communion, and that is such as will not only
justify, but oblige the People, as well as the Papists to separate: And if
this be so, then it is your selves must Separate alone, because the People
ought not to join with you. For though the Oaths themselves are not imposed on
the People as condition of Communion, yet the Matter and Substance of those
Oaths is put into the Prayers of the Church; and so far it becomes a condition
of Communion to all Persons. For to every Prayer the People are required to say
Amen; and they are not left at their Liberty to join in what Prayers they will,
and not in others, but are required not only to join, but to testify their
joining in all; their Amen supposes their joint consent, concurrence, and
approbation. What People are enjoined in the solemn Worship to pray for, is
made a condition of Communion to them; and if it be Sinful, will not only
justify, but require a Separation: For what I may not swear, though but once,
I may much less pray for daily; nor can there be a greater affront offered to
the Divine Goodness, than by solemn Prayer to endeavor to engage it for that,
which, at the same time, I condemn as Unjust and Wicked. How can I join with
those, in every time of whose solemn Worship, I am required more then once to
pray to God, that he would approve and prosper the breach of his Commandments,
and most signally and notoriously the Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth? To pray not
only for that which is highly unjust, but also for the Prosperity and
Continuance of it, is that which no Christian ought to do; and where he is
enjoined to do it, he not only may, but ought to separate from such; and so I
leave others to judge, whether there be any Reason for the Peoples non
Communion, (as he Styles it.) Other Reasons I could add, but because the Author
of The Caution against Inco^sistency has clearly proved, That those who think
the Oaths unlawful ought, for the same Reason, to condemn the Prayers, which
relate the Matter of the Oath, and consequently ought not to join, where they,
by being inserted in the daily Office, are made a condition of Communion; I
refer to that for more full Satisfaction in that particular. Only this I shall
add, that in conclusion of the Church Prayers we return Thanks to God, Who has
given us Grace with one accord to make our Prayers and Supplications. Now let
Men pretend what they will, in repeating this Prayer either they say true or
false; if they say true, then they join in those Prayers which contain the
Matter of the Oath; but if they do not join in those Prayers, then this Prayer
is a lie in their Mouths.

Yet there is one thing more I shall propound, That though personal Failings of
any Man are not a good Warrant to others to abstain from Communion, whether
nevertheless the Teaching, Preaching, and Maintaining Immoralities, and
Opinions destructive of Christian Practice, may not as well justify a
Separation from such, as Errors in the Faith? For though our Adversaries do not
say, That Perjury is lawful, yet they argue upon such Principles, as if there
could hardly be any such thing: They make Oaths to be no Security to any
Governors, which is enough to make all Governors hate and root out that
Religion which teaches so. The effect of their Discourse tends to the
destroying of all Faith, Truth, and Justice, amongst Mankind; than which
nothing can be more scandalous or dangerous to that Religion, which prescribes
and requires the highest Simplicity and Sincerity. And this thing alone, I
think, may go a great way toward justifying a Separation from such Persons.

From what has been said, the Answer is easy to what follows: For it is
apparent, That it is not barely a Political Security required of us; nor do we
(and God forbid either we or any others should) Revenge our Wrongs upon the
Church, as he maliciously insinuates: But we preserve our own Innocence, and,
what in us lies, by lawful and honest Means, the Churches Purity and just
Authority; though we heartily mourn, That the Wickedness of others has
unavoidably put us upon the necessity of taking the Course we now do.

As to that, which he calls my second Argument, he tells me in the First place,
That I proceed upon a gross Mistake, by confounding Deprivation with
Degradation; and yet, with his leave, the Mistake was not mine; for I called it
Deprivation, as he does, I never mentioned Degradation. But if the Civil Power
inflict a Penalty under the name of Deprivation, which tantamounts to a
Degradation, I could only argue against it as it was. Now, to take away a
Character, and make it eternally useless, is in effect the same thing; and this
is the Case; we are not only deprived of our Livelihoods, and shut out from our
proper Cures, but perpetually discharged from the Exercise of the Ministerial
Function, unless we will sin against the known Laws of God and the Land, and
the Dictates of our own Consciences; which we ought not, upon any account, to
do: And I think this wants very little of being equivalent to a Degradation,
let them call it by what Name they will. But what if the Civil Power never so
much as thought of your Distinction; as I am apt to think they little Regard
it? When the High Priest and Rulers of the Jews first consulted and resolved
amongst themselves, straightly to threaten the Apostles, That they speak
henceforth to no Man in this (i. e. Christ's) Name, (Act. 4 17.) and after put
their Resolves in Execution, expressly commanding them, not to Speak at all, nor
Teach in the Name of Jesus, (verse. 18.) do you think they troubled their heads
with your Distinction of Deprivation and Degradation? And how much is our Case
different? For we are obliged, what in them lies, either not to speak in that
Name, or to act contrary to it; and therefore I think we may very justly take
up the Apostles Answer, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken
unto you, more than unto God, judge ye. (verse. 19.) When the Heathen Emperors,
who set themselves against Christianity it self, Banished the Bishops, and
Martyred others, they did but deprive them; they would not for all the World
sure have thought of degrading them. And after all, what if your new Masters do
assert that Power in themselves? You know many of them are Erastians; and how
much such Men set by your Distinction, you can scarce be ignorant. But to go a
little farther with you, those Men who pretend to make Laws, are commonly
presumed best to understand their Meaning. Now it is not long since, that a
haughty Member of the Convention plainly told me, That it was in their power to
take away our Orders, and Unpriest and Unbishop us; for which he gave this
worshipful Reason, That the Legislative Power ought not to be stinted: And thus
neither the Authority nor Establishment of God himself, or his Christ, nor the
Bounds of Good and Evil, must be suffered to set any Limits to a proud
pragmatical Conventioner. By this you may see, That the Saviors you adore,
reckon, That our being at any time in Statu quo, lies wholly at their Mercy;
and that even your selves, if you do not absolutely please your new Masters,
and go through Stitch, Right or Wrong, with their Commands, can pretend to
little Benefit from your Character or Orders. Besides, I have lately heard of a
Man, who has accepted a Commission to visit all the Exempts in the City of
London, and within Ten Miles of it; by Virtue of which, for any thing I know, a
busy Chego-pated Priest, may insolently attempt to Visit his Metropolitan: And
whether this may not be improved in time to grant by Commission the Exercise of
Episcopal Jurisdiction to any Persons, whom they please, without Regard to
Orders, I cannot say, but I think it is a pretty Step, and fair Advance toward
it.

But be the Mistake whose it will, I shall now try what he answers to the
Argument; for it is that, which is the Concern: And here he deals most
disingeniously by me. For, First, in reciting my Argument, he leaves out those
Words, which would have cleared my Meaning; and others, wherein the Strength of
my Argument lay. Next, he Sums up my Argument falsely, and not in my Sense: And
after this, he gives no direct Answer to it, but raises three Questions, and
those too for the sake of some Answers he had found in Archdeacon Mason; and
those Answers come not up to the Case. Such mighty pains are some Men at to say
nothing to the purpose. But however we must wait his Motions.

My Argument he Sums up thus, That being they (i. e. the Clergy,) receive their
Authority from God, no Civil Power can disable them from the Exercise of their
Duty: And if it does, they are bound to quit the Communion of the Church, where
so disabled. Now I was so far from simply asserting* That the Civil Power
cannot disable them from exercising their Function, that I there instanced in
Cases where they lawfully might. But as he has worded it, he confutes himself.
For if they exercise only (as he calls it) their Duty, it is certain no Civil
Power lawfully can disable them from the Exercise of it. And if he grant it
their Duty in that Case, he justifies them: For no Man ought to be hindered from
discharging his Duty. Nor did I say, That they are bound to quit the Communion
of the Church, where so disabled: For the Church might own them, when the State
disallowed them. I said, in such Case of unjust Deprivation, they might
exercise their Office at their Peril; which either might be done in the Church,
or in Separation from that particular Church, according as the Doctrines there
taught, and the Terms of Communion in it stood.

The Argument being thus falsely represented, he answers it with Questions. The
method, I suppose, is new, and he a Man in fashion. The first is this, Whether
a Bishop duly Consecrated, or a Minister duly Ordained, may not be lawfully
Suspended and Deprived from the Execution of his Office, by the Secular Power,
wh^re there is sufficient Reason for it? Now this Question plainly answers it
self. For I think any thing may be done, for which there is a sufficient
Reason; and he is a very hard hearted Man, who will not allow him this. But
then there are other Questions to be asked, viz. What is, in such Case, a
sufficient Reason? Whether there be sufficient Reason in this particular Case?
And lastly, (if he please,) Whether no Authority in the Deprivers, and no
Crime, as to them, in the Deprived, be a sufficient Reason for Suspension or
Deprivation? It is an odd way of answering a Man in a particular Case, to float
in generals, and keep as far from the Question as may be; but perhaps he will
mend that anon; at present we must attend to the Solution of his Question,
which in his Singular way he performs by reciting two Objections, and as many
Answers to them, from Mr. Mason. And, to make short work, I will grant him all
that Mason says, where there is, as our Author calls it, a sufficient Reason
for so doing; and I hope he would not have it done without or against Reason.
And so, passing by the Act of Parliament, which he has left me to peruse at
leisure, till I have more spare time, I will directly come to his second
Question, and try whether he has any better Fortune there.

He is not agreed with himself, how he shall word his second Question; and
therefore I will set down that, where he expresses himself most at large, and
maintains the afirmative; Whether it may not be lawful for the Secular Power to
deprive Persons in Orders, for Crimes committed against the State, and
particularly, upon Refusal to give Security to the Government for their
Peaceable Behavior and Allegiance, by Oath? This he affirms, and he says I
expressly deny; which is expressly false, as may appear from those very Words of
mine, which he has cited to prove his Assertion: For there I did allow a
Deprivation by the Secular Power, where either the just Censure of the Church
had passed on any, or they did merit Deposition; and that I think they may do,
though a Censure be not actually passed upon them. But if you will have the
Deprivation valid even to their acquiescence, where the Secular Power, or that
which calls it self a Secular Power says, that a Crime is committed against it,
you must not only justify Queen Mary in Depriving Edward the Sixth's Bishops,
but you must condemn those deprived Bishops for making a Schism, and not
joining in Communion as Laymen, i. e. that they did not turn Papists.

But let us examine his Defense. I answer (says he) with Mason, Where was the
Act of the Church, in the Deposition of Ablathar? And where was the
Ecclesiastical Crime he was charged with? Did Mason then use thus to answer
with Questions? But your Questions shall have Answers however; And, First, I
think it not very clear whether the Jewish Church did afford so sufficient an
Ecclesiastical Remedy against their Criminal High Priest, as the Christian
Church does against Criminal Bishops; and if so, then it was altogether
necessary both for Church and State, that their King, who was of God's own
appointment, and something more than a mere Secular Person, should interpose
his Authority without any deference to Ecclesiastical Censure. Secondly, You
may enquire, but I am apt to believe that neither you nor I can certainly tell,
whether Abiathar was Censured by the Sanhedrim or not; for if it be not
Recorded that he was; so neither is it that he was not. Thirdly, Though it be
very convenient in it self, agreeable to the Rules of the Church, and makes
much for the Peace both of Church and State, That Christian Kings in Punishing
Ecclesiastics would take the Censures of the Church along with them, which
would make the Condemnation of such Persons more terrible and notorious; yet if
the Clergy should refuse, as it would be their Fault, so it does not hinder the
Secular Power to punish Offenders according to Justice. But all this is nothing
to the purpose, and will do him no service, because there are Cases, wherein
Ecclesiastics, Deprived by even a lawful Secular Power, may yet remain obliged
to execute their Commission from Christ, though at their Peril; or else the
Apostles and Primitive Bishops must be Condemned; and if so, it is much more
Lawful, when for adhering to right they are deprived only by a pretended Power.
But I suppose this Virtuoso will say, That Jehojada had been bound to leave of
all care of discharging his Duty of High Priest, if Athaliah had Deprived him.
As to his Second Question, (Where was the Ecclesiastical Crime Abiathar was
charged with?) I answer, That though I spoke of Ecclesiastical Censures, yet I
did never limit the matter to pure Ecclesiastical Crimes, nor have I (that I
can remember) so much as used that Phrase; for the Church may censure
whatsoever is Contra bonos mores, though, at the same time, the Secular Power
punish it as an Offense against the State: The one is Spiritual, and tends to
their Repentance and Amendment, and consequently is for their Good: The other
respects their Deserts, and the ill effects it had on the State, and repays and
punishes their Misdeeds. But if he would know Abiathar's Crime, it was High
Treason, which is a thing of so scandalous and dangerous a Nature, that he
becomes unfit to discharge so sacred an Office, who is guilty of it; nor can
the Censures of the Church be too severe against such Wickedness; when the Sons
of Peace, and those which should teach and pay the strictest Obedience, though
they meet even with the greatest Discouragements, shall turn Masters of
Misrule, the Church ought to spew them out. As for Abiathar, he had forfeited
his Life by his Treasonable Actions, (I do not say by joining with the Son
against the Father) and in such a case he who only restrained his Actions, but
granted him both Life and an honorable Subsistence, was very kind. But whether
this come nearest to our Case or theirs, I leave succeeding Time, and more
impartial Posterity to judge.

He farther answers with the same learned Author to this effect, That a Law was
made, That all Magistrates, whether Sacerdotal or Civil, should take an Oath
that the Queen, (i. e. Elizabeth) was Supreme. etc. under the Pain of
Deposition: For refusing this, the Popish Bishops were deprived, as presumed to
be for the Pope's Supremacy. But then he adds, The same Parity of Reason may
hold for administering and taking the Oath of Allegiance to, etc. i. e. Because
Bishops might be deprived for refusing an Oath to a lawful Power, against an
unlawful; therefore they may be deprived for refusing to take an Oath to an
unlawful Power, against that which is lawful and rightful. And this he calls
Parity of Reason, though an indifferent Person would say it were directly
contrary to it; and that the Legality and Rightfulness of Power, being the
Reason of the Oath to one, was a just Reason of denying it the other.

The same Author, he says, tells us, That when those Bishops would not take the
Oath, Episcopatibus suis tandem aliquando juxta Legem Parliamentariam sunt
abdicati. And now he thinks he has undone me: For he tells me he leaves me
this to English. If I cannot, I will come to him for help; though I think I
shall be very ill employed, if I do. But after all, I believe this Sentence was
particularly pitched upon for the sake of some Words in it. And first, he had
an Eye to the Word abdicati, as a fine clinch on the Times, and grateful to his
new Masters. What a lucky hit was this, to find such a Word in a venerable
Clergyman? Well! let them make their best on it: It is not to be doubted, but
they will never stick at Abdicating Bishops, who make no Scruple of Abdicating
Kings. His next Respect was to the Legem Parliamentariam, which seemed to be a
pretty Offering to his Goddess Diana, the House of Commons; for which they can
do no less than nominate him to Preach before them the next Sessions, and then
he will forfeit his Conscience, rather than miss the Thanks of the House. And
yet I must tell him, That it is an Impropriety of Speech in his Author: For
though the Parliament contrive, compose, and propound, yet they are the King's
Laws, whose Fiat it is which makes them so. But the subtillest Fetch of all is
in the Word Episcopatibus; which may signify their Temporalities, and the
Exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction in their proper Diocesses, as it does in
this place; or else may signify the Function and Order it self. Now, he durst
not English it in this latter Sense, for fear of giving up the whole Order, and
being charged with down right Erastianism: And yet he was willing to leave it
with an Inu^ndo, as if it ought to be taken in that sense that so he might
gratify the Secular Power with a boundless Authority: For thence are his
Hopes; and some Men care not to betray their whole Order, so they can enrich
themselves. Thus, Sir, I have Englished your Latin by Piecemeal, and, to
requite your Favor, I leave it to you to put together again.

His Third Question is this, Whether if a Person be lawfully Deprived of the
Exercise of his Ministry, he is notwithstanding bound, as a private Member, to
communicate in that Church? etc. This he says, I deny, which is a false and
impudent Slander; for nothing can be more plain, than that he, who is lawfully
Deprived ought to acquiesce; the only Remedy left him in that case, is by all
lawful means to get it off again as soon as he can. But he knows we deny the
lawfulness of the Deprivation, upon which account we think it lawful for us to
continue the Exercise of our Ministry, and would do it in conjunction with
them, were it not that they both unjustly approve our pretended Deprivation,
and refuse to suffer us the Exercise of our Ministry, either in our own or
their Churches, and also further clog their Communion with such Terms, as is
not lawful for us to comply with; and upon this score we think we both may, and
ought to maintain a separate Communion. You should have proved the Deprivation
lawful, which you knew we denied; but instead of that, you all a long run away
begging the Question.

This should have been the Last, but being a fruitful She Question, it has
foaled Two more, and how many it may bring forth in time, Who knows? Like Twins
he has put them together, and so let them go. Whether Ordination oblige such a
one to the actual Exercise of his Office, when forbid by the Magistrate? And
then, Whether for the Exercise of his Ministry, he may and is obliged to set up
and maintain a separate Communion? And that I may comply with his way as far as
I can, I will answer them with two more. First, Whether the Apostles, having
received their Commission and Authority from Christ, were obliged to leave off
the actual Exercise of their Office, when forbid by the Magistrate? Secondly,
Whether if a Separation be made, those who depart from others, or those who
give just Cause for it are the Schismatics? But these I must leave to him,
that we may examine how he solves his own. If (says he) the Magistrate may
lawfully Deprive, then the Clerk may be lawfully Deprived, and if so, he is
bound to submit. Still this is begging the Question; for we complain not of
what is lawfully, but what is unlawfully done. But he gives a Reason, which
either proves too much, or manifestly shows, That he thinks either that the
Magistrates Deprivation is always lawful, or though it should be unlawful, yet
must be submitted to. For (says, he p. 13, 14.) to officiate notwithstanding
such a Prohibition, is in our way to take up Arms* against him; and in a lower,
to do what the Pope does in a higher Station, and to control his Jurisdiction.
Now this is a Knavish malicious Trick, to compare our Actions to the Popes; the
Pope directly challenges a Supremacy over Kings, indeed over all Men; we only
lay claim to a Christian Liberty, not to comply with Sin and Wickedness, though
the Magistrate command it; and a Power not to desert our Station, wherein
Christ has fixed us, for every humoursom or unjust Prohibition of the State,
but at our Peril, and without Resistance; and what Agreement has this with the
Popes Actions? But if his Civil Magistrate may not any ways be controuled, but
must be complied with in all things, then I leave any indifferent Persons to
judge, whether these two things be not the direct Consequences of his
Arguments. First, This makes the Proceedings of the Apostles, and all the
Primitive Christians, in propagating the Gospel for about Three hundred Years,
to be altogether unjustifyable. For they were actually prohibited first by the
Jews, after by the Emperors; so that if his Doctrine had taken place,
Christianity had never entered into the World. Secondly, This shuts out the
Doctrine of the Cross, not only as Foolishness, but as Wickedness and
Disobedience, and puts it in the Power of the Civil Magistrate at his Pleasure
to extirpate Christianity out of the World; for if prohibited, they must cease
and comply; because to do otherwise Were in their way to take up Arms against
him, and control his Jurisdiction. And thus, if the Grand Signior should
Silence all the Christian Ministers in his Dominions, they must hold their
Peace, and no more speak in the Name of Jesus; for if they do our Author will
tell them, they are Rebels. I perceive this Author makes use of his Religion
only for his Convenience, and will put no more on than he can at any time put
off again; he is here a sort of a Christian, and at Japan would be a Hollander.

But to make good his Argument, he accuses me of Ignorance as to the Primitive
Times, and instanceth in Eustathius of Antioch, Athanasius of Alexandria, and
Paulus of Constantinople, put out by the Imperial Power; and this he says, Was
never questioned by the Orthodox, though they complained of the Injustice of
it, etc. Now I confess, that I have not had those Advantages which some have
been happy in; and am content to be accounted Ignorant, provided he will suffer
me to be Honest: But, yet as Ignorant as I am, I think, no Man that had
consulted his Cause, or his own Reputation would have produced this instance in
this case. For it will either justify our Proceedings, or force him to condemn
these Persons; and in so good Company we shall the less value hard Censures:
For were they thrust out of their Diocesses? What great difference is here? Are
not our Livelihoods and Cures taken from us? Are not our Bishops Deprived of
their Profits and the exercise of their Jurisdictions? This we suffer, and do
not so much as compare the Power then and now, whether lawful or unlawful: If
the Civil Authority wrongfully spoil us of our Goods, and restrain our Persons,
we know no Resistance any more then those good Men did. But did they forbear to
exercise their Office and Ministry where they had opp^tunity? No such thing.
Was there no Schism upon this account? It is plain, That the Orthodox refused
to Communicate with the Bishops put over them; the whole Christian World was
concerned on one side or other in the Case of Athanasius; at Constantinople the
People were so troublesome, that the Emperor was forced to recall Paulus, though
he was after again Banished; and upon the Expulsion of Eustathius from Antioch,
the suspected Bishops, set over them, were disgusted by many, and Theodoret
says, That plurimi Studiosi pietatis, cum Sacerdotes tum Plebs, desertis
Ecclesiasticis caetibus, privatim Conveniebant (lib. 1. cap. 21.) And this they
continued to do, though all the Churches were taken away from the Adherents to
Eustathius, in order to force them to Communion with those put in his place, as
may appear from that request of Athanasius to the Emperor, for one Church to be
granted to the Orthodox at Antioch, when he desired the like of Athanasius for
the Arrians at Alexandria (Theod. lib. 2. cap. 12.) I think a Man so Skilful in
Antiquity might have made choice of some more lucky instance; but that he may
not be at too much trouble, if he can have a little Patience, it shall not be
long ere I furnish him.

Next in order to an Answer to his. Second Question, he supposes the
Clergyman not bound by the Deprivation; but then (says he) What is this to a
Separation? For is he so obliged, that rather then not officiate, he may and
ought to break of from Communion with the Church? If you will make that
supposal (which in our particular Case is a great Truth) you of all Men were
most unfit to put these Questions. For when you join with those, who make this
unjust Deprivation, when you take our Churches, our Flocks, our Livelyhoods,
and suffer us not to exercise our Ministry, where you have the Profit of it,
unless we will do it to the dissatisfaction of our Consciences, Do you complain
that we do not maintain Communion with you? If we were in fault in this Case,
yet Modesty (if any be left you) and the ill Usage we have from your Party,
might make you hold your Peace. I freely grant, That we ought to continue in
the Communion of the Church we are of as long as we can, and that Separation is
like a Divorce, which is the last Extremity, etc. But then I say, That we still
are of the same Church we were of; for the Schism goes along with the Cause;
and there it is you, not we, are the Schismatics; the Separation I grant to be
Unhappy and Mischievous, but let them look to that who made the Divorce by
justifying unlawful Proceedings, and setting up sinful Terms of Communion, as I
have already proved; and therefore will say no more of it here. And this is
sufficient for an Answer to that Slander, as if we proceeded upon the same
Grounds with the Dissenters, which is manifestly false; only I am bold to tell
him, That they have now put a Plea into the Mouth of the Dissenters, which will
justify their Separation from them; and were it not, that they cannot justify
their Separation from us, your Perfidiousness and other ill Acts had given up
the Cause to them.

When he thought he had lost my Second Argument with multitudes of Questions,
he attacks that which he calls the Third. And, he says, I argue from the
Subjection the People and Clergy owe to the Bishops, and the Bishops owe to
their Metropolitan; and I grant, That I do so, and the Argument must be good,
unless he can Dispute away all the Government and Orders of the Christian
Church. But to this he returns with all imaginable Scorn. Our Author that
undertakes to give us an account of the Sense, Judgment, and Practice of the
Primitive Times, would have done well to have given us a touch or two of his
Skill that way, by some credeble Authorities; and particularly of such a
Subjection of the Bishop to the Metropolitan, to the Confutation of some of St.
Cyprian 's Epistles. It being very likely, that in a small time the whole
Controversy may turn upon this hinge, and it being most becoming Church Men to
direct Ecclesiastical Proceedings by Ecclesiastical Authority, I shall take a
little more pains in this place to answer, not only what he now objects, but to
take in what he has at any time dispersedly spoken as to this Matter. If this
scornful Gentleman will so give up all to the Civil Power, that their Commands,
and Orders must be actually obeyed and complied with in every thing, he in
effect grants two things (which done by any Clergyman, to have his Gown pulled
over his Ears were too mean a Punishment.) First, That it is in their Power to
destroy Christianity, and in the room of it to plant any other, or none at all.
Secondly, That Religion is only an Artifice or Sham to be made use of, so far
as it is serviceable to the Civil Power, and no otherwise. By this you may
perceive, what a Friend the Erastian is to the Atheist; and though our Author
does not speak out, yet he has many Expressions that look earnestly that way.
But he will allow, That the blessed Jesus, who instituted the Christian Church,
did by a published Gospel and Succession of authorized Pastors provide for the
Directing, Ordering, and Governing of that Church, which they are to stand by
in all Ages and Difficulties; then he must grant, That there are some Duties of
a Christian, which no Civil Power can supercede; and though we are not allowed
to resist the lawful Civil Power, how hardly so ever it use us, yet we must
practice our Duty at our peril; and if the Civil Power would obstruct it, we
must then take up our Cross and follow Christ. And if this be not our Case, we
are mistaken Sufferers; but if it be, it will very much call in question their
Sincerity.

To fear God, and honor the King, and not meddle with those, who are given to
change, I think, was not only laid down as a wise Man's Advice, but designed as
a Duty and Obligation upon every particular Person. But not to urge here
matters of Justice, Fidelity, and common Honesty, (which yet by the way, I
think, are never to be slighted) we are here to consider what Obligations we
may lie under with respect to the Government, and Orders in the Church. And if
he will allow me to reason either from the Practice of the Church, or the
Canons of the Church, or the Writings of those who best understood both,
particularly St. Cyprians, whom he himself Magnifies, and than whom no Man
better understood this Cause; then I doubt not but we may go a considerable way
in it.

That Episcopacy is the highest Order in the Christian Church, and that there
is nothing, which one Bishop as a Bishop may do, but another may do the same, I
readily grant; and consequently, That there can be no such thing as Episcopus
Episcoporum: But then that there are withal certain Rights, Privileges, and
Prerogatives belonging to the Metropolitan, which have been always thought to
have been inseperably annexed to him, and from the exercise of which other
Bishops have been ever ordinarily debarred; and that upon this account, that
the Peace and Unity of the Church cannot be otherwise preserved, nor the
Government managed; this (I say) I think to be as plain as the High way.

Whatever the Rights or Privileges of Metropolitans may be, I shall only
Discourse of some, which were universally allowed by the Ancient Church, and
confirmed by Canons, or Practice universally received, and which may at least,
in some measure, affect our Case; of which one is this, That no one was to be
Ordained a Bishop without the concurrence or consent of the Metropolitan. In
the 19th. Canon of the 1st. Council of Antioch, it is thus determined, (...).
That a Bishop shall not be Ordained without a Synod and the Presence of the
Metropolitan. And when in the same Canon they had made the actual Presence of
the Metropolitan, as necessary as such a case could permit, they add, (...).
That if any thing be done otherwise, then as was than determined, the
Ordination shall be invalid. Now this very Canon was only pursuant to a Canon
of the Council of Nice; and because most Men, especially those with whom we
have now to do, have, at least formerly, pretended a great Veneration for that
Ancient Council, we will see what was their Judgment, which in the 6th. Can.
you may find expressed thus. -- (...). Let this be universally known, that if
any one be Ordained a Bishop without the consent of the Metropolitan, This
great Counsel does determine, that such a one ought to be no Bishop. Perhaps it
was for this Reason, That Eusebius (as far as I remember) in reckoning up the
Ecclesiastical Succession, except Jerusalem (for which there might be
particular Reasons) mentions only Metropolitical Sees. For whilst the Rights of
the Metropolitan were preserved, and his Succession undoubted, it was scarce
possible, that the other Bishops of the Province should come in any other way,
but at the right Door; for he was either to be actually at, or consent their to
Ordination by Bishops summoned by him for that purpose; so that as the being
sure concerning him, removed away all doubt of the rest; so the being uncertain
concerning him, of course makes all the Ordinations in his time uncertain. This
I say, that you may consider what will be the effect of Setting up a
Metropolitan against a Metropolitan, and how it is a fair way to render the
validity of the Ministerial Function called in question. But of what force such
an Act would be, if done, I shall consider presently.

Another matter appropriated by the universal Church to the Metropolitan, was,
that nothing of Moment, which might concern the Province, or be of general
Concernment, should be done without his privity and consent; so that unjustly
to set a Metropolitan aside, and for other Bishops to neglect him, is to make
matters of greatest Moment, and nearest Concernment to the Church to become
impracticable; and to draw a Scandal upon the Actions of all Bishops, as to any
thing they shall do in such Cases; and when I have offered Authorities for the
Proof of this, I leave others to judge whether they are Credible enough for
such a Huff as our Author. Amongst those Ancient Canons, collected and received
before the Council of Nice, which are vulgarly called the Apostles Canons, the
34th. runs thus, (...). i. e. The Bishops of every Country ought to observe
him, who is their First (or Chief) and to esteem him as their Head, and to do
nothing of Moment without his Consent. Every other Bishop to employ himself
only about those things, which are business of his proper Dioces^ and the
Villages (or Places) thereunto belonging. Neither let him (i. e. the Chief) do
any thing without the Concurrence of the rest. And so Unity shall be preserved,
and God shall be gloryfied, etc. To this very Canon the Council of Nice
relates, and explains what is meant by the (...), the first amongst them. For
after a great deal of care taken about the Ordination of the Metropolitan, as a
Matter of great moment for the Churches Security, they conclude the Canon thus,
(...), (Can. 4.) i. e. Let the Authority (or Confirmation) of things done
throughout every Province belong to the Metropolitan. Upon this very Canon did
the African Fathers found their Authority for that saying in their Epistle to
Coelestine, Bishop of Rome, Decreta Nicoena, siv^ inferioris gradus Clericus,
sive ipsos Episcopos, suis Metropolitanis apertissime commiserunt. i. e. The
Decrees of the Council of Nice have most plainly put, not only the Clergy of
inferior Rank, but even the Bishops themselves, under the Jurisdiction of
their Metropolitans. And to both the foregoing Canons the Council of Antioch
seems plainly to referr, in their 9th Can. (...), etc. i. e. It behooves the
Bishops in every Province, to know the Bishop of the Metropolitical See, and
that he undertakes the Care and Management of the whole Province; and that by
reason of the great Concourse of People from all places to the Metropolis, upon
account of Business, etc. And having thus confirmed the Jurisdiction of
Metropolitans, they tell you, That they did it, (...). i. e. According to an
ancient Canon of our Fathers, binding, (or in force.) And that you may know
what particular Canon in this they had an eye to, in the very next Words,
speaking of the Duty of Bishops, they expressed it thus, (...); which are the
very words used in the Apostles Canon for the same purpose, as any one may see,
who will compare them together. From all this it is evident, That even Bishops
place at Rome, it made a Schism, and it had been a very Pernicious one, had not
Felix opportunely died. I will not urge upon our Author, That his frequent
loose way of expressing himself does, in effect, basely give up, not only the
Episcopal Order, but all the Orders in Christ's Church, and consequently the
Church it self, to the Secular Power, be it what it will; if this was done
designedly, (as it seems to be) it is so much the worse: But I will keep my
self to regular Ecclesiastical Practices and Authorities; and if a Clergyman
will not abide by these, or return them a fair Answer, he is much more fit for
a Censure than a Disputation.

It is a Rule so well known to be universally received by the Ancient Church,
That there shall be but one Bishop in a City, that I need not spend time to
prove it. That of the Chorepiscopi does not alter the case, and particularly is
nothing to our case, for these two Reasons. First, That though they were a sort
of Rural Bishops, yet they were only as Assistants, and acted in Subordination
to, and by the Direction of the City Bishop. Secondly, That we have none such
now; and as for those, who are so hasty to get into the places of our pretendly
deprived Bishops, they would never own themselves to be Chorepiscopi, but
challenge the whole entire Jurisdiction, and absolutely thrust out the lawful
Canonical Bishops, contrary to all the Rules of the Church. The reason why this
Rule bath been held so Sacred, is partly, because to do otherwise would be to
make the Church a Monster; for in St. Cyprian's Sense a Church is a People
united to their Bishop; where by the way observe, That the Word Plebs, or
People, is taken in a larger Sense, as well for the Clergy as Layety under the
Jurisdiction of one Bishop: And here the Bishop supplying the place of the
Head, and the People of the Body; to set up two Bishops were to make two Heads;
partly because if two Powers, independent upon each other, command and direct
in the same Church, it would breed such Disorders and Confusions as usually end
in Schism; and indeed it might make the Obedience of the People impossible,
whilst they might command different things at the same time; and for this
reason both so great Power was given to Metropolitans in Provincial Churches,
and all Bishops were Prohibited any Acts of Jurisdiction out of their own
Precincts, which might be any ways prejudicial to the Canonical Bishop of the
Place. And therefore where there is a lawful Bishop, another ought not to be
placed there; if it be otherwise, the whole Act is void; and this, Sir, your
good Friend St. Cyprian will tell you, Episcopo semel Facto, and Collegarum ac
Plebis testimonio and judicio comprobato, alium constitui nullo modo posse.
(Ep. 41. ad Cornel.) This, I think, is plain enough; but because our Author is
for abundance of Words, if he please to read St. Cyprian's Epistle to
Antosvianus, who favored Novatianus in such a case as is daily expected will
be ours, he may there find Reasons, as well as bare Assertions, of which take
this taste; Cum nemo ante se (he speaks of Cornelius Bishop of Rome) factus
esset, cum Fabiani locus, i. e. cum loous Petri and gradus Cathedr^e
Sacerdotalis vacaret, quo occupato de dei voluntate, atque omnium nostrum
conseasione firmato; quisquis jam Episcopus fieri voluit, foris fiat necesse
est, nec habeat Ecclesiasticam Ordinationem, qui Ecclesiae non tenct Vnitatem;
quisquis ille fuerit, multum de se jactans, and sibi plurimum vindicans,
profanus est, al^nus est, foris est. Et cum post primum secundus esse non
possit, quisquis post unum, qui solus esse debeat, factus est, non jam secundus
ille, sed nullus est. (Ep. 52.) Thus it is plain, That the grand Reason why St.
Cyprian gives the Cause against Novatian, was, because Cornelius in the Vacancy
of the Sea was Can^nically placed there before him. If therefore a Bishop be
thrust into the place of another, who is lawfully Bishop of the Place, all such
transactions are void and null in themselves; and all that forsake their true
Bishop, and join with him who is thrust in, are Schismatics; and though there
should be any Penalty or Deprivation befall the Bishop; yet if it be such,
which in its own Nature does only amount to a Suspension, it cannot make the
Place capable of another Bishop; because, notwithstanding the present
restraint, he remains Bishop still, though under a kind of an arrest; and in
such Case the return of the use and exercise of that Authority, which all this
while is really lodged in him, is to be waited and endeavored.

From hence, I think, it does appear, that it was a ruled Case in the Church,
That if any Person did come into any other than a vacant See, and claim there
as direct and proper Bishop, (as Novatianus did against Cornelius,) both he and
all his adherents were adjudged Schismatics. As to a Vacancy I am still of the
same Mind, and if our Author would have me change it, he would sooner have
prevailed with me by Arguments than Threatenings; I have seriously thought on
it, and cannot yet imagine how a Vacancy can be, but one of these three ways;
either God must make the Sea void by his Death, or a lawful Authority makes it
void by a lawful Deposition, or he himself makes it void by his Renunciation.
For the last of these, I perceive, our Author has a present kindness, but how
long it may hold I know not. For when others have taken away their Estates, he
in a pretty sly way persuades them to mend the Matter, by renouncing their
Order, and, I believe, with much the same design, that the Fox praised the Cock
for an excellent Singer, that while he shut his Eyes as he crow'd, Reynard
might have the opportunity to run in upon him, and make a prey of him; as to
the second way, which is Deposition, I do not see that there is the least room
for any Plea for it in this Case. For be the Authority of the Secular Power
what it will, as to the taking away their Estates, the consinement or
punishment of their Persons, or the temporary restraint of the exercise of
their Authority; yet, that the Secular Power can unmake a Bishop, (which is the
only thing can, as to them, come up to our Case,) I still peremptorily deny:
And let our Author clap his Hands and cry S'too, let him set all he can on my
Back, all the threatenings in the World, nay all the things that can be
threatened shall never fright me from it; indeed if he can fairly convince me by
Argument, I will yield, and give up my Religion, when they please to demand it:
But he had best have a care what he does; for, in the end, he himself would be
no Gainer by the Bargain. In the next place, if he fly to an Ecclesiastical
Deposition, there several things must be enquired into. As, First, A sufficient
Cause, without which the Act would be manifest Injustice, if not void. To
enquire after all the Causes, for which a Bishop may lawfully be Deposed, would
be too tedious; Photius in the 14th. Chapter of his Nomocanon refers us to very
many, I will not say all; our Author may search them at his leisure, and see if
he can pick up a new Charge; as for the present Accusation it is a thing of
that Nature, that the contrary may rather justify the doing the same by
others. In the next place there must be competent Judges; and the 12th. Canon
of the Council of Carthage will not allow less than Twelve Bishops to depose a
Bishop. But lay all Circumstances together as our present Case is, and I am apt
to think that there will not be found any competent Authority to sit in
Judgment upon our Bishops. But he that as it will, When has any such Authority
made any offer that way? Lastly, There must be a full and fair Hearing. And in
the close of the 97th. Canon of the Council of Carthage you may see what
Horror the Bishops expressed in the Case of Quedvultdeus of Deposing a Bishop,
before his Cause had a full and final Hearing. Indeed in some Cases the Canons
censure ipso facto, and then such solemn Proceedings are not necessary; but
even then there must be a notoriety of the Fact the Canon relates to, and there
must be a Declaration, that the Canon takes Place. But I do not see that any of
these things can be so much as pretended in this Case, and therefore deposed
they are not: The last way of Vacancy is Death; but of that I need not
Discourse, there are (thanks be to God) if not a great, yet a venerable Number
of them living; and, I hope, God will long continue their Lives for his Honor,
their own Renown, and the Good of this distressed Church.

From the foregoing Discourse, these Consequences may be fairly drawn; First,
That whosoever shall be put into the Place of the pretended Deprived Bishops,
are not to be esteemed Bishops, nor ought either Clergy or People to regard
them, but to adhere firmly to their former true Bishops. Secondly, That
whosoever shall Ordain such, or endeavor to Place them there, make themselves
Criminals, and liable to an Ecclesiastical Censure. Thirdly, That they and all
their adherents are Schismatics. I am accustomed to speak my Mind plainly; if
this do not please you, I cannot help it; you were pleased to call for
Authorities, I have given you some, and when you are at leisure, I hope I shall
hear of your Epistles.

Having thus dispatched the Argument, I think, I need not put in any Answer to
his impertinent Questions; but whereas he says, My Argument will serve either
way, as well for the Bishops and Metropolitans that have, as those that have
not taken the Oaths, he is much mistaken; for if my Allegation be good, they
will be liable to censure; and if he consider, he will yield that that alters
the Case. And by this he may perceive, That whatever matters of State have
occasioned, yet it is not bare matters of State we proceed upon, nor do we
think it unlawful to swear Allegiance to the Sovereign Power; and therefore
both his Questions in that respect are Impertinent. But I desire to know what
Primitive Christians ever thought it lawful to take an Oath of Allegiance, to
that which is no Sovereign, against that which really is, or to take a later
Oath directly contrary to a former lawful Oath? But if he can find none such,
if he please, I can furnish him with a sort of Christians in the Primitive
Times, who made so little Conscience of Oaths, that Jura, Perjura; Sacretum
proder^ noli, is said to be a received Axiom amongst them; and if these are
for his turn, I do not envy him their Company. But one great Artifice of our
Author, is to take the out skirts, or some little snips of the Cause, and then
put Questions as if we were concerned about nothing else, which is pitiful
Sophistry; if he please to deal fairly, and take the whole Case together, he
may take the liberty to ask as many Questions as he please, and I doubt not but
he may be furnished with Answers. In the mean time I shall leave this matter
here; and as for what follows, it coming not up so fairly to the Merits of the
Cause, I shall be very short.

The next thing that comes upon the Stage, is, Public Good, which, like the
Phoenix, is born to destroy it self; for it is rarely used, but when all other
Reasons fail; and commonly then most strongly pretended, when the Intention and
Design is to destroy it. Much Fairer and Honester it would be, if Men would
plead the Justice and Righteousness of their Cause, and not thus justify the
most shameless Treachery and prodigious Villainy under the Disguises and false
Pretenses of Public Good; but I must follow our Author, and it shall be as
close as I can, that I may the sooner have done with him, and get into better
Company. I did say, that the task his Author undertook would better become a
Committeeman or Sequestrator than a Divine of the Church of England; and he
grants that this had been true, provided it had been true that he undertook
what I charge him with, That the Public Good will Warrant us to destroy a
lawful King. As to which I shall only ask this Question, Whether K. J. was our
lawful K. or not? If he was, I think they have destroyed him as far as they
can; that it is not done more effectually, is not for want of good Will, but of
Power: And if I be not strangely mistaken, this is the thing which is defended,
or which at least ought to be defended; for otherwise all the rest fails. Next
he taxes me, as having either a bad Memory, or a very bad Conscience, for
saying, That his Author had not proved the matter in Hypothesi, etc. in our
particular Case; now a bad Memory is no good thing, but a very bad Conscience
is a very ill thing; but, I think, I have no great cause to accuse either in
this Matter. For let them pretend what they will, particular Persons and
Actions, and the thing as it really is, they will never be brought to; but here
they always suppose Cases, which they would have People to belive is ours, or
like ours, but never come home to the point. If they would give me leave, I
would propound some Cases of Conscience, and name Persons and Actions; so that
a direct Answer must unavoidably be given, or the trifling appear; but I would
advise these Men not to talk too much of Conscience, least they should awaken
her, and she should sing a Song in their Ears, and make their Hearts ache. But
before he can come to the Matter, this learned Author in Romances, not being
able to find out any thing more contemptible, compares me to Don Quixot; but he
should have remembered, that he was a kind of a desperate Fellow, and there may
be some hazard in undertaking such an Adversary; however, I believe, I shall
never mistake him for an Enchanted Castle, or a Windmill, though, for any
thing I know, he may have one in his Head.

Three Heads he propounds from my Discourse, of which the last is the Notion of
Public Good, and after his Landable Crabfashion, of going backward, he will
needs begin with that; but at last I find we are agreed, That Public Good is
good for Somebody, but who that Somebody is, it seems we are not yet agreed;
for, he says, it is not a Personal Good, and yet if it be not good for Persons,
I am afraid it will prove good for no Body. If he had pleased, he might have
observed, That I called the Public Good a Personal Good, not with reference to
Men's private separate Interest in detriment of the rest, but with respect to
them as Persons in Society; and doubtless Public Good is in its highest
Exaltation, when it is Diffusive to all; but yet in some Cases particular
Persons, or Parties may, and must suffer for the Preservation of the Community,
and this I fairly owned, and if he would not see it, I cannot help it; but to
argue as if I disowned any such thing, is very Disingenuous. But if there may
be some Cases, wherein it may be the Glory of some to suffer; Yet will this
prove it to be the Public Good, for some Men to raise their Fortunes upon the
Ruins of their Country? I think he might as well say, That a Man ought to set
his House on sire on purpose, that three or four Thieves might have the
opportunity to run away with the best of his Goods. I know not better how to
compare the Public Good of a Community, than to the safety of a human body,
when every Part and Member is right, sound, and well disposed, and out of
danger, it is certainly then best with it; but if a blow be made at me, I shall
rather take it on my Arm than on my Head, though it was intended at my Head,
and not at my Arm; and yet, I think, herein the Arm had no injustice from the
Head or Body, though it had from the external Enemy, because the use of it in
such case is to defend the Head, and it would have suffered more, if the blow
had been taken there; and as to internal Distempers, some are removed by Cure,
and every part preserved; but in case the whole be endangered by the
disaffection of a part, then we come to Amputation, and spare not a Leg or Arm,
or any Member, whereby the Body may be preserved sound, though not entire; but
then this is a remedy which brings an irrecoverable loss, leaves a Maim for
ever, and is never to be used but in cases of absolute Necessity; but then if
the Distemper affect the Head or Heart, as all lawful Means ought to be used,
so all Hazards must be run: For nothing can Warrant the cutting off the Head,
or pulling out the Heart. Here the whole unavoidably must follow the fate of
the part, and so the Remedy is worse than the Disease, and therefore under no
pretense whatsoever to be practiced. If it be objected, That the Head has not
the same Connection with the Civil and with the Natural Body, and that the Civil
Body may be preserved by a new Head, though not the Natural; I Answer, First,
That it is the safest Course for the Preservation of the Society to pay the
same deference to the Civil Head as to the Natural; and this, I think, our
Constitutions do, by making the legal Succession of Kings to be the same Head,
according to that known Axiom Rex non moritur. Secondly, That in any Body
whatsoever it is most unnatural for the Body to conspire against, and destroy
the Head. Thirdly, That in this respect the Civil Head has a closer Connection
with the Body, than the Natural; that the Ligaments between it and the Body are
the Constitutions, so that let him be driven where he will, whilst he is alive
and in Being, he will bear the Relation of the Head to the Body, while those
Constitutions last. To alter these at pleasure, and Men's Rights with them, is
the highest Injustice; and the setting any other Head on than the Constitutions
bear, most certainly puts the Body into strange Convulsions, and often ere long
brings Ruin upon it. Beware a Commonwealth, my Masters! Methinks I hear the
Magpyes, Daws, Crows and Rooks about the Town, begin to set their Notes that
way.

But after all, let all, that can, be allowed to Public Good; yet it ought to
be considered whether it be the particular Case, and whether the Public Good
be Secured or Advanced. And here it would be enquired, Whether Religion be
better Secured to us? Whether Men's Lives and Properties are more Safe? How we
increase in Strength, in Trade, in Riches, and the like? And though I do not
admire our Gain, yet many of these Things are out of my way; but there is a
certain Tract, called the DEAR BARGAIN, which speaks of these Things; and if
the Government would encourage that Author to write, I am persuaded he would
quickly set that Controversy in the true Light; and to him as the fittest Man
I leave it.

The next thing is the Practicability of this Principle of Public Good. Now
whatever the Public Good is, or whatever it may Warrant, yet if People are to
make that their Rule, they will judge of it, and then every one will judge of
Public Good according to his own Interest and Persuasion; and this by several
Arguments I did prove would fill the World with Violence and Confusion. But he
is so far from answering any of my Arguments, that he never mentions one of
'em as sensible that it would spoil all that he intended to sham on me
afterward. But very honestly he Sums up my Argument, as I neither laid nor
meant it, and tells me, That the Public Good's being liable to be abused, is
an inconcluding Argument, not only because of the Inconsequence, but because
this is a way of Arguing, that may serve against any thing; and if we put
Public Justice, or Laws, or Religion, or Reformation, into the place of
Public Good, it will hold in any of them as well as the other: Grant this to
be true, though it is of his own making; yet will this conclude, that whoever
pleads Public Good, Religion, or Reformation, is necessarily in the Right? And
if it be so liable to be abused, Does it not nearly concern us to examine well
whether it be not abused? When so many have been imposed upon by it, and even
we our selves so very lately almost to our utter Ruin, must we still be such
Fools as to believe without more ado every bawling, or self-interessed Fellow,
who cries Public Good? For this Reason I did then fairly intimate, That
Public Good as a common Noise, or solitary Plea, is never to be admitted
without such Criterions, and other Evidences accompanying it, as may make it
appear, that what is pleaded is real. And thus it will be in any of the Cases
he supposes; if he please he may set up the cry of Reformation, and then the
Church of England is for Reforming the Church of Rome; yea, at this time
perhaps one part of it is for Reforming another; the Presbyterian would Reform
them both, and the Independent outdoeth him; and still the Anabaptist has a
Knack of Reforming further, and the Quaker he is for Reforming them all. Now
set all these on Work, and encourage them by telling them, That the Plea of
Reformation being liable to be abused is no Argument, but it is Inconsequent,
and would reach to Public Good, or any thing else; and if they were suffered
to go on in this mad Humor, I am apt to think, that in a short time, they
would reform away all Religion. And if therefore Reformation be required, we
must not presently fall to altering or pulling down, but first enquire whether
there be any thing that stands in need of Reformation. For if things be either
well or near well, change is rarely for the better: But if there be discovered
either such gross Errors, or intolerable Abuses as need Reformation, yet it
must be done in a regular Course; for though there should be never so much need
of Reformation, if you will allow all to be Public Reformers, you will mend
Religion worse than those Tinkers do Kettles, who, instead of stopping one
hole, make two. And thus as to Public Good, the bare Name of it is not enough,
especially when such great Actions are pretended for the sake of it, as for any
thing we know may prove fatal; and therefore when such a Pretense is set up, I
think, there is a double Test whereby it ought to be tried; for as a Civil
Society we ought to examine such Pretenses with their agreeableness to our
Constitutions; for if they be contrary to them, they portend a Civil
Destruction. But then as we are a Christian Society, this Pretense of Public
Good must be examined by the Rules of Righteousness, and the Gospel of the
Blessed Jesus; and if Men will pretend for Public Good, to disannul
indispensable Duties, to destroy all Faith and Truth amongst Men, and to
overthrow the very Nature of Good and Evil, by making it Changeable and
Subservient to every present Turn and Occasion; this is the ready way to
destroy not only the Civil Society, but the Christian Church. And if that which
makes void Promises and Oaths, which evacuates God's Commandments, which
transforms Treachery into Virtue, and either makes it lawful to do Evil that
Good may come of it, or flatly says it is no Evil, if Good may happen to come
of it, (for I think there is not much Good come of it yet.) I say if this be
not Destructive of the Evangelical Rule, I know not what can. And if
disinteressed Persons were to judge of Particulars in the present Case, I dread
to think on which Side even a Moral Heathen would give the Verdict, to the
Shame of such numbers of Christians.

The third thing proposed, is, who shall be Judge? i. e. either of the
Mischief, or the Remedy. As to the former, he says, The Case before us is
supposed to be notorious: It is indeed supposed, but it was never proved. Must
we destroy a King and Government for the Shams and Slanders that malicious Men
suppose in defense of their Wickedness? Two things indeed he mentions, which
have a Tendency (as he says) to the Destruction of a Government, Desertion and
Lunacy. Now, if K. J. was Lunatic, this is the first time I have heard of it;
but if he was, that is not a sufficient ground to depose him: Indeed it may
warrant the setting up a Protector, or Regent, to act in his Name; but the
Honor and Title still remain with him. This seems to be the Case of Edward
III. who at the latter end of his Reign, being sensible of his Indisposition
for Government, made Lionel, Duke of Clarence, Regent of the Realm. But this
bereaved neither Edward III. his Father, nor Richard II. his Nephew, of their
Right. As for Desertion, I think they ought not for shame to have named it,
unless they had returned some better Answer to the Paper called Desertion
Discussed, than imprisoning the Author. But he says, I might as well have
asked, who shall be the Judge, whether the Banks are broken down in an
Inundation, etc. I hope he does not mean an Inundation of Foreigners, Poverty,
and Cruelty. But who is it has broke the Banks, or made the Breaches? Or how
are they repared and amended? No doubt, but that now all is well, and we are
out of danger, and as safe as Thieves in a Mill. But after all, he might have
considered, That there is a great difference between judging in Naturals and
Politics. As to the Objects of my Senses, Nature has made me the Judge, so
that if I see the Water break in, or the Wall thrown down, I need not ask
another, whether it be so or no; but I am not so proper a Judge of the Tendency
of my Superiors Actions, they being often moved by such Springs as I cannot
see, and therefore can make no certain Judgment of them: And it is no strange
thing for People to mistake these Actions when done, and not to know what is
good for themselves. Thus the Earl of Strafford was accused for advancing Trade
in Ireland, and for urging the necessity of the Interposition of the King's
Authority, where the Letter of the Law was too severe upon his Subjects. And I
could name the Person, who in Vindication of the Barbarity of the Kentish Men
to a certain Person in Distress, urged his putting an Act in execution in those
parts, than which, scarce any thing more tended to the Advancement of our
Trade, as even he, who urged it, had formerly acknowledged. Thus some people
will make even Health it self to be a Disease.

Now, if we are not well qualified to judge of the Evil, we are still more
unfit to he judges of the Remedy. For it is a Madness to prate of applying a
Cure to we know not what. But to put a stop here; he supposes Cases wherein the
Supreme Governor may be a Party, and therefore not to be allowed to be judge
in his own Case; But then will not his Subjects be a Party too? And if they in
this Case must be allowed to be Judge over the Supreme Governor, What is this
but to set a Supreme above a Supreme, whilst he himself grants, That the
Supreme Governor has no Supreme? But it is an idle if not a wicked Thing to
suppose such Cases without proving them, when such Supposals are made the
Reason of their Actions: For at this rate no Government can be long-lived. When
that is proved to be the Case, it is then time enough to discourse of what may
be done by the Entreaties and Petitions of the People, and the Mediation of
coordinate Powers, in order to set things to Rights. But let his Author say
never so plainly, That he does not set up the Power of the People over Kings,
yet his Principles do; and Men act by those, whatever they may pretend or say
to the contrary.

As to what concerns a Body of Men, he puts these two Questions from his
Author. Whether the Law of our Nation does not bind us to Allegiance to a King
and Queen in actual Possession of the Throne by consent of the three Estates of
the Realm? And whether such an Oath may not lawfully be taken, notwithstanding
any former Oath? The affirmative he proves from the Consent of the People,
whose true Representatives, (as he says) they are, I need not here examine of
what Force is the Consent of the People, because the Foundation whereon he
Grounds it, as to our present Case, is false: For the three Estates of the
Realm are the King's three Estates, and they can neither be legal Estates, nor
legal Representatives without the King's Authority, Writs, and Summons, and
other Requisites. But, it seems, the Inquirer here put an unlucky Question.
Where or how can all the People meet? Which he scornfully thus Answers. As if
the Author he opposes thought of no less than the numbering of the People from
Dan to Beersheba. But if he did not think of numbering them from Dan to
Beersheba, he ought to have thought of numbering them from Barwick to Dover.
For if the Government was not dissolved, Why goes it not according to the
Constitution? If it was dissolved, than all Men were as free as it is possible
for Men to be; and then no Man could represent another without his express
Consent; and every ones Consent ought to be taken Viritim; for whosoever did
not give his Consent, did not come into your new Body, and his natural Freedom
could not without Injustice be taken from him by Force.

When I thought we had been near an end, he is got again to the beginning; and
when he was thinking of closing, in the very next Words, he propounds no less
than three Heads of Discourse, which, he says, his Author treated of toward
the beginning; but all amount to no more, but the old Cuckoo Note of Public
Good, and that it ought to overruled every thing; as to which I might briefly
Answer, That Public Good is to be promoted in the way of Duty, not out of it;
and this is very ill taken up for a Plea, where there is neither Public Good
nor Duty in the Matter they plead for. But he undertakes to prove the Matter by
Instances, only they are Instances which have been already Answered, and he
does not handle them so dexterously as his Author. He begins with Parents and
Childeren, and unlucky Omen: If (says he) a Vow to God (which is as solemn a
Thing as an Oath) hinders that good, which Children are bound to do to Parents,
it cease to oblige as our Savior declares: Very good. But the reason is,
because that Vow never obliged at all, as be-ing unlawful, and contrary to that
which God and Nature had made a Duty of Childeren to Parents, though Wicked or
Froward. I thought the Duty of Children to Parents had been Abdicated; at
least, Sir, you ought to have overlooked it. But I desire it may be observed,
That, to make amends for this oversight, this very Author, who here makes the
Duty of Childeren to Parents so Sacred that it makes void a Vow to God himself,
within 3 Pages next following teaches you a trick to vacate the Obligation of
the Fifth Commandment.

But it seems I had said, That this was nothing to the purpose, and I think I
there proved it: But he says, it is to the purpose, because if the procuring
and preserving the Public Good be a Duty, and what a Person has vowed or
sworn be destructive of it, then the Oath cannot oblige, no more than a Vow,
etc. (p. 28.) But I say this also is nothing to the Purpose. For though the
procuring and preserving the public Good be a Duty, yet it does not make every
thing a Duty, which may tend toward it; and it must be procured and preserved
only by means lawful and honest. If Children might murder their Parents for
the Public Good, such Parents as have large Estates and wicked Children, had
need look out sharp; for Pretenses, even of Public Good, would not long be
wanting to send them of an Errand to another World.

Whereas I had said, with respect to such Oath or Vow, That the Sin was in
making, etc. he says this is true, where the Matter is unlawful in it self, but
not where the Obligation comes to cease. And this I grant also to be true; but
then a Man ought to be very well assured that the Obligation does cease, for
otherwise all the Arts and Shifts in the world will not absolve him from
Perjury. And I insisted on the first, as being our Case; and therefore his
Instance of the Shewbread is beside the Matter: For though, as dedicated to
God, it belonged to the Priests, yet it was never unlawful in it self for a Man
to eat Bread; nor did such Dedication hinder the Priests from being Charitable,
and in case of necessity, relieving a good Man from being starved. And though
it he the fashion of our days, not only to make Men poor, but by all means
possible to hinder them from any Relief, that they may starve; yet he needed
not to have gone to the Jews for an Instance, but might have told us of
Christian Bishops, who in times of Famine have sold the Riches of their
Churches, to buy Food for the Poor; and Posterity has honored their Memory
for it. As for his Story of Jaddus, I will not trouble my self to call it in
question; it will be somewhat to the Purpose when he can prove these three
things, 1. That Jaddus and the Jews took an Oath to Alexander: I find no such
thing in the Story; and he knows that we do not deny all manner of Submission
to Force. 2. That Darius was living when Jaddus made the Submission. 3. That we
have the same Authority, Warrant, and Directions, which Jaddus and the Jews
had; as to which last, he may do very well to address himself to a certain
Person, whom he very well knows, and try if he can find it in the Revelations.

The next Instance is of the Parents Part to Children, as to which he cites
these words from his Author; If Parents, instead of regarding the Good of their
Children, do openly design their Ruin, none will say but that they are bound
to take Care of their own Welfare. They are so; but yet even then there is a
Duty owing from those Children to those Parents. But in order to take off my
Answer there given, as if he had received a double Portion of Hugh Peters's
Spirit, he falls to his blackening Arts, and with the help of Flam-Supposals
and notorious Falsehoods, represents as indulgent a Father as perhaps lived, as
if he were another Saturn, who devoured his own Issue; and then he thinks the
Child may enter upon the Estate, and keep Possession against his Parent, etc.
and then tryumphantly asks this question, May not all this be done, and the
Fifth Commandment stand in its full Force? Yes, Sir! the Fifth Commandment will
be in force, and you and others, some time or other, will find so; but as you
order the Matter here, you make it either of no Force, or of Force to very ill
purpose; for so I take it to be, when it lays no other Obligation upon the
Child, but to dispossess the Father of his Estate, or to knock out his Brains.
Do not you think you have done an Heroic Act, thus to dispute away the fifth
Cammannment? But at this rate, I am afraid you will paint White-Chapel black,
and make People doubtful, how he is a Preacher of Righteousness, who devises
Tricks to take away the Obl^gation of God's Commandments.

The third Instance is of Masters and Servants, Victors and Captives; and in
these (his Author says) there is a Regard had to the Benefit of those, who are
in Subjection. This I did grant, but withal deny, That any Consequence could
be drawn thence, which would be for his turn. But here he accuses me of
Ignorance, Nonsense, Blunders, and what not, and all along after speaks in such
insolent language, as I think is only fit to be despised; and therefore I will
not do him the Pleasure to take any farther notice of it: Only I think it
disingenuous to cite my Words by the halves, and then cry out of Nonsense and
Inconsistencies. But it was impudence, as soon as this was done, to repeat the
following Words, which both make them Sense, and take away all Inconsistency.
But to my Argument he answers, That being under Government (rightly so called,)
does not Metamorphose us into Beasts; yet mere absolute Power comes very near
it. I know not what he means by his Government (rightly so called;) I hope it
is not Usurpation. That Parenthesis would better have become another, than him.
But his Answer is neither to the purpose, nor true: For there neither is nor
can be any Government, but somewhere there is lodged in it that, which he calls
an absolute Power; and thus in his way of Arguing, he has near Metamorphosed
all Mankind into Beasts, unless there be any such as are under no Government at
all. I as heartily wish, as he or any other Man can, That Power may be well
used; and yet I think I ought to be content to allow my Governors their
Failings, without mutinying against them, and displacing them: This would be,
not only endless, but to condemn our selves; for if it were said to us, he that
is without Sin, let him cast the first stone, I doubt you would scarce find one
to begin the Work. His Distinction of a private Injury from that wherein the
Public is concerned, is not practicable upon his Principle: For let it be made
lawful on any account to depose the supreme Governor, and the least and most
private Injury imaginable shall be interpreted a Breach of the Subjects
Privilege in general, and consequently against the Public Good. But there will
be no need for this, according to his Principle. For if the antecedent Good (as
he calls it) be so the Measure of the Obligation, as to dissolve it, when that
is wanting, every Man will be prone to think his own particular Good to be as
much that antecedent Good, as any thing he can call public; and consequently
if he be wronged, will take himself to be absolved from his Allegiance. This is
an admirable way to make Government firm and stable.

The last Relation he mentions is between Princes and their Subjects, as to
which, the only material thing he says, is, That the Nature of Political Oaths
is such, that they are reciprocal. Now though I do not think this will hold,
yet to what purpose should I enter into a Discourse about Oaths, when our
Business is with the Duties, which were antecedent to the Oaths, and to the
Performance of which we are more strongly bound by those Oaths! These
undoubtedly are not reciprocal: For if the Subject will not do his Duty, or
absolutely deny it, does this deprive the King of his Right to Sovereignty? At
this rate indeed we may depose Kings, and transfer Allegiance at pleasure. It
were a very happy thing, if the Duties of Relations were always justly and
mutually paid; but if there be (as too often there is) a Failure on the one
part, it does not discharge the Obligations of the other. Children owe a Duty
to wicked Parents, Servants to hard Masters, Subjects to severe Kings; though
it were much better, if they had more Encouragement to perform their
Obligations.

Every Cur will be snarling at the dead Lion, whom otherwise he durst not look
in the Face. The Actions, Writings, and Reputation of Dr. Hammond and Bishop
Sanderson, were enough to blast these Proceedings; and therefore almost every
Scribler for the late Treachery does all he can to lessen their Esteem in the
World. I had particular occasion to vindicate Bishop Sanderson; but he tells me
I mistake between what the Consent of the absent Prince is founded upon, and
upon what the Casuists found their Opinion of the Obligation that lies on
Mankind to do what tends to the Public Good under a Usurpation; and this he
calls teaching me A. B. C. and indeed I think he is much fitter to teach A. B.
C. than so great a Congregation, unless he had more Conscience and Honesty.
However, I will not learn my A. B. C. of him, if it were only for this Reason,
that I have no mind to learn it backward. But if he please to look into his
Author again, with a more impartial Eye, he will find that he invidiously and
maliciously endeavors to charge and undervalue Bishop Sanderson, as founding
the Actions of Subjects under a Usurpation on such a Reason as other Casuists
did not; and as if he made the presumptive Will of the Prince the sole Reason:
And in this Case, I think I had Reason to urge, That he founded the presumptive
Consent of the Prince upon the Public Good; and I shall not willingly suffer
so great a Person to be scandalized, let him put his B's and C's how he will.

The last Head he propounds is of Obedience to Authority, which if it had been
more thought of, and better observed, there had been no occasion to dispute
about it now: And I wonder with what face those Men can name Obedience to
Authority, who make it their whole Business to justify Disobedience to
Authority. Here, after some little Wit, and much trifling, and the Charge of
some Mistakes upon me, which I think might be easily returned, but I will not
spend time about it, because they come not up to the Case; at last he replies
to my Answer concerning the Case of the Jews: And this is the only thing
material he offers under this Head. My first Answer, That the Jews being
governed by one of their own Brethren was designed as a Blessing, the contrary
was a Judgment, he does not deny: But he would thence infer this Consequence,
That therefore they might not lawfully transfer their Allegiance from their own
Blood to a Foreigner. And this he thinks he can prove false. But I do not know
how that Consequence follows from my Words. The Jews spontaniously, wantonly,
and by their own Authority, could not transfer their Allegiance; but when God,
for their Sins, deprived them of a particular Privilege and Blessing, and put
them under the Power of others, and they knew it was his Will it should be so;
they were then bound to obey. And thus Nehemiah might serve as Governor under
Artaxerxes, and Jaddus take an Oath of Fidelity to Darius. And hence you see on
what Right the Oath was founded.

Next I urged, that they were under a state of Conquest, this he does neither
deny, nor own it to be our Case; and unless he does this latter, whatever he
infers thence, whether true or false, cannot affect us. And therefore I am not
further concerned to answer a Man, who labors to make acts of Violence to be
standing Rules for all Seasons.

In the third place I did (as he says) urge, That the Question to our Savior
was not concerning Oaths, but Tribute, which he grants all Casuists do allow
may be paid, even to an Usurper. But then he says, I know what Use, and what
Gain too, my Adversary made of this. But if he made an ill Use of it, how can I
help it? Must I Answer for that? As for his Gain, if he mean a Bishopric, it
is something; but as to the Merits of the Cause I cannot see, that he has
Gained any thing. But after all, both the Use an Gain, is an Argument borrowed
from Dr. Burnet, which runs to this purpose; if Submission may be testified one
way, why not another? If Tribute may be paid, why not promised? If promised,
why not sworn? And then he asks, Is it not as a Token of Allegiance? The Answer
is plain. I may submit wherein it may be done lawfully, but not wherein it is
unlawful. I may pay Money to a Thief, I may promise it, yea such may be my
Streights and Dangers, that I may swear to do it; and yet this is not as a
Token of Allegiance, which all that time is due to my King, and ought not to be
made over to a Thief; it is the Redemption of my Life, or Goods, and the
choosing a less Evil rather than a greater in a case, wherein I may do it
without Sin. For in such case, I think, I may lawfully part with my own, though
it is unlawful for the other to take it. And if this Answer will not please
him, he may still call me Fool, as he here does; I like the Title much better
than Knave, though I am fond of neither.

Lastly, With respect to Tiberius it was urged, that no Man had jus potius, and
that there was no prior Oaths in bar against him; as to which he Answers, That
Agrippa Posthumus was then living, one much nearer to Augustus, and that seemed
designed by him to succeed him. What he means by seemed designed I cannot tell.
Was he really designed, or not? It is a common thing for Relations to waver in
their Thoughts, which way they shall bestow their Favors, and sometimes it is
a piece of Art; but if Tiberius was designed (as he calls it) at last, the
Cause is so far cast. But because this will not do, he says, That there was a
jus potius in the Senate, from whom even Augustus was willing to receive it.
But if Augustus, who was before Tiberius, did receive the Senates Right, then
their Right was gone before Tiberius's time, and so the jus potius is good on
his side still. Beside by their own Laws they might make a Dictator, and they
had actually made Julius Caesar perpetual Dictator, who was before them both,
and in that very act gave away their Power; so that their giving up to
Augustus, was but Selling their Estate twice. And after all, his Author
confesses they swore Allegiance to Tiberius; and where was then their jus
potius? As to the prior Oaths he asks me, What I think of the Oath of Jaddus to
Darius, etc.? And in requital I ask him again, What is that in bar to the Title
of Tiberius? So that if Tiberius was as bad a Man as he represents him, (and
indeed I never thought him a Saint, though for his Art in Dissimulation he
might have been qualified for one in these times) yet in spite of our Author
his Title will prove the best he can set up.

As to the better Title, which he says he will adventure to set before me, he
may keep it to himself; he has offered his Ware to a wrong Chapman: But for
his Kindness I will leave him this Remark, That when the Childeren of Israel
forsook the living God to worship Graven Images, the greater part were always
more zealous for their Idols than for the true God.

In the Conclusion I find, that our Author is supositions of the force of his
Arguments; for he will not leave me to the Tribunal of Heaven, but threatens me
with being called to account here, and I do not question but that he will do
his endeavor, nor do I crave any Favor at his Hands. He that calls me to
Sufferings, I hope will enable me to bear them; and in such case I have no
other Remedy, but to appeal to the just God, before whom one Day we shall have
a Rehearing. And when it comes to my Thoughts how a Turk at Buda, laying his
Hand on his Breast, promised not to yield up the Town but with his Life, and in
pursuance of his Word so Manfully defended it, that it cost a victorious Army
dear, and took up almost two Summers Work, and when the Place was Untenable any
longer might have made honorable Conditions, yet rather than break his
Promise, chose to stand in the Breach, in his Drawers, and tempt and desie
Death; it amazeth me to think, who shall rise up in Judgment against this
Treacherous and Perfidious Generation. O God of Goodness and Compassion! in the
midst of Judgment think on Mercy, have Pity upon this poor distressed Church,
and give Men a Sense of that Simplicity, Sincerity, and Integrity, which thy
Law so highly extols and strictly requires of all who call themselves
Christians.

FINIS.

