A Short ACCOUNT OF That Faithful Servant of the Lord, and Diligent Labourer in
his Vineyard, George Gray, Who finished his Testimony, and laid down the Body
at Achorthies, in his native Country of Scotland, the 8th Day of the 12th
Month, 1689/90.

Where unto are added Two Epistles, written by himself, in the time of his
Imprisonment for the Truth at Aberdene.

Psalm. 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in Everlasting Remembrance. Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
Spirit, that they may Rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
London, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Lane,
Shoreditch, 1692.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe living Remembrance of the many Heavenly Comfortable Testimonies that were
born by this Faithful Minister of the Lord, (George Gray,) and also of his
Stedfastness and Patience, in the great Sufferings and long Imprisonment which
he Cheerfully underwent for the Truth; being fresh upon the Minds of those who
were experimental Witnesses of the powerfulness of his Ministry, and of the
Blessed success it had, especially in Aberdene, and the Country thereabouts,
where he was most frequently concerned in the Work of the Lord while in the
Body.

It was therefore thought fit to publish these short Testimonies following, as
an evidence of the sweet Savor he (through his Faithfulness to the Lord) has
left behind him, among those who (in the fellowship of the Gospel) were
Conversant with him; and also of the real esteem they bear to his Memory in the
Truth: Which, that they may have that good effect in those who read them as to
stir them up to faithfulness unto the Lord while they live in this World; That
so, they may receive a Crown of Eternal Righteousness hereafter, is the earnest
desire of

Alexander Seaton.

Patrick Livingston's TESTIMONY, Concerning George Gray.
AS to Dear George Gray, my dear Friend and Brother in the Service of the
Blessed Truth, and my fellow-Sufferer in Aberdene Prison; He was a man whom I
greatly loved; for though he was a Poor Man in this World, yet he was rich in
Faith; and though his Education was mean and low, he was endued with divine
Wisdom and Understanding in the things of God, and a good sound and Solid
Testimony he had in the Meetings of the Lords People; insomuch that many
Considering him in his place among Men, have taken notice of the Gift he had in
Delivering his Testimony with that Soundness and Weight, as no Critical Enemy
did ever catch him in a Word, as ever I knew off; and I knew him at his first
coming amongst us; and the Love of God in my Heart was toward him; For I never
found him under Blame, nor ever heard of any that could Justly Blame him,
either in his Testimony, Life or Conversation since he was restored into the
Obedience of the Truth; but he was of a good Report.

And when I heard of his being taken away from amongst us, I was satisfied in
my self (having that Constant experience of him in his Life time) that it was
well with him; and it came near me, the Consideration of the great loss and
miss Friends in those parts would have of him: But I live in the Hope that the
Lord will in his own time raise himself up Faithful Laborers in the room of
those Worthy Men he has been pleased to remove from us, and to take to himself
of late in this Island of England and Scotland; and my Prayer to God is,
through the Son of his Love, in the moving of his Holy Spirit, that all who
remain behind, may so live and walk in Unity and Fellowship with the Lord God
in the Spirit of his Son, and one with another, as that his Glory may shine
forth through us all, to the reaching and gathering of many more; and that all
who are gathered may grow up in the Spirit and Power of the Lord God Almighty;
That over all Heaven and Earth he may have his Honor, Glory and Praise
forever; Amen.

Patrick Livingston.

THE TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS Of the Monthly Meeting at Aberdene, Concerning George
Gray,
AMong the many Watchmen and Proclaimers of the blessed Morning of the
Everlasting Day of our God, this faithful Instrument was one, who was raised up
to Visit, Salute and Comfort the Seed of God in this Nation of Scotland, and to
be as a Nursing Father unto many Babes, and a Communicator of Spiritual Gifts
as a Faithful Steward to the Household of God therein, Especially in the
Northern parts thereof, where his Comfortable Labors and useful sweet Ministry
mostly was; and truly we can say, it is fulfilled as to him, that the Memorial
of the Just does flourish and remain as a fresh sweet savor with many who know
the Seals of his Ministry on our Hearts, and of Christ's speaking in (...)
through him, to the refreshing, watering and building up of many in the Unity of
the most precious Faith and Love; which was the end of all the Gifts given by
Christ Jesus, as says the Scripture: And truly his Gifts for this end, not
only of a large understanding in the Word of God's Wisdom that dwelt richly in
him, but also of utterance to express and bring forth the same abundantly, and
with great and clear demonstration of the Spirit, were much the more
remarkable, that he was a mean unlettered Man, (except simply Reading and
Writing) and of a very low condition in the outward; whereby his Masters Power
and Spiritual Wisdom, and Furniture of Gospel Ministers (by which he does
immediately replenish them) did shine and evidence it self the more clearly
through him, according to the Exhortation of the Apostle, who said, Let him
that speaks, Speak as the Oracles of God, and him that Ministers do it of the
ability that God gives him; So that he, being without any pretense of mixture
or assistance of the acquired Learning and Sciences so much admired in the
World, and pretended (though falsely) to be the most necessary accomplishment of
Gospel Ministers; it has been certainly known to some of us that very
understanding Persons (not of the Profession he was of) have confessed their
admiration at the utterance, excellent matter, and pertinent Conexion they
observed in his Testimony, whom they knew to be no learned Man, as to outward
Learning, being very apt to Judge (according to their way) His Spiritual
Accomplishments beyond* Men's natural reach.
that the Testimonies of others among us (who they knew had some of that
Learning) were hepled or furnished thereby; but as to him they were at a stand,
judging it, as indeed it was, somewhat beyond their natural Reach.

Now this Gospel Ministry which he freely received, and was not taught of man,
or by man, he was exceeding careful freely to give it forth for his Glory that
gave it him, and to make it no wise chargeable to any; Yea, in this he might
glory in his God, that his Hands ministered to his Necessities His care not to
make the Gospel chargeable.
by very constant, diligent, hard Labor (at all the intervals of his
Ministerial Services) in that outward Vocation and Trade he was off, being (as
many of the Lords Servants were of old) of a manual and mechanic Trade, which
he kept most diligently and assiduously to the very end of his Days: Yea, so
steadfastly unmovable was he in this his Principle of not making the Gospel
chargeable, and of being a good example in Laborious diligence with his Hands
(being indeed not sloathful in business, though fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord) that his care on that account can hardly be expressed. His Care and Zeal
was great, not only to have his own Conversation well ordered; but that the
least appearance of evil might be abstained from by all Friends; and that all
things that were truly Lovely, Comely, of good Report, and for the Honor of
the Blessed Truth, might be Zealously followed, both by himself as an Example
to the Flock, and by all others that were under the same Profession with him:
He truly loved to spend and be spent in the unwearyed Labors and Services of
the Gospel; His Zeal therein was so great that it seemed even to spend his
natural Strength, so that he did swiftly run his Blessed Race and lay down his
earthly Tabernacle, (wherein he had served the Lord with Cheerfulness) being
about forty nine Years of Age.

A little before his departure, being filled with the Power of the Lord, he
gave weighty Exhortation and Counsel to all that were present, especially to
his Children. To some Friends that came to see him, he said, He had not kept
back Weighty expressions upon his Deathbed.
the Word and Counsel of the Lord from them, and now he could say, it was good
Doctrine to leave nothing to do till a dying Bed.

He had been sometimes much exercised in Testimonies at Fairs or Markets, and
in Speaking to People out at the Prison-Windows in the time of that long
Imprisonment at Aberdene, wherein he was a faithful Yoke Fellow in Suffering
for Truth, to his own great comfort and advantage (as well as to the Honor of
God) being ever after that Suffering to his dying-day, raised up in a public
Ministry for the Lord, who had given him not only to believe, but to suffer
(with Joy) for his Name, both the imprisonment of his Person, and the spoiling
of a great part of the mean outward Substance which he possessed.

Among many remarkable passages which might be mentioned concerning him, this
one thing was thought fit to be here inserted; That being A Remarkable Passage.
once called to declare Truth in a public Fair (or Market) in Old Meldrum, one
pretending some Authority there, did violently beat him, who fell quickly after
into a heavy disease and sore pain, crying often out to some about him, that it
was for beating the Servant of the Lord.

He was little in writing outwardly (but has left living Epistles written in
the Hearts of many) yet these two following Letters being providentially found,
may serve for some taste of his Spirit, being writ when he was but very Young
in the Truth, and but entering in to his public Ministry in the time of his
Imprisonment.

This Testimony concerning our Dear Friend, aforementioned, was given forth at
our Men's Meeting at Aberdene, in the first Month, 1692. And subscribed in
behalf of the Meeting, by Thomas Mercer, John Robertson, Robert Gordon, Robert
Burnet, Andrew Jaffrey, John Gleny, John Hall, John Forbes.
The Papers written by himself, are as follows.

A WARNING TO THE Priests of Aberdene, Sent to them by George Gray, Weaver,
and Prisoner for the Truth in the said City, the 6th Day of the 3d Month, 1676.
O Ye Priests of Aberdene, How long will ye resist the Spirit of the Lord? How
long will ye despise Prophesying? How long will ye speak lying Divinations, and
speak Lies in the Name of the Lord? How long will ye hold up men's Inventions,
and Traditions, and Customs, and Fashions, after the Rudiments of this World,
which must pass away? How long will ye deceive your selves, and deceive and
delude others, by not knowing the Lord but by hearsay, and as ye have learned
it as a Trade to gain Money withal? For all ye do, is for Hire; and if they
give you no Money, then you will give them no Preaching nor Praying; and so it
is a sign and token that God never sent such to be Ministers, who will not
teach without Hire and without Money; for ye are Teachers for your Backs and
Bellys, and not careful to gain Souls to the Lord, and therefore Dreadful will
the Day be that will come upon you when you will not be looking for it, and Woe
and Misery will overtake you before ye are aware.

O ye Priests, ye Priests, Woeful and Dreadful is the Day which is approaching
you, from the dreadful God of Heaven and Earth for your Covetousness and
Deceitful Dealing with poor People, poor indeed for want of the true Knowledge
of God; for ye Murder and Kill their Souls with dead Lifeless Words, not
coming to the Spirit of Jesus Christ, nor yet speaking in and from the Power
and Life, but stealing and gathering Words from others, and out of old Authors
and Books, and tells that over, having it measured by an Hourglass, and so,
feed Peoples fleshly Ears for a time, and learn them a notion, without any
feeling of Life to their Souls, they not being spoken from the Life; and so
People come bad, and go as bad away; yet for all that ye profess to be
Ministers of Christ Jesus, and in the mean time you deny to be led, acted or
moved by his Spirit, or to wait for his Power, Spirit and Life to enable you
therein; But upon the contrary, you do maintain that men may be sufficient
Ministers, without Grace, It is to be observed that the Priests of Aberdene did
strongly contend against the absolute Necessity of Grace to the Constitution of
a Minister of Christ.
without the Power and Spirit of Christ; and that a Reprobate may be a Minister
and Convert Souls: And for this cause ye hold people from the Power, and suffer
them not to come to it, nor know it, but cry up the Letter of the Scripture to
be the only and alone Rule; and reject the Spirit of Christ, as he reveals
himself in Men and Women's Hearts by his Light. So ye are they that pretend to
the form of Godliness, and deny the Power thereof, you are they that are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, your end is
destruction, if you repent not, whose Belly is your God, who mind Earthly
things, and beget People into the same mind with you, in Pride, and Lust, and
Vanity, living without God in the World. O what will come upon you? O ye
Priests, but anguish of Spirit, Tribulation and Horror of mind, which will make
you to cry out, Woe, and alas! that ever we were born.

O Ye Priests, take Warning in time, and come out of your dark d^ce^tful ways,
or else Darkness will be your Portion for ever, for they that hate the Light in
their Life time, shall not enjoy it hereafter: Therefore ye Priests, turn to
the Light and believe in the Light, that you may become the Children of the
Light, yea, and all your Hearers, and sit down in Silence until the Lord by his
Power, Spirit and Life, raise you up and open your Mouths, and then will you be
true Ministers; and never till then, pretend what you will. And so take Warning
in time, before the dreadful Day come upon you, which shall come upon all the
Inhabitants of Babylon; which that ye may do, is the desire of my Soul.

George Gray.

A Copy of a Paper sent by George Gray to the Country Meeting at Collihill,
dated from the Tolbooth of Aberdene, the eight day of the third Month, 1676.
MY Dear Friends in the Truth, the Salutation of Love and Life be multiplied in
and among you from the Father of Life and Love, and in the sense of the Pure
Love of God which flows in my Heart toward you, do I warn and exhort you to
walk in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Crucifieth us to the World
and the World to us, and watch in Patience and Meekness and Calmness of Spirit
against every thing that would draw out the mind, in any measure, from the true
Meeting Place, either in Meeting or out of Meeting; For truly my Friends, he or
she that does not watch diligently out of Meeting, but let their minds go a
gading to the ends of the Earth, and take no heed to have them gathered in
before they come to Meeting, truly it is no wonder to see such disappointed;
and therefore my dear Friends, be careful every one in particular to have your
minds stayed upon the Lord, and the Lord will not be wanting to you; for great
is his condescending to us in this day, and wonderful is his work to those that
truly watch and wait upon him.

Therefore my dear Friends, every one know your place, and let not any go out
nor look out beyond your measures; and let none Speak, nor Sing, nor Sigh, nor
Groan but in a true sense of their Conditions; and let none make haste to speak
any thing before the Lord, which they know not to be from the true power, but
all to wait for the Power and Life and the Love of God; for truly where the
Love of God is not placed in the Heart, the true Power will not attend their
performances, neither will God regard their Speech or Prayer: Therefore dear
Friends dwell in Love, and walk in Love toward all Men and Women, and feel the
Love of God in your Hearts flowing forth to all, whether they love you or hate
you; for truly my Friends, where hatred is brought forth against any Person,
upon whatsoever account it be, although you may think the cause just, yet it
will separate you from the Love of God, for envy and hatred is of the Devil,
and he is there where it is; and Christ Jesus will not dwell with him in Unity;
And therefore my dear Brethren and Sisters, Love one another in that Love
wherewith Christ has loved you, and likewise your Enemies, for Love gathers
to God, but envy scatters; and therefore I warn you in the Fear and Dread of
the Everlasting God, that ye be not Hinderers of the Work of the Lord, for
dreadful will their Portion be that let or hinder it in this day, or bring an
evil report upon it: So take warning my Friends, and every one look to their
way, and to the prosperity of Truth. And my Friends, I thought the Zeal of
Truth should have had more effect upon some then I see it has; but I shall
forbear, leaving every one to their own Master: But they that follow for Loaves
and Fishes, when they get them not, they will fail even in that Zeal also.

My Little Children, Love one another. George Gray.

THE END.

