Great and Good News From His Grace the Duke of Schombergs CAMP at DVNDALK:
Containing, I. A full Account of the Discovery of the Villianous Design of the
French Papists. II. The Address of the Presbyterian Ministers in the North of
Ireland, to his Grace the Duke of Schomberg. III. The Address of the Quakers,
in the Province of Ulster, to his Grace the Duke of Schomberg. IV. A true List
of the Irish Prisoners taken by the Renowned Men of Enniskillen, at the Battle
of Newtown.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

I. A full Account of the Discovery of the Villainous Design of the French
Papists.
THE 150 French Papists which were picked out of the Army, are now at
Carlingford, and among them it is said there is one Jesuit, all ready to be
shipped for England: There is but four of the French, and two Irish that were
going to Charlemount to suffer, and of them one of the French is to be
executed; his Crime, and the whole Discovery was thus: He that is to be
executed, was formerly a Count in France, had Moneys from the French King to
raise a Regiment, spent it, and not daring to show his face, got to Holland,
and from thence for England, where he insinuated himself into the Army,
pretending to be a Protestant, though he never was one, and came with the Army
hither, where he writ a Letter to King James, that in case he would assure him
of a Pardon from the French King, he would bring over to him 400 Men; that he
should send his Answer in a Letter, which was to be brought into the French
Camp, by some Fellow, who, as a Countryman, was to come with a Cross of white
and red under the cover or folding of his Sleeve, and a Bottle of Brandy,
crying, Brandy-wine, Brandy-wine, and so up and down only in the French
Quarter, till one came to him, and said, God bless you Friend, how do you sell
your Brandy? and turn up his Sleeve to look for the Cross; which when the
Huckster perceived, he was to deliver the Letter from King James to him. The
Messenger going with this Letter to the Irish Camp, being taken, discovered the
Author, and it is said, had his Pardon for it. This coming to the General, he
forthwith gave orders to make public Proclamation, at the head of each
Regiment, That if any Papist was in the Army, did deny himself to be so, and
afterward discovered, he should immediately be put to Death, without more ado.
And thereupon most, if not all the aforesaid 150 were singled out. Since this
Discovery, there is not one French man permitted to pass any Guard, without a
Pass, any where out of the Camp: and orders are given to all Officers, to
proclaim, at the head of every Regiment, That if there be any Roman Catholic,
that shall not forthwith declare himself publicly to be so, if afterward
discovered, shall be punished with immediate Death. And it is said, that upon
that Proclamation, most, if not all those at Carling-ford are found out to be
such.

II. To His Grace the Duke of Schomberg, Captain General to Their Majesty's
Forces. The Humble Address of the remaining Presbyterian Ministers now in the
North of Ireland.
AS it has pleased the Glorious Lord God to move Their Majesty's to take the
Distressed Estate of their Protestant Subjects in this Country into their Royal
Care, and to make way for your Graces coming into this Kingdom with an Army for
Relief thereof, so we judge our selves obliged to signify unto your Grace the
sense of Duty upon us to bless God, and to Congratulate your Graces happy
Arrival, and begun-success, and do esteem it our Dispensible Duty to continue
Orators at the Throne of Grace, for carrying on his work in your Graces hands,
and to endeavor to keep our People in all Loyalty to Their Majesty's, and
Dutiful Obedience to your Graces Commands. So humbly expecting your Graces
Favor and Protection, We remain,

Your Graces most Humble and Dutiful Servants, T. Hall, J. Fieland, J. Fisher,
F. Fredell, W. Adair, T. Futt. Malcome.


III. To His Grace the Duke of Schomberg, General of Their Majesty's Forces in
Ireland. The Humble Address of the People called Quakers, in the behalf of the
whole, for the Province of Ulster.
WHereas we the People called Quakers since the Landing of the English Army are
threatened, and some abuses already committed upon them by those that call
themselves Protestants, and for their pretense to abuse us and make us odious
in the sight of the General and the whole Camp, do asperse and put forth, that
we the said People called Quakers, was aiding and assisting to the late King
James in his War, with Money to maintain a Regiment against the Protestants;
which said Aspersion and envious Information, we in the behalf of the rest of
our Friends do utterly and solemnly deny, and in the sight of God, can declare
we never were aiding nor assisting the said King with Money or any thing else,
save the Quartering men on free Quarter, which no Protestant could avoid no
more than we; but on the contrary are great sufferers, insomuch that many have
not left them to sustain their Families, but stripped their Clothes off their
Backs, taken their Goods and Victuals out of their Houses, their Horses and
Cows taken from them, and left in a state of starving, and not spared more than
any other Protestant where suffering has been.

Therefore we humbly desire and entreat thee, in our plain way, as we are an
Innocent People, and desire to live peaceably, and do unto all men as we would
have them do unto us; that thou would be pleased to give forth thy Order to the
Army, and other Protestants in the Country, that are wrong informed against us,
that they may not Rob us of our Goods, nor molest our Bodies or Families, for
we are a People that desires Peace, and is always willing to live honestly and
soberly, and pay our tribute to whom it is due. Therefore we make bold to
present thee with this our Address as unto a Christian Governor, hoping thou will be pleased to take us into thy Care and Favor, that we may not be further
exposed to spoil and ruin: As in Duty bound we shall humbly pray the Lord to be
thy Reward.

Signed in the behalf of our Friends at Lisbourn the Second of September 1689.
G. Gregson, R. Hoope, T. Wainwright, J. Greer.


IV. A True List of the Prisoners now at Enniskillen, that were taken at the
Battle at Newton and Belturbet.
Lord Montcastle, Lieutenat General. Mac Carty's Officers belonging to his
Lordship's Regiment. Major John Rooth. Capt. Barry O^ge. Dead Lieut. Patrick
Rivers. Lieut. Thomas Hogan. Lieut. Walter Obryan. Lieut. Daniel Mac Carty.
Lieut. Cus^ck. Ensign Mac Carty. Ensign Patrick Lavallin. Ensign Michael
Mulluany. Ensign Jo. Lawless. Ensign Gravalick. Lord Clares Officers. Major
Marany. Capt. Lawleigh. Capt. Jo. Carroll. Capt. Conner. Capt. Edward Laey.
Capt. Stephen Harrold. Lieut. Darby Callaghan. Lieut. Piercy Lacy. Lieut. Jo.
Sampson. Lieut. Thomas Kennedy Dead. Ensign James Stretch. Ensign Mauris
Rawleigh. Ensign Macnamarra. Lord Buffins Officers. Capt. Francis Bourke. Capt.
Patrick French. Capt. John Blake. Capt. Brown. Lieut. Jo. Kelly. Lieut. James
Badkin. Lieut. John Blake. Lieut. John Bourke Dead. Lieut. Christopher Finch.
Ensign Mac Donnell. Ensign Stephen Linch. Ensign Nicholas French. Ensign Peter
Merrick. Adjutant Dennis Madden. Colonel Obryans's Reigment. Capt.
Macnamarrah. Capt. Murtugh Obryan. Adjutant Nicholas Archdeacon. Quartermaster
Hahire. Sir James Cotters Reigment. Lieut. John Lacy. Prisoners taken at
Bellturbet. Lord Galmoys Officers. Cap. Vlick Bourk. Run away since. Capt. John
Mac Grath. Lieut. Richard Bourke. Ensign James Eggan. Colonel Oxbroughs
Officers. Capt. Coghlan. Capt. Miles Carroll. Lieut. Francis Scott. Lieut.
Roger Mac Manus. Ensign Conner. Ensign Dulchantry. Colonel Pursels Reigment.
Cornet James Keating. Quartermaster Fits Gerrald.
In all 2 Majors. 17 Captains. 18 Lieutenants. 15 Ensigns. 2 Ajutant. 1 Cornet.
2 Quarter Masters.


In all 56 Officers besides Common Soldiers, whose Numbers I have not, but may
be easily Judged by the Number of Officers to be Extreme great.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey.
1689.


