THE Great and Ancient CHARTER OF THE Cinque Ports OF Our LORD the KING, And of
The Members of the same.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for the Mayor and Jurats of Hasting, 1682.

The Great and Ancient CHARTER OF THE Cinque Ports.
CHARLES the Second, Char. 2.
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To all those to whom these Our present Letters Patent shall
come, Greeting. We have looked over the Letters Patent of Our famous
Predecessor the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England, Eliz.
about Confirmation, according to these words, viz. Elizabeth, by the Grace of
God, of England, France, and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all
those to whom these present Letters Patent shall come, Greeting. We have
looked over the Letters Patent of the Lady Mary, Mar.
late Queen of England, Our dearly beloved Sister, about Confirmation, made
according to these words: Mary, by the Grace of God, of England, France, and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, and upon Earth of the Church of England
and Ireland, Supreme Head, To all those to whom our present Letters Patent
shall come, Greeting. We have looked upon the Letters Patent of Edward VI.
Lord, Edw. 6.
late King of England, Our Brother, about Confirmation, made according to these
words: Edward VI. by the Grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, and upon Earth of the Church of England and Ireland
Supreme Head, To all those to whom Our present Letters Patent shall come,
Greeting. We have looked upon the Letters Patent of Henry VIII Lord, Hen. 8.
late King of England, Our mo^ dear Father, about Confirmation, made according
to these words, Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and
Lord of Ireland, To all those to whom these present Letters Patent shall come,
Greeting. We have looked upon the Letters Patent of Henry, Lord, Hen. 7.
late King of England, Our Father, about Confirmation, made according to these
words: Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, To all those to whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting. We
have looked upon the Charter of Edward IV. Lord, late King of England, made
since the Conquest, according to these words: Edward, Edw. 4^
by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, To the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Chief Officers, and to all Bailiffs and faithful Subjects, Greeting.
We have looked upon the Charter of Confirmation of Richard II. Lord, late King
of England, since the Conquest, made according to these words: Richard, Rich. 2.
by the Grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, To all
those to whom Our present Letters shall come, Greeting. We have looked upon the
Charter of Confirmation of Edward, Lord, late King of England Our Grandfather,
according to these words: Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Edw. 3.
Lord of Ireland and Aquitain, To the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Dukes, Earls, Barons Justices, Sheriffs, Head-Officers, and to all Bailiffs and
faithful Subjects, Greeting. We have looked upon the Charter of Edward, Lord,
late King of England, Our Father, according to these words: Edward, Edw. 2.
by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain,
To Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Head-Officers, and to all Bailiffs, and faithful Subjects, Greeting.
We have looked upon the Charter which Edward, Lord, late King of England, Our
Father, granted to the Barons of the Cinque Ports, according to these words:
Edward, Edw. 1.
by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain,
To the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Sheriffs, Head-Officers, and to all Bailiffs, and faithful Subjects, Greeting.
Know ye, that for the faithful Service which Our Barons of the Cinque Ports
have hitherto paid to Our Predecessors the Kings of England, and to Us lately
in Our Army in Wales, and for their good Service to be continued for the future
faithfully to Us and to Our Heirs the Kings of England, We have granted and
confirmed by this Our Charter for Us and Our Heirs to the same Our Barons, and
their Heirs, all their Liberties and Acquitances, The Liberties and
Acquitances, viz.
so that they may be free from all Toll, and from all Custom, viz. from all
Lastage, Tallage, Passage, Carriage, Riverage, Bridg-toll, and all Wreck, and
from all Sale, as their Achat and Reachat through Our whole Land and Dominion,
with Soc and Sac, Thol and Them, and that they may have Infangtheff, and be
Wreckfree, and Wittfree, Lastage-free, and * Lovecopefree, and that they may
have Den and Strond at Great Yarmouth, according to what is contained in an
Ordinance by Us thereupon made, and for ever to be observed; and also that they
be quit from Customs to be done to Shires and Hundreds; so that if any one
brings an Action against them, they shall not Answer nor Defend themselves
otherwise than they used to do in the time of Henry, Lord, Our Great
Grandfather; as also that they may have whatever they find by Sea and Land, and
that they be quit as to all their Goods and Merchandising, as Our Freemen; and
that they have their due Respects at Our Court, and their Liberties through Our
Dominions wheresoever they shall come; and that in all their Lands which they
were possessed of in the time of the Lord Henry, Our Father, viz. in the Forty
fourth year of his Reign, they be quit for ever from the General Summons before
Our Itinerate Justices, at what Pleas soever, in whatsoever Counties their said
Lands be, as also they shall not be bound to appear before Our Justices
aforesaid, unless any of the Barons sue any Man, or be sued by any. And that
they shall not be Impleaded but where they ought, and are wont to be, viz. at
Shepwey; Shepwey.
And that for the rest of their Liberties and Acquitances, they have them as
well, fully and honorably, as they and their Predecessors had them heretofore
by their Charters in the times of the Kings of England, Edward, William the
First and the Second, King Henry Our Great-Grandfather, and of Henry Lord the
King Our Father, as those Charters which Our said Barons have from thence, and
which We have looked upon, do reasonably testify. And We forbid any one to
disturb them or their Trading upon pain of the forfeiture of Ten pounds to Us,
provided that if the Barons be defective in doing and taking Justice, that the
Warden of the Cinque Ports to Us and Our Heirs for the time being, shall enter
upon their Ports, and Liberties upon default of the said Barons to do full
Justice there; Provided always that the said Barons and their Heirs shall pay
to Us and Our Heirs the Kings of England every year, the full Service of Fifty
seven Ships at their own Cost, for fifteen days, at the Summons of Us or Our
Heirs. We have likewise granted to them of Our special Grace, Utfangtheff.
that they may have Utfangtheff in their Lands within the Ports aforesaid, like
as Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons have in their respective
Manors in the County of Kent: And that they shall not be Impannel'd upon
Assizes, Not be Impannel'd upon Assizes.
or Juries, or any Recognizances by reason of their Foreign Tenure against
their Will: And that of their own Wines in which they Traffic, they shall be
quit from Our Right-Price, Right-Price of Wine.
viz. of one Pipe of Wine before the Mast, and another behind the Mast: And we
have further granted to the said Barons for Us and Our Heirs, that they shall
have this Liberty for ever, viz. that We or Our Heirs shall not have the
Guardianship, or Giving in Marriage their Heirs upon the account of their Lands
which they hold within the Liberties and Ports aforesaid, for which they pay
their aforesaid Service, and for which We or Our Predecessors had not the
Guardianship, Giving in Marriage.
and giving in Marriage in times past: But the aforesaid Confirmation of the
Liberties and Acquaitances aforesaid, and other Grants following, We of Our
special Grace have caused to be renewed to them; Provided always in all things
there be nothing prejudicial to his Majesty's Dignity, to Us, and to Our Heirs,
or hurtful to the Privileges of Our Crown, Life, and Members. Wherefore We
Will, and firmly Command for Us and Our Heirs, that the Barons aforesaid for
ever enjoy all their Liberties and Acquitances aforesaid, according as the
Charters aforesaid do reasonably testify: And that of Our special Grace they
may have Utfangtheff in their respective Lands within the Ports aforesaid,
Utfangtheff.
after the same manner as Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons have
in their respective Manors in the County of Kent: And that they shall not put
in the Assizes, Juries, or any Recognizances upon the account of their Foreign
Tenure, against their Will; And that in their own Wines in which they Traffic,
they shall be quit from Our Right-Price, viz. of one Pipe of Wine before the
Mast, and another behind the Mast: And that in like manner they may for ever
enjoy the Liberty aforesaid, viz. That We or Our Heirs shall not have the
Guardianship or Giving in Marriage their Heirs, upon the account of their Lands
which they hold within the Liberties and Ports aforesaid, for which they pay
their aforesaid Service, and for which We or Our Predecessors had the
Guardianship, or Giving in Marriage in times past: But the aforesaid
Confirmation of the Liberties and Acquitances aforesaid, and other Our Grants
following, We of Our special Grace have caused to be renewed to them; Provided
always in all things there be nothing prejudicial to his Majesty's Dignity, to
US, and to Our Heirs, or hurtful to the Privileges of Our Crown, Life, and
Members, as aforesaid, Witnesses hereunto being the Reverend Father Robert
Portunensis Bishop, Cardinal of the Holy See of Rome, Friar William de South,
Provincial Prior of the Friar Preachers in England, William de Valentia our
Uncle, Roger de Mortuo Mari, Roger de Clifford, Mr. Walter Stamell Dean of
Salisbury, Mr. Robert Scarborough Archdeacon of the East-Ridings, Mr. Robert
Sexton, Bartholomew de Southley, Thomas de Wayland, Walter de Hopton, Thomas de
Normannel, Stephen de Pencestre, Francis de Bonona, John de Levetot, John de
Metingham, and others.

Given under Our Hand at Westminster the Seventeenth day of June, in the Sixth
Year of Our Reign.

This Charter, before the Signing thereof, was by the Kings command openly read
in the p^esence of the abovenamed Witnesses and others of Our Council then
present, and was heard, examined, and agreed upon in the form above-written. We
have also looked upon the Letters Patent which the same Our Father made to the
Barons aforesaid after these words, Edward, by the Grace of God, King of
England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, To all Bailiffs and faithful
Subjects, to whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting. Know ye, that for
the faithful Service which Our Trusty and Well-beloved Barons, and other Our
Honest Men of the Cinque Ports have hitherto paid to Us, and Our Progenitors
the former Kings of England, and shall pay for the future, We have granted to
them for Us and Our Heirs, that they and their Heirs the Barons of the said
Ports shall for the future be ever free from all Tallages From all Tallages.
and Subsidies to be paid to Us and Our Heirs out of the whole or any part of
their own proper Ships. We have also granted to the same Barons and Men for us
and Our Heirs, That concerning the lawful things and Commodities which they in
due manner shall buy within Our Dominion of Ireland, Commodities in Ireland.
no one may be their Partners in those Things and Commodities, nor partake with
them in any wise against the Will of the same Barons and Men. We have further
granted for Us, and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, to the Barons and Trusty
Persons aforesaid, That all and every of them born within the aforesaid
Cinque Ports, although they have Lands or Tenements without the Liberties of
the said Ports, which are held by such a Service as the Giving in Marriage upon
the account of their being under Age, Giving in Marriage.
which belongs to Us and Our Heirs, according to the Law and Custom of Our
Realm. Nevertheless, according to the Liberty of the Ports, they may Marry
themselves without the let or impediment of Us or Our Heirs for ever, any Right
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And therefore we charge you, and
every of you, that ye molest not, or disturb the Barons and Persons aforesaid
in any thing contrary to these Our Grants. In witness whereof we have caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our Self at St. Albans the Twenty
eighth day of April, in the Twenty sixth year of Our Reign.

We have also looked upon some other Letters Patent which Our said Father
granted to the abovenamed Barons, after these words, Edward, by the Grace of
God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, To all those to
whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting. Taking into consideration that
the Navy of Our Cinque Ports cannot be maintained without great Charge and
Expenses, left the said Navy should fail or decay for the future, We have
granted for Us and Our Heirs, That all the Members of the Cinque Ports
aforesaid, and all other Advocants whatsoever that are willing to enjoy the
Liberties of the same, do contribute, (viz.) every one according to his
abilities, to do Service to Us and Our Heirs with their Navy, whenever they
shall be commanded by Us and Our Heirs. In witness whereof We have caused these
Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Our Self at St. Albans the Twenty eigth
day of April, in the Twenty sixth year of Our Reign.

And we Ratifying the Grants and Confirmations aforesaid, do grant and confirm
them to be well pleasing to Us and Our Heirs as much as in Us lies, for the
Barons aforesaid of the Cinque Ports, their Heirs and Successors, for their
good and faithful Service which they have hitherto paid to Us, and shall pay
for the future, as the Chatters and Letters aforesaid do reasonably testify.
And We further willing to do the said Barons a greater kindness, have given and
granted to them, for Us and Our Heirs, That although they have not hitherto
enjoyed any one or more of their Liberties and Privileges contained in the
said Charters and Letters, yet the said Barons, their Heirs and Successors, may
use and enjoy their Liberties and Privileges aforesaid, and every of them,
without the let of Us or Our Heirs, or Our Officers whatsoever. Witness
hereunto, the Reverend Fathers, William Bishop of Worcester, J. Bishop of Bath
and Wells, and W. Bishop of Exeter, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hereford, John de Britann. Earl of Richmond, Adam de Valentia Earl of Pembroke,
Hugh de le Spencer, Robert Son of Pagan, Edmund de malo Lacu, Steward of Our
Houshld, and others.

Given under Our Hand at Westminster the Twenty sixth day of July, in the
Seventh year of Our Reign.

We making Good the Grants and Confirmations aforesaid, do Ratify, and by the
Tenor of the Presents confirm them to be well pleasing to Us and Our Heirs, as
much as in Us lies, for the aforesaid Barons of the Cinque Ports, their Heirs
and Successors, for the good and faithful Service hitherto paid to Us and Our
Progenitors, and for the future to be paid to Us and Our Heirs, as the Charters
and Letters aforesaid do reasonably testify. And further willing to do to the
aforesaid Barons a greater kindness, We have granted for Us and Our Heirs to
the same Barons of the Cinque Ports, That although they or their Predecessors
hitherto have not fully enjoyed any one or more of their Liberties and
Acquitances contained in the Charters and Letters aforesaid, yet the said
Barons, their Heirs and Successors, may fully enjoy, for ever make use of their
Liberties and Acquitances aforesaid, without any let or impediment of Us, Our
Heirs, or any of Our Officers whatsoever. The Witnesses hereunto are the
Reverend Fathers, S. Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor, J. Bishop of Bath and
Wells, Our Treasurer, Lionel Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Lancaster, Edmund
Earl of Kent, Our most dear Sons; Edward de le Spencer, Guydo, Brian, John
Atley, Steward of Our Household, and others.

Given under Our Hand at Westminster the First day of July in the Thirty eighth
Year of Our Reign.

We have also looked upon the Letters Patent of the same Our Grandfather after
these words, Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, To all those to whom these present Letters shall come,
Greeting. We have looked upon Our Charter of Confirmation, which We lately made
to the Barons of Our Cinque Ports, under the Seal which We then used, after
these words, Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, To all those to whom these present Letters shall come,
Greeting. We have looked upon Our Charter of Confirmation, which we lately made
under the Seal which We then used, to the Barons of Our Cinque Ports, after
these words: Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, To all those to whom these present Letters shall come
Greeting. We have looked upon the Letters Patent which the Lord Edward, of
famous Memory, late King of England, Our Grandfather, made according to these
words: Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke
of Aquitain, To all those to whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting.
We considering that the Navy of the Cinque Ports cannot be sustained without
great Costs and Charges, left the Navy for the future should fail or decay, We
have granted for Us and Our Heirs, That all the Members of the Cinque Ports
aforesaid, and other Advocants and Resiants whatsoever in the Liberties of the
same, do contribute, (viz.) every of them according to their abilities, for the
doing the Service with their Ships to Us and Our Heirs, whenever by Us or Our
Heirs they shall be commanded thereunto. In Witness whereof we have caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Self at St. Albans the 28 day of April, in the 26 Year of Our
Reign.

And we Ratifying the Grant aforesaid, do grant and confirm it to be well
pleasing to Us and Our Heirs, as the aforesaid Letters do reasonably testify:
And because about those general words contained in the Letters aforesaid, viz.
(that every one contribute according to his Abilities) there have risen in
former times diverse dissentions; That the Barons of the Ports aforesaid may the
more commodiously pay their aforesaid Service to Us and Our Heirs at fit times,
We have given and granted, by the Advice of Our Prelates, Earls, and Barons,
and the Commons of Our Realm assembled together in Our present Parliament, to
the said Barons of the Cinque Ports, that all the Members of the said Ports,
and all Advocants and Resiants whatsoever in the Liberties of the same,
contribute to the Navy and Service aforesaid, to be kept and maintained out of
all their Goods and Chattels, as well those that are without the Liberty of the
aforesaid Cinque Ports, as within, and may be compelled thereunto by the Mayors
and Jurats of the Ports aforesaid, and also, if need be, by the Constable of
Our Castle of Dover: The Goods of Advocants and Barons of the Cinque Ports, not
to be taxed with the Goods of Foreigners.
And that the Goods and Chattels of the said Barons, and others, as well
without the said Liberties, as within, which are taxed for the maintenance of
the Navy, and performing that Service, be by no means taxed for Tallage, and
other Tributes, with the Goods and Chattels of Foreigners. In witness whereof
We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster the Twenty fifth day of February, in the First
year of Our Reign.

And We thought fit to have a Copy of Our Charter aforesaid under the Seal,
which We now use to be transcribed according to their request. In Witness
whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Self at York the Twenty sixth day of February, in the Second year
of Our Reign.

And We Ratifying the Grants and Confirmations aforesaid, as well pleasing, for
Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, do grant and confirm to the aforesaid
Barons of the Cinque Ports, their Heirs and Successors the Barons of the
Cinque Ports aforesaid, for their good and faithful Service to Us and Our
Progenitors hitherto paid, and for the future to be paid to Us and Our Heirs,
their Liberties, as the Charters and Letters aforesaid do reasonably testify,
and as the said Barons, and their Ancestors the Barons of the Ports aforesaid
have hitherto lawfully used and enjoyed their Liberties and Acquitances
aforesaid. In Witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster the Twenty second day of January, in the First
year of Our Reign.

And We being certified by the humble Petition of the said Barons, and honest
Men of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, and their Members, That notwithstanding, it
is contained in the Magna Charta of the Liberties of England, (amonst other
things) that the Barons of the Cinque Ports may have all their Liberties and
Free-Customs, yet they, by reason of the ambiguity, obscurity, and doubtful
meaning of certain Words, and general Terms contained in the Charters, Letters,
and Confirmations aforesaid, have been, and are at this time hindered from the
enjoying of certain of their Liberties and Free-Customs, as also the
Privileges and Acquitances which they were wont freely, peaceably, and quietly
to enjoy in the Ports aforesaid, and Members thereof, from the time of the
making the Charters, Letters, and Confirmations aforesaid, to the impoverishing
and undoing of the said Barons and Honest Men, as also to the damage of the
Service of Our Navy, and the utter loss thereof likely to ensue: We therefore,
greatly considering not only the premised, but also the good, voluntary, and
free Service which the aforesaid Barons and Honest Inhabitants of the
Cinque Ports, and Members aforesaid, have paid to Our Progenitors, and
especially to Us in the restoring the Rights of Our Kingdom; And willing
likewise to secure their Peace and Tranquillity, and the public Good on this
behalf, and making good to them, and well pleasing to Us and Our Heirs, as much
as in Us lies, all the Grants and Privileges aforesaid, as also all and every
of them which are contained and specified in the Charters, Letters, and
Confirmations aforesaid, and all and every of their Liberties, Privileges,
Acquitances, and Free-Customs which they, their Ancestors and Predecessors,
had, and used in the time of Our Progenitors, and which they were wont to
enjoy, and possess, do accept, approve, and ratify them; And to the
forementioned Barons of the Ports and Members aforesaid, and to their Heirs,
and Successors, by the tenor of these Presents, do give, grant, and confirm as
fully, plainly, and entirely, as if they had been word for word expressed,
declared, and manifested in these Presents: We willing moreover, and granting
for Us and Our Heirs aforesaid, that the aforesaid Barons, and their Heirs and
Successors of the Ports and Members aforesaid, shall have all their Liberties,
Acquitances, Privileges, and Free-Customs restored to them as fully and
entirely as their Ancestors and Predecessors had them in the times of St.
Edmund the Confessor, and William the Conqueror, late Kings of England, or any
other of Our Progenitors, more freely, fully, and honorably. And although the
said Barons, and Honest Inbabitants, or their Ancestors and Predecessors the
Barons and Honest Inhabitants of the Ports and Members aforesaid, or any of
them, by some emergent chance have not yet fully enjoyed or perhaps misused,
any one or more of the Liberties, Acquitances, Privileges, and Free-Customs
contained in the said Charter and Letters; yet the Barons and Honest
Inhabitants, their Heirs and Successors, for the future shall fully use and
enjoy the Liberties and Acquitances, Privileges, and Free-Customs whatsoever,
so not-used, or mis-used, Any Interruption or Impediment whatsoever
notwithstanding.
or any of them, without any hindrance or let occasioned by Us or Our Heirs,
Justices, Sheriffs, Coroners, Escheators, or other Bailiffs or Officers to Us
or Our Heirs whatsoever, any interruption had or made in time past to the
contrary, in any wise notwithstanding. We have also granted for Us and Our
Heirs, and by this Our Charter have confirmed to the Mayors, Bailiffs, and
Jurats of every Port and Member of the Ports, and Members aforesaid which were
chosen in the Ports and Members aforesaid by the Commons of the same, That if
any Customs hitherto granted and used in the Ports and Members of them, or any
of them, be doubtful or defective in any part; or if any differences arising
afresh concerning them in the same Ports and Members, or in any of them, where
there has not been a Remedy formerly made, shall want new ordering and
reforming, that the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurats of every Port and Member
of the Ports, and of the Members aforesaid, and their Heirs and Successors,
with the assent of the Commons of that Port or Member of the Ports, and of the
Members aforesaid, where this amendment, defect, or difficulty shall happen to
be made or had, May appoint a Remedy agreeable to Honesty and Reason, A fit
Remedy to be appointed.
for the common good of the Barons and Honest Men, and Inhabitants of the same
Port or Member of that Port, as also other of Our faithful Subjects resorting
thither, as often as they shall see it expedient; Provided that that Ordinance
be profitable to Us and Our Subjects, and agreeable to Reason, as aforesaid;
And that they may Record their Liberties and Free-Customs before Us, Our
Justices, or other Our Officers whatsoever. And further, that the same Barons
may be encouraged for the future to pay as good Service, or to their utmost
ability Better to Us and Our Heirs, then they paid Our forementioned
Progenitors and Us in times past, We have thought fit that other Liberties and
Acquitances, plain and express, be granted anew to the same Barons and Honest
Men. And moreover of Our special Grace, mere Motion, and certain Knowledge, We
have granted, and by these Presents do grant for Us and Our Heirs, as much as
in Us lies, to the same Barons and Honest Men of the Cinque Ports aforesaid,
and to the Barons and Honest Men of all and singular the Ports, Towns, and
Members adjoining, united, and pertaining to the same Cinque Ports, or any of
them, that they, their Heirs and Successors, and other Resiants whatsoever
within the Ports and Members aforesaid, or within any of the same, contributing
to the Service and Navy aforesaid, be for ever quit from Toll, Panage,
Bridg-toll, Wharfage, Murage, Passage, Lastage, Stallage, Tallage, Carriage,
Weight-toll, Picage, Landtax, Scot, and Gild, Hidage, Escuage, and also from
the Suits of County and Hundred (and Tributes of Hundreds) from the View of
Free-Pledges, and the Pence belonging to the View of Free-Pledges; as also from
whatsoever Summons, Returns, or Payments to be paid to Us, Our Heirs, or Our
Successors, for any of the Premises aforesaid; And from Fines for Murder, and
common Amercement whenever it happen that a County or Town before Us or Our
Heirs, or before Us, or whatsoever Our Justices, Officers or Ministers
belonging to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, fall into the hands of Us or Our
Heirs; and from all such like Custom, throughout Our whole Realm and Dominions.
And We have also granted to the aforesaid Barons and Honest Men, their Heirs
and Successors, That for ever they may have all Goods and Chattels Waviated, or
which are seized by Waife, and also all Goods and Chattels which are counted
Stray; as also any Treasure which is or shall be found within the Ports
aforesaid, or any Member of the same; And the Goods and Chattels which are said
to be made by the hand that are taken, or shall be took with any Person
wheresoever within the Ports and Members aforesaid, being before any Judge
whatsoever disavowed by the same person. And that the said Barons and Honest
Men, their Heirs and Successors the Barons and Honest Men of the Ports and
Members afor^said, shall have the Chattels of whatsoever Felons condemned or
convicted, or hereafter to be condemned or convicted; And the Goods forfeited
for the escape of Felons, and Fines whatsoever for the same Escapes in
whatsoever Courts belonging to Us or Our Heirs and Successors, they be Assessed
or hereafter shall be Assessed before Us or Our Heirs, or or the Justices and
Judges belonging to Us or Our Heirs whatsoever; And also the Chattels of all
other Persons which are or shall be demanded in a Writ Exigent for Appearance,
or for Felony; And also the Chattels of those which are Outlawed and Waviated,
or shall be Outlawed or Waviated; And the Chattels by what means soever
confiscated, and of all and singular the Barons and other Resiants whatsoever
within the Ports and Members aforesaid, wheresoever these Goods and Chattels
shall happen to be found within the Ports and Members aforesaid, or without
them, in the Counties of Kent and Sussex, or either of them, although the
Officers and Servants of Us or Our Heirs, or any one of them be there present.
And that the said Barons and Honest Men, and their Successors, shall for ever
have the Wreck of the Sea at whatsoever Coasts and Arms of the Sea in the Ports
and Members aforesaid adjacent it shall happen to be cast, and all and singular
the things which belong and appertain to ever such Wreck: And that they, their
Heirs and Successors, shall either in their own Persons, or by their Servants,
take and seize upon, for their own use, such Chattels which are counted Waif or
Strey, any Treasure found, Chattels which are said to be made by the hand,
Chattels of Felons by whatsoever means condemned or to be condemned, convicted
or to be convicted, the Chattels of all persons whatsoever which are or shall
be demanded in a Writ Exigent for Appearance, or for Felony; the Chattels of
those which are or shall be Outlawed, and which are or shall be Waifed; and
Chattels by what means soever confiscated, and the Wreck, with all things
belonging to such Wreck; without the trouble, molestation, or impediment of Us
or Our Heirs, the Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs, Coroners, or other Bailiffs
belonging to Us or Our Heirs, or any others whatsoever, although they were
seized heretofore by Us or Our Heirs, or some of the Bailiffs, Officers, and
Servants to Us and Our Heirs. We have also granted for Us and Our Heirs, to the
aforesaid Barons and Honest Men, their Heirs and Successors, for the better
maintaining of the Navy, and Service aforesaid, That every Mayor and Jurat in
every Port and Member of the Ports and Members aforesaid, where there is a
Mayor and Jurats; and every Bailiff and Jurat in every Port and Member of the
same Ports and Members where such Bailiff is chosen by he Commons of the
Inhabitants of that Port or Member of the Ports or of the Members aforesaid;
And also the Jurats in every Port and Member of the aforesaid Ports and
Members, where neither the Mayor nor Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the
Inhabitants of that Port or Member and their Successors, shall for ever receive
all and all manner of Fines for Trespasses, Offenses, Misprisions, Wrongs,
Negligences, Ignorances, Conspiracies, Concealments, Regraters, Forestallers,
Maintenances, Bribes, Champarties, Counterfeitings, Cheats, Contempts, and all
other defaults whatsoever: As also the Fines for a License of Agreements, and
all Amercements, Redemptions, Exits, and Penalties which are or shall be
forfeited; a year and a day, Waste and Strip, and all that which should belong
to Us and Our Heirs from such a year, and a day, Wast, and Strip of all and
singular the Barons and other Resiants aforesaid, their Heirs and Successors,
as well within the Ports and Members aforesaid, as without; And the said
Barons, and other such like Resiants in all the Courts whatsoever belonging to
Us and Our Heirs, shall Impose Fines, Assess Exits, and make Forfeiture for
Penalties, Adjudge a year and a day, Wast and Strip, and such like Forfeitures;
Which Fines and Amercements, Redemptions, Exits, Penalties, a year and a day,
Wast and Strip, Forfeitures, shall belong to Us and Our Heirs, unless they have
been granted to the aforesaid Barons and Honest Men, and their Successors: So
that the said Mayors and Jurats, and also the Jurats in every Port and Member
of the Ports and Members before-nam'd, elected as it is aforesaid, shall in
their own Person, or by their Servants, levy, take, and receive such Fines,
Amercements, Redemptions, Exits, Penalties, and Forfeitures, and all other
things which should belong to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors for a year and a
day, waste, strip, and the Forfeitures aforsaid, for the common profit and use
of the said Barons, their Heirs and Successors, without the impediment of Us or
Our Heirs, Justices, Bailiffs, or other Our Officers whatsoever: And that the
said Barons and Honest Men, their Heirs and Successors, may have as it shall
seem good to them within every Port and Member of the Ports and Members
aforesaid, a Pillory for Thieves, and a Cucking-stooll for the punishment of
Offenders there; And also that they and their Successors may for ever have
Leets, and Lawdays, with all the Profits which way soever belonging or
appertaining thereunto from any Resiants whosoever within the Liberty
aforesaid: And that the aforesaid Barons and Honest Men, and their Heirs and
Successors from henceforward, and every of them may have whatever they find
upon Land and Sea freely, peaceably, and quietly, without any impediment or
disturbance by Us or Our Heirs, or by the Constables to Us or Our Heirs of Our
Castle of Dover, or by the Admiral of the Cinque Ports, or Admiral within the
Ports and Members aforesaid, without any division of it to be made, or any part
of it to be rendered to Us or Our Heirs, or any other: And we have further
granted for Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, to the aforesaid Barons
and Honest Men, and to their Heirs and Successors Liberty to Erect Gallows
within every Port and Member of the Ports and Members aforesaid; And to give
Judgment upon all Offenders who shall happen to be taken and apprehended there
according to the abovementioned Privilege of Infangtheff and Utfangtheff, and
according to the custom anciently used in the Ports and Members aforesaid,
without the let, questioning, or impediment of Us or Our Heirs, Justices,
Coroners, Escheators, Sheriffs, or other Our Bailiffs, and Officers whosoever:
And that the said Mayor and Jurats, Bailiffs and Jurats, and also the Jurats in
every Port and Member of the Ports and Members aforesaid as they are before
limited, may and shall from henceforth have and hold before the fame Mayor and
Jurats, Bailiff and Jurats, and also Jurats, by a Complaint before them to be
relieved in the Court of any Port or Member of the Ports and Members aforesaid,
in any place, days or times most conveniently to be held according to custom
within any such Port or Member, all and all sorts of Pleas of and concerning
all sorts of Actions, real, personal, and mixed, happening by Sea or Land within
any such Port or Member; And that they may attach those Persons, and commit
their Bodies to Prison, against whom such Personal Actions shall happen to be
sued or prosecuted, and be Oyers and Terminers of all and every the aforesaid
Pleas, and give Judgment upon Process and Executions to be done according to
the custom of the Ports aforesaid; so that neither the Constable to Us or Our
Heirs of the Castle of Dover aforesaid, nor the Warden of the Cinque Ports
aforesaid, nor the Admiral of the fame, nor any Vicegerent, nor Deputy
appointed by him, shall about or concerning any such Plea within the Ports and
Members aforesaid, or about any other Business or Matter that is or happens, or
shall be or happen by Land, or Sea, by Fresh Water, or bounds and banks of the
deep Sea, in any wise come within the limits and liberties of the same Ports
and Members, or enter into such Port or Member upon such an account in any wise
whatsoever, unless in default of the Mayor, Bailiff, and Jurats not
administering Justice; And if such default shall chance to be, then We Will that
only the aforesaid Warden of the Cinque Ports aforesaid for the time being,
either by Word of Mouth or Petition to be made by the party which shall
perceive himself to be wronged, enter into the said Port or Member from time to
time, and cause the Plea touching this defect to come before him within the
same Port and Member in the presence of such Mayor, Bailiff, and Jurats, and
there examine the Plea aforesaid, and correct and amend such default, if there
be any, and there administer with speed full and complete Justice to all and
every of them who have any occasion to be there present; according to law and
custom: And that the Mayor and Jurats, Bailiff and Jurats, and the Jurats
aforesaid o every Port and Member of the Ports and Members aforesaid, elected
in manner and form aforesaid, shall for ever have the Cognizance, as well of
all sorts of Pleas in the actions abovenamed, as of all sorts of Pleas
belonging to the Crown, any way happening within every such Ports or Members;
And the Power of hearing and determining all pleas belonging to the Crown of Us
or Our Heirs, as well at the Suit of Us and Our Heirs, as at the Suit of other
Plaintiffs (the Pleas of all sorts of Treasons only excepted) which We Will for
Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, to be heard and determined before the
Warden for the time being of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, the Mayors, Bailiffs,
and Jurats of the same Ports being summoned according to the custom used in the
same Ports, at Shepey, according to the Law and Custom of the Court aforesaid:
And that every such Mayor and Jurats, Bailiff and Jurats, as also the Jurats as
above limited, may at their Election have and hold all and singular the Pleas
abovenamed (excepting those which are before excepted) before them within every
such Port and Member, in the Court of the same Port or Member; and may hear and
determine all such Pleas, and execute Judgments given upon them according to
the Law and Custom of Our Kingdom of England, or Custom of the Cinque Ports
aforesaid: And further, that none of the aforesaid Barons, Honest Men, or their
Heirs and Successors, or Resiants aforesaid, for the future shall be taken,
Arrested, or Attached by any Warrants, Precepts, or Commandment of the
Constable of the Castle aforesaid, or of the Warden of the Cinque Ports
aforesaid, or Admiral within the Ports and Members aforesaid, to answer upon
any such Plea; or be bound in any wise to appear upon the same Cause before the
same Constable, Warden, or Admiral, or his Vicegerent, or Deputy, unless upon
default of not administering Justice as aforesaid: And that none of the Barons,
Honest Men, or their Heirs, or such like Resiants, shall for the future be in
any wise Pressed, Attach't, or Arrested by any of the Officers and Ministers of
Us or Our Heirs, to or for the Service of Us or Our Heirs to be performed upon
the Sea, except for the Service of the said Barons to be paid to Us and Our
Heirs with their Navy, as aforesaid: We have further granted to the abovenamed
Barons and Honest Men, that they, their Heirs and Successors and other Resiants
whosoever of their Heirs and Successors, within the Ports and Members
aforesaid, who do now or shall hereafter contribute to the Service and Navy
aforesaid, be for ever free from all Aids, Subsidies, They shall be free from
all Subsidies, etc.
Contributions, Tallage, and all other how many soever, which, if the grant
aforesaid made to them had not been, should or might have been exacted of them,
or of any of them, by Us or Our Heirs, by the Bailiffs or Officers of Us or Our
Heirs, upon the account of their Lands, Tenements, and Incomes, or their Goods
and Chattels, or any thing belonging to them which they now have, and from
henceforth are to possess: And that whenever the Commons of the Counties of
Our Kingdom of England, or the Citizens and Burgesses of the Cities and
Buroughs of the said Counties have any way granted to Us, Our Heirs, or
Successors, the Tenth, Fifteenth, or any other Sum or Tax whatsoever, of their
Goods moveable, or Lands, Tenements, or other of their Incoms; Or that We or
Our Heirs have caused Our Tenths to be be levied throughout England, the said
Barons, their Heirs and Successors, and the Ports and Members aforesaid, the
Lands, Tenements, and Goods and Chattels of the Barons, their Heirs and
Successors, and of other Resiants aforesaid, or of any of them, whether they be
within the Liberties of the said Ports and Members, or without in the Counties
of Kent and Sussex, Within or without in the Counties of Kent and Sussex, they
shall not be Taxed.
shall not be Taxed for the Use of Us or Our Heirs; Nor shall any thing in any
wise be levied upon them sor Tenths, Fifteenths, and other Tributes or Tallages
aforesaid for the Use of Us or Our Heirs; Nor shall the said Barons, their
Heirs or Successors, or other Resiants aforesaid, be distreined, molested, or
disturbed upon these accounts in any thing concerning their Lands, Tenements,
or their Goods aforesaid; but that they, their Heirs and Successors, be for
ever free from all manner of Tenths, Fifteenths, and other such like Tributes
and Tallages, although they themselves or any of them be Agents in such Grants:
And We have further granted for Us and Our Heirs to the aforesaid Barons and
Honest Men, that none of them, their Heirs and Successors shall for the future
be put in any Assizes, Juries, Recognizances, Attaints, or other Inquisitions
whatsoever without the Ports and Members aforesaid, although they concern Us or
Our Heirs; And that none of them be made an Assessor, Taxer, or Collector of
Tenths, Fifteenths, or any parcel of them, or other Subsidies, Tallages, Taxes,
or small Sums whatsoever which are or shall be granted to Us or Our Heirs; Nor
be Collector of the reasonable Aid for the creating the Eldest Son of Us or Our
Heirs a Knight, or for the Marrying the Eldest Son of Us or Our Heirs; Nor
shall any of them be chosen or appointed Constable, Bailiff, or other Officer
and Servant to Us or Our Heirs, without the Ports and Members aforesaid,
against his Will; And in case that any of the aforesaid Barons, Honest Men, or
their Heirs and Successors, be for the future chosen, ordained, or appointed to
undergo and perform the trouble of any of the Offices or Employments aforesaid;
or to undergo, perform, or take any other Office against the force, tenor, and
efficacy of this our present Grant, although he shall refuse to undergo,
perform, or take upon him those Offices or Troubles, yet he shall in no wise
upon that account incur any Fine, Contempt, Forfeit, loss or damage upon his
Body or Goods; but that Our present Letters showed upon Record by him before
any Justices and Officers whosoever to Us and Our Heirs, in whatsoever place
through Our whole Kingdom of England, shall upon that declaration remain in
their force and virtue, and by that shall be allowed to do the same without any
Writ or Process to be thence further prosecuted: And that whenever there
shall happen any Examinations to be made before Our Constable of Our Castle of
Dover, or before the Warden of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, or Admiral of the
fame, such Inquisitions shall be had, taken and done within that Port or Member
of the Ports and Members aforesaid, where they of the respective Ports and
Members, by whom these Inquisitions shall be taken, do live and dwell, and no
where else; And that they who are mentioned and Empannelled in the Inquiries
aforesaid shall no way be bound, compelled, or forced to go out of their
respective Port or Member to any other place, to take their Charge or deliver
their Verdict; Nor shall they nor any of them any way upon that account incur
any contempt, amerciament, penalty, forfeiture, or any loss, to Us or Our
Heirs. Wherefore We Will and strictly Command for Us and Our Heirs, Wherefore
We Will.
that the aforesaid Barons and Honest Men of the Ports aforesaid, their Heirs
and Successors, have all and singular the Liberties and Acquitances aforesaid,
and all the Premises by Us renewed to them and every of them; and that for the
future without any impediment of Us or Our Heirs, Without impediment.
or Our Officers whosoever, they for ever use and enjoy them; Witness hereunto
the Reverend Prelate Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of all
England, Our most Dear Brothers George Duke of Clare, and Richard Duke of
Gloucester, the Reverend Priors George Bishop of Exon Our Chancellor of England,
and Thomas Bishop of London, Richard Earl of Warwick, and John Earl of
Northumberland Our most dear Cosins, as also Our Trusty and Well-beloved Mr.
Robert Stillington Keeper of Our Privy Seal, and Walter Blunt Knt. Our
Treasurer of England, and others; Given under Our Hand at Westminster the
Twenty third day of March in the Fifth year of Our Reign: But We Ratifying and
likeing the Charters and Letters aforesaid, and all and singular the things
contained in them, do accept and approve of them for Us and Our Heirs, as much
as in Us lies, and by the Tenor of these Presents do Ratify and Confirm them
to Our Well-beloved Barons and Honest Men of the said Cinque Ports and Members
of the same, and to their Heirs and Successors, as the Charters and Letters
aforesaid do reasonably Testify: In Witness whereof We have caused these Our
Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our Self at Westminster the Thirteenth day
of December, in the Third year of Our Reign. But We Ratifying and likeing well
the Charters and Letters aforesaid, and all and singular the things contained
in them, do accept and approve of them for Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us
lies, and by the Tenor of these Presents do Ratify and Confirm them to Our
Well-beloved Barons and Honest Men of the said Cinque Ports and their Members,
and to their Heirs and Successors, as the Charters and Letters aforesaid do
reasonably Testify: In Witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents, Witness Our Self at Westminster the Fifth day of March, in the
first year of Our Reign. But We Ratifying and likeing well the Charters and
Letters aforesaid, and all and singular the things contained in them, do accept
and approve of them for Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, and by the
Tenor of these Presents do Ratify and Confirm them to Our Well-beloved Barons
and Honest Men of the said Cinque Ports and their Members and to their Heirs
and Successors, as the Charters and Letters aforesaid do reasonably Testify:
In Witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness
Our Self at Westminster the Twentieth day of November, in the Second year of
Our Reign. But We Ratifying and likeing well the Charters and Letters
aforesaid, and all and singular the things contained in them, do accept and
approve of them for Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, and by the Tenor
of these Presents do Ratify and Confirm them to Our Well-beloved Barons and
Honest Men of the said Cinque Ports and their Members, and to their Heirs and
Successors, as the Charters and Letters aforesaid do reasonably Testify: In
Witness whereof we have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness
Our Self at Westminster the Twenty seventh day of October, in the First year of
Our Reign. But We Ratifying and likeing well the Charters and Letters
aforesaid, and all and singular the things contained in them, do accept and
approve of them for Us and Our Heirs, as much as in Us lies, and by the Tenor
of these Presents do Ratify and Confirm them to Our Well-beloved Barons and
Honest Men of the said Cinque Ports and their Members, and to their Heirs and
Successors, as the Charters and Letters aforesaid do reasonably Testify: In
Witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness
Our Self at Westminster the Eigth day of March, in the First year of Our Reign.
We have also looked upon the Letters Patents of the said Lady Elizabeth late
Queen, about the Grants to the Barons of the said Cinque Ports, and Towns of
Rye and Winchelsea, and Members of the same Ports and Towns, and every of them,
and to their Successors the Barons of the said Cinque Ports, Towns, and
Members, made after these words:

Elizabeth by the Grace of God, We have looked upon the Charters of Eliz. about
Fifteenths.
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of Our Exchequer for the time being, and to
all other the Officers, Ministers, and Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors
for the time being, or which hereafter shall be, to whom it shall or may
appertain, and to every of them Greeting. Whereas it appears unto Us by one
Record remaining in Our Exchequer, amongst the Records of the Term of Easter,
in the Sixth year of the Reign of Our most Dear Grandfather King Henry the
Seventh, That John Convers of Winchelsea, and William Warwyn of Dover Combons
of the five Ports, did come before the Barons of the same Exchequer the Seventh
day of May, in that same Term of Easter, in their proper Persons, and did
exhibit to the said Court there, a certain Letter of Attorney, Sealed with the
Common Seal of the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons of the five Ports, and
directed to the Treasurer and Barons of the same Exchequer, the Tenor whereof
follows in these words; To the Right, Mighty, and Noble Lord, John Dynham
Knt. Lord Dynham, High Treasurer of England, and to the full Honorable the
Barons of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Exchequer at Westminster that now be, We
the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons of the Towns and Ports of Hasting,
Winchelsea, Rye, Romney, Heth, Dover, and Sandwich, at our Brotheryield-General
at the said Town and Port of Romney, the day of the Date hereof, Holden,
Assembled, that is to say, William Nepsham Bailiff of Hasting, Richard Martham
Mayor of Winchelsea, John Cheeseman Mayor of Rye, John Cheynew Jurate of
Romney, Thomas Walton Jurate of Heth, Edward Hextal Mayor of Dover, and Thomas
Aldy Mayor of Sandwich, which send due Recommendations in all humblewise as
appertains: And whereas it has pleased our Sovereign Lord, by the Advice of
his Council, is Agreed that the Sustentation-Subsidy and maintenance of our
Navy, to do our old Service to our Sovereign Lord the King, and to his Heirs
Kings of England, That at every whole Fifteenth and Tenth hereafter by the
Commons of this His Realm, to Him and to His Heirs to be granted, the
Collectors of the same and every of them, within the Counties of Kent and
Sussex, from thenceforth shall have deduction in their Accounts betwixt them,
by the Certificate of the said Barons, so that they exceed not the Sum of Five
hundred Pounds Sterling, for the Allowance of all Resiants and Advocants of
their Allowance of all such Fifteens as from thenceforth shall be granted to
our said Sovereign Lord the King, and to His Heirs Kings of England, and from
thenceforth to be gathered, and that his Highness wills in that behalf, that
we nor our Heirs shall not in any wise exceed the Sum of Five hundred Pounds,
and that we should thereupon be bound by Recognizance before His said Barons in
His said Exchequer at Westminster, to the accomplishment of the same, We the
said Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, certify by these Presents, that we,
the day of the making hereof, have given full Power and Authority to our Right
Trusty, and Right Well-beloved Brethren and Combons, Mr. John Convers of the
said Town of Winchelsea, and William Warwyn of the said Town of Dover, our true
and lawful Attorneys, jointly and severally in that behalf, by the Advice of
Learned Council, to bind us to our said Sovereign Lord the King, and to His
Heirs Kings of England, by Recognizance in the said Kings Exchequer, before the
said Barons in all due and convenient Form, and Sum reasonable, after the said
Wisdoms and Discretions of the said High-Treasurer, and the said Barons for the
accomplishment of the Premises, that is to say, That we nor our Heirs shall not
from henceforth exceed the said Sum of Five hundred Pound.

In Witness whereof, we the said Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, the Seal
of our said Brotheryield used and accustomed to these Presents, have put at the
sa^ Town and Port of Romney, th 12th day of April, in the Sixth yea of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord King Henry the Seventh.

Whereupon the said John Convers and William Warwyn being then present in the
said Court in their proper Persons, and admitted there by the Barons to be the
Attorneys of the said Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons of the aforesaid
Ports, to execute and do in all things according to the Tenor of the said
Letter; And the said John and William taking upon them the same, did
acknowledge the same Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, to owe to Our said
Grandfather One thousand Pound Sterling, to be paid to Our said Grandfather in
the Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist then next coming. And except
they did perform it, the said John and William in the stead and Name of the
same Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, did grant that Our Grandfather
should cause to be levied the said Money, of the Lands and Tenements of the
said Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, whereof they, or any others, or any
other that were seized, and of their Goods and Chattels to whose hand soever
they should come, and made that this Recognizance was under such Condition,
That if the Collectors of the Fifteenths and Tenths to Our said Grandfather,
then, or to His Heirs Kings of England in the Counties of Kent and Sussex, and
elsewhere within this Realm of England from henceforth to be granted, should
not have Deductions in their Accounts to Our said Grandfather of such whole
Fifteenth and Tenth to be yielded by the Certificates of the Mayors, Bailiffs,
Jurats, and Barons, or their Successors from thenceforth to be above the Sum of
500 l.And if the said Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons, their Heirs and
Successors, by their Certificates to such Collectors in the said Counties of
Kent and Sussex, and elsewhere within this Realm of England; of, and for such
whole Fifteenth and Tenth for the same Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats, and Barons,
and the Resiants and Advocants of the said Ports, to be made and directed,
should not exceed the Sum of 500 l. at every such Fifteenth and Tenth
thenceforth to be granted, that then the said Recognizance should be void,
otherwise it should remain in his strength and effect as by the said Record
remaining in the Custody of Our Remembrancer in Our Exchequer more at large
appears. And whereas further it appears unto Us by Letters under the Privy
Seal of Our said most dear Grandfather King Henry the Seventh, directed to Mr.
Treasurer and the Barons of his Exchequer, bearing Date at Westminster the
Three and Twentieth day of June in the Ninth year of His Reign, That whereas
Our said Grandfather was then informed, that of old time accustomed at every
Fifteenth granted to the Barons of the five Ports, and their Advocants and
Members of them, and every of them, were wont to be allowed in the Exchequer of
Our said Grandfather, of as much and as large Sums of Money as they would ask
by sufficient Billet thereof, at every Fifteenth granted till then of late by
agreement thereof taken, and as between Our said Grandfather and them, they
were Cessed at a certain Sum of 500 l. and thereupon they were bound in a
Recognizance before the Treasurer and Barons of Our said Grandfather in his
Exchequer unto Our said Grandfather, in One thousand Marks, that they should
not exceed the said Sum of 500 l. in asking Allowance by Billet, upon
forfeiture to Our said Grandfather of the said Thousand Marks, And whereas Our
said Grandfather being informed, That the Treasurer and Barons of His Exchequer
did then deny to receive and allow the Bills and Billets under the Seals either
of the Towns of Winchelsea and Rye, and of the Members of the said five Ports,
of every of them for discharging of diverse of the Collectors of Our said
Grandfather, for diverse Fifteenths that then were past; Our said Grandfather
willing the said five Ports, the said Towns of Winchelsea and Rye, and the
Members of them, and every of them to be Partners of the said Discharge of 500
l. as they be Charged to Our said Grandfather in Service, and for diverse and
many other great Considerations Our said Grandfather specially moving, did by
the said Letters under the said Privy Seal, Will and Charge the said Treasurer
and Barons of his Exchequer and every of them, that they immediately after the
sight of the same Letters, should receive and take of the Collector and
Collectors of Our said Grandfather of any such Fifteenth, all such Bills and
Billets for discharging of the said Fifteenths before that time granted, and
thereafter to be granted, as well them that were under the Seals of the said
Towns of Winchelsea and Rye parcel of the Head Ports, or any of them, as them
that were under the Seals of any of the Members, to what manner of Sum that the
said Bills or Billets should amount unto. And if the said Bills or Billets
should amount to the Sum of 500 l. or beneath at a Fifteen, then Our said
Grandfather Willed and Charged them and every of them to allow all the Sum of
500 l. or any Sum beneath that Sum; And if the said Bills or Billets should
amount above the Sum of the said 500 l. Then Our said Granfather willed the
said Treasurer and Barons, that they allow to the said Collectors the said Sum
of 500 l. and no more. And then Our said Grandfather willed, that the said
Treasurer and Barons should make as hasty Process as they lawfully might
against the said five Ports, for the said Thousand Marks by them unto Our said
Grandfather to be forfeited, for their exceeding the said Sum contrary to their
said Recognizance, as by the said Letters under the Privy Seal of Our said
Grandfather more at large appears. And whereas diverse of the most ancient
Charters, and Letters Patents, made to the Barons of the said Cinque Ports in
that behalf, as also the Enrollment of the same by length and tract of long
time and many Ages, or otherwise are perished, and utterly worn out, lost, or
decayed, We considering the good Services which the said Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their Members
have done unto Us, and the great Charges which they have been at in Our late
Services upon the Seas, and elsewhere against the Spaniards, in the year of Our
Lord God 1588. and 1596. and willing that the said Barons of the said
Cinque Ports, and of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and the Members of
them, and every of them, and the Resiants of the said Ports, Towns, and
Members, and the Advocants of the said Ports, and Towns, and every of them,
should be discharged of the Sum of 500 l. at every Fifteen, and be Partners of
the said Discharge of 500 l. according to such rate and proportion as the
Cinque Ports, Towns, and Members be charged to Us, Our Heirs and Successors in
Service and in finding and maintaining of the Navy of the said Port, Towns, and
Members: In consideration of the said Services, and for the better maintenance
and sustentation of the Navy of the said Ports, and for diverse other good
considerations, Us specially moving of Our special Grace, mere motion, and
certain knowledge do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors grant unto the said
Barons of the said Cinque Ports, and of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea,
and of the Members of the same Ports, and Towns, and every of them and their
Successors; Barons of the said Cinque Ports, Towns, and Members, That at every
Fifteenth heretofore to Us granted and yet payable, and heretofore to Us
granted, and hereafter to be paid; And also at every Fifteenth hereafter to Us,
Our Heirs and Successors to be granted, they the said Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and of the Members
of the said Ports and Towns, and of every of them, and their Successors Barons
of the said Cinque Ports, Towns and Members for themselves, and the Resiants of
the said Ports, Towns, and Members, and the Advocants of the said Ports, and
Towns, shall have thereof, and be allowed in the Exchequer of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors at, and of every such Fifteenth so granted, or to be granted as is
aforesaid, the said Sum of 500 l. and no more: And therefore for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, We do Will and Charge the Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of
the Exchequer of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and of every of them for the
time being, for ever hereafter that they do from time to time, receive and take
of the Collector and Collectors of any Fifteenth at any time heretofore to Us
granted and yet paiable, and heretofore granted to Us, and hereafter to be
paid, and hereafter to Us, Our Heirs and Successors to be granted, all such
Bills and Billets for the discarge of the said Barons of Our said Cinque Ports,
and of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and of the Members of them and
every of them, and of the Resiants of the said Ports, Towns and Members, and
the Advocants of the same Ports and Towns, and of every of them for the time
being, of the Sum of 500 l. part or parcel of every such Fifteenth before this
time granted and yet payable, and heretofore granted unto Us, and hereafter to
be paid, and hereafter to Us, Our Heirs or Successors to be granted as well all
those Bills and Billets that be or hereafter shall be under the Seals of any of
the Cinque Ports and Towns of Rye and Winchelsea or any of them, as all those
which be or hereafter shall be, under the Seals of any of the Members of the
said Cinque Ports and Towns, or any of them; And if the said Bills or Billets,
do or shall at any time hereafter of, or for any Fifteenth amount above the
said Sum of 500 l. then for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We Will and Charge
the said Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the same Exchequer, and every of
them from time to time, to allow to the said Collector and Collectors of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors for the time being, for the said Barons of the said
Cinque Ports, and Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their Successors, and for
them and every of their Members, and the Resiants of the said Ports, Towns, and
Members, and the Advocants of the said Ports and Towns the said Sum of 500 l.
and no more: And then for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We Will and Command
that the said Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors for the time being, make as hasty Process as lawfully as
may be made against the said Barons of the said Cinque Ports, and of the said
Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their Successors for the levying of the said
1000 Marks by them to Us, Our Heirs or Successors to be forfeited for their
exceeding the said Sum of 500 l. contrary to their said Recognizance; And
further for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do Will and Charge all and every
Collector and Collectors of Us, Our Heirs and Successors of every Fifteenth to
Us granted, or hereafter to Us, Our Heirs or Successors to be granted, that
they and every of them do receive of the said Barons of the Cinque Ports, and
of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their Successors for them, their,
and every of their Members, and the Resiants of the said Ports, Towns, and
Members, and the Advocants of the said Ports and Towns, all and every such
Bills and Billets as have been, or hereafter shall be tendered unto the said
Collector or Collectors, or any of them according to the purport and true
meaning of these Presents: And moreover for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of
Our mere grace and certain knowledge, We do grant to the said Barons of the
said Cinque Ports, and Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and of the Members of the
said Ports and Towns and their Successors, that neither they, nor their
Successors, nor any of them, nor the Resiants of them, or any of them, nor the
Advocants of the said Ports and Towns, or any of them, or their Successors, at
any time hereafter by Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or by the Treasurer,
Chancellor, or Barons of the said Exchequer of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or
by any Collectors, or other Officers or Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, shall be distreined, impeached, impleaded, or molested in any thing
contrary to the Tenor and Purport of these Presents, although express mention
of the true yearly value or certainty of the Premises, or of any of them, or of
any other Gifts or Grants by Us, or any of Our Progenitors to the aforesaid
Barons of the said Cinque Ports, or of the said Towns of Rye and Winchelsea,
and their Members heretofore made in these Presents is not made, or any
Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, or Restraint to the contrary made, ordained
or provided, or any other thing, cause or matter to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster, the Six and twentieth day of January, in the
Three and fortieth year of Our Reign.

We have also looked upon the Letters Patents of Our most Dear Grandfather Lord
James, late King of England, made according to these Words: James by the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. To all those to whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting, etc. In
Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster, the Thirtieth day of January, in the Second
Year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the Thirty
eight.

We have also looked upon the Letters Patents of Our most Dear Father Lord
Charles, late King of England, (of Blessed Memory) made after these Words:
Charles by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all those to whom these present Letters shall
come, Greeting, etc. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster, the Sixteenth day of June, in the Tenth Year
of Our Reign.

Whereas Our Town and Port of Hasting in our County of Sussex, and Our Town and
Port of New-Romney, alias Romene, of Heeth, Dover, and Sandwich in Our County
of Kent, are, and, from the time of the contrary of which, being never known to
have been, were always the Cinque Ports of Us and Our Progenitors, the Kings
and Queens of England: And whereas also Our Towns of Rye and Winchelsea in Our
said County of Sussex, are, and from the whole time aforesaid have been Ancient
Towns, and within the Liberties of the Cinque Ports aforesaid: And whereas also
the Town and Privileged Monastery of Pevensey, and the Town of Seaford in the
County of Sussex aforesaid; and the Towns and Places called Bulver-Heath,
Little Iham, and Hidney in the County of Sussex aforesaid; and the Towns or
Places called Beckesbourne, and Graunge, alias Grenche in the County of Kent
aforesaid, are and have been ever since the time aforenamed, Members of the
said Town and Port of Hasting; And the Town of Bromhill in the aforesaid
Counties of Sussex and Kent; and the Town of Lydd and Old-Romney in the County
of Kent aforesaid; and that other Towns or Places called Denge-Marsh,
Oswardstone, alias Oswelstone in the County of Kent aforesaid, are, and have
been ever since the time aforenamed, Members of the said Town and Port of
New-Romney alias Romene; and also the Town of Westheeth in the County of Kent
aforesaid, is, and has been ever since the time aforesaid, a Member of the
same Town and Port of Heeth; and also the Towns of Folkstone and Feversham in
the County of Kent aforesaid; and the Towns and Places called Margate St.
John's, Goresend, Brichington-Wood, alias Wood-Church, and St. Peter's in the
Isle of Thannet in the County of Kent aforesaid; and Kingsdown, and Ringwolde
in the County of Kent aforesaid, are, and have been ever since the time
aforesaid, Members of the forenamed Town and Port of Dover; and also the Towns
or Places of Fordwich, Deal, Walmer, Ramsgate, and Stomer in the aforesaid
County of Kent; and Sarr in the Isle of Thannet in the said County of Kent; and
Brightlingsey in the County of Essex, are, and have been from the whole time
aforesaid, Members of the said Town and Port of Sandwich; as also the Town and
Hundred of Tenderden in the aforesaid County of Kent, is a Member of the
Ancient Town of Rye: And whereas also the Barons and Inhabitants of the
aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same, and their
Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of
Hasting aforesaid in the County of Sussex, and their Predecessors; and the
Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of New-Romney aforesaid in the
said County of Kent, and their Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth aforesaid in the said County of Kent, and
their Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of
Dover aforesaid, and their Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of
the Town and Port of Sandwich aforesaid in the County of Kent, and their
Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Rye
aforesaid in the County of Sussex, and their Predecessors; and the Mayors,
Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea aforesaid in the County
of Sussex, and their Predecessors; and the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the
Town and Privileged Monastery of Pevensey aforesaid in the County of Sussex,
and their Predecessors; and the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Seaford aforesaid in the County of Sussex, and their Predecessors; and the
Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Lydd aforesaid in the County of
Kent, and their Predecessors; and the Mayors, Jurats, and Commons of the Town
of Folkstone aforesaid in the County of Kent, and their Predecessors; and the
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Feversham aforesaid in the County of
Kent, and their Predecessors; and the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Fordwich aforesaid in the County of Kent, and their Predecessors; and the
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Hundred of Tenderden aforesaid in
the County of Kent, and their Predecessors, have had, held, and enjoyed, and as
yet have, hold, and enjoy diverse Liberties, Franchises, Privileges,
Jurisdictions, Acquitances and Freedoms in time past, as well upon the account
of the Letters Patents aforesaid above recited, and several other Charters and
Letters Patents by other Our Predecessors the Kings and Queens of England, to
them and their Predecessors heretofore respectively given, granted, and
cofirmed; as upon the account of diverse Prescriptions and Customs used and
accustomed in the same Ports, Towns, and Members respectively: We considering
that the Barons of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, and the Barons of the Ancient
Towns of Rye and Winchelsea aforesaid, and of the Members of the same Ports and
Ancient Towns, have from time to time thoroughly performed and paid great
Services with their Navy to very many of Our Progenitors and Predecessors the
Kings and Queens of England, to their great cost, and to the great honor and
profit of Our Progenitors and Our Kingdom aforesaid: And graciously and piously
considering that the said Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and the Members of the
same Ports and Towns are continually liable to the Injuries, Wrongs, Piracies,
and sudden Oppressions of Our Enemies: As also willing and greatly desiring
that the Navy of the Ports aforesaid, and of the Ancient Towns aforesaid, and
of the Members of the same Ports and Ancient Towns should not perish or decay,
(which cannot without great Charges and Expenses be kept, maintained or
furnished) but that it may be found fitter and in better readiness to serve Us,
Our Heirs and Successors: And that the Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns, and the
Members of the same Ports and Ancient Towns by the frequent recourse and
increase of Inhabitants may be made the stronger and better able to defend
themselves and the Neighboring Country; And also Consideration being had of
the most pleasing and acceptable Service which the Barons of the Cinque Ports
and of the Ancient Towns aforesaid have performed and paid to Us at Our
Inauguration to the Crown of this Our Kingdom of England, according as in times
past they did, and were bound to do to Our Progenitors the Kings and Queens of
England at their respective Coronation, the time of the contrary being never
remembered to have been; and are still bound to do to Our Heirs and Successors
the Kings of England at their Coronation according to their Honor and
Privilege: And We have looked upon the several Letters Patents as well of Our
Famous Predecessor aforesaid the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England, as of
Our most Dear Grandfather aforesaid, and Our most Dear Father abovementioned;
and all and singular the things respectively contained and specified in the
same: As also all and singular the other Gifts, Grants, Charters,
Confirmations, and Letters Patents whatsoever, made by one or more of Our
Ancestors or Predecessors the Kings or Queens of England to the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and to their Heirs and the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports, or
other Advocants of the Liberties of the same, and to the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, their Heirs and Successors, and to the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and of the Members of the same, and to the Barons and Honest-Men
of the Cinque Ports, and of the Members of the same, and to the Mayor,
Bailiffs, and Jurats of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same; and to the
Mayor and Jurats, Bailiffs and Jurats, or Jurats of the Cinque Ports and
Members of the same, and every of them, and of any Port or Member aforesaid:
And to the Baron of the Town and Port of Hasting, and to the Bailiff, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town and Port of Hasting, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Hasting; and to the Baron of the Town and Port
of New-Romney, and to the Jurats and Commons of the Town and Port of
New-Romney, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of
New-Romney; and to the Baron of the Town and Port of Heeth, and to the Jurats
and Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth; and to the Baron of the Town and Port of
Dover, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Dover; and
to the Baron of the Town and Port of Sandwi^h, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Sandwich; and to the Baron of the Ancient Town
of Rye, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Rye; and
to the Baron of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea; and to the Baron of the Town and
Privileged Monastery of Pevensey, and to the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of
the Town and Privileged Monastery of Pevensey; and to the Baron of the Town of
Seaford, and to the Bailiff and Commons of the Town of Seaford; and to the
Baron of the Town of Lydd, and to the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town
of Lydd; and to the Baron of the Town of Folkstone, and to the Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town of Folkstone; and to the Baron of the Town of
Feversham, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Feversham; and
to the Baron of the Town of Fordwich, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of
the Town of Fordwich; and to the Baron of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden,
and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden; by
whatsoever Names or Name, or by whatsoever incorporations or incorporation, or
pretense of incorporation hitherto they have been, or now, and for the future
shall be known, called or named; And We Warranting to them, and making them
well-liking to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as much as in Us lies, all and
singular their Liberties, Priviledes, Franchises, Customs, Freedoms,
Acquitances, Exemptions, Jurisdictions, Fairs, Markets, Marts, Toll, Stallage,
Piccage, Custom, Easments, Fines, Amercements, and other Profits and
Hereditaments contained and specified in the said Letters Patents, or in any
one or more of them, (by these Presents in no wise to be recalled, diminished,
or changed) do Ratify, Approve, Accept of, and Confirm them by these Presents,
as they have hitherto reasonably used them: And further of Our more free and
special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, We have given, granted and
confirmed, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give,
grant, and confirm to the aforenamed Barons of the Cinque Ports and the Ancient
Towns aforesaid, and of the Members of the same Ports and Towns, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Hasting in the County of Sussex, and to their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of New-Romney in the
County of Kent, and to their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth in the County of Kent, and to their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Dover in the County of Kent, and to their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Sandwich in the
County of Kent, and to their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Ancient Town of Rye in the County of Sussex, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town
of Winchelsea in the County of Sussex, and their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Privileged Monastery of
Pevensey in the County of Sussex, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid
Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Seaford in the County of Sussex,
and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the
Town of Lydd in the County of Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Folkstone in the County of Kent, and
their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town
of Feversham in the County of Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Fordwich in the County of Kent, and
their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town
and Hundred of Tenterden in the County of Kent, and their Successors,
respectively: That every Mayor, and Jurat of every respective Port of the
Cinque Ports aforesaid, and their Successors respectively, within every Port
aforesaid, for every Port aforesaid, and for all other Places or Towns
whatsoever, or any other Place and Town whatsoever belonging to any Port
aforesaid, or being a Member of any Port aforesaid, which have not within their
selves or self a Mayor or Bailiff elected by the Commons of those places or
place, Towns or Town: And also that every Mayor and Jurat of every of the
Ancient Towns aforesaid, and their Successors respectively; and every Mayor of
the aforesaid Town of Feversham, and their Successors respectively; and every
Mayor and Jurat of every of the other Members of the Ports and Ancient Towns
aforesaid where there is a Mayor and Jurats, and their Successors respectively,
within every Ancient Town, and within the aforesaid Town of Feversham, and
within every other Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid, for every
of the Ancient Towns aforesaid, and for the aforesaid Town of Feversham, and
for every other Member aforesaid respectively; and every Bailiff and Jurat, and
every Bailiff where there is no Jurat of every Member of the Ports aforesaid
where such Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the same Member, and their
Successors respectively, within every other Member of the Ports aforesaid, for
every such Member as above severally and respectively limited, may for the
future for ever have and hold, and have power to have and to hold before the
same Mayor and Jurats, and Mayor, and Bailiff, and Jurats, and Bailiff
respectively within every such Port of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and
Members aforesaid, at some most convenient place, days, and accustomed times
there respectively, one Court of Record: And that the same Mayors and Jurats,
and Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurats, and Bailiffs and their Successors
respectively, may and shall have in every Court of the said Courts severally
and respectively, more fully and freely than they formerly had in the same,
full Power and Authority by these Presents of hearing and determining in the
several Courts aforesaid respectively by some grievance in the same to be
considered, and of holding all and singular the Suits of and concerning all and
all manner of Debts, Accounts, Covenants, Contracts, Misdemeanors by Force and
Arms, or otherwise done in contempt of Us, Our Heirs and Successors; detaining
of Goods, Contempts, Cheatings, Writs of Withernam; and of and concerning all
and all manner of other Actions, All Actions Personal and mixed.
Real, Personal, and Mixed whatsoever; Suits of Assize of Fresh Disseisin, or of
the Death of an Ancestor, or of Redisseisin within every such Port, and Bounds,
Limits, and Precincts of the same Port, or any other places or place, Towns or
Town appertaining or belonging to any Port aforesaid, or being a Member of any
such Port or Ports where neither Mayor nor Bailiff is elected respectively; and
within every Ancient Town aforesaid, and within the aforesaid Town of
Feversham, and within every other Member aforesaid, and the Bounds, Limits, and
Precincts of every such Ancient Towns, and of the Town of Feversham aforesaid,
and other Suits which any way happen or shall happen, chance or shall chance to
be within any other Members aforesaid, respectively: And that the same Mayors
and Jurats, and Mayors, and Bailiffs, and Jurats, and Jurats and Bailiffs, and
their Successors respectively, may upon all such Pleas, Actions, Complaints of
Assize of fresh Disseisin, or of the Death of an Ancestor, or of Redisseisin in
the said Courts, or any of them which are, or shall be moved or redressed, have
Power, Authority, and License to bring and force the Person or Persons against
whom any such Pleas, Actions, or Complaints of Assize of Fresh Disseisin, or of
the Death of an Ancestor, or of Redisseisin which shall happen to be moved or
redressed in the Courts aforesaid, or any of them, to appear to the Suit by the
Summons, Attachments, or Distraint of the Sergeant of the Mace to the Mayors
and Jurats, and Mayors, and Bailiffs, and Jurats, and Bailiffs of every Port,
Ancient Town, and Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid, or any of
the same respectively; or by any other Officers who are or shall be deputed by
them respectively for the same, or by any other Officers to be deputed by the
aforesaid Courts or any of them; or by an Attachment of the Body of the Person
or Persons by any such Sergeants of the Mace, or other Officers to be Executed
according to the Law and Custom of Our Kingdom of England, or the Custom of any
Port or Ancient Town aforesaid, or of any Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns
aforesaid respectively, or according to the Custom used in any of our Buroughs
or Counties within Our Kingdom of England: And to hear and determine all and
singular the Pleas, Actions, Plaints, and Assize of Fresh Disseisin, of the
Death of an Ancestor, or Redisseisin in any one of the Courts aforesaid
respectively; and to bring and determine them by such like Proceedings,
Considerations, Judgments, and Executions of Judgments, by which they bring and
determine such like Pleas, Actions, Plaints of Assize of Fresh Disseisin, of
the Death of an Ancestor, or of Redisseisin according to the Law of Our Kingdom
of England in any of Our Courts, or according to the Custom in any of the
Ancient Towns aforesaid belonging to any such Port, or in any Member of the
Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid respectively, or in any Borough, or County,
or Liberty within the said Kingdom of England; Or they may be brought and
determined at the pleasure of the Mayors and Jurats, Mayor, Bailiff, and
Jurats, and Bailiff respectively, and make and execute the Executions,
Processes, and Judgments thereupon by the aforesaid Sergeant of the Mace, or
any other Officer aforesaid: And that every Mayor, Jurat, and Commons of any of
the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid whatsoever, where there
is a Mayor, and their Successors respectively; and all Bailiffs, Jurats, and
Commons, and the Bailiffs and Commons of every Member of the Ports aforesaid,
where the said Bailiffs are elected by the Commons of the Members aforesaid,
and their Successors, may and shall have and receive to their own proper use
and advantage respectively, all and singular the Fines, Amercements, Ransoms,
Issues, Forfeitures and other Profits whatsoever, coming, rising, chancing, or
happening from and in the Courts aforesaid respectively: And that they may by
their Officers levy, receive, seize, and keep all and singular those Fines,
Ransoms, Amercements, Issues, Forfeitures, and Profits for their own proper use
and advantage respectively from time to time, by an Action or Actions of Debt,
or such other Suits, Actions, Means, Ways, and Proceedings to be had and
prosecuted in any Court or Courts of Record within the Cinque Ports, or Ancient
Towns aforesaid, or Members of the same aforesaid, or in any one or more of
them, by which such like Fines, Amercements, Ransoms, Issues, Forfeitures, and
Profits are wont to be levied, received, and recovered in any of the Courts of
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, throughout Our whole Kingdom of England; or may
be without the impediment of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or of any of Our
Officers whosoever: And moreover for the better ruling and governing of the
Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid, We of Our special Grace,
certain knowledge, and mere motion have given, granted, and confirmed, and by
these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give, grant and confirm to
the said Barons and honest Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns
aforesaid, and to the Members of the same Ports and Towns, and to their
Successors, and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Hasting in the County of Sussex and their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of New-Romney in the
County of Kent and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth in the County of Kent, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Dover in the County of Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Sandwich in the County of
Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of
the Ancient Town of Rye in the County of Sussex, and their Successors; And to
the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea in
the County of Sussex, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff,
Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Privileged Monastery of Pevensey in the
County of Sussex, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town of Seaford in the County of Sussex, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Lydd in the County of Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor,
Jurats and Commons of the Town of Folkstone in the County of Kent, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Feversham in the County of Kent, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Fordwich in the County of Kent, and
their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town
and Hundred of Tenterden in the County of Kent, and their Successors
respectively; That every Mayor and Jurat of every Port of the aforesaid
Cinque Ports respectively within the Ports aforesaid, and the Bounds, Limits,
and Precincts of the same Ports, as also within all other Places and Towns, or
any other Place and Town appertaining or belonging to any Port aforesaid, or
being a Member of any Port aforesaid, in which Places or Towns, or in which
Place or Town the Mayor or Bailiff is not chose by the Commons of those Places
or Towns, or Place or Town, and their Successors respectively: And every Mayor
and Jurat of either of the aforesaid Ancient Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and
any Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid, where there is a Mayor,
and their Successors respectively: As also every Bailiff and Jurat of any
Member of the Ports aforesaid, where such Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of
the same Member, and their Successors respectively, within the Ancient Towns
and Members aforesaid, and the Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same,
severally, according as it is before limited, may and shall be henceforward for
ever Keepers of the Peace, Keepers of the Peace.
and Justices to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to keep the Peace for Us, Our
Heirs and Successors; and that every of them may and shall be Keeper of the
Peace, and Justice to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to keep the Peace for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, within each of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns,
Members, and Places abovenamed, and the Bounds and Precincts of the same, and
every of them severally and respectively: And We do create, appoint, make,
ordain and confirm by these Presents the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurats, and
every of them, and their Successors respectively, Keepers of the Peace and
Justices to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to keep the Peace for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, within every of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members and
Places aforesaid, and the Liberties, Bounds, Limits and Precincts of the same
respectively; And We appoint them to keep, and cause to be kept all Ordinances
and Statutes already set forth, or hereafter to be set forth, for the good of
the Peace of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and for the preservation of the
same, and for the quiet rule and government of the People belonging to Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, in all and singular their Articles, within every of the
Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members, and Places aforesaid, and the Liberties,
Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same severally and respectively, according
to the force, tenor, and effect of the same: And to Correct and Punish all
Offenders against the form of the said Ordinances and Statutes, or any of them,
in that place respectively, as according to the form of those Ordinances and
Statutes they were enjoined to do: And to make to appear before the aforesaid
Mayor, Bailiff, and Jurats respectively, all those who have threatened any
mischief to the Persons of any of the Subjects of Us, Our Heirs or Successors,
or to Fire their Houses; and make them bring sufficient security for their
peace and good behavior toward Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and toward the
Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors; and if they refuse to find out such
Security, then to cause them to be kept safe in Prison until they shall find
such Security: And moreover We Will, and for Us, Our Heirs and Succcessors, by
these Presents do grant and confirm to the aforesaid Mayors, Jurats, and
Commons; to the Bailiffs, Jurats, and Commons; and to the Bailiffs and Commons
of every of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid, and to
their Successors respectively, That any two or more of the aforesaid Mayors and
Jurats of any Port of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, and their Successors
respectively, within the Ports aforesaid, and the Liberties, Bounds, Limits,
and Precincts of the same, as also within any other Place or Places, Town or
Towns, appertaining or belonging to any Port aforesaid, or being a Member of
any Port aforesaid, in which Place or Places, Town or Towns, Mayor nor Bailiff
is chosen by the Commons of the said Place or Places, Town or Towns; (the Mayor
of which Places or his Deputy for the time being We Will always have to be but
one) and that any two or more of the aforesaid Mayors and Jurats of any of the
aforesaid Ancient Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and of any Member aforesaid of
the Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid where there shall be a Mayor, and
their Successors respectively; (the Mayor of which Places or his Deputy for the
time being We Will always have to be but one) and that any two or more of the
aforesaid Bailiffs and Jurats of any Member of the Ports aforesaid where such
Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the said Member, and their Successors
respectively; (the Bailiff of which Place or his Deputy for the time being, We
will always have to be but one) within the Ancient Towns and Members aforesaid,
and the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same severally and
respectively, for the future may and shall be for ever Justices to Us, Our
Heirs and Successors; and henceforward may for ever have full Power and
Authority to make enquiry, under the Oath of the honest and lawful Inhabitants
of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same
respectively by whom the truth of the matter may be the better known, Felony,
etc. to hear and determine.
after all and all manner of Felony, Murder, Manslaughter, Witchcrafts,
Art-magick, Trespasses, Forestallers, Regrators, Ingrossers, and Extortions
whatsoever, and of all and singular other Misdemeanors and Offenses concerning
which the Justices of the Peace to Us, Our Heirs or Successors lawfully may or
ought to make enquiry within the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and
Members of the same, or within any of them, or within any County of Our Kingdom
of England, by whomsoever or howsoever they have been done or committed within
any of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members and Places aforesaid, and the
Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same severally and
respectively, or which shall hereafter happen to be done or attempted in the
same Places respectively; As also after all those who within the Ancient Towns,
Members, and Places aforesaid of the Cinque Ports, or within the Liberties,
Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same respectively, have assembled together
against the Peace of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to the disturbance of the
Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or by force went or rode about Armed,
or for the future shall presume so to go or ride: And also after all those who
have lien in wait to maim or kill any of the Nation of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, or for the future shall presume to lie in wait; as also after all
Innkeepers, and all and singular those Persons who have offended or done any
thing against the form of the Ordinances and Statutes or any of them, which are
or shall be put forth for the common good of Our Kingdom of England, or the
Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by the abuse of Weights or Measures,
or in the selling of Victuals, or for the time to come shall presume so to
offend or attempt any such thing within the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns,
Members, or Places aforesaid, or within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and
Precincts of the same respectively; and also after all Constables whatsoever,
Petty-Constables, Keepers of Gaols, and other Officers and Ministers, who in
the Execution of their Offices have carried themselves unseemly concerning the
things aforementioned or any of them, or for the future shall presume to carry
themselves unseemly, or have been cold, remiss, or negligent in the Execution
of their Offices, or for the future shall be, within the Cinque Ports, Ancient
Towns, Members or Places aforesaid, or within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits,
and Precincts of the same respectively; and to make enquiry more fully about
the truth of all and singular the Articles, Circumstances, and other things
whatsoever by whomsoever, and by what mean soever the things aforementioned or
any thing that concerns them are done or committed, or which for the future
shall happen there respectively to be done or attempted within the
Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members or Places aforesaid, or within the
Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same respectively; and for the
looking after all Indictments whatsoever which have been or shall be so
presented before the aforesaid Mayors and Bailiffs or their Deputies, and the
Jurats and their Successors respectively, or which have been made or exhibited,
and not yet determined, before other of Our late Justices of the Peace, within
the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and the Members of the same, or any
of them respectively; and for the directing, making, and continuing Process
against all and singular of them so indicted, or against those who for the time
to come shall happen to be indicted before the aforesaid Mayor or his Deputy
and Jurats, the Bailiff or his Deputy and Jurats, or their Successors
respectively, or against those who shall render or give up themselves to their
own proper Officers; and to hear and determine all and singular the Felonies,
Murders, Manslaughters, Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Fortunetelling, Art-magick,
Trespasses, Forestallers, Regrators, Ingrossers, Extortions, Assemblings,
Indictments aforesaid, and all and singular the rest abovementioned, according
to the Laws and Statutes of Our Kingdom of England which are already set forth
or shall be set forth; and to correct and punish the said Delinquents and every
of them for their Offenses, by Fines, Ransoms, Amercements, Forfeitures, or any
other way as has been used, or ought, or hereafter shall be, to be done
according to the Law and Custom of Our Kingdom of England, or according to the
Form of the Ordinances and Statutes aforesaid already set forth or hereafter to
be set forth; and to do, execute and perform all other things, within the
aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same, and the
Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same respectively as fully,
freely, and perfectly, and in as ample manner and form, as the Justices of the
Peace of Us, Our Heirs and Successors in the Counties of Kent, Sussex, and
Essex, or in any of them, or in any other County within Our Kingdom of England,
have heretofore done, performed, and executed, or may or shall hereafter have
power to do, perform, or execute by virtue of any Commission, Act of
Parliament, Statute, Law, or Custom, or by other legal way whatsoever, and in
as ample manner and form, as if all those things had been exactly and by
special words contained, declared, repeated, and expressed in these Our Letters
Patents: And that any two or more of the aforesaid Mayors and Jurats of any
Port of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, and their Successors respectively, within
the Ports aforesaid, and within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits and Precincts of
the same, as also within any other Place or Places, Town or Towns whatsoever
appertaining or belonging to any Port aforesaid, or being a Member of any Port
aforesaid, in which Place or Places, Town or Towns the Mayor or Bailiff is not
chosen by the Commons of the said Place or Places, Town or Towns, (the Mayor of
which Places and his Deputy for the time being, We Will always have to be but
one) and that any two or more of the aforesaid Mayors and Jurats, and their
Successors respectively, of either of the Ancient Towns of Rye and Winchelsea
aforesaid, and of any Member of the aforesaid Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns
aforesaid where there is a Mayor; (the Mayor of which Places or his Deputy for
the time being, We Will always have to be but one) and any two or more of the
aforesaid Bailiffs and Jurats of any Member of the Ports aforesaid where such
Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the same Member, and their Successors
respectively, (the Bailiff of which Place or his Deputy for the time being, We
Will always have to be but one) from time to time for ever for the future may
and shall be the Justices of Us, Justices to deliver Gaols.
Our Heirs and Successors to deliver Gaols from the Prisons lying and being in
the same, within the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members, and other Places
aforesaid, and within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same
respectively, from time to time acccording to the Laws and Custom of this Our
Kingdom of England: And by these Presents we create, appoint, make, ordain, and
confirm any two or more of the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurats, and their
Successors respectively, (the Mayor and Bailiff of which Places or their
Deputy, We Will always have to be but one) the Justices of Us, Our Heirs and
Successors to deliver Gaols from the Prisons being in the same, within the
aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members, and Places aforesaid, and
within the Bounds, Limits, Liberties, and Precincts of the same respectively
from time to time according to the Custom of this Kingdom of England; and to
do, execute, and perform all other things whatsoever, from time to time, within
the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members, and Places aforesaid, and
within the Bounds, Limits, Liberties, and Precincts of the same respectively,
as fully, freely, and completely, and in as ample manner and form, In as ample
manner and form as other Justices.
as the Justices of Us, Our Heirs and Successors in the aforesaid Counties of
Kent, Sussex, and Essex, and any one of them, or in any other County within the
Kingdom of England have heretofore done, performed, or executed to the
delivering Gaols, by virtue of any Commission, Act of Parliament, Statute, Law,
or Custom, or any other legal way whatsoever, or for the future may or shall
have the Power to do, perform, and execute; and in as ample manner and form as
if all those things had been exactly and by special words contained, declared,
repeated, and expressed in these Our Letters Patents: And that no other
Justices of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, that are appointed or are to be
appointed for the Peace of Us, Our Heirs, or Successors, within the aforesaid
Counties of Kent, Sussex, and Essex, or any of them; Nor any Justice of Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, appointed or to be appointed to enquire after, hear, and
determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors, or to deliver
Gaols, within the aforesaid Counties of Kent, Sussex, and Essex, or any of
them; Nor any Sheriff, Undersheriff, Coroner, Escheator, nor any other
Officers belonging to Us, No other Justices may be suffered to enter in, etc.
Our Heirs or Successors, within the aforesaid Counties of Kent, Sussex, and
Essex, or any one of them for the future enter or come in any wise to do, act,
or perform any thing or things within the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient
Towns, Members or Places aforesaid, or within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, or
Precincts of the same; Nor may any of them have or exercise any Authority or
Jurisdiction concerning any causes, things, or matters whatsoever, any way
appertaining, belonging, or lying upon, or which for the future shall happen to
appertain, belong, or lie upon the Justices of Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
appointed or to be appointed to keep the Peace, or to enquire after, hear, and
determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors, or to deliver
Gaols, within the said Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, Members, and Places
aforesaid, or within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same,
or any of them, at what time or upon what cause soever those things shall
chance or happen to be: And that every Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of every of
the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid where there is a Mayor,
and their Successors respectively; and every Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and
Bailiff and Commons of every of the Members of the Ports aforesaid, where such
Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the Members aforesaid, and their Successors
respectively, All Fines, Issues, etc.
may and shall have and receive to their own proper use and advantage
respectively, all and all manner of Fines, Issues, Ransoms, Amercements,
Forfeitures and Profits whatsoever, which shall from time to time for ever for
the future be seized, forfeited, adjudged, come, happen, or fall out before the
abovenamed Justices of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, that are to keep the
Peace, and also those that are to enquire after, hear, and determine diverse
Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors, or those that deliver Gaols
belonging to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, within the said Cinque Ports, Ancient
Towns, Members and Places aforesaid, or before any one of those whosoever
respectively; and that they may levy and receive all those things by their own
proper and several Officers, for their own proper use respectively, without any
deduction from thence to be made to the Exchequer of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors; and without the impediment of Us, Without any deduction from thence
to Our Exchequer, etc. And without impediment.
Our Heirs or Successors, or Our Ministers whosoever: Notwithstanding We Will,
and Our intent is, and by these Presents We grant and confirm for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, to the aforesaid Mayors, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiffs, Jurats,
and Commons; and Bailiffs and Commons of every Port, Ancient Towns aforesaid,
and the Members aforesaid, and to their Successors respectively, That every
Mayor, Bailiff, and Jurat aforesaid, who now is, or hereafter shall be
respectively, before that he or they be admitted to the executing the Office of
a Justice of Peace within any of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns,
Members or Places aforesaid, or within the Liberties, Bounds, Limits, or
Precincts of the same respectively, by virtue of these Our Letters Patents, An
Oath to perform and execute the Office.
or of the aforesaid Letters Patents of Our said most Dear Grandfather James,
shall and may from time to time take such a Corporal Oath upon the Sacred
Gospel of God, faithfully to execute that Office in all things and through all
things according as he shall be Constituted and Ordained by the Laws and
Ordinances made for that purpose by the abovementioned Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and Bailiff and Commons of every of the
Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid, and their Successors respectively,
or the major part of them, without any other Warrant, Writ, or Commission to be
procured or obtained from Us, Our Heirs or Sucessors, viz. That every Mayor and
Bailiff aforesaid, who now is or hereafter shall be respectively, may and shall
from time to time take such an Oath as it is abovesaid, before the aforesaid
Jurats, or any two or more of them respectively, who now are or hereafter shall
be; and that every of the aforesaid Jurats who now is or hereafter shall be,
shall and may from time to time take that Oath as it is aforesaid, before the
aforesaid Mayors and Bailiffs who now are or hereafter shall be respectively,
without any other Warrant, Writ or Commission to be procured or obtained from
Us, Our Heirs or Successors; (to which

Mayors, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff and Commons
of every of the Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid, and to their
Successors respectively, We give and grant by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, full Power and Authority to ordain and make the said Laws and
Ordinances from time to time.) And moreover We Will, and by these Presents do
give, grant, and confirm for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to the same Mayor,
Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and Bailiff and Commons of
every of the Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members aforesaid, and to their
Successors respectively, That the aforesaid Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurats who
now are, or hereafter shall be respectively, shall for the future from time to
time for ever have full Power and Authority of Administering such an Oath, as is
aforesaid, to all and singular Persons who are, or hereafter shall be chosen
into the Office of a Mayor, Bailiff, or Jurat of the Cinque Ports, Ancient
Towns, or the Members aforesaid, or of any one or more of them respectively,
without any other or further Warrant, Writ or Commission to be had or procured
for that purpose from Us, Our Heirs or Successors: And further We Will, and by
these Presents do grant for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to the abovementioned
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and Bailiff and
Commons of every of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same,
and to their Successors respectively, That if it shall happen that any Mayor of
any Port, or of any Ancient Town, or of a Member of the Cinque Ports and
Ancient Towns aforesaid where there is a Mayor for the time being; Or that any
Bailiff of any Member of the Ports aforesaid, for the time being, should
hereafter be in such a manner troubled with Sickness, or any other infirmity
for some time or times, or by some other cause just and reasonable be so
detained or made unfit, that he or they cannot at present look to the Offices
of Mayor, and Bailiff, and the necessary businesses thereunto belonging; Or
that for any reasonable cause he should go out of the Ports, Ancient Towns, and
Members aforesaid; That then and so often, it may and shall be lawful for any
such Mayor and Bailiff of any of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and
Members of the same for the time being respectively, to make and appoint any
one Jurat of the said Port, Ancient Town, and Member aforesaid respectively
where the said Mayor or Bailiff for the time being was, to be the Deputy of the
said Mayor or Bailiff being, as is aforesaid, troubled with Sickness or any
infirmity, or upon some reasonable account, absent, detained, or made unfit, A
Deputy to be made for a Mayor or Bayl ff.
as it is abovesaid; Which Deputy put in the Office of the Mayor, or Bailiff
aforesaid, so made and appointed, may and shall be the Deputy of the said Mayor
or Bailiff respectively from time to time, as often as the aforesaid Mayor or
Bailiff respectively shall happen to be so troubled with Sickness or any
infirmity, or upon any other reasonable account be detained or made unfit, or
be absent as is aforesaid; and may continue Deputy all the time the aforesaid
Mayor or Bailiff shall continue in the Office of Mayor or Bailiff respectively,
unless in the mean time the aforesaid Mayor or Bailiff shall make or appoint
another Jurat of the said Port, Ancient Town, or Member aforesaid respectively,
his Deputy: And that every such Deputy of the aforesaid Mayor or Bailiff so
made and appointed as is aforementioned, may by virtue of these Our Letters
Patents do and execute all and singular of those things which do or may belong
to the Office of a Mayor or Bailiff respectively, which are to be done and
executed from time to time as often as the aforesaid Mayor or Bailiff
respectively shall so happen to be troubled with Sickness or any infirmity, or
be detained, made unfit, or be absent; during such time as the aforesaid Deputy
of the said Mayor or Bailiff shall be and continue, as fully, freely, and
entirely, and may in as ample manner and form do and execute them as if the
Mayor or Bailiff aforesaid were present, (a Corporal Oath upon the Sacred
Gospel of God for the good and faithful performance of all and singular the
things which belong to the Office of a Deputy of the Mayor or Bailiff
aforesaid, being first taken by such a Deputy, before one or more of the other
Jurats aforesaid of the Port, Ancient Town, or Member aforesaid respectively)
and as often as such a chance shall so happen: And moreover We Will, and by
these Presents do grant and confirm for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to the
same Mayor, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and Bailiff and
Commons of every Port, Ancient Town, and Member aforesaid, and to their
Successors respectively, That every such one or more of the Jurats may from
time to time for the future have full power and authority of giving and
administering such Corporal Oath upon the Sacred Gospel of God, as is abovesaid,
to every Deputy of a Mayor or Bailiff in such a case as is aforementioned to be
appointed, without any further Writ, Commission or further Warrant to be
procured or obtained upon that account from Us, Our Heirs or Successors: And
further, That the Barons of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, and Ancient Towns of
Rye and Winchelsea aforesaid, and of the Members of the same Ports and Ancient
Towns, may the more commodiously perform the Service of their Ships aforesaid
to Us, Our Heirs and Successors at fit times; As also for the better rule,
government, and preservation of the aforesaid Cinque Ports, and the aforesaid
Ancient Towns, and Members o^ every of the same Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns,
We do grant and confirm to the same Barons of the Cinque Ports and Ancient
Towns aforesaid, and of the Members of the same Ports and Towns, and to their
Succcessors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Hasting, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of New-Romney, and their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Dover, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Port of Sandwich, and their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Rye, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town
of Winchelsea, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town and Privileged Monastery of Pevensey, and their
Successors; and to the aforesa^d Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Seaford, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Bailiff, Jurats, and
Commons of the Town of Lydd, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor,
Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Folkstone, and their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Feversham, and their
Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of
Fordwich, and their Successors; and to the aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons
of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden, and their Successors, for the maintaining
and preserving the Service of their Navy aforesaid to be performed to Us, Our
Heirs or Successors; or for the defending and maintaining the Liberty of
Franchises, Customs, Privileges, and Burdens of every Port and Ancient Town
aforesaid, and of every Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid
respectively; as also for the maintaining all Necessaries and Offices
whatsoever of every Port and Ancient Town, and of every Member of the Ports and
Ancient Towns aforesaid, or any of them respectively, according to the
abovementioned limitation; That every Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of every Port
of the aforesaid Cinque Ports respectively, may in and upon themselves and all
other Inhabitants and Resiants whatsoever, within every such Port, the Bounds,
Limits, and Precincts of the same Port, and within any other Place or Places,
Town or Towns whatsoever belonging to any Port aforesaid, or being a Member of
any such Port, and not having within themselves a Mayor or Bailiff chosen by
the Commons of the same Place or Places, as is abovesaid; and upon all and
singular Land-rents and Inheritances whatsoever, within any of those Ports, the
Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same, and within any other Place or
Places, Town or Towns belonging to any of the Ports aforesaid, or being a
Member of any Port not having a Mayor or Bailiff elected respectively, as is
abovementioned: And upon all and singular the Goods, Chattels, and Merchandises
of all and singular the Inhabitants and Resiants, whether Possessors or Tenants
of any such Lands or Inheritances whatsoever within any such Port, the
Liberties, Limits, and Precincts of the same, and within any other Place or
Places, Town or Towns belonging to any Port aforesaid, or being a Member of any
such Port not having within themselves a Mayor or Bailiff elected respectively,
as is aforementioned; and every Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of any of the
Ancient Towns aforesaid, and of any Member of the Ports and Ancient Towns
aforesaid where there is a Mayor respectively, may in and upon themselves, and
upon any others of the Inhabitants and Resiants within any such Ancient Town,
the Liberties, Limits, and Precincts of the same, and within any such Member,
the Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same Member respectively; and upon all
and singular Land-rents and Inheritances whatsoever, within any such Ancient
Town and any such Member, and the Bounds, Limits, and Precincts belonging to
the same respectively; as also upon all and singular the Goods, Chattels, and
Merchandises of all and singular the Inhabitants or Resiants, whether
Possessors or Tenants of any such Lands or Inheritances whatsoever, within
every such Ancient Town, and every such Member, and the Bounds, Limits, and
Precincts belonging to any one of them; and every Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons;
and Bailiff, and Commons of every Member of the Ports aforesaid where such
Bailiff is chosen by the Commons of the said Member respectively, may in and
upon themselves and any other Inhabitants and Resiants whatsoever, within every
such Member, Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same; and in and upon all and
singular the Land-rents, and Inheritances whatsoever, within every such Member,
and the Bounds, Limits, and Precincts belonging to every such Member
respectively; as also they may in and upon all and singular the Goods,
Chattels, and Merchandises of all and singular the Inhabitants, whether
Possessors or Tenants of any such Lands or Inheritances whatsoever within every
such Member, and the Bounds, Limits, and Precincts of the same respectively,
set, assess, and lay from time to time as often as it shall seem necessary to
them, the Reasonable and Ratable Taxes of Scot, Shot and Lot, Tallage, and the
Reasonable Taxes commonly called Common Fines, Common Fines.
Imposts, and Sums of Money to be paid within certain times or time to that
purpose by them respectively limited and appointed; and by the same to be taken
and levied upon the Inhabitants and Resiants aforesaid, or upon their Goods,
Chattels, and Merchandises, Land-rents, Tenements, and Inheritances aforesaid
respectively, by the distraint and sale of the same, By the sale.
or the imprisonment of the Bodies of the Persons aforesaid and every of them,
upon whom such Taxes of Scot, Lot, Shot, As by the imprisonment of their Bodies.
Tallage, Taxes called Common Fines, Imposts, and Sums of Money, as is
abovementioned, may or shall be put, laid, or assessed; Or which otherwise may
be prosecuted by an Action or Actions of Debt in any Court of Record of the
aforesaid Cinque Ports or Ancient Towns aforesaid, or Members of the same
against any such Person or Persons respectively; Or may be recovered and
obtained by any other legal proceeding whatsoever, as it shall seem best to
them; and may be had, held, and enjoyed without any impediment of Us, Our Heirs
or Successors Justices, or of any other the Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or
Successors whatsoever; and all and singular the Premises aforesaid by these
Presents above granted or confirmed, or mentioned to be hereafter granted and
confirmed to the aforesaid Barons of the Cinque Ports and Ancient Towns and
Members of the same Ports and Towns, and to their Successors; and to the
aforesaid Mayor, Jurats, and Commons; Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and Bailiff
and Commons of the same Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same,
and to their Successors respectively for ever; For the payment and performance
of so many, so great, the same and such like Feofarms, Services, Rents, Sums of
Tribute-pence, and demands whatsoever to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as many,
as great, such, and which as are or heretofore were due, accustomed, and
payable to Us or Our Predecessors: Wherefore We Will, and by these Presents
firmly enjoining, do Command for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, That the
aforesaid Barons of the Cinque Ports, and Ancient Towns, and Members of the
same, and their Successors, and every of them and their Successors; As also
that the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Hasting aforesaid,
and their Successors; as also the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of New-Romney aforesaid, and their Successors; as also the Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town and Port of Heeth aforesaid, and their Successors; as
also the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Port of Dover aforesaid,
and their Successors; and also the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Port of Sandwich aforesaid, and their Successors; and also the Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Ancient Town of Rye, and their Successors; and also the
Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ancient Town of Winchelsea, and their
Successors; and also the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and
Privileged Monastery of Pevensey aforesaid, and their Successors; and also the
Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Seaford aforesaid, and their
Successors; as also the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Lydd
aforesaid, and their Successors; and also the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the
Town of Folkstone aforesaid, and their Successors; and also the Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons of the Town of Feversham aforesaid, and their Successors; and also
the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town of Fordwich aforesaid, and their
Successors; and also the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Town and Hundred of
Tenterden aforesaid, and their Successors, and every of them and their
Successors respectively have, hold, use, and enjoy, and may for ever have,
hold, use, and enjoy all and singular the Liberties, Authorities,
Jurisdictions, Eranchises, Acquitances, Lands, Tents, Fairs, Marts, Markets,
freedom from Toll and Tribute, Custom, and Privileges aforesaid according to
the Form and Tenor of these Our Letters Patents, and other Grants made to them,
without any Action or impediment of Us, Without the impediment.
Our Heirs or Successors, Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, or other Bailiffs or
Ministers of Us, Our Heirs and Successors whatsoever: Nor Will We that they or
their Successors or any of them by reason of their Liberties or Immunities
aforesaid, We will not.
be prosecuted, molested, vexed, or grieved, accused, or be in any thing
troubled by any Action of Us, or Our Heirs, Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, or
other Bailiffs or Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors whosoever: We will
and by these Presents Command and Charge as well Our Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Barons of Our Exchequer at Westminster, and the other Justices of Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, as Our Attorney and Solicitor General for the time being,
Attorney and Solicitor to the King.
and every of them, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whosoever, That
neither they nor any of them shall prosecute or continue, or cause or make to
be prosecuted or continued any Writ or Summons of Quo Warranto, Quo Warranto.
or any other Writ or Writs, or Process whatsoever in Our Name, against them or
any of them for any Reasons, Accounts, Matters, Claims, or Offenses aforesaid,
or against any one or more of them respectively for any such things which were
due, claimed, attempted, used, had, or usurped in the time of the late
Rebellion, and Revolting from the King, or at any other time before the making
of these Presents: We will.
We Willing also that they or their Successors or any of them be in no wise
hindered or molested, or be compelled to answer for any such thing or things, by
any of the Justices, Officers, or Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, in
or for any due, use, claim, or abuse of any of the Liberties, Franchises, or
Jurisdictions aforesaid in the time of the Rebellion and Revolting aforesaid,
or at any other time before the day of the making of these Our Letters Patents:
Provided always, and Our Royal intent is, That these Our Letters Patents, or
any thing therein contained be not in any wise prejudicial to the Warden or
Keeper for the time being of the Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of
the same, as to any Jurisdictions, Authorities, Liberties, or Privileges
within the aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same,
hitherto lawfully used and exercised by the said Wardens or Keepers of the
Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same: Provided also, That these
Letters Patents, or any thing or things contained or mentioned in the same may
in no wise extend or be extended to the confirming, strengthening,
establishing, approving, or ratifying certain Letters Patents, or any thing or
things in the same contained or mentioned, made by the Lord Henry the Sixth,
late King of England, under his great Seat of England bearing Date the Twenty
eighth day of November, in the Five and twentieth year of his Reign, unto the
Mayor of the Town of Feversham, and to the Barons and Commons of the same Town,
and their Successors; Or heretofore made or granted, or mentioned to be granted
under the Name of any other Incorporation whatsoever; Nor to the confirming,
strengthening, establishing, approving, or ratifying any Liberties, Franchises,
Immunities, Privileges, Exemptions, Grants, thing or things whatsoever given,
granted, confirmed, contained, specified or mentioned in the same
Letters Patent of the said late King Henry the Sixth; Nor to the confirming
any other Letters Patents whatsoever concerning the confirmation, strengthening,
or approving of the aforesaid Letters Patents of the said late King Henry the
Sixth, or of any thing or things contained or mentioned in the same Letters
Patents of the said late Henry the Sixth, any thing in those Patents to the
contrariwise notwithstanding: And We further Will, We will further.
and by these Presents do Ordain, and strictly enjoining, do Command for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, That all every Mayor, Bailiff, Jurat, Recorder,
Coroner, Common Clerk, Constable, and all other Officers and Ministers of the
aforesaid Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same, or any of them
respectively, and their Deputies; as also that all Justices of Peace to Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, within the same Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, or Members
of the same, or any one or more of them, by the virtue and according to the
Tenor of these our Letters Patents, or of any other Letters Patents, or
Charters heretofore made, who are now appointed, or hereafter are to be
nominated, chosen, or appointed, before they be admitted to the performance or
exercise of the Office or Offices of the Place or Places to which they have
been respectively so nominated, appointed, elected, or ordained, or shall
hereafter be nominated, elected, or ordained, or before that they or any of
them respectively in any wise enter upon such Place, they and every of them
shall take as well the Corporal Oath commonly called, The Oath of Obedience, as
the Corporal Oath commonly called, The Oath of Supremacy, upon the Sacred
Gospels of God, before such Person or Persons, as and which are at present, or
shall be for the future appointed and designed to give and tender such like
Oaths by the Law and Statute of this Our Kingdom of England: And We further
Will, and by these Presents do Ordain and Declare for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, That when any election for the future shall be made of any Person
or Persons whosoever into the Office of a Recorder, or into the Office of a
Town Clerk to any of the Ports, Towns, Members, or Places aforesaid, otherwise
than of such and suchlike Person and Persons who are now chosen and preferred
in suchlike Office or Offices, and do now serve in the same or either of them
respectively, if so be that We, Our Heirs or Successors by any Writing or
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of Us, Our Heirs or Successors shall declare or
signify to the Barons of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, or to the Mayor, Jurats,
and Commons; or to the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; or to the Bailiff and
Commons of the Ports and Ancient Towns aforesaid, and their Members, or to any
other Officers and Members of those Ports and Towns, and the Members of the
same respectively, to which such Election or Elections respectively do belong
to be made; Our or Our Heirs and Successors disallowing of such Person or
Persons respectively so elected to serve in such like Office or Offices to
which, as is aforesaid, he or they were elected respectively, That then and so
often both by and after such declaration and signification made in the form
aforesaid, the Election or Elections of such Person or Persons so disallowed as
is abovesaid, shall be void and of none effect: And that from that time it may
and shall be lawful for the Barons of the Cinque Ports aforesaid, and the
Members of the same; or for the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons of the Ports and
Ancient Towns aforesaid, and of the Members of the same; or for the Bailiff,
Jurats, and Commons; or for the Bailiff and Commons of those Ports and Towns,
and the Members of the same, or any one or more of them respectively, to whom
such Election or Elections respectively belong to be made, to choose, nominate,
and Swear any other honest and discreet Person or Persons, fit for the
executing the Office or Offices aforesaid unto which he or they shall be
respectively nominated and elected into the Place or Places of such Person or
Persons, so, as is aforesaid, elected and afterward disallowed; according to
the Tenor of these Presents, and other Letters Patents and Grants of any of Our
Predecessors made for that purpose: And thus as often as such a Case shall
happen, (any thing contained in these Presents, or any other reason, cause, or
matter whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.) And that expess
mention is not made in these Presents of the true yearly value, or of the
certainty of the Premises or of any of them, or of other Gifts or Grants
heretofore made by Us, or by any of our Progenitors or Predecessors to the
aforesaid Barons of the Cinque Ports, and to the Mayor, Jurats, and Commons; to
the Bailiff, Jurats, and Commons; and to the Bailiff and Jurats of the same
Cinque Ports, Ancient Towns, and Members of the same, and to their Successors;
Or any Act, Ordinance, Proviso, Proclamation, or Restraint to the contrary
heretofore had, made, published, ordained, or provided, or any other reason,
cause, or matter whatsoever in any thing notwithstanding. In Witness whereof,
We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster the Three and twentieth day of December, in
the Twentieth Year of the Reign of Us Charles the Second, etc.

By a Writ of the Privy Seal. Pigott.

The Doquet.
SIR,
THIs contains Your Majesty's Grant and Confirmation unto the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and to the Towns and Members of the same, of their Ancient
Charters, Liberties, and Privileges, and of some Particulars formerly granted,
and hereby renewed in regard of some small Defects therein; and with power to
make Deputies, and recover the things granted by Actions of Debt: Also a
Provision for all Officers to take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy, and a
Reservation of Power to Your Majesty to put out any Recorder, o^ Town Clerk
hereafter to be chosen, (other than those now in place) or any signification of
Your Majesty's Dislike, under Your Sig^ Manual; and with such other Clauses ^
are usual in Grants of like nature.

By Sign Manual.
An Explication by way of Alphabet of all the hard and obsolete Words that are
to be found in the foregoing Charter.
A.
AChatum Reachatum are used for a Contract or Bargain by way of Buying and
Rebuying, Selling and Re-selling.

Aponsagium, Bridgtoll, vid, Pontagium.

Ambiderter, is he, that when a Matter is in Suit betwixt any, takes Money of
one side and of the other to plead for the Suit or such like, or if he be a
Jury-Man, to say his verdict.

Attaint, is a Writ, and lies where false Verdict is given by Twelve Men, and
Judgment given thereon, then the Party against whom they have passed, shall
have a Writ against the Twelve Men, and when they be at Issue, it shall be
Tried by Twenty four Jury Men, and if the false Verdict be found, the Twelve
Men be Attaint, and then the Judgment shall be, That their Meadows shall be
eyred, their Houses broken down, their Woods turned up, and all their Lands and
Tenements forfeited to the King: but if it pass against him that brought that
Attaint, he shall be imprisoned, and grievously Ransomed at the Kings Will.

Assise, is taken for a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the recovery of things
immovable, whereof your self, or your Ancestor has been Disseised.

Assise, of Novel Disseisin, lies where a Tenant in Fee-Simple, Fee-Tail, or
for Term of Life, is lately Disseised of his Lands or Tenements, or else of a
Rent-Service, Rent-Seck, or Rentcharge, of Common of Pasture, of an Office, of
Toll, Tronage, Passage, Pawnage, or for a Nuisance levied, and diverse other
such like.

Assise of Mort d' Ancester, lies where my Father, Mother, Brother, Sister,
Uncle, Aunt, etc. died seized of Lands, Tenements, Rents, etc. that he had in
Fee-Simple, and after his Death a Stranger abateth: and it is as good, as well
against the Abator, as any other in Possession.

Assise of Redisseisin, is where a Man is Disseised, and recovereth by Assise
of Novel Disseisin, and afterward is again Disseised by the same Disseisor, he
shall have against him a Writ of Disseisin directed to the Sheriff to make
Inquisition, and if the Redisseisin be found, he shall be sent to Prison.

B.
Brevis, (Brief) signifies most properly in our Law, the Process that issues
out of the Chancery or other Courts, Commanding the Sheriff to Summon or Attach
A. to answer B. But more largely it is taken for any Precept of the King in
Writing under Seal, issuing out of any Court, whereby he Commands any thing to
be done, for the furtherance of Justice, and good Order. In English, a Writ.

C.
Champartie, or Bribe, signifies in the Common Law, a maintenance of any Man
in his Suit depending, upon condition to have part of the thing (be it Lands or
Goods) when it is recovered.

Champertours, be they, that move Pleas or Suits, or cause to be moved, either
by their own procurement, or by other; and pursue at their proper Costs, for to
have part of the Land in variance, or part of the Gains.

Common Fines, are a certain Sum of Money, which the Resiants of a Court Leet
pay to the Lord of the Leet, toward his Charge of Purchasing the Leet.

D.
Den. and Strond, the former whereof signifies an hollow place to put things
in; the latter, the Seashore.

Doquet, or Docket, is a little piece of Paper or Parchment written, that
contains in it the effect of a greater Writing.

E.
Escheat, is where a Tenant in Fee-Simple does Felony, for the which he is
Hanged or Abjured the Realm, or be Outlawed for Felony, Murder, or
Petty-Treason; or if the Tenant dye without Heirs general or special, then the
Lord of whom the Tenant held the Land may enter by way of Escheat, or if any
other enter, the Lord shall have against him a Writ, called a Writ of Escheat.

Escheator, is an Officer who observes such Escheats which belong to the King,
and Certifieth them into the Eschequer.

Estray, is where any Beast or Cattle are in a Lordship, and none knows the
Owner thereof, then it shall be seized to the use of the King, or of the Lord
that has such Estray by the Kings Grant, or by Prescription: and if the Owner
come and make Claim thereto within a year and a day, then he shall have it
again, or else after the year the Propriety thereof shall be to the Lord, so
that the Lord make Proclamation thereof according to the Law.

Escape, is where one that is Arrested comes to his Liberty, before he be
delivered by award of Justice, or by order of Law.

Exigent, is a Writ that lies where the Defendant in Action Personal cannot be
found, nor any thing within the County whereby to be Attached or Distreined,
and is directed to the Sheriff to make Proclamation at five Counties one after
another, that he appear, or else that he shall be Outlawed.

F.
Forestall, is to be quit of Amercements and Cattels Arrested within your Land,
and the Amercements thereof coming.

Forestaller, is he that Buyeth Corn, Cattle, or other Merchandise, whatsoever
is Saleable by the way as it comes to Markets, Fairs, or such like Places to
be Sold, to the intent that he may Sell the same again at a more high and dear
Price, in Prejudice and Hurt of the Common Wealth and People.

G.
Gild, has diverse significations, as sometimes a Tribute, other times an
Amercement, thirdly a Fraternity or Company combined together by Orders and
Laws made amongst themselves by the Kings License, fourthly it is used for a
Prestation within the Forest to be made for gathering of Sheaves of Corn, of
Lamb, and of Wool to the use of the Foresters.

H.
Hidage, is to be quit, if the King shall Tax all the Land by Hides; now an
Hide is a whole Plough-Land.

Hostellar, is an Innkeeper.

I.
Infangtheff, is, that Thieves taken within your Demesne or Fee Convicted of
Theft, shall be Judged in your Court.

Ingrosser, is one that Buyeth Corn, Grain, Butter, Cheese, Fish, or other dead
Victuals, with an intent to sell the same again at a higher and deerer Price.
Regrator is the same.

K.
Kiage, is a Toll required for Keys and Wharfs by the Water side; or rather the
Custom paid for Wharfage, or loading aid unloading Goods.

L.
Lastage, is a Custom challenged in Fairs and Markets for carrying of things
where a Man will. Lastage-Free, is to be exempt from that Custom.

Lastis Hundred, is a bigger sort of Hundred containing about three ordinary
ones; Sandwich in Kent is so called.

Lot and Scot, signify a Customary Contribution laid upon all Subjects
according to their ability.

Lovecopefree, this Word is not to be explained, or else it is false Printed
for Lot and Copefree: now Copefree is to be quit from Poll-Money; Or else it
signifies to be quit from that which Diggers of Mines pay to the Lord for
breaking up his Ground.

M.
Marriage, signifies not only the coupling together of Man and Wife, but also
the bestowing a Ward or a Widow in Marriage.

Manutenentiae, Maintenance, in our Common Law is used in the evil part, for
him, that secondeth a Cause depending in Suit between others, either by lending
of Money, or making Friends for either Party, toward his help; then the injured
Party may have against him a Writ of Maintenance.

Misericordia, is used in the Common Law for an Amercement or Mulct set upon
any for Offense; so that if a Man be outragiously Amerced in a Court that is
not of Record, as in a Court Baron, etc. there is a Writ called a Moderata
Misericordia to be directed to the Lord or his Baily, Commanding them that they
take moderate Amercements according to the quantity of the fault.

Murage, is a Toll levied for the Building or Repairing of Public Walls; it
seems also to be a Liberty granted by the King to a Town, for the gathering
of Money toward Walling of the same.

N.
Novel Disseisin. See before, Assise of Novel Disseisin.

O.
Outfangtheff, alias Ufangtheff, is, that Thieves or Felons of your Land or
Fee, out of your Land or Fee, taken with Felony or Stealing, shall be brought
back to your Court and there judged.

P.
Passage, signifies the Hire that a Man pays, for being transported Over-Sea.

Pannage, or Pawnage, is that Money which the Agistors of Forests do gather for
the feeding of Hogs within the Forest; and it is also taken for all manner of
Mast-Trees within the Forest, on which the Hogs do feed.

Pontage, is either the Contribution which is gathered, or the Toll which is
paid by Passengers for the Repair of Bridges; it is called also Brigbote.

Peisage, is Weight and Measure: from Peisa, signifies Weight.

Piccage, is the Money paid for the breaking of the Ground to set up Booths and
Standings in Fairs.

Q.
Quietancia, alias Acquietancia, is a Release or Discharge from any Debt
formerly due.

Quo Warranto, is a Writ which lies against him that Usurps any Franchise from
the King, then the King shall have this Writ to make him come before his
Justices, and show what Warrant or Title he has to demand such Franchise: Or
else it signifies a Writ against him that intrudeth himself as Heir into Land.

R.
Riverage, is that which is paid for being carried over a River.

Right Prisage of Wines, is a Custom whereby the King challenges out of every
Bark laden with Wine, containing less than forty Tun, two Tun of Wine at his
own Price.

Regrator; See, Ingrosser.

Redisseisin; See, Assise of Redisseisin.

Recordate, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to remove a Cause out of an
inferior Court, into the King's Bench, or Common Pleas.

S.
Soc, is a liberty or power to seek after Thieves or Stolen Goods, within a
Manor, and to do justice upon the Inquisition: It is also taken for the
Company of Tenants which live within such a Liberty, and are exempted from
those common Services of the Prince and Country whereunto Subjects are
ordinarily tied.

Sac, is a Royalty or Privilege touching Plea and Correction of Trespasses
within a Manor, and to have the Amercements of ones Tenants in ones own Court.

Stallage, is a certain Custom exacted for the Street taken or assigned in
Fairs and Markets.

Scot, See, Lot.

Shot, is Tax-Money.

Scutage, Escuage, or a kind of Knights-Service, called Service of the Shield,
whereby a Tenant who holds by Knight Service, is bound to follow his Lord into
the Scottish or Welsh Wars, at his own charge.

Strip, or Estrepement, is a Writ for taking Lands from him that strips and
spoils them: Or properly, the unmeasurable soaking or drawing of the heart of
the Land by Plowing or Sowing it continually, without Manuring, or other such
useage as is requisite in good Husbandry.

T.
Tallage, is used for the share of a Man's Substance paid by way of Tribute.

Theolonium Tolnetum, Toll or Custom paid to the King.

Thol, is the liberty of Buying and Selling in ones own Ground.

Them, is the Privilege of having the Generations of your Villains, with their
Suits and Cattle, wheresoever they shall be found in England.

Terrage, is a freeing from Land-Taxes.

Tumbrel, is a Cucking-Stool, a Punishment for Scolds.

V.
View of Frankpledge, is a Writ to exempt one from the View of Frankpledge, who
is not Resident within the Hundred: Frankpledge is a Custom whereby Neighbors
were commonly bound one for another, to be Sureties for each others Truth to
the King and his Subjects.

Vtlagat, is an Outlawed Person.

Vetit-Mamium, a Writ of Withernam, which is directed to the Sheriff for the
taking as many of the Man's Goods who did Distrein unlawfully from another, as
the value of the Distreined Goods comes to: And if the Goods or Beasts be in a
Fortlet or Castle, the Sheriff may take with him the Power of the County, and
beat down the Castle.

W.
Wast, is when a Tenant lets the House fall, or pulls it down, or cuts down any
thing with damage to the Land that he possesses: It is also a Punishment or
Forfeiture belonging to Petit-Treason or Felony.

Wret, is where a Ship is perished on the Sea, and no Man escapes alive out of
the same, and the Ship or part of the Ship so perished, or the Goods of the
Ship come to the Land of any Lord, the Lord shall have that as a Wreck of the
Sea. But if a Man, or a Dog, or a Cat, escape alive, so that the Party to whom
the Goods belong, come within a year and a day, and prove the Goods to be his,
he shall have them again.

Witfree, is a Discharge from all Defaults and Amercements.

Waviat, is when Goods are seized by Waif, which is the Goods of a Thief,
whether stolen or not, which upon urgent necessity, as haste, or such like, he
has left any where behind him, then the Kings Officer, or the Bailiff to the
Lord within whose Jurisdiction they were left, who by Prescription or Grant
from the King has the Franchise of Waif, may seize the Goods so Waived to to
the Lords use, who may keep them as his own, unless the Owner come and lay
claim to them, within a year and a day.

FINIS.

