THE GREAT EVIL OF Health-Drinking: OR A Discourse, wherein the Original, Evil,
and Mischief of drinking of Healths, are discovered and detected; and the
Practice opposed.

With several Remedies and Antidotes against it, in order to prevent the sad
Consequences thereof.

Prove. 20.1. Wine is a Mocker, strong Drink is raging: and whosoever is
deceived thereby, is not wise. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the
Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXIV.

A serious Address TO Governors and Governed.
I Shall more certainly come near the Mark I aim at, by flying low in a
Supplication, than high in a Dedication; of which I know more than one most
Worthy, if the Building were not too little for a stately Front, and too mean
to bear an Inscription in Great Letters, and whose Worth might cover my
Presumption in appearing in the World. I am perfectly of the mind of a late
worthy Person, who cared not whether it were known there was such a person in
the World, if he might but do good while he was in it. I study neither for
temporal Rewards, nor Praise, but for the Good of those I cannot speak, nor
write to. And that I may the easier obtain, what I earnestly desire of you, I
will first humbly supplicate, what no Man can with any reason deny, and then
what they should grant.

1. I beseech you labor to maintain and promote the Purity of Society, which
every Man is bound to do, next to the Purtiy of his own Soul and Body. Here we
make choice of them, with whom we are to live for ever. The Comfort and
Blessedness of Society in this Life, as in the way to Blessedness in Heaven,
does consist in inoffensive, useful, and as much as possibly we can attain to,
untainted, innocent, and holy Conversation. Is not Society much broken and
stained by these Cups which are a Vehicle of Excess and Corruption?

2. I beseech you consider, that Mankind has nothing since the Fall, but what
comes through the Hands of Christ. And God made Adam and Eve Coats of Skins,
and clothed them, but it was after the Promise of Christ was made, Genesis 3.21.
And what comes to us by his means, that was not purchased by his Blood? and
what was purchased by his Blood, was not intended to be abused and thrown away
by the Receivers, or taken to their hurt.

3. Can it be thought that our blessed Lord did fast, and suffer Hunger, endure
Temptation, sweat drops of Blood, complain, I thirst? Did Water and Blood run
out of his Sides, to obtain for us a wanton Liberty, to deceive our selves, and
ensnare others? to tempt, overthrow, infatuate? to make sport with the Gifts of
his Bounty, ordained for his Glory, and our cheerful serving of so good a
Master?

4. Did he who made a Plenty out of great Compassion to a fainting Multitude,
command that nothing be lost, but that the very Crumbs and Fragments should be
gathered, yet allow such a Waste as is made by Healthing? Or can we think, that
he who taught us to pray for daily Bread, can approve of such an Institution as
this is, an Invention to make the abuse of Plenty the more specious? Is not
Healthing a very Vanity, and the Superfluity of Vanity? what is there in it to
commend it to Observation? It is now coming up apace to be placed among Duties,
and it is exacted from them that have no Inclination to it, they are called
upon to do it, as with an Hoc age. But the nearer it approaches toward the
Altar of Duties, the more Care should be to thrust it down, or turn it out of
doors, to its Profane and Pagan Company. Is it not to be admired, that so empty
a Ceremony should be coming up to be a stated and solemn Service?

5. Consider, I pray you, if we know the use of Time, which is our All to
prepare for an approaching Eternity, and the use of Plenty, the Benefit and
Comfort of Society, what the right Enjoyment of Friends is, and what our very
Bodies are ordained for; we would not throw away not a piece of a Day upon such
an Exercise as drinking Healths; no, not a moment in such a Service. I can no
better compare these Cups, than to Watering-Pots that water the Garden of
Vices, which come up so fast and thick.

6. Suppose we had a Sovereignty over our Servants the Creatures, and might do
what we pleased with them, we might use them, or throw them away; yet certainly
we must give an account of our selves to God before his Judgment Seat, and of
our Actions, whether good or evil. Can any Man reduce Healthing, drinking under
that Notion and Formality, to the order of good Actions, by which God is
glorified, our selves and others bettered? I am sure, we must in our eating and
drinking, as by a Divine Law, in a positive way glorify God.

7. I beseech you, consider, are not the Threatenings of God so full and big,
that they are ready to break down upon us in sore Judgments and Visitations?
And our Sins are as legible in the late Threatening Providence, as was the Sin
of the old World, or the Sin of Sodom. Whose Flesh has not smarted with that
greatest, strongest freezing, that any Man can remember? True, by the Goodness
of God, there is plenty of Corn in the Land; but what became of our Drink, was
it not quite out in many, near out in most good Houses? what became of our
Bread? Have we not seen a hoar Frost, and Rhyme upon the outside of it, and an
Ice within? What became of our Wind and Water Mills? those Grinders ceased in
many places. I am not ignorant what may be said to all this. But can any Man
tell what our Corn in the Ground may come to? what our Flocks and Herds may
come to? or what may become of these Bodies of ours? of the Health we yet
enjoy? And that this should befall us at that time, wherein our blessed Savior
is more forgotten than remembered, and dishonored by inexcusable Riot and
Excess, is not to be neglected. Surely drinking is grown to a height and great
Excess, and Healthing helps it on, and is an Invention that has the force of an
Engine to carry it up, as a Provocation, nearer Heaven. Surely God calls to a
Repentance, to a ceasing from this Sin; and I am as sure, that if Drinking
fall, Healthing will fall with it, and as long as Healthing is maintained,
Drinking will keep its course. Upon these Considerations, I do most humbly and
earnestly address my Supplications:

1. To the Men of Honor and Power, to them that put on Scarlet by their
Office, and fare deliciously every day; and to them that for the Grandeur of
their Office, have the Government of great Corporations upon their Shoulders;
that they would refrain from, or restrain the luxuriant Growth of Immorality,
which is fed by the waste of Drink. If you would drain the Chanel, stop this
Humor of Healthing, which is one of the liveliest Springs of it. Some of old
have well said, that Majesty was begotten in Wedlock between Reverence and
Honor. It is not good for Honor to be alone, when you sit in the State of
your Office. Let not Reverence be forced to quit the Room, while Healths are
drunk to your Honor. Reverence takes it ill to be affronted by that Boldness.
Some Countries forbad drinking Wine to Magistrates. But Nehemiah, who lived in
great Honor, and kept a noble House, had plentiful Supplies of all sorts of
Wine. Neh. 5. It is lawful for you to keep great Houses, open Tables, and to
drink Wines; but if you would have God to think upon you for Good, make that
great Man your Example; and in this also a greater than he, Ahasuerus, at whose
Feasts none did compel. Esth. 1.8. And this being written before time in the
Holy Scripture, is written for our Learning: And whether drinking Healths be
not a moral Compulsion, tho not violent, is humbly submitted, and also
attested, by Gasper Sanctius upon that place: Cum Principium aut Amicorum salus
interponitur, nemo poterit non obtemperare. -- [ A Lapide to the same sense.
Aug. Sermon. de Temp. hereafter quoted.] I do not by this tax or accuse, for I am
a Stranger to the great and sun ptuous Tables that are kept; but I do humbly
beseech them, that think it a necessary part of the Grandeur of our Metropolis,
to consider how many Companies, and Meetings of Vestry-men and others, they
become Examples and Authorities to, and how impossible it is to restrain this
Extravagance (this is a very diminutive Word) in the City Youth, which are so
commonly poisoned by these Draughts, as long as they have the Warrant of such
Examples. These have been the parting Cups to many from all Modesty and Virtue,
and it is notoriously known, to the great Sorrow of many Friends, where Young
Men began their Journey to a far Country, where they are yet lost, and not
found. Luke 15.

2. I desire Parents, [and who will hear me, if they will not, in what I desire
of them, for the sake of God and all that is dear to them, and their
Posterity?] that they both by early Instruction, strict Injunction, and
exemplary Practice, restrain their Children from the Entrance into this kind of
Learning. It was a wise Apothegm of Reverend Mr. Dod, (whom Learned Capel
called John the Divine, and the worthy Dr. Harris said, spoke better Apothegms
than Plutarch, etc.) If Fathers would but study to be as good themselves, as
they would have their Children be, the World would be better. I know some that
are very observing and wise, that do much complain of the danger of sending
their Sons abroad for Education, and into Callings. Drinking prepares for
Debauchery; and they, like young Swimmers, dabble first about the Banks, but
grow modish, and then confident, by Healths, and keep so long to that Element,
till they grow stark giddy, are drowned, or take Surfeits, and are hardly, if
ever recovered. Healthing is to be abhorred for this Effect of it, that it
makes young Men confident; and their seeing it the current Practice, Genteel,
Modish, their being abroad a while to see Fashions more than to follow Studies,
gives Reputation and Encouragement to their Confidence: And then turn or stop
them if you can! If you would have your Sons keep from Debauchery, and running
into Ruin before your Eyes, keep them from dabling.

St. Augustine, the he preached twice before the same day, caused to be
assembled not only Old Men, but Women and Children to his Church in Hippo, that
they might fear as long as they lived, because of what had happened that day.
Cyril, an eminent Citizen of Hippo, had an only Son, eum superfiue diligebat,
and supra Deum; he loved him superfluously, and more than God, and they both
are fallen into the Ditch. The Father being drunk with superfluous Love,
forbore to correct him, and indulged him to do what he pleased. How came they
both to fall into the Ditch? but because the Father was blind, and fond, and
naught, and neglected his own, and Children's Salvation. And now, behold your
Cyril had a Son, as you know, whom he neglected to correct, and he did
luxuriously consume part of his Father's Goods, and now he was overcome with
Drunkenness, (oppressit nequiter) he wickedly abused his own Mother, forward
with Child; he would have violated his Sister; he has killed his Father, and
wounded his two Sisters to death. -- O dolorosa Ebrietas! etc. O most grievous
Drunkenness! the Mother of all Evils, the Sister of all Luxury, the Father of
all Pride. O Drunk^nness, thou do blind the Mind, have lost all Judgment,
have no Wisdom or Counsel; thou art a flattering Devil, sweet Poison. O
Drunkenness! let Men learn to know thee, to avoid thee; And again, to avoid
thee, to run from thee, as from Death: for he that covets thee, shall not
obtain the Kingdom of Heaven. It is not enough for all the Faithful to abstain
from it themselves, but they that abstain, to teach others to abstain from it,
etc. Ad Fratr, etc. s. 33. com. 10. May you not as well teach them the Modes of
Swearing, as the Arts of Drinking? may you not as safely put them to nurse to
Volupia, as initiate them in the Rites of Bachus? As you would keep them chaste,
be sure you keep them sober; or else if they do not kill you, they will break
your Hearts, and kill Joy and Hopes at your very Hearts.

3. I earnestly entreat Governors, Tutors and Masters in every Faculty: If
Youths had no rational So uls, they would have no need of your Skill, and they
would be of no use to you; you have therefore the Care of Souls; your Charge is
great, and your Work difficult. Some must be broken from ill Customs learned
before they came to you; and some must be preserved from Infection, that come
untainted to you. Rules of Art are not more necessary than Regulation of Life^,
you know the Power of Example. If there be any spark of Light, if any Divine
Authority in what is presented to you; Let none that are under your Care have
cause to say, they had your Example for this playing upon the slippery Brink of
the Whirlepool of that drowning Sin of Drunkenness. I say again, Healthing
gives young Men confidence to drink; and how can you take them down, if you set
up the mode? I have more than once, with some sadness, read the Oration of the
Learned Sixtinus Arnama, when Rector of the University of Frankere, See the
last Edit. of his Antibai barous Bible.
where he gives a lamentable account of the German Universities, and
particularly of that; and among other things, said this, Multos generosae
indolis and magnae spei Adolescentes, quos Parents and Praeceptores integros
vitae a se dimiserant, and indulgens haec matter acceperat, intra paucos dies,
per initiales istas Potationes, quibus in ipso introitu Bacho, id est, Diabolo
initiabantur, corruptos vidimus, and postea misere periisse audivimus. I do not
say, he means Healths by those Initiales Potationes, those entering Drinkings,
by which they were baptized to Bachus, that is, the Devil. But is not the Form
of Healthing now in use, the Form of Admission into such Fraternities? Allow
but Liberty in this, as in a harmless thing, and if ever you can restrain them
from turning round and giddy in the course of Sin, or cure them of that
Epidemical Vice, you may be more famous than the famous Stroker, and be even a
Thaumaturgus.

4. I humbly beseech the Reverend and Exemplary Clergy, who are the Standards
of this Age, to continue, as I hope they will, in a wise and religious
Abstinence, and, if I may use the Word without Offense, Nonconformity to the
exorbitant Humor of Healthing, as famous Mr. Bolton called it, when it was
nothing so much in fashion as now it is. By this you preserve the Dignity of
your Calling, as much as by any thing in your common Conversation, even in the
Opinion of those great Men, that seem pleased for the time, with them that
minister in these Offices. By this, as by other Decencies of your Calling, you
maintain an Authority of being heard, when you advise, admonish; rectify
without a silencing Repulse of, Physician, heal thy self; or, Pull out the Beam
out of thine own Eye. It was counted no better than a Scandal in former times,
and there is no reason why it should be accounted profitable in this Age, much
less commendable. The Reverend Writer of the Life of the most Fatherly Bishop
Lake, sets out his noble and charitable Hospitality, when Bishop of Bath and
Wells, that his constant Family commonly consisted of at least fifty Persons:
Now in this Rankness of Housekeeping, I know it is a Disease that commonly
falls upon great Families, that they grow disorderly and riotous -- which fault
lest any Man should suspect to be in his House, I cannot but remember another
Virtue of his, 1 Timothy 3.4. For notwithstanding his large Allowance of all
things fit for the Entertainment of Strangers, you should see no Footsteps of
Riot or Excess in his House: No tippling or carousing of Healths, etc. Virtues
and Vices do not change Places and Natures, with Times and Humors. How
unsuitable is it, for the same Hands that administer the Cup of Blessing, with
a solemn Prayer for the Soul and Body of the Receiver, to hand about these
Sacramenia, as St. Ambrose calls them, with Head uncovered, Bows and Reverence,
and implied Prayers, which avail not, but oftentimes do actually Harm to both
Soul and Body.

5. I apply my self with an importunate Request to them that are in the Flower
of their Age, that are the Nursery of the Church and Commonwealth, the young
Gentleman, and Youth of all Professions, that they would seriously look into
this little Manual, as into a Glass, that is intended to inform, and not to
decoive. You are coming into the World to act your Part; you carry with you the
Hoarts and Hopes of Parents; the World will be good or bad as you prove, when
your Fathers are gone before, either hastened to their Grave with Sorrow by you,
or comforting themselves in seeing you tread in the right Path before they dye.
Juventas was of old a Goddess; she is now known to be what she is, but still
the wicked One does court her, and would fain be great with her, and if he can
get her Heart, what shall she not have? even half his Kingdom. But be not
deceived, lest you be destroyed, first depraved, and then lost. He will cheat
you till your Fyes are out, and then abuse you, yea, make you grind in his
Mill. You walk upon a Sea of Glass, and dazzling Vanities and Shows, Pageants
and Pleasures, and false Images of things hang out to deceive and divert you
from the scope of your Life, and main Business. You have need of a strong
Guard, a well-resolved Heart seasoned with Grace, and a steady Head. Satan
conveys his Poison in Wines and pleasing Liquors, and they are handed to you by
your Friends, that are unhappily drawn in; and their Virtue is to intoxicate,
and to deprive you of the excellent Faculty of discerning between Good and
Evil, of the Capacity of doing good, (for that is lost while the Fit is upon
you) and all your Power united for doing Evil. You may see in a little time
that there is nothing so childish and unmanly, nothing so bold and daring,
whether they be in Oaths and Blasphemies against God, or hazarding of Life;
nothing so obscene and filthy, nothing so base and false; in a word, nothing so
sinful and abominable, but is done and practiced by the giddy and debauched
Person, who is inspired with Wine, elevated into a Madness, and unmanned in a
Puppet, acted as the infernal Spirit hangs him upon his Wyres, and blows him
with the Wind of his Temptations. He plays foul upon you, and makes the World
believe it is Health you drink for, but do not you see what it proves? It is
Health by an Antiphrasis. You may desire to see Countries and Fashions, but of
all Lands take heed of Crapulia, and of all Company avoid the Carnalists, and
of all the Fashions, the Fashions of them that wear the Garments spotted with
the Flesh. If once you like to be a Carnalist, you may quickly become Atheist,
Papist, Heathen, any thing. I do heartily pray for you, and shall do while I
live, that you may be holy and harmless, the Children of a Heavenly Father.

To Conclude, I beseech every one that reads this little Book, would receive
every Beam of Light that shines upon it, as from the Father of Lights, and
kindly and gently breath upon every Spark of Divinity and Reason, to keep it
in, and make it burn, to dry the unwholesom Moisture of evil Habits and
Manners, and to warm and foment the fainting languid Spirits of Grace and
Goodness.

ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 24. r. to the Sin forbidden. P. 41. l. 22 r. Amos 6.6 P. 44. l.
2. r. provocandi. P. 49. l. 21. r. Romanorum. P. 52. l. 1. r. Plautus f.
Paulus. and l. 26. r. a, and l. 27. r. and. P. 55. l. 8. r. Annam, and l. 26.
r. Perenna. P. 68. 2. r. Drink, or Ordeal f. Order, which in the Saxon
signifies Judgment, of which Sir Hen. Spelman's. Gloss at large. P. 92. l. 10.
r. as often as any of them will drink to him again. P. 96. l. 16. r. even f. ever.

THE Introduction.
IF Health-drinking can be proved to be of a bad Original, as it is found to be
of a pernicious Tendency, it can never become a wholesome Practice, though it
could be reduced to its prime Original; if we could cut off the Custom from its
old Root of Heathenism and Barbarity, and graft it upon better Reasons. We
plainly see in daily and dear experience, the Fruit to be deadly to very many,
and good for none; many are the worse, and none the better for it. Were it a
Physical Potion for Health, none would drink it, but such as value Health: but
as very a Vanity as it is, being dissolved in a pleasing Liquor it is
commended, and it is taken by Quarts and Pottles, by them that love the Liquor,
better than the Health of Body and Soul. Health is the Inscription and Title
upon the Glass; but they that taste it, find themselves no better by it; and
they that largely drink, are constantly the worse. What tho? Can I think that
Men will leave it, or thank me for their Information? Can it be expected, that
Men will do by this, as by other things, if they be good for nothing, and if
they do more hurt than good, throw them away? Or rather, is it not to be
feared, that they who are as dry and open as a Sponge, to swallow down the
Modes of Sin and Vanity, will be tenacious, and as hard as a Flint to retain
them? As long as I see the Sacred Oracles disbelived, the Holy Commandments
disobeyed, known Sins committed, and known Duties negleced, and Things contrary
to the Law of Grace and Nature commonly practiced; no Man can expect, much less
can I, that what is offered to the World with the best Affection and Intention,
shall be kindly entertained of all, or received by them that stand in most need
of Instruction and Correction. Physicians write of Diseases and Remedies, not
expecting that every Man that is diseased will apply the Remedies, and wax
better by them. Here are some Antidotes for the Infected, and Preservatives for
them that with much difficulty escape the Taint of an ill Conversation; if but
some of either will but kindly take what is humbly proposed, it will be a great
Reward.

If I thought Healthing to be inoffensive and harmless, I had rather a thousand
times, that the common Conversation should be blameless, than that I should
blame it. And as I know it is hard rightly to reprove, so I know that the best
prepared Reproofs are hard of digestion. And Men that are fond, if not proud,
of a Virtue, that fits them for a general Conversation, are most difficultly
gained to assent to any Limitations, and Restraint of the common Liberty, that
is taken by some, if not most of every degree and quality. Dear Lovers of
Pleasures swell too big to be brought under the strict Discipline of a good
Conversation; and the growing Naughtiness of the profusely Vicious is such,
that they take not themselves to be come to Age, until they get from under the
Pedagogy of Divines, and deride Seriousness, as much as Seriousness does lament
their haste and labor to undo themselves. Some may demand some express divine
Prohibition of drinking Healths, as if then they would not transgress it. But
this Demand implies a refusal to yield to any thing that can be said, and to be
ruled by any thing but what cannot be produced. But when such as they will
conscienciously obey what is plainly written in the Scriptures, they will not
whet their Wits, to cut asunder rational Connections and Consequences from
Divine Precepts, to open a broad Path for their Lusts, and disorderly Walking.

I am not so fond of my own Apprehensions and Reasons, as to look for wonderful
Effects from them; nor so dull, as not to foresee what work some Men may make
of what I write: Although I am sure, my Antidotes and Remedies are incomparably
better than the moral Disease of Healthing, although it had never killed its
Thousands. I shall not marvel, if this Discourse be tossed up and down in sport,
or kicked up and down in Anger and Disdain: but I will still marvel, why Men
called Christians, will make void God's Laws, and cast them behind their Backs.
I will still marvel, why Men, endued with so noble and divine a Faculty as
Reason is, and that Reason so finely set in many, with a sparkling Wit, that
both shines and cuts, should practice that, for which no good Reason was ever
produced or offered. And I will not only wonder, but I will lament, that Men
capable of immortal Glory and Honor, do so debase themselves, as to lay their
Honor in Wet and Dirt, to turn their Throats into a Sink, and their Bellies
into a Common-Shore Are not Men fallen out with their Maker, that deface his
Image in themselves and others by Intemperance? and are not satisfied with that
Defacement, but proceed to destroy it, by cutting off their own and others
Lives?

The Bodies of Men are small Vessels, richly laden with a great Treasure, an
immortal Soul, and many rich Gifts and Talents; they are put out in a Sea of
Mercies, and favored with a prosperous Wind, and commanded to keep a straight
Course to the Heavenly Canaan. But, to our great grief and amazement, we see
some, and hear of others very often, split, and sunk into the bottomless Deep
of Eternity, and several disabled, and lie by to be carin'd. The Account of
these unvaluable Losses is this in short: The Owners and Possessors of these
Vessels would not learn the spiritual Art of this Navigation; and whereas
others that safely arrive, do carefully observe the Card and Compass, obey
Commands, take the Wind and Season, prepare for Storms and Encounters, watch
and pray; these Extravagants observe no Card, keep no Compass, neglect the
Wind, cast off their Commander, drink down their Pilot into a deep and dead
Sleep, make frequent Visits and Invitations, treat and drink high and often.
The Plague of Sin and Vice did spread among them, they grew diseased; some
loved their Friends to death; and others quarrelled, fought, and killed their
Companions. When we see and hear such Miscarriages as these, such doleful
Tidings and Reports of Destruction upon Destruction, shall we not advise, warn,
and importune those who have yet escaped the Wreck, and those who have not yet
put out to Sea, to take heed that they perish not by the same means? Who is so
inhumane, as not to be moved with, and grieve for the Corruption of Society,
and the Destruction of Men? But which is the truest kindness, to study to
prevent the Death of more, or to lament the doleful End of a vain Life of too
many? The Loss to the Living, who lost their share of Comfort and Happiness, in
the casting away of these mad Adventurers, is not comparable to their own; and
none can compute the Loss, but they that suffer it, and feel it in Eternity. It
is unspeakable Folly, not to know the worth of that Treasure they carry in
them, until it is lost in the bottom of another World; and that Men will not
believe whither they are going, till they are gone for ever.

The River is full of such miscarrying Vessels, and Healthing is the River's
Mouth; at this they first set out, who never return to God, nor a sound Mind,
nor the Path of Life. I have ever observed, the greatest Safety to be in
keeping furthest off from it, either by keeping Company, or taking leave upon
firm Land. It has proved dangerous to go with Company as far as the River's
Mouth; for when they are once got in, and gone one Mile in the way of
Compliance, they have been towed on by the Ropes of Civility and Complement, or
urged, and indeed compelled by Importunity to go with them twain, or a great
way further than they should have done. And what if some know their own
Strength? that they can swim with the Stream of this Custom, and keep their
Head above the danger of a Plunge? Yet with what quietness and ease of Spirit
can they look upon their dear Friends and Companions, reeling, sickning,
falling, dying round about them! Who can deny Healthing to be the beginning and
entrance into innumerable Evils, the beginning of many Woes and Sorrows, too
big to be concealed, and too gross to be excused? The Humor spreads more and
more, and breaks out as the Disease, an evil Disease to the Morals of this Age;
and the Humor is catching, because it pretends to some Breeding and Civility;
and it is the more taking among the Vulgar, because it comes from the
University, and Inns of Court, from the Cities, and great Men's Houses. And
although some, who are of a harder Temperament of Virtue, do not lie by it, nor
keep Chamber, nor walk upon Crutches for it; yet we know, the far greater
Number of Healthers had preserved much Purity in their Converse, Sobriety in
their Minds, Innocence in their Hands, Health in their Bodies, and their Breath
in their Nostrils, had they not drunk down these Potions.

What St. Augustine wrote of Apuleius, De Civitat Dei, l. 8. c. 14.
that the Title of his Book was, De Deo Socratis, but in his Book and
Disputation it self he calls him Demon; may be said by experience of this. As
the God of Socrates, in the Title of the Book, proved to be a Demon in the
Book it self: so it is your Health in the Preface and Introduction of drinking;
but it proves Sickness, Debauchery, Blows, Wounds, Death; O that I could stop
here, and not say, Damnation too, in the course and progress of it!

Is not a Health now become a Signal of a Battle, in which many lose their
precious Lives basely and inhumanely; others their Senses, their Clothes, their
Modesty; and they who escape with their Lives, lose themselves for the time? Is
not this the Belt, that makes the Union of many in Sin and Wickedness too great
and straight? And is not this the Sword, that makes the Rupture and Disunion
almost inourable? Is not this sometimes the Symbol, and the Colors, the
Colors of a Party? and sometimes the Defiance, and the Challenge? Is it not
upon this, as upon a profane Sacrament, that Men in effect vow and swear a
Confederacy, or an Enmity? Is it not unsafe running into this Dilemma? If you
drink, you are gone; if you refuse, you are in danger of being sped. I am sure
this Cup is not the Cup of Blessing, it is not the Cup of the Lord. It puts many
a Soul out of all preparation for death; but now who dares come within the
Lists, but he that is near End, one way or other, be he never so unprepared for
it? The old Form, which became a Proverb, Aut bibe, aut abi, Do as we do, or be
gone, was safe and civil, in comparison with the Forms of our young Masters,
who swear you shall drink, or swear they will run you through, they will see
through you, they will pin you to the Wall, or fasten you to the Ground. These
can sacrifice to your Health, and send you to Hell; damn themselves, and you
too. It is dangerous to drink, and it is deadly to refuse. O the Patience of
God, and the Provocations of this kind of Murderers! Do they not believe, that
if they are so bold with Death, Death will make much more bold with them? Is it
a Glory to them, that they have the ability to do so great a Mischief? Was it
to Alexander's Honor to kill Clytus, that had saved his Life, in a drunken
Frenzy? What! they would be Alexanders also! who by being drunk, lost the Glory
which he had gotten when he was sober, and merited the Title of Madman, as
well as Great, for his being a successful Murderer or Executioner. The still
and private Sot, that bibs by himself, that lives and dies almost every day;
that lives a Sot, and dies an Infidel; that presumes indeed there will be a
Resurrection out of his Sleep, but so lives, as if there would be no Judgment,
nor Resurrection from the Dead to it; even this quiet Bibber is a virtuous and
sober Man, compared with these growing Alexanders.

Surely it is high time to make some enquiry into this Disease which kills so
fast, and to make what discovery we can. And tho we cannot reform, let us not
by a stupid or timorous silence seem to allow, but rather reprove the Enormity,
discover the Sin and Danger which is not discerned, and justify the refusal of
drinking Healths. It is a Ceremony deeply stained and polluted with gross
Debauchery, and at best but an empty Formality, and in some it is a common and
crying Sin. And if Blood cry for Vengeance, and a sudden premature Destruction,
by drinking Men into Diseases and the Grave, be a secret Murder, it concerns
all that do, or do not believe a Judgment to come, to abstain from it, and all
that can, to reform and forbid it. And if but some one or few shall receive any
satisfaction and benefit by it, he that endeavors it shall never repent his
Pains, tho he may be sure to be paid off by some with contempt and derision.

And notwithstanding all manner of discouragements, I do, in observance of the
many awaking Calls of divine Providence, apply my self to this Subject;
wishing, for the Argument, and the patient Reader's sake, that my Reason were
but equal to my Antipathy against Healthing, which is daily increased by my
fervent Love to the World, and by a Sorrow for the many Sins and bitter Sorrows
which begin with this kind of Complement. And I have but one Request to the
Reader, that he will answer my Affection to him with its like; and then we
shall agree in Affection, tho my Reason stand not right in his Eye.

CHAP. I. Showing that Ceremonies and Rules of engaging to drink to excess, and
particularly this of Healthing, has been reproved by Ancient Fathers, and
Modern Divines. How the Question of drinking Healths has been stated and
determined.
. 1. I Do acknowledge, that I received my Information of the Judgment of the
Fathers, from holy and learned Mr. Rob. Bolton, in his Book called, Dinections
for comfortable walking with God. And since I have been Owner of the Books
themselves, I have examined the Quotations, and made some further use of them.
And by the way, I do seriously offer this to the Consideration of every
conscientious and teachable Reader:

1. Whether, seeing we ought to be holy in all manner of Conversation, for God
is holy, the nearer we come to a Strictness, and the further from Sensuality,
and pleasing our selves, to the offense and ensnaring of others, or to the
emboldning of such as abuse Matters of Liberty to a License, be not more
becoming a Christian, and holy Walking, than an arbitrary Latitude, which may
prove indulgent to the Flesh, which all must crucify that hope to be saved?

2. Whether we owe not a greater observance to the Rules of holy Walking,
supposing them framed according to the severity of a mortified Heart, and
perhaps judged by some as too precise and strict, than to such Persons as
please their own Palates, or look more to a Civil Complement, than a Divine
Commandment? Should I not rather follow the Directions of such a Noah, as
Reverend Mr. Bolton was, than the Modes of promiscuous Company, that cannot
pretend to follow any divine Rule in these Modes and Formalities? Yea, whether
I owe not a greater respect to the Judgment and Directions of such a Father as
Mr. Bolton was, than (suppose) to the freer Conversation of younger Divines,
who never felt the Agonies of Conscience he did, nor saw the Beauty of Holiness
which he saw? What tho he be dead, and they living? he in his Grave, and in
Heaven, and they at Table, and present? Why are such Directions read, but to be
remembered and practiced? And according to the old Rule, Finge Catonem, I have
often thought, when I have seen some take a liberty, what would Mr. Bolton say
to such things as these! Had I never had any stronger Reason for my Forbearance
than this, Mr. Bolton reproved it, my Heart would have smitten me for a
Compliance. Could I possibly reduce Healthing to any Commandment, or any
Petition in the Lord's Prayer, I think I should not scruple it; but that is past
my Skill and Reach. But I think a Man may, without much stretching, reduce the
Occasions of Sin to that Sin, or those Commandments which forbid the Sin.

. 2. The Fathers that declaimed and preached sharply against Drunkenness, and
Engagements to Excess, are St. Basil, Sermon against Drunkenness and Luxury,
into which the People ran at Easter, to his great Sorrow. St. Augustine, Sermon.
de Tem. 232. St. Ambrose, libro de Helia and Jejunio. I acknowledge, that most
of the vehement Passages in these Fathers, are against Excess of drinking, and
seeking Victory by drinking, and urging to drink, ad aequales calices, a like
quantity, in a like kind; and therefore come not home to this Question of
drinking Healths directly. For it is acknowledged, that some that drink Healths,
are Persons of that Civility, that they will not urge, neither to the same
quantity and number, nor in the same kind, but indulge some kind of Liberty.
But I conceive St. Ambrose speaks home to Healthing, to which I shall strictly
confine my self.

. 3. Augustine. Sermon. de Temp 231 Ebrietatis malum sit grave vitium, and Deo
odibile, ita per universum mundum d pluribus in consuetudinem missum est, ut ab
illis qui Dei praecepta cognoscere nolunt, jam nec putetut esse peccatum.
The great Sin of Drunkenness overslows most Nations; and it is so noisome a Sin
in it self, and pernicious in its Effects, that Men could not ordinarily
subject themselves to its Power, but by some taking and enchanting Preface. St.
Basil calls the Devil, (the great Master of idolatrous and profane
Ceremonies,) the Maker of the Laws of Drinking, in that pathetical Sermon. Men
could not be commonly cheated out of their Senses and Reason, but by a
Ceremonious Mist, some goodly Pretense. Several Nations have had their several
ways; Vid Epist Lipsii, Centur. Miscel. Ep. 10. La Horat Od. 27. and Lub ni
Comment Soythissare est inebriari. Cael. Rhod
and barbarous People first began, and others followed. The Form of Invitation
among us is a Health. Our blessed Savior, who paid a great Price for the Bread
we eat, and our smallest Beer, taught us to ask for our Comforts, as they that
pray to do the Will of God on Earth as it is in Heaven; and his Apostle taught
us, that every Creature is sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer. But
instead of Prayer, we have, Here Is a Health, the Form of profaning of Cups,
and they are accordingly blessed. Such Forms were unknown to the Primitive
Christians; but after that Christians waxed fat, and abused the Blessing of
Plenty, they heard of it in a solemn manner from their Teachers.

. 4. St. Basil describes the Preparation for the drinking Combat thus:

Very early they meditate and provide for their drinking; they adorn their
Rooms with Carpets and Hangings, they exercise or train up their Servants for
it: They show all care and diligence to provide Cups, and cooling Vessels,
Bowls and Plate, setting them out as in a Pomp and solemn Feast Day, that the
Variety and Fairness of the Vessels may beget an Appetite, and stir up
Admiration, and that by the commodiousness and change of Cups, they may drink
the longer. They appoint Overseers and Officers, the Governor of the Feast,
Yeoman of the Wine; and after all, there is but an Order in a disorderly and
confused Thing. And as the Greatness of Earthly Princes is augmented by their
Guards: so do they, by assigning Offices to Drunkenness, as to a certain Queen;
they endeavor to hide the Turpitude of it, by the means of these Officers. And
over and above, there are added Crowns, and Flowers, and Ointments, and a
Thousand sorts of Fumes and Smells, etc. Then the Drinking going on, they
contend to increase the Madness, and ambitiously strive for Drunkenness, as for
a Victory; of which Law they have the Devil for the Author, and Sin the Reward
of the Victory, etc. When they are thought to have drunk well, they fall to
drinking after the manner of Beasts, that stoop down to drink out of a running
Spring: For there stands forth a young Man, not drunk as yet, bearing upon his
Shoulder a Vessel of cooled Wine; standing in the midst, he distributes
Drunkenness to his Guests through crooked Pipes. This is a new way of measuring
to every Man an equal share, that there be no Envy, nor Grudging, nor Fraud,
nor Cheat in drinking. Every one takes the Pipe or Canal that is set before
him, and drinks at one draught as much as the Vessel contains, out of the
Silver Pipe.. 5. St. Ambrose relates the manner of drinking in the likeness of
a Battle.

You may see the Ranks of diverse Cups, which you may imagine to be a Battle set
in Array; Golden and Silver Vessels set out, you would think it a Show. In the
middle there is a Horn full of Wine, non epularis, sed praeliaris instrumentum
buccinae; not to serve as a Trumpet to call to a Feast, but to sound a Battle.
First, they flourish and picqueer with smaller Cups, as in a Skirmish. But this
is no Show or Appearance of Sobriety, but the Rule of Drinking. For as Actors
of Tragedies do sensibly and by degrees raise their Voice, until they have
opened the Passage for a lively Voice, that afterward they may make the place
ring with the greater Noise: So they do at first exercise themselves with
prelusory Cups, to provoke to a Thirst, lest perchance they quench it, and
being satiated, they may afterward drink no more. When they are warm, they
call for greater Cups: Then the Heat grows to a Flame. Dry Meat grows hot with
Thirst; and as the Vessels begin to be low, they are filled up with purer or
unmixed Drink. Cups contend with Meat, and betwixt whiles they are often
doubled. Then the Drinking being protracted, there are great strifes and
contendings who shall excel (exceed) in drinking. Nota gravis; It is a
disgrace or a disparagement to a Man, if he excuse himself, or if a Man think
it would do well to temper the Wine. And thus they do till they come to the
second Course or Service. But as soon as the Banquet is done, and you would
think they must rise, then do they again renew their Drink. And when they have
done all, then they say they do but begin. Then the Golden Pots are carried,
and the greater Goblets, as so many Instruments of War. And lest this be
thought immoderate and excessive, there is a measure made, and the strife is
before a Judge, and it is determined by a Law. The Agonothetes, or Master of
these Games and Revels there, is Fury, the Stipend is Debility, the Reward of
the Victory is Fault, the Event of the War is uncertain a great while. -- These
are the the only Strifes that are inexcusable. If a Man in War finds himself
too weak, he turns his Arms, and deserves a Pardon; but here, if any Man gives
up, or turns his Cup, he is urged to drink. If where you strive for Masteries,
any Man lift you up with his hand, you lose the Garland, but you are free from
suffering Injury thereby: In your Banquets, if a Man take off his hand from the
Wine, it is poured into his Mouth. All are drunk; the Conquerors and Conquered
do all lie down drunk, and very many asleep. Neither is it lawful to carry any
of them to their Grave, before he that feeds them, has seen Vengeance done
to them all, that he may revenge his Expense upon them. -- A most doleful
Spectacle to the Eyes of Christians, a most miserable Show! etc. Ambrose de
Helia and Jejunio, cap. 13. Quid obtestationes potantium loquar? quid memorem
sacramenta, quae violare nefas arbitrantur? Bibamus inquiunt, pro salute
Imperatorum. To what purpose shall I speak of those most earnest Entreaties?
wherefore should I remember those Sacraments (or Oaths) which it is unlawful to
violate? Let us drink for the Health of the Emperors. Idem, cap. 17, etc.

. 6. I will forbear to produce the Sayings of Augustine in this place,
referring him to some following Heads; nor will I be large in Quotations out of
modern Divines, who have reproved this exorbitant Humor of the Times, as
Reverend Mr. Bolton calls it. Read him if you please, Directions for walking
with God, p. 200. What says the most learned Mr. Thomas Gataker to it? Hear
him. Also to let pass the brutish and swinish Disposition of those that think
there is no true Welcome, nor good Fellowship, as they term it, unless there be
deep carousing of Healths to the Bride and Bridegroom, and every idle Fellows
Mistress, till the whole Companies Wits be drowned in Drink, that not Religion
only, but Reason it self be wholly exiled, and the Meeting it self be rather
called a drunken Match, than a Marriage Feast. This Vehemence is not usual in
that great Man, but it seems the Matter moved him. Epist before Mr. Bradshaw's
Sermon, called the Marriage Feast.

Read, if you would see and read, what is convincingly and persuasively written
by that attractive and divine Preacher, Dr. Robert Harris, in his Drunkards
Cup, Folio, page 307, etc. The Ingenious and Reverend Mr. Sam. Ward of Ipswich,
gives Examples of six or seven, that soon died after their drinking Healths, by
means thereof; and prescribes, as the best means against ruining Drunkenness,
if great Persons would first begin through Reformation in their own Families,
banish the Spirits of their Butteries, abandon that foolish and vicious Custom,
as St. Ambrose and Basil call it, of drinking Healths, and making that a
Sacrifice to God for the Health of others, which is rather a Sacrifice to the
Devil, and a Bane of their own. In his Sermon called, Woe to Drunkards, p. 537,
and 553 of the Collection of his Sermons. That excellent Expositor of the
Canticles and Revelations, Mr. James Durham of Glascow in Scotland, in his
Exposition of the Commandments, Com. 7. says, That drinking of Healths, and
pledging, is one of the highest Provocations in Drunkenness, and dreadful
perverting the End for which God has given Meat and I rink, p. 390.

That very judicious and zealous Divine, Mr. Rich. Garbut, (Author of that full
and excellent Demonstration of the Resurrection, much and very deservedly
commended) falls heavy upon the Sin of Drunkenness, and with a keen edg, in a
homely, but methinks majestic Northern Dialect, strikes at Healthing, to
strike the Cup out of his Hand, and the Sin out of his Heart. The Drunkard,
Devil-like, (O read and fear, fear and abhor, abhor with Repentance) is a
Sinner, who cannot be content to be wicked alone, but he must needs tempt
others to the same Wickedness also. Do not Healths, and whole ones, and putting
the Cup to the Nose, and down the Throat, or down the Neck, look for it? And
will you not do me right? etc. One come from the Dead, to awaken Drunkards and
Whoremongers. The substance of some. Sermons of his, p. 70, and alibi. I have
heard, that worthy Mr. John Geree has written a Tract on purpose against
Healthing.

. 7. These were the Thoughts of those eminently learned and holy Ministers of
this Mode. And certainly they were Men as like to know Good and Evil, as most
Men were in their days, or that now survive them. And when I see but one
Preacher or Writer, of their Piety and Learning, defend the Lawfulness or
Innocence of Healthing, I will increase my Wonder, but hardly abate my
Prejudice, or forsake my Reason. I know it is very common and fashionable among
the Clergy; but whether ever they found comfort in it, or durst commend and
approve of it, I leave to their consideration. Surely those Divines, that have
studied the Word of God, that preached most zealously to the salvation of
Souls; that were nearest Heaven in a holy Life, and most above the Preferments,
and Complaisance, as the way to them, were most to be attended to. It seems not
to be once scrupled by very many, or they would not be so officious and
forward. But to avoid the Censure of Singularity, and to show that there is
matter of Conscience in it, I will, in the next place, show how the Case has
been stated and determined.

CHAP. II. Showing how the Question of drinking Healths has been stated and
resolved, with some Animadversions upon it.
. 1. THe famous Philosopher and Divine, Mar. Trider. Wendelinus, Philosophiae
moralis lib. 1. cap. 16. propounds the Question thus:

Quaeritur an per sobrietatem liceat, in alterius salutem bibere? Whether it
consist not with Sobriety, to drink the Health (or to the Health) of another?

After he has showed it was the ancient Custom of the Greeks, Romans, Germans,
and Muscovites, he resolves the Question in the Affirmative, but with a
Limitation: It is lawful to drink to the Health of another; quatenus fieri id
nullo sobrietatis detrimento potest, as far as it may be done without the harm
or detriment of Sobriety; for we may testify our Joy of another Health by this
Sign, as well as by any other Sign. The sense of this Question, propounded in
this form, is no more but this, That one may drink to another Health, and be
sober. But as thus resolved, it gives no countenance to the common practice of
Healthers. And tho it may consist with Sobriety, if it consist not with another
Grace, or Virtue, or Duty, or with Prayer to God, which is implied in it, or it
signifies nothing, it may be unlawful.

But says he, Quod si vero propinantis intentio sit: But if it be the
Intention of him that drinks, to overwhelm others, with Cups to the Health of
others, and to thrust them down, and dethrone them from the state of a sound
Mind; and the Intention of the Pledger be to fulfill the desire of him that
drinks or begins to him, as it is in Germany and Muscovy, we embrace and hold
the Negative, for this manifest reason, because we are all bound to study
Sobriety. Luke 21.34. 1 Pet. 3.7. and 5.8. Cogitent hoc, says he, Aulae and
Aulici, etc. Let Princes Courts, and Courtiers think of this, who so drink the
Healths of others, that they hazard and impair their own.

It may well be doubted, whether they who lead and follow in this Maze of
Healthing, will thank this learned Man for determining in favor of them. Do
they not venture, without asking Questions for Consciencesake? and make a
common Trespass and Path, where the Author of our Salvation has raised a Wall,
with a Caveat, Take beed lest any of you be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, etc.? Here Is small Thanks to be paid to Wendeline for his
Resolution, except he had taken away the Restriction.

. 2. Our acute Schoolman, and concise Casuist, Dr. Ames, is round and quick in
dehorting from all the Rites and Sacraments of Bacchus: Abstinendum est igitur,
etc. Therefore we must abstain, (even from this ground, if there were no other)
from all those Rites by which Drunkenness is wont artificially to be promoted:
Of which kind are Adjurations of others, by great Names, i. e. Healths.
or the Names of such as are dear, to empty Cups; the sending about of Cups to
be taken off by all alike; the Abuse of Lots, (as they use in some Places by
Dice put into a Jug or cup, instead of a Rattle, or by a Mill affixed to a Jug
or Pot) according to a fictitious Law (not written) and laying a necessity upon
the Guests: And from all other the like Mysteries of Bacchus, and Manuductions
to Excess of Drinking. Case Consc. lib. 3. cap. 16.

. 3. The deep-sighted, searching, and skilful Guide of Souls, in all the paths
of a holy and righteous Conversation, Mr. R. B. in his voluminous Treasure of
practical Doctrines, the Christian Directory, puts the Case, and resolves it
thus:

Quest. Is it not lawful to drink a Health sometimes, when it would be ill
taken to refuse it, or to be uncovered while others drink it?

Answ. Distinguish between drinking measurably, as you need it, and
unmeasurably, when you need it not. 2. Between the foreseen Effects, and doing
it ordinarily, or when it would do hurt, or extraordinarily, when it will more
prevent hurt. And so I conclude;

1. It is unlawful to drink more than is good for your Health, by the
provocation of other Men.

2. It is unlawful to do that which tempts and encourages others to drink
too much. And so does the Custom of pledging Healths, especially when it is
taken for a Crime to deny it.

3.
The ordinary drinking and pledging of such Healths is unlawful, because it is
the scandalous hardening of others in their Sin, unto their Ruin.

4. But if we fall among such furious Beasts, as would stab a Man, if he would
not drink a Health, it is lawful to do it to save ones Life, as it is to give a
Thief my Purse, because it is not a thing simply evil in it self, to drink that
Cup, but by Accident, which a greater Accident may preponderate.

5. Therefore any other Accident, beside the losing of your Life, which will
really preponderate the hurtful Accident, may make it lawful: As possibly in
some Cases and Companies, the Offense given by denying it, may be such as will
do more hurt far than yielding would do; (as if a malignant Company would lay
ones Loyalty to the King upon it.)

6. Christian Prudence therefore (without carnal compliance) must be always the
present Decider of the Case, by comparing the good and evil Effects.

7. To be bare, when others lay the Honor of the King or Superiors upon it, is
a Ceremony, that on the aforesaid reason may be complied with.

8. When to avoid a greater Evil, we may extraordinarily be put to any such
Ceremony, it is meet that we join such Words, (where we have liberty) as may
prevent the Scandal, or hardening any Person in Sin.

9. And it is our Duty to avoid the Company that will put us upon such
Inconveniences, as far as our Calling will allow.

Christ. Direct. Tom. 1. cap. 8. fol. 388.. 4. Upon the Resolution of the Case
so stated, by this eminent Servant of Christ, I will be bold to make some
Observations.

I observe three Things in the Case.

1. Is it lawful sometimes to drink a Health? By this the common Practice is
shut out of the question, as an unlawful Custom, as he plainly speaks.

2. When it will be ill taken to refuse, and then when a Man cannot without
danger put it by; intimating, that a Man should do what he can to avoid it. And
if a Man must do what he can to avoid it, it is clearly a thing unlawful to
urge it, and worse to take the refusal ill. The Supposition in the Case is
this; That a sober Man may fall into such Company, that are so unreasonable and
uncivil, as to take it ill that any should refuse to do as they would have him.

3. The Ceremony of being uncovered when Healths are drunk, is another part of
the Case, and intimates, That a sober Man may well scruple to conform so far.

4. If it be unlawful to drink more than will do a Man good, by the invitation
or urgency of another; then it is manifestly unlawful to call upon, or urge a
Man to drink; and he that urges another, is not a fit Judge of the Harm, but he
that knows his own Necessity and Strength.

5. Drinking and pledging Healths, in a customary way, is to tempt and
encourage to Excess, and so it is a sinful and scandalous thing, hardening of Men
to their Ruin.

6. And here arises another Case: What if a Man fall among those furious
Beasts, that will stab a Man if he will not drink a Health? what is to be done
in such a case? It is not simply evil in it self to drink that Cup, says Mr.
B. but by Accident, which a greater Accident may preponderate. Where note, that
such Persons that stand upon those Terms, have put off Civility and Manhood,
and are to be avoided like furious Beasts. Yet here, I conceive, some Things
are to be thought of in such a case.

(1.) A Man, in case of danger to his Life, may drink that Cup, which they that
require it call a Health, tho not in the same Notion and Formality in which it
was urged and imposed.

(2.) But what if the Cup be unlawful in it self? What if a Protestant fall
into the Company of furious Papists? or if a sober Person fall into the Company
of raging Hectors? And he be required to drink to the coming in of Popery, or
to the Confusion and Damnation of all Whigs, or of such as are hated, by any
other Name? what shall a Man do in such a Case? Or what if I be required to
drink to the destruction of one, whom I am bound to love and honor? The Cup,
with such an Inscription or Title, is flatly unlawful. Or what if I be required
to drink to the Prosperity, Success, long Life of an Enemy to God, Religion,
and my Country? Such Cups, under those Titles, are to be abhorred, as sinful.
And many such have been drunk in our days, full of the Poison of deadly Hatred.
For ought I see, by these Resolutions of enquiring Men into the Rules of
Practice, the most innocent is dangerous and scandalous.

Here Is enough to direct sober Men, that desire to walk by a Rule; yet the
Question is capable of Enlargement, and I shall present what I have found out
upon enquiry.

CHAP. III. Some Things premised. In what Notion Healthing is taken. That
Healthing is ancient, is no Plea for it. Liberty of drinking more ancient. A
Sacrifice and Prayer, or honorary, memorative Sign, by Ambrose, Augustine,
Rosinus, etc. Its Rise. Its Tradition to us.
. 1. ANd here I must premise:

1. That it is suspicious, that the Ceremony of Healthing did spring from the
same Original that other Ceremonies of drinking did, and to the same End of
Intemperance, and fatal Corruption of true Friendship, and good Society. And if
this were doomed by common Consent to Oblivion, it would not be long before
another should be brought into its place, as long as Men are prone to that Sin
which is the disgrace of Mankind. But then, if there be any Reverence for our
Maker, any Honor to our excellent Nature, Men should stop every Door at which
Sin enters, by the Devil's Instruction, in a disguise, to bind us, and then
destroy us.

2. Rational Men should not require clearer or stronger Arguments against
Healthing, than the Subject will afford. It is not to be doubted, but if
Healthing were as expressly forbidden, as Murder or Fornication, but it would
be a dark and controverted Text to some, which is as clear as the Sun to
others, and it would be practiced for all the Prohibition.

3. Tho all the Conversation of Christians should be Christian, according to
the Laws of Christ, and of entire Charity and Benevolence, and therefore above
that which is merely Civil; yet it is lawful to converse with Men in the
generality of human Nature, upon good occasions, and for good ends. It is our
duty to communicate the good Things which Divine Bounty has bestowed upon us;
and it is our duty, to express our mutual Esteem and Affections by Words or
Deeds: and so it is lawful at our Tables, and other Meetings, to drink one to
another, as it is to help or carve, or to invite them to a liberty to partake
of what we have. And it may become us to remember our absent Friends, and that
when we meet as Confederates in the same Covenant of Grace, in the same
Religion, Name, Nature, and Cognation, etc.

4. The distaste is not only against this Ceremony, but any other, that does
tacitly or expressly lay any obligation upon any Man to drink for his carnal
pleasure or harm.

5. Mutual, sober, communicative Drinking, is an expression of a Friendship and
Confederacy; and therefore it is not unlawful for one to express that
Friendship and Love by Words or Signs. I may wish him any Grace or Mercy from
God. But when that which is intended, is the gratification of the Flesh, and
the Health is but a pretense for it, it cannot be excused nor defended.

6. There is a great difference between drinking a Health, and remembering of a
Friend in drinking, both in the intention of the thing, and common practice;
but if the remembrance of the absent be any kind of engagement to drink
unseasonably, or excessively, it is as bad as Healthing. But there is a great
difference between them: The one is profitable, and the other not; the one is a
Duty, the other not; for the one we have divine Precedents, for the other none.
When we call to mind our absent Friends, we make them as personally present as
we can; we include them in the same Affection with the present: We remember
their condition and circumstances of Life, and so according to their condition
we are affected, sometimes into Joy and Thanksgivings, sometimes into Pity and
Commiseration, sometimes into Sorrow and Sympathy. It was the Sin of them that
drank Wine in Bowls, that they forgot the Afflictions of Joseph. Amos 1. And it
was an effectual way to forget him. Remembrance of the Absent may move us to
weep and sigh, and to forbear our drinking, may afford matter of Discourse, and
to lay aside our Cups: But in Healthing, what is there more than drinking our
selves, and making others drink, and that to the present, as well or more than
the absent.

. 2. That which I am enquiring into, is drinking a Health or Healths,
abstracted from the Formalities of being uncovered, or kneeling, or any other
Accident or Effects, but in it self, as near as I can. It is the first Occasion
and Spring of much Vanity, Sin, and Evil; it sends out both the sweet of such
Kindness as it is, and the bitter of Unkindness; it is an implicit Prayer, if
not express, and a Curse. It is to the Happiness and Unhappiness, good Success
and bad, to a good Voyage, to a good Journey, to a next merry Meeting; and it
is to all that is bad and fearful. The swaggering Protestant drinks it to the
destruction of the Pope, and he is the never the further off for that; and the
fiery Papist, he drinks the Confusion of Heretics. It is a Dedication, and an
Execration, and sometimes a Memorial.

And I think it is a Sacrifice, or some kind of Sacrament, or a Prayer.

. 3 The most considerable Pretense or Apology for it, is taken from its
Antiquity and Universality, and will prove it as lawful, as the Romish Church
to be true. May not as much be said for the grossest of Vices? Sin was in the
World a long time before it; this came not in, but till after the Devil grew
genteel and complemental. It was an ancient Custom to drink in honor of great
Names, or to the Health of Friends; but to engage and challenge by it, to the
infringement of Liberty and Sobriety, was unknown to the most simple Ages, that
retained the shape of Humanity, and face of Virtue. This Fashion was not come
up in the days of Homer, as the Learned Dr. Duport observes upon that Verse of
Homer: (...).
At hand a Cup of Wine there stood,
To drink when he himself thought good.


Nondum quippe inoleverat barbarus ille mos, provocando se mutuo majoribus
poculis. That barbarous way of mutual provocation to quaff, was then a
Stranger; every Man drunk what he pleased, and not at the beck and gust of
other Men. He recites several Greek Authors for his Opinion, and among other
Testimonies, a Laconick Apothegm out of Plutarch. The Lacedemonian heard, that
some at their Feasting were compelled to drink, Why not, says he, to eat? Et
certe, says the Doctor, videtur esse par ratio, hoc est plane nulla: As good
reason surely for the one as the other, which is none at all. -- Gnomol.
Homeric. Od 8. p. 185. But after that Corruption grew rank in the Soil of
Prosperity, it became proverbial of quaffing and urging, Graeco more bibere,
Graeco more potare, interpretantur quidam, grandibus meracisque poculis se
invitare. Cicero in Verrem, Action. 3. Fit sermo inter cos, and invitatio, ut
Graeco more biberetur, hospes hortatur, poscunt majoribus poculis, celebratur
omnium sermon laetitiaque convivium. Cael. Rhodigin. Antiq. Lectionum, l. 28.
c. 6. And one of their Laws of drinking, became a Proverb, Aut bibat, aut
abeat; It was the safer way to be gone, than stay; for the reason which Cicero
gives in the 5th of his Tusculan. Q. Ne sobrius in Violentiam Vinolentorum
incidat: lest the Wine-drinkers fall upon him with Violence.

This was a more genteel and civil Law than that, If he will not drink, pour it
upon his Head; which was done to Empedocles, and which he took at a Feast, in
such Indignation, that the day following he called a Council, and the maker of
the Feast, and the Symposiarch, or the Governor of it, were both condemned.
Vid. Adag. Erasmi, Chiliad. 1. Cent. 2. Prove. 47. Diogen. Laertius in vit.
Empedoc. l. 8. But our Germans, says Erasmus, are more barbarous than the
Scythians: Drink, say they, or I will break your Head with this Jug, as big as
it is. The Scythians, both Men and Women, were wont to pour out Wine upon their
Clothes, accounting it a pleasant and happy Life. Quid ais? and agnoscis haec
in nostris Moribus? says Lipsius. Our Bibbers in our Country, will pour Wine
into the Bosom of them that refuse to drink, and when they greedily drink, drop
it upon their own. Lips. Ep. Miscellan. Ep. 7. La.

. 4. The Ancient Romans used freedom in their drinking, without Arts of
alluring. Aulus Gellius reports of Romulus, the first King of the Romans, being
invited to a Supper, drank but sparingly, because he had Business to do the
next day; they said to him, Romulus, If all Men should do as you do, Wine would
be cheap: He answered, Yea, but, it would be dearer, if every Man may drink as
much as he please, for I have drunk as much as I had a mind to. A. Gell. Nect.
Attic. l. 11. c. 14. The Persinas also were very abstemious, sparing, and
laborious in the first Ages; but in process of time, being infected with the
Median and Lybian Luxury, their Lusts grew corpulent and bulky, and became to
be merobibos, and multobibos; and they were wont to compel to drinking at their
Feasts, which made Ahasuerus to reform that evil Custom, and constrain no Man,
but indulge every Man to drink as little as he would. Bresson. de Regio
Persarum Principatu, l. 2. p. 215.

. 5. So it was of old, but you know how it is now. I have thought it to be some
kind of Pagan Sacrifice, and to imply a Prayer, which are the Notions I shall
stick to, and produce considerable Proof of it. It is also an Honorative and
Memorative Rite and Ceremony.

. 6. And so it was taken to be by ancient Fathers, who preached and wrote
against it, as a Sin of their times, and an Obligation to Drunkenness:
Wherefore should I speak of your earnest Entreaties, and Obtestations?
Wherefore should I remember your Sacraments? Quid memorem Sacramenta? your
Sacraments, Oaths or Mysteries? Bibamus, inquiunt, pro Salute Imper atorum: Let
us drink for the Health of the Emperors, and he who refuses, reus erit in
Devotione, he is faulty in his Devotion, Loyalty, or Love to the Emperor -- O
pia Devotionis Obsequium! O the supple flattering observance of pious Devotion!
-- Let us drink, say they, for the Health of our Armies, for the Strength and
Valor of our Companions, for the Health of our Sons. -- And they do think that
these their Prayers and Vows do reach, or come up even to God; even as they who
bring their Cups to the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, and there drink, in
Vesperam, until the Evening, and believe, that otherwise they cannot be heard.
O Stultitiam Hominum, qui Ebrietatem Sacrificium put ant! etc. O the Folly of
Men who think Drunkenness to be a Sacrifice! Who think them to be appeased with
Drunkenness, who taught us to bear Sufferings with Fasting. Quot de Intemper
antia convivii novimus ad Torment a venisse? How many intemperate Men have we
ever known to be Martyrs? -- It is plain that St. Ambrose took this Healthing
to be Vows, Prayers, Sacrisice. Libr. de Helia and Jejunio, c. 17.

. 7. St. Augustine, in his 64 Epist. to Bishop Aurelius, falls sharply upon
Drunkenness, and especially at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs; which because the
carnal and ignorant Vulgar are wont to believe to be not only the Honors of
the Martyrs, but the Comforts of the dead. It seems to me that that Turpitude
be easier dissuaded from, if it be forbidden out of the Scripture, and if
Oblations and Sacrifices for the Dead, which we may truly believe to help
little, upon these Commemorations be not so sumptuous, etc.

Rosinus confirms the Observation of drinking in honor of Persons, and
sacrificing: Solemn hoc erat, ut Divo alicui libarent; and threw upon the
Table or Floor some of their Wine, utque in Dominae aut Amicae Honorem Cyathum
ebiberent, eamque palam nominarent; and then drank in honor of their Lady,
Mistress, or Miss, and named her openly. Antiquitat. Romanorum, l. 5. c. 30.

. 8. We may learn out of Heathen Authors, that to Health is as much as to
sacrifice and pray. Some, says Alexander ab Alexandro, do say, that Graeco
more bibere, to drink after the manner of the Greeks, is as often as they name
or call their Gods or Friends among their Cups, every one by his Name, so often
to drink largely and take off their Wine; and when Magistrates were chosen, or
Honors conferred, they carried about Wine in Goblers, and pointed them out by
Name, to whom they should give the Cup; and then first they were wont to call
their Gods, and afterward their Friends, and so often to drink deep, and bona
a Diis precari, and to beg good things of their Gods. It was the Custom of the
Thracians, inter Ep^las and Porula primum libare Diis D^pes, and been precari
convivis: they first offered Dainties to their Gods, and then prayed for their
Guests, and according to their Prayers, to eat their Dainties with Modesty,
hund xliter, no otherwise than if it had been at a sacred Banquet. Let them
among us take notice of this, who sit down, and rise from their Tables, and
never pray for God's Blessing, nor return God Thanks: And let them also learn
from the Thracians, that pray before Meat, to eat and drink according to their
Prayer, as at a holy Feast.

The Greeks and Romans in their familliac eating together, pieces of the Meat
and some Wine being thrown into the Fire, they gave Drink Offerings to their
Gods, and the first Fruits of their Suppers to their familiar Spirits, or
Houshold-Gods, to whom the Salt and Bread, and Cheese fell for their Mess. The
first Cup was mineled to Jupiter Olympius, the second to their Hero's, the
third to Jupiter the Savior. -- And when pure, or Wine unmixed was given, it
was observed that they should call to Jovem sospitem, Jupiter that gives
Health, No cemulentes faceret, lest the Wine should make them drunk; but when
it was mixed with Water, Jovom appellare Servatorem, to call to Jupiter the
Savior. Alex. ab Alex. Genialium Dierum, l. 5. c. 19.

The third Cup was by the Ancients accounted solemn and mystical, and it became
a Custom to facrifice, (...), the third to Jupiter Soter. Dr. Duport. Gnomot.
Homer. p. 138. Vid. and Coelium Rhodiginum. l. 28. c. 6. de tertio Poculo Jovi
Soteri, p. 1068.

Paulus in Persa, and in Sticho describes the manner of feasting. Toxilus calls
thus; -- Hoe age, accumbe, hunc Diem suavem,
Meum natalem agitemus, amaenum.


Mind your Business, sit down, let us keep this sweet and pleasant Day, this is
my Birthday. Age Puer, Come Boy, do thy Business, a summo septenis Cyathis
commit hos Ludos: Begin these Sports, or Merriments, with seven Cups,
beginning with him that sits uppermost: Be nimble, and make haste. Pegnium,
Thou do not give me my Cups fast enough: Prithee give 'em me. Been mihi, been
vobis, been Amicae meae. All Happiness to me this is, a Health to you is this;
A happy Life to me, to you, and to my Friend and Miss.
Coelius Rhodiginus has collected, That it was the Custom of the Greeks, after
Supper to drink Poculum boni Daemonis, the Cup of the good Demon, which
Eustachius upon Homer thought to be Fortune. And what was this Cup, but a
Libation or Sacrifice to Fortune? And the Cups bore the Names of their Gods,
because they were dedicated to them. The first Cup was to Jupiter Olympius, (as
you heard before) the next was the Cup of the Hero's of the Earth, the third
was of Jupiter the Savior.

But why was it called the Cup of Jupiter the Savior? because that manner of
drinking was kept within the bounds of Sobriety; he that went beyond that, was
noted to be intemperate. The same Cup was called (...), from the Perfection of
the number Three, which contains the Beginning, Middle, and End. It is found in
Books, says the same laborious Collector, that the chief Cup in Feasts offered
Praefatione (...). This is the Cup of the good Demon, which many thought to be
Bacchus, Laetitiae Dator, the Giver of Mirth. The last was Praefations Jovis,
the Cup of Jupiter Liberator, the Deliverer. We have found in Thesautis Julii
Pollucis, the last Cup was called (...), or Mercury; for rising from Supper,
they were wont to drink or sacrifice to Mercurius, the President of Sleep, as
Athanaeus writes, the last was the Cup of Jupiter the perfect. Antiq. Leet. p.
1008.

How like to these Paganish Dedications, are the Forms and Inscriptions, or
Dedications of Health? Do they not call the Cups by the Names of the Persons
whose Health they drink, viz. This is your Health, such a Health, have you had
this Health? and when at a loss, they ask, Whose Health is this? How like is
this form of Speech to the old one, Bibamus pro Salute Imperatoris, let us
drink for the Health of the Emperor.

. 9. That Healthing implies Sacrifice and Prayer, may be proved by plainer
Evidence yet, in the Sacrifice and Festival observed in Memory of Anna Perenna,
or to vary a little after the Popish Dialect, the Feast of St. Ann Perenna.

In the Month of March, some say on the Ides, or 15th day of that Month, was
the Feast of Anna, Sister of Dido, as some say, preferred into the place of a
Goddess. Eodem Mense and public and privatim, ad Annam Perennam Sacrificatum
itur, ut annare and perennare commode lieas, says Macrobius Saturnal. l. 1. c.
12. Quo commodius annare, and perennare liceret. says Alexand. ab Alexandro,
l. 3. c. 18. Annare dicimus, Annum agere, to live a Year, quemadmodum porennare
Annos peragere, to live out, or complete many Years. Annum persicere, and quasi
perpetuum agere, to live perpetually; as Peret, in Cornucopia in Martial.
Epist. fol. 143. Col. 2. Sunt qui Lunant putarint, quae Anna vocaretur, quod
Annus ex Mensibus fiaet. Lil. Gyraldus Syntagm. Histor. Deorum Syntagm. 1. p.
57.

On the Ides of March there was a Feast to Anna Perens, in quo largioribus
Poculis indulgebant, and pro Cyathorum numero Annos mutuo precabantur; in which
they gave themselves to drink larger Cups than ordinary; and according to the
number of the Cups, they prayed for so many Years to live for one another.
Rosin. Antiquitat. Roman. l. 4. Calendario Romano; which Feast is described by
Ovid. Fastor. Libr. 3.

Sole tamen, Vinoque calent, Annosque precantur;
Quot sumunt Cyathos, ad numerumque bibunt.
Invenies illic qui Nestoris ebibat Annos.
Well warmed with Sun and Wine, for Years they wish,
For every Year they wish, they take a Dish,
(They drink and pray) and to a number drink:
Some to the Years of Nestor e're they shrink.
To conclude this Evidence, that Healthing does intimate a Sacrifice or Prayer,
may appear from that horrid, and worse than barbarous, that cruel and devilish
Sin of imprecating Evil to Enemies in their Madness of drinking, when they
wish, till they curse even to Hell; therefore when they are pleased, then it is
your Health, the best Prayer they can make. This is a Jewish Custom at their
Weddings, when they drink and pledge, they say, Le chasim tobh, Sit tibi saluti;
Be it to your Health, or your Health. But if they are displeased and
disaffected toward any, as they are toward Christians, then (...) a Curse,
which Letters cabalistically resolved, do amount to 165, and in one Word they
imprecate 165 Curses to him. Bnxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 28. de Nupt. What are
they that curse and damn in their Cups, Jews or Christians? I wish they would,
when they are sober, think of these Things.

. 10. Here Is Evidence full enough for the Notion in which I take this
Healthing; but whence does it arise? who is the Inventor of it? Here Is an
Enquiry for a Polydore Virgil, or some such Man as he, or Hieronymus
Mercurialis. I must go no further than my own dim and short Candle will help
me. The Heathens might imitate the Jews, and use that as a divine, which was a
corrupted Sacrifice. So the Learned Gataker conceived, in his Annotations upon
Jer. 7.18. The Peace Offerings and Drink Offerings of the Jews were by God's
Appointment, and were Sacrificia salutaria, votiva, and eucharistica, called by
the Seventy, (...). Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis, c. 11. and others. What the
Devil borrows from God pure and incorrupt, he leaveneth with his Malice, to
corrupt God's People, and all that are deceived by him. God's People paid dear
for what they borrowed from Heathen Idolaters, or took up in imitation of them.

That Text in Isa. 65.12, 13. is interpreted by sundry learned Men to
countenance what I am upon: But ye are they which forsake the Lord, and forget
my holy Mountain; that prepare a Table for that Troop, and that furnish a
Drink Offering unto that Number. Here is their Sin; their Loss and Misery by it
is set down by the Prophet. The Sin was forsaking the Lord, forgetting God's
holy Mountain, not regarding his Worship in Jerusalem, or Mount Sion; and
preparing a Table for that Troop, and a Drink Offering to that Number. In the
Original, as you see in the Margin, the Troop is Gad, and the Number Meni. The
Learned Drusius, giving to Jacobus Montanus his Opinion of Genesis 30.11. tells
him, that some Interpreters do render Gad a Troop, and others Fortune. Gad, as
the Hebrews witness, is Good Fortune, quam Graeci (...) vocant, and the Hebrews
Muzzal Tobh. Caeterum Fortunae, quam Gad appellabant, veteres mensam
instruebant. But the Ancients did prepare a Table for Fortune, which they
called Gad, Isa. 56.11. Drusius de quaesitis per Epistolam, Ep. 100. Grotius
also observes, that Gad signifies Fortune, among the Hebrews, Chaldeans, and
Arabians.

The Seventy translate the Words, And have prepared a Table to Demon, and
filled a Mixture to Fortune.

Meni is by Avenarius translated Mercurius, an Idol worshipped by the
Merchants. So Mr. Pool, English Annotat. The Merchants sacrificed to Maia and
Mercurius, in the Month of May, praying for good Success; and these Deities and
Idols were the Sun and Moon, under several Names, as Macrobius informs,
Saturnal. l. 1. c. 12. So also Alexander ab Alexandro, lib. 3. Rosin. Antiq.
Romans lib. 2. cap. 9. and Lilii Gyraldi Syntagma 9.

The Host of Heaven were in number many, and sacrificing to them, they
sacrificed to a Number; perhaps, says Sanctius, alluding to the Custom of the
Heathen, qui tot cyathos libabant, who sacrificed so many Cups, as there were
Letters in his Name for whom they prayed. Hence let our Merchants, Persons of
great Ingenuity, Industry, and Acquaintance in the World, remember that they
are Christians, and to send out their Ships with Faith and Prayer, and wait for
their return by Prayer still, by Patience and Submission to the Will of God;
and give over drinking Healths for a good Voyage, a good Return and Success,
that they may not attribute their good or bad Success to Mercury, or to a good
and bad Fortune, but to the Goodness of God, and his trying Providence. Did
but their Ships run as many Hazards at Sea, as their Souls and Bodies do by
Land, by drinking, their Lives would be more careful than they be, and would,
if ever, learn to pray by Land. I doubt not but there are as many good Men of
them, as of any Profession, that spill not their Wine upon the Ground in
Libations, as the Heathen did; nor make a Body, sanctified to the Lord, as
loathsome as a Swilling-Tub; but send forth their Stocks with the Sacrifice of
Prayer, and receive them with another of Thanksgiving. So there are too many
that trade in Sin, and I beg their candid acceptance of this Digression, upon
occasion of this particular Notice that is given of the Pagan Merchants
Superstition.

. 11. The first coming in of this Healthing to the Britains, they have cause to
remember with Sorrow; it was with wishing well, but doing ill, (at least I
cannot trace it higher.) The Story is to be found in Fabian's Chronicle, and
Hollingshead, but I shall take it out of Rich. Verstegan's Restitution of
decayed Intelligence, c. 5. p. 127. As this Lady Rowena was very beautiful, so
was she of a very comely Deportment, and Hengistas having invited King Vor^iger
to a Supper at his new-built (Tongue) Castle, caused that after Supper, she came
forth of her Chamber into the King's Presence with a Cup of Gold filled with
Wine in her Hand, making in a very seemly manner a low Reverence unto the King,
said with a pleasing Grace and Countenance, in our ancient Language. Waes Healt
Hlaford Cynang, which being rightly expounded according to our present Speech:
Be of Health Lord King. -- Waes, now pronounced Wax, is as much as to say,
Grow, Re, or Become; and Waes Heal, by corruption of Pronunciation, after
wards became to be Wassaile. The King not understanding what she said, demanded
it of his Chamber lain what it was; and when he knew, he asked him how he might
answer her in her own Language, whereof being informed, He said unto her, Drink
Heal; that is to say, Drink Health. The King was so be-witched with this Lady,
that he put away his own Christian Queen, and married her, which was fatal to
the Britains. King Vortiger might be as unacquainted with the Complement, as he
was with the Saxon Language; for the Britains used all freedom in their
drinking, without any Compulsion or Obligation, as is remembered in that old
Distick.

Ecce Britannorum mo^ est laudabilis iste.
Vt bibat Arbitrio, Pocula quisque suo.
Behold, the Britain's way praiseworthy is,
That every Man may drink what is Pleasure is.
What Devourers of Ale the Saxons were, may be seen in Johannes Boemus's Book,
called, Mores, Leges, and Ritus omnium Gentium, l. 3. c. 13. They would set a
Pail before them full of Ale, and drink out of it in a Dish, it is incredible
how much they would drink, no Sow, nor Bull could swallow down so much. He that
drank down the rest, had a Garland of Flowers, or Roses, given him as a Reward,
and carried away the Glory. And from them did proceed, says he, that damnable
Custom of drinking the strongest Wines through all Germany, with unspeakable
Mischief. -- He is taken for an Enemy that will not pledge the Cups that are
held out to him. So he. And to conclude, Mr. Cambden records it, The Historical
Proof.
That the English, who of all the Northern Nations, were least given to drink,
and commended for their Sobriety; learnt in the Low Country Wars to drown
themselves in excessive drinking, and by drinking to the Health of others, to
waste their own. Annot. Eliz. Anno 1561. p. 318.

. 12. Because I would not be singular, but back what I have a good while ago
laid up, as the Signification of Healthing, I will produce some very worthy
Divines speaking the same thing.

Reverend Mr. Durham, in his Exposition of the seventh Commandment, gives his
Judgment thus. If we look narrowly into the thing it self (although Custom, when
it grows inveterate, weakeneth us in the uptaking of things, yet) it will
probably be found to have risen from Heathenish Idolaters, who used Libamen
Jovi, Baccho, etc. And if it be supposed to help the Health of others, that
cannot be expected from God, who has given no such Promise, it must therefore
be from the Devil; it was called by the Heathen, Phiala Jovis, drinking of
Health, being amongst them, a piece of Drink Offering, or Sacrifice to their
Idols, in the behalf of those they mentioned in their drinking, or whose
Healths they drank; and it is certain there is no Vestigia of it in
Christianity, nor any reason for it; and Experience clears that many are
grown superstitious in the use of it, as if the refusing such a thing were a
Prejudice or Indignity to the Persons mentioned; and that the Devil has made
use of it, as a Rower, to convey in much Drunkenness into the World. We think
absolutely safest to forbear it, and we are sure there is no hazard. So he, p.
391.

See also the Saying of Reverend Mr. Sam. Ward, above quoted.

CHAP. IV. Arguments against Healthing, and Dissuasives from it, general and
particular, as it implies Sacrifice and Prayer.
1. I Do presume, this Ceremony of Healthing had no better Inventer, than the
first Deceiver, and Inventer of Sin, and his teachable and forward Disciples
joining with him: He that ordered the Scene, made this Prologue to it, for them
that are so apt to learn and act. And it is most likely to deceive, and take,
because it has the face of Friendship, and the good looks of Love and
Kindness; and he that dissents from it, looks like some odd peevish Humorist,
and unhewn piece of Moroseness, that will not fall in, and close in the square
of Society, and therefore is fitter to live by himself, and to keep home, than
to come abroad. And if the Dissent breed an Argument, the Consenters clearly
carry it by the Poll; and they that oppose it are judged to wrangle against
Points of Honor, Civility, Breeding, good Manners, good Nature, yea Innocence,
and the received Gustom of all Sorts and Qualities of well-tempered Men, Men of
great Virtue and Accomplishments. How ridiculous does that odd Man look, that
makes not one among them? as ridiculous as if he wore a high-crown'd Hat, lined
and faced with Scruples, a deep Ruff, and a Fur-gown; as made up of Scruples,
Formality and Seriousness. This Ceremony is so innocent, that, what can be said
against it? I say, If no more but this, it would raise Presumption into a
rational Confidence, that it is not good, because so many, that I will not
describe, are so forward, so constant, so open at it, so urgent, and so
quarrelsom about it; and because others are so ready at a call, so apt to
imitate, so conceited and apish at it: Whereas, if it were but so innocent and
virtuous, as some paint it out to be, Men would be more averse from it, not so
public in it, and soon grow weary of it.

There are many Divine Rules given us by our heavenly Master, that are quite
out of use in Society, and common Converse; and we know that Men are slow to
learn, and very bashful openly to profess and show what is truly good and
pious. Healthing implies praying; if Men were called upon to pray without
drinking, how mute would Healthers be? But now how forward to begin, how
earnest to exhort and press others to it? The reason of this is so plain, it
need not be produced. And whether it should be followed, because virtuous
Persons sometimes, and in some cases use it, or laid aside because bad Men make
an ill use of it, may deserve a Resolution, since it is none of the Virtues of
virtuous Men, who do rather submit in Complement, than commend, or approve of
it.

. 2. My business is to speak of Healths: I have but little to say of the
Imprecations and Execrations, so much in fashion among evil Men. Their Healths,
failly so called, are a Test, or a Drink-order, significant of a. Faction, and
rampant Inhumanity. The very sound of them strikes Horror through the Ear into
every Heart that is not cased, or roughcast with a Coat of Flint: I will not
record them, but heartily wish their Consciences (so much as is left) would
recollect them, and spread them before their Faces, that they may be ashamed,
and repent of them, before the Pangs and Horrors of Death do apprehend them.
Could Balaam turn his Tongue to these, if it had not been tied up and
restrained from cursing Israel? How gracious had such Men as these been with
Barak? If these Champions had been baptized into Dagon and Ashtaroth, it would
have better become them to curse in their Drink, as Goliath did David by his
Gods. The Jews curse Christians, and the Pope does curse Heretics. But what
are they that drink, and curse and damn their own Countrymen, Fellow Subjects,
and Fellow Soldiers, listed under the same Banner, in the same Protestant
Church? The Jews hold it lawful for them to be so drunk at the Feast of Purim,
Buxtorf, Synag. c. 24.
till they cannot distinguish between blessed Mordecai and cursed Haman: The
one they bless, the other they curse, as the Enemy of their Nation. But do our
Damners never mistake Haman's and Mordecai's? curse them who deserve to be
blessed? If this come in their sight, I do earnestly entreat them to look to
that Laver in which they were baptized, and remember that they be sure to
renounce none but them, who were renounced in their Names; to read and believe
their Creed, the coming of Christ to Judgment, the Resurrection of the Dead,
and eternal Life; to read and study, who are blessed in our Savior's Sermon;
to remember the first and great Commandment, and the second which is like to
it. All these written upon their Hearts, will be a greater Glory to them, than
all the Epitaphs upon the Tombs of their Ancestors. And lastly, If they would
believe their own Senses, that Men are mortal, and that they are Men, and then
measure the Correspondency between their Lives and their Belief, their Morals
and God's Commandments, their Practices and due Preparations for Death, that by
doing thus, they may turn their Tongues to Prayer and Blessing. Of whom have
they learnt to drink and curse? If they think there is no better Life to come,
why do they not make more, and better use of this? why do they not labor to
lengthen this? If there be a Damnation in Hell to come, why do not they turn
out of the common Road to it? If there be none, why are they so sinful as to
hate their Enemies? and how come they to be so moderate toward those they
hate, as to wish them no worse than nothing, or that Evil which they do not
believe? If you hate them with that mortal hatred, that you would drink and
curse them into Hell, as fast as you pour down Cups, why will you, by drinking
and cursing, throw your selves in after them, into the bottomless Pit? Do you
think they will not be as hateful to you there as here, if you and they should
be so miserable as to meet there? But by your Drink and Cursing, you cannot
confound nor renounce, nor damn them thither, but you damn your selves
meritoriously, and as effectually as you can. O turn! why will you dye?

But to be short with you; there is no doubt, but all such Healthing as
imports, or is attended with marks of Faction, Hatred, Wrath, Bitterness, with
Execration or Damnation, is as bad as Hatred was in Cain, or Murder, or any of
those Sins which are evil in themselves, and damnable in their Merit. Yea more,
you that have the Obligations upon you to be Christians, sin in these things
worse than Heathens; yea, they are worse in you, than in that Devil, who sets
up School to perfect Men in these Works of Darkness. For you sin against solemn
Vows, against endearing Obligations, against Means and Methods of Grace, and
many other Circumstances of Aggravation. Such kind of Healthing as this, is
downright Sin, and so much the greater, as it is sometimes in your Sport and
Frolicks, and not always in your Excess and Madness. And your Huzza's, Songs,
Music, Drums and Trumpets, are to still the Cries and Tremblings of
Conscience, and your Flesh and Joints, or to keep down your Hair from standing
on end with Horror; as the drumming about the Idol Moloch, did drown the Cries
of poor Infants that fried in the brazen Arms of that Idol. If you spice your
Healths with any gratings of Impiety, Blasphemy, Malice, Luxury, or any other
Sin, they are materially and formally Sins, as any that are committed by the
Sons of Men, and must be repented of, or else you would wish your selves out of
Hell again, upon condition you might lick the Sores of a poor Lazarus, and fare
as ill as he did at the rich Man's Doors. O therefore cease to do evil, and
learn to do well; and put away this Evil far from you, or certainly God will
put you far from him! Whether you will or no, die you must, and perhaps by
Drunken Clubs, one at another Heels, one this Week, and another the next, and
so on, till all are gone, as some have done. There are some Sins, which are
Peccata tacenda, and so there are Pocula tacenda, Healths not to be named, and
they that drank were carried away as with a Tempest, where they drunk no more.

. 3. Having rid my Hands of those grossly depraved Cups; I will take in hand
those that have a fairer outside: and with Reflection upon what has been
observed of the Customs of the Heathens, I frame my first Argument and
Dissuasive from thence.

Christians ought not to drink, and converse by drinking, after the manner of
the Heathen. Their inscribing and entitling, or dedicating of their Cups was
not a natural Action, for the Service of Nature; not a Dictate of natural Light
and Reason, but idolatrous and superstitions, and a pleasure to the Flesh.
Whatsoever they do, as purely natural and moral, may be done by us: but their
Sacrificing, and Dedications of Cups were none of those things. And even those
Actions which are as natural as eating and drinking, by Christians must be
regulated by the Word of God. Grace must be the Principle, God's Law the Rule,
God's Glory the Intention, or the end of it, according to that of the Apostle,
Whether you eat or drink, or whatever else you do, do all to the Glory of God.
1 Cor. 10.31. No Man lives to himself, nor dies to himself: Romans 14.7.
therefore no Man should do any of the Actions of Life, to please himslf, or to
himself, as his End. Whether Healthing, considered in its proper Notion, can be
to the Glory of God, is put off till afterward.

That Christians are to live singularly by their own peculiar Laws, is plain
from the Apostles Doctrine, and not to do after the manner of the Heathen,
under that very Consideration of their being Heathens. Walk not as other
Gentiles walk, in the Vanity of their Mind: Ephesians. 4.17. Not in the Lust of
Concupiscence, as the Gentiles that know not God: 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. The Vanity of
Mind, and Lust of Concupiscence are Sins in all Men, but the Exhortation is
enforced from the Persons, as the Gentiles do, and one reason serves for all: We
have not so learned Christ: Ephesians. 4.20. And because of our Calling: 1 Thessalonians.
4.7. And these Reasons bind us, that live remote from, and unmixed with
Gentiles; and therefore cannot be a Scandal to them. And the Opposition is
carried on in other places: Ye cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord,
and Table of Devils; ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils: which may be extended beyond a local Communication with them, to an
imitation of them at the farthest distance from them: 1 Cor. 10.21. The famous
Mr. Mead says, That Stephanus in his Thesaurus found some, who thought the
(...), in the Text did allude to that Cup (...), used among the Gentiles; and
further says, This was the Tenet of the Gentiles, that the Sovereign and
Celestial Gods were to be worshipped only pura mente, and with Hymns and
Praises, and that Sacrisices were only for Demon; out of Porphyry, Trismegist.
Apuleus de Daemonio Socratis. He therefore that had given himself to the Lord,
the only Potentate, to the one and only Mediator Jesus Christ, must have no
Communion, no part in the Service of the many Mediators, Lords, or Daemon-Gods
of the Nations. So far that excellent Man, in his Apostasy of the latter times,
c. 6. See also, if you please Constant. Lexicon. Verb. (...). The Ancients,
when the Tables were removed and taken away, did drink the Cup of the good
Genius, like our Grace Cup, by which some understand Mercury, or Jupiter Soter,
as was observed above. To us there is but one God, the giver of Health, and all
other Mercies; and one Mediator Jesus Christ, through whom we ask and obtain.
Now except we have some Intimation, that we may offer a Cup, a Health to God
for any Person, through the Mediation of Christ, it is the safest way to
forbear. This way of arguing is not new, nor only an Apostolical Preciseness,
but used by others. There is in the Works of St. August. a Tract de
Rectitudine, of the Rectitude of Catholic Conversation, where the Author runs
over abundance of Heathen Practices, which Christians must abstain from, and
this is one, Nullus in Convivio cogat alium plus bibere quam oportet: let no
Man make another drink more than he ought (and Healthing is a kind of
Constraint, as will appear by and by.) And St. Augustine did adjure his Auditors
by the dreadful Day of Judgment, that they abandon from their Feasts, that
filthy Custom of drinking without measure, as the Poison of the Devil, and
Observations of Pagans. Sermon. de Temp. 232. and eadem Dominica, S. Sermon. 2.
Deny to our ignorant, unreformed, nominal Christians, any ^riviledg of
Christians, how will they fly upon you? what, am I a Pagan? what, am I a
Heathen? And is there no force in an Argument drawn from our Distinction from
Pagans, both in the Reason of the Learned, and common Sense of the Vulgar,
beside the Divinity of the Apostle? How frantic would a Feast of Anna Perenna,
Healthing, and praying for many Years, be to a sober Christian? And what is
healthing Health after Health in too common Meetings? Was it foolishly done of
Heathens? and how wisely is it done of us?

. 4. Christians should eat and drink, and converse as becomes Christians, but
such are we, (it is our greatest Glory and Prerogative): This Argument is an
Appendix to the former. As we may with admiration and praise, say, as our
Savior said upon another occasion, We have Bread to eat, which the World knows
not of: So we ought to use such a way of eating and drinking together, at our
ordinary Tables, and common Visits, as becomes those that have a Table by our
selves, always in the sight of our Heavenly Father, and King of Kings. Our
ordinary Meat and Drink do feed and refresh those Bodies that are joined to the
Lord, and to rise again in Glory: And therefore as we live for a peculiar
Service proper to Saints and Christians, and die to rise to a superlative
proper Glory; so certainly we should eat and drink in such a manner, not as
those Dogs do, that shall not eat of the Childrens Bread. And as we should be
careful to wash the Heart from all defilement, that that which comes out of us
may not defile us, or others; so what we eat and drink should be in a
sanctified manner, to a holy use. If this Divinity be too strict, all I will
say is, the Glory of that Distinction which Grace makes between us and Heathens
and Infidels, is too great for us. Kings Children do not find fault with the
restraint, that they may not live like Beggars or common People. St. Luke, in
the holy Story of the Infancy of the Church, informs us, that the Believers did
eat, (which contains their drinking also) with gladness and singleness of
Heart. Acts 2.48. And when in the rich City of Corinth, their Love Feasts were
polluted to Drunkenness, the Apostle reproves, and reforms that profane Abuse
of their Feasts, and God visited them with Sicknesses and Death for it, 1 Cor.
11. If any think they are tied too hard, seeing they enjoy Estates and Plenty,
and are Gentlemen, except they may drink according to their quality and plenty;
the Corinthians might plead the same, for some of them were wealthy. The more
bountiful God is to us, the more careful should we be not to offend him. We
should eat and drink as holily, as if we were to vindicate our selves from the
Slanders of Heathens, because we are to give an account to God, and do eat in
his sight, when far enough from the censorious Eyes of Infidels. Tertullian, in
his Apology relates the Christian Custom. Non prius discumbitur, quam oration ad
Deum praegustetur; editur quantum esurientes capiunt, bibitur quantum pudicis
est utile; ita saturantur, ut qui meminerint, etiam per noctem adorandum Deum
sibi esse. They sat not down before Prayer to God was first tasted; so much is
eaten, as satisfied the hungry; so much is drunk, as is good for chaste Persons:
They are so filled, as those that remember they must worship God in the Night.
Adversus Gentes, c. 39. Such was their Feasting. The Heathens defamed their
private Suppers, as infamous and profuse; and the same Tertullian replies, as
Diogenes said of the Megarenses: Megarenses obsonant, quasi crastina die
morituri; that they did eat, as if they were to die next day. And Minutius
Felix vindicates the Christians from such Aspersions. Convivia non tantum
pudica colimus, sed and sobria; nec enim indulgemus epulis, ut convivium mero
ducimus, sed gravitate hilaritatem temperamus. We do not lengthen our Feasts
with Wine, but temper our Mirth with gravity.

These Primitive Fathers and Christians took it for a Scandal and Dishonor to
be intemperate.

And Clemens Alexandrinus gives us an account of their Way, and says, Let us
exhort one another with a twofold Invitation out of the Law, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, and then thy Neighbor. -- Let the second be with an honest
Conversation. -- As before we eat, it is fit we praise the Lord, the Maker of
all things; so when we drink, it becomes us to sing unto him. Padag. I. 1. c. 4.

. 5. Arg. 3. The Occasions of Sin, and innumerable evil Effects and
Consequences, are carefully and conscienciously to be avoided: but Healthing is
the apparent and known Occasion of many Sins and Miseries. I must prove every
Branch of this Argument, because I bring my Argument and Impeachments against
this Usage before Parties and Judges, that are corrupted, and bribed, and
pre-ingaged.

1. That Occasions of Sin have some kind of Causality, as the Object and
Matter, is plain enough, but grant a difference between them: Yet as they are
Occasions, they are carefully to be shunned, or else we fall upon wilful Sins,
by a wilful taking the occasions of them. They that wait for Occasions and
Opportunities, do stay no longer out of the Snare, than the Snare is making for
them, and lie in wait for their own destruction. But if Men have any fear of
Death and Judgment, or any common aversion from Sin, they must not go in at the
door of Occasion, which the Devil and his Porters hold open to them. Solomon
does advise and charge us, that we should not look upon the Wine when it is
red, and gives its color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright: For the
Color will inflame the Appetite, when it is looked upon in earnest; and then
when the inflamed Appetite must be fed, Sin preys upon the ensnared Sinner;
when it smiles in the Glass, it bites and stings like a Serpent in its Effects.
Prove. 23.31, 32. It is not required that we must drink blindfold, we may see
what we drink; but if the sparkling of the Wine makes us dote upon it, and
excessively covet it, then we are poisoned by it, and it goes down smoothly,
but bites like a Serpent, and stings like an Adder. The Mischiefs of it are
very sensible and great, yea, deadly. The Wine that was red, was turned into an
Adder or a Serpent; and a Man should forbear fondly to look on the briskness of
his Wine, as it is a Temptation, as he would refuse to drink off that Cup that
had a living Serpent in it. The wise Man does dehort us from Occasions and
Temptations, because of the deadly Effects thereof. If any despise Solomon in
this, they despise both him that was the greatest and wisest of Kings, and the
only wise God, who is infinitely greater than he, and he gives them warning.
And what demonstration can be so sensible, as what is taken from such Effects?
And they that feel not the point of the Argument, are in danger of
Insensibleness and Stupidity, described in the last Verse: They have stricken
me, say they, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not. A
deadly Disease does seize upon the Conscience; the Heart is untouched with the
smartness of God's Judgments, until the Sting of Death take that fast hold,
that it can never be taken out. A prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hides
himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished. Prove. 22.3. and 27.12.

I could be too tedious, to prove that Occasions of Sin are to be eschewed, as
the Doors and Entries into Sin. I will pass from this to the Effects of
Healthing, which are exceeding many; and because the ill Effects are so many
and notorious, they should not be retained amongst Men and Christians. And if
it be any Motive to us, as it ought to be, we have the Examples of Churches and
Ages, who disused and laid aside an ancient, primitive, Christian Custom,
because it was an occasion of much Dissoluteness and Immorality. The Agapae, or
Feasts of Charity, which commenced with the first Assemblies of Christians at
the Lord's-Table, and were continued for several Centuries in some Churches,
were reproved, and put down, because of the Exorbitance of ungoverned People,
and prohibited to be used in Churches, by several Canons of Councils. And after
that those Love Feasts were changed into Fealtings at the Memorials of Martyrs,
and Dedications of Churches, Ep. Ang. Aurel. supra citat. Sermon. de Temp. 232 S.
2, etc.
they were met with there also, by the Zeal of holy Men, offended with the
disorders of those Meetings, after the manner of Heathens. Their use, abuse,
and reasons why they were prohibited, may be seen in short, but fully, in
learned and laborious Hornbeck, Vetera and Nova, l. 1. c. 20. item Exam. Bullae
de Festis.

If such a Custom, well begun, and continued for good uses, was reproved and
vacated, because it was abused and corrupted into Sin; shall we retain that
which had no better an Institution than you have seen, and is so pregnant of
evil and terrible Effects, which grow greater and greater, and worse and worse,
almost every day? They that retain it still, in defiance of the many
Proclamations from Heaven against it, seem to be resolved to continue in their
Sins, whatever it shall cost them or others.

I will not undertake to reckon the common Products of this fair-faced,
insinuating Cheat; it looks like Health, but it brings forth a Spawn of
Deformities. It Is confessed, if this were not, as long as the Hearts of the
Sons of Men are evil, these Streams of Iniquity will break out; but then this
is a very plausible occasion for them, and gives color and reputation to them,
which without it, would nakedly appear uncomely Vices: Quid enim delectant
damna sine gratia?

First: Healthing is an Invitation, a Provocation, an Engagement to drink, not
only as a Sign of Welcome, and hearty Friendship, but an Obligation to drink,
for drinking sake. And according to the intention and affection of them that
engage together, the Current of Evil that flows from it, is either higher or
lower. If Men are prepared for a Debauch, for a Revenge, for a Victory, for
Sport with the Infirmities of some, then Healthing can never be washed clean
from their Iniquities: if it be in Pride, Ostentation of Generosity, if to make
a Party, to pick a quarrel, to give offense, or to make an occasion of quarrel,
or discrimination of Affections and Parties, Healthing is as great a Sin as any
of these are, and can be no more excused than any of the Works of Darkness. And
as Healthings do multiply among us, as they do to a great excess; so the
Pestilence of contagious Manners breaks out, and a Man cannot come among them
that have the Receipts and Arts of Poisoning, but his Soul and Body are in
danger of present Death. Whatsoever the Sin is that Healthing is an
Introduction to, and so made use of, Healthing is forbidden in that same
Commandment in which that Sin is forbidden, that Men by Healthing fall into:
for it is a known Rule in the Exposition of the Commandments, that in what
Commandment soever any Sin is forbidden, the Occasions of that Sin are
forbidden in that same Commandment. All the Sins that are drawn on by
Healthing, run into it, and it is tainted with them, and therefore can never be
acquitted from Pollution and Guiltiness. It has the same tendency to
Drunkenness, which is against many of God's Commandments, and other Sins, as
the giving of a Lie, or a box of the Ear to a Quarrel, and that to drawing
Blood and Murder: it has the same tendency to the Sins that are drawn after
it, that Wantonness and Dalliance has to Fornication and Adultery.

Secondly; It is plain, by and in common Practice, a flattering Preface and
Dedication before a whole Tome of Sins, and in particular, if not to downright
Drunkenness, yet to an Excess in Drinking. Thus indifferent Men take it, and so
Parties find it. And this I prove by these Evidences.

1. It is manifest, when Men intend a Debauch, they begin with a Health, and
proceed from some great one to give credit to the Work: and to deny a Health,
is as much as to deny Duty or Honor to the Patron of that Cup, to whom the
Dedication is made; so it was of old, and so it is still. As St. Augustine
relates the manner of it. Then they drink to several Names or Persons, not of
the Living only, but of the Dead, of Saints, of Angels, thinking they pay them
Honor: Sermon. de Temp. de Ebriet.. 2. So Ambrose above quoted. Apud Germanos
Ebrietatis contilianda gratia, says Wendelin. Lib. supra citate: When the
Germans design a drunken Bout, especially in Princes Courts, they have their
Pocula Soteria, their Healthing Cups, which they drink to the Health of their
Princes, and which they can by no means refuse. So that ingenious Mercurius
Britannicus, said to be the most Reverend Bishop Hall, in his Mundus alter and
idem, describes the Service of Bacchus, l. 1. c. 3. One of the Guests having
put off his Garland, with bended Knees, as if he were at Prayer, takes a Cup,
holding a Pint and half, and says, Here Is a Health to Cagustrius, the most
Potent Archduke of Crapulia, (that is Drunken-Land): every one from the
highest to the lowest, with the same Cup, Action, Gesture, approves himself a
faithful Citizen, and well affected, or which he had rather, a stout Drinker.
Another rises up presently after, and says, Been vos, been nos, all Happiness
to you, and to us, and to the most famous and imperial City Zouffenberga. -- A
third drinks in Honor to Yurania, and the Nobles, and every one adds something
to allure the Company to new Draughts.

2. It is an Engagement to drinking, if you consider the Person that begins it,
who, as he expects to be pledged, so they that follow, hold it Civility to
follow their Leader.

3. If it stays, the stop or neglect is looked upon as a Default, and he that
neglects, is called upon as to do his Duty; it must not die upon his Hands, or
at his Door.

4. It is often taken as an Affront, a Slight, a matter of wrangling, if not of
Duelling and foulest Murder.

5. It is looked upon as a Debt in the Bond of Civility and Courtship, and paid
as duly as a How-do-you: if one begins your Health, you must thank him, and
call for his.

Object. But what if it be an Engagement? what then? what harm is there in that?

Answ. No seeming harm at all to them that swallow Sins, and it never stays
with them to make Conscience sick; but to them that walk and live nearer the
Light of God's Law, it is apparently a Trespass upon Holiness and Goodness.

1. He that begins, makes himself a Debtor to pledge all that pledge him, as often
as any of them can hold out. He opens his Bosom to the Tempter, and all his
Angels and Agents; they lay by their Armor, and take off their Watch against
the Assaults of the Devil, or drinking Men to a wet Encounter, when they lay by
their Hats out of Reverence to this Paganish Devotion.

2. They who cannot bear much Drink, or are not forward to it, do by their Fear
and Compliance give Countenance to the most shameless Soker, and harden him in
his Sin, and are accessory to all his Excess, and justify his drinking many, by
their drinking some.

3. By this means the worst of Men have an opportunity to take in others, into
a Partnership in this trade of breaking, and going behindhand in all manner of
Goodness: no Man shall carry away one Mite of Sobriety, but the best is become
as bad as the worst. A Man of a large Appetite, and profound Vessel, that is an
Infundibilum, Equites aurei dolii Mer. Brit. Aelian vere Hist.
a Tunnel, as one great Knight of the Golden Tun was called in Aelian. This Man
who dies his Face to a Scarlet above a modest Blush, may be ashamed to drink
all, or most himself: Modesty may make him take a turn in the Air, divert
himself with some Discourses, or Exercise, and come to his Element by leisure,
even as Ducks that come sometimes to Land. But when Healthing is up, he drinks
but in a mode, has a fair Pretense, even the Rule of the Company, for his
pouring down, and all that can bear it are as bad as he. And where can you see
a difference between one and another, while Healths are called and pledged,
except that one can bear more than another.

4. It is a Temptation to many weak Men, quickly to lose themselves by yielding.

5. It is a very plausible Excuse for loss of Time, bad Hours, and an hundred
Faults, for in Civility they could not break off, nor refuse, it would be ill
taken, etc.

6. Let him look to it that begins; for tho all that pledge are guilty, yet they
all lay the evil Consquences upon him; as he that begins a Fray, is blamed of
all; they make his beginning the great Fault, and their following too little to
be repented of.

7. Many particular Persons have been spoiled by it; and it has been the
beginning of many a Man's being given to Drink, and by that to his Ruin. Many
Men were modest and sober, and seemed religious in their private Capacities,
but being called to Office must be modish, and drink Healths, and according to
their place begin them too. They have in time been thoroughly wet with a shower
of Sin, gone home with Shame, and what then? either they must repent of it, and
do so no more; and then they are Wh -- or else they must turn it. into a lest,
and make little of it, and so become hardened in that, and other Sins. Healthing
now is become one of the genteel Qualities of an Office.

8. It corrupts or divides Society. If a Man drink according to the measure and
pleasure of Companies, if he do not renounce and abjure Reverence of God,
Modesty, and Temperance, he must put them off for a time. To refuse Healths,
looks as ill as a Truly founds meanly. We are miserably disjoynted; and there
is not any one thing that keeps us out of joint more than factious and
contradictory Healths. And if a Man be not of the same Party, he must drink,
and grossly dissemble his Disaffection, or hear of it. Holy, sober, modest
Persons must keep home, for they are not qualified for public Company.

9. The Evil of Healthing has been so great a Sin and Provocation, that some
have lost their Lives by it, some have repented of it in particular, as a great
Sin; so did Mr. Francis Cartwright: See Mr. Bohon's Directions. And one of the
greatest, and worthiest of Honor, that ever this Nation bred, vowed against
it, and kept his Vow, and that was the great Sir Matthew Hale: See his Life, p.
14. And tho he was afterward pressed to drink Healths, (I wonder who had so
little Respect or Reverence for him) particularly the King's, which was set up
by too many, as a distinguishing mark of Loyalty, and drew many into great
Excess after his Majesty's happy Restoration, but he would never dispense with
his Vow, tho he was sometimes roughly treated for this, says the Reverend Dr.
Burnet. And now let any Man of never so much Wit, show as much for Healthing,
as ever these two Instances against it, and he will say something to bring up
the Objection again to receive further Answers, when these are enervated.

To conclude this Argument, I say confidently, that Healthing falls under the
Imputation and Charge of all those Faults, and fatal Consequences that are
occasioned by it, and in probability had not been at those times, but through
it.

. 6. But suppose it never had been attended with those foul Effects of
Drunkenness, or any other, take it simply in its own Nature, as it is a kind of
Sacrifice or a Prayer, and let it appear as it is.

1. Take it as a Sacrifice to Health for any Person, and it is so putid, a
heathenish, irrational Vanity, that I will not stand to expose it. Salus and
Aesculapius were helpless Deities of the blind and deluded Heathen: they had a
God for every thing, for every State of Man; one to be a Midwife, another to
rock the Cradle, and so on, as St. Augustine runs them over. Lib. 4. c. 11. But
to us there is but one God, as the wisest of the Heathens also thought, that
one Jupiter was in all those Powers which the more ignorant adored. The simple
and ruder sort of Christians carried their Banquets to the Sepulchers of the
Martyrs, to be blessed by them; but did no Sacrifice to them. The Papists, like
the Heathen, built Altars and Temples to Saints, and had a Saint for every
Artificer, for every Disease, etc. Homily of the Peril of Idolatry, 2d Part.
But while we have the Reason of Men, and the Revelation from God, let us not
come near in Imitation to Heathens and Papists: Or, if it be a Sacrifice for
Health, who is it offered to? the God that gives it? Where has he required it?
Or rather, is it not offered to the Stomach and Belly of him that drinks it? I
loath to think of so vile a Sacrifice, it looks so like an Imitation of them
that sacrificed among the Pagans.

But the Notion I fix upon, is that which I think none can deny, that when we
drink an Health, we signify our good Wishes to the Party, and think this
Interpretation of it, does justify and excuse it, and rather commend than
condemn it. But if this Notion will bear a Trial, I will try it, and search
into it.

Let it be granted, that drinking to any Person is a Signification of Federacy,
Love, Friendship, Peace, of Favor from a Superior to an Inferior, of Respect
and Honor, if due Circumstances be observed, from an Inferior to a Superior;
and also we have seen Persons of great Civility to drink what they think best
to another, with a desire that he drink the same, because it is thought to be
the best, and by that the Stranger is encouraged to a Freedom, and that the
best is for his Service. But when Healths are called for, and delivered, these
things are quite altered, and I think perverted.

To make out this Notion more distinctly: 1. It is clear to us, that no Prayer
is accepted with God, but what is according to his Will; and that he is the
only Object of our Prayers, because the Giver of all things. 2. Health, if it
be taken largely, for all manner of outward good things, beneficial to Life and
Health, or for spiritual Well-being, which comes within the Signification of
Salus, or for that particular Blessing of bodily Health and Soundness; Health
in all these Acceptations is an invaluable Mercy, and the loss of it a very
great Affliction and Misery.


Hence I conclude two things.

1. That no Man is fit to drink a Health, but he that at that time is fit to
pray to the Holy God, the God of Heaven, by Jesus Christ. 2. No Man is fit to
pray, or to drink a Health, but he that is truly serious, and considers what he
does.
The reason of both is plain, because drinking a Health, in the most innocent
Notion of it, does intimate, or is attended with a Prayer, or a good Wish to
them they drink to; and that Prayer is, or should be to the merciful God only,
for one of the greatest outward Mercies that Mankind can desire or enjoy.

If any Man say, This carries the Notion too high, for no Man designs to
interest or concern God at all in a Health. (Truly it may be so, that it is
furthest from the Heart of many.) But how can you drink a Health and not
interest God in it? for if you wish well to the Person whose Health is drunk,
and wish him so great a Mercy as Health is, in its lowest Signification; you
must wish it of God, for none can give or continue it but he; and if you do not
seriously and heartily wish it of God, you do but delude, or mock, or
hypocritically complement your Friend, whose Welfare you pretend solemnly to
wish: you wish him Health, but do not intend therein to pray to God to give it.
Here Is now a Trial of the great Love of Healthers! But if you do heartily
desire that Mercy from God, how can you do it and not be serious? and make it a
piece of your Devotion? It is seriously to be prayed for, or not at all, for
you ought not to dissemble in the matter. If it be a serious good Wish or
Prayer then, Procul hinc, procul ite profani, sancta sanctis. Healths are only
to be drunk by holy and serious Persons: And I think they will hardly be
brought to it upon the Premises, and what is yet to follow.

First; Either you must join Drink and Prayer, or separate them.

1. If you join Drink and Prayer, whether mental or oral in a Health, then by
whose Institution do you drink and pray? by God's? or by Man's, by what Man, or
what kind of Men? Does Prayer sanctify that Cup? or does the Cup pollute the
Prayer? or do you seem to pray for the Drink's sake, and drink for your own
pleasure, or another's Health? I grant, and I wish it were more common, that we
may pray and praise God as we drink: But then by what Authority of Institution
do I drink that Cup,
to that end that it may be to the Health of another Person? or what kind of
sign is it that I wish the Health of another, when I drink? or what Efficacy
has any drinking upon anothes Constitution? If it had any Virtue at all to
give, restore, or continue Health, either naturally, or by Institution. I would
advise all Physicians and Apothecaries to forbear it, because it hinders them;
and to advise against it, or to use it as the last Remedy, when they have had
as many Fees as they desire, before they try it: But they know it has no
virtue to that end, but rather the contrary, as sometimes they find it to their
Profit. What help does their drinking afford to their Prayer? What, is it like
Water to a Mill? Drink turns about the Wheel of their Affections to make them
more ardent in their Requests for Health? Or, is it because they cannot wish
well to others, but when they are pleasing their own Sense and Appetite? or
then their Devotions are as violent as Raptures, when they are transported, and
in an Elevation? What a kind of carnal Fanaticism is this?

2. Or, though you do join Drink and Prayer, yet their Virtue is distinct and
separate; Prayer goes one way, and Drink another. Indeed I think they are
better parted than joined; and lest God be dishonored by such kind of Prayers,
as the Generality dishonor him and themselves by such kind of drinking; it
were plain dealing for them to speak the naked Truth, and say, when they drink,
Here Is to my self: or, Here Is to my own Health, and drink no more than will
consist with their Health, and promote it, and not hinder their holy and
fervent Prayer for themselves and others. Moderate drinking does promote their
own, but can never promote another, much less does immoderate save either, but
endanger one at least. When you pray, pray so that God may mercifully hear you;
and when you drink, drink so that God may mercifully bless you. But away with
these profane, uninstituted, carnal Sacraments, lest the Sin of Drinking cry
louder than your Prayers. We have often seen how Drinking has drowned Prayer,
and carried away all sense of God and Duty before it.

What? whether God hear you, yea or no, you care not for that; drink you must,
and drink you will! It is a Custom and a Complement in fashion, and if you keep
Company, you must do as Company do, and you look no further. This is most like
to be true. But if any be resolved to persist in their way, I am also resolved
to proceed to argue against it, and dehort from it; and some Arguments are
humbly presented to the most sober and innocent, and some earnestly submitted
to the wise and discerning, and all to them that are highly guilty, to reclaim
them if possible.

1. All Prayer for Health, and all other temporal Blessings, is to be presented
to God through our Mediator Christ, with Understanding, Intention of Mind, and
Faith and Reverence, in subordination to the hallowing of God's Name, and
concurrence with doing his Will on Earth as it is in Heaven. But is drinking of
Healths accompanied with such a Prayer? I propose my Assumption by way of
serious Question, whence every considering Man may conclude,

2. We ought to wish very well to our Neighbor, and to wish Health to them
that want it, with Submission to the Will of God, and a sanctified Health to
them that have it? And when ever we wish it, to be in a Disposition of Mind to
pray for it. But in drinking Healths, do we mind or regard these things? The
Physician is serious in many Years hard study, in cautious Prescription: The
sick and languishing are serious and patient in their Applications: And will
not you be serious in wishing it?

3. All Mercies that are wanting and desirable are to be sought for by proper
means of divine Appointment and Blessing. But seriously, Is drinking a Health,
or Healths, a proper, a natural, a moral, an instituted Means? a Means and
Method that God ever blessed to so great an end? The Physician applies proper
natural Means; the Christian and the Divine uses, and should only use
instituted Means to procure it; and is drinking Healths a proper, or a likely
means to obtain it? Then Healthers, heal your selves of Gouts, Fevers,
Surfeits.

4. When you drink a Health, do you mean that particular and singular Mercy, or
a Collection of Spiritual and Temporal Mercies? If the first; then why do you
seek that above all? is it because you place Felicity in it? know we not that
Sickness brings us as near Felicity? or do you make Health your top-Mercy and
your Idol? How many have you ever known attain Health that drunk it, (if you
have, advise the sick to drink Healths to themselves in Sack and Claret, or
Brandy, or any other strong and pleasing Liquor.) If under Health, you
comprehend spiritual Welfare and Salvation, (which you ought to wish
continually for all you love and Honor) is drinking Healths a spiritual Means
to procure it? If Healthing be a Means, why do you send for the Minister to
pray? and desire your Friends to pray by you when you are sick, and not for
your Companions to drink by you? God is more dishonored by one days healthing,
than he is honored, or Salvation promoted by a Lent of Prayers, except they
for sake their Drinking. If a Conception of Devotion spring within them, it is
made away like the Male Children of the Israelites, by the cruel Hands of
Healthers; it is drowned and smothered under this Cover.

5. Do not we plainly see there is a Repugnancy between these two? do not we
see, that thorow-drinking does cast off all thorow-Prayer? or effectual
thorow-Prayer does pray away Healthing? Where there is a sensible Repugnance,
can there be a true Consistence, and Cooperation?

6. That which God dislikes, should not be followed; and do not we see how God
dislikes these Practices? How Men are given up to the strong Delusions of Wine
and Strong-Drink? to the Mockage of Wine? see we not how Men are given up to
fill up their measure of Iniquity, and cut short their precious Lives? Do not
we hear what Organs play at these Devotions? Do not we know and hear what
Songs, instead of Psalms? what Blasphemy and Atheism, instead of God's Fear?
what Cursing instead of Blessing? what Affronts are offered Heaven? and what
Violence is offered to Hell? Are not Healthers commonly given up to Debauchery
and Sensuality? like Men forsaken of God, and possessed of Satan? And how can any
Men that have a Reverence, or Tenderness, or Zeal for God, give Countenance to
Healthing, any more than to any other Sin, whether Whoredom or Murder? See in
constant Observation at all Feasts of Companies, Parish-Meetings, Elections for
Parliaments, etc. who begin first, or hold out longest, and go through the
whole Service, they that pray most, or swear most? that love their Neighbor,
or hate him? Why will you join and imitate, or countenance such Men in such
things? As you should hate the Garments spotted with the Flesh, so you should
hate the Tables, Floors, Cups that are more than spotted with these Libations:
Isa. 28.8. For all Tables are full of vomiting and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean. If you thought so well of your earthly Tabernacles, as you do
of your Halls, Houses, Shops, you would no more set your Bodies on fire, than
your Houses: why will you partake in that Levity, Profaneness, Scorn, and
Derision of true Seriousness and Goodness in that ribbald, py-bald Wit and
Folly, in the Factiousness, and other Ingredients that make these Cups bitter
to any Soul that has any Sense and Taste? These are some of the things that
are mingled with your Prayers for Health, and Prosperity, and I know not what.

And in my Mind, these things are highly aggravated, that they should be the
common uncontrolled Practice in many public Meetings, at a time, when very
many are prosecuted to the utmost, for not receiving the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and when many crowd in, whether fit or unfit, and when so many
Officers are by Law obliged to receive the Sacrament, as a Test against Popery.
What can come nearer the holy Institution of our blessed Lord, than blessing of
Cups, hallowing them with Prayers, handling and delivering them with Prayers?
(does God take them so?) receiving them bare, and often either kneeling or
standing up? And who is this Service done to? and what more unlike to the holy
Sacrament than this? what more contrary in Effects? and inconsistent with the
Use and End of that divine Communion! -- But I must smother many other
Considerations to make an end.

10. Which do you chiesly intend in Healthing, whether Praying, or Drinking? if
Drinking, why will you profane Prayer by a carnal Subordination of it to the
Flesh? if Prayer, why do you drink so much? etc.

CHAP. V. Remedies and Antidotes against Healthing.
. 1. ALL that has been hitherto said, might be made up in Antidotes against
this Cup of moral Poison; to which I will more briefly add these following,
which are prescribed to none but them that will take them.

1. As it was said of old in another case, Go to Jordan; so say I, Go to the
Font, to the Laver of Regeneration, and remember that you put on Christ, and
were admitted into that Society, whereof he that was crucisied, complained in
his Extremity, I thirst, and is now exalted high above every Name, is Head,
Master, Governor; and the Society are all Saints by Vow and Profession.

2. Value the Price and Purchase of Souls and Bodies; remember that both are
not your own, being redeemed by, and dedicated to the Lord, you are bound to
glorify him with both; you are not Debtors to the Flesh, to live after the
Flesh; but if you would live, must mortify the Flesh, and honor God in your
Persons, which you cannot do if you dishonor even your Bodies, which are not
for Drink any more than for Fornication, or Pride, or any other filthy Service.

3. Consider the Price of your common Mercies, of infinitely greater Worth than
all the precious Jewels, the profuse and prodigious Cajus dissolved in Vinegar
to drink them off. The Tenure by which you hold is the noblest by Gift, by the
Covenant of Grace, for your use, but for his Glory; 1 Cor. 10.31. If you do not
like them upon these Conditions, why do not you throw them up, and hold them so
no longer? and then see the Consequence!

4. By the Gospel we are indulged a great Liberty in the Enjoyment of
Creatures, we are under no Prohibition and Restraint that was upon the Jews:
But we are no where so enjoined Temperance and Sobriety, as by the Gospel; none
made such Laws for the Appetite as Christ, who called them Blessed that are
poor, and pronounced a Woe to them that are full. He preferred Lazarus in his
Sores, with Dogs, before the rich Man. Carnifices salutis, ventrem and gulam,
coercebat exemplis. Novatianus Epist. de Cibis Judaicis.

5. Do not affect to be civil, modish, and genteel in those things by which
Sobriety, Modesty, Seriousness, and Holiness are defaced. Grace, and pure
Christianity, are the most noble qualities, except we think the Divine Nature
the meanest. And what is Gentility, but the World's old Livery newly trimmed? an
upstart Foreigner, that claims equal Privileges with Grace, if it does not take
the upper hand of it at most of our Tables. If Men did affect to be regenerate,
and Christians indeed, in all Conversation, and to be accomplished with
gracious Habits, supernatural Qualities and Graces, above all Qualities, no
Book would be more studied than the Bible, and what Christ teaches would never
be forgotten, etc. But Men soon learn, because they affect the Modes of Speech,
and Actions, and Conversations, (and this of Healthing is taken up as soon as
any,) and carry it, as if it were a mean thing to be religious, and silliness
to be serious, and an odd thing to be strict, and an indecent thing to be
singular, where we should not be singular indeed, that is, because we should
all follow the Rules and Examples of our Master in Heaven, the Teacher that
came from God, to teach us the way to him.

6. Be not so much taken with the Modishness of this Complemental Snare, as not
to be out of love, and in the utmost detestation of its ordinary Attendants. To
this end frame and draw true Images of things, and take off the Vizors from the
face of Healths; when it is enjoined as a Sign of Loyalty, (which I hope it
will never be, that has been forbidden by Royal Proclamation) then it will be
soon enough. It was an Apothegm of a most learned Statesman, I will pray for
the King's Health, and drink for my own. Sir Francis Bacon. When it can be
proved to you, that it is a real Sign of Honor and Respect, or an Act of
Civility, or Generosity, Nobleness or Hospitality; and when it ends as well as
it began, then take it up. But do not you find, that then Persons drink
together more like Friends, and less like Strangers, when there are no Healths
drunk, than when there be? And do not you find it true, what St. Ambrose
observed, Rogas ad jucunditatem, cogis ad mortem; invitas ad prandium, efferre
vis ad sepulchrum, etc. You invite to a Dinner, but they are carried to their
Grave, etc. Vocatis ut amicos, emittitis ut inimicos: You invite them as
Friends, but send them out like Enemies.

You may, if you will, see in Healthing, 1. Irreverence of God, taking his Name
in vain. 2. No Kindness to your Friends, but their Health in pretense. 3. An
ungrateful Abuse of excellent Mercies, Wine and Strong-Beer, that lose their
comforting Virtue by excess, and their Use by wantonness. 4. Sin and Levity
faced and painted with a deceiving Complement. Some drink in mere Bravery and
Pride, or in Flattery, or out of Fear, or mistaken Love, but most commonly from
Self-love, and Sensepleasing.

Secondly, draw right and lively Idea's and Images of that great Sin of
Drunkenness, for detestation sake. Laesa est pietas, ubi irridetur ebrietas.
Ambr. You may find enough to turn your Heart from it, if you will but search
for it. And is not this the daily Attendant upon Healthing? It Is the greatest
Disgrace a Man can put upon himself or others. Why shall it not be reputed to
be as great a dishonor to be laid by the heels by this Sin, as to be put in
the Stocks, or a Prison? Suppose a Company of rude and impudent Servants should
combine to abuse their Master, a Person of noble Birth, and great Honor; to
that end they should wheedle and gull him into a pleasant Humor, make him very
merry; and when they have levelled him down to a Familiarity, they take his
place, and play the Master; they then put out one Candle, and anon another, and
then come the Grooms and Footmen, and paw upon him, and at last lay him under
the Table, or in a meaner place. Thus the Divine Reason is abused by the
Senses, and the Inferiors being little better, or rather in that worse than
Brutes, make sport with their Master. Again, imagine a noble Person to have
many graceful and useful Servants under him, and if they be not true and
officious to him, it is his Fault, and not theirs; and this noble Person being
out of humor, he turns one out of his place, and then another, until he have
left him none to help him: Would it not be a very ignoble Action? Would he not,
when come to himself, repent, and do so no more? Is it not like this, when the
noble Reason and Affections are depraved by Lust, do serve his Senses, and the
Members of his Body, even those that were born with him, bred with him from the
very Cradle, went to School with him, lay in the same Bed with him, and are as
dear to him when he is himself, as his very Eyes, Hands, and Feet; but he does
cast them off by the insinuation of Wine; the Eyes fail, the Hands shake, the
Legs wave like Reeds: Neque pes, neque men's satis officium faciunt. And tho
they are next day taken home again, yet for ought he knew, they were quite
gone, never to be seen till the Resurrection. -- It is a high Offense to our
glorious Creator; it perverts the end of our Redemption; it unmans the Man, and
is a contempt of Death, the Grave, and Hell it self. If Men had any reverence
for their God, Creator, Savior, Sanctifier; if any honor to their own Nature;
if any sense of Mortality, and of the reference this mortal Life has to
eternal Life, they would never live it thus, throw away their Time thus. How
curious are Men of their own Pictures, of their Childrens Faces and Shapes, of
the Monuments of their Ancestors! how enraged at the violation of their
Daughters! And will you with your own hands, by the ungrateful abuse of Plenty,
deprave, desile, swill, and prostitute your selves! What if you were stripped by
your own Servants, of your own Clothes, and they should put on you their
Liveries or Frocks? would you brook it? Yet a Gentleman is a Gentleman in the
meanest Garb; but you are not Men, when you undress, or put off Sobriety. In a
word, it is a great Sin, and what if the Lord find you so doing?

7. If you would not drink to excess, nor health about, be sure you do not
begin. And know, there is an honor due to Temperance, as much as Chastity. If
you would not dishonor the Chastity of the dearest Friend, if you would take
it for a dishonor to have your Chastity attempted, never tempt, or suffer
Temperance to be tempted; for Temperance and Chastity are of the same great
Family, tho but low in the World.

8. Prize and improve Retirement; study to bear it, and to be happy in it. And
be no oftener, nor longer abroad, than good occasion will require. And in your
own House, under God, be Master; suffer no Servants to be drunk, nor any of
them to play the Gentleman with Healths. And no Man of breeding or worth, will
put you out of your own way.

9. Preserve the purity of your Souls, as well as your Hands; the purity of
your Bodies from Excess, as from all Uncleanness. And as you would not be a
Companion of Thieves, neither in their Thievery, nor in their Prisons, nor in
the place of Execution, be not a Companion of Drunkards; for Thieves and they
shall be condemned together. 1 Cor. 6.9. And as sleight of hand, and cunning
conveyances of small Things, are preparatory Exercises to the Art of Cheating;
so is Healthing the initiating Ceremony in the Profession and Society of
Good-Fellows. Next to the purity of your own Persons, preserve the purity of
your own Families, and then of Societies, which are corrupted commonly by
nothing more, than by this wanton playing with plenty of the best of Creatures.
Poor People, that labor hard, and drink Water or small Beer, do not use it;
nor you neither, but when you have the best, and wantonly waste it.

10. If you have not experience of your own, you may soon be informed of the
many Evils which befall others, and that this is the entrance into the Schools
of Vanity and Iniquity, and the Chambers of Death. It is good for you to be
established with Grace, and not with Meats, says the Apostle, and not with
Drink, say I; and be resolved neither to offend nor entice any, nor to impose
upon any, nor to be imposed upon, that you may not communicate your sins to
others, nor be partakers of other Men's sins. Be sober, and watch; and if Men
will not contain themselves, be as resolute to refuse, as others are to offer.
Purity will do you more good, and bring you a greater Glory, than all these
shows of Civility and Breeding, as this is thought to be, by them who first
grow modish, then apish, and then bold, and then obdurate. And whether
Healthing be a sin, or sinful, or how far it partakes or contracts, I humbly
leave it to them that will peruse this Discourse; but this I think is too
manifest, that it is an Inlet of a Flood of Sin in all parts of the Land, and
does more harm than Floods in Harvest.

I have but one thing more to do, to commend the Reader to the Grace of God,
and Holiness and Sobriety to his study, and conclude with those grave Words of
the great St. Augustine. Ergo Fratres charissimi, dum haec suggero, me absolvo
apud Deum. Quicunque me audire contempserit, and ad bibendum pronus fuerit, vel
in convivio suo alios adjurare vel cogere voluerit, and pro se, and pro illis
in die Judicii reus erit. Et quia, quod pejus est, aliqui etiam Clerici, qui
hoc deberent prohibere, ipsi cogunt bibere aliquos plus quam expedit, amodo
incipiant and seipsos corrigere, and alios castigare, ut cum ante Tribunal
Christi venerint, nec de sua, nec de aliorum ebrietate incurrant supplicium.
Sermon. de Temp. 232. and in ead. Domin. Sermon. 2.

If All that has been said by me, will not prevail on our common Healthers to
leave off this ill Custom, I will desire them to read and ponder his Majesty's
Proclamation (here adjoined) against vicious, debauched, and profane Persons,
and against drinking his Health, published a little after his Happy
Restoration, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign.

CHARLES R.
SInce it has pleased the Divine Providence, in so wonderful a manner, and by
ways and means no less miraculous, than those by which he did heretofore
preserve and restore his own chosen People, to restore Us, and Our good
Subjects to each other, and to show Us a very hopeful Prospect, if not to put
Us already into possession of that Peace, Happiness and Security, with which
this our Kingdom has been heretofore blessed: It will become Us all, in our
several Stations, to acknowledge this transcendent goodness of Almighty God in
so seasonable a conjuncture, with such a Circumspection, Integrity, and
Reformation in Our Lives, that we may not drive away that Mercy which so near
approaches Us, by making Our selves (wholly) unworthy of it. And in Order
hereunto, We think it high time to show Our Dislike of those (against whom We
have been ever enough offended, tho We could not in this manner declare it) who
under pretense of Affection to Us and our Service, assume to themselves the
liberty of Reviling, Threatening and Reproaching others; and as much as in them
lies, endeavor to stifle and divert their good Inclinations to Our Service,
and so to prevent that Reconciliation and Union of Hearts and Affections, which
can only, with God's Blessing, make Us rejoice in each other, and keep Our
Enemies from rejoicing.

There are likewise another sort of Men, of whom we have heard much, and are
sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in Taverns, Tipling-houses, and
Debauches, giving no other Evidence of their Affection to us, but in Drinking
Our Health, and inveighing against all others, who are not of their own
dissolute temper: and who, in truth, have more discredited Our Cause, by the
License of their Manners and Lives, than they could ever advance it by their
Affection or Courage. We hope, that this extraordinary way of delivering Us all
from all We feared, and almost bringing Us to all We can reasonably hope for,
has and will work upon the Hearts even of these Men, to that degree, that they
will cordially renounce all that Licentiousness, Profaneness, and Impiety,
with which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt others, and
that they will hereafter become examples of Sobriety and Virtue, and make it
appear, that what is past was rather the Vice of the Time, than of the Persons,
and the fitter to be forgotten together.

And, because the fear of Punishment, or apprehension of Our Displeasure, may
have influence upon many, who will not be restrained by the Conscience of their
Duty, We do declare, That We will not exercise just Severity against any
Malefactors, sooner than against Men of dissolute, debauched, and profane
Lives, with what parts soever they may be otherwise qualified and endowed; and
We hope that all Persons of Honor, or in Place and Authority, will so far
assist Us in discountenancing such Men, that their Discretion and Shame will
persuade them to reform what their Conscience would not, and that the
displeasure of good Men toward them, may supply what the Laws have not, and,
it may be, cannot well provide against, there being by the License and
Coruption of the Times, and the depraved Nature of Men, many Enormities,
Scandals, and Impieties, in Practice and Manners, which Laws cannot well
describe, and consequently not enough provide against, which may by the example
and severity of virtuous Men, be easily discountenanced, and by degrees
suppressed.

However, for the more effectual reforming these Men, who are a discredit to
the Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor, and to wish well to: We
require all Mayors, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, to be very vigilant and
strict in the discovery and prosecution of all Dissolute and profane Persons,
and such as blaspheme the Name of God by profane Swearing and Cursing, or
revile or disturb Ministers, and despise the Public Worship of God; that being
first bound to the good Behavior, they may be further proceeded against, and
exposed to shame, in such a manner, as the Laws of the Land, and the just and
necessary Rules of Government shall direct or permit.

God save the King.
I intended to produce some sad Examples (of which there are too many) of the
lamentable Effects of Healthing, but I shall only relate one, viz.

At a Tavern near Cheapside in London, certain Gentlemen drinking Healths to
their Lords, on whom they had dependence, one desperate Wretch steps to the
Tables end, lays hold on a Pottle-pot full of Canary, swears a deep Oath, What
will none here drink a Health to my noble Lord and Master? And so setting the
Pottle-pot to his Mouth, drinks it off to the bottom, was not able to rise up
or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoring Sleep; and being
removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the Servants of the House, attending
the time of the drinking, was within the space of two hours irrecoverably dead.

FINIS.

