ONE OUTCRY More against TITHES. Unto the Chief RULER of the Nation of ENGAND,
and all that are with him of God permitted to be in present Authority, whether
Parliament, Council or Army; by whatsoever Name or Title known or called: But
in a more especial manner, To such of them as are yet remaining faithful unto
the former declared for, and never to be forgotten Cause of KING JESUS, who are
such as have not departed, through sinning against the light of a good
conscience, by opposing such as would have promoted the same, nor have sought
by any secret endeavors to hinder and obstruct the performing to God Almighty,
and making good unto his poor every-wayes-wronged people, viz. All those many
National-Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, Vows, Oaths
and Covenants, with solemn Appeals, which unto him were in the days of
greatest distress made for obtaining deliverance from Sions destroying bloody
Enemies, to the end Christ's Kingdom might be advanced, and Satan's Kingdom of
Tyranny defaced, and the Government of the Lord God of Israel, by his holy,
just, and good Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, and righteous Judgments be
established in the room of the Popes destroying Power, which upholdeth wicked
devouring men as yet to tyranize over the dear Saints and Servants of God for
their consciences, as much as ever they did in the Kings time, who in his Days
regarded not what tyranny by his Power, and in his Name was done against the
Members of Christ, as did appear by his suffering of them to be so inhumanely
used as they were, both by imprisonments, banishments, and setting of them
gagged in Pillories, burning of them with hot Irons, and cutting off their ears
from their heads, besides whipping and stocking, with many more bloody
cruelties; all which cruelties being by the King suffered and connived at, was
the only cause why the wrath of God with his revengeful Judgments came upon
him, his posterity, and the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
etc.

And yet notwithstanding, you that are in present Power know these things, do
even as he did, suffer the Saints in your Name, and by your power daily to be
imprisoned, and otherwise afflicted; and that you may not be ignorant thereof,
I have been moved to make the same known unto you by way of declaration, which
is grounded upon the Holy Scriptures; wherein is contained the manner of our
sufferings, and by whom: Together, with serious Advertisements concerning the
abuse of Power, and the abominations of Priesthood, the wickedness of Lawyers,
with them combining for to destroy the Just from off the earth.

Written the beginning of the second Month, 1657. by ISAAC GRAYES, Prisoner for
the cause of Christ in the Wood-street Compter, London, where I have been kept
above three years; Given forth for the sake of such as with my self do suffer
for the testimony of Faith and a good Conscience.

For if I build again the things which I have destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor, Gal. 2. 18. And think thou this, O man, that judge them
which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment
of God? Romans 2. 3. Let all such therefore take heed that their own wickedness
of backsliding do not come when it is too late to correct them, let him that is
wise in heart read with understanding, Jer. 2. 19. LONDON, Printed for the
Author, and some of them are to be sold at the Black-More, near Fleet-Bridge,
1657.

The unlawfulness of the National Priesthood, with their unjust demands proved
by way of grounds and reasons, laid down according to the holy Scriptures, why
there ungodly Wages of Tithes, by the suffering, persecuted, and every ways
afflicted Members of Christ Jesus in this their day of faithfulness to him, are
denied, as by this following Declaration will be made appear.
HUmbly shows unto you, O ye Rulers of the people, the abominations which are
committed in the matters of tithes by the called Ministers of England, and
others, for as much as that it does evidently appear by the Law of the Lord God
of Israel, Tithes were given to Levi and his sons, and to such as with them
were appointed of God unto the Office of the first Priesthood, and none else,
who had a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the Law, that
is of their Brethren, as may appear; of which Priesthood the Priests of this
Nation are not; for they cannot prove themselves made by the Law of God, as the
first Priesthood was; neither can it be made appear they ever received from
the Lord God of Israel any such commandment for their taking tithes of the
people of England, as the Aaronical and Levitical Priesthood did for their
taking tithes of their Brethren the children of Israel; as for the Priests of
this Nation it will appear they never were made Priests of God, but by the
late Bishops, who themselves were formerly made by the Pope of Rome, as I
shall make appear toward the later end of this Treatise, by the Laws and
Statutes of this Nation

And again I find that the Priests, the Levites, and all the Tribe of Levi had
no part of Inheritance with Israel, and therefore were they appointed to eat
the Offerings of the Lord made by fire; because they had no Inheritance amongst
their Brethren, for the Lord was their Inheritance; Read Deuteronomy. 18. v. 1, 2.
And as it does appear by Moses in his refusing to give them any possessions of
Lands with their Brethren after God had given them victory over such of their
Enemies as they became possessors, viz. of the Lands of those many Kings which
were slain of them by the edge of the Svvord; and nothing was by Moses given
to the Tribe of Levi, because said he, the Lord God of Israel was their
Inheritance, as he had said unto them, Josh. 19. 3, etc.

And again it does and may appear, that the Lord God of Israel did appoint
Storehouses, unto which the people were expressly commanded in the time of the
first Covenant for to bring their tithes, that thither the Widovv, the
Fatherless, and Stranger, might also come within the Gates of the Priests to be
filled; by which it is manifest, That the Widovv, Fatherless and Stranger had
as much right to the Tithes as the Priest; through which relief there was not
a beggar in Israel; neither were they (the Priests and Levites) permitted to
persecute any upon Trebble Damages who did not bring their Tithes according to
the Commandment of the Lord; for they that did neglect were cursed with a
curse, as it is evident, Mal 3. Now the contrary does appear among the Priests
of England; whom I have heard often say, They were of Gods own Tribe of Levi,
and yet live in the practice of such abominable things, and do also justify
such as with them do the same, as never was committed nor done in the time of
the first Priesthood, as is daily made manifest in that unsufferable
wickedness of theirs in taking away peoples Cattle out of their yards, and
Goods out of their Houses for pretended Tithes upon trebble Damages, which is
three for one, against the express Law of God; whereby it does and may appear
unto such as are with my self of the seed of Israel, That it is not only the
Priests fault alone, who are not of God, but you sin in suffering of them, as
you are the Rulers of the people, who do permit them in your Name, and by your
Power, to do what they do: These evils rightly considered, does give a
discovery that you are departed from the Lord God of Israel, whom you once
declared for, as does appear by your taking part with the Priests, who are his
Enemies; or else if it were not so, your consciences would teach you to obey,
observe and keep the Laws; Statutes, Commandments, Precepts and Judgments of
the Lord as well as my self* who for keeping the same do suffer; which would
not be if you did stand in the counsel of the Lord, which then you would seek
to do his will by seeing his Laws duly and truly executed upon such as are the
breakers thereof, which would cause your days to be prolonged in the Land
wherein ye yet live as so many Enemies to that most holy God, whose just and
righteous Laws yea even hate to obey, observe, and keep, and in effect do
amongst your selves conclude, That the Government which God Almighty did
appoint his people to be governed by according to his righteous Order, which
by you is not judged good enough, nor wise enough to be governed by in your
generations, as is evident by your ruling of the people with such Laws as you
and other transgressors before you did from Imagination make, and set up to
oppose the Laws, Commandments, and Statutes of the only wise God; for which
wickedness of theirs so committed, the just judgment and vengeance of the
Lord has from one generation to another destroyed both them and theirs from
off the earth, and yet you are not sensible for what they have been cut off,
although he has made use of you as Instruments in his hand to cut off the late
King for his disobedience to the Lord God of Israel, who stood not in his
counsel, but was driven aside by the flattery of wicked Priests and Lawyers as
you are, although little notice by you is taken thereof.

I therefore desire from my heart in love to your souls, that you did fully
understand and know wherefore the Lord did permit you to put the King to death,
and then you would seek how to do his will, and not your own; and then who do
you think would harm you? but because you do not, therefore it is that you
delight not in the Law of the Lord, as King David his servant did, for which
cause plots and conspiracies are daily and justly ^y him suffered for to be
contrived against you, which hitherto has been discovered to that end and
purpose, that you might be warned for to return unto the Lord from the evil of
your doings, before destruction in good earnest does come upon you, and then it
will be too late to seek repentance, or to wish you had unto God and his people
paid your vows; now know, that through your disobedience unto him whom you have
promised reformation unto, and yet have not performed what you have so
promised, the number of of oppressors under you have taken boldness for to
increase; at which the lying National Priests do rejoice, who do in like manner
make their boast, and say, That they will have Tithes paid unto them upon
force, by such people as do refuse for conscience sake, or else they will take
away their goods, which daily they do in your Name that are the chief Rulers
of these three Nations, viz. England, Scotland, and Ireland; and by your Power
they also imprison the Saints as they did in the Kings time, for that they
cannot in conscience pay Tithes; the Priests excusing the manner of their
tyranny so committed, does lay the fault and blame upon you, they saying they
are enforced to do what they do because you require of them Offerings or first
Fruits, which they cannot pay unto you, unless the people first pay the same by
way of Tithes unto them; now if it be so betwixt you and the Priests, then
where is that Liberty of Conscience performed, with your former Engagemens,
Declarations, Remonstrances, and those many Oaths, Vows, and Covenants
discharged, which were made in the sight of heaven, in the days of your
distress, when you were entrusted by the people of God (as their servant) to
fight their Battles, viz. at Dunbar, Worcester-Fight, and several other places,
as you cannot but remember, was put forth under pretense of Public Liberty,
but are all yet unperformed, with your last Promise also, which you made to my
loving friend, Mr. Iessie, and several other friends, concerning your taking
away of that yet continued Antichristian Oppression of Tithes, which should be
done (said you) by the third day of Siptember, which was in the year 1654. or
if they were not taken away then you bid them call you Juglers: Now know,
that had this last Promise with your former Remonstrances, Engagements and
Protestations, etc. been by you really intended for to have been performed,
according to what you pretended, then my self, who formerly have made redress
unto you, and many more of the dear Saints and faithful Servants of the Lord
God of Israel, could not have been by you suffered for to be thus ruinated in
our outvvard Estates, many of us as are, and yet notvvithstanding, our persons
kept prison for that we cannot sin against our consciences in paying Tithes;
in which Prison I have been many times in danger of being thrown into the
Hole through poverty, which has made me unable of my self for to provide
moneys for to pay my Chamber-Rents; so that if my sufferings must for
conscience sake be by you still continued, then that you would be pleased to
show some compassion unto me, by taking care for to have my Chamber-Rent
satisfied, I shall remain very thankful to you for the same; through which
kindness of yours, if I may so find it, I shall be the better enabled for to
be kept from perishing till the Lord is pleased to give deliverance some other
ways, it may be through the death of my cruel Enemies, if it may not come from
you; for I am well assured from the Lord, a deliverance I shall have from my
oppressors ere long. And thus having discharged my conscience in what I have
already declared, I shall return again to my former Matter, from whence I am a
little digressed.

Giving of you to know, and all in Authority with you, That forasmuch as you by
your Power do uphold the Priests of this Nation for to take the wages of the
Law of the Lord God of Israel by way of tithes, which peculiarly was given unto
the first Priesthood for their service done, which was their right both by Law
and Commandment, during that legal Ministration: Now I say, the contrary does
appear by these Priests, for that they do not the work and service which the
Law of tithes requires should be done, therefore transgressors they are, and
you also guilty of the same transgression, for that they are by you supported
and upheld for to serve in their false Ministry, contrary to what the Lord has
appointed, who did command that these Priests in the first Covenant should be
clothed with holy Garments while their service was by them a discharging, which
the Priests of England do not appear in; neither have they in use the Water of
Purification, nor do they serve at the Altar of the worldly Sanctuary, as the
Aaronical and Levitical Priests did, who made ready all the Burnt-offrings,
Sacrifices, etc. Where I say is there an* of these services by our counterseit
English Priests done? neither do they circumcise as the first Priesthood did,
who performed what was by them of the Law required according to the will of
God, unto whom the right of tithes did appertain by way of a peculiar Gift for
their work, and service done, as does appear Numb. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
etc. Numb. 18. 20; 21, 23, 31, etc. And now seeing that the
Tythe-Egge-taking-Priests of this Nation have not donenor does any of the
services which the Law of the Lord God of Israel does require; they are
manifest rebels to God, and dissemblers with that people, we are by them
seduced, for that they receive of them Tithes, the wages of the Law, which did
belong to the Levitical Priesthood, who left not their work undone as they do:
And thus by their wicked actions they appear not to be called of God as those
Priests were, who had Storehouses to put Tithes into, as is evident, Mal. 3.
that thither the Widow, Fatherless, and Stranger might come read Deuteronomy. 14. 27,
28, 29, etc. for to be filled and satisfied within the Gates of the Priests,
that there might not be a beggarin Israel: Now by what has been already
declared, it does appear, That neither the Priests have right to Tithes, nor
none else. Yet notwithstanding Tithes by the Laws of the Pope are forced to be
paid in this Nation, and neither Widows, Fatherless; nor Strangers suffered for
to partake with the Priests thereof, but instead of being out of them relieved,
they are forced for to pay Tithes, and such as do not, are by them imprisoned;
never was there any such cruelties by the Priests under the Law unto the
Widows, Fathersess and Strangers done, as is by these Priests of England, who
are of the Pope, (but surely woe will be their reward according to what Christ
has pronounced, which will assuredly come upon them and their Assistances) for
their binding heavy burdens upon the poor, too grievous for to be born, Matthew.
3. never was there such Priests known since the world began, as these
deceivers, deluders, and Seducers are, who do appear to be Gods adversaries,
with whom it shall go ill; read Isa. 3. And says the Lord of Hosts, the mighty
One of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of my Adversaries, Isa. 1. 24.

Now having proved them to be no Priests by the Law of the Lord God of Israel,
I shall also through his help and gracious assistance, make it appear that they
are no Ministers of the Gospel, but such as the Apostle of them has said
should in the last days come, who accordingly are come, which have a form of
godliness, as all false Professors have, but deny the Power thereof, as he has
also said they should do, who are crept into the Houses of the cruel Beast,
which for them was provided, where they promote his worship and service whose
Ministers they are, for which they receive tithes, leading silly women captive,
laden with sins, led away by them with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and as Jannes and Jambers withstood
Moses, so do they also resist the truth, being (as by their actions does
appear) men of corrupt minds, who are reprobate concerning the Faith; but they
shall proceed no further then unto the making manifest of their folly and
madness, as theirs also was made manifest: Thus by the light of Christ in my
conscience am I come to see what the Priests are, and their upholders, in
despite of their fair pretenses, and am made able to witness the truth
fulfilled according to the sayings of the true Minister of Jesus Christ; read
the 2. Epist. of Paul to Timothy. 3. ch 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, v. etc. and for which
Testimony of mine born against the Priests (for Christ) I am come by them, and
such as with them live by Tithes, for to suffer persecution; which are such
evil men and seducers as the Apostle and true Minister of Christ has said
should wax worse and worse, and being deceived shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his
power, who now are unto me, and all the enlightened of Christ, known for to be
of that sort which the Apostle had a foresight of in the mystery of Iniquity,
wherein they are now come forth in their proper colors of deceivableness, of
all unrighteousness, which by them is made use of instead of the holy Garments,
of the true Priesthood, they receiving not the love of the Truth, that they
might be saved; for which cause says the Apostle God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who
belive not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, as does appear by
their disorderly walking in all manner of pleasure and idleness, which the true
Ministers of Christ did witness against, who said We did not eat any man's bread
for naught, but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that we might not
he chargeable to any; not because we have not Power, but to make our selves
ensamples unto such as follow us, which the called Ministers of England do not,
but are enemies unto both their example, and such Saints as do witness the same
life and Ministry; but the Priests do live upon the maintenance which they gain
by making use of the power of the World, by which they take away from the poor
the benefit of all their labors, which truth I hope is made manifest unto
every one that has but reason in them, as well as unto the suffering Saints,
which is the fruits by which they are made manifest, according as Christ has
said, Matthew. 7. By their fruits ye shall know them; and was there ever such
fruits of robbing and spoiling peoples Goods, and imprisoning of the Saints and
faithful servants of the Lord God of Israel since the world began, as by
priests in our age, who surname themselves Messengers of God, and yet wrong and
violence, robbing and spoiling is the fruits they bring forth, by which they
are also known to be none of the Ministers of Christ, nor Messengers of God,
but have made themselves fully manifest to be of the remainder of that cursed
generation and stock of hypocrites, which were devourers of Widows Houses, as
daily does appear which cannot be denied, for there never was greater
devourers then they are since the world began, who for a pretense make long
prayers to accomplish their mischievous designs; and was there ever the like
praying and preaching in any age as has been in this our age or last days of
finishing iniquity; under which pretense of theirs, the innocent who are
departed from evil are become the prey of the devourer; but for their reward
says Christ, They shall receive to themselves the greater damnation; read
Matt. 23. 14, etc. And says the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 2.
They shall through covetousness, and with feigned words make merchandise of the
people; and was there ever such merchandise made of a people since they had a
being upon the earth, as now is made by these called Preachers and Minister's
of the Gospel, whose wicked fruits has made them manifest to be those
hypocrites and false Teachers which were before spoken of, should proceed from
the corrupt Tree, from whom the Man of God does flee, to follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love; Patience, and Meekness, 1 Timothy 6, 11, v.
etc. in which life they, the Priests, are not found, as does appear by their
upholding and seeking to maintain by the power of the cruel Beast, that which
Christ has disannulled because of the weakness and unprositableness thereof,
for that the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope
made perfect, whereby we draw near to God, Heb. 7. 18, 19, v. etc.

And now for to take away all obstructions, before I procced further I shall
give an account of my Faith and hope by declaring what Church I am of, that I
so may remove the cause of jealousy, which is too often appearing in the
ignorant, yea, even in such which makes a high profession of godliness, I
shall therefore give you, the Rulers, and all that are wise in heart for to
know, That I own the Ministry and Ministers of the everlasting Gospel, which
is not of man, neither are they made by man, as the Priests of the Nation are
but are such as Christ has made, whose foundation stands sure, which shall
abide for ever, which changes not, neither can it be shaken, being built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. And I do also vvitness and declare, That all
the Ministers of Christ have accordingly received a perfect Ministry, which is
free, and not burdensome to any, because they belong to the true Church,
whereof Christ is head, which is his body, according as the Scripture does with
me declare; which Church is the Assembly of the Righteous, who are holy, from
which the ungodly are excluded, according as it is written Psalm. 1. 5. The Lord
knows the ways of the righteous, but the ways of the ungodly shall perish.
I do also own the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which none that are unholy can
partake of, and the worship of God, which is in spirit and truth; read Joh. 4.
23. And likewise the Law of God, which is holy, ^ust, and good, which never
changes by no diversity of place or time. And thus have I in brief declared an
account of what Church I am, and also of my faith and hope, wherein I have
truly discharged my conscience in brief, and for which I am at this day a
sufferer.

And so far as I can understand from friends which does give me an account of
what they understand from amongst you, that there is nothing to be expected
from you, but more bonds to be laid upon the Saints; at which nevvs I find in
my self a comfortable satisfaction for to continue my waiting upon the farther
good pleasure of the Lord God of Israel, rather then to sin against my
conscience by giving way to break his Laws, Commandments, Ordinances, and
Statutes, for which I have suffered persecution for above this eight years
together; first by one John Lawson a drunken Priest, belonging to the Parish of
Basinborne in the County of Cambridge, who for Tithes took away my goods, and
yet notwithstanding was not therewith contented, while such time as by his
cruelty he drove me to fly with my Family twenty miles from that Town by the
reason he had gained a Warrant from the Committees of that County for to carry
my body to prison, refusing to take Bail, according as the Warrant did express.
But soon after I had removed my self and Family from his Tyranny, an other
Enemy to the Gospel appeared against me, viz. one John Budging of the same
Town, Farmer of the Tithes, belonging to the Parsonage, who persecuted me at
the popish Law; and after he had spent some time, gained power also for to
carry me away to prison, notwithstanding he had carried away a great part of my
Corn out of the field; through which Tyranny of his I was forced to forsake my
poor Wife and Children, which constrained me to put my life upon the danger of
loosing, by reason I fled to the Army of the Commonwealth of England for
refuge into Scotland, where as a Soldier I did engage, in hopes of gaining not
only victory over such as was then counted our Enemies, but also to have seen
an end of that their power by which tyranny and oppression is still promoteed:
And after the wars of Scotland were over, there followed on Worcester-Fight,
where I was also bodily engaged; and after that Field-Battel was fought, I
returned privatelely home to visit my poor Wife and distressed Family; but not
long after my adversary obtained intelligence that I was at home, and thereupon
did send certain sons of Belial for to carry me away to prison, which for to
accomplish their end, did by force of Arms break into my house upon me; but
being by me strongly resisted with Sword and Pistol, they durst not proceed the
attempting to come up into my Chambers, where I was ready to receive them; they
perceiving of it, did quarrel amongst themselves about raising of the Town for
to pull down the house upon my head, they threatening sorely to have me forth
dead or alive; I understanding the same, did through the help of the Lord make
my pass out of an upper-Windovv, leaving my poor Wife and Children to their
bloody rage, who did accordingly set a drawn Sword to her Breast, and did
threaten to kill her after they did see I was escaped: Many more insufferable
cruelties have I and my Family undergone, which are too many for me to give
relation: But to be brief; So precious was my liberty unto me when time was,
that the very thoughts of a Gaol was un to me dreadful, that while I was at
liberty, I was in mighty bondage through the continual fear of being betrayed,
which at length was brought to pass by one Crooply a Broker, Shopkeeper
sometime of the Town of Cambridge, who as I understand did receive from my
enemy a pretty roundsum of money forto betray me; which accordingly he effected
by his discovering where I was at a Friends house, at which house I was
seized on by several Sergeants, and brought away to prison, it being upon the
third day of the second month, called April, in the year 1654. where I have
ever since remained, and many times and often in great necessity, by reason my
poor Wife has not had left wherewith all to relieve me with the value of 12.
d. in money all this time of my long and harsh imprisonment as she with weeping
tears has unto me expressed; and I seeing her distress, have been forced to
borrow money for to relive her; this being the truth according to what has
been by me declared, I shall leave the consideration thereof unto you the
Rulers for to judge according to conscience, whether these outrages by you
ought any longer to be suffered, seeing they are done against the Law of the
Lord God of Israel, and also against your own promoted Laws, as they are now
become executed, seeing the Ecclesiastical Courts are down; and it is also
contrary to Law for any man to be kept in prison as I have been and not
relieved, insomuch, that had not the Lord in mercy toward me raised up some
few of his beloved people, who live in the life of Righteousness, for to have
taken care of me in this time of my harsh affliction I might unavoidably have
perished not only by hunger and nakedness, but by cold also, for that I could
not come to receive the benefit of the heat of fire for the space of two Years
and seven months: Now judge I pray you who are wise in heart, whether my
sufferings have not been sad, yea or no, as to the outward man, although mine
Enemies are pleased to laugh at my affliction, they saying, I would not accept
of Liberty if it were given me, I like the Prison so well; but the Devil was a
liar from the beginning, and therefore I shall not here stand to spend time to
give any further answer to their lies, but do declare, I am forced to be a
Prisoner contrary to the Law of the Lord God of Israel, and also the invented
Laws of rebellious men, which are called the Laws of the Land. Now seeing I do
suffer for conscience sake, this question I do propound; Suppose there was a
Law now in force as was in the time of the late Bishops, by which I were
commanded to take tithes, yet how could that Law be esteemed or ^udged
wholesome, seeing it would enforce me to contribute unto such as do set up and
uphold that which Christ has abolished and mad of non effect, who has also
blotted out the Handwriting that stood in Ordinances, by which Tithes were
paid, and has the same nailed to his Cross. Col 2. 12. Now I appeal to both
^ou the Rulers, and also the Saints with ^ou, for to judge according to
conscience, how this by me could be done without denying Christ to be come in
the flesh, as all they do that at this day pay tithes, or receive the same:
Your answer to this I humbly desire, seeing that Christ Jesus, who is now the
second Priesthood, has changed the first, and also that Law by which they took
Tithes, as it does appear Heb. 7. But yet you Rulers may object and say, Tithes
are not now demanded for to be paid upon a Gospel account, but upon a civil
account: My answer is, There was never no such Law which did require Tithes for
to be paid upon a civil account; but a Statute there is that was made the 27.
of Henry the 8. chap 2. says, Tithes are due to God and holy Church. But then
it may be further said, That although it be so, yet Caesar ought to have his
due, and custom must be given to whom custom belongs; so that Tithes upon the
account of Custom and Tribute ought to be paid, sor we must be subject to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, that I do grant.

But what makes that for the lawfulness of paying Tithes? not any thing at all,
because they were not customarilie paid, but by a Law and Commandment from God
were they given to the Tribe of Levi and that Priesthood; which Law and
commandment I am sure does not own neither English Priests nor Laymen:
Therefore seeing there is no Law neither from God nor man that does command
Tithes to be paid, then upon necessity it must be by you granted, there can be
no transgression; and upon that account it will appear, that all such as do
force Tithes to be paid, are transgressors to God Almighty, for that they are
deniers to do what his Law does require, wherein is declared, That Tithes were
peculiarly appointed unto the Aaronical and Levitical Priesthood, as I have
said from which the poor were relieved, and were not paid by custom, as does
appear Mal. 3. and such as did neglect to pay, robbed God, and not the Priests:
And again, if custom should have been observed by the Saints and faithful
Servants of God, then should they never have suffered such cruel persecutions
as they did under the Rulers of the World, that must also be granted but
because they deny to observe their customs so soon as they came to know the
Lord, and did him obey, then came their sufferings upon them; as for Instance,
That famous Witness of Christ the Apostle Paul, after he came to live in the
enjoiment of the life, as the Scriptures bears witness he did, then he denied
to observe the customs of the Jews, for which he was by the rude multitude
abused, and judged not worthy to live, as the Saints now are who bears witness
unto the same truth in life, as Paul did, which made the Jews say, He taught
all men every where against the people and the Law, and that he brought in
Greeks to pollute the holy Temple, and had persuaded all the Jews and Gentiles
to forsake the Law of Moses, saying they ought not to be circumcised, neither
walk after their customs; whereupon all the City was moved against him, and the
people ran together, and drew Paul out of the Temple, Acts 21. And is not the
like trade of cruelty by the Priests of this Nation, and such as are
professors, who are their Proselites, still carried on against the dear Saints
and Servants of God, who are moved by the Lord for to go into their
Steeplehouses for to declare against their filthy lying abominations; this
cannot be denied, for it is too much manifested in the City of London; but to
hasten: And also I find that Jeremiah said, The customs of the people were
vain, Jer. 10. And likewise the children of Ifrael were from the Lord expreslie
commanded not to observe the customs in the Land of those people which the Lord
for the same wickedness cast out, by which the Land was defiled, Lev. 10. 3,
etc. Lev. 18. 1 Samuel 2. 13, etc. Now by what has been declared, it does
evidently appear from the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which was one
Doctrine that they taught the people against their Customs and vain Traditions
of the Fathers, as they were contrary to the will of the Lord, although the
Priests of this Nation do make a Trade of maintaining all such filthy customs,
by which they make merchandise of the ignorant people, under pretense of being
Ministers of the Gospel, although their actions does witness them liars to
their faces, who are proved no other then the Merchants of Babylon, and common
waged servants of the cruel Beast, whose service they promote, as by their
daily persecuting such Saints as do deny them and their filthy service,
wherein they are manifested to be like unto the Leopar, which is very cunning
in getting his prey, as Pline writes, who says, They have such a kind of
smell, that all four-footed Beasts are desirous to go after them, being allured
with the pleasantness thereof; but yet the Beasts are so terrified when they
see the grimness of their l^oks, whereupon it is that when they have enticed
them to come near them with the sweetness of their smell, then they hide the^r
heads, and so catch them, and pull them in pieces: Is not this the manner of
the flattering Priests of the Nation, and such as are with them confederated?
who allure the simple by feigning themselves to be the Messengers of God, and
Ministers of the Gospel, by which sweet words they catch the ignorant, who
indeed are no other then thieves that live by stealing, and putting to sail the
words of the hol Prophets and the Apostles, under which pretense they hide
themselves from being seen of the ignorant, to be such bloody savage Beasts of
prey as they are; against whom I am engaged by my conscience for to bear
witness, and also against such Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, Customs, and
Prescriptions, which does maintain and uphold them, which are by Enemies
brought in against the Law of a good conscience, declaring that they are things
void, and against Justice, which Laws must needs be known and acknowledged by
the enlightened of Christ for to be inferior unto the Laws and Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, who is appointed of the Father to be the true Lawgiver unto his
people, as he is their Savior, who is the Prince of Peace, and the heir of all
things, who is God over all, blessed for ever, who is the head of his Church,
whereunto Tithes are not belonging, nor forced maintenance permitted; she being
the Spouse of Christ, is free from corruption and sinister affection, which the
National false Church is not, unto which the Priests belong who take tithes
according to the Law of their Grandfather the Pope of Rome, who first gave
their Predecessors Tithes to keep them from corruption and sinister affection,
under pretense of rewarding of them for their service done for Holy Church, as
does appear by the Statute of 24. of Henry the eight, chap. 12 by which it is
manifest, the called Ministers, Priests Preachers, Parsons, Vicars, Clarks, and
Curates belong not to the Church of Christ, and therefore unholy are they who
have no right to tithes, and upon that consideration ought an evil custom or
usage by you the Rulers, who profess your selves Christians for to be
abolished, according to the saying of Judge Cook upon Littleton. Now I appeal
unto the Saints with you, for to judge what greater evil there can be by you
permitted answerable to the maintaining of such a generation of men as does
plead for the upholding of such customs and wicked usages as deny Christ, and
does command me and all Saints to give Wages unto such as never did nor does
any Work for me or mine; surely this must needs be judged to be not only
against reason, but against the very being of a good conscience, wherein God
has written the Witness of his Eternal Law, by which I see all Laws, Customs,
and Prescriptions for to be null and void, and are no Prescriptions nor
Customs, being things void in themselves, because against Justice, as does
appear in Doctor and Student, chapter the second.

Therefore I say again, That all Laws, Statutes, Customs, Usages, or
Prescriptions, which would set up and uphold that which God by Christ has
disannulled and made void, is no less then High Treason against God for any of
you Rulers for to attempt to maintain that which is against the Law of the holy
One of Israel. And again The Priests of the Nation, who stand by your Power,
have been both they and their Predecessors, so notoriously changing and
changeable, that they have made nothing perfect; and for me to own such as is
not of Christ is clearly against my conscience; and seeing they are not of
Christ, nor are found one amongst themselves, nor indeed never were, as it does
appear by the Laws and Statutes of this Nation, which does declare and manifest
they have been always such as did with men and times change according to the
wills of such as came, to get Rule and Domination over the People, unto whom
they always became subject, as this generation of Priests have done, and would
again do, I am persuaded, if an event turn or change of Government should come,
then would they again quickly appear in their colors; or if God should order
your hearts that are now in Rule to do his will, then would you soon prove what
mettle they are made of, if you would promise to give every one of them 100. l.
a year upon condition they would for bear their preaching, as they call it, and
such as would not should have nothing, then I am confident they would be as
mute as fish, and as dumb as he that never could speak.

But to hasten, that so I may show and further make manifest that which the
Priests can no ways deny, concerning their Predecessors, how that they in the
time of Henry the eighth, some time King of England, denied the Pope, and would
not own him any longer for to be their chief Head, although they had been by
him made Priests; but yet notwithstanding, that they declined him, and owned
Henry the eight for to be their chief Head, rather then they would hazard the
loosing of their beastly [read the Acts and Monuments of the Church.] Honors,
Dignities and Possessions, which was brought in and maintained by Tithes. And
then they again in the time of Edward the sixth made another notable turn and
denied the Mass Book and received the Book of COMMON PRAYER at his Commandment.
And afterward in the time of Queen Mary they denied the Common Prayer Book, and
received the Mass Book. And in the days of Queen Elizabeth they denied the
Mass Book, and again received the Book of Common Prayer. And in the time of the
late old Parliament this generation of Baalamish Priests, who love the Wages of
unrighteousness, being willing for to follow the example of their Makers, the
late late Bishops, denied the Book of Common Prayer and received that Pamphlet,
called the Directory, rather then they would offend their great Masters the
late old wicked Parliament, who for their service done, did grant them an
Ordinance for to take Tythe-Eggs, Pigs, and Geese, etc. which the true
Ministers of Christ never did. And what they now own, I hope is sufficiently
made manifest unto all the children of light, which makes them unto me of no
esteem, they being such as care not who they own for their chief Head, that
matters not to them, whether he be called of God, or chosen by his people,
seeing they are Christ's Enemies, as does appear by their petitioning of you the
powers of the World, for to maintain and uphold them in what Christ has
changed, by doing the Will of God, who is heir of all things, which shall abide
in the house for ever, unto whom the right of Inheritance does belong, whose
gift is free, and all that are made Ministers by him are free indeed, and as
they have freely received, so do they freely give, by which they are known from
the Ministers of Antichrist, who are of the corrupt Tree, as by their fruits
they are known, Matthew. 7. 15. who are denyers that Christ is to be come the
second Priesthood, who is the unchangeable one, which shall endure for ever,
although they believed it not, who are such as do teach another Gospel,
according to what they have been taught of their predecessors, who as they are,
were the upholders of that which Christ has abolished, who do also justify
the maintaining of those places wherein the Nations have served their gods, in
which places they are now found doing the service of their Mistress, viz. the
Whore of Babylon, although the Lord God of Israel has commanded that those
places should be by such as are his people destroyed; Deuteronomy. 12. 2. by this
their service they make themselves clearly manifest not to be of God nor
Christ, but men of corrupt minds, and being destitute of the knowledge of the
truth, do suppose their gain which is brought in unto them by tithes, through
the help of the power of the cruel Beast, is godliness, whose Ministers they
are, as does appear by their false Worship also, which by them is promoted, for
which they have neither precept nor example in all the holy Scriptures;
therefore are they enforced for to get their Wages of Tithes by a popish Law,
contrary to such as were the priests of the first Covevenant, who imprisoned
none for Tithes, as they do, but as the Lord ordained, so did they do and
continue, who were made by a Law, as does appear, Exodus 4. 13, 14. Exodus 28. who
had also a command from the Lord for to justify them in their Ministry whose
power they abused, not as the National priests do their power, which is of the
World, whose practice is continually to live upon the abuse of that their
power, by which they stand who never were called of God as Aaron was, Heb. 5.
4. neither did they go to the Magistrate for to get Warrants for to put into
the hands of a Constable for to take away peoples Houshold-Goods for Tithes
upon trebble damages, which is 3 s. for one, as these of England daily do, by
whom the Saints do continually suffer the spoiling of their goods, because they
are not the Ministers of Jesus Christ, therefore do they not own his Doctrine,
they being of the World, neither can they know him, according as it is written
Joh. 14. 17 who are such as live in pride, covetousness, and oppression, as
their makers the Bishops did, who in their day with them, their under-Clergy
were called the body spiritual, or English Church, as does appear by the
Statute of 24. of Henry the eight, chap. 12. and the same Statute does further
declare, That the Kings, Queens, and Nobles of this Realm, so called, since the
time the Pope had his Domination endowed them, the salse Church, both with
Honors and Possessions. And again says the Statute, The Pope and the Sea of
Rome did in the time of their rule reserve unto himself amongst other things
the trial of the right of Tithes, as does appear by the Statute of the 26. of
Henry the eight, some time King of England: and in chap. 1 it is declared, That
he and his Successors were the only supreme Head of this called Church of
England.

Thus have I made appear the root of these Priests, and their fhundation have I
also made manifest, and discovered not to be of Christ, but have proceeded from
man, who have accordingly erected two places for their breeding up of Priests,
viz. Cambridge and Oxford, which are by them called two Eyes, for the
furnishing every parish in England, with able lying seducers, where is also by
them Churches built at the charge of the ignorant people, wherein is also
provided for the service of the whorish Priests Funts and Basins for the
management and carrying on of what they so gravely solemnise with much
pretended seeming zeal, viz. the sprinkling of Infants, which they say is
baptism, but they lie, for which piece of cheating service, they have never a
word of Scripture, besides their Easter-Reckonings, and time of Christmas, and
Churching (or else cheating) of Women, and their Mortuaries, and for the smoke
going up peoples Chimneys, all which Trade brings them in much gain.

Thus through the assistance of Christ Jesus have I according to the Gospel
proved the Priests of the Nation to be no Ministers of Christ, nor Messengers
of God, which is my second ground why I deny to pay them or any else Tithes,
who are such as the Lord God of Israel for their oppression will feed with
their own flesh, yea says he, They shall be drunk with their own blood; and
then shall they know that I am the Lord, the Savior of them whom they oppress.
Read Isa. 49. 26. And thus the Lawyers with them may also take notice; for the
same judgment and vengeance that is due to the Priests belongs unto them
also, because they are the Executors of the power of the cruel Beast, who are
the guard of his Throne; and therefore do they spoil the dear Saints and
people of the Lord Jesus Christ, Prince of Peace, and King of Righteousness,
whose people for their obedience to him and are with their persons estates by
them continually devoured and destroyed in their murtherous Gaols, and all for
want of such Justice and true Judgment for to be executed upon them for breach
of Law as was performed by that honest King called Alpheret, who defended the
cause of the poor and needy, and rescued the right of the oppressed from out of
the hands of such destroying Lawyers as did live upon the abuse of his Laws; he
hanged up Judge Hasf because he saved one Trustram which was Sheriff, from
being put to death, who had taken away goods from many people, although for the
Kings use; but yet notvvithstanding that was not by the King owned, because it
was by his Law judged Robbery; read Mirror of Justice, fol. 241.

Now consider ye Rulers what a vast difference there is betwixt your doing
justice upon the Lawyers that live upon the abuse of the Law, and King
Alpherets, forasmu^h as that you cannot deny in your consciences you do permit
of unsufferable Robberies daily for to be done, both by Priests and Lawyers,
and yet seek not to have that Wickedness remedied; besides the Murders which
you suffer the Lawyers to do against express Law, upon their Opinions and
false Judgments, according to their Opinions by them given, whereby many
thousands have been murdered for theft, which is against the righteous Law of
the Lord: And therefore seeing that you know these evils and yet will not
seek to prevent them of committing any more, how can you expect any safety for
to be given unto you from the Lord God of Israel, whose Laws in effect you
despise? for which things sake the wrath of God will suddenly seize upon
you, as well as it has done upon others before you, unless there be a speedy
returning unto the Lord, whose Work when time was you promised to do, which
yet lies undone, which causes the Enemies of the Lord to renew their strength
again, who did in the time of your seeming zeal for Christ, and his now
persecuted cause, judge themselves as good as half hanged for what they had
done in answer to their Opinions which they caused to take place in the room of
Law; through whose Villainous false Opinions and Judgments given, the late King
by them and the Priests were seduced, and persuaded to permit of doing such
things which the Law did not justify him in although Judge Jenkins, and Judge
Cook, and some few others did as to the best of my remembrance, persuade him
what possible they could, not to hearken to the false Opinions of those wicked
Judges which he was deceived by: These things being true, as thousands of the
well-affected, then so called, with my self at this day can also witness, was
in the matter of Ship Money done contrary to Law; and therefore how does it
behove you that are got into the present Rule and Authority of the three
Nations, for to take heed of your standing, seeing you are Instruments that
have come through much blood unto what (...) are now possessed with? How much
(I say again) does it concern you for to see and consider what you are doing?
and then I hope you will seek to stand for the putting into execution the
Laws, Commandments, Statutes, Precepts, and Judgments of the Lord God of
Israel, instead of the Laws of Tyrants, wherein his Honor will be promoted,
and your souls eternally saved, and your bodies prosperously from him
protected; and then will all plots and conspiracies cease from being contrived
any more against you, when you shall learn for to do his Will according to his
righteous Law, which requires blood for blood, life for life, an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, and a foot for a foot; Thine eyes
(says the Lord to his beloved people) shall not pity or spair such
transgressors who have by their wickedness given themselves over to death,
which according to the Law are not to be excused, by which example those that
do remain alive may hear and fear henceforth, that there may be no more such
evils committed amongst you; read Deuteronomy. 19. 20, 21.

Now I appeal unto your consciences there for to judge whether you are not such
as do transgress what the Lord has commanded should be obeyed, which is by
reason of your suffering a company of Lawyers to abuse and destroy the good
people of this Nation by such a Power as is not of of God; and therefore if
you do not see that remedied, you cannot have thoughts to escape unpunished
with the King, because the Lord of Hosts has expressly commanded his chosen
people That they should not suffer the judgment of the stranger to be
perverted, lest their Right should be hindered; much more ought you to be
careful of the cause of the Widow and Fatherless, Deuteronomy. 24. 17, etc. who are
yet by you permitted to suffer vvrong; and therefore are they and their Estates
spoiled and ruinated by both Priests and Lawyers, who act contrary to their
express Popish Law as does appear in that Statute made the 2. of the Reign of
King Edward the sixth, chap. 13. which Statute says, Be it provided and
enacted, That if any person do withold or withdraw any manner of his Tithes,
Oblations, Obventions, Profits, Commodities, or other duties, or any part of
them, cont^ary to the true meaning of the said Act, or of any other Act
heretofore made, that then the parties so substracting or withdrawing the same,
may be convented, sued in the Kings Ecclesiastical Court by the party from whom
the same shall be subtracted or withdrawn, to the intent the Kings Judges
Ecclesiastical may and shall, then and there hear and determine the same
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law.

And that it shall not be lawful for any Parson, Vicar, Propriator, Owner, or
other Farmers or Deputies, contrary to this act to convent or sue such
witholders of Tithes, Obventations, or other duties aforesaid, before any other
Judge then what is Ecclesiastical.

Now know Oh you my dear friends, for unto you do I make this known, who are
the persecuted Saints of the Most High, That these forementioned lines are the
very words of that Statute; now judge ye Rulers how contrary these wicked
Lawyers that are yet in their vilanous beings upon their Stages at Westminster
do act, who as it does appear, are suffered by you their Masters for to be
above the Law, which is the only cause the Lords people for conscience sake, in
obedience to Christ Jesus are daily sued, convented, and brought before them
in their filthy Dens, called temporal Courts, contrary to their own invented
filthy tyrannical Laws, as has been already proved, and as I could make more
at large appear by many more Laws, but only I fear being too large, and
therefore do I make use of no more then what may justify me in the truth of
what I have too charge against them for their abominations daily committed
against the very express Laws of the Land, as does further appear in that 22.
of Henry the eight, chap. the 7. which says, Be it provided always, That the
last Act shall not extend, nor be expounedete give any cause of Action or Suits
in the Courts Temparal; which notwithstanding they daily do: Now judge, O ye
Rulers, how you do think you can in conscience stand justified with the Lord
and his poor oppressed people, whom you suffer daily for their consciences to
be troubled, afflicted, and abused by your Priests and others of their spirit,
by their being convented, and by them brought before such a company of forsworn
murdering Lawyers, whose continual practice is to engage themselves against
the conscientious people of this Land* even against their Commissions in the
matter of Tithes, as I have already declared, for that the Law says, None
shall expound it no other ways to give remedy for tithes then what it does of
it self plainly express, whereby cause of Action may be given, or Suit
commenc^t in the Courts temporal, against any person, or persons, which shall
refuse or deny to set out his, or their Tithes, or shall detain, withold, or
refuse to pay his Tithes, or Offerings, or any parcel thereof, but that in such
cases the persons or parties being Ecclesiastical, or Lay-persons, have cause
to demand, or have the said Tithes or Offerings, in every such case in the
Spiritual Courts, according to the Ordinance of the first part of this Act (and
not otherwise.)

And thus unto you the Rulers have I made it plainly appear by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, That it is utterly unlawful for your Temporal Judges to
give judgment in the matters of Tithes against the Saints, as they daily do in
such Courts as are called Temporal Courts, viz. The Exchequer, Common Pleas,
and in that other Court or Place, called the Chancery, which is called a Court
of Equity, If lies may take place, or rather a Court of Iniquity, through which
deceivable Name of Equity many people have made their Addresses from out of
other Courts into that, in hopes of gaining right there but have found as much
wrong, and have met with much inconscionable dealings as ever they did before,
the Lawyers being all agreed to destroy the poor wronged people that have been
forced to seek help where none is to be had, through their ignorance of not
knowing that the Lawyers Tyade is upheld and maintained by fraud and wrong, as
does appear in this great controversy of Tithes; there shall need no other
proof against them then this of Tithes, as does appear in their wresting and
abusing the Law in that cause; through which they promote all manner of
injustice against the Saints, by whom they both suffer imprisonment, and also
the spoiling of their Goods, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Nation,
which in themselves require right should be done; but contrary to that these
Law-breakers do force Jurymen through their being ignorant of the Law,
commonly to forswear themselves by giving up false Verdicts against their
conscientious Neighbors in the matter of tithes, by their fining for the
ungodly Plaintiff against the poor Defendant for not dividing or setting forth,
and not paying their predual Tithes, or for taking or carrying away the same
before the tenth part be divided or set forth; by which unlawful proceedings of
wicked Plaintiffs before ungodly forsworn Judges in their Secular courts, the
Saints do greatly suffer by the Priests and others of their Antichristian
Tribe, who by them are well bribed for their pains; so that betwixt the one and
the other, this poor Land and people is brought under the guilt of those
horrible crying sins which Israel of old in their days suffered to be
committed amongst them, although they were the Lords beloved people, unto whom
he sent his holy Prophet to give them warning that the Lord had a controversy
against the inhabitants of the Land for suffering those abominations, through
which there was no truth, or mercy, nor knowledge of God amongst them; for by
swearing, lying, killing, and stealing, and committing Adultery, they brake
out, and blood touched blood; therefore the Word of the Lord unto them was by
the Prophet declared, That the Land should meurn, and every one that did dwell
therein should languish, with the Beasts of the field, and with the Fowls of
heaven, yea the fishes also of the sea shall be taken away; read Hos. 4. 2, 3,
4. The fore-promised matter being well considered by such as yet do live to
fear the Lord, may justly give their judgment for God, That both the Rulers
and people of this Nation are under the guilt of all those sins, and are in
danger of coming to suffer sad judgments from the Lord, for that the Priests
and the Lawyers, and such as with them do live upon the gain of oppression, are
yet suffered to be the actors of all manner of wickedness that in this Land is
committed under pretense of Law, by whom this forementioned scripture is
fulfilled, as has been by them made manifest from the beginning of all our
troubles, who yet do confederate together to divide the people from holding
amity one with another, that thereby they may hinder the promoting the cause of
truth, and the establishing of Justice; through which wickedness of theirs when
time was in dividing the people from the King, and setting him against the
people, Justice by him was wholly neglected, although he was much sought to by
the people of God for to see the same duly administered, as he was permitted of
God to be the chief Magistrate of the three united Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; but he not standing in the counsel of God, would not
hearken unto the desires of his people, but grew weary in hearing them,
whereupon no more addresses by them unto him was made; wherefore his end
suddenly upon him came, and therefore justly did the God of Justice deliver him
up into the hands of those which sought his life: Let good heed therefore be
taken by you that are in present Power, least the cause be forgotten which
brought him to suffer the pangs of death; for know you, the Lords hand is not
shortened, but is stretched out still for to reach you also forth from all your
Guards of Guns, Swords and Pikes, which by multitudes of men is made use of for
to defend you; yet notwithstanding your strong Arm of flesh, you may take
notice, the King had as great a power in his time as you, and was more
esteemed, regarded, and beloved by the people, as to the generality, then
possibly can be imagined you are; but yet he not doing that which was right in
the sight of God, you see was cut off. Oh therefore that you may remember with
all speed for to establish Justice, that so you may rule for him for the good
and well-being of his poor distressed and every ways afflicted and persecuted
people, who are at this day frustrated of all hopes of man's doing Justice, and
therefore cry they unto the Lord for to be delivered from the hands of their
oppressors, seeing hitherto you have denied their redemption, notwithstanding
you have sworn unto the Lord you would give them deliverance: This know
therefore, your time to perform what you have engaged and promised is almost
past; therefore what you do, do speedily; for I behold your night a coming, and
then will all your Works cease, and then vvil all your intentions, with former
pretenses come to be frustrated and annihilated, and your memorials will also
be blotted out from under Heaven, and your very Names will then become a
stinck to all Nations, and you posterities will be made miserable, like unto
the distressed children of the late King, who being left without Habitation,
are become vvanderers about in strange Lands, unto whom you cannot afford to
show pity nor compassion; can you therefore imagine, that if Justice (which
is the exalting of a Nation) be by you any longer neglected, that you shall
receive more favor then they have found at your hands? surely no: Therefore
remember what Samuel did to Agag, and for what he was hewed in pieces; Read 1 Samuel 15. 33. Woe to him that increases that which is not his; shall they not
rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee? and thou
shall be for booties unto them, because thou have spoiled many Nations; all the
remnant of the people shall spoil thee because of men's blood, and for the
violence of the Land, of the City, and of all that dwell therein.

Thou have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and have
sinned against thy soul, for which the Stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the
beam out of the Timber shall answer it; Read Hab. 2. 6, 7 8, 9, 10, 11.

But to hasten, that so I may proceed to show unto you the great abominations
that are done and committed by your Power, and in your Name, viz. by those
forementioned wicked wretches, the Priests and Lawyers, who are together
confederated for to commit the horrible and silthy thing in the Land, as I have
already shown, and shall make further manifest by those Laws which you have
sworn to maintain, which Laws say it is utterly unlawful to imprison any one
while they dye. And yet notwithstanding, how many hundreds in this Nation are
unjustly kept in prison at this day, ready to perish, and many already since
this time of your governing, have perished; I wish their blood may not be laid
to your charge for suffering it, seeing the Law does judge it Manslaughter: be
pleased therefore to read Mirror of Justice, page 88. 27, 28. fol. 294. And
again, the Law does further say, That to suffer any to die in prison through
want as I am given to understand some lately in the Kings Bench have done, is
also by the same Law judged Manslaughter; and likewise for Judges to delay
relieving Prisoners by the Law till they dye, is also Manslaughter; for
suffering of which, and for not doing what the Law did require for the relief
of the imprisoned, one Judge Pearne was convicted and hanged; See for this
Mirror of Justice, fol. 228. page 30.

Now it does evidently appear from this foregoing matter, That there was a
glorious face of Justice did in those times which were counted Pagan manifestly
appear, wherein Justice, Righteousness and Judgment according to their
agreed-upon Laws, was duly and truly, without respect of persons, administered
and executed upon such as were found the betrayers of the Rights and
Privileges of the people; but since that time that Justice took his seat and
Royal Throne in this Nation, wicked and ungodly men have for many Ages together
born Rule, through whom Justice has been kept as a stranger out of this Land,
whereby truth is fallen; and such as have through the fear of the Lord departed
from Iniquity, are become a prey, as is evident by such as with my self do at
this day suffer imprisonment for our earnest contending for public Justice,
and open punishment to be inflicted upon such as are known to be truths
perverters, betrayers, and abusers of the righteous Laws, Ordinances, Statutes,
Precepts, Commandments and Judgments of the Lord God of Israel, as does and
may further appear by the Witness and Testimony Paul that called, chosen, and
famous Apostle of Christ; read 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6, 7 8 9, 10 where it does
evidently appear, Paul the true Minister of Christ was earnestly exhorting of
Timothy above all things to take heed unto the Commandment, unto the end, that
he might know charity from out of a pure heart was the sum, wherein the whole
was contained, from whence the exercise os a pure conscience was to be set on
work, according to that unfeigned Faith that dwelt in the Apostle, from which,
says he, some have swerved and turned aside, desiring to be Teachers of the
Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. These words
considered by the wise in heart, whom God has filled with the spirit of
Wisdom, who are the persons I do appeal unto, for to judge whether this
Complaint and just Accusation of the Apostle is not as well against England, as
against those Usurpers and Abusers of the Law which did live in his time,
seeing we are the people that have broken so many Engagements which unto the
Lord Jesus and his Members was made in the time of the beginning of the great
troubles of these three Nations.

But I must hasten, and come to the words of the faithful Minister of Christ,
from whence I have a little digrest; from which declaration of his it does
appear how wonderfully he (exalted) the Law of God, who said to Timothy; We
know that the Law is good if a man use it lawfully, knowing this, that it was
not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient for unholy,
profane, for sinners, for murderers of Fathers, and Mothers; for Man-slayers;
for Whoremongers, and for them thus defile themselves with mankind; and for
M^nstealers, for Liars, and perjured persons, and if there be any other thing
that is contrary to sound Doctrine, according to the glorious Gospel, etc. Now
having thus far discharged my conscience, I shall leave the whole mattter after
perused to be considered of according to conscience, who, and what they are
that deservedly ought to be brought to coudigne punishment; seeing the Law from
God has been appointed for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well, who are for well-doing, by evildoers, contrary to the mind
of God revealed in his law, kept in Prisons in this Nation, by whom at this day
I am with many more unjustly kept in prison for conscience sake, and not for
any evil done, whereby I am the better enabled to declare from a Principle of
Faith, that my sufferings are only for the Gospel sake, who have accordingly
learned from the teachings of the Lord not to withold any thing of what is
called civil right from any man but have been free and willing a^ all times to
make good that which has been due of right to men, and am in like manner
subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, knowing the Earth is the
Lords and the fullness thereof; but yet notwithstanding, that if any in
Authority shall go about to take from me and mine any part of the Earth which
God shall give us further to be possessed with, then I shall not resist; for I
must needs be subject, not only for fear of the wrath of foolish, proud, vain
man, who is ready to be offended at what he ought rather to be ashamed of, then
to justify himself. Thus for conscience sake as I have learned of Christ, am I
freely willing to submit my self unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, although my deadly Enemies have reported otherways against me, which the
Lord our God knows I purely suffer for that I cannot give unto his Enemies that
for Maintenance which belongs unto him, viz. Tithes which unjust demands I
must for conscience sake deny, although I come to suffer death for the same,
seeing it is clearly manifest from the declaration of Christ and his Apostles,
that whosoever pays Tithes denies Christ to be come in the flesh, as all
they do which at this day do either pay or receive the same, as I have made
fully appear from the sum of the holy Scriptures: And thus to both you Rulers,
Saints and People of all forms, sects and sorts, have I truly discharged my
conscience according to the gift of God in me by way of Grounds and Reasons
laid down, wherein I have shown the justice of my cause, and have therein
matter of great comfort thus to declare why Tithes have been, and are by me
still denied; in which Grounds I have made an eminent discovery, That Tithes in
England have been, and are forced to be paid contrary both to the Laws of God,
and also to the Laws of the Land, which Laws I have not broke, but do suffer
for my obeying the Law of the Lord God of Israel; in which obedience I hope he
will help me to be continued in the further remaining part of the days of this
my Pilgrimage, whose servant I am, and do find in my self a freedom in like
manner to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake only,
whether it be unto the King, as unto the supreme; or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise
of them that do well, according to that Declaration of the first Epist. of
Peter, chapter 2. v. 13, etc.

Isaac Craye.
AND lastly, these few following lines I have been moved to write by way of
humble desires, the which lines are dedicated only unto all conscientious,
sincere, faithful hearted Friends, to that end and purpose that they would be
pleased for the time to come to have a special care who, and what they be are
by them put in trust for to dispose of their Christian contribution, which they
may be from God moved for to give toward the relief of such as do for
conscience sake suffer under the Enemies of the everlasting Gospel; forasmuch
as that I am given credibly to understand by some faithful Friends, That they
do fear some wicked persons under the profession of Godliness have made use of
my Name and sufferings to gather moneys amongst several friends, which they
employ to their own private benefit; it is true, the evil may be by them justly
feared; for in the time I was made to suffer under the Council of State, I was
was so served by some who did get large sums of money; one of their Names I
have not yet forgotten, which I will here accordingly insert, viz Horn, a
Cheese-Monger, sometimes keeping his Shop not far from London Bridge; thus has
such wicked Wretches under the notion of Religion cheathed the truly religious
and honest hearted; and knowing that these evils has been committed against
me, it is to be feared they are daily put in practice still under color of
relieving such as are of late come to suffer for God, as I do; how much
therefore does it concern the truly charitable, who do witness what the life of
true Profession is, for to take heed they trust none but such as are known
truly faithful, although never so much show of outside seeming zeal for God and
Christ be professed, seeing it has thus happened since the days of our great
troubles, that through such outside profession, and hypocritical seeming zeal
for God and cause of Christ the trul conscientious people of this Nation have
been cheated out of their lives, estates, and liberties; under which vilanous
sort of professing Zealots, or rather Trappanners of the innocent, I have in a
most wonderful manner many ways suffered wrong, both before this my
imprisonment, and ever since, through their filthy invented lies, and giving
forth notorious reproaches, which they from the persuasions of the Devil and
the Priests have been set on work to promote against me, they thinking thereby
to leave me friendless, that so they may pine me to death in prison, seeing
they can no other ways destroy me; but the Lord having sa tisied me with
inward comfort, from which I find my self wonderfully supported with patience
to be contented in every condition; so that I can with abundance of unspeakable
comfort and inward peace undergo the strife of wicked lying tongues; and being
fully satisfied from the measure of Christ in me, that the Saints and dear
servants of God in former ages, have in like manner suffered under such as
these English false Professors are, who are unrighteously called Christians;
one place of Scripture for to make the same appear I shall quote, and but one,
although I might instance the like reproaches against David, the man after Gods
own heart; Job the servant of the Lord, and Jeremiah his holy Prophet, who also
bore his sharein reproaches; and many more of the dear servants of God as well
as I at this day do* it is a truth, they that deserve no good Name nor
righteous report themselves, do give none to others: The Scripture which I
shall mention is Heb. 10. beginning at the 32. v. and so on, where it does and
may appear, That the Apostle was countenancing and counselling of such friends
as he found one with them in the faith of Christ to be cheerful in their
sufferings; whereupon he bids them call to remembrance the former days, in
which after they were enlightened they endured a great fight of afflictions;
Partly (says he) whilst ye were made a gazing-stock both by reproaches and
aff^ictions; and par^ly, whilst you were so used; for ye had compassion on me
in my bonds, and then ye took oyfull the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
your selves that you have in Heaven a better and enduring substance; cast not
away therefore your confidence which has great recompense of reward; for you
had need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might rece^ve
the promise. Thus from the enjoyment of that life which Christ the light of the
light of the World has given me to be possessed with, do I come to see a full
discovery, who, and what they are which are Enemies to the cross of Christ, he
having revived his witness in me, I am thereby kept close to the Word of his
Patience, through whose help I am enabled to read with understanding the holy
Scriptures with great joy and inward consolation, according to that measure of
life abiding in me, by which they were given forth by way of Declaration, as
does appear Luke 1. 1. and am assured the time is at hand wherein none of these
fore-premised Enemies of Christ, and Saint-reviling, reproaching barking Dogs
shall not move a Tongue as they now do.

Written from my unjust imprisonment in the VVood-Street-Compter, London, where
I remain a su^ferer for Christ the everlasting Gospel, which the Priests do
daily persecute. The second Month, 1657.


FINIS.

