An Appeal of Murder from certain unjust Judges, lately sitting at the Old
Baily, to the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth; and to all sensible
Englishmen, containing a Relation of the Trial, Behavior, and Death of Mr.
William Anderton, Executed June 16. 1693. at Tyburn, for pretended High Treason.
WEre all Men truly Good, public Laws would be of little or no use. For all
political Laws are the good Daughter of a bad Mother, as being preventionally
or occasionally the Offspring of ill Manners; but without them there is no
Living in any Comfort or Security: hence all civilized Nations have ever
gloried in their Laws, as their Honor and Safety, and heretofore none more
than the English, and perhaps none with greater reason; for it may be a
difficult Task for a well-read Historian to find out a Kingdom under the Cope
of Heaven, where the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of Subjects are more
cautiously and critically secured; but especially in case of Life (the
Foundation of all humane Blessings) wherein no Conjectures or Presumptions are
allowed, but the Law requires at least two credible and positive Witnesses, and
if any thing be doubtful or controverted, always judges in favorem vite, and
makes even the Judge himself of Council to the Prisoner, that he may by no means
miscarry through any Error, Ignorance, Passion, or Inadvertency. But after all,
the Law is a dead Letter, and cannot execute it self; and when it so happens,
that the Laws, which were made against Offenses, are seized by the Offenders,
and turned against those whom they were designed to protect, the Sins of any
Nation can scarce draw upon them a more heavy Curse and Judgment: For then the
Sheep are daily dragged to trial before the Wolf, and nothing but Villainy is
maintained, encouraged, and promoted; and an honest Man had a thousand times
better fall into the hands of a Confederacy of High-way-men, who will rob and
dispatch him with some kind of Generosity, than under the clutches of a corrupt
Minister of Law, who after a swinging mortification in a nasty Prison, shall at
length in a great deal of state, with mighty formality, and tedious ceremony,
proudly doom him to death, and all under color and pretense of those Laws,
which, if they could speak for themselves, would acquit the Prisoner and hang
the Judge; and whether the following case be not a fresh and lamentable
Instance of something too like this, I shall leave wholly to the Readers
Judgment, after an impartial Perusal.

Mr. William Anderton knowing himself to be mortally, though caulesly hated, by
some Persons, had absconded of late for a considerable time, as it has been the
hard fortune of diverse great and good Men to do in these difficult times; but
being by a parcel of false Villains betrayed to Mr. Robert Stephens, Messenger
of the Press, and his sworn Enemy, he was apprehended on the second of May this
present 1693. and Stephens (whose Malice much out-weighs his Brains) not
content with his Person, plainly plundered the House, carrying away Goods to a
considerable Value, which there was no color of Law for him or any Man else to
seize; and this I suppose might be one great motive, to make him swear so
desperately at the Trial, that he might take away a Man's Life, who otherwise
might come upon him for Robbing him of his Goods; the Booty secured, away he
goes, in triumph with his Prisoner, to my Lord Chief Justice Holt, where he
railed against him in a very indecent manner; the Judge was very calm, and said
very little to the matter, but, upon the accusation, committed Mr. Anderton to
Newgate, not for High Treason as is falsely alleged, by that Lying
Pamphleteer, licensed according to Order, who published that malicious Account
of his Conversation, Behavior and Execution which was cried about Streets
immediately after his death; That Judge knew the Law better, and I believe is
not in himself so very forward to overstrain it. Whilst he thus stood committed
for Misdemeanour, he was bailable; and accordingly very sufficient Bail was
offered for him; but Aaron Smith, who wisely weighs what advantage is to be
made of every Prisoner, and considers not only the Person himself, but the
Interest he is engaged in, and the Friends he may be supposed to have, thought
too few Guineas were offered; and therefore still kept off the Bail
endeavoring to make a better Market; but while things hung thus between the
Bail and the Bail-master, on a sudden the Controversy was ended by the coming
of a fresh Warrant upon the former, which committed the Prisoner for High
Treason.

This way of Proceeding being somewhat unusual gave occasion to diverse
Censures; some said, it was only a Trick to prevent his being bayled: others
said, that the Fact, though never so fully proved, could not amount to High
Treason, and that they could not touch his Life; and that they had hereby done
him a Kindness, because upon his Trial he would be discharged without any
further Imprisonment or Corporal Punishment: But these, I suppose, were more
conversant among the Lawyers than the Politicians, and could better tell what
ought to be done, than what some Men were contriving to do. Others judged this
fresh Commitment to be the result of new Councels, and a plain Evidence, that
they had taken new Measures; and therefore did hence conclude, that he was
thought a Person not only dangerous, but fit to make an Example, and that
therefore it was resolved he should be hanged right or wrong: And the Event
proved these to be in the right.

Now such illegal Proceedings and bloody Councels very ill becomes those who
complained of smaller Failings in others, and have turned all things upside
down under a pretense to mend Matters and reform Abuses; but there is nothing
more sanguinary, than a pretending State-Reformer; nothing more cruel and
savage, than a Moderation-Man got into Power. But these doings being naturally
so odious to English men, I hope they will consider, that the difference is not
great, whether they be hanged with Popish or Protestant Halters; and will see
at last, that they have a very ill security for their Lives, Liberties, and
Properties, when those who take upon them to guard them from Popery, become
more Lawless and Cruel than Papists. There were indeed some even in the Council
who did dislike these Proceedings: but others prevailed; and it would not be
forgotten, that there is a certain sly plump Divine, who perhaps is as good at
Hocus Pocus Tricks, as any Man in Europe; he can cut a Man's Throat so neatly,
that he shall never know who hurt him; he will put at his pleasure all into
confusion and hurry, make Men so mad that they know not where they are, nor
care what Mischief they do; and all the while, as if he had Gyges's Ring, shall
walk invisible, and shall not be so much as suspected to have had any hand in
the matter: To this Crafts-Master Robin Stephens made haste over the Water to
set forth his great Services, and to receive ample Praises, if not a Reward.
But his Expectation was sadly balked; for the Oracle fell foul upon him,
telling him, that now he was threatened to be turned out of his Place he could
find these Men, and that it might justly be thought that he had been
confederate with them all this while, and false to the Government; and that if
he did not give better Testimony of his good affection to the Government, and
that he was an Enemy to such kind of Men, he might lose his Place for all this.
Now all this is only an Use of Instruction to a Messenger who was malicious
enough of himself; for the plain English of it is this; It Is true you have
taken a Printer, but what of that? For unless you go through with your Work,
and swear him out of his Life, you do the Government no Service, and had as
good have done nothing at all: Guilt is ever merciless and bloody, a Man is got
into the head of a Schism, has seized on N^bath's Vineyard, and there wanted
not much but they had killed to secure the Possession; for had not Fuller's
Plot miscarried we had had a Jezebel's Fast, and Sons of Belial had been set up
to testify, that the poor old innocent Gentleman did blasphemy God (...) the
King; now the Prisoner was of a Trade that told Tales, and the wicked Mufty
strongly presumed that this was the Man, who had not only often refreshed his
Memory with the mention of his Guilt, but did give him some disturbance in the
possession of his ill-gotten Goods, and therefore he was unpardonable, such a
Man he could not endure should live. But though he knows not how to forgive,
yet I heartily wish he may repent, that God may forgive him, lest he find Hell
a more difficult place to get out of than of late he imagined.

I shall pass by several Circumstances, which perhaps some would think
material, that I may avoid Tediousness and come to the Trial itself, which was
begun on Thursday June 1, but respited till Saturday following, that this
bloody Scene might be acted with the greater Solemnity. The Court being set,
several appeared on the Bench, but his real and effectual Judge was Treby, one
of the old Republican strain, and as fit a Person as could have been picked out
for such a murderous Design; this Man being Recorder of the City of London,
when the Lord Russel was condemned for High Treason, and by his place being to
pass Sentence upon him did declare himself exceedingly troubled in mind and
mightily dissatisfied because there was only one positive Witness, and other
circumstantial Evidence against his Lordship, and not two positive Evidences to
the same fact, as he said the Law required: But see how men's Consciences can
face about, when their Malice is to be gratified; he could now brow-beat,
revile, and in effect force a Jury to bring in a Verdict of High Treason, when
there was not one positive Evidence to any matter of fact, nor indeed any
Evidence at all, that could directly affect the Prisoner as to the matter in
his Indictment. The Lord deliver me and all honest Men from Trebyan Justice.
Herodotus relates of Cambyses, that he took an unjust Judge and caused his Skin
to be slead off, and tanned, and therewith the Seat of Justice to be lined, and
then put his Son in the place, who sitting upon his Father's hide, could not
want a Monitor to make him careful to pronounce righteous Judgment; and for my
part I cannot give a reason why Christians should not be as sollicitous to have
Justice duly administered as Heathens.

Mr. Anderton made it his Request, that he might have a Copy of his Indictment,
but it would not be granted; and indeed so great Care was taken, and so strict
a Charge given, that neither before nor after his Trial could any Copy be
obtained, so long as he lived; whether it may be had now I know not. The Crime
laid to his Charge was the Composing, Printing and Publishing two Malicious
Treasonable Libels: The first entitled, Remarks upon the present Confederacy,
and late Revolution in England; The second, a French Conquest neither desirable
nor practicable. As to the later of these it is now certainly known, that he
had no hand in it, and that it was Printed at a Press which he never saw, and
by Persons with whom for a long time he had no Communication: and it must be
allowed to be a reasonable Supposal, that his Judge knew this at the time of
his Trial. For the Government had at that time in their custody those Persons,
who knew when and where it was Printed (and as it was said) had made a
Discovery of all* perhaps of more than they knew: The Papers of that sort taken
upon the Prisoner were sent to him the day before he was seized; and some have
a vehement suspicion, that it being resolved he should be taken the next day,
those Pamphlets were sent before hand that something might certainly be found
upon him: But his Innocence in that Matter has since been made evident to all
the World by an irrefragable Testimony; for this September Sessions at the Old
Baily, Price in open Court made Oath, that he and the Prisoners then at the
Bar, Newbolt and Butler, Printed the French Conquest. This was both a Surprise
and a Choak-pear to some there, and a murmuring noise ran through the Court,
whilst some whispered, And was Anderton then hanged for that which oaths have
done? And the Attorney General, a Man who need not be taught to speak, was
struck dumb and looked blank, I suppose in anger and indignation that he should
be imposed upon to accuse a Man of a thing for which he lost his Life; and the
same Man in the same Court proved innocent. For this I do think of him that he
would not knowingly prosecute a false Accusation against an innocent Man, tho
this is more than I would say of the Judge.

Upon the Trial the principal Evidence against the Prisoner was Robin Stephens
the Messenger: Now all Courts of Judicature use to have a particular regard to
the Credibility of the Witnesses, and not to throw away any man's Life upon the
Testimony of infamous malicious Persons; and such as care not what they swear.
Now the Man is yet living to bear witness of it against whom Robin Stephens in
Malice made Oath before a Justice of the Peace, that he was a busy,
troublesome Dissenter, came not to his Parish Church, nor had received the
Sacrament there, for the space of Twelve Months then last past, and the
Gentleman being brought before the Justice of Peace to satisfy the Law in that
case, he gave such convincing Evidence to the said Justice that he was a
constant Churchman, and for Eleven of the said Twelve Months had received the
Sacrament at his own Parish Church, that the Justice gave him his Warrant to
take up Stephens for making a false Oath; and the Warrant he lately had to
produce, and I believe has still. But what a rare Fellow this is for honest
Men's Lives to depend on, you shall farther perceive by the Testimony he gave
upon the Trial.

One thing whereof Mr. Stephens made Oath was, that at the time of Mr.
Anderton's Apprehension, he did in Words disown the Government, and called K.
W. Hook nose, not submitting himself. Now as to the Words this is absolutely
false; for some scuffle there was but not a Word spoken. Mr. Anderton in the
time of his Health and Liberty was a Man of Integrity, and so far from being
given to Lying, that he particularly hated a Liar, and such a Person no one can
think would persist in a needless Lie at his Death; and to the very last he
denied the speaking any such Words; but for a further Evidence he told to
several Persons the very reason of his Silence. For he said he knew Robin
Stephens to be short-sighted, but withal that he knew his Voice, and that while
he did not discover himself by speaking, he was in some hope to give him the
slip. But if Robin Stephens be pleased a little better to recollect himself, he
may then perhaps remember that another Person about three days before that time
had said such Words to him; but he ought to have a care how he transfers
Matters from one Man to another; for that is the way not only to condemn the
innocent, but to acquit the guilty: But after all, suppose it true, that he had
spoken that unhandsome Word; a disrespectful Term it might be, but Treason it
was not, neither was it any thing to his Indictment; and why then should a
Judge make such a bustle about it, and exercise his Wit thence to prove the
Prisoner disaffected to the Government? What has a Judge to do with a Man's
Affections? If a Jury will be prevailed on to find a man guilty of High Treason
for saying a Man has a Hook-nose, who really has a Hook-nose, they will hang a
Man for speaking truth; and that is an ill Country for an honest Man to live in.

Another part of Mr. Stephens's Evidence was, that he there took an old Trunk
filled with Papers and Pamphlets, and that he had seen the said Trunk formerly,
and knew it to be Mr. Anderton's, and lest the poor old Trunk should not be
sufficiently taken notice of, it is put into the Ordinary's Paper, and also
into that which was cried about on the day of his Execution. Now the Reason of
Swearing to the Knowledge of the Trunk was, because it was not found in any of
the Rooms that could be proved to belong to Mr. Anderton: But if Robin Stephens
had never seen that Trunk before, then he must make a false Oath in swearing
that he had seen it before, and that he knew it to belong to Mr. Anderton: and
indeed he had never seen that Trunk before, nor did it belong to Mr. Anderton.
For I can name the Gentlewoman to whom the Trunk did belong; and in whose
constant use it has been for these Ten years last past and upwards, in whose
house Robin Stephens never was that she can tell, nor does she so much as know
him; and some Weeks before Mr. Anderton's Apprehension she innocently lent the
said Trunk to a Person who said she had occasion for such a thing for a little
time, and did expect it to have been returned but now she must lose her Trunk,
and dare not own it, lest she should bring herself into a great deal of Trouble
for doing a common neighbourly Kindness.

But the Evidence which was principally relied on, and which seemed most
strongly to affect the Prisoner, was the matter of the Desk, as to which Robert
Stephens made Oath, that he took out of the said Desk 40 or 50 of a sort of the
Remarks and French Conquests. Now herein lay the great Masterpiece of Robin
Stephens's Villainy, for he had seen the Desk formerly, and might well remember
and swear to the knowledge of it, and moreover the Desk was taken in a room,
which was owned to belong to Mr. Anderton; but all this comes short; for it is
no Treason to have a Desk, yea even a notoriously known Desk; and therefore to
do the Feat it was requisite, that some Books should be found in that Desk, and
then it would be reasonably supposed, that the Books did belong to the Owner of
it; though this is no infallible Reasoning. For Men's Books, Moneys, and other
Commodities, are often laid up in other Men's Desks; every thing is not a Man's
own, which he has in Possession. But the truth is, there was not so much as one
of the Remarks or French Conquests in the said Desk; and if after Mr. Anderton
was apprehended, Robin Stephens or any of his Gang did steal the said Desk, and
put such treasonable Papers into it, I would ask of any indifferent Person,
Whether he, or they, or Mr. Anderton ought to be hanged for it? I could name
the Person who has more than once told me, that whenever he could appear with
safety, he would be ready to make Oath, That about an hour before Mr. Anderton
was seized he had occasion to look for something in the said Desk; and that at
that time there was nothing in it, but two Quires of clean white Paper, and
some bound Books ( i.e. such as the Bible, Common Prayer Book, Whole Duty of
Man, and Books commonly used in Families) and not any stitcht Books, and that
he was with Mr. Anderton to the very minute that he was taken, and is as sure,
as it is possible for Man to be, that neither he nor any other did put any such
Books into the said Desk from the time he had occasion to search it, to the
time of Mr. Anderton's apprehension, for which he gives many convincing matters
in evidence, too long to be here inserted. He had no occasion to speak of this
till after the Trial; for he could not foresee such a malicious Contrivance,
nor know beforehand what Stephens would swear; or if he had, he durst not
appear to give Evidence, lest he himself should fall under the same sat; but
it is well known, that the Prisoner peremptorily denied any such Books to have
been there, though he owned the Desk; and he used an Argument to convince the
Bench of the truth of what he said, drawn from the very Evidence given against
him, viz. That the Desk was small and not able to contain half so many Books,
as were sworn to be taken out of it; and for proof hereof desired that the Desk
might be brought into the Court for the Juries, and all others Satisfaction:
But his righteous Judge would not allow it, but shuffled off the matter,
saying, That the Number of Books was only matter of supposal. But then is Blood
with him so cheap, and can he be satisfied in Conscience to hang a Man for a
Supposal, and that Supposal false; and such a Supposal, that he himself durst
not suffer to be examined, lest it should have made it apparent, that their
grand Evidence was a perjured Rogue? This was the only piece of Evidence that
did in the least seem to affect the Prisoner; and therefore ought to have been
fairly and fully canvassed, and not so lightly huddled and shamed over; all the
other Evidence was nothing to the purpose; and if even this had been true, it
could not have cast him. For the having Books in a Desk is neither Compossing,
Printing, nor Publishing, which is the Crime charged in the Indictment.

The substance of the aforesaid Testimony concerning the Books being taken out
of the Desk was seconded by the Evidence of Hooper Beadle of the Hall, and the
Constable and his Beadle. Now though the Falsehood of the thing is already made
manifest, yet I shall retain some Charity for these Persons, till I find cause
to the contrary; because it is very probable, that they might be deceived. For
if Stephens, or any Agent of his, in the time of the huddle, and removal of
things, did put such Books into the Desk, and afterward examine it before the
said Constable and Beadles, they might ignorantly swear to his Contrivance; and
they might truly say such Books were taken out of the Desk, and not know that
Stephens and not Mr. Anderton put them in. But there is one thing, which shows
them to be too loose and heedless in the matter of an Oath, in that they
alleged so many of the French Conquests to be there, when it is certain there
was not the fourth part of so many in the house, which (as I have already told
you) were sent him the day before, and which the Government it self now (if it
did not then) well knows were not Printed by him. And yet after all this
multitude they were content to fall to one of each, that they might be
particularly sworn to; and when Mr. Constable was asked, how he knew those to
be the Books, and was desired by the Prisoner to read the Titles of those Books
whereof he accused him, truly it appeared, that the learned Gentleman had been
bred to no such dangerous things as Writing or Reading. Now could a more
unquestionable Witness have been produced to printed Books, and their Titles,
than a Man that cannot read? But for a help at a dead lift, it was said that he
had made his private Mark on the said Books; but then it ought to be
considered. That his private Mark was made to the two Books at the Lord Chief
Justice Holt's Chamber, which Robin Stephens produced out of his Pocket, when
the Prisoner was brought to be examined. Now what did his Mark set on two Books
at the Lord Chief Justice's Chamber, which were all the while before in another
Man's Custody, signify to prove that those were the Books, which were about
four hours before taken out of a Desk in S. James's? Robin Stephens might have
produced what Books he pleased, and in all likelihood this Man would have set
his private Mark on them; but if he would have been sure, he ought to have set
his private Mark at the time of their being taken out of the Desk; but if there
were not villainous Treachery in the case, there was no such Book to be marked.
Would any Judge, who had either a Grain of Sense or Conscience, hang a Man upon
such Evidence as this?

I suppose it is for a blind, that Stephens swore, that coming to the Door (i.
e. Scudamore's) and asking what Lodgers they had, turning his head aside, he
saw the Prisoner's Mother in the Yard, who crying out Murder, the Prisoner
came out of the House, and fell upon him. For I cannot imagine what should make
him swear such a needless Lie, unless it were to cover the Treachery, whereby
the Prisoner was betrayed, and to bear the World in hand, that he accidentally
discovered him by espying his Mother. For his Mother was not in the Yard, but
in the common Room, which they used for their Kitchen; and Stephens came into
the Yard, and directly to the Door, which by chance at that time was bolted;
and when he could not by force get in (for the Prisoner's Wife and Mother
spying him out at the Window would not open the Door) he took down a pane of
Glass, and was striving to come in that way, whereupon they opened the Door,
and at the outcry of his Mother and Wife in that Room, the Prisoner Mr.
Anderton came upon him, who had escaped the Buzzard, had it not been for the
strong Guard he had set.

This piece of Evidence also admirably well agrees with another, That he saw
him shoving up a Bed, which ran upon Wheels. Now the Bed stood in a Room, from
which you must come thorough two Doors into the Yard. In short, Mr. Anderton
did not shove up the Bed, nor was he first seen to Stephens at this time of his
apprehension, either in that Room, or in the Yard, but in their Kitchen or
common Room lying between both. And indeed as to this matter the Prisoner
convinced him of the Falsehood of it in the open Court; but however it was taken
no notice of. The Witness must not be disparaged or discouraged, though some
Men will be apt to wonder at his Wit, how he could contrive to forswear himself
in so many particulars.

Besides Stephens, the Constable and the Beadles, there were also two Printers
sworn, viz. Roberts and Snowden, the Substance of whose Evidence was, That they
had seen the Characters in the Hall, together with the etc. and that they did
believe it was the Letter that Printed that Book, (i. e. the Book then showed
in Court) as also that the two Books were Printed with one and the same Letter
or Character. Now if this Evidence be true, it ought to have acquitted him; if
it be false, it ought not to have hurt him. For the Government well knows where
and by whom one of the Books was printed, and that it was not Printed by Mr.
Anderton, nor had he any manner of hand in it, or any communication at that
time with those Printers; and if both the Books were printed with the same
Letter or Character, then I think it is a pretty fair and clear Inference, That
he printed neither of the said Books, and consequently ought upon this Evidence
to have been discharged. But be the matter true or false, what signifies
believing in this case? Is one Man to be hanged for another believing? Malice
is put to its shifts, when without any color of Legal Evidence it is forced to
believe a Man out of his Life. But if such Evidence as this shall be looked on
as good and satisfactory in matter of Life, I think the whole Society of
Printers are deeply concerned in it, and that they are all in very dangerous
Circumstances; for I am assured by a very understanding Printer, that there is
not a Printing House in Town, but has of the same sort of Letter or Character,
so that upon such an Oath as this, any or all the Printers of the Town might
have been taken, and whom they thought fit hanged. For there is none of them
but had Characters as suitable to the Book, as that which was sworn to; and if
it had been seized, and thus sworn to, they were as liable to be hanged as
Anderton. At this rate the Government need not give themselves the charge of a
Messenger of the Press, nor the trouble of such frequent Searches; but as soon
as any Seditious or Treasonable Pamphlet comes abroad, it is but going to the
next Printers and seizing his Letter, and having found some of the same sort of
Character, to get a couple of Rattle-headed Fellows to swear to it, and hang
him; and thus they may pick and choose what Printers they please to hang. Was
ever such a wise Oath made by two Printers? but Snowden was made choice of, for
his notoriously known Malice against the Prisoner, and no doubt but his Fellow
was endued with some excellent Quality or other.

There was brought in another Witness, who made Oath, that about three Quarters
of a year before, he had sold the Prisoner Paper by the Name of Williamson. Now
what is the Crime of buying Paper? The Stationers would have an ill Trade, if
every Man should make himself a Traitor, who becomes a Customer to any of them.
Whatever they conjectured, no body offered to prove, that he made any ill use
of his Paper; and then if he had bought half the Paper in the Town, I know not
what harm had been in it, provided that he had honestly paid for it. What need
was there to have troubled such a Witness as this? There can scarce be thought
any other Reason, but that they were resolved to run a Man down with noise and
number, against whom they wanted sufficient Evidence.

Thus I have examined the Witnesses, and I do not know that I have omitted any
thing material spoken by them; their business was to fix the Press, Letter, and
Pamphlets upon the Prisoner, to prove he worked there, but particularly, that
he printed the two Books laid in the Indictment; which if their Evidence did
not amount to, it signified nothing. Now if a Man carefully consider the whole
Evidence in relation hereto, he will plainly perceive, that it was either
false, inconsistent, or impertinent, and after all nothing to the purpose. For
he stood indicted for Composing, Printing, and Publishing two particular
Pamphlets, viz. the Remarks and ^^^^^h Conquest. I suppose they themselves did
not think him the Composer, that word was put in for Formality's sake; but
however if they did, there was no offer in the least to prove it; nor was there
any proof, that he printed both, or either of the Books laid in the Indictment,
or any other Book, or that he printed at all; nor was it proved, that he
published the said Books, or any other Books; nay, there was not the least
thing, that looked like an Evidence toward any one of these things; so that
there was not one tittle of his Indictment proved. Let us now see what art this
reverend Judge could use to condemn him? For any Man who had known the Laws of
England would have thought he had been safe enough.

The Prisoner with a great deal of calmness and clearness had all along made
appear the insufficiency of the Evidence; but the Judge, he as much cries it up,
strains all his Rhetoric to set glosses upon it, overrules all, and though
for Fashion-sake he leave it to the Jury, yet he persuades them, that they
could not but see in it, what no body else could: and now like a Knavish
Disputant, who begs the the Question, he takes for granted, that the matter of
Fact was proved, though the contrary was as clear as Noonday. But then from
this false Supposition of the proof of matter of Fact, there arose matter of
Law, viz. Whether Printing were Treason? And in consequence hereof, Whether it
were within the purview of the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3? As to this, the
Prisoner desired he might have the benefit of Council, and pleaded his Right to
it, urging not only the Privilege of every Englishman, but that it was the
Practice of all our Courts of Justice, and that no Man was denied Council where
any matter of Law arose, and instanced in the case of Sydney and others, to
whom the Judges freely and readily assigned Council as to matter of Law, and
owned it to be their Right. But the business of our tender Judge was by any
means whatsoever to cast the Prisoner, and to make several new Presidents in
this one Man, nor durst he trust so plain a case with the meanest Lawyer: or
that had been to expose their own Malice and Weakness, an(...) and whole Court
would easily have seen through the Business; but as for the Prisoner himself
they thought he might easily be dealt with, and the matter veiled; for either
by the advantage of their skill in Law, or the awe of their Authority, such a
Person might be easily quelled, and therefore they peremptorily deny to him,
what was (as the Learned in the Law tell me) never denied to any Man before,
Council as to matter of Law. Being thus shamelesly overruled, he was
constrained to be his own Council. A hard case, and a very discouraging part to
plead Law against a Judge of Law, who improved his Art and Authority, against
him to the utmost, and appeared resolutely bent to have his Blood right or
wrong. Nevertheless not to be wanting to himself, he undertook that part, and
made such a Plea as stunned his Jury, and gave satisfaction to the whole Court,
except such as came thither with a resolution to Murder him. The things which
he principally insisted on, as to matter of Law, were three. 1. That Printing
(though even that was not proved) was not Treason. 2. That the Crime laid to
his charge came not within the purview of the 25 Edw. 3. 3. That if it did, yet
by the said Statute he ought to be discharged; because there was not such
Witness against him as that Statute requires, and without which it condemns no
Man. And these he proved fully and clearly by several cases in Law, by several
Authorities from that great Oracle of Law the Lork Coke, and from our plain
Laws and Statutes themselves, he argued from the Statute whereon he was
indicted, that whereas that made two things Treason; Conspiring the Death of
the King, and Levying War. The Printer, who worked for hire, could not be
guilty of this whatever the Author might; and further that the Books contained
nothing of such matter, but the contrary, of which he produced an Instance full
and plain; he also urged, that that Statute allows no conjectural Presumptions,
Inferences, or strains of Wit, but direct and manifest proof by, at least, two
Witnesses, whereas there was not one against him, that spoke to the purpose, or
any thing like it; he pressed and explained the Statue 1 mo Marie, even to a
demonstration of his case. For whereas that Statute says, no Act, Deed or
Offense, shall be adjudged Treason, but such as are declared and expressed to
be such by the 25 of Edw. 3. It is absolutely impossible, that Printing should
be any ways declared or expressed in that Act, it not being known in England
till eight Kings Reigns after, and not long invented, before it travailed
hither. Any Man that had but a grain of Sense, Reason, or Conscience, would
have thought this should have struck the matter dead; but he still urged
further an Act of their own; and where Men will not so much as stand to their
own Acts, happy are they who have nothing to do with such. In the Reign of King
Charles the Second, an Act was made to prevent abuses in Printing, etc. by
which the Printer upon the first Offense is disabled to follow his Trade for
three years, and upon the second disabled for ever with Fine, Imprisonment, or
other corporal Punishment not extending to Life or Limb; this is pretty severe,
and yet a great way off Treason; but this being in favor of that King was made
only for his Life, and consequently expired with him; but no longer since then
the last Sessions of Parliament was this very Act revived, and the present
Government obtained it not without great Struggling: But to what purpose? Or I
would fain know what favor was done it, if there were more effectual Remedies
before? And I think it may be worth while for the Parliament when they sit next
to consider for what reason they revived that Law, or whither it be to any
purpose for them to make that or any other Law, if even whilst they are fresh
made, and in all Men's view and knowledge, a Judge shall dare openly not only to
set them aside, but to violate them, and judge contrary to them. But I shall
trouble the Reader no further with his Plea, which had been here inserted, but
that some thought it would be too tedious, and not so proper for all sorts of
Persons, as being fraught with much Latin and French, which he was necessitated
to use as to the matters he cited. In short, he acquitted himself so well, that
all indifferent Persons were abundantly satisfied, and yet it proved to no more
purpose than a Wall-lecture. The reason is, the Trial was only a piece of
Pageantry, and the Man was condemned long before; but to overruled this without
more ado, had been a downright Affront both to Law and Reason, and therefore
Mr. Judge must needs make a Flourish; and now a Man would expect, that he
should have gone through all the Cases, Statutes, and Arguments used by the
Prisoner, and fairly and fully confuted him; but I thank you, no such matter;
if the Man had but little Honesty, yet he had more Wit; he warily leaves it all
in the Lurch, and to put a blind upon the matter, makes a Bluster with two or
three old musty impertinent Presidents, which had not seen the Sun for many
Ages, the chief of which was that of Sir John Oldcastle Lord Cobham, and he
might as well have urged the Case of the Man in the Moon. For what was my Lord
Cobham's Case to Printing? That famous Wicklevite lived in the Reign of Richard
the Second, some scores of years before Printing was thought on, which came not
into England till the Reign of Henry the Seventh; and the Prisoner had very
well observed, That what is not expressed in the Statute 25 Edw. 3. (and it is
impossible Printing should be expressed there) is barred from being any ways
adjudged or interpreted Treason, by the Statute 1 mo Marie. In short, in
summing up the Evidence to the Jury, the Judge acted not the part of a Judge, but
rather of a keen malicious Council or Accuser, and mustered up all his Arts to
ensnare and impose upon the Jury; he aggravated to the utmost every little
Punctilio, which he thought might be any thing servicable to beget in the Jury
an hard Opinion of the Prisoner; he could not let the Bed with Wheels alone,
but whipped it up and down like a Top; he could not forbear brushing the poor
Man's Nightgown; he rambled from St. James's to Hoxton, and fetched in every
little Trifle with all the witty Malice imaginable; nay, if you will believe
him, he looked into the very Soul of the Man, and told the Jury what was within
him; he was an ill-minded Man, a disaffected Person, he was no Lover of the
Government; and in my Conscience I cannot tell how he should, the Government
had not used him to well, that he should be passionately fond of it; but above
all he took mighty Pains to beat it into their heads, That Printing was an
Overt Act: But on the other hand, of there being two Witnesses to the proving
the Fact (alas, he knew there was not one) or of any thing the Prisoner had
pleaded though plain and substantial Law, or of any thing that did make for the
Prisoner, not a Word did he speak; and when he had thus disguised the business
with all the skill he had, The Jury were sent out to consider of their Verdict.

Whilst the Jury were withdrawn all sorts of People were big with Expectation,
what would be the Issue of the business; many, who who were very well affected
to the Government, thought he could not be found guilty, and do not stick to
say still, that he had very hard measure; nay, even Robin Stephens, who
thirsted for his Blood, was fearful he would escape; for as he was passing
along the Streets coming up to three Gentlemen, one of whom asked what they
thought would become of Mr. Anderton, Stephen's laying his hand on Mr. M --
sh's Shoulder said thus, The Rogue pleaded bravely, and I believes hopes he
has Friends among the Jury to get off; but if such as he are acquitted, the
Government must give us Orders to stob them wherever we find them. I think
this is a faithful Servant of the Government indeed, a Man who will go through
stitch with his work; but then, my Dear Countrymen! what would become of the
Laws, if every Rogue should have a License to murder whom he pleases?

After two hours debate the greater part of the Jury became very well inclined
to have found Not Guilty; but there was a true Trojan amongst them, one who
loved Mischief and the Government in his Soul; and he was for hanging Men for
being Jacobites, not for being Guilty: and being since told of the severity of
their Verdict, he readily acknowledged, that the Evidence did not amount to the
proof of the Fact, but, says he, what of that? I believed he was guilty, and I
will hang a hundred of them for half so much Evidence. A very useful Man, and
certainly deserves a Pention, if he have not one already. When the Jury
appeared, the Question was asked, Whether they were agreed of their Verdict? A
zealous Man answered, No. Whereat the Court fround, and showed themselves much
displeased, when the Foreman of the Jury (who is a Man well affected to the
Government, but withal a sensible Man, not malicious, and desirous that all
Men may have fair play for their Lives) put this Question to the Bench, Whether
the having those things by him, without making any further use of them, did
affect the Prisoner as to Life? Now this Question was very pertinent. For all
that was proved against the Prisoner, was that such things were found there,
and it ought to be taken notice of, that though the thing was called in
Question, yet it was not proved, that the Room, where the things were found,
did belong to him; and there was a Person present in Court, and brought thither
by means of Robin Stephens, who offered to make Oath, that the Room was hired
by one Williams, and that the said Williams had paid the last Quarters Rent for
it; whereupon Stephens and others gave her very ill Names, and with great
Threatenings drove her out of the Court, and both she and her Husband have been
somewhat scurvily used since. The Question, though very proper, was nothing
pleasing; but after some frowning and pouting, Treby arose and answered, No. In
which answer he plainly acknowledged, that all that was offered in proof
against the Prisoner, did not affect him; but then he further said, That was
not their Business, they were to find it Printing, and that was a sufficient
Overt Act. But then is Printing Treason? If so, then we have a Trade that is
Treason, at which Men work every day, and are allowed by Law, which is not more
severe against any thing, than Treason. But perhaps he will say, he meant the
Printing these Books; but with his good leave, there was no such thing proved,
nay, not so much, as that he printed at all. And must a Jury find a matter of
which no manner of Evidence at all is given? He might as well have bid them
find it Conjuring, for any proof that was offered of it. But if the thing were
supposed, yet I believe his Lordship is the first, that ever declared Printing
as such, to be an Overt Act of Treason; and I shall leave it to the Learned in
the Law to declare, when they shall think fit, what Crime that is, and how to
be punished, when a Judge takes away a Man's Life by declaring that to be an
Overt Act of Treason, which the Law does not so account.

But I cannot omit it, as seeming to me a thing of sad and dangerous
Consideration, that when some of the Jurymen, as by way of complaint, said
thus. My lord, our Foreman is of Opinion, this Fact is not proved. He
presently replied, Whether it be proved or no, you ought not to determine; the
bare finding the Books in his Custody would not be Treason; but the case is,
Gentlemen, here is a Man that has a Printing-Press, to which no Man has
admission but himself; and this Man is found with Errata and etc. (not a tittle
of all this proved) so that he must needs print the Treason. To this a pert
Jury-man answered, It Is a very strong Presumption, my Lord! And then Baron
Powel clenched the Nail with this grave saying. A violent Presumption is as
much as if a Man had been there and done it himself. What blessed times are
these? Would not a Man think, that Astrea were come down from Heaven again, and
sat in Court? For was ever such brave Justice known? The Jury are sworn to
proceed according to their Evidence, but the Judge tells them, they are not to
determine whether the thing be proved or no. i. e. They are brought thither to
be forsworn, and to hang Men contrary to their Oath upon the bare Say-so of a
Lying corrupt Judge. The Law says there shall be positive Evidence in case of
Life, but a great Lawyer says, a violent Presumption is the same thing. In
plain terms, (Countrymen) this is not to murder a single Man, but to murder
the Laws; and the most innocent Englishman breathing has no security of his
Life against a presuming Judge.

These Answers, or rather Shams, being returned to the Questions, after some
other ill Words, and ill Looks, the Jury were sent back again, where almost
three hours more were spent in debating the matter before they could come to a
Conclusion, and then part complied, rather tired and frighted than convinced;
The last, who came in, was the Foreman; and it is besitting the times, for the
head to follow the tail; nor were they Arguments, but Terrors, which shocked
his Judgment, and brought him off at the last; some of his fellow Jurymen used
him rudely, gave him very ill Language, and threatened him high with the
Government, and thus all being awed into a Compliance, away they come with
their wicked, but to the Court welcome, Verdict, and bring in the Prisoner
Guilty. And now the Judge, to show how acceptable it was to him, falls a
stroaking the Jury; and endeavors to make them some amends for the hard words
he had given them before, telling them, That they had done like honest and good
Men, and had brought in a Verdict agreeable to their Evidence. The most impudent
Lie that ever was spoke from a Bench; for there was not one tittle of Evidence
either as to his Composing, Printing, or Publishing, which was the Crime laid
to his Charge in the Indictment. But the Foreman, when he came to have the
liberty of his thoughts, was not pleased with what was done; and that he might
prevent the mischief, what in him lay, he did declare his dissatisfaction, and
that also was made known, and at another time, had been enough to have staid
Judgment: But they had gained their wicked Point, and would not depart from it;
Sentence according to course was put off to the last day of the Sessions, in
the mean time the Prisoner, that he might either save his Life, or leave those
who sought his Blood without excuse, had a Petition drawn and delivered, which
is as follows. To the Right Honorable Sir John Fleet, Lord Mayor of the City
of London, and the rest of the Commissioners for the Goal delivery of Newgate.
The humble Petition of William Anderton a convicted Prisoner in Newgate.
Shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner has been by the Jury found Guilty of Printing the
Books laid in the Indictment, and thereby is concluded from Questioning the
Legal Evidence they had for it, though your Petitioner humbly appeals to your
Lordships Observations and Consciences, whether all that was sworn came up to
more, than bare circumstantial Evidence, of his bare Printing them; which in
Cases of Treason, as your Petitioner is informed, has never been allowed. And
whereas your Petitioner was advised, That bare Printing these Books (admitting
the same proved) could not by the Laws be construed as an Overt Act of Treason
in the bare Printer; And your Petitioner requested the Court again and again,
That this matter might be argued by his Counsel, which the Court were pleased
not to permit. Your Petitioner yet notwithstanding, not doubting of your
Lordships Inclinations, not only to do him all Justice, but to show him all the
Mercy and Favor you can that may consist with your Lordships Justice; and
humbly conceiving, That this Court, by further considering your Petitioner's
Case, may, even yet, be capable of Relieving your Petitioner, especially, if
upon hearing what your Petitioner can say, your Lordships shall be satisfied,
That your Petitioner happened to be Convicted through any Error or Mistake, (as
no Man was ever exempt from Error, and the best of Men are always readiest to
confess it) Your Petitioner therefore humbly beseeches your Lordship's
Patience seriously to read and consider some few (of many) Reasons which your
Petitioner has heard from others, which he herein has set down as briefly as
he can as follows.) First, They lay down, That the Treason laid in the
Indictment, being that Of the intent of the heart, (expressed in the Statute by
Compassing and Imagining the King's Death) requires by Law Two Proofs, The one
of the Fact, the other of the Inference, and that both these must be plain;
That of Fact called the Overt Act) must be proved by direct and positive
Evidence, by Two Witnesses at least, and not by Circumstantials only (as this
of Printing was against your Petitioner, there being no positive Proof at all,
not so much as by One Witness given of his Printing either of the Books laid in
the Indictment.) And then, that of Fact being thus proved, must by necessity of
Inference as evidently and certainly prove, That the Party in doing such
Overt Act could intend or imagine thereby nothing less than the King's Death;
And if either of these Proofs fall short of such necessary Certainty such
Indictment must fail, the Law, for great Reasons, regarding only such plain and
direct Proofs in these great Charges.

Now can a Printer, Quatenus only the Printer of these Books, be thereby
inferred to Assent to and Approve of the matters and things contained in these
Books, and that necessarily too, Quatenus the Printer? By the same Legal Logic
every Printer may be proved to have in his heart and approve of all the
Opinions, Notions and Imaginations contained in all the Books he ever Printed:
For, a Quatenus ad omne valet Consequentia.

It Is true (say They) Writing and Speaking have, in some Instances, been
accounted as Overt-Acts, and there might be good Reason for it, as a Man
expressing his own Mind by his own Writing, and by his own Words, which,
according to the manner of his Writing or Speaking, may evidently appear to
come from his Own heart; And your Petitioner does not doubt but that the
Writing a Book, as in Cardinal Pool's Case, and the Signing the Warrant for the
Execution of King Charles the First, as in the Case of the Regicides, which
Cases were urged by some of the Court against your Petitioner, were sufficient
Overt-Acts, to prove the Compassing and Imagining the King's Death. But can
these Instances be any thing to the Case of a Printer? whose business it is, as
a Printer only, to print the Thoughts of Others, being accounted in Law only as
a mere Mechanic, and whose end thereby is to get Money for his Work. And for
further reason in this matter, they observe, That as it does not appear that
bare Printing was ever pretended to be an Overt Act within Stat. 25 Edw. 3. so
when the Parliament of 13 Car. 2. carried up Treason to the highest, for the
Preservation of the King's Person during his Life, and (among other things)
particularly therein took notice of Printing, yet would they not thereby lay so
great a Penalty upon the Printers, as, no doubt, considering the
unreasonableness of Comprising such Tools and Mechanics within an Act intended
for Persons of higher Designs: But this Parliament kept the Printers in their
Remembrance, as intending to consider them by themselves in another Act, as
they very soon after did; for the very same Parliament in 13 and 14 Car. 2.
make an Act which they style, An Act for preventing Abuses in Printing
Seditious, Treasonable, and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and for regulating
Printing and Presses; and therein, as they fix them their Rules and Bounds, so
they allot them their Punishment: Which, for the first Offense, is Disability
for three years; and for the second, perpetual Disability, Fine, Imprisonment,
or other corporal Punishment at Discretion.

Wherefore, the Premises thoroughly weighed and considered, your Petitioner
humbly implores your Lordships, That, in favor of Life, in a new and
extraordinary Case, and That too, of Treason, your Lordships would be pleased
to extend so much Mercy to your Petitioner as to suspend your Judgment and
pronouncing Sentence upon on him until your Lorships shall have heard what can
be further Offered by Counsel on his behalf. And your Petitioner shall ever
pray, etc.



Here is no need of a Comment; this Petition speaks for it self, and doubtless
will continue to speak to their everlasting Shame, who answered it only with
Neglect and Scorn. When the last day of the Sessions came, and the Prisoner was
asked in course what he had to say, why Sentence should not be passed upon him?
He desired that his Petition might be read; but the Court not being willing to
take notice of the knowledge of any such Petition, thereby to elude his
Request, he foreseeing it, had provided one ready, and offered it to be read,
but no Man daring to take and read it, he took the freedom to read it himself,
and then offered these things further in Arrest of Judgment, which he drew up
by way of Queries.

1. Whether if a Jury not being competent Judges of the matter of Fact whereof
they are to judge, and bring in their Verdict against the Defendent contrary to
Law; I say, whether Judgment ought to pass upon the Defendent because of that
Verdict?

2. Whether if a Judge, (who is Counsel for the Defendent, and therefore
indispensibly bound to take particular Cognizance of what the Defendent urges
in his own behalf, as well as what is alleged against him) in summing up the
Evidence, does omit (out of forgetfulness or otherwise) the only material Point
upon which the whole Indictment is founded, and which the Defendent so much
urged in his own behalf; and also which inevitably led the Jury into this
Mistake of their Verdict; whether, I say, this be not sufficient to stay
Judgment?

3. Whether any Judge, etc. can construe Printing to be a sufficient Overt Act,
till it be so declared by Parliament?

4. Whether the Stat. of 13 Car. 2. does not plainly intimate the contrary? And
likewise the 13 and 14 Car. 2. lately revived.

These Queries, and this Petition, will some time or other be thought
considerable; and the rather for that the Prisoner did make it his humble and
last Request, That these things being matter of Law, he might be allowed
Counsel to plead them, or any other matter of Law in his Case. And he backed his
Request with this modest Reason; That being matter of Law, he thought the
satisfaction of the Judg's Conscience concerned in it, as well as his Life; but
if his Counsel could be satisfied or fairly overruled in it, he would
acquiesce without more ado. The matter now lay wholly before the City Recorder
Salathiel Lovel; and some Persons perhaps will wonder how the soppish Tool
could so easily get over these matters; but he is mounted into a Station above
himself, and now thinks himself above all Sense, Reason or Law: Thus much he
knew, that his business was to doom the Man to die, not to expose the matter by
disputing the Case, and therefore after a flourish or two of Empty Rhetoric,
he in a bravery proceeds to pronounce that dreadful Sentence, which the Law
allots to Treason; which is not barely death, but to have the heart and bowels
torn out and burnt, and the body dismemb'red, and the Quarters set up or
disposed as Authority orders. Thus Innocence falls before the Guilty; and it is
the Triumph of a hardened Sinner to wash his hands in blood.

Whilst Mr. Anderton was preparing for his Death, his Friends were struggling
for his Life: he had many Friends upon the account of his known ability,
industry, and integrity; others were taken with his manly behavior, and clear
pleading upon his Trial; and others were more forward to move in his Case in
pity or indignation at his Lawless usage. Those who were concerned in it, might
have observed the activity and zeal of charitable and pitiful Christians, the
fair and open dealing of some generous Noble Persons, the pretty Fetches and
Tricks of little Courtiers to hook in a prize, but above all the Artifices of a
Council in declining what was beforehand resolved should not be granted. The
Queen (as still upon occasion it was answered) could do nothing without the
Council, nor the Council without the Queen; if the Council was met, the Queen
was not there, or if she was there, there wanted such and such of the Council,
without whom nothing could be done; and thus things at every turn were shuffled
off: but where the danger is imminent, and time short, Persons are willing to
watch hard and look out sharp; taking this course his disconsolate Wise had at
last so fairly set the Council, that it was thought they could not avoid giving
her a direct Answer; for though they were resolved he should not live, yet (the
matter being so warmly debated amongst all sorts of Persons) they were not
willing to say peremptorily he should die: To put her by now, this Artifice
served effectually; a number of Waiters attending about the Council Chamber
fell foul upon the poor Woman, in no very courtly Language, reproaching and
reviling her, That she did not bring her Husband to Confession: In short, they
so teazed and plagued her, that they drove her away, and an old Hag followed
her, persecuting her, and all that came near her as Friends, with such vehement
and bitter Language, that they were forced to quit the place. But of these
things there is a worthy pious Gentlewoman, who never spares any pains to
promote a work of Charity or Mercy, can give a better account than I; and they
being too long to be inserted here, with her, and to her careful Observation, I
leave them. It did at last plainly appear, that the reason of Caiaphas
prevailed, It was expedient one should die. (Pardon the Expression, for the
very Words were used,) and therefore no matter whether the Law was strained, or
not; they had caught a Man whom they thought fit should die, if not for his
Crimes, yet for Example: And thus we have bravely secured our Lives, Liberties
and Estates, when men are hanged for Reasons of State, not for Offenses against
Law.

I now draw near to his last Exit, only I crave leave to premise a very short
account of his Life. Mr. Will. Anderton was born at Wakefield in Yorkshire,
Sept. 29. 1663. his Father's Name was also William Anderton, an eminent
Clothier in that Town, his Mothers Elizabeth, the Daughter of Mr. Maximilian
Topham, she is yet living, a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, yet as pious as
courageous: for though in this Man she lost the Son both of her love and
support, (for she is fallen into poverty) and would readily have given her own
life in exchange to have saved his, yet she bore it with such a Christian
Magnanimity, that she did not stick to say, That she thanked God, that he had
singled out one of her Children to dye in so good a Cause. He was brought up in
the Grammar School there, till he was fit for the University, for which he was
designed by his Father, whose desire was to have made him a Clergyman; but he,
considering with himself, that since his Father's death, by many Losses and
Crosses, the Estate had been very much impaired, and that there were others
beside himself to be brought up, and disposed of in the World, so that a
tolerable University-maintenance could not be allowed him without crushing his
Mother, and Brother and Sisters, he resolved to betake himself to a Trade. When
his Schoolmaster heard of this, he was extremely troubled; for he looked on
him as a Boy of as great hopes as any he had taught; and to divert him from his
Resolution, did promise and undertake, that amongst his Friends and
Acquaintance he would procure him a Maintenance, but the Boy being unwilling to
depend on such Uncertainties made haste away up to London, in the year 1679.
where he was unfortunately bound Apprentice to one Thomas Snowden a Printer,
and withal a furious Bigoted Fanatic; who using to pray (after his fashion)
every Night in his Family, never failed in one part of his Prayer to blother
out most malicious Invectives and venomous Imprecations against the Church of
England, and its Members, especially the Clergy. His new Apprentice, who had
been bred by his Loyal Parents in the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
England, could not endure this; but when his Master fell to praying backwards,
would get up on his Feet, and manifestly show his dislike. At first his Master
reproved him, and thought to have persuaded him with Argument, but at that
weapon the Apprentice was too hard for him, which made his angry Master have
recourse to the Argumentum bacillinum, thinking he would at least be able to
cudgel his young Man into Fanaticism: But still as often as the Master came to
the malicious part of his Prayers, so often the Apprentice arose, though he was
as often beaten for it; till in the end his Master perceived his immovable
Resolution, and knowing that he could not justify his own Proceedings, gave
him leave to pray his own way, and to go to Church: but withal bore him such
an eternal grudge for it, that he laid hold on all Advantages imaginable to use
him ill; and by the silly Oath he made against him at the Trial, any man would
think, it stuck by him still. Such doings made the Apprentice so very uneasy,
that about half of his Time being served, after complaint made to the
Chamberlain, he was turned over to one Miles Fletcher, with whom he lived very
comfortably the rest of his time, he respecting and faithfully serving his
Master, and his Master entirely loving his Apprentice. It is a Trade wherein
some excel in one part, and some in another; but Mr. Anderton had attained to
that perfection in it, that several skilful Persons now give him the Character,
that take him for all parts of his Trade together, he has scarce left his
Fellow behind him in England. When this unnatural Revolution was brought about,
wherein Men in the face of Heaven forsoook and renounced those Principles which
before they had valued themselves upon, against and above all the World; our
Sufferer chose the better, not the stronger side, adhereing to the Orthodox not
the Apostate Church of England, and being for True not Sham-Loyalty, which
became the occasion of his glorious though untimely end.

From the time of his Commitment to the very moment of his Death he was of a
very even and sweet behavior, being modestly courageous, cheerful without
Lightness, and devout without Ostentation. He made it his particular Request,
that some Minister or Ministers would be with him every Morning and Evening to
read the Prayers of the Church, and perform such other Offices as in such case
as his did belong to that Function, which except one day in the Week was duly
observed, and sometimes oftener; for when any Clergy came accidentally to visit
him, if they did neglect to offer, he commonly requested them to pray with him.
He gave little or no entertainment to any hopes of Life, as being sensible that
it was rather Malice than Matter against him; and that a Crime may be pardoned,
but Malice is not to be satisfied without the destruction of its Enemy, if he
once come in its Power. He often expressed a great Satisfaction in the Cause
for which he suffered; saying, that it ministered to him both Comfort and
Courage, and that he doubted not but that God would acquit whom the Court had
condemned. As to the Ordinary, he indeed in point of Conscience refused to
communicate with him, yet mildly and modestly telling him that he was desirous
to give him no Trouble, and requested of him that he would not any ways concern
himself with him or about him; at which Mr. Smith fell into such an unseemly
intemperate fit of Rage, that he reviled the Prisoner with bitter Words, and
very generously damned both him and all the Ministers that came at him to Hell:
but he took it patiently, and returned not the least Word that might seem to
sound harshly. As his Wife once laid her hand on his Fetters and wept; he
entreated her to forbear, saying, he was less than a Man that could not bear
that, but that her Tears were more grievous to him than his Fetters: Another
time as he was hanging a Link on the Chair thereby to ease himself somewhat
from the weight of his Fetters, and perceiving his Wife to look very heavily at
it, he said cheerfully to her, My Dear, these are my Arms alluding to the Arms
of their Family, being Sable, two single Shack-bolts, and one-double Argent,
which if the Critics will give me leave) I take to be very honorable bearing,
as being originally given to such, who having behaved themselves valiantly in
the Holy Wars, yet had the Misfortune to be for some time made Prisoners by the
Infidels; or to such who did either by their Prowess fetch off, or by their
Charity redeem such Prisoners. But it would be endless to insist on these small
Matters, I will therefore hasten to the great and last Act of this sad Tragedy.
When Tucker told him that the Dead Warrant was come, and that he was in it; he
gave him thanks for giving him notice of it, that he might be sure he had now
nothing else to do, but to prepare to dye; saying further, The Lord's Will be
done. He received the holy Sacrament twice during his Imprisonment; but whether
it be customary, or that they had particular Order, the Keeepers all (except
Walker, who was all along not only civil, but even compassionate toward the
Prisoner) the Evening and Morning before he suffered became exceeding rugged
and harsh not only to him, but to all that came to him; insomuch that his
Mother and Brother coming that Morning to receive the Communion with him could
neither beg nor buy admission; and the poor old Woman was forced to depart
without joining in the last Act of Christian Communion with him, or so much as
taking her intended last Farewell of him; which looks as if some Persons took a
pride in Baseness and Cruelty, and studiously set themselves to add to the
sorrows of the afflicted. Other very unbecoming Actions toward him I could
mention, which I shall forbear, being unwilling to set forth that Barbarity
which some delight to act. When he was brought down to go to the place of
Execution, he entered into the Sledge, and rode along in it with that calm
Behavior and decent Courage, as stroke the Beholders with remorse and
amazement, and made his Enemies gnash their Teeth with Indignation, to see him
triumph over their Malice even in his Death. In his Passage all the way the
People rather seemed sorrowful, than inclinable to offer any Abuse, except near
S. Giles's Church, where a rude fellow treated him with very spiteful Language,
to which he made no return, but lifting up his eyes to Heaven, said, O sweet
Jesus! how much more have thou suffered for me and for Mankind? and shall not I
learn of thee patiently to bear the undeserved Reproaches of this inconsiderate
Man?

As he was coming up to the Place of Execution, a Clergyman, got up into the
Cart to be ready to receive him; at which the Ordinary seemed to be much
incensed; for he gave him very ill Words, bidding him get him down, and saying,
he ought not be there, nor should he be suffered; The Minister replied little,
but stayed still, till (see how one ill Nature helps another) Major Richardson
came up, and with Threatenings and his Cane lifted up forced him to come down,
who immediately thereupon applied himself to the Sheriffs (for by this time
they were come up) when some ill Person suggested that he was a Papist, to
which the Prisoner presently answered, Mr. Sheriff, upon the Words of a dying
Man he is not, but a Minister of the Church of England. I mention this
purposely that People may take notice what ill use is made of the Words Papist
and Popery; and how necessary it is that they were better understood: for to be
called a Papist is dangerous, but to be one or to teach the worst of Popish
Doctrines is advantageous; heretofore the Power of Deposing Kings and
Equivocation, either as to Oaths, Promises, or any Transactings were accounted
Popish Doctrines, and those who owned them were universally condemned; but now
you have those very Doctrines in every Pulpit in the Town, and the Persons by
all applauded. What preposterous Doings are these, to hate the Name and love
the Thing? to knock an honest Man of the head, for being maliciously and falsely
called a Papist, and to admire him for a Saint who really acts upon Popish
Principles, whilst he raises these Scandals, and rails against Popery? whether
may not People be led, who will suffer themselves to be thus deluded? I pray
God open their eyes, that they may see the things that belong to their Peace,
before they be hid from their eyes.

Due to return to our Business, the Ordinary made all the opposition he could;
but the Sheriff granted the Prisoner's Request, bidding the Ordinary hold his
Peace, and saying it was a thing never denied to a dying Man. Being in the
Cart, and also the Prisoner's Brother, he used an Office which seemed to be
collected out of several Offices in the Common Prayer Book, with such small
Alterations as might serve to adapt them to the present Occasion; being since
asked the Reason, he said that he did it both for the Authority of the thing,
and also to avoid any Cavils that might be made at, or any Snares that might be
laid for, any of his own Conceptions. But But when he came to mention the Creed
he put these particular Questions to the Prisoner. Do you believe these
Articles which you are now about to rehearse with me, to contain that Faith
which has all along been received by the Church of Christ? and particularly by
the Church of England? and is this the Faith wherein you die, and wherein you
hope for Salvation? The Prisoner making Answer, I do so believe, and am now
ready to die in that Faith, and in that Faith hope for Salvation. Then said the
Minister, if so, say after me: Then they repeated the Creed, raising their
Voices somewhat higher than ordinary; after that the Minister asked him several
Questions concerning his Repentance, his Charity, his endeavors o^ Restitution
for any Wrongs by him done his forgiving of others any Wrongs done to him, and
the like. And then, at the earnest Request of the dying Man he denounced the
Absolution, then proceeding to diverse other Prayers they concluded with that
Sentence in the Office for the Burial of the Dead: O holy and merciful Savior,
thou must worthy Judge eternal, suffer me not at my have hour for any pains of
Death to fall from thee. This being over, the Minister (whether that he could
not endure to see the Man die, or that he would not communicate with the
Ordinary, or for some other Reason best known to himself,) after he had
particularly embraced Mr. Anderton, fervently recommended his Soul to God, and
taken his last Farewell of him, went down out of the Cart: The Sheriffs civilly
commanded a way to be made, and were readily obeyed, he passing through the
Crowd, not only with ease but respect. During the time the Prisoner was at his
private Devotions, an Order came to remit the Quartering of his Body, which
being by some thought a Reprieve, it was handed to him, and having read it, and
finding it no more, he returned it, saying, I thank you Mr. Sheriff, the Will
of the Lord be done. Having leave from the Sheriffs to speak his mind if he had
any thing to say to the People; he began to speak, but being troublesomely
interrupted by the Ordinary, and also finding he could not be heard, he desired
a Speech he had prepared might be taken out of his Pocket and given to the
Sheriffs, to be by them Printed, or Disposed as they thought fit, which has
been since Printed, and is as follows: To my Countrymen,
Liberty and Property has for some years made an hideous Cry in these
Kingdoms, and nothing more than the Rights and Privileges of the Subject is the
Pretense of our present Deliverers; and doubtless it was for the sake of these
that so many of my insatuated and blind Countrymen rebelled against their
Lawful and Injured Monarch, whilst Religion (Rebellions Umbrage) was made the
Covert of the hidden Designs of those who have now demonstratively shown, that
they sought nothing less than our Ruin: And that these were only Pretenses to
gain their ends, the very blind, although they cannot see, yet must certainly
feel it. Under the like Pretenses do our Deliverers still continue to deliver
us even from what they please, that they think will but in the least help to
effect what they came for: Under the Notion of the necessity of a War, they
deliver us from our Money, and from our Traffic and Commerce, by which so great
a part of the Kingdom is sustained: Under the Notion of carrying it on, they
kidnap our young Men, the Flower of our Kingdom, and directly contrary to Law
transport them; and to save their own Foreigners put them in them first Onsets
of their Battles, as the Heathens did the Christians of old, that their Enemies
Swords might be blunted with killing them, before they came to encounter them:
They exhaust all our Stores both for Sea and Land, and carry away all our
Artillery; and if any Man seem but to disapprove of these their Proceedings
under the Notion of Law they murder him: Nay, if they do but so much as
suppose him not to be on their side, he must be a Traitor, and no matter what
the Law says, they say he shall die.

Can any thing be more plain to demonstrate this than my present Case? My
supposed Crime was Printing, and all that the Witnesses could personally say
against me, was, That I was a Man against the Government, and had called the
Prince of Orange Hook-nose, though I protest I never did; not one of them could
say, nor did they offer to say, that I ever printed the Books of which they
accuse me, or procured them to be printed, or published any of them, or that
the Materials were mine, or that I hired the Room where they were found; but I
was an ill Man, and that was sufficient: By which it is plain, that they were
resolved right or wrong to have my Life.

That they designed not to Try but to Convict me is as plain; for they refused
positively to allow me Counsel to such Matters of Law, as was never refused to
any before; and though I caused several Statutes to be read, some to prove that
there must be two Witnesses at least to the Fact; others, that though there had
been two, as there was not one, yet positively declared that it was not
Treason: Nay, the very last Session of Parliament was it enacted, That the
Printer of Seditious and Treasonable Books should for the first Offense be
punished no otherwise than not to follow his Trade for three years, and for the
second Offense never to follow it more, and such farther Punishment as seemed
fit to the Court, not extending to Life or Limb. Now though mine (had it been
proved) had but been the first, yet you see contrary and in direct opposition
to the Law, they make it High Treason: And when the Jury could not agree to
find me Guilty, and came down to ask the Court, Whether the finding these
Things there, and supposing them to be mine, since it could not be proved that
I printed these Books, or had made any use of them, could affect my Life? I
say, when the Jury asked this Question, and the Lord Chief Justice Treby told
them positively, No, it did not; yet withal he told them, That that was not
their Business, their Business was to find me Guilty of Printing: And while
they stayed, the Court frowned upon them to that degree, that the Foreman told
them, he was not to be frighted; upon which they publicly reviled them,
calling them, ill Men, ill Subjects, and a Pack of Knaves; and so terrified
them into a Compliance. That this is true, those who were near know too well,
although the partial Writer of the Trials has most perfidiously published not
only an unfair, imperfect, and lame Account, but has also stuffed it with
downright Untruths and Falsehoods, and left out whatsoever made for me; not so
much as mentioning the Contradictions of the Witnesses in what they did swear,
their swearing to some things that made for me, and when I took hold of them
they denied them, nor has he in the least told the World of the Judg's
overruling whatsoever I offered, without giving any other Answer than that it
should be so because they would have it so; with many other such things, which
the conscientious Auditors can testify.

And now I pray consider where is this Liberty and Property? where the Rights
and Privileges of the Subject? Nay, where the very Laws themselves? And
consequently where is the Security of any Man? Why, even in the Deliverers
Pockets, where your Money is, and where also without all doubt, if you look not
well to your selves, your Estates e're long will be likewise. What are the
Proceedings but Arbitrary in a superlative Manner, and such as no Reign ever
produced before? These were they you were heretofore only afraid of, being
jealous without just Cause; but now you see them actually come upon you. I hope
you your selves will put a stop to them, by laying these Proceedings before the
Parliament, for had it been Sitting at this present these Proceedings durst not
have been practiced; and I pray God to put so speedy an end to them, that as I
am the first, so I may be the last that may suffer by them.

I have hitherto lived a Member of the Orthodox Church of England as by Law
established, and I declare I now die in the Unity of the same: Therefore,
according to its Discipline, I hold my self obliged to ask Pardon of the whole
World, of every particular Person whom I have any ways offended; and I do
freely and sincerely forgive every one that has offended me, particularly my
most false and perjured Witnesses, and among them more particularly ROBIN
STEPHENS, my most unjust and unrighteous Judges, and my repenting Jury; and I
pray God may not lay this their Sin of wilful Murder to their Charge at the
General Bar, where they shall appear as Criminals, and not Judges.

May the Almighty bless, preserve, prosper and restore our Sovereign Lord King
James, to the just Possession of his indubitable Lawful Crowns; strengthen him
that he may vanquish and overcome all his Enemies here on Earth, and crown him
with eternal Glory hereafter: And that he may never want Heirs to inherit his
Crown, bless I beseech thee, O God, his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and
give him such a numerable Issue, that there may never want one of his Loins to
sway the Scepters of these Kingdoms so long as Sun or Moon endure. Amen. Amen.

William Anderton.
June 15. 1693.



Several sorts of Men have their several Objections against this poor Man's
Speech, which he wrote the day before he dyed, between the hours of Eight and
One, being fourteen times interrupted in the Writing of it, and forced to
convey a Copy of it through a Keyhole to a Friend, least it should be taken
from him. Some complain, That he did not pray for the Queen; but these surely
forget what Man they have to do with. Formerly in such cases Men used to pray
for their King; and when they were acquitteed used to say, God bless the King,
without any further Notice of other Persons, unless there were particular
Reason for it: But since a joint Regency has been set up, it has followed in
course that they prayed for the King and Queen; but he was a Man who would not
countenance this, or take any Notice of it, and therefore used the old form and
way, not caring who excepted against it. But if any Honourers of their Queen by
mistake except these, they may know, that he honored her as much as they; and
doubtless she will believe no less of him, who prayed so heartily for the
Prince of Wales, the Son of her Womb, his Majesty's care, and all their good
Subjects hopes.

Others allege, that it has too much Levity in it for the Speech of a dying
Man, and for that reason quarrel with the word Kidnapping in it, and that is
the very term now by all used, and by which all Men express and understand the
Fact signified by it; and he that would speak to be understood by all, should
speak in the Language used by all: when Words are new and fresh, they carry
along with them somewhat of the lightness, quaintness, or other particular
Humor or Quality of the first Deviser, but when they are once appropriated and
naturalized by use, that Humor is lost, and they become in some measure
necessary; and he that will find fault with a Man for speaking as other Men do,
perhaps will find in the End, that more will find fault with him.

On the quite contrary, there are others who are as much displeased with the
Sharpness and Severity of it; so difficult a matter it is to please all Palats.
But this is only in that part of his Speech, where his subject matter plainly
engaged him to speak somewhat after that manner; and therefore the Objectors
ought to consider, that there are some things in their own Nature so harsh and
ungrateful, that a Man cannot mention them without seeming to grate or bite;
but then how Evil and Severe are those things themselves? And if a Man must
necessarily speak of such Matters, they ought to lay the blame on the things,
which extort from a Man such severity of Language, not on the Man, who speaks
properly and according to the nature of the things, which was always esteemed a
Virtue and Commendation. Some Persons can find fault with the Excellencies of a
Man, as I remember it was one Objection against Mr. Ashton's Paper, that he
reasoned too logically: the same Crime I am apt to think will never be objected
to him, who picked the quarrel. Were any of these smooth Men to suffer in the
same manner with such kind of Justice as Mr. Anderton had, perhaps it might set
their Tongues and Pens on edge to speak and write as severe Truth as he did.

There are others, who employ time, which might be better spent in seeking or
making Exceptions against this brave Man; But I will leave them with Trinculo
to mutiny by themselves; I wish all of them had seen him and conversed with him
in the time of his Confinement; they then would rather have admired him, than
disparaged him; a Man upon whom the Terrors of Death made no Impression; no
Man that came to him could ever discover any the least sign of fear, or
perturbation of Mind in him, but found him always in the same sweet even
temper, excepting only in his Devotions and Exercises of Religion, wherein he
was very fervent and vehement, as pouring out all his Soul to his God. To carp
and cavil is no hard matter, but to die is not so very easy; and I hope I
shall be thought to make no ill Wish, if I wish that those who are so ready to
censure, may be able to make as brave and as Christian an End, as this poor Man
did, who is persecuted both living and dead.

During the time that the Ordinary busied himself, he was observed not to mind
him, but to employ himself in his private Devotions, and after the Delivery of
his Speech to the Sheriffs, his Cap pulled over his Eyes ready for Execution,
he prayed thus; Most great and most merciful Lord God! do thou look down upon
me thy poor unworthy Servant in this hour of my great extremity, and have Mercy
upon me. Sweet Jesus, receive my Soul into thine everlasting Kingdom, for into
thy hands do I commend my Spirit, because thou have redeemed it, O Lord God of
Truth! Come Lord Jesus, and receive my precious Soul, Father of Mercy have
mercy upon me; O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me; Lord,
comfort and support my Soul in these my last Minutes, come sweet Jesus, come
quickly, and save me sweet Jesus by thy most precious Blood, by thy Agony and
bloody Sweat, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost, O Lord, do thou deliver me.
Here the Ordinary put in saying, you must give a sign when you are ready;
whereupon the Sheriffs charged him not to interrupt them; and as he was
proceeding his Sister desired to speak to him, which was granted; who kissing
him and weeping over him said, be of good comfort though there is no Pardon for
you here yet there is above. So when they had taken a Christian leave of each
other, he returned to his Devotions, when after a short pathetical Prayer
constantly calling upon his Savior the Cart drove away. His Body was conveyed
to a House near, till the dusk of the Evening, and then brought to Town, both
for quietness sake and to prevent giving Offense; but as privately as it was
done, that Blood-hound Stephens pursued him dead, and was observed to walk
several times by the House, and to give notice to the Mob; so that he who was
designed to have been stolen to his Grave by a few Friends late in the night,
was followed by a very numerous Train, but without any manner of Incivility,
and now lies interred in little S. Bartholomew's Churchyard, expecting a
joyful Resurrection, and the coming of the righteous Judge, before whom William
and Mary, Anderton and Treby shall appear without any other difference or
respect, than what their Sins or their Virtues shall make; and from whom they
shall receive according to what they have done in the flesh, be it good or evil.

FINIS.

