A brief Answer to a late Discourse concerning The Unreasonableness of a New
Separation.
WHether the Letter was written to, or feigned by our Author I know not, nor is
it of any concern; either way it might give a fit Occasion to start the
Question: And he pretends a surprise to read that the Non-Swearers should think
themselves bound to separate Communion, though he struggles with himself to
think it possible, that those who have expressed so great a Sense of the
Mischief of it in others, should be so ready to fall into it themselves. But
alas, he need not have been at that Pains if he had considered, That they do
not fall, but are forced into it, as I shall presently make appear. Indeed he
seems to be troubled, for he tells us, That he soon apprehended the mischievous
Consequence of a new Schism: And I wish he, and some others had been as
Quick-sighted in foreseeing and preventing such Causes, which unavoidably
produce such Mischiefs: But I find that some Men look one way, and some
another; and some after they have done all the Mischief they can, yet will not
leave off that old stale Trick of wiping their Mouths, And saying they have
done no Hurt.

But the Wonder is, that Men should be so Obstinate, When the difference is
only about the Resolution of a Case of Conscience, wherein wise and good Men
may easily differ. And is then a Case of Conscience really so trivial a Thing?
I had thought there was not any moral Action, and consequently not any Duty of
a Christian, about which a Case of Conscience might not one time or other
arise; and may these then be determined either ways, because wise and good Men
may so easily differ: What is this but to destroy the very Nature of Good and
Evil, or to make the bounds so moveable, that we shall never know certainly
where to find them. I shall readily grant, that when the matter is Dark and
Intricate, we may well hope, that God will be merciful to a mistaken Person;
but if a Case of Conscience arise, let Men differ as they please, he only
determines right, who determines with the nature of the Thing; and he is only
Safe, who follows that Determination. He that determines beside, or against the
nature of the Thing, determins wrong, and in moral Actions he certainly does
ill, who follows such determination, however merciful soever God upon other
accounts may be to him. And this, Nature seems to have taught every Man; for
why else should all the Comforts of a Man's Soul so much depend upon the
Satisfaction of his Conscience, that he has taken a right course: Whereas it
were the easiest matter in the World to satisfy Conscience, if without much ado
they might safely submit to any Determination, which comes from a Man, who, for
any Thing we know, may be Wise and Good. And therefore whatsoever our Author
may think, I shall desire him henceforward, to speak more reverendly of a Case
of Conscience, lest he tempt a loose World both to think and speak meanly of
our Employment.

Well, a Case of Conscience it is, though a Shriveled one; but the Oaths (says
he) are not made a Condition of Communion, and therefore cannot be a sufficient
cause of Separation. Now I could have told him forty Things which they are not;
and if he should be out in that one, which he mentions, it would be very
unlucky; and that he is so, I shall endeavor presently in its proper place to
prove. In the mean time I could tell him of a Man, who has Discoursed much of
Terms of Communion, who has Quarrelled almost all, and yet never failed to
comply with any that were set up; and it is hard to tie us up to that Man's
Terms of Communion, which no Man living could ever yet learn what they were.

But he tells us, That there is a difference between a Tender and a sour
Conscience, and I doubt not, but in his Liberality he intended the sour
Conscience for us; and he might have made it what he pleased when he was about
it. But as I am well satisfied in my Conscience (at least as to my self) that I
have taken a safer course in this Matter to appear before the Tribunal of
Heaven than our Jolly Swearers: So I will assure this Author, That if he have
no better Physic than he Administers in this Discourse, he will never make a
true Cure of any of those Consciences, which he is pleased to represent as
Diseased and Sour; but perhaps the Sowreness may lie elsewhere, and some
complain of the Light, when the fault is in the weakness of their Eyes.

It is a wonderful Condescension in our Author, but to suppose, That those who
take the Oaths may be to blame, but he says, That nevertheless, if they act
according to their Consciences, there can be no ground for Separation, unless
it be Lawful to separate from all such, who follow the Dictates of an erroneous
Conscience, and so there will be no end of Separation. And indeed at this rate,
there will be no end of Trifling and Sophistry: For if I am bound to separate
from some erroneous Consciences, Why must it needs be Lawful to separate from
all? Have all erroneous Consciences an equal influence on Communion and good
Manners? If a Man was persuaded, that the Elements of Bread and Wine, after
Consecration were really Transubstantiated into that very Body and Blood of
Christ, which suffered on the Cross; and accordingly should in Conscience adore
it, and think all others bound to do so too. I have so much Charity for our
Author, as to think he would not join in Communion with him: And if I had to do
with one, who scrupled eating Flesh on Fridays, I desire our Author to give me
a good Reason, Why I should forbear Communion with him on that account? So that
after all, it is, not the erroneous Conscience, but the nature of the Thing
wherein Conscience errs; which, according as it affects Communion, either
requires a Separation, or allows a continuance of Communion. And of which
nature the Matter in Controversy is, shall be presently considered; and then
perhaps I may help him to imagine (though he says he cannot at present) why,
Becanse some Men's Consciences are so tender in the point of Loyalty, that they
cannot take the Oaths, that they must needs be so tender too as not to join
Communion with those who do it.

But he says he will leave general Reflections, and apply himself to the main
point; and I am very glad we shall come to it, for here I intend to close with
him. The grand Question he makes to be this; Whether there be any Reason for
these Scruples about the Oaths? and then infers, That if there be not, it will
be granted that there can be no Reason for a Separation on the account of them:
And then proceeds, That if there be any Reason, it must arise, either from the
continuing Obligation of the former Oaths, or from the nature of the present
Oaths. I wish he had told us what he means by Scruples, and what the Scruples
are; for we commonly account Scruples to be odd troublesome things, which
proceed from a Mind well inclined, but a weak Understanding, not able to
support it self, whereby men are desirous to do well, but strangely timorous
and over fearful of the lawfulness of every thing they go about. So that at
first dash he represents all the Non-Swearers to be, at best, only a Parcel of
well meaning Fools. For my own part, I have no Scruples, but am well satisfied,
without any Scruple, that I cannot lawfully take the Oaths. And though this
Author writes as triumphantly as if he had the Reason, Sense and Conscience of
all Mankind in his keeping, yet am I so nnfortunate as to think my Foundation
unshaken. But, before I can proceed, I must inform you, that he has not fairly
and truly stated the Case. For the Question is not nakedly and simply, whether
the Oaths may or may not be lawfully taken; (though I will discourse that with
him in fit place) but whether Oaths imposed under such unjust and merciless
Penalties, and attended with such fatal Consequences, will not warrant the
Non-takers in a Separation from such as do. And to clear up this, I must crave
leave to open the Case more fully.

After six Months Warning, and frequent Rabling, if we take not the Oaths, we
are silenced for six Months more; so that if the Oaths be not taken, all the
Churches in England must be shut up. I know not any considerable difference
betwixt this and a Popish Interdict; neither matters it much, whether we lie at
the mercy of the Pope or a Parliament, whether God shall be worshipped in the
Land, or not. This time being elapsed, and the Oaths not taken, then are we
absolutely deprived, and not only our legal Estates taken away, and our Wives
and Children sent to wander like Vagabonds, and beg their Bread; but our Flocks
taken from us, and we not suffered to discharge our Duties toward God and his
Church, and the Souls committed to our Care, which our Orders and Institution
enable us to, and require from us: And when, without taking the Oaths, we are
not suffered to discharge our Duties, nor act in any Communion as Ministers, I
desire to know, what this wants of being made a Condition of Communion to us,
quatenus Ministers.

But perhaps he will say, That we are not hereby forced to break Communion, but
may still join in the same Communion as Laymen: I thank him kindly; when some
men have betrayed their Consciences for large Preferments, that they may enjoy
them quietly, we must part with all, and our Ministry to boot. But though this
may serve their turn, it will not ours; for if no Lay-power can make or unmake
a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, then the Charge of our Ministry will still lie upon
us, notwithstanding this depriving Act, and necessity will lie upon us to
discharge it at our Peril. To this end I would desire this learned Author to
tell me, whether he takes us for Baal's Priests, or Jeroboam's Priests, or
Parliament Priests, or Convention Priests, or God's Priests: If he will, with
Erastus, throw all into the Civil Power, I have nothing to do with him, nor any
more to account of him than as one of the common Herd: But if he thinks the
Power of the Clergy, as Clergy, is derived from Christ, to whom the Father gave
all Power; and to be received by a Succession of Authority, who received it
from them, whom Christ sent as the Father sent him; and if he think that the
Bishops of the Christian Church were the Successors of the Apostles in their
ordinary and standing Authority for all Ages; and that they were empowered to
derive Authority to several Orders of men, to exercise Spiritual Offices for
the Benefit of the Church, still retaining the supreme Ecclesiastical Authority
in their own Order in their own Churches, as all Antiquity thought, and most
sober men since: Then he must acknowledge that a Clergy-man's Authority is from
God; and that, notwithstanding any Civil Act to the contrary, he is bound to
take care of his Office, and give account of his Stewardship, though the most
bitter Persecutions attend him for so doing. And therefore if they will warrant
a Civil Act to disable us from doing our Duties, they must excuse us if we have
these dreadful apprehensions of the Account we have to give; That we endeavor
to do it as we can, at our hazard, when we are not suffered to do it in
Communion with them.

And yet this is not all, for there is one thing more which seems unavoidably
to necessitate a Schism, if we are discharged from our Office upon account of
these Oaths, though the Crime will lie at their Door, not ours. Our Author has
been as great a Trimmer of Ecclesiastical Orders as any man I know; but now
being commonly styled a Bishop, I hope he will prove Strenuus sui Ordinis
Assertor; and being he is as well seen in Antiquity as any man in Europe, I
hope he will not quarrel me, who am only a Presbyter, for asserting that
Prerogative of his Order, which genuine Antiquity always appropriated to it.
Now in the Primitive Times, (whose Example and Rule our Church follows) in
every Church or Diocese, (as now called) all the inferior Clergy were subject
to their Bishops; and the Bishops of their several Churches or Diocesses were
not to transact any Ecclesiastical Matter of moment and common concern, without
the Consent of him who was Episcopus primae Sedis, or Metropolitan. And though
sometimes Persecutions made fearful Squanders amongst them, yet it was never
thought to take away the Subjection of the inferior Clergy to their Bishop,
nor the Dependence of the Bishops upon their Metropolitan: And if any Clerk
withdrew his Obedience to his Bishop, or any Bishop denied his Dependence upon
his Metropolitan, he was liable to, and certainly struck with the Censures of
the Church, though he suffered never so deeply. And if either by the Levity or
Apostasy of the Clergy or People, or the Impetuosity of the Secular Power, a
Bishop was set over a Church or Diocese, in opposition to one there Canonically
placed already, or a Metropolitan placed over a Province, in opposition to one
already Canonically placed there, it always in course produced a Schism, and
the Church was ever accounted to be with those, who adhered to them, who were
first rightly fixed; and they always were esteemed Schismatics, who sided with
that Bishop or Metropolitan, who was set up in opposition. Now this is very
like to be our Case, and is the very thing which our Author ought to have
stated. For our Metropolitan, and several other Bishops, are now actually by a
Secular Act Deprived: But are they Deprived by any Canons or Canonical Censures
of the Church? Or are they Discharged from their Office and Trust which God
has committed to them? Did ever any Secular Act, much less such an Act as
this, pretend to Unbishop and Unpriest Men? I shall easily grant, That the
Secular Power has often Seized Bishops Estates, and Imprisoned and Banished
their Persons: But still they were accounted Bishops of those Churches, and
ceased not to discharge their Duties, as their Circumstances would permit, and
neither their Clergy nor People renounced them, unless they were guilty of such
Crimes, for which the Censures of the Church did Depose them, or the Canons
ipso Facto Deprive them. But where is the Heresy? Where are any of all those
Crimes, for which these our Bishops merit Deposition? Or what just Censure of
the Church has passed upon them? For any thing I can see, if they be not
Lords, they are Bishops still, and bound by their Sacred Function, and their
Duty to God, to take care of their Churches; and consequently the Clergy of
their Diocesses, whether Swearers or Nonswearers, ought to live in
Subordination and Subjection to them, and the People to pay them Obedience in
all Things appeartaining to God. So that if any other Bishop be thrust into a
Church belonging to any of these Bishops, he can be no other than an Intruder;
and if he claim a Right to the Church, and Act in Opposition to the first
Canonical Bishops, he must be a Schismatic; for both People and Clergy are
bound to adhere to their first and true Bishop, and oppose the other, and
refuse Communion with him. But upon our Constitution, we of the Clergy have a
further Obligation to this, for we are Sworn to pay him Canonical Obedience,
and therefore we must either oppose any Man, who Uncanonically sets up against
him, or be Perjured: And this will reach to you Swearers as well as the
Nonswearers; and there is no way to free us from this, but either his Death, or
Desecration, or Renunciation, though this last was never accounted commendable
in a Bishop.

But then if one be put into the place of the Metropolitan, the Schism will be
wider and more pernicious; for both People and Clergy, and all the Bishops of
the Province (so that our Author himself is here caught in a Noose, and shall
be in a straight betwixt two) are bound to adhere to the first and true
Metropolitan, and to refuse Communion with him who sets up against him; so that
if the extravagant Penalties of this Act take place, and others be put into the
Churches of the pretended Deprived, of necessity a Schism must follow: And
according to the Sense, Judgment and Practice, of the ancient Church, the
Church will be with us, and the Schism with them; and their Schism will be much
of the contrary Nature with that of the Donatists; the Terms of Communion with
the one, being as much too loose, as with the other, too straight. Our Author,
who is old excellent at Mustering up the ill Presidents, I know will think to
slur this by telling us Tales, how Emperors have put out Bishops, translated
Metropolitans, or erected new ones and the like. But it is one thing to act in
pursuance to the Canons of the Church, and another to act against them; it is
one thing to show particular favor to a Place or Person, and that with the
consent of the Church; and another thing to impose upon the Church against her
Laws and the Laws of God: If he have other Instances, I shall either prove that
they were Unjust, or come not up to our Case, or else I will yield him the
Cause.

I know not whether I can be so apprehensive of the Mischiefs of Schism, as our
Author pretends to be, but I think I dread them as much; and the more, because
by woeful Experience it is evident to the World, that the sad Divisions amongst
Christians, have rendered Christianity little more than a bare Name: And
therefore I am unwilling to lay on Load, though to help the right Side. But I
will immind our Author (and I am apt to think he will quickly guess what I
mean) that there are some Scandalous Persons mentioned in Antiquity, to whom I
could so parallel a sort of Persons amongst us, that scarce one Egg should seem
more like another; and if things are thus pushed on to the height, I hope
whatever we suffer, we shall not basely desert God and his Church, and our
Duty; and though they may go clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and fare
Sumptuously every Day, whilst care is taken that we may be Starved, yet they
must expect to be Pelted, and then Men will speak and write their Minds freely:
For in vain do you imagine, that when Men have nothing to lose, they have any
thing to fear.

Whether I have stated the Case right, I must leave to indifferent Persons to
judge; but if it be right then I think it is clear, That a Schism will be
unavoidable, and that they may wash their Hands with Pilate, but cannot wipe
off the Crime. And if I have stated the Case rightly, I need not trouble my
self to give any Answer to his Arguments, because upon this State they are all
beside the Business, and nothing to the purpose. But because under a pretense
of Arguing against Schism, he really undertakes the defense of the Oaths, and
to cover their own Perjury would make it a Crime in us not to do the same
thing. I shall take some notice of them on that account, but very briefly, and
without any particular relation to the Case of the supposed Schism, as to which
they are Impertinent. And here I need not follow him through all his copious
Eloquence, pretty Disguises, variety of Reading, and subordinate Reasonings.
For it is apparent to any Man who has but half an Eye, that the whole stress
of his Discourse is founded on this single Point. That the consideration of the
public Good does dissolve the Obligation of an Oath to a Sovereign Prince
rightfully claiming: For this he must mean, if he speak home to the purpose;
and if this Foundation prove Sandy, then he has only raised a ruinous Building.

But to prevent slanderous Tongues, I must first premise some Things. First,
That I do think that all Sovereign Princes are bound to have Respect to the
public Good, that as their Station is above all other Men, so their Actions
are of a more public Influence and Concern, and of all they shall give a more
severe Account to God than other Men, by how much their Trust from him is
greater. Secondly, That Kings deviating from the public Good, may be Informed,
Advised and Admonished, by proper Persons in a fit manner; yea that in some
Cases they may be sharply Reproved, perhaps it is particularly the Duty of some
Men to do this, though at their Peril. Thirdly, That if a Lawful King command
me to any thing that is Wicked, or palpably against the public Good, I ought
not therein actually to obey him, and that I may use all Lawful means to
prevent such Mischief; but not by Resisting, or by being Injurious to the
Person or Honor of the Prince. But then I must add, That no pretense of
public Good whasoever can warrant us to destroy a Lawful King, or take off the
Obligations of an Oath, whereby we have bound our selves, in all things Lawful
and Honest to obey him: For this were really to overturn all things, and to
destroy the public Good, under pretense of preserving it. The contrary our
Reverend Author undertakes to prove, which I cannot reflect upon without Grief;
because it seems to me a Task which would much better have become an Old
Committee-man or Sequestator, than a Divine of the Church of England.

And yet after all if we should grant, that he had proved it in Thesi, yet he
has no where so much as offered to prove it in Hypothesi, and apply it to our
particular Case. So that in our present Concern no considering Person can be
one jot the better for all his rambling Arguments. But to evince the Error of
his main Thesis, I shall now offer some few things to consideration, and then
give a brief answer to some things, which perhaps might not otherwise seem so
directly and fully answered.

How Specious or Glorious soever any Proposition may seem in the Theory; yet it
ought not to be esteemed as right or sound, if it be impracticable, without
filling the World with perpetual Troubles and Confusions. That his Doctrine is
very liable to be abused, I suppose he will not deny; (though, not long since,
a Reverend Person did deny it to my Face;) for the greatest part of Mankind
being wicked, and credulous against their Governors; under this pretense a set
of Knaves, with active Fools, may at any time cry up a dissolution or
forfeiture of the Covernment, mate the best of Kings, and overturn any
Establishment; and we in England ought the more to be afraid of it, because
this pretense has been here most taking and most mischievous. The Public Good
has been made the Public Cheat, and Common Sham; and I can scarce remember,
that I ever heard Men commonly talk loud of Public Good, but there was
mischief brewing: And I am confident, that this Scholastic Chimaera, (for as
they use it, it is no other,) within the space of 50 years last past, has cost
this Nation as much Blood and Treasure, as tolorably well improved to this Day
might have well nigh peopled, and stocked half America.

But, in the next place, let us consider, Who shall be Judge of this Public
Good? If the Supreme Governor, then our Author has all this while been in a
wrong Box, and might better have held his Peace; if he will not allow it to be
placed there, because a single Man may be corrupted or deceived: The Answer is
easy, that so may he, or any other Man; for I know no security that we now
have, that any Man shall be infallible as to Truth and Right, and immovable as
to goodness. Our greatest safety lies in honesty and industry, with humble
Prayers for God's Grace and Assistance; and perhaps the best State either of
private Persons or Communities in this Life, is to be tolorably well: and if
Persons cannot be content to enjoy that, but make it their whole business
perpetually to mend it, they had best have a care that they do not, worse than
that restless Projector, who to make a perfect Engine would needs erect a
Windmill upon a Watermill, and so turned and overturned, contrived and hewed,
till he reduced both to a pair of Nut-cracks. But then if any other man, or
body of men, and not the Sovereign Prince, be made Judge of this Public Good,
we are nothing the beter, but something the worse, for this is to set a Supreme
above a Supreme. For whosoever is Judge of the Public Good, according to which
all Men's actions are to be directed, he has really the Command of all Men,
whatsoever another may have in Name. But after all, the matter comes to the
Mobile, and every Man must judge for himself; and so, for ought I see, may
translate his Allegiance or Obedience, or turn King of himself, as he pleases.
For it matters not, what really is the Public Good; for in Practice Men must
and will guide their Actions by what they think is so, whether right or wrong:
For if my Oath bind me to the Public Good, I must be judge what it is, or else
I cannot answer the ends of my Oath in our Author's sense, who discharges a
Subject from his Allegiance, in case the Public Good intervene between him and
the Prince. Now what brave Work will this make? We have Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Socinians, and there were Church of England-Men,
perhaps there are some few still: Now let the Prince direct as he please, or
let the Public Good be what it will, it is certain that every one of these
Parties will judge that to be for the Public Good, which is most agreeable to
their Scheme of Principles, and makes for their Interest: And what a fine task
has a Prince, to be bound at every turn, and in every thing, to please every
one of these Parties? If he do not, then cry they, the Public Good is
concerned, and they are absolved from their Allegiance. Miserable Kings! Or
rather Miserable People! For at this rate, when can we be quiet or safe, unless
one of these Parties should be so fortunate, as, for the Public Good, to knock
all the rest o'th'head? Such is the Fruitsof this celebrated Doctrine. We very
well know, and it is not long since, that it was the Grand Topic exclaimed
against, that the Pope challenges a Power of Deposing Princes; and indeed it
is a Doctrine, turbulent, pernicious, and to be abhorred: And yet did ever any
Pope pretend to Deprive a Prince, but the necessary benefit of Christianity,
and the Public Good, was made the Pretense and ground of it? And have not we
extremely mended the matter, by putting it into the Power of every Subject to
Depose his King; or at least, to endeavor it to his utmost, in case he
apprehends it will be for the Public Good? For my part, I never can be a
Papist; and yet I think, at this rate, Protestant Princes have made an ill
exchange of one Pope, for so many thousands. And it is a wonder to me, how
these Men come to be the Darlings of Kings, who upon their Principles can never
be made sure to any, but are dangerous to all.

Next I desire to know of our Author, what this Public Good is, and where this
Divine beauty dwells, whom all our Knights Errant run Mad for, and fill the
World with Blood and Slaughter? For in their way of discourse, the Public Good
is generally made a delicate fine thing in the Abstract; a separate invisible
Being, distinguished from all personal interest and benefit. Now if this
Public good be good for no Body, he may keep it to himself for me, if the rest
of his mad crew will permit it: But if Public good be more than an airy
Notion, and really prove to be a personal good, and that which makes for the
Walfare of every one in the Community, then I am willing to put in for my
share; and I think every Man has, or ought to have, a share; and Kings the
greatest of all. And if we leave off these nice thin Distinctions, and suffer
Public Good to be (as it ought) for the sake and benefit of Persons; then we
shall find, that she is a most sweet natured Creature, that does good to all;
and if at any time by chance, she seem to have done any particular Person an
unkindness; yet one way, or other, she abundantly makes him amends for it. But
Alas! such a Public Good would do our Author's Argument no service; for this
Public Good would never have taught us to Depose a Rightful King, to lose our
Trade, our Men, our Money, and bring our selves under the just apprehension of
those dreadful Judgments, which a People ought to expect, who have rebelled
against God and Man. The destroying the Community for the Public Good, is a
thing that passes my Understanding.

Further, I desire our Author to instruct me, whether the Public Good be not
only consistent with manifest Injustice and Wrong, but also an encouragement,
and sufficient Warrant, for Men to do that which is palpably unjust and
wrongful? If he do not affirm this, then his Public Good does him no Service,
because it comes not up to our case; and if he do affirm it, then I desire him
to acquit St. Paul from Preaching false Doctrine, when he tells us, That their
Damnation is just, who say they may do evil, that good may come of it. And a
shame take those silly Heathen Athenians, who rejected the Counsel of
Themistocles, be-cause Aristides made this report of it to them, that it was
indeed profitable to the Commonwealth, but not honest: had they been
Christians, they might easily have got over such a pitiful Scruple; and a
learned Doctor, nay (God be merciful to us) a Bishop (commonly so styled) of
our Church, would have taught them, that the Public Good sanctified all, and
that we ought to boggle at nothing to procure it. When, O Lord, shall be we
delivered from these mortified Hipocrites, who fast for strife and debate, and
make long Prayers for Pretenses, whilst like Locusts they devour all the good
of the Land?

The Public Good is a very honest, harmless thing in its self, but, as used of
late, has done a World of mischief; and now, I think, our Author is improving
it to the height, to make it dissolve the obligation of Oaths, which are the
most Sacred Tie can be laid on Man; and yet at the same time he destroys the
obligation of those very Oaths he persuades Men to take: For if Men should
think it for the Public Good to recall their Lawful Prince upon honest terms;
What would become of the obligation of his new Oaths? And indeed in his sense,
all Oaths to the Supreme Governor are not only Elusory, a mocking both of God
and Man, but mischievous and destructive of the Public Peace: For he grants,
that the End and Design of administering such Oaths, is to ensure the Subject to
the Prince; and certainly the Public Good and Peace requires, that in all
honest ways they be fast to him: But if the true and just measure (as he calls
it) of the obligation of these Oaths be the Public Good, so that they bind a
Man to pursue that, though to the destruction of the Person to whom they Swear,
they are so far from being a security to him, that upon the Plea of Public
Good they may be set up as a pretense, yea as an obligation to Rebel against
him. At this rate every Oath will be dangerous and seditious; and it would be
the wisdom and safety of the Prince never to suffer any to be administered. Even
those he calls Political Oaths were ever intended as a Personal Security, and
ever thought so, and the Public Good requires they should be so; but, in our
Author's sense, they never can be so. And it is somewhat strange to me, that he
who has despised, all sorts of Persons, as ignorant and silly, in respect of
himsef, should now endeavor to persuade us, that all Mankind has ever been so
cunning as to Swear in his abstracted Metaphysical Notion.

I as heartily desire the Public Good as any Man, and think it every Man's
duty in his Station, and to his Power to promote it; but I think it never can
be done by expelling Kings; and that rather it is against the Public Good by
violence to oppose the Supreme Governor, much more to Dethrone him; for it is
always accompanied with such heart-burnings, with such discontents and
factions, with such disorders and open violence, with such overturnings and
unsettledness, with the ruin of many Families, and often with so much Blood and
Slaughter and long Wars; that the worst of Tyranny (which can never last long)
were better to be born, than to seek a remedy against it by such unhappy means.
And besides all this, the ill example of such proceedings influenceth
Posterity, and becomes the occasion and promoter of Eternal Troubles, wherein
the Peaceable and Good are always the greatest Sufferers. And since he thinks
the Public Good is so much advanced by the late Revolution, I desire him to
cast up the account, and tell us how much better we now are, than we were in K.
J's Reign? For my part, I do not think so many losses, so great charges, such
threatening dangers, to be compensated by his gaining a Bishopric.

I grow weary of discoursing of a Public Good, which is set up to destroy it
self. I shall now give a brief Answer to such other things in the Discourse, as
may any way seem to require it, and conclude. To secure the Law on his side he
cites Glanvil and Bracton, but forgets what St. Paul and St. Peter said; let
him take his share with the Lawyers; I will venture my Soul with the Apostles:
Nor need I Answer the Citation; for as I ever thought, that it was the Duty of
a Sovereign Prince to his Power, not only to protect his Subjects, but to be
tender of them; so I could never be persuaded, that it was Lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever to Rebel, or countenance Rebellion against him; and, not
long since, I am sure this was both the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
the Law of the Land.

The History of Passive Obedience he has answered with the greatest ease
imaginable; for he tells us, that it is impertinent to this purpose, because
heve is no renouncing the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, or asserting the
lawfulness of Resistance; but the single point is, Whether the Law of our
Nation does not bind us, etc. Now, though I think a Divine might have made a
double point of it, yet for once let it pass. Gentlemen, you have only changed
the Object of your Obedience, it may be as Passive as you will; but if some
blunt Fellow were to put this into plain English, I fancy I should hear him
speak after this manner: My Masters, you have been all this while mistaken as
to Passive Obedience; for it is only a Doctrine which teaches, or, at least,
leaves all Men at liberty, to be Weathercocks, to turn with every Wind, and
comply with every turn; and is as good a Doctrine as any Turncoat could wish
for. I confess, I did not understand the Mystery before, and I think our Author
has made a very seasonable discovery if it, and I wish he alone may have the
Honor of it.

He thinks three Objections may be raised against him out of the History of
Passive Obedience, which he branches into several particulars, but stops all
their Mouths with Public Good; but to prevent their choking, I have pulled it
out, and left their mouths open again, and therefore need not trouble my self
farther in that matter, unless he should get another stopple.

His comparison of a Vow and an Oath, is nothing to the purpose; for who ever
thought, that either a Vow or an Oath bound a Man contrary to his real Duty?
The Sin in such a case is in making them, not in breaking them: But let our
Author speak out, and tell me, that taking an Oath of Allegiance to a Lawful
Prince, is contrary to my Duty, and then I will thank him for proving, that it
is Lawful to take an Oath to him who expells him. He adds, That if Parents,
instead of regarding the good of their Children, do openly design their ruin,
and contrive ways to bring it about; none will say but that they are bound to
take care of their own welfare. Now I know not what a Madman may do; but none
will suppose, that a Parent in his right Wits will do thus; as it is both
unnatural and unreasonable to think, that a King should contrive the
destruction of his Subjects, without whom he has none to Reign over, or assist
him: But he should have told us, that the Children, in such a case, might have
taken away all the Father's subsistence, and done their utmost endeavor to
starve him, or cut his throat; and no doubt but this had been an excellent
Comment on the Fifth Commandment.

I know not to what purpose he so labors to prove, That a Natural Equity or
Common Right is due to Subjects, yea even to Slaves: For who ever thought, that
being under Government, Metamorphos'd us into Beasts, or worse? Whereas it has
been ever judged the great advantage of the reasonable Creature, that he is
both Sociable and Governable: But he should have proved, that because the
Subject has a Common Right, therefore he can receive no wrong; or if he do, or
apprehend he shall, then he may cry out the Public Good, and raise Rebellion,
and overturn any Government: Nor was it kindly done to condemn Mr. Hobb's for
laying down a Proposition, which tended to the securing of Government when once
established in his way, when any Man may see that he has borrowed the worst of
Mr. Hrbbs's Principles to patch up his Discourse; nor is there any thing
material in his whole Discourse, but it might have been brought (mutatis
mutandis) to vindicate the Long Parliament, and Oliver, and condemn K. Charles
the Martyr, and his Loyal Sufferers: But if you examine their Principles
narrowly, you may observe that they are fitted to overturn any Government, but
secure none; so that I wonder any Government can endure them, or the Men that
teach them.

The Casuists, have displeased him for allowing men under a State of
Usurpation, to do those things which tend to the Public Safety; and in another
Paragraph he discovers the reason of his displeasure to be this; that they have
not allowed them to do every thing in a State of Usurpation, which they might
do under their Lawful Sovereign: But he is even with them, and roundly condemns
them all for founding it on the presumptive consent of the absent Prince; but
it is his own mistake; for quite contrary they found the presumptive Consent of
the absent Prince upon the Public Good, and his desire of the preservation of
his Subjects; and Bishop Sanderson, Obl. Cons. Prael. 5. over whom he seems
peculiarly in this place to insult, gives this reason of the Prince's
presumptive will: Ejusmodi obsequio, non tam injuste dominanti, quam toti
communitati, hoc est, Reipublicae serviisse existimandus est; quam salvam esse,
justi haeredis nihilo minus interest, quam illius qui de facto in ea dominatur.
Fortasse an and multo etiam magis, quo sincerius patriam diligere censendus
est, and ei omnia bona velle, qui genuinus Pater Patriae est, quam quo eo
excluso in ipsius aedes se ingessit, and in familiam ipsius jus and Imperium
exercet, etc.

I do not remember any thing more in his discourse material, except a numerous
heap of Instances, and in the Van comes the Unfortunate Vortigern, whom his
Nobles forsook for endeavoring to bring in a Foreign Power: But if that be a
sufficient discharge of Subjects Obligation to their Prince, as he tells us,
and they thought, and endeavors to persuade us to be of the same mind; I
believe Somebody will give him no thanks for it. To run through all his
Instances would be extremely troublesome, and therefore I will make short work
of them; for what a miserable straight had this Great Man been reduced to, if a
wicked World and the madness of the People had not furnished him with Instances
of strange Disorders, Irregularities, and mischievous overturnings of
government? But when those very Instances show us the Confusions, Calamities,
and Miseries, which attend such doings; to make them the Rule and Measure of
our Actions, is to be madder than Madmen, and to take away all hopes of ever
arriving at any settled and firm establishment. But what can we expect better
from a Man, who lays aside all his Divinity for a little bad Law, and worse
History?

He is so elevated with his last Instance, about the determination of our
Savior, of paying Tribute to Tiberius; that in zeal he cannot forbear to call
the Non-swearers perjured and Apostates.

Some men surely, are not only privileged, but admired, for speaking
Contradictions. But to be short, I think the the testimony of Velleius
Paterculus concerning the Authority of Tiberius, to be better than our
Author's, though he so scornfully reject him; and I could wish, that if it had
been but for the sake of Dio's reason, that some others had imitated the Wisdom
he commends in Augustus, in declining the imposition of Oaths. He boasts what
he had gained upon the account of the Jews paying Tribute, but it will impose
upon none but Fools and Partisans; and I will give it no particular answer,
because he misrepresents the case both of the Jews and Tiberius; as to which I
will only mention some few particulars, and then let him reckon his gains.
First, That none should rule over the Jews, but one of their Brethren, was
designed as a Blessing, if they continued in Obedience, and an encouragement to
do so; so their being given up to a Foreign Power was a Judgment, and Curse
upon them for their Sins; and which had not befallen them but for their
wickedness. Secondly, That they were under a State of Conquest, and that to
such a Power, as they were no way able to oppose. Thirdly, That the Question to
our Savior was not concerning Oaths but Tribute, which, he himself grants, all
Casuists do allow may be paid even to an Usurper. Fourthly, That at that time
no Man had Jus potius, nor had there been any prior Oaths taken in Bar against
Tiberius; so that though he calls him an Usurper, I know not where he will find
one with a better Title. And by this it appears, that our Savior gave not the
least encouragement to take contradictory Oaths; and I think our Author might
have been better employed, than thus to attempt to fasten such a scandal upon
the Great Preacher of Righteousness, and Savior of the World: But I forbear
too, though I scarce know how a Man can, in such a case; for many reasons I am
unwilling to judge severely of my Brethren, who have sworn; nor has any Man
been more forbearing; yet since he so boldly accuses those, as Men of much
greater Heat than Judgment, who call it Perjury; I will let pass their heat,
and interpose for their Judgment, and if I may have liberty to Write, I will
undertake to prove it so; and if I fail in the Judgment of my Bishop and
Metropolitan, then to submit to any Censure he shall inflict upon me. To
conclude, the Sectaries are all run mad, and become more ungovernable than the
Possessed in the Evangelist, and daily increase.; and I see not how a Schism in
the Church of England can be avoided, if these Oaths be imposed. We have made
wise work of it, and the Lord have Mercy upon us.

FINIS.

